 The chassis was based on a pressed steel ladder frame with channel @-@ section side members and fabricated and tubular cross members . Suspension was by semi @-@ elliptic leaf springs and Watson <unk> dampers front and rear , with a tubular beam axle at the front and a live axle and radius rods at the rear . The standard wheelbase was 134 inches ( 3 @,@ 400 mm ) , with a wheelbase of 141 inches ( 3 @,@ 600 mm ) available for seven @-@ passenger bodies . The front and rear tracks were both 56 inches ( 1 @,@ 400 mm ) wide . Center @-@ locking wire wheels with 5 " x 33 " tires were used front and rear . 
 The Duesenberg Straight Eight was the first production automobile to use hydraulic brakes on all four wheels . The brakes on the front wheels were 16 inches ( 410 mm ) in diameter and were finned to dissipate heat . The fluid used in the system was a mixture of glycerine and water . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The initial production target was 100 cars per month . By the end of 1922 , after slightly more than a year of production , fewer than 150 Duesenberg Straight Eights had been built . Production of the Straight Eight continued through several changes in management , placement of the Duesenberg Automobiles and Motors Company into receivership in January 1924 , and the restructuring of the company into the Duesenberg Motor Company in February 1925 , until the purchase of the company by E. L. Cord in October 1926 . About 650 Straight Eights had been built when Cord ended production in 1926 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Duesenberg Model X , a derivative of the Straight Eight , had a short production run in 1927 . About twelve were built . The Model X had an engine with the same bore and stroke as the Straight Eight but with a non @-@ <unk> head . The engine delivered 100 horsepower ( 75 kW ) . The chassis had a wheelbase of 135 inches ( 3 @,@ 400 mm ) . 
 Despite its regional and worldwide automotive firsts , the Straight Eight has been obscured by the later Model J. It is no longer widely known by the Straight Eight name under which it was marketed and sold , having been renamed the " Model A " after the introduction of the Model J. 
 = Wide Open ( Millennium ) = 
 " Wide Open " is the ninth episode of the first season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on Fox on January 3 , 1997 . The episode was written by Charles D. Holland and directed by Jim Charleston . " Wide Open " featured guest appearances by Glynn Turman and Roger Cross . 
 Forensic profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) , a member of the private investigative organisation Millennium Group , tracks a serial killer who hides in his victims ' homes and preys on those who feel most safe . 
 " Wide Open " was Charleston 's second , and Holland 's only , contribution to the series . The episode opens with a quote from the biblical Book of Job , and makes reference to author Patricia Highsmith . It received mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A man , Cutter ( Pablo Coffey ) , visits an open house viewing , where he is given a tour by the estate agent , and seems to take an interest in the bedroom of a young girl . That night , the owners have returned home , and are settling down for the evening when their daughter , Patricia , begins screaming . Later , a security guard for the family 's alarm company finds the bodies of the parents hacked to death on the first floor , but Patricia is nowhere to be seen . 
 The Millennium Group , a private investigative group , dispatches profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) to the scene , where he meets Seattle detective Bob Bletcher ( Bill Smitrovich ) . Black finds the house 's alarm system , noticing that it did not go off until the killer left the house . He deduces that the killer stayed hidden in the house during the viewing , emerging that evening to kill the family . However , Black also notices something near an air vent ; pulling it from the wall , he finds Patricia , alive but greatly disturbed . 
 Black 's wife Catherine ( Megan Gallagher ) , a clinical social worker , warns against questioning Patricia — although she is an important witness , she is only a child and is in a fragile mental state . Black and Bletcher visit James Glen ( Glynn Turman ) a graphology expert , having found the killer 's signature in the viewing 's guestbook . Analysis of the killer 's handwriting links him to almost forty open house viewings over the previous six months . 
 An estate agent receives a video recording of the murders in the post , leaving Black puzzled . That same day , the killer hides in another open house , later murdering a woman with a shotgun before calling the police to the scene . Black finds an X drawn in blood under the house 's welcome mat ; Patricia has begun drawing red Xs in her crayon pictures , which Catherine takes notice of . Black reviews the videotape , finding a reflection of the killer in a glass pane . Extracting a picture from this , he requests to show it to Patricia , but stops himself , realizing that the killer let Patricia live so that she could relive the events when questioned . 
 Cutter , a crossing guard , hides the shotgun in a dumpster , calling the police to report finding it . The police officer who takes his statement later recognizes him on seeing the video . Black has deduced the killer 's motives — he is trying to undermine society 's notion of safety . Black and Bletcher organize a stakeout at another open house , identifying Cutter when he arrives ; however , Cutter escapes into the neighborhood . Black realizes that he has hidden in a nearby house , where he and Bletcher find the occupants tied up . Cutter ambushes Black , knocking him down , but before Cutter can escape , the family 's dog lunges at him , sending him falling over a mezzanine to his death . Bletcher later tells Black that Cutter 's aunt and uncle were tortured to death in front of him when he was a child , which led him to recreate the torment for other families . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Wide Open " is the second of two episodes of Millennium to be directed by James Charleston , who had also helmed the earlier first season episode " Blood Relatives " . The episode also marked the only contribution to the series from writer Charles D. Holland . 
 Pablo Coffey , who portrayed Cutter , the episode 's serial killer , would later appear in " Manus Domini " , an episode of Millennium creator Chris Carter 's series Harsh Realm . The episode features Glynn Turman as a graphologist , portraying the discipline in an exaggerated , " near @-@ psychic " manner ; although it had been portrayed more realistically in the second episode of the series , " Gehenna " . Bill Smitrovich , who plays recurring character Bob Bletcher , had previously portrayed a graphologist in the 1986 film Manhunter , which has been seen an influence on Millennium . 
 The character of Patricia Highsmith — the little girl who survives the first attack — is named for the author Patricia Highsmith , author of Strangers on a Train and the Tom Ripley series of novels . The episode opens with a quotation from the Book of Job , one of the poetic books of the Ketuvim , the third part of the Tanakh or Hebrew Bible . Another passage from the Book of Job had been used in the opening of the episode " Dead Letters " . Biblical verses were also used at the beginning of other episodes in the series , including the Book of Exodus in " Kingdom Come " ; the Book of Jeremiah in " Weeds " ; and the Gospel of Luke in " Blood Relatives " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Wide Open " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on January 3 , 1997 ; and earned a Nielsen rating of 6 @.@ 9 , meaning that roughly 6 @.@ 9 percent of all television @-@ equipped households were tuned in to the episode . The episode was watched by approximately 6 @.@ 7 million households . 
 " Wide Open " received mixed reviews from critics . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , finding that its cold open was " the most distinctive thing about the whole case " . Shearman and Pearson felt that the episode 's killer was unspectacular , remaining " largely anonymous " ; and that his death scene was " as half @-@ hearted a climax as he deserves " . Writing for The A.V. Club , Zack Handlen rated the episode a B + , describing it as " thoroughly unsettling " and " solid stuff " . Handlen felt that the treatment of the episode 's villain was better than most other instalments of the series , which " helps give the episode overall a stronger sense of purpose " . However , it was felt that the character of Frank Black was still too vague and impersonal , coming across simply as " a generic representation of Chris Carter 's idea of heroism " . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated " Wide Open " 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 . Gibron felt that the episode had " a clever premise , a great deal of suspense and some gruesomely graphic imagery " , but criticized the " off @-@ the @-@ cuff " manner in which the killer 's motives were explained . 
 = Shetland sheep = 
 The Shetland sheep is a small , wool @-@ producing breed of sheep originating in the Shetland Isles , but is now also kept in many other parts of the world . It is part of the Northern European short @-@ tailed sheep group , and it is closely related to the extinct Scottish Dunface . Shetlands are classified as a landrace or " unimproved " breed . This breed is kept for its very fine wool , for meat , and for conservation grazing . 
 Although Shetlands are small and slow @-@ growing compared to commercial breeds , they are hardy , thrifty , easy <unk> , adaptable and long @-@ lived . The Shetland breed has survived for centuries in difficult conditions and on a poor diet , but they thrive in better conditions . Shetlands retain many of their primitive survival instincts , so they are easier to care for than many modern breeds . 
 = = History = = 
 Up to the Iron Age , the sheep of the British Isles and other parts of northern and western Europe were small , short @-@ tailed , horned only in the male and variable in colour . Short @-@ tailed sheep were gradually displaced by long @-@ tailed types , leaving short @-@ tailed sheep restricted to the less accessible areas . These included the Scottish Dunface , which until the late eighteenth century was the main sheep type throughout the Highlands and Islands of Scotland , including Orkney and Shetland . The Dunface died out on the mainland , Scotland , in the late nineteenth century , leaving its descendants limited to a few islands , including the Shetlands . The Shetland type of the Dunface has been regarded as distinct since the early nineteenth century or before . 
 = = = Breed conservation = = = 
 By the early twentieth century , the Shetland was perceived as threatened by cross @-@ breeding , leading to a decline in wool quality . To combat this , the Shetland Flock Book Society was formed in 1927 , and this remains the body responsible for the sheep 's protection on their native islands . 
 By the time the Rare Breeds Survival Trust was set up in the 1970s , the Shetland had become rare , and it was listed by them as Category 2 ( Endangered ) . Since then , the breed has become popular with smallholders , and it is now classified as Category 6 ( Other native breeds ) , with a UK population of over 3000 . On the mainland the breed is governed by the Shetland Sheep Society . 
 = = = Export and history outside the Shetland isles = = = 
 A notorious Shetland sheep was a ram kept by United States President Thomas Jefferson for several years in the early nineteenth century . Unlike modern Shetlands ( but like some related breeds ) this ram had four horns . He was kept with about 40 other sheep on President 's Square in front of the White House . In the spring of 1808 , it attacked several people who had taken shortcuts across the square , injuring some and actually killing a small boy . Having been moved to Jefferson 's private estate at Monticello , the ram was eventually killed after having killed several other rams : it was described by Jefferson as " this abominable animal " . Such aggressive Shetland rams , however , are unusual . 
 In North America , the original Jefferson flock of Shetlands did not persist . It was not until the mid @-@ twentieth century that Shetlands were imported into Canada , and then from Canada into the United States in the 1980s . Since then , a North American Shetland Sheep Registry has been established , and there are now thousands of the breed in the region . 
 = = = Modern farming = = = 
 Today , <unk> sheep are mainly kept in the Shetland isles and a handful of other locales . This is because of their ability to survive on infertile land that would otherwise be agriculturally useless . Their good @-@ natured temperament is also a major attraction in keeping Shetland sheep . They are most commonly farmed for their prized wool , but they also may be kept for their meat . 
 = = Breed characteristics = = 
 The Shetland is one of the smallest British breeds . The ewes are usually polled ( hornless ) and the rams usually horned , although horned ewes and polled rams do occur occasionally . The breed is noted for its very fine , soft wool and the high quality of its meat , though its smaller size limits its use in commercial meat markets . They are small @-@ bodied animals , with no wool on their faces , noses or legs . The legs are of medium length and finely boned . They have small , erect ears . A distinguishing feature of northern short @-@ tailed sheep is the short , fluke @-@ shaped tail , broad at the base , tapering to a point , and covered towards the tip in hair , not wool . 
 Shetlands occur in many different colours and patterns , most of which have particular traditional names . The rams weigh approximately 90 to 125 lb ( 41 to 57 kg ) and ewes about 75 to 100 lb ( 34 to 45 kg ) . 
 = = = Wool = = = 
 The wool produced by the Shetland has historically been a valuable commodity . Shetlands produce numerous shades of wool colours ( see below ) , and this variety was commercially important to the wool industry of the Shetland Isles , where natural wools are often used undyed . Tweed is also produced from the coarser Shetland wool , but the Isles are best known for their multicoloured knitwear ( made using Fair Isle knitting ) and for the traditional knitted lace shawls which are so fine , they will pass through a wedding ring . Fleeces usually weigh between 2 and 4 lb ( 0 @.@ 9 and 1 @.@ 8 kg ) . 
 In November 2011 , Shetland wool produced in the Shetlands gained protected geographical status with a protected designation of origin ( PDO ) classification as " Native Shetland Wool " . It was the first non @-@ food product in the UK to receive this status . 
 = = = = Colours and patterns = = = = 
 Shetland sheep can show almost all possible sheep colours and patterns , although solid white and solid <unk> ( reddish @-@ brown ) or black are most common . Many of the colours and patterns have Shetland dialect names – these derive from the Norn language formerly spoken in Shetland , and similar names are also used in at least one other Nordic language : Icelandic . 
 Eleven main colours are recognised by the breed association ( most including many different shades ) : light grey , grey , white , <unk> ( dusky bluish @-@ grey ) , musket ( light greyish @-@ brown ) , <unk> ( dark steely @-@ grey ) , black , fawn , <unk> ( reddish brown ) , <unk> ( honey @-@ toned , yellowish @-@ brown ) , and dark brown . 
 Thirty different coat patterns and markings are recognised , many of which can occur in combination . They include <unk> ( " <unk> " : dark belly and dark shading around nose and eyes , lighter elsewhere ) , <unk> ( " mouflon " , the reverse of <unk> : light belly , dark face with light marks around eyes , dark elsewhere ) , <unk> ( generally light with dark " panda " patches around the eyes ) , <unk> ( dark with white blaze down face ) , <unk> ( white marking around the muzzle ) , <unk> ( with white socks on the legs ) , <unk> ( irregular patches of different colours ) and <unk> ( with a collar of a differing colour ) . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Like other " primitive " breeds , the ewes are highly seasonal , becoming fertile in October and November ( in the Northern Hemisphere ) and lambing in spring or summer . On the poor grazing of the breed 's native isles , the lambing percentage is about 130 % . However , when the ewes are on better pasture , twin lambs are more common , especially from mature ewes . Shetland ewes are hardy , easy <unk> , good mothers and produce ample milk . Healthy lambs are born with a weight between 4 and 7 lb ( 2 and 3 kg ) . 
 = = = Lamb and Mutton Production = = = 
 In truth , ' slow @-@ growing ' is something of a misnomer . Forage conversion to milk with good Shetland ewes is excellent , second only to Lleyn ewes in the UK . Because of the Shetland ewe 's forage conversion efficiency , growth in her lambs is explosive . A good Shetland ewe on adequate forage can easily wean off 150 % of her body weight in purebred twins by fall . Some ewes wean singles nearly as big as themselves . A Shetland ewe on the heavy side at 80 lbs ( 36 kg ) is easily capable of weaning 60 lb ( 27 kg ) purebred twins . Or what makes the Shetland ewe an optimal maternal base for <unk> lamb production is her prowess in producing hybrid market lambs . Take the same ewe and breed her to say a Leicester , Texel , Charollais or <unk> ram , and keep her on the same pasture management system . In some flocks these ewes are weaning off pairs of 90 lb ( 40 kg ) twins at only 120 @-@ 150 days old- each crossbred lamb weighing more than their dam . 
 Shetland lamb is of the highest quality , with rave reviews from chefs and home cooks alike . Texture and flavor are very desirable , with high @-@ yielding carcasses . The mutton also has nice flavor , with some customers and many breeders preferring mutton over lamb . 
 Lines that have been bred with selection pressure focused on uniformity and finer fiber diameter often do not perform as optimally as lamb producers , and vice versa . Shetland breeders find it imperative that the breed maintains a balance in its ability to produce both a quality fleece and carcass , managed relatively holistically . 
 = Brian Booth = 
 Brian Charles Booth ( born 19 October 1933 ) is a former Australian cricketer who played in 29 Tests from 1961 to 1966 , and 93 first @-@ class matches for New South Wales . He captained Australia for two Tests during the 1965 – 66 Ashes series while regular captain Bob Simpson was absent due to illness and injury . Booth was a graceful right @-@ handed middle order batsman at No. 4 or 5 , and occasionally bowled right arm medium pace or off spin . He had an inclination to use his feet to charge spin bowlers . Booth was known for his sportsmanship on the field and often invoked Christianity while discussing ethics and sport . 
 Born near the New South Wales country town of Bathurst , Booth moved to Sydney in 1952 and played in the grade cricket competition while training to become a teacher . He made his first @-@ class debut for the New South Wales cricket team and came to prominence in dramatic circumstances in his second match , against the touring Englishmen in 1954 – 55 . Due to late withdrawals , Booth was selected at late notice and had to be called from work on the morning of the match . After arriving after the start of the match , he scored 74 following a batting collapse . Booth struggled to make an impression early in his career and missed a season to train and with the Australian field hockey team for the 1956 Olympics in Melbourne . Upon returning to first @-@ class cricket in 1957 – 58 , he held down a regular position in the state team while the Test players were touring overseas . Booth gradually progressed and gained selection on the 1959 – 60 Australian Second XI tour to New Zealand . 
 Booth was selected for the Australian team that toured England in 1961 and played in the final two Tests . Upon his return to Australia , Booth made two centuries in the 1962 – 63 home Test series against England , establishing himself in the Test team . He made two further centuries the following summer against South Africa and was named the Australian player of the year . Following the retirement of Richie Benaud , Booth was appointed vice @-@ captain under Simpson as Australia embarked on a successful 1964 tour of England , which saw the retention of the Ashes . Booth played his final Test series in 1965 – 66 against England , captaining Australia in the First and Third Tests because Simpson was sidelined with a broken wrist and chickenpox respectively . The First Test was drawn but Australia fell to its first innings defeat in almost ten years in the Third Test . As he was also in a form slump , Booth was dropped as the Australian selectors made mass changes , ending his career . In retirement , Booth returned to his teaching duties and served as an Anglican lay @-@ preacher . He was inducted into the Cricket NSW Hall of Fame in 2014 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 The son of " Snowy " Booth , a market gardener and talented country cricketer , Booth was born in <unk> , located 9 km ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) outside the New South Wales regional town of Bathurst . His father hung pictures of Don Bradman and Stan McCabe on the wall and told him that " these are the two greatest living cricketers " . Booth represented Bathurst High School at the age of 13 and played first grade cricket in Bathurst at 15 . He was selected for a New South Wales youth country side at the age of just 14 . In 1950 , Booth represented New South Wales Country against a combined Sydney team , and moved to St. George to play on a weekly basis two years later . He made the first grade team at the age of 19 and began a four @-@ year course at Sydney Teachers College . Booth also played hockey in <unk> and began playing for St. George upon his arrival in Sydney . 
 Booth made his first @-@ class debut for New South Wales against Queensland in the 1954 – 55 Sheffield Shield . He made a duck in the first innings before adding 19 in the second . New South Wales won , but Booth was dropped when the Test players returned from international duty . Booth was recalled a month later for a match against Len Hutton 's English cricket team at the Sydney Cricket Ground . Arthur Morris and Bill Watson had to withdraw at late notice and Booth was asked to play , having already started his day 's work as a teacher at Hurlstone Agricultural College . He caught a train and arrived at the ground more than half an hour after the start of play , by which time New South Wales had collapsed to 3 / 12 . New South Wales fell further to 5 / 26 before Booth came in with a borrowed cap and bat to join Peter Philpott . They put on an 83 @-@ run partnership , and Booth eventually finished the innings unbeaten on 74 as the hosts folded for 172 . Booth made a duck in the second innings and took his maiden first @-@ class wicket as New South Wales defeated Hutton 's men . It was only the tourists ' second loss for the campaign , and the last match in Booth 's debut season . 
 Booth had a low key season in 1955 – 56 , struggling to find a regular position in the New South Wales team . As there were no international matches during the summer , the Test players were available for the whole campaign . He played in six matches and had few opportunities , managing only 157 runs at 31 @.@ 40 , passing fifty on only one occasion . New South Wales went on to claim a hat @-@ trick of Sheffield Shield titles . 
 Booth was selected for the New South Wales hockey team in 1955 and toured New Zealand in 1956 . Good performances on this tour led to his selection in the Australian Olympic squad for the 1956 Summer Olympics , but he had an anxious wait following media claims that he had received out of pocket expenses for playing cricket , which would make him a professional and therefore ineligible to participate in the Olympics . Eventually , Booth and fellow first @-@ class cricketers Ian Dick and Maurice Foley were cleared to play for Australia . Booth then missed the 1956 – 57 Sheffield Shield season because he was part of the Australian field hockey team that finished fifth at the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne . Booth was selected as an inside left , but was not utilised in any of Australia 's matches . In his absence , New South Wales won a fourth consecutive domestic title . 
 In 1957 – 58 , the Australian Test team toured South Africa during the southern hemisphere summer , opening up opportunities in the Shield competition back in Australia . Booth established himself at first @-@ class level with 503 runs at 50 @.@ 30 . After scoring two fifties , he broke through for his maiden first @-@ class century against the Victorian Bushrangers at the Sydney Cricket Ground , in his last match of the season . He put on a partnership of 325 with future Test team @-@ mate Norm O 'Neill in fewer than four hours . It was his fifteenth first @-@ class match , and helped his state secure a fifth successive title with a ten @-@ wicket win over their arch @-@ rivals . With the Test players returning to Australia in 1958 – 59 , Booth again faced more competition for places . He struggled , playing six matches and aggregating only 190 runs at 31 @.@ 66 . He only had six innings for the entire season , and in his only opportunity against Peter May 's touring Englishmen , he made a duck . Booth passed 50 on two occasions during the season , making 75 and 85 . In one high @-@ scoring match against South Australia , he took 0 / 97 with his part @-@ time off spin . 
 = = First @-@ class consolidation = = 
 The national team toured the Indian subcontinent during the 1959 – 60 Australian season , opening up more vacancies at a domestic level . Booth had a strong first @-@ class season , scoring 718 runs at 65 @.@ 27 with two centuries to place third on the run scoring aggregates . He started the season with 168 as New South Wales defeated Queensland by an innings before scoring 177 two matches later in an innings win over South Australia . His state completed a seventh Sheffield Shield triumph in succession . 
 Booth 's performances saw him selected for a second choice Australian team that toured New Zealand under the captaincy of Ian Craig . He scored 105 in his first innings for his country , in a victory over Auckland . Booth scored 184 runs at 30 @.@ 66 and took three wickets at 25 @.@ 00 in the four international matches against New Zealand . Booth considered retiring after the season , feeling that the time needed for first @-@ class cricket was impinging on his work as a lay preacher and a Christian youth worker . 
 Booth brought himself into contention for the Test selection with a series of strong displays in 1960 – 61 . He aggregated 981 runs at an average of 65 @.@ 40 , with three centuries . Only five players scored more runs , all at lower averages . Two of the centuries were in combined Australian XI matches at the end of the season for expected Test squad members . In a match against the Tasmanian Tigers , Booth struck a breezy 100 from 104 balls in 90 minutes of batting . Another highlight was an 87 against the touring West Indies , helping New South Wales to complete an innings win . Booth 's productivity helped his state to another Sheffield Shield win . 
 = = Test career = = 
 Booth was then selected for the Ashes tour of England in 1961 ; he and Victorian opening batsmen Bill Lawry , the two uncapped batsmen in the team , were regarded as the last two players chosen . Booth quickly gained a reputation for his attention to physical fitness . He led the Australians in their morning exercises during the sea voyage , which captain Richie Benaud made optional . After scoring 37 and seven against Worcestershire in his first match on English soil , Booth broke through for his first century for Australia , scoring 113 against Cambridge University in his fifth match in England . He made 59 against the Marylebone Cricket Club , but was overlooked for the first three Tests . 
 Booth scored 127 not out against Somerset , and in the next match against Lancashire , he was caught behind for 99 from the bowling of another Brian Booth . He played consistently , with two more half @-@ centuries to earn his debut in the Fourth Test at Old Trafford in place of Colin McDonald . The series was evenly poised at 1 – 1 , and Australia batted first on a pitch that initially assisted fast bowling . The surface was tinged with green and England fielded a pace line @-@ up that included Brian Statham and Fred Trueman . Booth was struck in the torso by his first ball , a bouncer that did not rise as high as was expected . He managed to repel a spearing yorker on the second ball and compiled a battling 46 , the second highest score on the difficult pitch , featuring in a partnership of 46 — the highest in Australia 's innings — with Bill Lawry . Australia managed only 190 on the bowler @-@ friendly pitch . Booth only managed nine in the second innings before Australia retained the Ashes after an English collapse on the final day resulted in a 54 @-@ run win . In the drawn Fifth and final Test at The Oval , Booth came in with the score at 4 / 211 after the dismissal of O 'Neill for 117 . He featured in a 185 @-@ run partnership with Peter Burge . Booth was dismissed for 71 while attempting to loft the spin of Tony Lock over the infield , as captain Richie Benaud needed quick runs ; observers felt the need to attack cost Booth his maiden Test century . Booth added three more 70s in the closing tour matches before the team returned to Australia . 
 The 1961 – 62 season was entirely a domestic season . Booth scored 507 runs at 42 @.@ 25 with two centuries , against Queensland and South Australia . He placed 13th on the run scoring aggregates , helping New South Wales to win its ninth consecutive Sheffield Shield . 
 After scoring 72 in the opening match of the season and adding 41 against the touring Englishmen for New South Wales , Booth retained his place in the Test team for the 1962 – 63 Ashes series . He scored his maiden Test century in the First Test at The Gabba , compiling 112 in the first innings of a high scoring draw . Thirteen innings reached fifty , but Booth was the only player to reach three figures . English captain Ted Dexter attempted to shut down Booth 's scoring by employing leg theory . In the Second Test at the Melbourne Cricket Ground , Fred Titmus bowled outside leg stump with five men on the on side , but Booth completed consecutive centuries with 103 in the second innings . As a result of Dexter 's defensive field placings , Booth scored at only half the rate he managed in the First Test . Booth took six hours to reach triple figures and hit only four boundaries . His innings was not enough to prevent England from completing a seven @-@ wicket victory . Booth was unable to maintain his form for the rest of the season , with 34 and 77 in the Fourth Test in Adelaide being the only other times that he passed 20 . Australia won the Third Test , drawing the series , and Booth ended the series with 404 runs at 50 @.@ 50 . He added a further three fifties in the Sheffield Shield as Victoria ended New South Wales ' nine @-@ year winning streak . 
 Booth started the 1963 – 64 season strongly . He scored centuries in his first two innings , recording 121 and 169 not out against Queensland and Western Australia respectively . In his rapid innings against Western Australia at the SCG , which took only 165 minutes , Booth reached 100 in 94 minutes during the second session of the day . In the lead @-@ up to the Tests , Booth scored 63 for his state against South Africa but was unable to prevent defeat . In the Tests , he began the way he did in the previous season , with a century . Coming to the crease with Australia at 3 / 88 in the first innings of the First Test in Brisbane , Booth withstood an opening burst of bouncers from South African spearhead Peter Pollock . He went on to accumulate his Test best of 169 from 81 overs of batting , in a display that gained wide praise because of his elegant strokemaking . One newspaper proclaimed that his innings had " more Grace than the Princess of Monaco . " Ray Robinson said " it was a tailored innings , fit to be put on display in a showcase and <unk> by a single chance " . South African skipper Trevor Goddard later said " We didn 't mind the leather chasing , when he played so charmingly " . Booth 's innings was the highlight of a match that was uneventful in terms of cricket but notorious for the no @-@ balling of Ian Meckiff . A broken finger sidelined Booth for a month and prevented him from playing in the Second Test , but he returned for the Third Test in Sydney , and began a sequence of 75 , 16 , 58 and 24 . He finished the series in the Fifth Test in his home town , top @-@ scoring in both of Australia 's innings , with 102 not out and 87 in a draw . It capped off a productive fortnight for Booth ; he had scored 162 not out against South Australia before the final Test . In four Tests , he aggregated 531 runs at 88 @.@ 50 . For the entire first @-@ class season , Booth had struck five centuries and totalled 1 @,@ 180 runs . According to Gideon Haigh , he had " played exquisitely " throughout the season , which was his career peak and saw him named the Australian Cricketer of the Year for 1963 – 64 . 
 = = = Vice @-@ captaincy = = = 
 Captain Benaud retired at the end of the South Africa series — he had already relinquished the leadership after the First Test — and Booth was elevated to the vice @-@ captaincy under Bob Simpson for the 1964 tour of England . Along with Simpson and Lawry , Booth was one of three on @-@ tour selectors . Some observers felt that the personable Booth would have been more popular among the playing group than Simpson , while others thought that he would not have been hard @-@ nosed enough in pursuing his team 's competitive interest . While Simpson was known for being relentlessly hard @-@ nosed , he was also abrasive and sometimes irritated others by making derogatory comments towards teammates . Booth again ran daily fitness classes during the voyage , and on this occasion , Simpson made them compulsory for the players . Booth started the tour well , scoring 109 not out in his third match for the summer , against Surrey . He passed 50 three more times before the start of the Tests , when his form waned . 
 Booth failed to pass 20 in the first six innings of the Test series . With Australia 1 – 0 up after three Tests , a draw in the Fourth Test was sufficient to retain the urn . Booth regained his touch with three scores beyond fifty in four innings leading up to the Fourth Test , including 132 against Middlesex . When the teams reconvened at Old Trafford for the Fourth Test , Booth made a " courtly " 98 in a 219 @-@ run partnership with Simpson . The Australians batted for more than two days to burn off any chance of an England victory . Booth then scored 193 not out , his highest for the summer , in Australia 's 7 / 315 declared against Yorkshire , setting up the tourists ' victory . He made 74 in the Fifth Test and ended the series with 210 runs at 42 @.@ 00 . Along with Simpson and Lawry , Booth was one of three Australians to accumulate more than 1 @,@ 500 first @-@ class runs for the English summer . 
 Three Tests against India and one against Pakistan lay ahead of Booth as the Australians visited the Indian subcontinent on the late @-@ 1964 voyage back to Australia . He had a mediocre time , passing fifty only once , with 74 in the Second Test at Mumbai 's Brabourne Stadium . That innings was terminated when Indian wicket @-@ keeper KS <unk> fumbled a stumping opportunity — the ball rolled back down the pitch . Despite breaking the stumps with his hand while the ball was not in close proximity , <unk> 's appeal was upheld . According to Haigh , " It seemed like ten men [ one of the Australians was ill ] were pitted against thirteen [ eleven Indian players and two umpires ] " . Booth compiled 127 runs at 21 @.@ 17 and took the only three wickets of his Test career on the spin @-@ friendly subcontinental surfaces . He took 2 / 33 in the drawn Third Test in Calcutta , before capturing his final wicket in the second innings of the only Test against Pakistan in Karachi . At the time , cricket matches in Australia and England were typically interrupted by the Sunday rest day , and Booth used these for religious observances . However , this custom was not observed on the subcontinent . Booth wanted to withdraw for personal reasons , but decided to play due to injuries and illnesses to other players . He made 57 in a Test against Pakistan in Melbourne upon arrival in Australia . It was the only home Test of the season before the hosts embarked upon a tour to the Caribbean . Booth scored 115 for his state against the Pakistanis and ended the Australian season with 327 runs at 46 @.@ 71 . 
 Australia arrived in the West Indies in 1964 – 65 for five Tests against the emerging power of the 1960s , who were led by the hostile express pace bowling of Wes Hall and Charlie Griffith . After narrowly evading a bouncer at the start of his innings , Booth made a battling top @-@ score of 56 in the First Test loss at Sabina Park in Jamaica . He then made 117 in the Second Test at Port of Spain in Trinidad , an innings that included a stand of 228 with Bob Cowper , which helped Australia hang on for a draw . It was to be Booth 's last Test century , an innings he regarded as his " most satisfying " , having collected a series of bruises , on a ground with no sightscreen . Booth did not pass 40 in the last three Tests and ended with 234 runs at 29 @.@ 25 as Australia lost 2 – 1 , their first series loss since the 1956 Ashes series and their first series loss against a team other than England , excluding a one @-@ off Test against Pakistan in 1956 . He had particular trouble with the pace of Griffith , and on one occasion , the paceman hit him on the nose before <unk> him on the next ball ; Booth maintains that he did not see the ball . Booth added two more fifties in the four first @-@ class matches outside the Tests . 
 = = = Temporary captain = = = 
 At the start of the 1965 – 66 season , Booth scored fifties in three consecutive matches , including an 80 against the MCC tourists . The 1965 @-@ 66 Ashes series saw Booth captain Australia for the first time in a Test . Simpson sustained a broken wrist , leaving Booth to lead the hosts in the First Test in Brisbane . Booth prepared quietly , leaving Simpson to handle the press . He won the toss and elected to bat ; fewer than two hours of play was possible on a rain @-@ shortened first day , and the second day was entirely washed out . Booth made only 16 before being caught and bowled by Fred Titmus on the third morning , but centuries to Lawry and debutant Doug Walters saw Australia declare at 6 / 443 . Booth rotated his spinners and dismissed the tourists for 280 ; the match ended in a draw with England at 3 / 186 after being forced to follow on . When Geoff Boycott pushed a ball from leg spinner Peter Philpott away with his hand , Booth refused to appeal for handling the ball . 
 After the drawn Second Test , Simpson contracted chickenpox , so Booth was again captain for the Third Test in front of his home crowd at the SCG . It was an extra burden , as Booth had made only 49 runs in the first two Tests ; his team @-@ mates felt that their captain had been too anxious following his struggles against Griffith in the Caribbean . However , there was to be no fairytale for Booth , who later admitted to being in psychological disarray ; he was unaware if the rolling done on the pitch after the toss was legal , and Philpott arrived late and ran onto the field just as play was starting . 
 England batted first and their openers immediately seized the initiative , putting on 234 for the first wicket in four hours . The tourists made 488 and Booth scored eight as Australia replied with 221 and were forced to follow on . He made 27 in the second innings before being bowled by David Allen as the hosts fell to an innings defeat . It was Australia 's biggest defeat at home since the Fourth Test of the 1911 – 12 Ashes series when they lost by an innings and 225 runs . After the match , England captain Mike Smith told Booth that he expected to see him in the Fourth Test , but his Australian counterpart prophetically predicted his downfall . 
 With Australia 0 – 1 down , the selectors took drastic action and dropped Booth , Cowper , Philpott , McKenzie and David <unk> . The revamped team won the next Test by an innings , and Booth never played for Australia again . If he had played another Test , Booth would have been eligible for the New South Wales Cricket Association 's retirement bonus of <unk> a Test . Booth 's last five Test innings had netted only 84 runs . After the match , he received a letter from Don Bradman , then a member of the selection panel and the Australian Board of Control : 
 Never before have I written to a player to express my regret at his omission from the Australian XI . In your case I am making an exception because I want you to know how much my colleagues and I disliked having to make this move . Captain one match and out of the side the next looks like ingratitude , but you understand the circumstances and will be the first to admit that your form has not been good . 
 Booth ended the first @-@ class season with 596 runs at 29 @.@ 80 , including four half @-@ centuries . He continued to play for New South Wales before retiring during the 1968 – 69 season . 
 = = Final first @-@ class seasons = = 
 In the 1966 – 67 Australian season , Booth scored 638 runs at 49 @.@ 07 , ranking fifth in the run @-@ scoring aggregates for the summer . He scored 149 against Queensland , and added four fifties , including two scores in the 90s . As a result , Booth was made vice @-@ captain of an Australian Second XI that toured New Zealand under the leadership of Les Favell , while the national team was in South Africa . After failing to pass 26 in his first five innings , Booth made his highest first @-@ class score — 214 not out — against Central Districts , and was Australia 's leading run @-@ scorer for the tour . After scoring only 62 runs in the first four innings in the opening three international matches against New Zealand , Booth made 179 in the fourth and final match . 
 Booth was less successful in his penultimate season in 1967 – 68 , with only 426 runs at 23 @.@ 66 , including two half @-@ centuries , both against Victoria . A decision by administrators to introduce Sunday play into the Sheffield Shield ended his career , as he refused to make himself available for games that involved Sunday play . He played in only one match in his final season in 1968 – 69 , scoring a duck and 15 as New South Wales lost to South Australia by three wickets . Booth continued to play grade cricket for the St. George club until 1976 – 77 , leading the batting averages and aggregates in 1974 – 75 . With 10 @,@ 674 runs at 45 @.@ 42 , he was fifth on the all @-@ time run @-@ scoring aggregates in Sydney grade competition at the time of his retirement , but has now dropped to ninth . 
 = = Style and the place of religion in sport = = 
 Brian Booth , that model of a man and of a batsman who tends to be under @-@ rated and forgotten because both he and his cricket were so <unk> self @-@ effacing . Tall , upright , correct in method , ever @-@ patient , he repeated the hundred he had got at Brisbane , and so gave England a target to go for while all around him were failing . 
 – E.W. Swanton 
 Booth was regarded as an elegant batsman who had an erect stance at the crease . He was known for not hitting the ball hard but for having an easy and relaxed style . In hockey , a player is not allowed to lift his stick above the shoulders ; this background strengthened Booth 's forearms and wrists and enabled him to impart momentum on the ball without a large swing of the blade . Booth was particularly known for his late cut and his cover drive , which he played in a manner not dissimilar to Mark Waugh . He was known for his quick footwork against spin bowling and was rarely stumped , and he had the ability to change his batting tempo . Booth quickly got into position and typically moved onto the back foot to cover his stumps . A lean player , Booth stood 181 cm , weighed 66 kg and refrained from smoking , gambling and drinking . He was known for his efficient <unk> , and on the second day of the Second Test against the West Indies in Trinidad in 1964 – 65 , he ran out Gary Sobers and Basil Butcher with strong throws from the outfield . Booth started as a part @-@ time leg spinner before converting to off spin . 
 Booth had a reputation for walking when he knew that he was out , without waiting for the umpire 's decision , and he was regarded as a player and leader of the highest principles . He was known for his record of instilling high standards of conduct into his players and prevented them from showing dissent towards unfavourable umpiring decisions . Robinson said that " if a prize were offered for <unk> among Australia 's post @-@ war cricketers Brian Booth ought to win it hands down " . Lawry regarded Booth as one of the most gentlemanly cricketers that he knew . 
 A committed Christian , Booth is an Anglican lay @-@ preacher , and often invokes religious and ethical arguments while talking about issues such as sportsmanship . Booth became intensely religious in the 1950s after befriending Pastor Roy Gray , a colleague in district cricket and a classmate at Sydney Teachers College . Gray challenged his friend 's faith , and Booth reflected that " Until that point , sport had really been my God " . During Booth 's career , the media made much of his religious convictions . After scoring his maiden Test century , Booth was asked whether he felt that God was with him . He replied in the affirmative , and the next day , a newspaper printed the headline " England can 't win . God is on Brian Booth 's side . " 
 Booth co @-@ authored Cricket and Christianity with Paul White and wrote Hockey Fundamentals and Booth to Bat . In 1998 he wrote Sport and sportsmanship : a Christian perspective towards 2000 for the Australian Christian Forum on Education . He believed that the foundations of sport were courtesy and fairness , and he condemned the prevalence of verbal jousting in the modern game . During his career , Booth often spoke at religious functions in combination with other Christian cricketers . He appeared with the English Test opener Reverend David Sheppard at Sydney Town Hall and preached with Conrad Hunte in the West Indies . 
 Despite Booth 's views being more genteel than that of most of his team @-@ mates , there was minimal friction or disconnect . Early in his state career , Booth declined to join a Melbourne Cup gambling sweep organised by captain Keith Miller . However , Miller included Booth in the event by assigning him to look after the money . Booth said " That was typical of Keith . That he was able to turn something that might have been a problem into something positive , giving me a responsibility , making me feel part of the team . " He added " The boys just accepted me for what I was . If they didn 't share the strength of my convictions , they were quite happy for me to hold them . " Simpson said that Booth never attempted to impose his worldview on his teammates and never gave any inkling that he disapproved of their behaviour . 
 = = Outside cricket = = 
 After retirement , Booth resumed full @-@ time duties as a Sydney schoolmaster . He spent 12 years as a teacher in the government secondary schools of New South Wales before becoming an instructor in physical education at Sydney Teachers College in 1967 . Before retiring in 1989 , Booth served as the head of the Health and Human Movement Studies Department at the Sydney Institute of Education — the successor of the STC — for five years . In 1958 , he married Judith Williams , whom he met at STC . They had four daughters , the first being born in 1961 , and six grandchildren . Booth is the uncle of hammer thrower Brooke Krueger @-@ Billett , who represented Australia at the 2006 Commonwealth Games . 
 In 1967 , Booth was appointed as the founding chairman of the Youth Advisory Council , a body that sought to address community issues such as hooliganism . Booth was made a life member of the New South Wales Cricket Association ( NSWCA ) in 1974 and served as a vice @-@ president for four years from 1973 – 74 onwards . He was awarded life membership of the Marylebone Cricket Club , the home of cricket . Booth has remained involved in grassroots cricket with St George . He has served as the club president among other positions on the executive committee , and currently serves as a coach . The Booth Saunders pavilion at the club 's home ground , Hurstville Oval , is jointly named in his honour . He is also the patron of the St George Randwick Men 's Hockey Club and the St George Women 's Hockey Club . 
 In the 1974 Federal Election , Booth gained preselection as the Liberal candidate for the Division of St George , standing against Science Minister William Morrison of the ruling Australian Labor Party in the federal election . The seat , which had changed hands at several elections in the past , was held by Morrison for Labor , who were returned to office . In 1982 , Booth was awarded a MBE for " services to the community and sport " . 
 In 2002 , Booth returned to the public spotlight when he condemned the sledging , or verbal intimidation tactics , that are used in modern cricket . He stated " I can 't remember in the games that I played in , I can 't ever remember being sledged , and I can 't ever remember sledging anybody " , in reference to Steve Waugh 's Australian team , which was perceived as being too hostile . In the Australian edition of the 2002 Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack , he wrote a chapter titled " The Curse of <unk> " . 
 Booth was inducted into the Cricket NSW Hall of Fame in 2014 alongside Geoff Lawson and Margaret Peden . 
 = Ivor McIntyre = 
 Ivor Ewing McIntyre , CBE , AFC & Bar ( 6 October 1899 – 12 March 1928 ) was a pilot in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . He gained national recognition in 1924 when he and Wing Commander Stanley Goble became the first men to circumnavigate Australia by air . Two years later , under the command of Group Captain Richard Williams , McIntyre piloted the first international flight undertaken by an RAAF plane and crew ; this feat earned him the first Air Force Cross awarded to an RAAF member . Born and raised in England , McIntyre had served with the Royal Naval Air Service and Royal Air Force in World War I before joining the RAAF . He left the Air Force in 1927 to become an instructor with the South Australian branch of the Australian Aero Club , and died after a plane crash the following year . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Ivor Ewing McIntyre was born on 6 October 1899 in Kent , England , the son of Captain Duncan McIntyre . He joined the Royal Naval Air Service ( RNAS ) in 1917 , and saw action in World War I as a flight sub @-@ lieutenant . McIntyre transferred to the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) on its creation as an independent service in 1918 , and was a lieutenant when awarded the Air Force Cross in the 1919 New Year Honours . He was granted a short @-@ service commission in the RAF as a flying officer on 12 December 1919 . 
 McIntyre joined the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) in 1923 . In November that year , he piloted a survey flight between Melbourne and Sydney , and carried out a similar mission between Melbourne and Hobart in February 1924 . In July 1925 , McIntyre was tasked by the Chief of the Air Staff with intercepting a squadron of the United States Pacific Fleet as it approached Melbourne on a flag @-@ waving visit ; he succeeded in doing so despite poor weather and not without , according to the official history of the inter @-@ war RAAF , " an enormous element of luck , not to mention risk " . 
 = = Pioneering flights = = 
 = = = Circumnavigation of Australia = = = 
 In 1924 , McIntyre and Wing Commander ( later Air Vice Marshal ) Stanley Goble , another veteran of the RNAS , became the first men to circumnavigate Australia by air . McIntyre was lead pilot while Goble , who was Chief of the Air Staff at the time , acted as commander and navigator . The pair took off from Point Cook , Victoria , on 6 April 1924 in a single @-@ engined Fairey IIID floatplane . They flew anticlockwise along the eastern coast to Thursday Island , Queensland , then crossed the Gulf of Carpentaria to Darwin , Northern Territory , and continued along the Western Australian and South Australian coasts . Along the way they faced adverse weather , fatigue and illness , and had to deal with engine problems and fuel leaks . 
 McIntyre and Goble returned to Victoria after covering 8 @,@ 450 miles ( 13 @,@ 600 km ) in 44 days . As they flew over Point Cook , 12 RAAF aircraft took off to escort them to their landing place at St Kilda Beach , where a crowd of 10 @,@ 000 people was waiting to welcome them . Prime Minister Stanley Bruce called the journey " one of the most wonderful accomplishments in the history of aviation " ; his government presented McIntyre with a gift of ₤ 250 , while mission commander Goble received ₤ 500 . The British Royal Aero Club awarded the duo the annual Britannia Trophy , and they were appointed Commanders of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in the King 's Birthday Honours . McIntyre was also awarded the Oswald Watt Gold Medal for 1924 , and promoted to flight lieutenant effective from 31 March that year . 
 = = = Pacific Islands flight = = = 
 In 1926 , McIntyre was selected as lead pilot on another pioneering Australian flight under the command of the then @-@ Chief of the Air Staff , Group Captain ( later Air Marshal Sir ) Richard Williams , to study the South Pacific region as a potential theatre of operations . In company with Flight Sergeant Les Trist , they took off from Point Cook on 26 September 1926 and made a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 16 @,@ 000 km ) round trip to the Solomon Islands in a De Havilland <unk> floatplane . The DH.50 's fuselage bore the words " Royal Australian Air Force " , the first aircraft to do so . Like the circumnavigation of Australia in 1924 , this flight was not without its difficulties . Approaching Southport , Queensland , on 29 September , the DH.50 lost power and had to land in the ocean ; after making repairs , McIntyre was twice thrown clear of the aircraft while taxiing to the beach in heavy surf . The expedition returned on 7 December to a 12 @-@ plane RAAF escort and a 300 @-@ man honour guard . 
 Though subsequently described as partly a " matter of prestige " owing to rumours of other countries planning such a journey , as well as a " reaction " by Williams to the 1924 expedition led by Goble , Williams ' rival at the time for leadership of the young Air Force , this was the first international flight undertaken by an RAAF plane and crew . McIntyre was awarded a second Oswald Watt Gold Medal , and a Bar to his AFC , for his part in the flight ; it marked the first occasion that the AFC was awarded to a member of the RAAF . Trist received the Air Force Medal , and Williams was appointed a CBE . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 McIntyre left the RAAF in November 1927 to become a flying instructor for the newly formed South Australian section of the Australian Aero Club . He died in an Adelaide hospital on 12 March 1928 of injuries received the previous day , when he crashed the club 's Moth trainer while giving an aerobatics display at Parafield . Goble said of him , " That he did sterling work with our air force is well known , but it is doubtful whether the majority of the people in Australia have a true appreciation of the greatness of this man and the magnitude and difficulties of many of the tasks he performed . " 
 In 1994 , <unk> and Goble were honoured by the issue of a postage stamp by Australia Post , one of a series depicting Australian aviators that also included Freda Thompson , Lawrence Hargrave , Sir Keith and Sir Ross Macpherson Smith . 
 = 61 Cygni = 
 61 Cygni / <unk> / is a binary star system in the constellation Cygnus , consisting of a pair of K @-@ type dwarf stars that orbit each other in a period of about 659 years . Of apparent magnitude 5 @.@ 20 and 6 @.@ 05 respectively , they can be seen with binoculars in city skies or with the naked eye in rural areas without light pollution . 
 61 Cygni first attracted the attention of astronomers when its large proper motion was first demonstrated by Giuseppe Piazzi in 1804 . In 1838 , Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel measured its distance from Earth at about 10 @.@ 3 light years , very close to the actual value of about 11 @.@ 4 light years ; this was the first distance estimate for any star other than the Sun , and first star to have its stellar parallax measured . Among all stars or stellar systems listed in the modern Hipparcos Catalogue , 61 Cygni currently has the seventh highest proper motion , and the highest among all visible stars or systems . 
 Over the course of the twentieth century , several different astronomers reported evidence of a massive planet orbiting one of the two stars , but recent high @-@ precision radial velocity observations have shown that all such claims were unfounded . No habitable planets have been confirmed in this stellar system to date . 
 = = Name = = 
 61 Cygni is relatively dim , so it does not appear on ancient star maps , nor is it given a name in western or Chinese systems . 
 The name " 61 Cygni " is part of the Flamsteed designation assigned to stars . According to this designation scheme , devised by John Flamsteed to catalog his observations , stars of a particular constellation are numbered in the order of their right ascension , not in Greek letters as the Bayer designation does . The star does not appear under that name in Flamsteed 's Historia Coelestis Britannica , although it has been stated by him that 61 Cygni actually corresponds to what he referred to as 85 Cygni in the 1712 edition . It has also been called " Bessel 's Star " or " Piazzi 's Flying Star " . 
 = = Observation history = = 
 = = = Early observations = = = 
 The first well recorded observation of the star system using optical instruments was made by James Bradley on 25 September 1753 , when he noticed that it was a double star . William Herschel began systematic observations of 61 Cygni as part of a wider study of binary stars . His observations led to the conclusion that binary stars were separated enough that they would show different movements in parallax over the year , and hoped to use this as a way to measure the distance to the stars . 
 In 1792 , Giuseppe Piazzi noticed the high proper motion when he compared his own observations of 61 Cygni with those of Bradley , made 40 years earlier . This led to considerable interest in 61 Cygni by contemporary astronomers , and its continual observation since that date . Piazzi 's repeated measurements led to a definitive value of its motion , which he published in 1804 . It was in this record he christened the system as the " Flying Star " . 
 Piazzi noted that this motion meant that it was probably one of the closest stars , and suggested it would be a prime candidate for an attempt to determine its distance though parallax measurements , along with two other possibilities , Delta Eridani and Mu Cassiopeiae . 
 = = = Parallax measurement = = = 
 A number of astronomers soon took up the task , including attempts by François Arago and Claude @-@ Louis Mathieu in 1812 , who recorded the distance at 500 milliarcseconds ( mas ) , and Christian Heinrich Friedrich Peters used Arago 's data to calculate a value of 550 mas . Peters calculated a better value based on observations made by Bernhard von Lindenau at Seeburg between 1812 and 1814 ; he calculated it to be 470 ± 510 mas . Von Lindenau had already noted that he had seen no parallax , and as Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve pointed out after his own test series between 1818 and 1821 , all of these numbers are more accurate than the accuracy of the instrument used . 
 Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel made a notable contribution in 1812 when he used a different method to measure distance . Assuming the orbital period of the two stars in the binary to be 400 years , he estimated the distance between the two this would require , and then measured the angular distance between the stars . This led to a value of 460 mas . He then followed this up with direct parallax measurements in a series of observations between 1815 and 1816 , comparing it with six other stars . The two sets of measurements produced values of 760 and 1320 mas . All of these estimates , like earlier attempts by others , retained inaccuracies greater than the measurements . 
 When Joseph von Fraunhofer invented a new type of <unk> , Bessel carried out another set of measurements using this device in 1837 and 1838 at Königsberg . He published his findings in 1838 with a value of 369 @.@ 0 ± 19 @.@ 1 mas to A and 260 @.@ 5 ± 18 @.@ 8 to B , and estimated the center point to be at 313 @.@ 6 ± 13 @.@ 6 . This corresponds to a distance of about 600 @,@ 000 astronomical units , or about 10 @.@ 4 light years . This was the first direct and reliable measurement of the distance to a star other than the Sun . His measurement was published only shortly before similar parallax measurements of Vega by Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve and Alpha Centauri by Thomas Henderson that same year . Bessel continued to make additional measurements at Königsberg , publishing a total of four complete observational runs , the last in 1868 . The best of these placed the center point at 360 @.@ 2 ± 12 @.@ 1 mas , made during observations in 1849 . This is close to the currently accepted value of 287 @.@ 18 mas ( yielding 11 @.@ 36 light years ) . 
 Only a few years after Bessel 's measurement , in 1842 Friedrich Wilhelm Argelander noted that Groombridge 1830 had an even larger proper motion , and 61 Cygni became the second highest known . It was later moved further down the list by Kapteyn 's Star and Barnard 's Star . 61 Cygni currently has the seventh highest proper motion of all stellar systems listed in the modern Hipparcos Catalogue , but retains the title of highest proper motion among visible stars . 
 By 1911 , further observations had improved on Bessel 's parallax measurement of 313 @.@ 6 mas to 310 @.@ 0 mas . This corresponds to a motion transverse to our line of sight of 79 km / s . Observations at Yerkes Observatory had measured its radial velocity as 62 km / s . Using the two measurements together yielded a space velocity of about 100 km / s , moving towards a point about 12 degrees west of Orion 's belt . 
 = = = Binary observations = = = 
 Due to the wide angular separation between A and B , and the correspondingly slow orbital motion , it was initially unclear whether the two stars in the 61 Cygni system were a gravitationally bound system or simply a juxtaposition of <unk> von Struve first argued for its status as a binary in 1830 , but the matter remained open . 
 However , by 1917 refined measured parallax differences demonstrated that the separation was significantly less . The binary nature of this system was clear by 1934 , and orbital elements were published . 
 In 1911 , Benjamin Boss published data indicating that the 61 Cygni system was a member of a comoving group of stars . This group containing 61 Cygni was later expanded to include 26 potential members . Possible members include Beta Columbae , Pi <unk> , 14 Tauri and 68 Virginis . The space velocities of this group of stars range from 105 – 114 km / s relative to the Sun . 
 = = Amateur observation = = 
 An observer using 7 × 50 binoculars can find 61 Cygni two binocular fields southeast of the bright star Deneb . The angular separation of the two stars is slightly greater than the angular size of Saturn ( 16 – 20 ″ ) . So , under ideal viewing conditions , the binary system can be resolved by a telescope with a 7 mm aperture . This is well within the capability for aperture of typical binoculars , though to resolve the binary these need a steady mount and some 10x magnification . With a separation of 28 arc @-@ seconds between the component stars , 10x magnification would give an apparent separation of 280 arc @-@ seconds , above the generally @-@ regarded eye resolution limit of 4 arc @-@ minutes or 240 arc @-@ seconds . 
 = = Properties = = 
 Although it appears to be a single star to the naked eye , 61 Cygni is in fact a widely separated binary star system , composed of two K class ( orange ) main sequence stars , the brighter 61 Cygni A and fainter 61 Cygni B , which have apparent magnitudes of 5 @.@ 2 and 6 @.@ 1 respectively . Both appear to be old @-@ disk stars , with an estimated age that is older than the Sun . The system has a net space velocity of 108 km / s relative to the Sun , which results in the high proper motion across the sky . At a distance of just over 11 light years , it is the 15th nearest known star system to the Earth ( not including the Sun ) . 61 Cygni A is the fourth nearest star that is visible to the naked eye for mid @-@ latitude northern observers , after Sirius , Epsilon Eridani , and Procyon A. This system will make its closest approach at about 20 @,@ 000 CE , when the separation from the Sun will be about 9 light years . 
 61 Cygni A 's long term stability led to it being selected as an " anchor star " in the Morgan – Keenan ( MK ) classification system in 1943 , serving as the K5 V " anchor point " since that time . Starting in 1953 , 61 Cygni B has been considered a K7 V standard star ( Johnson & Morgan 1953 , Keenan & McNeil 1989 ) . 
 61 Cygni A is a typical BY Draconis variable star designated as <unk> Cyg while 61 Cygni B is a flare type variable star named HD <unk> with their magnitudes varying 5 @.@ 21 V and 6 @.@ 03 respectively . The two stars orbit their common barycenter in a period of 659 years , with a mean separation of about 84 AU — 84 times the separation between the Earth and the Sun . The relatively large orbital eccentricity of 0 @.@ 48 means that the two stars are separated by about 44 AU at periapsis and 124 AU at apoapsis . The leisurely orbit of the pair has made it difficult to pin down their respective masses , and the accuracy of these values remain somewhat controversial . In the future this issue may be resolved through the use of asteroseismology . 61 Cygni A has about 11 % more mass than 61 Cygni B. 
 It has an activity cycle that is much more pronounced than the solar sunspot cycle . This is a complex activity cycle that varies with a period of about 7 @.@ 5 ± 1 @.@ 7 years . ( An earlier estimate gave a period of 7 @.@ 3 years . ) The combination of starspot activity combined with rotation and chromospheric activity is characteristic of a BY Draconis variable . Because of differential rotation , this star 's surface rotation period varies by latitude from 27 to 45 days , with an average period of 35 days . 
 The outflow of the stellar wind from component A produces a bubble within the local interstellar cloud . Along the direction of the star 's motion within the Milky Way , this extends out to a distance of only 30 AU , or roughly the orbital distance of Neptune from the Sun . This is lower than the separation between the two components of 61 Cygni , and so the two most likely do not share a common atmosphere . The compactness of the astrosphere is likely due to the low mass outflow and the relatively high velocity through the local medium . 
 61 Cygni B displays a more chaotic pattern of variability than A , with significant short @-@ term flares . There is an 11 @.@ 7 @-@ year periodicity to the overall activity cycle of B. Both stars exhibit stellar flare activity , but the chromosphere of B is 25 % more active than for 61 Cygni A. As a result of differential rotation , the period of rotation varies by latitude from 32 to 47 days , with an average period of 38 days . 
 There is some disagreement over the evolutionary age of this system . Kinematic data gives an age estimate of about 10 Gyr . <unk> , or the age determination of a star based on its rotation and color , results in an average age of 2 @.@ 0 ± 0 @.@ 2 Gyr . The ages based on chromospheric activity for A and B are 2 @.@ 36 Gyr and 3 @.@ 75 Gyr , respectively . Finally the age estimates using the <unk> method , which involve fitting the stars to evolutionary models , yield upper limits of 0 @.@ 44 Gyr and 0 @.@ 68 Gyr . However , a 2008 evolutionary model using the <unk> code from the Côte d 'Azur Observatory gives an age estimate of 6 @.@ 0 ± 1 @.@ 0 Gyr for the pair . 
 = = Claims of a planetary system = = 
 On several occasions , it has been claimed that 61 Cygni might have unseen low @-@ mass companions , planets or a brown dwarf . Kaj Strand of the Sproul Observatory , under the direction of Peter van de Kamp , made the first such claim in 1942 using observations to detect tiny but systematic variations in the orbital motions of 61 Cygni A and B. These perturbations suggested that a third body of about 16 Jupiter masses must be orbiting 61 Cygni A. Reports of this third body served as inspiration for Hal Clement 's 1953 science fiction novel Mission of Gravity . In 1957 , van de Kamp narrowed his uncertainties , claiming that the object had a mass of eight times that of Jupiter , a calculated orbital period of 4 @.@ 8 years , and a semi @-@ major axis of 2 @.@ 4 AU . In 1977 , Soviet astronomers at the <unk> Observatory near Saint Petersburg suggested that the system included three planets : two giant planets with six and twelve Jupiter masses around 61 Cyg A , and one giant planet with seven Jupiter masses around 61 Cygni B. 
 In 1978 , Wulff @-@ Dieter Heintz of the Sproul Observatory proved that these claims , as well as the claims for unseen companions around many other stars , were spurious , having failed to detect any evidence of such motion down to six percent of the Sun 's mass — equivalent to about 60 times the mass of Jupiter . 
 The habitable zone for 61 Cygni A , defined as the locations where liquid water could be present on an Earth @-@ like planet , is 0 @.@ 26 – 0 @.@ 58 AU , where 1 AU is the average distance from the Earth to the Sun . For 61 Cygni B , the habitable zone is 0 @.@ 24 – 0 @.@ 50 . 
 = = = Refining planetary boundaries = = = 
 Since no certain planetary object has been detected around either star so far , McDonald Observatory team has set limits to the presence of one or more planets around 61 Cygni A and 61 Cygni B with masses between 0 @.@ 07 and 2 @.@ 1 Jupiter masses and average separations spanning between 0 @.@ 05 and 5 @.@ 2 AU . 
 Because of the proximity of this system to the Sun , it is a frequent target of interest for astronomers . Both stars were selected by NASA as " Tier 1 " targets for the proposed optical Space Interferometry Mission . This mission is potentially capable of detecting planets with as little as 3 times the mass of the Earth at an orbital distance of 2 AU from the star . 
 Measurements of this system appeared to have detected an excess of far infrared radiation , beyond what is emitted by the stars . Such an excess is sometimes associated with a disk of dust , but in this case it lies sufficiently close to one or both of the stars that it has not been resolved with a telescope . A 2011 study using the Keck Interferometer Nuller failed to detect any exozodiacal dust around 61 Cygni A. 
 = U2 360 ° Tour = 
 The U2 360 ° Tour was a worldwide concert tour by rock band U2 . Launched in support of the group 's 2009 album No Line on the Horizon , the tour visited stadiums from 2009 through 2011 . It was named for a stage configuration that allowed the audience to almost completely surround the stage . To accommodate this , a massive four @-@ legged structure nicknamed " The Claw " was built above the stage , with the sound system and a cylindrical , expanding video screen on top of it . U2 claimed that the tour would be " the first time a band has toured in stadiums with such a unique and original structure . " 
 In an era of declining music sales , analysts expected U2 360 ° to be a major source of income for the band . Every date of the tour sold out , many within minutes of tickets going on sale . To accommodate the time required to assemble and transport " The Claw " between tour dates , three separate stage structures were required on tour . The 360 @-@ degree production increased the capacity of venues by up to 25 % , leading to attendance records at over 60 venues . Various themes were incorporated into the shows ; portions of the concerts featured outer space themes , due to " The Claw 's " resemblance to a spaceship . Pre @-@ recorded messages from the International Space Station were displayed during the shows , as were sociopolitical statements from Desmond Tutu and Aung San Suu Kyi . The setlists were adjusted for each year of the tour ; for the 2010 shows , unreleased songs were debuted live , while for 2011 legs , the group performed more 1990s songs to mark the 20th anniversary of the release of Achtung Baby . 
 Comprising three legs and 110 shows , the tour began on 30 June 2009 in Barcelona , Spain and concluded on 30 July 2011 in Moncton , Canada . It twice visited Europe and North America , while making stops in South America , Africa , and Oceania . The 2010 North American leg of the tour was postponed until the following year after frontman Bono suffered a serious back injury . U2 won Billboard Touring Awards for Top Tour and Top Draw of 2010 and 2011 , and for Top Boxscore at a single venue in 2009 for shows at Croke Park in Dublin . A 2009 show at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena , near Los Angeles , United States was filmed for the concert video U2360 ° at the Rose Bowl and was streamed live over YouTube ; the concert set a new US attendance record for a single headlining act . The tour was generally well received by critics and fans . By its conclusion , U2 360 ° had set records for the highest @-@ grossing concert tour with $ 736 million in ticket sales , and for the highest @-@ attended tour with over 7 @.@ 2 million tickets sold . 
 = = Conception and stage design = = 
 Willie Williams , who has worked on every U2 tour since the 1982 – 1983 War Tour , was again a designer for this tour ; Mark Fisher served as the architect . Williams had been toying with ideas for 360 @-@ degree stadium staging for U2 for a number of years , and presented sketches of a four @-@ legged design to the group near the end of their Vertigo Tour in 2006 . The inspiration for the " spaceship @-@ on @-@ four @-@ legs " design , nicknamed " the Claw " , came from the landmark Theme Building at Los Angeles International Airport . Early reports referred to it as the Kiss the Future Tour , though the name was later changed . 
 The tour featured a 360 @-@ degree configuration , with the stage being placed closer to the center of the stadium 's field than usual . The stage design featured a large four @-@ legged steel structure that held the speaker system and cylindrical video screen and hovered above the performance area . The stage was surrounded by a circular ramp , which connected to the stage by rotating bridges . Fans with general admission tickets could be placed both outside the ramp as well as between the ramp and stage . The stage had no defined front or back and was surrounded by the audience . The stage design was able to increase the venues ' capacities by about 15 – 20 % . Tiered football stadiums were preferred venues in this scheme , compared to flat fields or baseball stadiums , although a few of the latter added to the routing . As with many large @-@ scale tours of its era , the U2 360 ° Tour had both the workforce and the revenues associated with a medium @-@ sized company . 
 The stages were built by the Belgian company <unk> along with the U.S.-based company <unk> . Each stage deployed high @-@ pressure , state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art hydraulic systems . These were used for the first time ever to assemble and dismantle the high tonnage structure . <unk> designed a unique system , based on <unk> 's Synchronous Lift System , to raise the modular construction to a height of 30 metres in an efficient and effective manner . 
 The steel structure was 51 metres ( 167 feet ) tall ( doubling the size of the stadium set for The Rolling Stones ' A Bigger Bang Tour , the previous record holder ) , was able to hold up to 200 tonnes underneath it , and required 120 trucks to transport each of the three sets constructed to support the tour . Each leg of the structure contained its own sound system . The cost of each structure was between £ 15 million and £ 20 million ( $ 23 million and $ 31 million , respectively ) . As a result , the tour was heavily insured . The size of the stage led to some problems with its construction in certain venues . The band paid $ 2 million to raise the HD video screen in Cowboys Stadium for their concert in Arlington , and paid $ 3 million to expand the Hippodrome de Montréal into a temporary stadium for their concert in Montreal . The 360 ° tour crew consisted of 137 touring production crew supplemented by over 120 hired locally . Daily costs of the production were approximately $ 750 @,@ 000 , not including the stage construction ; the majority of this came from truck rentals , transportation , and staff wages . The tour was not expected to break even until the conclusion of the second leg . 
 When the tour was announced , U2 guitarist The Edge said of the show 's design : " It 's hard to come up with something that 's fundamentally different , but we have , I think , on this tour . Where we 're taking our production will never have been seen before by anybody , and that 's an amazing thing to be able to say . For a band like U2 that really thrives on breaking new ground , it 's a real thrill . " Lead singer Bono said the design was intended to overcome the staid traditional appearance of outdoor concerts where the stage was dominated by speaker stacks on either side : " We have some magic , and we 've got some beautiful objects we 're going to take around the world , and we 're inside that object . " He also said that the group 's goal was for the show to not be too choreographed . Williams said the goal is to establish a physical proximity : " The band is just sitting in the palm of the audience 's hand . " At the conclusion of the tour , the intent was to leave the three structures in different parts of the globe and turn them into permanent concert venues . An auction of the stages was planned following the last concert . 
 The transforming video screen was designed by Mark Fisher in a collaboration with Chuck Hoberman and Frederic <unk> . The screen was fabricated by <unk> 's company Innovative Designs of Belgium , using LED pixels manufactured by Barco . The screen was purchased and rented to the tour by XL Video . It is made up of elongated hexagonal segments mounted on a multiple pantograph system , which enables it to " open up " or spread apart vertically as an effect during the concerts . The video screen is composed of over one million pieces : 411 @,@ 000 pixels , 320 @,@ 000 fasteners , 150 @,@ 000 machined pieces , and 30 @,@ 000 cables are needed to create the visual display at each concert . The screen is mounted on a cabled pulley system to enable the entire screen and pantograph system to move lower and closer to the band . The automation for the screen deployment was provided by <unk> UK . The LED segments of the screen are weather @-@ resistant . 
 U2 announced that it would purchase carbon offsets to take into consideration the environmental impact of the large production , which has been estimated to be up to 65 @,@ 000 tonnes of carbon dioxide ; approximately the same amount that would be emitted in flying a passenger plane 34 million miles . In addition to the carbon offsets , the band also set up a page on <unk> so that people could carpool to concerts in an attempt to lower the carbon footprint . Additionally they launched a fan travel carbon offset program in partnership with Offset Options . Most of the carbon emissions are a result of transporting the three stage structures across Europe and North America . An environmental consultant to <unk> noted that to offset the tour 's 2009 emissions , the band would have to plant over 20 @,@ 000 trees . In an interview with BBC Radio , The Edge reiterated that U2 were offsetting their carbon emissions , also stating , " We 'd love to have some alternative to big trucks bringing the stuff around but there just isn 't one . " 
 Load @-@ out of the massive set from venues took as much as 3 1 ⁄ 2 days . Sound and light equipment was packed into the fleet of trucks first during the four hours following the concert ; the remainder of the time was spent deconstructing the steel structures making up the stage using four cranes . The extensive amount of time it took to assemble and disassemble the stage interfered with the development of the schedule for the 2010 Major League Baseball season . U2 was also forced to reschedule what would have been their final Giants Stadium concert , when the NFL changed the start time of a New York Jets game , and load @-@ out time from the concert a day and a half prior would have been insufficient . 
 = = Commercial partnerships and philanthropy = = 
 The tour was U2 's first under their 12 @-@ year deal with Live Nation . It was sponsored by BlackBerry , in a move that broke U2 's prior relationship with Apple Inc. and opened possibilities for collaborations between U2 and Research In Motion on mobile music experiences . Lead singer Bono said of the new relationship , " I 'm very excited about this . Research in Motion is going to give us what Apple wouldn 't : access to their labs and their people so we can do something really spectacular . " The explicit corporate sponsorship of a tour was a first for the group , and was due to the anticipated production costs being higher than for any previous U2 tour . The first commercials for a new Blackberry application , called the " U2 Mobile App " , began airing in early July 2009 against the song " I 'll Go Crazy If I Don 't Go Crazy Tonight " ; the application allows the user to listen to the album No Line on the Horizon , contains a news section which features updates about the tour , and an interactive section that allows the sharing of images and enables the user to see their position during a concert relative to the band and other application users . Models of the stage were added to Google Earth approximately a week before the scheduled concert took place ; tour architect Mark Fisher stated , " We thought it would be interesting to put up on Google Earth a piece of portable architecture . " 
 A category of stage @-@ close seats called " The Red Zone " was created to be sold by an auction process , at prices estimated at up to € 1 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @,@ 300 ) . All proceeds are to be donated by U2 members to charity , with The Global Fund to Fight AIDS , Tuberculosis and Malaria expected to receive much of it . Approximately € 9 million ( $ 11 million ) in U2 360 ° Tour profits is expected to go to charity . The band asked fans to bring masks of Aung San Suu Kyi to concerts and wear them during performances of " Walk On " in her support ; the song was originally written for Suu Kyi . 
 The tour was subject to minor criticisms , at both the events surrounding the opening concerts in Barcelona , and the concerts in Dublin . When rehearsing for the tour in Barcelona , residents of the city complained about the band 's noise after 10 pm , which was the time until which the city allowed the band to rehearse . The setup of the band 's stage for the Croke Park concerts in Dublin was criticised by fans for only allowing seating around part of the circular @-@ shaped stage , taking away from the 360 ° seating configuration that was used at other venues . One fan claimed that only 270 ° of seating around the stage was being utilised for the three Dublin concerts , and that there was no reason that the stage could not be placed in the middle of the venue . Additional criticisms about the Croke Park shows arose from about 80 Dublin citizens , who protested against the Dublin City Council for allowing the band 's crew to dismantle the stage in the middle of the night following the three concerts , due to the loud noises caused by the crew . The protest blocked several crew trucks from exiting the venue , putting the tour behind schedule , and tour promoter MCD Productions delivered a letter to the protesters informing them that they could be sued for any of the tour 's financial losses due to the protest . In addition to the loudness of the band 's crew , the Dublin City Council decided to withhold the band 's € 80 @,@ 000 ( $ 104 @,@ 000 ) bond , after breaking the 75 decibel maximum volume at all three of the Dublin concerts . 
 Like most concerts , tour venues have benefited from hosting concerts . North Carolina State University 's agreement with Live Nation resulted in $ 166 @,@ 000 in parking proceeds and $ 175 @,@ 858 food and beverage concessions . Additionally Live Nation agreed to pay for replacing the sod on the football field where the stage and floor seating was located up to a cost of $ 250 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Ticketing and itinerary = = 
 The initial tour dates were announced in March 2009 . U2 played 44 shows in that year . The tour began in Barcelona on 30 June and played in Europe through 22 August 2009 . The North American leg of the tour began on 12 September 2009 in Chicago followed by two nights in Toronto and ended on 28 October 2009 in Vancouver . The band played in Europe in 2010 following the postponement of the second North American leg until 2011 . They finished 2010 by playing Australia and New Zealand in November and December . There were multiple shows in each city making it the largest stadium tour of Australia in the band 's history . 
 U2 manager Paul McGuinness confessed anxiety over initial ticket sales taking place during the late 2000s recession . Drummer Larry Mullen , Jr. said , " Will we sell it out ? Who knows ? Will the economic situation have an impact ? Probably . But that 's not going to stop us . " Bono said , " I want to put on an extraordinary show , but I ’ d like to own my house when it 's over . " The tour featured a tiered pricing system for tickets ; the most expensive ticket being slightly higher in price than the last tour , but the cheapest tickets , the general admission tickets , being lower . Playing larger capacity venues allowed the band to price tickets more conservatively and subsidise less expensive tickets with costlier ones . In the US , field level tickets were priced at $ 55 , and approximately 10 @,@ 000 tickets per show were priced at $ 30 . The price points were $ 30 , $ 55 , and depending on the market , $ 90 – 95 and $ 250 . McGuinness said , " We have worked very hard to ensure that U2 fans can purchase a great @-@ priced ticket with a guaranteed great view . " 
 Tickets for European shows first went on sale in mid @-@ March , with high demand . Shows in Gothenburg , Amsterdam and Milan sold out reasonably fast , with second dates being added in each city ; those also sold out quickly . In The Netherlands , demand rendered all of KPN 's 0900 paid service numbers unreachable . The nearly 90 @,@ 000 tickets for the opening concert in Barcelona were sold in 54 minutes , establishing a new record for concerts in Spain . The tour set a record by selling 650 @,@ 000 tickets in seven hours . Regarding the quick sellout of two Croke Park shows in Dublin , Bono said : " It 's overwhelming , really . It 's a very big deal for us to sell @-@ out our hometown at such speed , it 's unbelievable . ... We don 't take anything for granted . " Fans from all around the world travelled to Ireland for the band 's hometown shows , leading the Gaelic Athletic Association to close their museum in Croke Park for the duration of the events due to fears over security and excessive demand . The Croke Park shows later won Top Boxscore at the 2009 Billboard Touring Awards . 
 The first North American tickets went on sale in late March . Fans who purchased general admission tickets were given seating closest to the stage on a first @-@ come , first @-@ served basis . <unk> were held for U2.com subscribers , with those holding membership the longest getting the first chance to purchase tickets . Sales were strong , with initial dates in Chicago and outside Boston and New York selling out within minutes once the public sale began , and with second shows being added at each venue . Due to the higher capacity of the 360 degree configuration , the shows often set records for the largest concert attendance at each venue ; tour director Craig Evans claims the tour set attendance records for 60 different venues . Two of the U2 360 ° Tour 's concerts remain in the top five highest @-@ attended single concerts in the United States ever , with the 25 October performance in Pasadena , California , setting the record at 97 @,@ 014 attendees . 
 The high US demand for tickets for the tour , and the difficulty which some fans had in getting them , brought attention to rapidity with which tickets turned up on the higher @-@ priced secondary market . Some tickets were being resold on the secondary market for prices of up to $ 7 @,@ 500 . Additionally , pre @-@ sale passwords were being sold on eBay for bids of up to $ 400 . Although some artists were known to be holding back tickets from general sale and delivering them straight into the secondary market , Live Nation said that U2 did not engage in this practice . 
 = = = Postponement of 2010 North American shows = = = 
 Bono sustained an injury to his back during preparation for the North American third leg of the tour , the damage to which included sciatica , a ligament tear , a herniated disc , and partial paralysis of his lower leg and resulted in the need for emergency spine surgery at Ludwig <unk> @-@ University Hospital in Munich . Following the surgery , Live Nation announced that the opening concert in Salt Lake City , which had been scheduled to take place on 3 June 2010 , would be postponed to a later date , with other dates also potentially being affected . His doctors , who included noted sports physician Hans @-@ Wilhelm Müller @-@ Wohlfahrt , then said Bono had a good prognosis but would need eight weeks of physical rehabilitation , and McGuinness and Live Nation announced that the entire North American leg was being postponed and would be rescheduled into 2011 . McGuinness stated , " Our biggest and I believe best tour has been interrupted and we 're all devastated . For a performer who lives to be on stage , this is more than a blow . He [ Bono ] feels robbed of the chance to do what he does best and feels like he has badly let down the band and their audience . " 
 On 13 July 2010 , the rescheduled concert dates were announced for 2011 , beginning 11 May in Mexico City , Mexico , and ending 30 July in Moncton , Canada . Bono apologised for the inconvenience to fans over their affected travel plans , but noted that it had given the band the opportunity to record new material in the studio which U2 were considering playing live . 
 = = Concert setlists and show themes = = 
 = = = Main set = = = 
 Each concert of the U2 360 ° Tour contained between 22 and 26 songs . Two songs played over the public address system preceded the band 's arrival on stage — David Bowie 's " Space Oddity " and an outtake from the No Line on the Horizon sessions called " Soon " ( previously titled " Kingdom of Your Love " ) . The opening five tracks were identical each night on the first leg ; " Breathe " opened and was followed by " No Line on the Horizon " , " Get on Your Boots " , " Magnificent " , and " Beautiful Day " . The next few tracks featured the most variation of the setlist . " I Still Haven 't Found What I 'm Looking For " was played frequently , while early concerts featured a selection from " Angel of Harlem " , " In a Little While " , " Desire " , and " Party Girl " . Concerts later on included " Mysterious Ways " , " Until the End of the World " , " New Year 's Day " , and " Stuck in a Moment You Can 't Get Out Of " . " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " , " Elevation , and " Electrical Storm " were played on rare occasions , and " One " , which usually closed the main set , was sometimes performed about half @-@ way through . The rest of the setlist had little variation . " Unknown Caller " was played most nights , and was followed by " The Unforgettable Fire " , " City of Blinding Lights " , and " Vertigo " . The remix arrangement of " I 'll Go Crazy If I Don 't Go Crazy Tonight " was performed next , featuring Larry Mullen , Jr. walking around the outer stage playing a djembe , followed by " Sunday Bloody Sunday " , which features scenes from the 2009 Iranian election protests on the video screen . " Pride ( In the Name of Love ) " , " MLK " , " Walk On " , " Where the Streets Have No Name " , and " One " typically rounded out the main set , though the band occasionally closed it with " Bad " or " Mysterious Ways " . " One " was usually preceded by a video from Archbishop Desmond Tutu talking about aid to Africa and the ONE campaign , though the video was played prior to " Where the Streets Have No Name " on occasion . 
 The second leg of the tour featured more variation in the first part of the setlist . " Breathe " opened most concerts , though its place was occasionally taken by " Magnificent " . " No Line on the Horizon " continued to follow " Breathe " in early setlists , but was later moved back so that it followed " Beautiful Day " instead . " Mysterious Ways " and " Elevation " were performed more frequently , as was " I Still Haven 't Found What I 'm Looking For " . " Your Blue Room " , a track from Original Soundtracks 1 , made its live debut on the tour ( with recorded guest vocals by Sinéad O 'Connor ) , while " Pride ( In the Name of Love ) " was dropped . " Unknown Caller " was dropped for a period of several weeks before being revived towards the end of the leg , and " In a Little While " also returned to the setlist . 
 The third leg of the tour featured the debut of six previously unreleased songs : " North Star " , " Glastonbury " , the instrumental " Return of the Stingray Guitar " , " Every Breaking Wave " , " Mercy " and " Boy Falls from the Sky " , a song written by Bono and The Edge for the musical Spider @-@ Man : Turn Off the Dark . " Every Breaking Wave " was later released on U2 's following studio album , Songs of Innocence ( 2014 ) , and " Return of the Stingray Guitar " evolved into the backing track for the song " Lucifer 's Hands " , which was released on deluxe editions of the same album . " Breathe " , " Stuck in a Moment You Can 't Get Out Of " , and " Unknown Caller " were dropped from rotation , while " Miss Sarajevo " , " I Will Follow " , " Mothers of the Disappeared " , " Hold Me , Thrill Me , Kiss Me , Kill Me " and " Spanish Eyes " made their tour debuts . On the fourth leg of the tour , " Scarlet " was performed in place of " MLK " and dedicated to the release of Suu Kyi . " One Tree Hill " made its tour debut and was dedicated to the 29 miners who died in the Pike River Mine disaster ; their names were shown on the screen at the conclusion of the song . " All I Want Is You " and " Love Rescue Me " were also included in the set during the fourth leg . 
 During the sixth leg of the tour in South America , the " Fish Out of Water " remix of " Even Better Than The Real Thing " , later released in the 20th anniversary reissue of Achtung Baby , was revived as the show opener . " Out Of Control " and " Zooropa " were also debuted , while " In a Little While " was dropped from the setlist . The seventh leg saw the tour debut of " The Fly " . It moved " Mysterious Ways " and " Until the End of the World " both up in the setlist to be the third and fourth songs following " The Fly " . The last show in Moncton , New Brunswick had the chorus of " The Ballad of Springhill " included in the setlist , as a tribute to the nearby town of Springhill , Nova Scotia , which suffered from a large mining disaster in 1958 . 
 = = = Encores = = = 
 The encore was identical each night and consisted of " Ultraviolet ( Light My Way ) " , " With or Without You " , and " Moment of Surrender " . " Ultraviolet " featured an elaborate staging wherein Bono wore a suit with embedded with lasers that shone through the violet lighting scheme , while singing to , around , and hanging from , an illuminated steering wheel @-@ shaped microphone dropped from above . Following the band 's exit from the stage , Elton John 's " Rocket Man " was played . Beginning on the second leg of the tour " One " opened the first encore and was followed by " Where the Streets Have No Name " , with " Amazing Grace " often used to bridge between them . The second encore remained unchanged until the third leg , when " Hold Me , Thrill Me , Kiss Me , Kill Me " was debuted ; U2 rotated it with " Ultraviolet ( Light My Way ) " to open the encore . At the 2 July 2011 show in Nashville , Bono invited a visually impaired fan on @-@ stage to play " All I Want Is You " on guitar for his wife after the normal set closer " Moment of Surrender . " After the song , Bono gave the fan his Gretsch Irish Falcon guitar . At the next show on 5 July 2011 in Chicago , the band performed " One Tree Hill " to end the show in honour of New Zealander Greg Carroll , an employee of the band whose 25th death anniversary was two days prior . The band 's first single , " Out of Control " , " Bad " and " 40 " each closed a single show , each of them played after usual closer " Moment of Surrender " . 
 = = = Diversity of material performed = = = 
 " The Unforgettable Fire " and " Love Rescue Me " were played in a U2 concert for the first time since the Lovetown Tour in 1990 . " Ultraviolet ( Light My Way ) " and " Zooropa " had not been performed by the band since the Zoo TV Tour in 1993 , while " Electrical Storm " , a 2002 single from The Best of 1990 – 2000 , was played for the first time ever . " Hold Me , Thrill Me , Kiss Me , Kill Me " was played for the first time since the end of the PopMart Tour in 1998 . " Scarlet " , from the group 's 1981 album October , was played for the first time ever in a concert setting , and for the first time since 1981 . 
 = = = Rehearsals = = = 
 Before the U2 360 ° Tour commenced , " If God Will Send His Angels " , " Sometimes You Can 't Make It on Your Own " , and " Drowning Man " , a previously unplayed song from War , were rehearsed , as was " Even Better Than the Real Thing " in the Perfecto mix style , while The Edge stated in an interview with Rolling Stone that " Luminous Times ( Hold on to Love ) " was also being considered . None of these were played during the first four legs of the tour . Willie Williams stated in his 27 June 2009 tour diary entry on U2.com that the band " really wants [ Drowning Man ] to work and it sounds great " , but the rest of the setlist struggled due to the song 's " beautiful melancholy " . In his 24 July 2009 entry , Williams noted that " October " and " White as Snow " were also being considered . " Sunday Bloody Sunday " and " Mysterious Ways " were rehearsed in an acoustic style , but performances during the tour were done by the full band . Before the third leg , " Tryin ' To Throw Your Arms Around the World " was also rehearsed . 
 = = = Show themes = = = 
 Bono stated that the setlist was divided into two acts and a coda . The first half , from " Breathe " to " Vertigo " , focused on the personal , where Bono " envisages himself as a young man , struggling to find his feet in life and in search of some kind of personal epiphany . " The remix version of " I 'll Go Crazy If I Don 't Go Crazy Tonight " was created by the music team Fish out of Water as a mashup of previous remixes by <unk> and Dirty South . The " I 'll Go Crazy " remix is intended to disorient the audience as the band moves into the second act , " Sunday Bloody Sunday " to the encore , which focuses more on the political aspect of Bono 's persona , where he " [ wrestles ] with the problems of the wider world . " The coda , showcased in the encore , displays U2 " at their most raw and vulnerable , stripped to the metaphorical bone . " 
 = = Link up with the International Space Station = = 
 During some concerts on the European leg of the tour , a video link @-@ up with the crew of the International Space Station was aired . This segment was recorded by the astronauts on 26 June 2009 . In an interview with BBC Radio , Bono stated that a second video piece had been recorded where the astronauts aboard the International Space Station sang " Your Blue Room " . A NASA press release revealed that crewmember Frank De Winne had recorded the final verse of the song on 18 August 2009 . Images of the Station and of space provided to the band by NASA were presented in a video montage during the piece , recorded for the North American leg of the tour . A different video piece featuring <unk> debuted at the Las Vegas concert during " In a Little While " where Frank repeats the bridge at the very end of the song . 
 During the second North American leg , a recording of astronaut Mark Kelly during Space Shuttle Endeavour 's trip to the International Space Station was used to introduce the song " Beautiful Day . " Using lyrics from David Bowie 's " Space Oddity " , he dedicated it to his wife , US Congress member Gabrielle Giffords . The representative , injured in the 2011 Tucson shooting and still in recovery at the time of the recording , had previously selected " Beautiful Day " as a wake @-@ up call for Kelly during a previous shuttle mission . 
 = = Concert broadcast and releases = = 
 = = = U2360 ° at the Rose Bowl = = = 
 The 25 October 2009 concert from the Rose Bowl in Pasadena , California , U2 's penultimate show of the year , was simultaneously broadcast live on YouTube and filmed for a future video release . Directed by Tom Krueger , the shoot used 27 high definition cameras , and it marked the first time since 1983 's U2 Live at Red Rocks : Under a Blood Red Sky that the band intentionally filmed over a single night — in contrast to recording multiple shows . It was the first time a concert was streamed live on YouTube , and nearly 10 million people from 188 countries were reported to have watched . The feed was initially set to be restricted to 16 countries but was later made available worldwide . In June 2010 , the show was released to home video as U2360 ° at the Rose Bowl on DVD and Blu @-@ ray , receiving positive reviews from critics . 
 = = = U22 = = = 
 On 24 October 2011 , it was announced that U2 would release a double CD set entitled U22 , containing 22 songs recorded during the tour . Members of U2.com were able to vote on what songs would appear on the release through December 2011 . U22 is available only to members of U2.com. A bonus track , " Unknown Caller " , was also made available to subscribers . 
 = = = From the Ground Up = = = 
 On 30 September 2012 , U2.com announced its 2012 / 2013 subscriber 's pack would contain a " lavish 260 page large @-@ format hardback photobook " called From the Ground Up featuring photographs from the tour , 4 lithographs of each band member , bookmarks and an album called Edge 's Pick that will contain 15 tracks from the tour selected by The Edge that were not on U22 . Five bonus tracks , " No Line on the Horizon " , " Spanish Eyes " , " Desire " , " Pride " , and " Angel of Harlem " , were also made available to subscribers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Reception towards the U2 360 ° Tour was generally positive . The New York Times described the stage as " part insect , part spacecraft , part cathedral " , noting that the design meant the band was more visible than on previous tours . They also praised the fact that political messages took a backseat to the music , while NBC News suggested that using the video screen to display Aung San Suu Kyi and Desmond Tutu reminded attendees of the plights of people in the developing world . Rolling Stone called the production a cross between Zoo TV and the Elevation Tour and noted that the design elements " all but disappear " from the band 's perspective onstage . Canada 's National Post saw structural similarities in the stage to the alien craft in War of the Worlds , stating the concert " was as if the band had descended to colonize the stadium with their message of intergalactic hope " , and that the space theme meant " When you can play music with someone who 's in space , the idea goes , you 're shrinking our corner of the universe down to size . " The Washington Post stated that the visual display made the band seem invincible , but that the performance was more of an " orgy of light and sound " than a rock concert . In contrast , The Boston Globe complained that the stage 's size caused the band to struggle to connect with the audience and play with intimacy , as all four members were often playing to a different section of the stadium . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 The U2 360 ° Tour was the highest @-@ grossing tour of 2009 , with earnings of over $ 311 million for the year 's 44 shows , and around 3 million ticket sales . Due to the high costs to operate the tour , U2 's profits were minimal . Sales of No Line on the Horizon had been slow , meaning the group was not making much money from that either . Through November 2010 , the tour 's first 66 shows had grossed $ 443 million and sold 4 @.@ 3 million tickets . At the 2010 Billboard Touring Awards , U2 were honored for the year 's Top Tour and Top Draw for U2 360 ° . 
 On 11 April 2011 , Live Nation announced that the U2 360 ° Tour became the highest @-@ grossing concert tour in history , with ticket sales totalling over $ 700 million . The tour concluded in July 2011 with a final gross of $ 736 @,@ 421 @,@ 586 , and a total attendance of 7 @,@ 272 @,@ 046 . According to Billboard.com , the final gross and attendance figures for the tour were the highest ever reported to the site . At the 2011 Billboard Touring Awards , U2 repeated as winners in the Top Tour and Top Draw categories . 
 = = Tour dates = = 
 = Myst = 
 Myst is a graphic adventure puzzle video game designed and directed by the brothers Robyn and Rand Miller . It was developed by Cyan , Inc . , published by Brøderbund , and initially released on the Macintosh platform on September 24 , 1993 . Remakes and ports of the game have been released for platforms including Sega Saturn , PlayStation , 3DO , Microsoft Windows , Atari Jaguar CD , CD @-@ i , AmigaOS , PlayStation Portable , Nintendo DS , iOS , and OS X. The game puts the player in the role of the Stranger , who uses a special book to travel to the island of Myst . There , the player solves puzzles and travels to other worlds known as " Ages " . Clues found in each of these Ages help to reveal the back @-@ story of the game 's characters . The game has several endings , depending on the course of action the player takes . 
 After producing several interactive games aimed at children , the Miller brothers decided to create an adult @-@ targeted game with a non @-@ linear story , believable characters , and an ethical dilemma . Initially turned down by Activision , Cyan was later approached by Sunsoft , who helped fund Myst . The game took two years to develop and was Cyan 's largest project . 
 Upon release , Myst was a surprise hit , with critics lauding the ability of the game to immerse players in the fictional world . The game was the best @-@ selling PC game until The Sims exceeded its sales in 2002 . Myst helped drive adoption of the then @-@ nascent CD @-@ ROM format . Myst 's success spawned four direct video game sequels as well as several spin @-@ off games and novels . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gameplay of Myst consists of a first @-@ person journey through an interactive world . The player moves the character by clicking on locations shown on the screen ; the scene then crossfades into another frame , and the player can continue to explore . Players can interact with specific objects on some screens by clicking or dragging them . To assist in rapidly crossing areas already explored , Myst has an optional " Zip " feature . When a lightning bolt cursor appears , players can click and skip several frames to another location . While this provides a rapid method of travel , it can also cause players to miss important items and clues . Some items can be carried by the player and read , including journal pages which provide backstory . Players can only carry a single page at a time , and pages return to their original locations when dropped . 
 To complete the game , the player must explore the seemingly deserted island of Myst . There the player discovers and follows clues to be transported via " linking books " to several " Ages " , each of which is a self @-@ contained mini @-@ world . Each of the Ages — named <unk> , <unk> , Mechanical , and <unk> — requires the user to solve a series of logical , interrelated puzzles to complete its exploration . Objects and information discovered in one Age may be required to solve puzzles in another Age , or to complete the game 's primary puzzle on Myst . For example , in order to activate a switch , players must first open a safe , after discovering its combination , and then use the matches found within to start a boiler . 
 Apart from its predominantly nonverbal storytelling , Myst 's gameplay is unusual among adventuring computer games in several ways . The player is provided with very little backstory at the beginning of the game , and no obvious goals or objectives are laid out . This means that players must simply begin to explore . There are no obvious enemies , no physical violence , and no threat of " dying " at any point , although it is possible to reach a few " losing " endings . There is no time limit to complete the game . The game unfolds at its own pace and is solved through a combination of patience , observation , and logical thinking . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Players assume the role of an unnamed person known as the Stranger , who stumbles across an unusual book titled " Myst " . The Stranger reads the book and discovers a detailed description of an island world called Myst . Placing his hand on the last page , the Stranger is whisked away to the world described , and is left with no choice but to explore the island . Myst contains a library where two additional books can be found , colored red and blue . These books are traps that hold Sirrus and Achenar , the sons of Atrus , who once lived on Myst island with his wife Catherine . Atrus writes special " linking books " that transport people to the worlds , or " Ages " , that the books describe . From the panels of their books , Sirrus and Achenar tell the Stranger that Atrus is dead ; each brother blames the other for the death of their father , as well as the destruction of much of Atrus ' library . Both plead for the Stranger to help them escape . However , the books are missing several pages , rendering the sons ' messages initially unclear and riddled with static . 
 As the Stranger continues to explore the island , books linking to more Ages are discovered hidden behind complex mechanisms and puzzles . The Stranger must visit each Age , find the red and blue pages hidden there , and return to Myst Island . These pages can then be placed in the corresponding books . As the Stranger adds more pages to these books , the brothers can speak more clearly . After collecting four pages , the brothers can talk clearly enough to tell the Stranger where the fifth page is hidden . It also allows the player to more accurately judge each brother 's personality . If the Stranger gives either brother their fifth page , they will be free . The Stranger is left with a choice to help Sirrus , Achenar , or neither . 
 Sirrus and Achenar beg the Stranger not to touch the green book that is stored in the same location as their final pages . They claim that it is a book like their own that will trap the Stranger . In truth , it leads to D 'ni , where Atrus is imprisoned . When the book is opened , Atrus asks the Stranger to bring him a final page that is hidden on Myst Island ; without it , he cannot bring his sons to justice . The game has several endings , depending on the player 's actions . Giving either Sirrus or Achenar the final page of their book causes the Stranger to switch places with the son , leaving the player trapped inside the Prison book . Linking to D 'ni without the page Atrus asks for leaves the Stranger and Atrus trapped on D 'ni . Linking to D 'ni with the page allows Atrus to complete his Myst book and return to the island . Upon returning to the library , the player finds the red and blue books gone , and burn marks on the shelves where they used to be . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In 1988 , brothers Rand and Robyn Miller were living apart in the United States . Robyn was taking a year off from university , writing and trying to establish state residency . Rand was a computer programmer for a bank . Rand approached his brother with the idea of making an interactive storybook using HyperCard . The brothers were not big video game players themselves , although they were familiar with Dungeons & Dragons , and had played Zork . In his parents ' basement — Robyn did not own a computer himself — Robyn began drawing pictures and creating a nonlinear story that would eventually become their first game , The Manhole . The Manhole and the games that followed — Cosmic Osmo and <unk> — were specifically aimed at children and shared the same aesthetics : black @-@ and @-@ white graphics , point @-@ and @-@ click gameplay , a first @-@ person point of view , and explorable worlds . Robyn recalled that the games were more about exploration than narrative : " In the projects we did for children , we didn 't really tell stories [ … ] They were just these worlds that you would explore . " 
 Around 1990 , the brothers decided to create a game that would appeal to adults . Among their goals were believable characters , a non @-@ linear story , and for the player as protagonist to make ethical choices . The Millers pitched the game to Activision under the title The Gray Summons ; Robyn recalled that Activision told them to stick to children 's games . At the time of the rejection , Robyn recalled they were not doing well financially — " we were eating rice and beans and government cheese and that [ was ] our diet . " Facing the end of their game @-@ producing career , Sunsoft of Japan approached the Millers to create an adult @-@ oriented game . Like with The Gray Summons , the Millers wanted their game to have a non @-@ linear story with believable characters and an ethical choice . They also wanted to produce a game with far more impressive graphics than their previous efforts — at one point they considered making the game entirely hand @-@ drawn . Finally , they knew their story would be a mystery . 
 Development of Myst began in 1991 . The game 's creative team consisted of the brothers Rand and Robyn Miller , with help from sound designer Chris Brandkamp , 3D artist and animator Chuck Carter , Richard Watson , Bonnie McDowall , and Ryan Miller , who together made up Cyan , Inc . Myst was not only the largest collaboration Cyan had attempted at the time , but also took the longest to develop . Cyan took inspiration from games like Zork , Star Wars ' mythic universe , portals to other worlds like in C.S. Lewis ' The Chronicles of Narnia , and the mysterious islands of old literature like the works of Jules Verne . The game 's name , as well as the overall solitary and mysterious atmosphere of the island , was inspired by the book The Mysterious Island by Verne . 
 Sunsoft was not interested in the game for PC , and was instead focused on the video game console market . At the time , consoles had no hard drives and small memory buffers , meaning the game had to be designed around these technical constraints . To solve this issue , they compartmentalized parts of the game 's environments into the different Ages . The Millers decided that most people did not like puzzles . Thus , a good puzzle would feel familiar and part of the world — not like a puzzle , but something for players to figure out like a circuit breaker in their house , using observation and common sense . Cyan did not have fans to please , and did not know exactly who the game would appeal to ; Robyn felt like they did not have to second @-@ guess their choices and could " explore the world as we were designing " and build a game for themselves . Cyan proposed Myst to Sunsoft with a $ 265 @,@ 000 price tag — more than double what they thought it would cost to develop the game , but ultimately less than Myst cost to produce . After getting the go @-@ ahead , Cyan play tested the entire game in a role @-@ played Dungeons and Dragons form to identify any large issues before entering full production . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Myst was not only the largest collaboration Cyan had attempted at the time , but also took the longest to develop . According to Rand Miller , the brothers spent months solely designing the look and puzzles of the Ages , which were influenced by earlier whimsical " worlds " made for children . Much of the early development time was spent devising puzzles and the Ages , and the story was secondary . " We were place designers [ ... ] and the maps kind of fueled the story , " Rand said . The plot evolved in tandem with the changing environment , developing new story details with each new building in the world . The climactic ending with Atrus was a later development in the game 's story after Cyan realized they wanted to create a more complicated ending . In retrospect , Robyn felt that Myst did not quite provoke the emotional reaction and ethical quandary they set out to create . 
 When Cyan began development , developing believable characters was a major hurdle . The brothers were limited to one @-@ way communication with the player , and at any point a player could choose to walk away and " break the spell " of the game . Displaying video in the game was initially infeasible . Designing around the limits , the designers created the trap books , which were location @-@ specific , one @-@ way communication devices . The release of QuickTime halfway through development of the game solved the video issue . 
 At first , the developers had no idea how they would actually create the physical terrain for the Ages . Eventually , they created grayscale <unk> , extruding them to create changes in elevation . From this basic terrain , textures were painted onto a <unk> which was wrapped over the landscapes . Objects such as trees were added to complete the design . Rand noted that attention to detail allowed Myst to deal with the limitations of CD @-@ ROM drives and graphics , stating " A lot can be done with texture … Like finding an interesting texture you can map into the tapestry on the wall , spending a little extra time to actually put the bumps on the tapestry , putting screws in things . These are the things you don 't necessarily notice , but if they weren 't there , would flag to your subconscious that this is fake . " 
 The game was created on Macintosh computers , principally Macintosh Quadras . The graphics were individual shots of fully rendered rooms . Overall , Myst contains 2 @,@ 500 frames , one for each possible area the player can explore . Each scene was modeled and rendered in <unk> 3D , with some additional modeling in Macromedia <unk> . The images were then edited and enhanced using Photoshop 1 @.@ 0 . 
 The original Macintosh version of Myst was constructed in HyperCard . Each Age was a unique HyperCard stack . Navigation was handled by the internal button system and <unk> scripts , with image and QuickTime movie display passed off to various plugins ; essentially , Myst functions as a series of separate multimedia slides linked together by commands . As the main technical constraint that impacted Myst was slow CD @-@ ROM drive read speeds , Cyan had to go to great lengths to make sure all the game elements loaded as quickly as possible . Images were stored as 8 @-@ bit <unk> resources with custom color palettes and QuickTime still image compression . Animated elements such as movies and object animations were encoded as QuickTime movies with <unk> compression ; in total , there were more than 66 minutes of <unk> animation . This careful processing made the finished graphics look like <unk> images despite their low bit depth ; the stills were reduced in size from 500 kB to around 80 kB . 
 Cyan playtested the game with two people sitting in front of the game , finding that they would converse with each other and vocalize their likes and dislikes compared to one person silently playing . Rand and Robyn sat behind the testers taking notes , and could make on @-@ the @-@ fly changes and fixes . Cyan wanted the interface of the game to be invisible , and to craft a game that all kinds of people would enjoy . Early on they had decided that there would be no inventory , enemies , or ways to die ; eventually they included a save system as a concession to the fact that it would take most players months to complete the game . Among the problems testers discovered with the story was that Myst initially had no inciting incident . In response , Cyan added a note from Atrus to Catherine that clued players into the existence of a chamber by the dock that played a message from Atrus and explained the game 's objectives . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Chris Brandkamp produced most of the ambient and incidental sounds in the game . To make sure the sounds fit , Brandkamp had to wait until the game 's visuals were placed in context . Sound effects were drawn from unlikely sources ; the noise of a fire in a boiler was created by driving slowly over stones in a driveway , because recordings of actual fire did not sound like fire burning . The chimes of a large clock tower were simulated using a wrench , then transposed to a lower pitch . 
 At first , Myst had no music , because the Millers did not want music to interfere with the gameplay . After a few tests , they realized that the background music did not adversely affect the game and , in fact , " seemed to really help the mood of certain places that you were at in the game . " Robyn Miller ended up composing 40 minutes of synthesized music that was used in the game and later published as Myst : The Soundtrack . Mixing and effects were done on an E @-@ mu Proteus MPS synthesizer . The soundtrack was recorded over the course of two weeks ' evenings . Initially , Cyan released the soundtrack via a mail @-@ order service , but before the release of Myst 's sequel , Riven , Virgin Records acquired the rights to release the soundtrack , and the CD was rereleased on April 21 , 1998 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Myst was commercially successful on release . Along with The 7th Guest , it was widely regarded as a killer application that accelerated the sales of CD @-@ ROM drives . The game 's success also led to a number of games which sought to copy Myst 's success , referred to as " Myst clones " . Myst was the bestselling PC game throughout the 1990s , until The Sims exceeded its sales in 2002 . The PC version of Myst holds an average score of 82 @.@ 57 % at GameRankings based on seven reviews , although the subsequent remakes of the game and the console ports have generally received lower average scores . Myst 's success baffled some , who wondered how a game that was seen as " little more than ' an interactive slide show ' " turned out to be a hit . 
 Myst was generally praised by critics . Computer Gaming World in 1993 assured readers that the game was not like other CD @-@ ROM games that were " high on glitz and low on substance ... Myst is everything it 's touted to be and is , quite simply , the best [ Macintosh ] CD @-@ ROM game " . It praised the game 's open world nature , lack of death , and " straightforward and simple " storyline . The magazine stated that the " mesmerizing " and " stunning " graphics and sound were " not the star of the show ... the substance of the game is every bit as good as its packaging " , and concluded that Myst " is bound to set a new standard " . 
 Wired and The New York Times suggested that Myst was evidence that video games could in fact evolve into an art form . Entertainment Weekly reported that some players considered Myst 's " virtual morality " a religious experience . Aarhus University professor Søren <unk> pointed to Myst as an excellent example of how stories can be told using objects rather than people . Laura Evenson , writing for the San Francisco Chronicle , pointed to adult @-@ oriented games like Myst as evidence the video game industry was emerging from its " adolescent " phase . 
 GameSpot 's Jeff <unk> wrote that " Myst is an immersive experience that draws you in and won 't let you go . " Writing about Myst 's reception , Greg M. Smith noted that Myst had become a hit and was regarded as incredibly immersive despite most closely resembling " the hoary technology of the slideshow ( with accompanying music and effects ) " . Smith concluded that " Myst 's primary brilliance lies in the way it provides narrative justification for the very things that are most annoying " about the technological constraints imposed on the game ; for instance , Macworld praised Myst 's designers for overcoming the occasionally debilitating slowness of CD drives to deliver a consistent experience throughout the game . The publication went on to declare Myst the best game of 1994 , stating that Myst removed the " most annoying parts of adventure games — vocabularies that [ you ] don 't understand , people you can 't talk to , wrong moves that get you killed and make you start over . You try to unravel the enigma of the island by exploring the island , but there 's no time pressure to distract you , no arbitrary punishments put in your way " . 
 Some aspects of the game still received criticism . Several publications did not agree with the positive reception of the story ; Jeremy Parish of 1UP.com noted that while Myst 's lack of interaction and continual plot suited the game , it helped usher in the death of the adventure game genre . Edge stated the main flaw with the game was that the game engine was nowhere near as sophisticated as the graphics . Heidi Fournier of Adventure Gamers noted a few critics complained about the difficulty and lack of context of the puzzles , while others believed these elements added to the gameplay . Similarly , critics were split on whether the lack of a plot the player could actually change was a good or bad element . In a 2000 retrospective review , IGN declared that Myst had not aged well and that playing it " was like watching hit TV shows from the 70s . ' People watched that ? , ' you wonder in horror . " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In addition to the numerous remakes and ports of the game , Myst 's success led to several sequels . Riven was released on October 29 , 1997 , in which Atrus asks the Stranger to return to help him rescue his wife from Gehn . Myst III : Exile was released simultaneously for Macintosh and Windows systems in North America on May 7 , 2001 , and was later ported to the PlayStation 2 and Xbox consoles . Exile was not developed by Cyan ; Presto Studios developed the title and Ubisoft published it . Taking place 10 years after the events of Riven , Exile reveals the reasons for Atrus ' sons being imprisoned and the disastrous effects their greed caused . The fourth entry in the series , Myst IV : Revelation , was released on September 10 , 2004 , and was developed and published entirely by Ubisoft . The music was composed by Jack Wall with assistance from Peter Gabriel . The final game in the Myst saga was Myst V : End of Ages , developed by Cyan Worlds and released on September 19 , 2005 . 
 In addition to the main Myst saga , Cyan developed Uru : Ages Beyond Myst , which was released on November 14 , 2003 . Uru allows players to customize their avatars , and renders graphics in real @-@ time . The multiplayer component of Uru was initially cancelled , but GameTap eventually revived it as Myst Online : Uru Live , which was in turn cancelled . The game was later resurrected as an open source title . The newest and current iteration of online Uru was made open source and various fan ages have been created . The Miller brothers collaborated with David Wingrove and wrote several novels based on the Myst universe , which were published by Hyperion . The novels , entitled Myst : The Book of Atrus , Myst : The Book of Ti 'ana , and Myst : The Book of D 'ni , fill in the games ' backstory and were packaged together as The Myst Reader . 
 By 2003 , the Myst franchise had sold over twelve million copies worldwide , with Myst representing more than six million copies in the figure . The game was the best @-@ selling PC game until The Sims exceeded its sales in 2002 . 
 The game 's popularity has led to several mentions in popular culture . References to Myst made appearances in an episode of the The Simpsons ( " Treehouse of Horror VI " ) , and Matt Damon wanted The Bourne Conspiracy video game to be a puzzle game like Myst , refusing to lend his voice talent to the game when it was turned into a shooter instead . Myst has also been used for educational and scientific purposes ; <unk> recognized a primary school teacher , Tim Rylands , who had made literacy gains using Myst as a teaching tool , and researchers have used the game for studies examining the effect of video games on aggression . A parody computer game , <unk> , was released in 1996 ; the game is a satirical free roam of Myst island which had been apparently vandalized by frustrated visitors . 
 The television streaming service Hulu has obtained the rights to create a television series around Myst in May 2015 . The series would explore the origin of the main island featured in Myst . The series is being produced by Legendary Television , which had acquired the television rights from Cyan for the series in late 2014 . The show will be produced by Matt Tolmach and written by Evan Daugherty . 
 = = Re @-@ releases and ports = = 
 Myst 's success led to the game being ported to multiple platforms , including the Saturn , PlayStation , PlayStation 3 , PlayStation Portable , iPhone , Nintendo 3DS , Jaguar CD , AmigaOS , CD @-@ i , and 3DO consoles . 
 = = = PC remakes = = = 
 Myst : Masterpiece Edition was an updated version of the original Myst , released in May 2000 . It featured several improvements over the original game , with the images re @-@ rendered in 24 @-@ bit <unk> instead of the original Myst 's 8 @-@ bit color . The score was re @-@ mastered and sound effects were enhanced . 
 realMyst : Interactive 3D Edition was a remake of Myst released in November 2000 for Windows PCs , and in January 2002 for Mac . Unlike Myst and the Masterpiece Edition , realMyst featured free @-@ roaming , real @-@ time 3D graphics instead of pre @-@ rendered stills . Weather effects like thunderstorms , sunsets , and sunrises were added to the Ages , and minor additions were made to keep the game in sync with the story of the Myst novels and sequels . The game also added a new Age called Rime , which is featured in an extended <unk> realMyst was developed by Cyan , Inc. and Sunsoft , and published by Ubisoft . While the new interactivity of the game was praised , realMyst ran poorly on most computers of the time . Robyn Miller expressed frustration with realMyst , saying : " I only saw realMyst after it was released . As a remake , it was a lapse of reason and directionless ; overt merchandising of the original Myst . It definitely wasn 't how we originally envisioned Myst , as was promoted . " 
 realMyst : Masterpiece Edition , a visually enhanced revision running on the Unity engine that also includes the graphics of the original Myst game , was released on Steam on February 5 , 2014 . 
 = = = Console and handhelds = = = 
 On May 18 , 2012 , the PlayStation Network released a port for Myst in the form of a PSone classic for the PlayStation 3 and PSP . 
 In November 2005 , Midway Games announced that they would be developing a remake of Myst for the PlayStation Portable . The remake would include additional content that was not featured in the original Myst , including the Rime age that was earlier seen in realMyst . The game was released in Japan and Europe in 2006 , and the US version was released in 2008 . 
 A version of Myst for the Nintendo DS was also released in December 2007 . The version features re @-@ mastered video and audio , using source code specifically re @-@ written for the Nintendo DS . The remake features Rime as a playable Age , with an all new graphic set . This version of the game was released in Europe on December 7 , 2007 , courtesy of Midway . It was released in North America on May 13 , 2008 , originally published by Navarre and later reissued by Storm City Games . The version was heavily panned by the gaming press , with an aggregate score of 43 / 100 on Metacritic . This version was again later re @-@ released for Nintendo 3DS , published by <unk> Media in Europe , and Maximum Family Games in North America and Australia . The game later appeared in digital format via the Nintendo eShop in North America on November 15 , 2012 , and in Europe on September 5 , 2013 . 
 In February 2005 , Cyan and Mean Hamster Software released Myst for the Microsoft Windows Mobile platform ; Riven was ported shortly after . In August 2008 , Cyan announced that the company was developing a version of Myst for Apple 's iOS . The game was made available to download from the iTunes App Store on May 2 , 2009 . The original download size was 727 MB , which was considered very large by iPhone standards . An updated version of realMyst was released for iPad 2 and above , with improved graphics over the original PC release , on June 14 , 2012 . 
 = Moors murders = 
 The Moors murders were carried out by Ian Brady and Myra Hindley between July 1963 and October 1965 , in and around what is now Greater Manchester , England . The victims were five children aged between 10 and 17 — Pauline Reade , John Kilbride , Keith Bennett , Lesley Ann Downey and Edward Evans — at least four of whom were sexually assaulted . The murders are so named because two of the victims were discovered in graves dug on Saddleworth Moor ; a third grave was discovered on the moor in 1987 , more than 20 years after Brady and Hindley 's trial in 1966 . The body of a fourth victim , Keith Bennett , is also suspected to be buried there , but despite repeated searches it remains undiscovered . 
 The police were initially aware of only three killings , those of Edward Evans , Lesley Ann Downey and John Kilbride . The investigation was reopened in 1985 , after Brady was reported in the press as having confessed to the murders of Pauline Reade and Keith Bennett . Brady and Hindley were taken separately to Saddleworth Moor to assist the police in their search for the graves , both by then having confessed to the additional murders . 
 Characterised by the press as " the most evil woman in Britain " , Hindley made several appeals against her life sentence , claiming she was a reformed woman and no longer a danger to society , but she was never released . She died in 2002 , aged 60 . Brady was declared criminally insane in 1985 , since when he has been confined in the high @-@ security Ashworth Hospital . He has made it clear that he wishes never to be released , and has repeatedly asked that he be allowed to die . 
 The murders , reported in almost every English language newspaper in the world , were the result of what Malcolm MacCulloch , professor of forensic psychiatry at Cardiff University , called a " concatenation of circumstances " . The trial judge , Mr Justice Fenton Atkinson , described Brady and Hindley in his closing remarks as " two sadistic killers of the utmost depravity " . 
 = = Victims = = 
 The full extent of Brady and Hindley 's crimes did not come to light until their confessions in 1985 , as both had until then maintained their innocence . Their first victim was 16 @-@ year @-@ old Pauline Reade , a neighbour of Hindley 's who disappeared on her way to a dance at the British Railways Club in Gorton , Manchester , on 12 July 1963 . That evening , Brady told Hindley that he wanted to " commit his perfect murder " . He told her to drive her van around the local area while he followed behind on his motorcycle ; when he spotted a likely victim he would flash his headlight , and Hindley was to stop and offer that person a lift . Both Brady and Hindley provided different accounts of the murder . 
 Driving down Gorton Lane , Brady saw a young girl walking towards them , and signalled Hindley to stop , which she did not do until she had passed the girl . Brady drew up alongside on his motorbike , demanding to know why she had not offered the girl a lift , to which Hindley replied that she recognised her as Marie Ruck , a near neighbour of her mother . Shortly after 8 : 00 pm , continuing down <unk> Street , Brady spotted a girl wearing a pale blue coat and white high @-@ heeled shoes walking away from them , and once again signalled for the van to stop . Hindley recognised the girl as Pauline Reade , a friend of her younger sister , Maureen . Reade got into the van with Hindley , who then asked if she would mind helping to search for an expensive glove she had lost on Saddleworth Moor . Reade said she was in no great hurry , and agreed . At 16 , Pauline Reade was older than Marie Ruck , and Hindley realised that there would be less of a hue and cry over the disappearance of a teenager than there would over a child of seven or eight . When the van reached the moor , Hindley stopped and Brady arrived shortly afterwards on his motorcycle . She introduced him to Reade as her boyfriend , and said that he had also come to help find the missing glove . Hindley claimed Brady took Reade onto the moor while Hindley waited in the van . After about 30 minutes Brady returned alone , and took Hindley to the spot where Reade lay dying . Her throat had been cut twice with a large knife . The larger of these wounds was a four @-@ inch incision across her voice box , and the collar of Reade 's coat had been deliberately pushed into this wound . He told her to stay with Reade while he fetched a spade he had hidden nearby on a previous visit to the moor , to bury the body . Hindley noticed that " Pauline 's coat was undone and her clothes were in disarray ... She had guessed from the time he had taken that Brady had sexually assaulted her . " Brady 's account differed from Hindley 's . He claimed that Hindley was not only there at the scene , but that she assisted him with the sexual assault on Pauline . Returning home from the moor in the van — they had loaded the motorcycle into the back — Brady and Hindley passed Reade 's mother , Joan , accompanied by her son , Paul , searching the streets for Pauline . 
 Accompanied by Brady , Hindley approached 12 @-@ year @-@ old John Kilbride in the early evening of 23 November 1963 at a market in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , Lancashire , and offered him a lift home on the pretext that his parents would be worried about him being out so late . With the added inducement of a bottle of sherry , Kilbride readily agreed to get into the Ford Anglia car that Hindley had hired . Brady told Kilbride that the sherry was at their home , and they would have to make a detour to collect it . On the way he suggested that they take another detour , to search for a glove he said that Hindley had lost on the moor . When they reached the moor Brady took the child with him while Hindley waited in the car . Brady sexually assaulted Kilbride and attempted to slit his throat with a six @-@ inch serrated blade before fatally strangling him with a piece of string , possibly a shoelace . 
 Twelve @-@ year @-@ old Keith Bennett vanished on his way to his grandmother 's house in Longsight ( Manchester ) during the early evening of 16 June 1964 , four days after his birthday . Hindley lured him into her Mini Pick @-@ up — which Brady was sitting in the back of — by asking for the boy 's help in loading some boxes , after which she said she would drive him home . She drove to a lay @-@ by on Saddleworth Moor as she and Brady had previously arranged , and Brady went off with Bennett , supposedly looking for a lost glove . Hindley kept watch , and after about 30 minutes or so Brady reappeared , alone and carrying a spade that he had hidden there earlier . When Hindley asked how he had killed Bennett , Brady said that he had sexually assaulted the boy and strangled him with a piece of string . 
 Brady and Hindley visited a fairground on 26 December 1964 in search of another victim , and noticed 10 @-@ year @-@ old Lesley Ann Downey standing beside one of the rides . When it became apparent that she was on her own , they approached her and deliberately dropped some of the shopping they were carrying close to her , before asking for the girl 's help to carry some of the packages to their car , and then to their home . Once inside the house Downey was undressed , gagged and forced to pose for photographs before being raped and killed , perhaps strangled with a piece of string . Hindley maintained that she went to fill a bath for the child and found the girl dead ( presumably killed by Brady ) when she returned . In Dr. Chris Cowley 's book Face to Face with Evil : Conversations with Ian Brady , Brady states that it was Hindley who killed Lesley Ann Downey . The following morning Brady and Hindley drove with Downey 's body to Saddleworth Moor , where she was buried , naked with her clothes at her feet , in a shallow grave . 
 On 6 October 1965 Brady met 17 @-@ year @-@ old apprentice engineer Edward Evans at Manchester Central railway station ( now Manchester Central ) and invited him to his home at 16 Wardle Brook Avenue in Hattersley , Cheshire , where Brady beat him to death with an axe . 
 = = Initial report = = 
 The attack on Edward Evans was witnessed by Hindley 's 17 @-@ year @-@ old brother @-@ in @-@ law , David Smith , the husband of her younger sister Maureen . The Hindley family had not approved of Maureen 's marriage to Smith , who had several criminal convictions , including actual bodily harm and housebreaking , the first of which , wounding with intent , occurred when he was 11 . Throughout the previous year Brady had been cultivating a friendship with Smith , who had become " in awe " of the older man , something that increasingly worried Hindley , as she felt it compromised their safety . 
 On the evening of 6 October 1965 Hindley drove Brady to Manchester Central railway station , where she waited outside in the car while he selected their victim ; after a few minutes Brady reappeared in the company of Edward Evans , to whom he introduced Hindley as his sister . After they had driven back home and relaxed over a bottle of wine , Brady sent Hindley to fetch her brother @-@ in @-@ law . When they got back to the house Hindley told Smith to wait outside for her signal , a flashing light . When the signal came Smith knocked on the door and was met by Brady , who asked if he had come for " the miniature wine bottles " . Brady led Smith into the kitchen and left him there , saying that he was going to collect the wine . A few minutes later Smith heard a scream , followed by Hindley shouting loudly for him to come and help . Smith entered the living room to find Brady repeatedly striking Evans with the flat of an axe , and watched as he then throttled Evans with a length of electrical cord . Evans 's body was too heavy for Smith to carry to the car on his own — Brady had sprained his ankle in the struggle — so they wrapped it in plastic sheeting and put it in the spare bedroom . 
 Smith agreed to meet Brady the following evening to dispose of Evans 's body , but after returning home he woke his wife and told her what he had seen . Maureen told him that he must call the police . Three hours later the couple cautiously made their way to a public phone box in the street below their flat , Smith taking the precaution of arming himself with a screwdriver and a kitchen knife to defend them in the event that Brady suddenly appeared and confronted them . At 6 : 07 am Smith made an emergency services call to the police station in nearby Hyde , Cheshire , and told his story to the officer on duty . In his statement to the police Smith claimed that : 
 [ Brady ] opened the door and he said in a very loud voice for him ... " Do you want those miniatures ? " I nodded my head to say yes and he led me into the kitchen ... and he gave me three miniature bottles of spirits and said : " Do you want the rest ? " When I first walked into the house , the door to the living room ... was closed . ... Ian went into the living room and I waited in the kitchen . I waited about a minute or two then suddenly I heard a hell of a scream ; it sounded like a woman , really high @-@ pitched . Then the screams carried on , one after another really loud . Then I heard Myra shout , " Dave , help him , " very loud . When I ran in I just stood inside the living room and I saw a young lad . He was lying with his head and shoulders on the couch and his legs were on the floor . He was facing upwards . Ian was standing over him , facing him , with his legs on either side of the young lad 's legs . The lad was still screaming ... Ian had a hatchet in his hand ... he was holding it above his head and he hit the lad on the left side of his head with the hatchet . I heard the blow , it was a terrible hard blow , it sounded horrible . 
 = = Arrest = = 
 Early on the morning of 7 October , shortly after Smith 's call , Superintendent Bob Talbot of the Cheshire Police arrived at the back door of 16 Wardle Brook Avenue , wearing a borrowed baker 's overall to cover his uniform . Talbot identified himself to Hindley as a police officer when she opened the door , and told her that he wanted to speak to her boyfriend . Hindley led him into the living room , where Brady was sitting up in a divan writing a note to his employer explaining that he would not be able to get into work because of his ankle injury . Talbot explained that he was investigating " an act of violence involving guns " that was reported to have taken place the previous evening . Hindley denied that there had been any violence , and allowed police to look around the house . When they came to the upstairs room in which Evans 's body was stored the police found the door locked , and asked Brady for the key . Hindley claimed that the key was at work , but after the police offered to drive her to her employer 's premises to retrieve it , Brady told her to hand the key over . When they returned to the living room the police told Brady that they had discovered a trussed up body , and that he was being arrested on suspicion of murder . As Brady was getting dressed , he said " Eddie and I had a row and the situation got out of hand . " 
 Hindley was not arrested with Brady , but she demanded to go with him to the police station , accompanied by her dog Puppet , to which the police agreed . Hindley was questioned about the events surrounding Evans 's death , but she refused to make any statement beyond claiming that it had been an accident . As the police had no evidence that Hindley was involved in Evans 's murder she was allowed to go home , on condition that she return the next day for further questioning . Hindley was at liberty for four days following Brady 's arrest , during which time she went to her employer 's premises and asked to be dismissed , so that she would be eligible for unemployment benefits . While in the office where Brady worked she found some papers belonging to him in an envelope that she claimed she did not open , which she burned in an ashtray . She believed that they were plans for bank robberies , nothing to do with the murders . On 11 October Hindley was charged as an accessory to the murder of Edward Evans and was remanded at Risley . 
 = = Initial investigation = = 
 Brady admitted under police questioning that he and Evans had fought , but insisted that he and Smith had murdered Evans between them ; Hindley , he said , had " only done what she had been told " . Smith told police that Brady had asked him to return anything incriminating , such as " dodgy books " , which Brady then packed into suitcases . Smith had no idea what else the suitcases contained or where they might be , but he mentioned in passing that Brady " had a thing about railway stations " . The police consequently requested a search of all Manchester 's left @-@ luggage offices for any suitcases belonging to Brady , and on 15 October British Transport Police found what they were looking for at Manchester Central railway station — the left @-@ luggage ticket was found several days later in the back of Hindley 's prayer book . Inside one of the suitcases were nine pornographic photographs taken of a young girl , naked and with a scarf tied across her mouth , and a 13 @-@ minute tape recording of her screaming and pleading for help . Ann Downey , Lesley Ann Downey 's mother , later listened to the tape after police had discovered the body of her missing 10 @-@ year @-@ old daughter , and confirmed that it was a recording of her daughter 's voice . 
 Police searching the house at Wardle Brook Avenue also found an old exercise book in which the name " John Kilbride " had been scribbled , which made them suspicious that Brady and Hindley might have been involved in the unsolved disappearances of other youngsters . A large collection of photographs was discovered in the house , many of which seemed to have been taken on Saddleworth Moor . One hundred and fifty officers were drafted to search the moor , looking for locations that matched the photographs . Initially the search was concentrated along the A628 road near Woodhead , but a close neighbour , 11 @-@ year @-@ old Pat Hodges , had on several occasions been taken to the moor by Brady and Hindley and she was able to point out their favourite sites along the A635 road . On 16 October police found an arm bone sticking out of the peat ; officers presumed that they 'd found the body of John Kilbride , but soon discovered that the body was that of Lesley Ann Downey . Her mother ( now named Ann West after her marriage to Alan West ) had been on the moor watching as the police conducted their search , but was not present when the body was found . She was shown clothing recovered from the grave , and identified it as belonging to her missing daughter . 
 Detectives were able to locate another site on the opposite side of the A635 from where Downey 's body was discovered , and five days later they found the " badly decomposed " body of John Kilbride , whom they identified by his clothing . That same day , already being held for the murder of Evans , Brady and Hindley appeared at Hyde Magistrates ' Court charged with Lesley Ann Downey 's murder . Each was brought before the court separately and remanded into custody for a week . They made a two @-@ minute appearance on 28 October , and were again remanded into custody . 
 The search for bodies continued , but with winter setting in it was called off in November . Presented with the evidence of the tape recording Brady admitted to taking the photographs of Lesley Ann Downey , but insisted that she had been brought to Wardle Brook Avenue by two men who had subsequently taken her away again , alive . Brady was further charged with the murder of John Kilbride , and Hindley with the murder of Edward Evans , on 2 December . At the committal hearing on 6 December Brady was charged with the murders of Edward Evans , John Kilbride , and Lesley Ann Downey , and Hindley with the murders of Edward Evans and Lesley Ann Downey , as well as with harbouring Brady in the knowledge that he had killed John Kilbride . The prosecution 's opening statement was held in camera , and the defence asked for a similar stipulation , but was refused . The proceedings continued in front of three magistrates in Hyde over an 11 @-@ day period during December , at the end of which the pair were committed for trial at Chester Assizes . 
 Many of the photographs taken by Brady and Hindley on the moor featured Hindley 's dog Puppet , sometimes as a puppy . Detectives arranged for the animal to be examined by a veterinary surgeon to determine its age , from which they could date when the pictures were taken . The examination involved an analysis of the dog 's teeth , which required a general anaesthetic from which Puppet did not recover , as he suffered from an undiagnosed kidney complaint . On hearing the news of her dog 's death Hindley became furious , and accused the police of murdering Puppet , one of the few occasions detectives witnessed any emotional response from her . In a letter to her mother shortly afterwards Hindley wrote : 
 I feel as though my heart 's been torn to pieces . I don 't think anything could hurt me more than this has . The only consolation is that some moron might have got hold of Puppet and hurt him . 
 = = Trial = = 
 The trial was held over 14 days beginning on 19 April 1966 , in front of Mr Justice Fenton Atkinson . Such was the public interest that the courtroom was fitted with security screens to protect Brady and Hindley . The pair were each charged with three murders , those of Evans , Downey and Kilbride , as it was considered that there was by then sufficient evidence to implicate Hindley in Kilbride 's death . The prosecution was led by the Attorney General , Frederick Elwyn Jones . Brady was defended by the Liberal Member of Parliament Emlyn Hooson , and Hindley was defended by Godfrey <unk> , recorder of Salford from 1964 — both experienced QCs . David Smith was the chief prosecution witness , but during the trial it was revealed that he had entered into an agreement with a newspaper that he initially refused to name — even under intense questioning — guaranteeing him £ 1 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to about £ 20 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) for the syndication rights to his story if Brady and Hindley were convicted , something the trial judge described as a " gross interference with the course of justice " . Smith finally admitted in court that the newspaper was the News of the World , which had already paid for a holiday in France for him and his wife and was paying him a regular income of £ 20 per week , as well as accommodating him in a five @-@ star hotel for the duration of the trial . 
 Brady and Hindley pleaded not guilty to the charges against them ; both were called to give evidence , Brady for over eight hours and Hindley for six . Although Brady admitted to hitting Evans with an axe , he did not admit to killing him , arguing that the pathologist in his report had stated that Evans 's death was " accelerated by strangulation " . Under cross @-@ examination by the prosecuting counsel , all Brady would admit was that " I hit Evans with the axe . If he died from axe blows , I killed him . " Hindley denied any knowledge that the photographs of Saddleworth Moor found by police had been taken near the graves of their victims . 
 The tape recording of Lesley Anne Downey , on which the voices of Brady and Hindley were clearly audible , was played in open court . Hindley admitted that her attitude towards the child was " brusque and cruel " , but claimed that was only because she was afraid that someone might hear Downey screaming . Hindley claimed that when Downey was being undressed she herself was " downstairs " ; when the pornographic photographs were taken she was " looking out the window " ; and that when the child was being strangled she " was running a bath " . 
 On 6 May , after having deliberated for a little over two hours , the jury found Brady guilty of all three murders and Hindley guilty of the murders of Downey and Evans . As the death penalty for murder had been abolished while Brady and Hindley were held on remand , the judge passed the only sentence that the law allowed : life imprisonment . Brady was sentenced to three concurrent life sentences and Hindley was given two , plus a concurrent seven @-@ year term for harbouring Brady in the knowledge that he had murdered John Kilbride . Brady was taken to Durham Prison and Hindley was sent to Holloway Prison . 
 In his closing remarks Mr Justice Atkinson described the murders as a " truly horrible case " and condemned the accused as " two sadistic killers of the utmost depravity " . He recommended that both Brady and Hindley spend " a very long time " in prison before being considered for parole but did not stipulate a tariff . He stated that Brady was " wicked beyond belief " and that he saw no reasonable possibility of reform . He did not consider that the same was necessarily true of Hindley , " once she is removed from [ Brady 's ] influence " . Throughout the trial Brady and Hindley " stuck rigidly to their strategy of lying " , and Hindley was later described as " a quiet , controlled , impassive witness who lied remorselessly " . 
 = = Later investigation = = 
 In 1985 Brady allegedly confessed to Fred Harrison , a journalist working for The Sunday People , that he had also been responsible for the murders of Pauline Reade and Keith Bennett , something that the police already suspected , as both children lived in the same area as Brady and Hindley and had disappeared at about the same time as their other victims . The subsequent newspaper reports prompted the Greater Manchester Police ( GMP ) to reopen the case , in an investigation headed by Detective Chief Superintendent Peter Topping , who had been appointed head of GMP 's Criminal Investigation Department ( CID ) the previous year . 
 On 3 July 1985 Topping visited Brady , then being held at Gartree Prison , Leicestershire , but found him " scornful of any suggestion that he had confessed to more murders " . Police nevertheless decided to resume their search of Saddleworth Moor , once more using the photographs taken by Brady and Hindley to help them identify possible burial sites . Meanwhile , in November 1986 Winnie Johnson , Keith Bennett 's mother , wrote a letter to Hindley begging to know what had happened to her son , a letter that Hindley seemed to be " genuinely moved " by . It ended : 
 I am a simple woman , I work in the kitchens of Christie 's Hospital . It has taken me five weeks labour to write this letter because it is so important to me that it is understood by you for what it is , a plea for help . Please , Miss Hindley , help me . 
 Police visited Hindley , then being held in Cookham Wood , Kent , a few days after she had received the letter , and although she refused to admit any involvement in the killings , she agreed to help by looking at photographs and maps to try to identify spots that she had visited with Brady . She showed particular interest in photographs of the area around Hollin Brown Knoll and Shiny Brook , but said that it was impossible to be sure of the locations without visiting the moor . The security considerations for such a visit were significant ; there were threats made against her should she visit the moors , but Home Secretary Douglas Hurd agreed with Topping that it would be worth the risk . Writing in 1989 , Topping said that he felt " quite cynical " about Hindley 's motivation in helping the police . Although the letter from Winnie Johnson may have played a part , he believed that Hindley 's real concern was that , knowing of Brady 's " precarious " mental state , she was afraid that he might decide to co @-@ operate with the police , and wanted to make certain that she , and not Brady , was the one to gain whatever benefit there may have been in terms of public approval . 
 Hindley made the first of two visits to assist the police search of Saddleworth Moor on 16 December 1986 . Four police cars left Cookham Wood at 4 : 30 am . At about the same time , police closed all roads onto the moor , which was patrolled by 200 officers , 40 of them armed . Hindley and her solicitor arrived by helicopter from an airfield near Maidstone , touching down at 8 : 30 am . Wearing a donkey jacket and balaclava , she was driven , and walked around the area . It was difficult for Hindley to make a connection between her memories of the area and what she saw on the day , and she was apparently nervous of the helicopters flying overhead . At 3 : 00 pm she was returned to the helicopter , and taken back to Cookham Wood . Topping was criticised by the press , who described the visit as a " fiasco " , a " publicity stunt " , and a " mindless waste of money " . He was forced to defend the visit , pointing out its benefits : 
 We had taken the view that we needed a thorough systematic search of the moor ... It would never have been possible to carry out such a search in private . 
 On 19 December David Smith , then 38 , also returned to the moor . He spent about four hours helping police pinpoint areas where he thought more bodies might be buried . Topping continued to visit Hindley in prison , along with her solicitor Michael Fisher and her spiritual counsellor , the Reverend Peter Timms , who had been a prison governor before resigning to become a minister in the Methodist Church . She made a formal confession to police on 10 February 1987 , admitting her involvement in all five murders , but news of her confession was not made public for more than a month . The tape recording of her statement was over 17 hours long ; Topping described it as a " very well worked out performance in which , I believe , she told me just as much as she wanted me to know , and no more " . He also commented that he " was struck by the fact that she was never there when the killings took place . She was in the car , over the brow of the hill , in the bathroom and even , in the case of the Evans murder , in the kitchen . " Topping concluded that he felt he " had witnessed a great performance rather than a genuine confession " . 
 Police visited Brady in prison again and told him of Hindley 's confession , which at first he refused to believe . Once presented with some of the details that Hindley had provided of Pauline Reade 's abduction , Brady decided that he too was prepared to confess , but on one condition : that immediately afterwards he be given the means to commit suicide , a request with which it was impossible for the authorities to comply . 
 At about the same time , Winnie Johnson sent Hindley another letter , again pleading with her to assist the police in finding the body of her son Keith . In the letter , Johnson was sympathetic to Hindley over the criticism surrounding her first visit . Hindley , who had not replied to the first letter , responded by thanking Johnson for both letters , explaining that her decision not to reply to the first resulted from the negative publicity that surrounded it . She claimed that , had Johnson written to her 14 years earlier , she would have confessed and helped the police . She also paid tribute to Topping , and thanked Johnson for her sincerity . Hindley made her second visit to the moor in March 1987 . This time , the level of security surrounding her visit was considerably higher . She stayed overnight in Manchester , at the flat of the police chief in charge of GMP training at Sedgley Park , Prestwich , and visited the moor twice . She confirmed to police that the two areas in which they were concentrating their search — Hollin Brown Knoll and Hoe Grain — were correct , although she was unable to locate either of the graves . She later remembered that as Pauline Reade was being buried she had been sitting next to her on a patch of grass and could see the rocks of Hollin Brown Knoll silhouetted against the night sky . 
 In April 1987 news of Hindley 's confession became public . Amidst strong media interest Lord Longford pleaded for her release , writing that her continuing detention to satisfy " mob emotion " was not right . Fisher persuaded Hindley to release a public statement , in which she explained her reasons for denying her complicity in the murders , her religious experiences in prison , the letter from Johnson , and that she saw no possibility of release . She also exonerated David Smith from any part in the murders , except that of Edward Evans . 
 Over the next few months interest in the search waned , but Hindley 's clue had directed the police to focus their efforts on a specific area . On the afternoon of 1 July 1987 , after more than 100 days of searching , they found a body buried 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) below the surface , only 100 yards ( 90 m ) from the place where Lesley Ann Downey had been found . Brady had been co @-@ operating with the police for some time , and when news reached him that Reade 's body had been discovered he made a formal confession to Topping . He also issued a statement to the press , through his solicitor , saying that he too was prepared to help the police in their search . Brady was taken to the moor on 3 July , but he seemed to lose his bearings , blaming changes that had taken place in the intervening years , and the search was called off at 3 : 00 pm , by which time a large crowd of press and television reporters had gathered on the moor . 
 Topping refused to allow Brady a second visit to the moors , and a few days after his visit Brady wrote a letter to BBC television reporter Peter Gould , giving some sketchy details of five additional murders that he claimed to have carried out . Brady refused to identify his alleged victims , and the police failed to discover any unsolved crimes matching the few details that he supplied . Hindley told Topping that she knew nothing of these killings . 
 On 24 August 1987 police called off their search of Saddleworth Moor , despite not having found Keith Bennett 's body . Brady was taken to the moor for a second time on 1 December , but he was once again unable to locate the burial site . Keith Bennett 's body remains undiscovered as of 2016 , although his family continues to search the moor . 
 Although Brady and Hindley had confessed to the murders of Pauline Reade and Keith Bennett , the Director of Public Prosecutions ( DPP ) decided that nothing would be gained by a further trial ; as both were already serving life sentences no further punishment could be inflicted , and a second trial might even have helped Hindley 's case for parole by giving her a platform from which to make a public confession . 
 In 2003 the police launched Operation Maida , and again searched the moor for the body of Keith Bennett . They read statements from Brady and Hindley , and also studied photographs taken by the pair . Their search was aided by the use of sophisticated modern equipment , including a US satellite used to look for evidence of soil movement . The BBC reported on 1 July 2009 that Greater Manchester Police had officially given up the search for Keith Bennett , saying that " only a major scientific breakthrough or fresh evidence would see the hunt for his body restart " . Detectives were also reported as saying that they would never again give Brady the attention or the thrill of leading another fruitless search on the moor where they believe Keith Bennett 's remains are buried . Donations from members of the public funded a search of the moor for Bennett 's body by volunteers from a Welsh search and rescue team that began in March 2010 . In August 2012 it was claimed that Brady may have given details of the location of Keith Bennett 's body to one of his visitors . A woman was subsequently arrested on suspicion of preventing the burial of a body without lawful excuse , but a few months later the Crown Prosecution Service announced that there was insufficient evidence to press charges . 
 = = Perpetrators ' backgrounds = = 
 = = = Ian Brady = = = 
 Ian Brady was born in Glasgow as Ian Duncan Stewart on 2 January 1938 to Maggie Stewart , an unmarried 28 @-@ year @-@ old tea room waitress . The identity of Brady 's father has never been reliably ascertained , although his mother claimed he was a reporter working for a Glasgow newspaper , who died three months before Brady was born . Stewart had little support , and after a few months was forced to give her son into the care of Mary and John Sloan , a local couple with four children of their own . Brady took their name , and became known as Ian Sloan . His mother continued to visit him throughout his childhood . Various authors have claimed that he tortured animals , although Brady objects to such accusations . Aged nine , he visited Loch Lomond with his family , where he reportedly discovered an affinity for the outdoors , and a few months later the family moved to a new council house on an overspill estate at Pollok . He was accepted for Shawlands Academy , a school for above @-@ average pupils . At Shawlands his behaviour worsened ; as a teenager he twice appeared before a juvenile court for housebreaking . He left the academy aged 15 , and took a job as a tea boy at a Harland and Wolff shipyard in Govan . Nine months later he began working as a butcher 's messenger boy . He had a girlfriend , Evelyn Grant , but their relationship ended when he threatened her with a flick knife after she visited a dance with another boy . He again appeared before the court , this time with nine charges against him , and shortly before his 17th birthday he was placed on probation , on condition that he live with his mother . By then she had moved to Manchester and married an Irish fruit merchant named Patrick Brady , and it was the latter who got Brady a job as a fruit porter at Smithfield Market . 
 Within a year of moving to Manchester , Brady was caught with a sack full of lead seals he had stolen and was trying to smuggle out of the market . He was sent to Strangeways for three months . Because he was still under 18 , he was sentenced to two years in borstal for " training " . He was sent to Latchmere House in London , and then Hatfield borstal in the West Riding of Yorkshire . After being discovered drunk on alcohol he had brewed he was moved to the much tougher unit at Hull . Released on 14 November 1957 , Brady returned to Manchester , where he took a labouring job , which he hated , and was dismissed from another job in a brewery . Deciding to " better himself " , he obtained a set of instruction manuals on book @-@ keeping from a local public library , with which he " astonished " his parents by studying alone in his room for hours . In January 1959 Brady applied for and was offered a clerical job at Millward 's Merchandising , a wholesale chemical distribution company based in Gorton . He was regarded by his colleagues as a quiet , punctual , but short @-@ tempered young man . He read books such as Teach Yourself German and Mein Kampf , as well as works on Nazi atrocities . He rode a Tiger Cub motorcycle , which he used to visit the Pennines . 
 = = = Myra Hindley = = = 
 Myra Hindley was born in <unk> on 23 July 1942 and raised in Gorton , then a working @-@ class area of Manchester . Her parents , Nellie and Bob Hindley ( the latter an alcoholic ) , beat her regularly as a young child . The small house the family lived in was in such poor condition that Hindley and her parents had to sleep in the only available bedroom , she in a single bed next to her parents ' double . The family 's living conditions deteriorated further when Hindley 's sister , Maureen , was born in August 1946 . About a year after the birth , Hindley , then 5 , was sent by her parents to live with her grandmother , who lived nearby . 
 Hindley 's father had fought in North Africa , Cyprus , and Italy during the Second World War , and had served with the Parachute Regiment . He had been known in the army as a " hard man " and he expected his daughter to be equally tough ; he taught her how to fight , and insisted that she " stick up for herself " . When Hindley was 8 , a local boy approached her in the street and scratched both of her cheeks with his fingernails , drawing blood . She burst into tears and ran into her parents ' house , to be met by her father , who demanded that she " Go and punch him [ the boy ] , because if you don 't I 'll leather you ! " Hindley found the boy and succeeded in knocking him down with a sequence of punches , as her father had taught her . As she wrote later , " at eight years old I 'd scored my first victory " . 
 Malcolm MacCulloch , professor of forensic psychiatry at Cardiff University , has suggested that the fight , and the part that Hindley 's father played in it , may be " key pieces of evidence " in trying to understand Hindley 's role in the Moors murders : 
 The relationship with her father brutalised her ... She was not only used to violence in the home but rewarded for it outside . When this happens at a young age it can distort a person 's reaction to such situations for life . 
 One of her closest friends was 13 @-@ year @-@ old Michael Higgins , who lived in a nearby street . In June 1957 he invited her to go swimming with friends at a local disused reservoir . Although she was a good swimmer , Hindley chose not to go and instead went out with a friend , Pat Jepson . Higgins drowned in the reservoir , and upon learning of his fate Hindley was deeply upset , and blamed herself for his death . She collected for a funeral wreath , and his funeral at St Francis 's Monastery in Gorton Lane — the church where Hindley had been baptised a Catholic on 16 August 1942 — had a lasting effect on her . Hindley 's mother had only agreed to her father 's insistence that she be baptised a Catholic on the condition that she was not sent to a Catholic school , as her mother believed that " all the monks taught was the catechism " . Hindley was increasingly drawn to the Catholic Church after she started at Ryder Brow Secondary Modern , and began taking instruction for formal reception into the Church soon after Higgins 's funeral . She took the confirmation name of Veronica , and received her first communion in November 1958 . She also became a <unk> to Michael 's nephew , Anthony John . It was also at about this time that Hindley first began bleaching her hair . 
 Hindley 's first job was as a junior clerk at a local electrical engineering firm . She ran errands , made tea , and typed . She was well @-@ liked at the firm , enough so that when she lost her first week 's wage packet , the other girls had a collection to replace it . Beginning at Christmas 1958 , Hindley began a short relationship with Ronnie Sinclair , and became engaged at 17 . The engagement was called off several months later ; Hindley apparently thought Sinclair immature , and unable to provide her with the life she envisaged for herself . 
 Shortly after her 17th birthday she changed her hair colour with a pink rinse . She took judo lessons once a week at a local school , but found partners reluctant to train with her , as she was often slow to release her grip . She took a job at <unk> and Hinchliffe , an engineering company in Gorton , but was dismissed for absenteeism after six months . 
 = = = As a couple = = = 
 In 1961 the 18 @-@ year @-@ old Myra Hindley joined <unk> as a typist . She soon became infatuated with Brady , despite learning that he had a criminal record . She began a diary and , although she had dates with other men , some of the entries detail her fascination with Brady , whom she eventually spoke to for the first time on 27 July 1961 . Over the next few months she continued to make entries , and grew increasingly disillusioned with him , until 22 December when Brady asked her on a date to the cinema , where they watched the biblical epic King of Kings . Their dates together followed a regular pattern ; a trip to the cinema , usually to watch an X @-@ rated film , and then back to Hindley 's house to drink German wine . Brady then gave her reading material , and the pair spent their work lunch breaks reading aloud to one another from accounts of Nazi atrocities . Hindley began to emulate an ideal of Aryan perfection , bleaching her hair blonde and applying thick crimson lipstick . She expressed concern at some aspects of Brady 's character ; in a letter to a childhood friend , she mentioned an incident where she had been drugged by Brady , but also wrote of her obsession with him . A few months later she asked her friend to destroy the letter . In her 30 @,@ 000 @-@ word plea for parole , written in 1978 and 1979 and submitted to Home Secretary Merlyn Rees , Hindley said : 
 Within months he [ Brady ] had convinced me that there was no God at all : he could have told me that the earth was flat , the moon was made of green cheese and the sun rose in the west , I would have believed him , such was his power of persuasion . 
 Hindley began to change her appearance further , wearing clothing considered risqué such as high boots , short skirts and leather jackets , and the two became less sociable to their colleagues . The couple were regulars at the library , borrowing books on philosophy , as well as crime and torture . They also read works by the Marquis de Sade , and Fyodor Dostoyevsky 's Crime and Punishment . Although she was not a qualified driver ( she passed her test on the third attempt , late in 1963 ) , Hindley often hired a van , in which the two planned bank robberies . Hindley befriended George Clitheroe , the President of the Cheadle Rifle Club , and on several occasions visited two local shooting ranges . Clitheroe , although puzzled by her interest , arranged for her to buy a .22 rifle from a gun merchant in Manchester . She also asked to join a pistol club , but she was a poor shot and allegedly often bad @-@ tempered , so Clitheroe told her that she was unsuitable ; she did though manage to purchase a Webley .45 and a Smith & Wesson .38 from other members of the club . Brady and Hindley 's plans for robbery came to nothing , but they became interested in photography . Brady already owned a Box Brownie , which he used to take photographs of Hindley and her dog , Puppet , but he upgraded to a more sophisticated model , and also purchased lights and darkroom equipment . The pair took photographs of each other that , for the time , would have been considered explicit . For Hindley , this demonstrated a marked change from her earlier , more shy and prudish nature . 
 = = = As murderers = = = 
 Hindley claimed that Brady began to talk about " committing the perfect murder " in July 1963 , and often spoke to her about Meyer Levin 's Compulsion , published as a novel in 1956 and adapted for the cinema in 1959 . The story tells a fictionalised account of the Leopold and Loeb case , two young men from well @-@ to @-@ do families who attempt to commit the perfect murder of a 12 @-@ year @-@ old boy , and escape the death penalty because of their age . 
 By June 1963 Brady had moved in with Hindley at her grandmother 's house in Bannock Street , and on 12 July 1963 the two murdered their first victim , 16 @-@ year @-@ old Pauline Reade . Reade had attended school with Hindley 's younger sister , Maureen , and had also been in a short relationship with David Smith , a local boy with three criminal convictions for minor crimes . Police could find nobody who had seen Reade before her disappearance , and although the 15 @-@ year @-@ old Smith was questioned by police he was cleared of any involvement in her death . Their next victim , John Kilbride , was killed on 23 November 1963 . A huge search was undertaken , with over 700 statements taken , and 500 " missing " posters printed . Eight days after he failed to return home , 2 @,@ 000 volunteers scoured waste ground and derelict buildings . 
 Hindley hired a vehicle a week after Kilbride went missing , and again on 21 December 1963 , apparently to make sure the burial sites had not been disturbed . In February 1964 she bought a second @-@ hand Austin Traveller , but soon after traded it for a Mini van . Twelve @-@ year @-@ old Keith Bennett disappeared on 16 June 1964 . His stepfather , Jimmy Johnson , became a suspect ; in the two years following Bennett 's disappearance , Johnson was taken for questioning on four occasions . Detectives searched under the floorboards of the Johnsons ' house , and on discovering that the houses in the row were connected , extended the search to the entire street . 
 Maureen Hindley married David Smith on 15 August 1964 . The marriage was hastily arranged and performed at a register office . None of Hindley 's relatives attended ; Myra did not approve of the marriage , and her mother was too embarrassed — Maureen was seven months pregnant . The newlyweds moved into Smith 's father 's house . The next day , Brady suggested that the four take a day @-@ trip to Windermere . This was the first time Brady and Smith had met properly , and Brady was apparently impressed by Smith 's demeanour . The two talked about society , the distribution of wealth , and the possibility of robbing a bank . The young Smith was similarly impressed by Brady , who throughout the day had paid for his food and wine . The trip to the Lake District was the first of many outings . Hindley was apparently jealous of their relationship , but became closer to her sister . 
 In 1964 Hindley , her grandmother , and Brady were rehoused as part of the post @-@ war slum clearances in Manchester , to 16 Wardle Brook Avenue in the new overspill estate of Hattersley . Brady and Hindley became friendly with Patricia Hodges , an 11 @-@ year @-@ old girl who lived at 12 Wardle Brook Avenue . Hodges accompanied the two on their trips to Saddleworth Moor to collect peat , something that many householders on the new estate did to improve the soil in their gardens , which were full of clay and builder 's rubble . She remained unharmed ; living only a few doors away , her disappearance would have been easily solved . 
 Early on Boxing Day 1964 , Hindley left her grandmother at a relative 's house and refused to allow her back to Wardle Brook Avenue that night . On the same day , 10 @-@ year @-@ old Lesley Ann Downey disappeared from a funfair in Ancoats . Despite a huge search she was not found . The following day Hindley brought her grandmother back home . By February 1965 Patricia Hodges had stopped visiting 16 Wardle Brook Avenue , but David Smith was still a regular visitor . Brady gave Smith books to read , and the two discussed robbery and murder . On Hindley 's 23rd birthday , her sister and brother @-@ in @-@ law , who had until then been living with relatives , were rehoused in Underwood Court , a block of flats not far from Wardle Brook Avenue . The two couples began to see each other more regularly , but usually only on Brady 's terms . 
 During the 1990s , Hindley claimed that she took part in the killings only because Brady had drugged her , was blackmailing her with pornographic pictures he had taken of her , and had threatened to kill her younger sister , Maureen . In a 2008 television documentary series on female serial killers broadcast on ITV3 , Hindley 's solicitor , Andrew <unk> , reported that she had said to him : 
 I ought to have been hanged . I deserved it . My crime was worse than Brady 's because I enticed the children and they would never have entered the car without my role ... I have always regarded myself as worse than Brady . 
 = = Incarceration = = 
 = = = Brady = = = 
 Following his conviction Brady was moved to Durham Prison , where he asked to live in solitary confinement . He spent 19 years in mainstream prisons before being diagnosed as a psychopath in November 1985 and sent to the high @-@ security Park Lane Hospital , now Ashworth Psychiatric Hospital , in Sefton ; he has since made it clear that he never wants to be released . 
 The trial judge recommended that his life sentence should mean life , and successive Home Secretaries have agreed with that decision . In 1982 the Lord Chief Justice Lord Lane said of Brady : " this is the case if ever there is to be one when a man should stay in prison till he dies " . The death , in November 2007 , of John <unk> , who had spent 55 years in prison for murdering three children meant that Brady became the longest serving prisoner in England and Wales . 
 Although he refuses to work with Ashworth 's psychiatrists , Brady has occasionally corresponded with people outside the hospital , including the late Lord Longford , criminologist Colin Wilson and various journalists . In one letter , written in 2005 , he claimed that the murders were " merely an existential exercise of just over a year , which was concluded in December 1964 " . By then , he went on to claim , he and Hindley had turned their attention to armed robbery , for which they had begun to prepare by acquiring guns and vehicles . During several years of interactions with forensic psychologist Chris Cowley , including face @-@ to @-@ face meetings , Brady told him of an " aesthetic fascination [ he had ] with guns " , despite his never having used one to kill . He complained bitterly about conditions at Ashworth , which he hates . In 1999 his right wrist was broken in what he claimed was an " hour @-@ long , unprovoked attack " by staff . Brady subsequently went on hunger strike , but while English law allows patients to refuse treatment , those being treated for mental disorders under the Mental Health Act 1983 have no such right if the treatment is for their mental disorder . He was therefore force @-@ fed and transferred to another hospital for tests , after he fell ill . He recovered and in March 2000 asked for a judicial review of the legality of the decision to force @-@ feed him , but was refused permission . 
 Myra gets the potentially fatal brain condition , whilst I have to fight simply to die . I have had enough . I want nothing , my objective is to die and release myself from this once and for all . So you see my death strike is rational and pragmatic . I 'm only sorry I didn 't do it decades ago , and I 'm eager to leave this cesspit in a coffin . 
 While at Ashworth , in 2001 Brady wrote The Gates of Janus , which was published by Feral House , an underground US publisher . The book , Brady 's analysis of serial murder and specific serial killers , sparked outrage when announced in Britain . 
 According to Chris Cowley , Brady regrets Hindley 's imprisonment and the consequences of their actions , but not necessarily the crimes themselves . He sees no point in making any kind of public apology ; instead , he " expresses remorse through actions " . Twenty years of transcribing classical texts into Braille came to an end when the authorities confiscated his translation machine , for fear it might be used as a weapon . He once offered to donate one of his kidneys to " someone , anyone who needed one " , but was blocked from doing so . According to Colin Wilson , " it was because these attempts to express remorse were thrown back at him that he began to contemplate suicide . " He might have achieved this in 2006 , when a female friend sent him 50 paracetamol pills , stored in two Smarties tubes hidden inside a hollowed @-@ out crime novel . The potentially lethal dose of tablets was intercepted . 
 Winnie Johnson , the mother of undiscovered victim , 12 @-@ year @-@ old Keith Bennett , received a letter from Brady at the end of 2005 in which , she said , he claimed that he could take police to within 20 yards ( 18 m ) of her son 's body but the authorities would not allow it . Brady did not refer directly to Keith by name and did not claim he could take investigators directly to the grave , but spoke of the " clarity " of his recollections . 
 In 2012 Brady applied to be returned to prison , reiterating his desire to starve himself to death . At a subsequent mental health tribunal , held in June the following year , Brady claimed that he suffered not from paranoid schizophrenia , as his doctors at Ashworth maintained , but rather , a personality disorder . His application was rejected , with the judge stating that Brady " continues to suffer from a mental disorder which is of a nature and degree which makes it appropriate for him to continue to receive medical treatment " . 
 = = = Hindley = = = 
 Hindley lodged an unsuccessful appeal against her conviction immediately after the trial . Brady and Hindley corresponded by letter until 1971 , when she ended their relationship . The two remained in sporadic contact for several months , but Hindley had fallen in love with one of her prison officers , Patricia Cairns . A former assistant governor claimed that such relationships were not unusual in Holloway at that time , as " many of the officers were gay , and involved in relationships either with one another or with inmates " . Hindley successfully petitioned to have her status as a category A prisoner changed to category B , which enabled Governor Dorothy Wing to take her on a walk round Hampstead Heath , part of her unofficial policy of reintroducing her charges to the outside world when she felt they were ready . The excursion caused a furore in the national press and earned Wing an official rebuke from the then Home Secretary Robert Carr . With Cairns 's assistance and the outside contacts of another prisoner , Maxine Croft , Hindley planned a prison escape , but it was thwarted when impressions of the prison keys were intercepted by an off @-@ duty policeman . Cairns was sentenced to six years in jail for her part in the plot . 
 Hindley was told that she should spend 25 years in prison before being considered for parole . The Lord Chief Justice agreed with that recommendation in 1982 , but in January 1985 Home Secretary Leon Brittan increased her tariff to 30 years . By that time Hindley claimed to be a reformed Catholic . Ann West , the mother of Lesley Ann Downey , was at the centre of a campaign to ensure that Hindley was never released from prison , and until West 's death in February 1999 , she regularly gave television and newspaper interviews whenever Hindley 's release was rumoured . 
 In 1987 Hindley admitted that the plea for parole she had submitted to the Home Secretary eight years earlier was " on the whole ... a pack of lies " , and to some reporters her co @-@ operation in the searches on Saddleworth Moor " appeared a cynical gesture aimed at ingratiating herself to the parole authorities " . Then Home Secretary David Waddington imposed a whole life tariff on Hindley in July 1990 , after she confessed to having been more involved in the murders than she had admitted . Hindley was not informed of the decision until 1994 , when a Law Lords ruling obliged the Prison Service to inform all life sentence prisoners of the minimum period they must serve in prison before being considered for parole . In 1997 the Parole Board ruled that Hindley was low risk and should be moved to an open prison . She rejected the idea and was moved to a medium @-@ security prison ; the House of Lords ruling left open the possibility of later freedom . Between December 1997 and March 2000 Hindley made three separate appeals against her life tariff , claiming she was a reformed woman and no longer a danger to society , but each was rejected by the courts . 
 When in 2002 another life sentence prisoner challenged the Home Secretary 's power to set minimum terms , Hindley and hundreds of others , whose tariffs had been increased by politicians , looked likely to be released from prison . Hindley 's release seemed imminent and plans were made by supporters for her to be given a new identity . Home Secretary David Blunkett ordered Greater Manchester Police to find new charges against her , to prevent her release from prison . The investigation was headed by Superintendent Tony Brett , and initially looked at charging Hindley with the murders of Pauline Reade and Keith Bennett , but the advice given by government lawyers was that because of the DPP 's decision taken 15 years earlier , a new trial would probably be considered an abuse of process . 
 On 25 November 2002 the Law Lords agreed that judges , not politicians , should decide how long a criminal spends behind bars , and thus stripped the Home Secretary of the power to set minimum sentences . The news came too late for Hindley ; on 15 November 2002 , aged 60 , she had died from bronchial pneumonia caused by heart disease . She was a 40 @-@ a @-@ day smoker who in 1999 had been diagnosed with angina and hospitalised after suffering a brain aneurysm . Camera crews " stood rank and file behind steel barriers " outside , but none of Hindley 's relatives were among the congregation of eight or ten who attended a short service at Cambridge crematorium . Such was the strength of feeling more than 35 years after the murders that a reported 20 local undertakers refused to handle her cremation . Four months later , her ashes were scattered by her ex @-@ partner , Patricia Cairns , less than 10 miles ( 16 km ) from Saddleworth Moor in Stalybridge Country Park . Fears were expressed that the news might result in visitors choosing to avoid the park , a local beauty spot , or even that the park might be vandalised . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 David Smith became " reviled by the people of Manchester " , despite having been instrumental in bringing Brady and Hindley to justice . While her sister was on trial , Maureen — eight months pregnant — was attacked in the lift of the building in which she and David lived . Their home was vandalised , and hate mail was regularly posted through their letterbox . Maureen feared for her children : " I couldn 't let my children out of my sight when they were little . They were too young to tell them why they had to stay in , to explain why they couldn 't go out to play like all the other children . " 
 After knifing another man during a fight , in an attack he claimed was triggered by the abuse he had suffered since the trial , Smith was sentenced to three years in prison in 1969 . That same year his children were taken into the care of the local authority . His wife Maureen moved from Underwood Court to a single @-@ bedroom property , and found work in a department store . Subjected to whispering campaigns and petitions to remove her from the estate where she lived , she received no support from her family — her mother had supported Myra during the trial . On his release from prison , David Smith moved in with the girl who became his second wife and won custody of his three sons . Maureen managed to repair the relationship with her mother , and moved into a council property in Gorton . She divorced Smith in 1973 , and married a lorry driver , Bill Scott , with whom she had a daughter . 
 Maureen and her immediate family made regular visits to see Hindley , who reportedly adored her niece . In 1980 Maureen suffered a brain haemorrhage ; Hindley was granted permission to visit her sister in hospital , but she arrived an hour after Maureen 's death . Sheila and Patrick Kilbride , who were by then divorced , were present at Maureen 's funeral , believing that Hindley might make an appearance . Patrick Kilbride mistook Bill Scott 's daughter from a previous relationship , Ann Wallace , for Hindley and tried to attack her before being knocked to the ground by another mourner ; the police were called to restore order . Shortly before her death at the age of 70 Sheila Kilbride said : " If she [ Hindley ] ever comes out of jail I 'll kill her . " It was a threat repeated by her son Danny , and Ann West . 
 In 1972 David Smith was acquitted of the murder of his father , who had been suffering from an incurable cancer . Smith pleaded guilty to manslaughter and was sentenced to two days ' detention . He remarried and moved to Lincolnshire with his three sons , and was exonerated of any participation in the Moors murders by Hindley 's confession in 1987 . He died in Ireland in 2012 . 
 A 1977 BBC television debate discussed arguments for and against Myra Hindley 's release , with Lord Longford being on the side who argued that Hindley should be released and Ann West ( the mother of Lesley Ann Downey ) being on the side arguing against any suggestion of Hindley being released and threatening to kill her if she ever got out of prison . 
 Joan Reade , Pauline Reade 's mother , was admitted to Springfield Mental Hospital in Manchester . She was present , under heavy sedation , at the funeral of her daughter on 7 August 1987 . Five years after their son was murdered , Sheila and Patrick Kilbride divorced . Ann West , mother of Lesley Ann Downey , died in 1999 from cancer of the liver . Since her daughter 's death , she had campaigned to ensure that Hindley remained in prison , and doctors said that the stress had contributed to the severity of her illness . Winnie Johnson , mother of Keith Bennett , continued to visit Saddleworth Moor , where it is believed that the body of her son is buried . She died in August 2012 . 
 Manchester City Council decided in 1987 to demolish the house in which Brady and Hindley had lived on Wardle Brook Avenue , and where Lesley Anne Downey and Edward Evans were murdered , citing " excessive media interest [ in the property ] creating unpleasantness for residents " . 
 The case has been dramatised on television twice : in See No Evil : The Moors Murders and Longford ( both 2006 ) . 
 = = Lasting notoriety = = 
 The photographs and tape recording of the torture of Lesley Ann Downey , exhibited in court to a disbelieving audience , and the nonchalant responses of Brady and Hindley , helped to ensure the lasting notoriety of their crimes . Brady , who says that he does not want to be released , was rarely mentioned in the news , but Hindley 's gender , her repeated insistence on her innocence , followed by her attempts to secure her release after confessing her guilt , resulted in her becoming a figure of hate in the national media . Her oft @-@ reprinted photograph , taken shortly after she was arrested , is described by some commentators as similar to the mythical Medusa and , according to author Helen Birch , has become " synonymous with the idea of feminine evil " . 
 Given Hindley 's status as a co @-@ defendant in the first serial @-@ murder trial held since the abolition of the death penalty , retribution was a common theme amongst those who sought to keep her locked away . Even her mother insisted that she should die in prison , partly for fear for her daughter 's safety and partly out of the desire to avoid the possibility that one of the victims ' relatives might kill her . Some commentators expressed the view that of the two , Hindley was the " more evil " . Lord Longford , a devout Roman Catholic , campaigned to secure the release of " celebrated " criminals , and Myra Hindley in particular , which earned him constant derision from the public and the press . He described Hindley as a " delightful " person and said " you could loathe what people did but should not loathe what they were because human personality was sacred even though human behaviour was very often appalling " . Despite his best efforts , the tabloid press branded him a " loony " and a " do @-@ gooder " for supporting the " evil " Hindley . Hindley became a long @-@ running source of material for the press , who printed embellished tales of her " <unk> " life at the " 5 @-@ star " Cookham Wood Prison and her liaisons with prison staff and other inmates . 
 = The Boat Race 1902 = 
 The 59th Boat Race took place on 22 March 1902 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Although Oxford used swivel <unk> for the first time in the history of the race , Cambridge won by five lengths in a time of 19 minutes 9 seconds . The victory took the overall record to 33 – 25 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1901 race by two @-@ fifths of a length , and led overall with 33 victories to Cambridge 's 24 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford 's coaches were G. C. Bourne who had rowed for Oxford in the 1882 and 1883 races , William Fletcher , who rowed for Oxford in the 1890 , 1891 , 1892 and 1893 races and Harcourt Gilbey Gold ( Dark Blue president for the 1900 race and four @-@ time Blue ) . Cambridge were coached by John Ernest Payne ( two @-@ time Blue in 1899 and 1900 ) . The umpire for the race for the thirteenth year in a row was Frank Willan who won the event four consecutive times , rowing for Oxford in the 1866 , 1867 , 1868 and 1869 races . It was his last time in charge of the race as he would be replaced by Frederick I. Pitman the following year . 
 With a hard frost impeding Cambridge 's practice in Ely , the crew relocated , at the invitation of Sir John Edwards @-@ Moss , to Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames where parts of the river were clear of ice . Oxford disregarded Felix Warre 's latest boat in favour of the previous year 's vessel , however with the inclusion of the recently patented " swivel rowlock " . According to Oxford rower and author George Drinkwater ( who rowed at bow for the Dark Blues in this race ) , the <unk> " were not altogether a success " and stated that while Cambridge could " row a faster stroke " , the Dark Blues " were very ponderous " . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 6 @.@ 5 lb ( 79 @.@ 0 kg ) , 4 @.@ 5 pounds ( 2 @.@ 04 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . The Cambridge crew contained four rowers with Boat Race experience , including Wilfrid Hubert Chapman who had last rowed in the 1899 race . Seven of the nine members of the Cambridge crew matriculated at Trinity College . Oxford saw five former Blues return , including cox Gilchrist Maclagan who was steering in his fourth consecutive race . The Dark Blues also featured a pair of brothers , John George and Devereux Milburn , who were also the race 's only non @-@ British participants , hailing from the United States having attended The Hill School in Pennsylvania before studying at Harvard University . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . At the time of the race it was raining ; umpire Willan started proceedings at 12 : 45 p.m. and Cambridge led from the first stroke . Within two minutes they were clear of Oxford , and , out @-@ rating them marginally for the duration of the race , they pulled away with every stroke . Cambridge passed the finishing post with a five @-@ length lead , in a time of 19 minutes 9 seconds . It was the Light Blues third win in four years and the victory took the overall record in the event to 33 – 25 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = John Tavares ( ice hockey ) = 
 John Tavares ( born September 20 , 1990 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey Centre who currently serves as the captain of the New York Islanders of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He was selected first overall by the Islanders in the 2009 NHL Entry Draft . 
 Previously , Tavares competed at the major junior level as a member of the Oshawa Generals of the Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) before being traded to the London Knights at the 2009 OHL trading deadline along with Michael Del Zotto . Tavares broke into the OHL after gaining " exceptional player " status at the age of 14 , allowing the Generals to select him in the OHL Priority Draft as an underage player in 2005 . Tavares was named the Canadian Hockey League ( CHL ) Rookie of the Year in 2006 and CHL Player of the Year in 2007 . In 2009 , he finished the season with a career total of 215 goals , breaking Peter Lee 's OHL record by two . 
 Tavares was the focus of an unsuccessful push to have the NHL 's draft rules changed to allow him to participate in the 2008 Entry Draft , as well as an attempt to allow him to play in the American Hockey League ( AHL ) as a 17 @-@ year @-@ old in 2007 . Tavares was ranked as the top prospect for the 2009 Draft by both the NHL Central Scouting Bureau and International Scouting Services . 
 Tavares has represented Canada at five International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) <unk> events , including the 2010 and 2011 World Championships . At the under @-@ 20 level , he won gold medals at the 2008 and 2009 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships . He was named the most valuable player of the 2009 tournament after scoring eight goals and 15 points in six games . He also participated in the 2006 IIHF World U18 Championships , but failed to medal . Additionally , Tavares represented Team Ontario at the 2006 World U @-@ 17 Hockey Challenge and 2007 Super Series . On January 7 , 2014 , he was named to the 2014 Canadian Olympic Hockey Team , winning a gold medal at the 2014 Winter Olympics despite an injury preventing him from participating in the nation 's final two games . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Tavares was born on September 20 , 1990 in Mississauga , Ontario , to Barbara and Joe Tavares , who are of Polish and Portuguese descent , respectively . His maternal grandparents Bolesław and Josephine Kowal immigrated from Poland to Sudbury , Ontario , and his paternal grandparents Manuel and Dorotea Tavares immigrated from Portugal to Toronto . At a young age , Tavares moved to Oakville , Ontario . This is where he was first exposed to minor hockey via the Minor Oaks Hockey Association . Tavares also played soccer and lacrosse , and his highly competitive nature often led him to fight with other players . Tavares excelled at lacrosse , following in the footsteps of his uncle John Tavares , the all @-@ time scoring leader in the National Lacrosse League ( NLL ) , and was a ball boy for his uncle 's NLL team , the Buffalo Bandits . The younger Tavares credits his uncle with teaching him the importance of remaining unselfish , stating that what he learned by following his uncle with the Bandits has made him better both as a person and a hockey player . Many skills he learned in lacrosse — such as spinning off checks and battling in traffic — transferred to ice hockey and improved Tavares ' abilities as a goal scorer . 
 In Oakville , Tavares attended St. Thomas Aquinas Catholic Secondary School . He lived five minutes from Sam Gagner , who later signed a contract with the Edmonton Oilers , and the two quickly established a friendship . Gagner 's father , former National Hockey League ( NHL ) player Dave Gagner , built a backyard ice rink on which Tavares spent much of his time honing ice hockey skills . In the OHL , Tavares placed an emphasis on his education , earning honours as well as the Oshawa Generals ' Scholastic Player of the Year in 2007 – 08 . Tavares also spends some of his time working with the Special Olympics . 
 He showed such promise as a hockey player that when he was seven , his parents moved him up one age group and he began playing with older children . From there , he moved on to the Mississauga Braves of the Greater Toronto Hockey League ( GTHL ) . After playing the 1998 – 99 season with the Braves ' novice team , Tavares moved to the Mississauga Senators of the GTHL the following season . With the Senators ' AAA minor atom team , Tavares won the GTHL minor atom championship in the 1999 – 2000 season . Tavares eventually moved to the Toronto Marlboros of the GTHL . During the 2003 – 04 season Tavares was teammates with Sam Gagner of the Edmonton Oilers . That season , Tavares scored 95 goals and 187 points in ninety games and led the Marlboros ' bantam team to the 2004 Bantam AAA Provincial Hockey Championships , where the Marlboros defeated Drew Doughty and the London Jr . Knights 5 – 0 in the championship game . Tavares scored one goal in the game and was named the tournament 's top forward . The following season , Tavares joined the Marlboros ' minor midget team , where he recorded 91 goals and 158 points in 72 games . For his achievements , Tavares shared the Buck Houle Award with Bryan Cameron , " in recognition of outstanding on ice performance , leadership and loyalty " . During this season , he also played 16 games with the Milton <unk> of the Ontario Provincial Junior A Hockey League ( OPJHL ) , during which he recorded 11 goals and 23 points . Tavares ' debut with the <unk> came while he was only thirteen , making him one of the youngest players to ever play junior hockey . 
 = = = Ontario Hockey League = = = 
 Tavares petitioned to gain eligibility to play major junior in the OHL in the spring of 2005 . As OHL rules did not allow for players under the age of 15 to be drafted , the league introduced an " exceptional player " clause , allowing the 14 @-@ year @-@ old Tavares to be drafted one year sooner than he would otherwise have been eligible . Consequently , Tavares is the youngest player to ever be drafted in the OHL , although Bobby Orr was signed and had played at a younger age . The Canadian Hockey League ( CHL ) , the umbrella organization which governs major junior hockey in Canada , sent a proposal to Hockey Canada , recommending that the rule be expanded across junior hockey , which eventually was granted . To date , only four other players , Aaron <unk> , Connor McDavid , Sean Day and Joseph Veleno , have been granted the same status . 
 The Oshawa Generals held the first pick in the 2005 draft , and they selected Tavares , earning him the Jack Ferguson Award , which is given to the player picked first overall in the OHL Priority Selection . Tavares played his first OHL game on September 23 , 2005 , scoring his first OHL goal in a game held just three days after his 15th birthday . He showed he could play in the OHL immediately , scoring ten goals in his first nine games with the Generals , and finished the 2005 – 06 season with 77 points , including 45 goals . Tavares was named to the OHL 's all @-@ rookie team , and won both the Emms Family Award and CHL Rookie of the Year awards as the top first @-@ year player in both the OHL and CHL respectively . 
 As a 16 @-@ year @-@ old in 2006 – 07 , Tavares was selected to represent the OHL for two games in January for the annual ADT Canada @-@ Russia Challenge , including one game in Oshawa . Later that month , on January 25 , 2007 , Tavares registered a 7 @-@ point night in a 9 @-@ 6 win versus the Windsor Spitfires . He scored four goals and three assists , including his 50th goal of the season in his 44th game . Towards the end of the season , on March 16 , 2007 , Tavares recorded his 70th and 71st goals of the season , breaking Wayne Gretzky 's OHL record for most goals by a 16 @-@ year @-@ old . He was awarded the Red Tilson Trophy as the most outstanding player in the league , and named the CHL Player of the Year . 
 Tavares scored 40 goals in 59 games for the Generals during the 2007 – 08 season , while his 118 points was placed him third in OHL scoring . Tavares led the OHL in scoring until he missed several games to participate with Team Canada at the 2008 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships . As Tavares was participating in the 2009 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships , it was speculated that the Generals were ready to trade him to the London Knights . Tavares ' future with the Generals had been questioned since the beginning of the season as the Generals were not expected to seriously contend for the championship , while the Knights were among the league leaders . The deal was made official on January 8 , 2009 , as Oshawa sent Tavares , Michael Del Zotto and Darryl Borden to the Knights , in exchange for Scott Valentine , Christian Thomas , Michael <unk> and six draft picks . 
 Tavares made his debut with the Knights on January 11 against the Mississauga St. Michael 's Majors . Making his return to Oshawa at the 2009 CHL Top Prospects Game as captain of Team Orr , he recorded an assist in a 6 – 1 win over Team Cherry , but injured his shoulder after Zack Kassian of the Peterborough Petes checked him behind the net . On March 8 , 2009 , Tavares set the OHL goal @-@ scoring record with his 214th goal , passing the previous record held by Peter Lee . The next day , he received his third OHL Player of the Week recognition of the season . 
 = = National Hockey League = = 
 Although he was born five days after the September 15 cutoff date for eligibility in the 2008 NHL Entry Draft , there was a significant effort made to allow Tavares into the Draft . Following his 72 @-@ goal campaign in 2006 – 07 , Tavares ' agents asked the NHL and NHL Players ' Association ( NHLPA ) to make an exception for Tavares similar to the one the OHL had made in 2005 . The attempt was unsuccessful , however , and Tavares was forced to wait until 2009 to participate in the League Entry Draft . In October 2007 , however , it was reported that then @-@ Toronto Maple Leafs General Manager John Ferguson , Jr . , had offered the 17 @-@ year @-@ old Tavares a spot with the team 's American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Toronto Marlies . Like the NHL , however , the AHL declined to amend its by @-@ laws , and Tavares subsequently returned to the OHL . 
 The NHL International Scouting Services ranked Tavares as the top draft prospect in the world , ahead of defenceman Victor Hedman , forward Magnus <unk> @-@ Svensson and forward Matt Duchene in its March 2009 update . The 2009 draft class was led by Tavares , who was taken first overall by the New York Islanders . 
 = = = New York Islanders = = = 
 On July 15 , 2009 , Tavares signed a three @-@ year , entry @-@ level contract with the Islanders . His first NHL game was in the pre @-@ season in a game against the Edmonton Oilers . He spent 22 minutes and 50 seconds on the ice alongside linemates Doug Weight and Sean <unk> during the Islanders ' 3 – 2 loss . Weight , a veteran NHLer , said that , " John 's going to be a big piece of [ an Islander rebuilding effort ] . " Tavares scored his first career NHL goal and assist in his first ever professional game , scoring on a <unk> against Marc @-@ André Fleury of the Pittsburgh Penguins on October 3 , 2009 . 
 Tavares led NHL rookies in scoring throughout much of his first season . In December 2009 , Tavares scored five consecutive Islanders goals over a four @-@ game span to tie the club record for most consecutive goals by one player . He scored an empty @-@ net goal against the Atlanta Thrashers on December 3 , and both Islanders goals on both December 9 against the Philadelphia Flyers and December 10 against Toronto . The record was originally set by Bryan Trottier , when he scored five consecutive goals in a 1982 game against Philadelphia . At the end of the season , Tavares finished second in rookie scoring , behind Matt Duchene , with a total of 54 points . 
 As New York opened up their season at home against the Dallas Stars on October 9 , 2010 , Tavares suffered a mild concussion late during the first period . The Stars ' Adam <unk> bumped into Tavares , and the latter was unable to return to the game . He scored his first career hat @-@ trick on October 23 , 2010 , in a loss to the Florida Panthers . He then scored his second career hat @-@ trick , as well as his first career natural hat @-@ trick , on January 15 , 2011 , in a win against the Buffalo Sabres . 
 On September 14 , 2011 , Tavares signed a six @-@ year , $ 33 million extension with the Islanders . He is scheduled to become an unrestricted free agent in July 2018 . After being held pointless in the first two games of the 2011 – 12 season , Tavares had back @-@ to @-@ back four @-@ point games against the Tampa Bay Lightning and New York Rangers . From December 29 , 2011 , to January 21 , 2012 , Tavares had 21 points in a 12 @-@ game point streak , seven of which were multi @-@ point games . He was selected to play in the 2012 NHL All @-@ Star Game . In his first career All @-@ Star Game , he recorded one goal and one assist . Additionally , during the 2011 – 12 season , Tavares was named as an alternate captain for New York . 
 Tavares played with Mark Streit in Switzerland for SC Bern while the 2012 – 13 NHL lockout took place . During the shortened 2012 – 13 season , Tavares was third in the NHL with 28 goals . He helped the Islanders reach the playoffs for the first time since 2007 , scoring 47 points in 48 games . Tavares was also named a finalist for the 2013 Hart Memorial Trophy , awarded to the NHL 's most valuable player , on May 10 , 2013 . Tavares scored his first career NHL playoff goal against Pittsburgh goaltender Marc @-@ André Fleury in Game 3 of the 2013 Stanley Cup playoffs . He would finish with three goals and five points in six games as the Islanders were ultimately eliminated by the Penguins . 
 On September 10 , 2013 , Tavares was introduced as the 14th captain in New York Islanders history , replacing former Islander Mark Streit of the Philadelphia Flyers , who served as team captain since 2011 . On February 19 , 2014 , during the 2014 Winter Olympics , he suffered a torn medial collateral ligament ( MCL ) and a torn meniscus in his knee during the quarterfinal game against Latvia , forcing him to miss the remainder of the Olympics as well as the remainder of the Islanders ' season . At the time of his injury , Tavares was third in the NHL with 66 points in 59 games . The following season , he was selected for the 2015 NHL All @-@ Star Game , along with teammate Jaroslav <unk> . Tavares finished the 2014 – 15 NHL season as runner up for the Art Ross Trophy with 86 points , one point behind Dallas Stars forward Jamie Benn . 
 On April 19 , 2015 , Tavares scored 15 seconds into overtime against Washington Capitals goaltender Braden Holtby in Game 3 of the Eastern Conference Quarterfinals of the 2015 playoffs . The goal , which gave the Islanders a 2 – 1 victory , was the first game @-@ winning overtime goal in the playoffs for the Islanders since 1993 . Despite this , however , the Capitals won the series in seven games . 
 Tavares scored the first regular season goal for the Islanders at Barclays Center in a 3 @-@ 2 overtime loss to the Chicago Blackhawks during the first game of the 2015 @-@ 16 NHL season . 
 On April 24 , 2016 , Game 6 of the Eastern Conference Quarterfinals against the Florida Panthers , trailing 1 @-@ 0 in the final minute of play , assisted by Nikolay <unk> and Nick <unk> , Tavares scored the game tying goal off a loose puck in the crease with 53 @.@ 2 seconds left in regulation . He finished the job by scoring the series @-@ clinching goal in double overtime , winning a playoff series for the Islanders for the first time since 1993 . 
 = = International play = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 During his rookie season in the OHL , Tavares competed for Team Ontario in the 2006 World U @-@ 17 Hockey Challenge in Saskatchewan as a 15 @-@ year @-@ old , but failed to medal . Later that year , at the end of the 2005 – 06 season , he was selected to join Canada 's under @-@ 18 team for the 2006 IIHF World U18 Championships in Sweden , but failed to medal once more , falling to the Czech Republic in the bronze medal game . Later in the off @-@ season , he was invited to the under @-@ 18 team 's summer training camp to prepare for the 2006 Ivan Hlinka Memorial Tournament in the Czech Republic and Slovakia , though an injury ultimately prevented him from participating . 
 During the following season , Tavares was invited to Canada 's national junior selection camp in preparation for the 2007 World Junior Championships , but was not named to the final roster . After completing his second OHL season , however , Tavares was named to the Canada 's junior team for the 2007 Super Series against Russian junior players . He scored four goals and one assist as Canada won the series 7 – 0 – 1 . 
 Tavares earned another invite to the selection camp for the 2008 World Junior Championships and made the final roster for the tournament on his second attempt . He scored four goals to help Canada to its fourth @-@ straight gold medal in the competition . Returning the next year , along with Zach Boychuk , P. K. Subban and Thomas Hickey from the previous year 's gold medal @-@ winning team , Tavares was selected to compete in the 2009 World Junior Championships in Ottawa . He scored three points in the first round @-@ robin game against the Czech Republic , an 8 – 1 win , and was named Player of the Game . In the final round @-@ robin game against the United States , Tavares scored a hat @-@ trick for his 12th career goal of the tournament to tie Eric Lindros and Jeff Carter for the all @-@ time Canadian junior record . In doing so , <unk> helped propel Canada to a 7 – 4 win that gave them the top spot in their pool and a subsequent bye to the tournament semifinal . He was also named Player of the Game for the second time in the tournament for his performance on the night . Meeting Russia in the semifinal and down 5 – 4 with less than ten seconds left in regulation , Tavares fought off two Russian players along the boards and backhanded a shot towards the goal . The shot was blocked by defenceman Dmitri Kulikov a few feet in front of the net , but after the puck came loose , teammate Jordan Eberle retrieved it and sent it into the right side of the net to dramatically tie the game with 5 @.@ 4 seconds left . Then , as the game was forced into a shootout , Tavares scored to put Canada up 2 – 0 in the tie @-@ breaker and into the gold medal game against Sweden . Recording an assist in the final , he helped Canada defeat the Swedes 5 – 1 to capture their fifth @-@ straight gold medal . Tavares finished the tournament with eight goals and seven assists for 15 points in six games , second only to teammate Cody Hodgson in tournament scoring . Tavares was also named one of the top three players on the Canadian team by its coaching staff , as well as a tournament All @-@ Star , Top Forward and MVP . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 As the New York Islanders failed to qualify for the playoffs in Tavares ' rookie season in the NHL , he was selected to the Canadian men 's team for the 2010 IIHF World Championship in Germany . Canada General Manager Mark Messier made a specific effort to assemble a young team ; as a result , Tavares was one of five teenagers on the final roster . With seven goals in seven games , Tavares led all tournament players in goal @-@ scoring . Despite recording no assists , he ranked fifth in points . He helped Canada to the quarterfinal against Russia , where they were defeated 5 – 2 . 
 The following year , Tavares returned to the national team for the 2011 IIHF World Championship in Slovakia . He improved to nine points over seven games with five goals and four assists to lead Canada in scoring ; he ranked fifth among all tournament players for the second consecutive year . As Canada again reached the quarterfinal , they were eliminated once more by Russia , losing 2 – 1 . Tavares was chosen by coaches as one of the three best players on Team Canada , along with defenceman Alex Pietrangelo and forward Andrew Ladd . 
 Tavares played for SC Bern in Switzerland during the 2012 – 13 NHL lockout and quickly became the PostFinance Top Scorer , tallying 42 points — including 17 goals — in just 28 games . He also played for Team Canada at the 2012 Spengler Cup , which the nation ultimately won after defeating HC Davos in the final . 
 At the 2014 Winter Olympics , Tavares injured his knee in Canada 's quarterfinal match , rendering him unable to play for the remainder of the tournament as well as the 2013 – 14 NHL season . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Tavares has been praised by his coaches for his ability to anticipate the play since he joined the OHL . A lack of speed had been the most common criticism of Tavares ' play , something he spent his junior career attempting to improve . Tavares ' skating speed is something he greatly improved since turning professional , and his speed is no longer considered an issue on the ice . 
 The media hype he has encountered has led Tavares to remain guarded when speaking to the media , while his teammates and family attempt to shield him from the spotlight where they can . However , Tavares is regarded as a natural leader on the ice , and a player who puts his team first . The Oshawa Generals named Tavares their team captain in 2008 , while he also served as the alternate captain with the Canadian junior team in 2009 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards & Honors = = 
 = Junya Nakano = 
 Junya Nakano ( <unk> <unk> , Nakano Jun 'ya , born February 28 , 1971 ) is a Japanese video game composer who was employed at Square Enix from 1995 to 2009 . He is best known for scoring Threads of Fate and co @-@ composing Final Fantasy X. He has also worked as an arranger for Dawn of Mana and the Nintendo DS version of Final Fantasy IV . Nakano has collaborated with his friend and fellow composer Masashi Hamauzu on several games . 
 He was introduced to music at the age of three when his parents offered him lessons in the electronic organ . After studying composition and arrangement at a vocational school , Nakano worked for Konami from 1991 to 1994 , where he scored numerous arcade games . Nakano is noted for his ambient style and for using percussion , timbre , and rhythm in his compositions . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Junya Nakano was born in Kyoto , Japan . His parents introduced him to music when he was three years old , offering him lessons in the electronic organ through the Yamaha Music Foundation ; they also encouraged him to join some brass bands . After playing the 1979 arcade game Lunar Rescue , he developed an interest in video games and subsequently began to enjoy chiptune music . By frequently listening to the radio , he started composing MIDI music using the NEC PC @-@ 9801 in 1985 . In 1987 , he attended a vocational school to study composition and arrangement in hopes of entering the gaming industry . After graduation , he joined the Kobe branch of Konami in 1991 , where he contributed music to eight arcade games with several collaborators over a three @-@ year period . Deciding he wanted to create more original music and have a chance to receive individual recognition , Nakano left Konami after completing the score for Golfing Greats 2 in 1994 . 
 Nakano joined Square ( now Square Enix ) in 1995 . He created four pieces for the 1996 video game Front Mission : Gun Hazard , which featured composers Nobuo Uematsu , Yasunori Mitsuda , and Masashi Hamauzu . His first solo project came about with Satellaview 's Treasure <unk> the same year . In 1996 , Nakano joined several of Square 's composers to create the soundtrack for the fighting game Tobal No. 1 ; he contributed three compositions . Hamauzu and Nakano became friends after working on Front Mission : Gun Hazard and Tobal No. 1 , and they have later collaborated on several titles . In 1997 , Nakano served as synthesizer programmer for the score to Front Mission : Alternative . Nakano composed the soundtrack for the Japan @-@ only adventure game Another Mind , which he was given a deadline of two months to complete . His subsequent score to the 1999 title Threads of Fate ( known as " <unk> " in Japan ) gave him worldwide recognition . 
 Since scoring Threads of Fate , Nakano has collaborated with several composers on major projects instead of being the sole composer . In 2001 , Nakano and Hamauzu were chosen to assist Uematsu in the production of the score for the critically acclaimed Final Fantasy X , based on their ability to create music that was different from Uematsu 's style ; Nakano created 20 pieces . One of his tracks from the game , " Guadosalam " , was arranged for the piano and featured in the album Piano Collections Final Fantasy X ( 2002 ) . Following Final Fantasy X , Nakano composed the soundtrack to <unk> Ace Entertainment 's flight simulator Sidewinder F. 
 Back at Square Enix , he created the music for Musashi : Samurai Legend with Hamauzu and the duo <unk> Zeal ( Takayuki and Yuki Iwai ) in 2004 . In 2006 , Nakano created seven tracks for the Xbox 360 game Project Sylpheed , which also featured several other composers . Later the same year , he arranged four pieces from the Mana series for Dawn of Mana ( known as " Seiken Densetsu 4 " in Japan ) . He was also selected to arrange half of Final Fantasy IV 's Nintendo DS remake under the supervision of Uematsu , and composed the soundtrack to its 2008 sequel , Final Fantasy IV : The After Years . On December 31 , 2009 , Nakano confirmed that he had left Square Enix and would be joining his former mentor and collaborator Yuji Takenouchi 's supergroup " GeOnDan " , whom have since disbanded . Nakano 's last projects for Square Enix before leaving were the soundtracks to Fullmetal Alchemist : Prince of the Dawn and Daughter of the Dusk . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Nakano is best known for creating ambient music with percussive , timbral , and rhythmic elements . According to an interview conducted by the website <unk> , Nakano was composing music focusing on an instrument 's tone and acoustics until 1995 , while after that time , he slowly moved his focus toward studying the harmony and melody important to music as a whole . After joining Square , he started focusing on rhythm and timbre which he implemented in titles like Front Mission : Gun Hazard , Treasure <unk> , and Tobal No. 1 . The music in Threads of Fate contains many different styles like ambient , jazz , and Spanish music ; the tracks have been described as " mellow " and " upbeat " . For Final Fantasy X , Nakano was responsible for most of the ambient @-@ styled compositions , which featured percussion , timbre , and rhythm . Nakano stated in the original soundtrack 's liner notes that he wanted to create music with a " vibrant and dynamic feel " that tied together his years of experience with game music . 
 When starting out in the field of music , he was influenced by brass bands he was involved with and electronic organ music ; however , he could not think of a specific musician who influenced him . Nakano cites Hamauzu as the colleague he admires most at Square Enix , and is particularly interested in the sounds he creates . When asked about his thoughts of Uematsu and how he had influenced his work , Nakano replied : " He is a very youthful and active person , but he hasn 't influenced my work . " 
 = = Works = = 
 = Expedition Everest = 
 Expedition Everest — Legend of the Forbidden Mountain is a steel roller coaster built by Vekoma at Disney 's Animal Kingdom theme park at the Walt Disney World Resort in Lake Buena Vista , Florida . The ride is themed around the Yeti hiding in Mount Everest . It is listed in the 2011 book of Guinness World Records as the most expensive roller coaster in the world . Including sets and extras , its total cost was reported to be US $ 100 million , following 6 years of planning and construction . It is the tallest artificial mountain in all of the Walt Disney Parks , though contrary to popular belief , Expedition Everest is not Florida 's tallest mountain . It is Disney 's 18th mountain @-@ themed attraction . 
 = = History = = 
 The attraction first was announced publicly on April 22 , 2003 , during an event to celebrate the fifth anniversary of Disney 's Animal Kingdom . It took three years and more than 38 miles of rebar , 5 @,@ 000 tons of structural steel , and 10 @,@ 000 tons of concrete to build the mountain . Expedition Everest first opened for previews on January 26 , 2006 , and had its grand opening on April 7 , 2006 , in ceremonies led by Disney CEO Bob Iger and theme parks chairman Jay <unk> . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 = = = Queue = = = 
 The attraction features a stand @-@ by , <unk> + , and a single rider line . The queue starts at the office of the fictional " Himalayan Escapes " travel agency , progressing to a replica temple with little holy figures . Visitors next enter a tea garden , followed by a room with equipment from a successful expedition , and then the " Yeti Museum " , which contains information on the Yeti and a moulding of a Yeti footprint . There are also about 8 @,@ 000 artifacts brought from the Nepal trip in the museum . The single rider line skips all of the exhibits . 
 = = = Ride = = = 
 The riders board the roller coaster in the model village of <unk> Zong , to begin a speedy route through the Himalayas to the base of Mount Everest . 
 The train departs the station to the right and climbs a small lift leading to a short drop , then circles around to the 118 @-@ foot ( 36 m ) lift hill , carrying the riders into the 199 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ foot @-@ high ( 60 @.@ 8 m ) mountain . It is the tallest attraction at Walt Disney World , beating The Twilight Zone Tower of Terror by 6 inches . Disney keeps it just under 200 feet because law requires structures 200 feet or taller to have a blinking red light as a beacon for low @-@ flying planes . On the way up it passes through a ransacked temple with murals of the yeti , warning the riders that the mountain is his territory . At the top of the mountain the train curves around the main peak and goes through a cave . When it emerges , it draws to a halt in front of track that has been torn apart , presumably by the yeti . The train itself is held in place by a series of rubber tires while an automatic switch rotates the piece of track directly behind the train . The train then rolls backwards along a new route that spirals down through the mountain , coming to a halt in a large cave , where riders see the yeti 's shadow on the wall as he tears up more track . This effect distracts riders from noticing another automatic track switch rotates in front of them . As the shadow moves away , the train rolls forward out of the mountain and down the main 80 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) drop . It enters a 250 ° turn and speeds back up through another cave in the mountain , where the roars of the yeti are heard once more . The train exits from the rear of the mountain and enters a large helix before being lifted back into the mountain a final time . The train drops through a cave , where the yeti is reaching down toward it . On reaching the bottom of this drop , riders return to the unloading dock and depart into a gift shop . One ride takes about 2 minutes and 50 seconds . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Expedition Everest has six steam @-@ like trains , each with six cars that together provide 17 rows seating two abreast , for a total of 34 riders per train . The trains are themed as the " <unk> Rail Service " and are made to look old and rusty . Riders must be at least 44 inches ( 110 cm ) tall and are secured by a lap bar . Up to five trains usually operate at once , but fewer can be used if guest demand is low . To create the illusion of a " steam powered " train , engineers placed vents under the station . When a train comes into the station , steam comes up through the vents and enters the loading platform . 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The steel track is 4 @,@ 424 feet ( 1 @,@ 348 m ) long and the lift is approximately 118 feet ( 36 m ) high . Expedition Everest is the first ride to use Vekoma 's newest track system , in which the rails are on the outside of the ties rather than on the inside . This was the first large @-@ scale installation of such a system . 
 = = Facts and details = = 
 Although moderate in height and length by contemporary standards , Expedition Everest was the first ride for Disney to have its trains travel both forward and backward . This is accomplished through two sets of track switches , one before the rear segment and one after . This was the second Disney roller coaster to run backwards , the first being Indiana Jones et le Temple du <unk> : Backwards ! at Disneyland Resort Paris ( 2000 – 2004 ) . Expedition Everest , however , was the first Disney roller coaster to switch between forward and backward sections during a single ride . 
 The mountain facade , the Yeti audio @-@ animatronic , and the roller coaster are three independent structures . Each structure reaches the ground @-@ level and does not touch the other two structures . This was achieved via 4 @-@ D scheduling software that told builders how to construct it . 
 = = = Mountain = = = 
 Expedition Everest is often compared to the 1959 Matterhorn <unk> roller coaster at Disneyland , which also features a snowy mountain setting and an " abominable snowman " figure throughout the ride . Expedition Everest 's mountain is made from 1 @,@ 800 tons of steel and painted with 2 @,@ 000 gallons of paint . It is the tallest artificial mountain in the world , but not , as occasionally cited , the tallest point in Florida . It is Disney 's 18th mountain @-@ themed attraction . As of 2012 , there are 20 mountain @-@ themed attractions . 
 The artificial mountain is a model , not of Mount Everest , but of the fictional " forbidden mountain " guarded by the yeti in the story created by Walt Disney Imagineering for the attraction . Everest is represented by the barren background peak on the far right , which is made to seem far in the distance ( an example of forced perspective ) . 
 = = = Yeti = = = 
 The yeti is the largest and most complex audio @-@ animatronic figure ever built by Walt Disney Imagineering . It is 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) tall . Its " skin " measures 1 @,@ 000 square feet ( 93 m2 ) , and is held in place by 1 @,@ 000 snaps and 250 zippers . Its movement is controlled by 19 actuators ( when functioning in " A @-@ mode " , its full mode of operation ) . It can move 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) horizontally and 18 in ( 46 cm ) vertically when functioning in " A @-@ mode " . The yeti 's roars are provided by voice actor Fred Tatasciore . 
 The yeti has not been in full " A @-@ mode " operation since a few months after the ride 's opening , when its framing split , causing significant risk of catastrophic malfunction if it were operated . It currently only operates in the alternative " B @-@ mode " , which is limited to a strobe @-@ light effect designed to give the appearance of movement , earning it the nickname " Disco Yeti " . The problem was caused by damage to the yeti 's concrete base structure , which is unlikely to be repaired until a major refurbishment in the distant future , because the design limits access to the yeti without major disassembly of the superstructure . The problem with the concrete is rumored to have occurred due to a glitch in the 4 @-@ D scheduling software that prevented adequate curing of a portion of the Yeti 's foundation prior to the overlapping fabrication of mountain elements and roller coaster track . 
 Joe Rohde , the Imagineer in charge of building the attraction and Animal Kingdom , was asked at the D23 2013 Convention about the disco yeti . His response was " You have to understand , it 's a giant complicated machine sitting on top of , like , a 46 @-@ foot tall tower in the middle of a finished building . So , it 's really hard to fix , but we are working on it . And we continue to work on it . We have tried several " things " , none of them quite get to the key , turning of the 40 @-@ foot tower inside of a finished building , but we are working on it ..... I will fix the Yeti someday , I swear . " 
 = = Promotions = = 
 = = = Discovery Networks = = = 
 In 2005 , Disney , Discovery Networks and Conservation International conducted expeditions to Nepal as part of the promotion for Expedition Everest . The purpose was to conduct scientific and cultural research in remote areas of the Himalayas , the location of the yeti legend . Participants included Joe Rohde from Walt Disney Imagineering and scientists from Conservation International and Disney 's Animal Kingdom . 
 The expeditions and the making of the attraction were chronicled in three documentaries broadcast on Discovery 's cable television channels in April 2006 . The first was Expedition Everest : Journey to Sacred Lands , broadcast on the Travel Channel on April 9 to coincide with the attraction 's grand opening . The second , Building A Thrill Ride : Expedition Everest , was aired on April 10 and detailed the planning and construction of the ride , along with some of the ideas that made it possible . ( During construction , for example , instead of traditional scaffolding the Imagineers used interior poles that poked through the outside of the mountain and were connected by wooden platforms . ) This documentary also featured survival tips from Les Stroud . The third , Corwin 's Quest : Realm of the Yeti , was broadcast on Animal Planet on April 15 and featured American animal and nature conservationist Jeff Corwin . 
 = = = Everest in the City = = = 
 On February 15 , 2006 , Disney staged an elaborate publicity stunt called " Everest in the City " in Times Square , New York City . They draped large billboards over the sides of several buildings , depicting Everest with a coaster car careening down the mountainside and the yeti looking on from another peak , its eyes glowing red and flashing when the text message " <unk> " was sent to a phone number provided by Disney . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 On December 18 , 2007 , a 44 @-@ year @-@ old guest was found unconscious after the train returned to the station . He was taken to a hospital , where he was pronounced dead . A preliminary autopsy by the Orange County medical examiner 's office concluded that the victim had died of dilated cardiomyopathy . 
 = = Awards and records = = 
 Expedition Everest is listed in the 2011 book of Guinness World Records as the most expensive roller coaster in the world . Including sets and extras , the total cost of the ride was reported to be US $ 100 million following 6 years of planning and construction . 
 Expedition Everest won the 2006 Theme Park Insider Award for the " World 's Best New Theme Park Attraction " . It has also been ranked in the Golden Ticket Awards and the Best Roller Coaster Poll . It was ranked 2nd for " Best New Ride For 2006 " in the Golden Ticket Awards . 
 = Wojdan Shaherkani = 
 Wojdan Ali <unk> <unk> Shahrkhani ( or " Shaherkani " ) ( Arabic : <unk> علي <unk> الدين <unk> ) ( born 1 February 1996 in Mecca ) is a Saudi judo competitor who was one of two women selected to represent the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia at the 2012 Summer Olympics . Her inclusion in the games came after the International Olympic Committee put pressure on the Saudi Arabian Olympic Committee to include women on their team . The Saudi Arabian Olympic Committee imposed special rules on <unk> related to how to behave while representing Saudi Arabia at the 2012 Games . At the time of the competition , she had only attained a blue belt , having practised judo for just two years . 
 = = Career = = 
 Wojdan Shaherkani studied judo , a sport connected to her family , as her father is a judo referee . By 2012 , she had attained a blue belt . Her first competition was in 2012 , the 2012 London Olympics . 
 = = = 2012 Summer Olympics = = = 
 Shahrkhani was one of two Saudi Arabian women selected to compete in the 2012 Summer Olympics held in London , United Kingdom . She competed in judo in the above 78kg event . The other Saudi woman selected was Pepperdine University @-@ based runner Sarah Attar . 
 Shahrkhani was invited to compete by specific invitation of the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) as she was not eligible based on international and regional ranking criteria . The top 14 women in each weight class based on international rankings automatically qualified , while 8 women across all classes from Asia qualified based on the <unk> rankings , with 20 total additional spots available through special invitation of the IOC , <unk> and the <unk> . Unlike most Olympic competitors , she did not win her spot through a national competition because Saudi Arabia strongly discourages women from participating in sport , and thus no such competitions for women exist in the country . Other judoka in the competition had attained black belts in the sport ; Shaherkani only had a blue belt . 
 There was opposition within Saudi Arabia to the concept of women representing the country at the Olympics . Ultimately the Saudi government gave in to international pressure from sport and women 's rights activists to include women or face possible sanctions . The IOC president Jacques Rogge said of Shahrkhani 's and Attar 's inclusion , " The <unk> has been working very closely with the Saudi Arabian Olympic Committee and I am pleased to see that our continued dialogue has come to fruition . " 
 The Saudi Arabian Olympic Committee chose not to promote Shahrkhani 's participation . They also required that she " dress modestly , be accompanied by a male guardian and not mix with men " while in London for the 2012 Games . Additionally , her competition clothing had to comply with Sharia law . On 30 July 2012 , Shahrkhani said that she would withdraw from the event if she was not permitted to wear her hijab during bouts . Her father ( who often speaks for her , partially because she does not know English ) clarified that he wanted his daughter to compete , and that they wanted to make " new history for Saudi 's women " , but that she would not participate without a hijab . The next day the IOC and the International Judo Federation announced that agreement had been reached on a hijab that she could wear . The design agreed upon was a tight @-@ fitting , cap @-@ style covering , rather than the more common headscarf which drapes around the neck and under the chin . Despite this , she was still labeled a prostitute by religious clerics inside in the country . 
 Her first match was in the Round of 32 , which was an elimination round , on 3 August , the seventh day of competition at the Olympics . Wearing white , she lost to Puerto Rican Melissa <unk> in 82 seconds , lasting longer than the shortest match in her weight class , which lasted 48 seconds where Mika Sugimoto of Japan beat Maria <unk> <unk> of Brazil . The match was refereed by <unk> <unk> , and judged by Young Chun Jeon and Cathy <unk> . There were no penalties awarded in the match . After the match , she said to the press ( in Arabic ) : " I am happy to be at the Olympics . Unfortunately , we did not win a medal , but in the future we will and I will be a star for women 's participation . " She also stated that , because she was not accustomed to fighting in such large tournaments and because of the debate over the hijab , it had been difficult for her to focus on the competition . Despite this , she clarified that she was happy to have participated and planned to continue to practise judo in the future . Although her fight was not televised live on any local Saudi television channels , it was available within the Kingdom on several satellite networks broadcasting from other parts of the Arab world . 
 = Hurricane Betsy ( 1956 ) = 
 Hurricane Betsy in 1956 was the first North Atlantic hurricane to make landfall in Puerto Rico in 24 years . The third tropical cyclone of the 1956 Atlantic hurricane season , Betsy developed from a tropical wave on August 9 to the east of the Lesser Antilles . It rapidly developed into a 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) major hurricane before striking Guadeloupe . There , Betsy heavily damaged 1000 houses and left severe crop destruction , and there were 18 deaths in the territory . As Betsy continued into the northeastern Caribbean , it capsized a ship , killing its crew of two . 
 On August 12 , Betsy struck southeastern Puerto Rico and quickly crossed the island . Damage was heaviest where it moved ashore and in the territory 's central portion , and throughout Puerto Rico there were 15 @,@ 023 houses that were destroyed by Betsy . Multiple locations reported heavy crop damage , including Camuy which reported a complete loss of the corn crop . Hurricane Betsy was the first hurricane to be observed from the San Juan radar , and also resulted in the first hurricane warning on the island to be released on television . The hurricane left $ 40 million in damage and 16 deaths , which prompted a federally declared disaster area . Locally the hurricane was known as the Santa Clara Hurricane . After exiting Puerto Rico , Betsy brushed the Bahamas before turning northeastward , becoming extratropical on August 18 . The remnants dissipated two days later to the south of Newfoundland . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Before Betsy 's formation , the northeastward shift of the Azores High allowed for an increase in atmospheric instability across the tropical Atlantic , which made conditions for tropical cyclogenesis more favorable in early August . A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa on August 4 . On August 9 , a ship reported rough seas and winds of force 10 on the Beaufort scale . On that basis , it is estimated that Tropical Storm Betsy developed that day about 835 mi ( 1345 km ) east of Barbados . The next day , a Hurricane Hunters flight observed winds of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) , which indicated that Betsy had intensified significantly overnight . The flight reported how small the hurricane was , including a 10 mi ( 16 km ) wide eye . After maintaining that intensity for about 24 hours , Betsy began weakening , moving directly over Marie @-@ Galante and southern Guadeloupe . It entered the eastern Caribbean with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) before it began a track to the west @-@ northwest . 
 On August 12 , Hurricane Betsy passed about 30 mi ( 48 km ) south of Saint Croix before striking southeastern Puerto Rico . This made Betsy the first hurricane to strike the island since the 1932 San Ciprian hurricane . It crossed the central portion of the island , and the structure deteriorated and the eye became difficult to locate as Betsy crossed the highest mountains . On two occasions the eye dropped slightly to the south because of the mountains . The eye became well @-@ defined as it approached the coast , and Betsy emerged on the northwest coast near Camuy at a similar intensity as when it moved ashore . The hurricane re @-@ intensified as it moved toward the Bahamas , reaching winds of 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) on August 13 . That day , the eye passed near Grand Turk Island and San Salvador Island . By that time , the storm had increased in size ; the Hurricane Hunters reported that the gale force winds extended 125 mi ( 201 km ) to its north . The eye reformed on August 14 , becoming well @-@ organized and attaining a minimum barometric pressure of 960 mbar ( 28 inHg ) . The next day , Betsy turned to the northeast due to an approaching trough . Despite beginning a weakening trend , the pressure dropped further to 954 mbar ( 28 @.@ 2 inHg ) on August 17 . The eye became increasingly poorly defined , and Betsy weakened to a tropical storm on August 18 to the south of Nova Scotia . Turning to the east , it became extratropical later that day , eventually dissipating on August 20 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 When the first advisory was issued on Betsy , a hurricane watch was issued from Barbados to Antigua . Around that time , a hurricane watch was also issued for Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands , which was later upgraded to a hurricane warning . This was the first hurricane warning in Puerto Rico to be aired on television . 
 The hurricane struck Guadeloupe with winds from 100 – 120 mph ( 160 – 195 km / h ) , which caused extensive damage to 1 @,@ 000 houses . The communications throughout the territory were disrupted . The high winds destroyed upwards of 60 % of the banana , breadfruit , coconut , and papaya crop , which severely impacted the economy . Across the French West Indies , the hurricane resulted in 18 deaths and caused $ 10 million in damage , $ 3 @.@ 5 million of which from crop damage . In nearby Dominica , winds reached 69 mph ( 111 km / h ) . In Saint Croix , the hurricane dropped 3 @.@ 20 in ( 81 mm ) , while winds reached 86 mph ( 138 km / h ) . In the northeastern Caribbean , Betsy capsized a ship and killed its crew of two . Another ship in the region drifted for several days south of Saint Croix due to a damaged engine . 
 When Betsy crossed Puerto Rico , it produced hurricane force winds across the entire territory except in the southwest corner . Sustained winds reached 73 mph ( 117 km / h ) in San Juan , and Ramey Air Force Base on the island 's northwestern portion recorded 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) wind gusts . The high winds downed a significant number of trees in the island 's interior due to the funneling within valleys . In Aibonito , the winds destroyed 1000 houses and damaged another 500 , and in nearby <unk> the winds severely damaged or destroyed 1285 dwellings . In Jayuya in the central portion of the island , the hurricane left severe crop damage , including a complete loss to the banana crop . However , damage was heaviest in Yabucoa near where Betsy moved ashore , due to a slight oscillation of the eye . High winds caused severe damage in a 20 mi ( 32 km ) radius . In Yabucoa , over 12 @,@ 000 people were left homeless , and damage totaled $ 8 million . Damage was likewise severe where Betsy moved offshore in Camuy , with a complete loss to the corn crop , 95 % of the avocado , 65 % of breadfruit , and 50 % of the coffee crop ruined . The hurricane dropped heavy rainfall in the central portion of the island , with a peak 24 ‑ hour total of 8 @.@ 72 in ( 221 mm ) in Río Grande . The same station recorded a total of 9 @.@ 07 in ( 230 mm ) , which was the highest total related to Betsy 's passage . Across Puerto Rico , Betsy destroyed 15 @,@ 023 houses and left $ 40 million in damage . There were sixteen deaths on the island , which was less than expected due to well @-@ heeded warnings . There were also 24 injuries in the territory related to the storm . Betsy was the first hurricane on record to be observed from the San Juan radar . On the island , it is known as the Santa Clara hurricane . Due to the damage , U.S. President Dwight Eisenhower declared Puerto Rico as a disaster area on August 18 , which allocated millions of dollars in assistance . The Puerto Rican governor allocated $ 6 @.@ 7 million of funding to aid in rebuilding . 
 In San Salvador in the Bahamas , the hurricane produced wind gusts of 132 mph ( 212 km / h ) , and sustained winds reached 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . The <unk> dropped about 5 in ( 130 mm ) of rainfall . Betsy destroyed several houses and wrecked the roofs of several churches . Hurricane Betsy left about $ 380 @,@ 000 in damage in the Bahamas . While delivering relief supplies to San Salvador Air Force Base , a Douglas C @-@ <unk> @-@ DL Globemaster II operated by the U.S. Air Force crashed . The plane had a right landing gear fail and as the result the plane skidded down the runway and came to a stop . One person was killed . Due to uncertainty in the storm 's movement , officials issued a hurricane warning for southern Florida . Although Betsy remained far away from the state , its eye was observed on radar in Miami at a potentially record distance of 337 mi ( 542 km ) . 
 In the Grand Banks offshore Canada , the hurricane sunk a ship , although the entire crew was rescued . 
 = Tropical Storm Allison = 
 Tropical Storm Allison was a tropical storm that devastated southeast Texas in June of the 2001 Atlantic hurricane season . The first storm of the season , Allison lasted unusually long for a June storm , remaining tropical or subtropical for 15 days . The storm developed from a tropical wave in the northern Gulf of Mexico on June 4 , 2001 , and struck the upper Texas coast shortly thereafter . It drifted northward through the state , turned back to the south , and re @-@ entered the Gulf of Mexico . The storm continued to the east @-@ northeast , made landfall on Louisiana , then moved across the southeast United States and Mid @-@ Atlantic . Allison was the first storm since Tropical Storm Frances in 1998 to strike the northern Texas coastline . 
 The storm dropped heavy rainfall along its path , peaking at over 40 inches ( 1 @,@ 000 mm ) in Texas . The worst flooding occurred in Houston , where most of Allison 's damage occurred : 30 @,@ 000 became homeless after the storm flooded over 70 @,@ 000 houses and destroyed 2 @,@ 744 homes . Downtown Houston was inundated with flooding , causing severe damage to hospitals and businesses . Twenty @-@ three people died in Texas . Along its entire path , Allison caused $ 9 billion ( 2001 USD ) in damage and 41 deaths . Aside from Texas , the places worst hit were Louisiana and southeastern Pennsylvania . 
 Following the storm , President George W. Bush designated 75 counties along Allison 's path as disaster areas , which enabled the citizens affected to apply for aid . Allison was the first Atlantic tropical storm to have its name retired without ever having reached hurricane strength . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on May 21 , 2001 . It moved westward across the Atlantic Ocean , retaining little convection on its way . After moving across South America and the southwestern Caribbean Sea , the wave entered the eastern North Pacific Ocean on June 1 . A low @-@ level circulation developed on June 2 , while it was about 230 miles ( 370 km ) south @-@ southeast of Salina Cruz , Mexico . Southerly flow forced the system northward , and the wave moved inland on June 3 . The low @-@ level circulation dissipated , though the mid @-@ level circulation persisted . It emerged into the Gulf of Mexico on June 4 , and developed deep convection on its eastern side . Early on June 5 , satellite imagery suggested that a tropical depression was forming in the northwest Gulf of Mexico , which was furthered by reports of wind gusts as high as 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) just a few hundred feet above the surface , towards the east side of the system . 
 At 1200 UTC on June 5 , the disturbance developed a broad , low @-@ level circulation , and was classified as Tropical Storm Allison , the first storm of the 2001 Atlantic hurricane season . Some intensification was projected , though it was expected to be hindered by cool offshore sea surface temperatures . Due to the cold @-@ core nature of the center , Allison initially contained subtropical characteristics . Despite this , the storm quickly strengthened to attain peak sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , with tropical storm @-@ force winds extending up to 230 miles ( 370 km ) east of the center , and a minimum central pressure of 1000 mbar . The storm initially moved very little , and the presence of several small vortices from within the deep convection caused difficulty in determining the exact center location . Later in the day , several different track forecasts arose . One scenario had the cyclone tracking westward into Mexico . Another projected the storm moving east towards southern Louisiana . At the time , it was noted that little rain or wind persisted near the center , but rather to the north and east . Under the steering currents of a subtropical ridge that extended in an east – west orientation across the southeast United States , Allison weakened while nearing the Texas coastline , and struck near Freeport , Texas with 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) winds . Inland , the storm rapidly weakened , and the National Hurricane Center discontinued advisories early on June 6 . Shortly after being downgraded to a tropical depression , surface observations showed an elongated circulation with a poorly defined center , which had reformed closer to the deep convection . 
 The depression drifted northward until reaching Lufkin , Texas , where it stalled due to a high pressure system to its north . While stalling over Texas , the storm dropped excessive rainfall , peaking at just over 40 inches ( 1 @,@ 033 mm ) in northwestern Jefferson County . On June 7 , the subtropical ridge off Florida weakened , while the ridge west of Texas intensified . This steered Tropical Depression Allison to make a clockwise loop , and the storm began drifting to the southwest . As the center reached Huntsville , Texas , a heavy rain band began to back build from Louisiana westward into Liberty County , Texas , which had caused additional flooding . At the time , the system had a minimum central pressure of about 1004 mb and maximum sustained winds of about 10 mph ( 16 km / h ) . Late on June 9 and early on June 10 , Allison 's remnants reentered reached the Gulf of Mexico and emerged over open waters . The low once again became nearly stationary about 60 mi ( 100 km ) south of Galveston , Texas , and despite more favorable upper @-@ level winds , it showed no signs of redevelopment . Due to dry air and moderate westerly wind shear , the storm transformed into a subtropical cyclone . While the subtropical depression moved eastward , a new low level circulation redeveloped to the east , and Allison quickly made landfall on Morgan City , Louisiana on June 11 . At around the same time , the surface center reformed to the east @-@ northeast of its previous location , aligning with the mid @-@ level circulation . Strong thunderstorms redeveloped over the circulation , and Allison strengthened into a subtropical storm over southeastern Louisiana . The storm intensified further to attain sustained winds of 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of about 1000 mb near <unk> , Mississippi , accompanied by a well @-@ defined eye @-@ like feature . 
 The storm was officially downgraded to a subtropical depression at 0000 UTC on June 12 . Somewhat accelerating , the depression tracked to the east @-@ northeast through Mississippi , Alabama , Georgia , and South Carolina before becoming nearly stationary near Wilmington , North Carolina . The depression drifted through North Carolina and sped to the northeast for a time in response to an approaching cold front . Though satellite and radar imagery show the system was well @-@ organized , the system slowed and moved erratically for a period of time , executing what appeared to be a small counterclockwise loop . The storm began tracking in a generally northeasterly direction , and crossed into the southern Delmarva Peninsula on June 16 . The subtropical remnants reached the Atlantic on June 17 , and while located east of Atlantic City , New Jersey , winds began to restrengthen , and heavy rains formed to the north of the circulation . The low was interacting with a frontal boundary , and started merging with it , as it accelerated to the northeast at 13 mph ( 21 km / h ) . The remnants of Allison briefly reintensified to a subtropical storm through baroclinic processes , though it became extratropical while south of Long Island . By later on June 17 , the low was situated off the coast of Rhode Island , spreading a swath of precipitation over New England . The remnants of the tropical storm were then absorbed by the frontal boundary by June 18 , and eventually passed south of Cape Race , Newfoundland on June 20 , where the extratropical cyclone dissipated . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Shortly after the storm formed , officials in Galveston County , Texas issued a voluntary evacuation for the western end of Galveston Island , as the area was not protected by the Galveston Seawall . The ferry from the island to the Bolivar Peninsula was closed , while voluntary evacuations were issued in Surfside in Brazoria County . When the National Hurricane Center issued the first advisory on Allison , officials issued Tropical Storm Warnings from Sargent , Texas to Morgan City , Louisiana . After the storm made landfall , flash flood watches and warnings were issued for numerous areas in eastern Texas . During the flood event , the National Weather Service in Houston issued 99 flash flood warnings with an average lead time of 40 minutes . With an average lead time of 24 minutes , the National Weather Service in Lake Charles , Louisiana issued 47 flash flood warnings . With an average lead time of 39 minutes , the National Weather Service in New Orleans / Baton Rouge issued 87 flash flood warnings , of which 30 were not followed by a flash flood . 
 In Tallahassee , Florida , a shelter opened the day before Allison 's movement northward through the area , seven staff members housing 12 people . Two other shelters were on standby . Teams informed citizens in the Florida Panhandle of flood dangers . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Tropical Storm Allison was a major flood disaster throughout its path from Texas to the Mid @-@ Atlantic . The worst of the flooding occurred in Houston , Texas , where over 35 inches ( 890 mm ) of rain fell . Allison caused over $ 9 billion in damage ( 2001 USD , $ 12 billion 2014 USD ) , making it the costliest tropical storm on record in the United States . The storm also killed 41 people directly , including 27 of whom which drowned . This ties Allison with a tropical storm in 1917 as the second @-@ deadliest tropical storm to impact the US ; only surpassed by the 1925 Florida tropical storm which killed 73 people . 
 = = = Texas = = = 
 Combined with waves on top , areas of Galveston Island experienced a wall of water 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) in height , creating overwash along the coastline . The storm caused winds of up to 43 mph ( 69 km / h ) at the Galveston Pier . While Allison was stalling over Texas , it dropped very heavy rainfall across the state . Minimal beach erosion was reported . Flash flooding continued for days , with rainfall amounts across the state peaking at just over 40 inches ( 1 @,@ 033 mm ) in northwestern Jefferson County . In the Port of Houston , a total of 36 @.@ 99 inches ( 940 mm ) was reported . Houston experienced torrential rainfall in a short amount of time . The six @-@ day rainfall in Houston amounted to 38 @.@ 6 inches ( 980 mm ) . The deluge of rainfall flooded 95 @,@ 000 automobiles and 73 @,@ 000 houses throughout Harris County . Tropical Storm Allison destroyed 2 @,@ 744 homes , leaving 30 @,@ 000 homeless with residential damages totaling to $ 1 @.@ 76 billion ( 2001 USD , $ 2 @.@ 29 billion 2012 USD ) . 
 Several hospitals in the Texas Medical Center , the largest medical complex in the world , experienced severe damage from the storm , which hit quickly and with unexpected fury on a Friday evening . The Baylor College of Medicine experienced major damage , totaling $ 495 million ( 2001 USD , $ 643 million 2012 USD ) . The medical school lost 90 @,@ 000 research animals , 60 @,@ 000 tumor samples , and 25 years of research data . The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston , across the street , lost thousands of laboratory animals . Throughout the Medical Center , damage totaled to over $ 2 billion ( 2001 USD , $ 2 @.@ 6 billion 2012 USD ) . 
 The underground tunnel system , which connects most large office buildings in downtown Houston , was submerged , as were many streets and parking garages adjacent to Buffalo Bayou . At the Houston Theater District , also in downtown , the Houston Symphony , Houston Grand Opera , and Alley Theater lost millions of dollars of costumes , musical instruments , sheet music , archives and other artifacts . By midnight on June 9 nearly every freeway and major road in the city was under several feet of water , forcing hundreds of motorists to abandon their vehicles for higher ground . 
 Despite massive flooding damage to entire neighborhoods there were no drowning deaths in flooded homes . In the area , there were twelve deaths from driving , six from walking , three from electrocution , and one in an elevator . Elsewhere in Texas , a man drowned when swimming in a ditch in <unk> . Damage totaled to $ 5 @.@ 2 billion ( 2001 USD , $ 6 @.@ 8 billion 2012 USD ) throughout Texas . 
 = = = Louisiana = = = 
 While making its first landfall , Allison 's large circulation dropped severe rains on southwest Louisiana . Days later , Allison hit the state as a subtropical storm , dropping more heavy rains to the area . Rainfall totals peaked at 29 @.@ 86 inches ( 758 mm ) in Thibodaux , the highest rainfall total in Louisiana from a tropical cyclone since another Tropical Storm Allison in 1989 . Most of the southeastern portion of the state experienced over 10 inches of rain ( 255 mm ) . Winds were generally light , peaking at 38 mph ( 61 km / h ) sustained in Lakefront with gusts to 53 mph ( 85 km / h ) in Bay <unk> . The storm produced a storm surge of 2 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 75 m ) in Cameron as it was making landfall in Texas . While moving northward through Texas , the outer bands of the storm produced an F1 tornado near Zachary , damaging several trees and a power line . A man was killed when a damaged power line hit his truck . 
 When Allison first made landfall , heavy rainfall flooded numerous houses and businesses . Minor wind gusts caused minor roof damage to 10 houses in Cameron Parish , while its storm surge flooded portions of Louisiana Highway 82 . When the system returned , more rainfall occurred , flooding over 1 @,@ 000 houses in St. Tammany Parish , 80 houses in Saint Bernard Parish , and hundreds of houses elsewhere in the state . The flooding also forced 1 @,@ 800 residents from their homes in East Baton Rouge Parish . The deluge left numerous roads impassable , while runoff resulted in severe river flooding . The Bogue Falaya River in Covington crested past its peak twice to near @-@ record levels . The Amite and Comite Rivers reached their highest levels since 1983 . In addition , the levee along the Bayou Manchac broke , flooding roadways and more houses . Damage in Louisiana totaled to $ 65 million ( 2001 USD , $ 84 million 2012 USD ) . 
 = = = Southeast United States = = = 
 In Mississippi , Allison produced heavy rainfall of over 10 inches ( 255 mm ) in one night , while some areas in the southwestern portion of the state received over 15 inches ( 380 mm ) . The flooding damaged numerous houses and flooded many roadways . Thunderstorms from the storm produced four tornadoes , including one in Gulfport , Mississippi that damaged 10 houses . Severe thunderstorms in George County damaged 15 houses , destroyed 10 , and injured 5 people . Damage in Mississippi totaled to over $ 1 million ( 2001 USD , $ 1 @.@ 3 million 2012 USD ) . Rainfall in Alabama was moderate , with areas near Mobile experiencing more than 10 inches ( 255 mm ) . Heavy rainfall closed several roads in Crenshaw County . The storm , combined with a high pressure , produced coastal flooding in southern Alabama . Allison produced an F0 tornado in southwest Mobile County that caused minor roof damage and another F0 tornado in Covington County that caused minor damage to six homes and a church . 
 The storm , combined with a high pressure system , produced a strong pressure gradient , resulting in strong rip currents off the coast of Florida . The currents prompted sirens , which are normally used for storm warnings , to be activated in Pensacola Beach . The rip currents killed 5 off the coast of Florida . Outer rain bands from the storm dropped heavy rainfall across the Florida Panhandle of over 11 inches ( 280 mm ) in one day . The Tallahassee Regional Airport recorded 10 @.@ 13 inches ( 257 mm ) in 24 hours , breaking the old 24 ‑ hour record set in 1969 . Throughout the state , Allison destroyed 10 homes and damaged 599 , 196 severely , primarily in Leon County . Including the deaths from rip currents , Allison killed eight people in Florida and caused $ 20 million ( 2001 USD , $ 26 million 2012 USD ) in damage . 
 Over Georgia , the storm dropped heavy rainfall of 10 inches ( 255 mm ) in 24 hours in various locations . The deluge caused rivers to crest past their banks , including the Oconee River at Milledgeville which peaked at 33 @.@ 7 feet ( 10 @.@ 3 m ) . The rainfall , which was heaviest across the southwestern portion of the state , washed out several bridges and roads , and flooded many other roads . Georgia governor Roy Barnes declared a state of emergency for seven counties in the state . The storm also spawned two tornadoes . In South Carolina , Allison 's outer bands produced 10 tornadoes and several funnel clouds , though most only caused minor damage limited to a damaged courthouse , snapped trees and downed power lines . Allison produced from 12 to 16 inches ( 305 to 406 mm ) of rainfall in North Carolina , closing nearly all roads in Martin County and damaging 25 homes . The severe flooding washed out a bridge in eastern Halifax County and flooded numerous cars . Wet roads caused nine traffic accidents throughout the state . 
 = = = Mid @-@ Atlantic and Northeast United States = = = 
 In Virginia , Allison produced light rainfall , with the southeastern and south @-@ central portions of the state experiencing over 3 inches ( 76 mm ) . A tree in a saturated ground fell over and killed one person . Allison also produced one tornado in the state . Washington , D.C. experienced moderate rainfall from the storm , totaling to 2 @.@ 59 inches ( 66 mm ) in Georgetown . In Maryland , rainfall from Tropical Depression Allison totaled to 7 @.@ 5 inches ( 190 mm ) in Denton , closing eleven roads and causing washouts on 41 others . The Maryland Eastern Shore experienced only minor rainfall from one to two inches ( 25 to 50 mm ) . Damage was light , and no deaths were reported . In Delaware , the storm produced moderate rainfall , peaking at 4 @.@ 2 inches ( 106 mm ) in Greenwood . No damage was reported . 
 Allison , in combination with an approaching frontal boundary , dropped heavy rainfall across southeastern Pennsylvania , peaking at 10 @.@ 17 inches ( 258 mm ) in Chalfont in Bucks County and over 3 inches ( 76 mm ) in portions of Philadelphia . The rainfall caused rivers to rise , with the Neshaminy Creek in Langhorne peaking at 16 @.@ 87 feet ( 5 @.@ 1 m ) . Several other rivers and creeks in southeastern Pennsylvania crested at over 10 feet ( 3 m ) . The rainfall downed numerous weak trees and power lines , leaving 70 @,@ 000 without power during the storm . The flooding washed out several roads and bridges , including a few SEPTA rail lines . In addition , the rainfall destroyed 241 homes and damaged 1 @,@ 386 others . Flooding at a Dodge dealership totaled 150 vehicles . Hundreds of people were forced to be rescued from damaged buildings from flood waters . The flooding dislodged a clothes dryer in the basement of the " A " building of the Village Green Apartment Complex in Upper Moreland Township , breaking a natural gas line . The gas leak resulted in an explosion and an ensuing fire that killed six people . Firefighters were unable to render assistance as the building was completely surrounded by floodwaters . Additionally , one man drowned in his vehicle in a river . Damage in Pennsylvania totaled to $ 215 million ( 2001 USD , $ 279 million 2012 USD ) . 
 In New Jersey , the storm produced heavy rainfall , peaking at 8 @.@ 1 inches ( 205 mm ) in Tuckerton . The rains also caused river flooding , including the north branch of the Metedeconk River in Lakewood which crested at 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) . The flooding , severe at places , closed several roads , including numerous state highways . Gusty winds of up to 44 mph ( 71 km / h ) in Atlantic City downed weak trees and power lines , leaving over 13 @,@ 000 without power . Several people had to be rescued from high waters , though no fatalities occurred in the state . Overall damage was minimal . 
 Tropical Storm Allison caused flash flooding in New York , dropping up to 3 inches ( 75 mm ) of rain in one hour in several locations and peaking at 5 @.@ 73 inches ( 146 mm ) in Granite Springs . The rains also caused river flooding , including the Mahwah River which crested at 3 @.@ 79 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) . Allison 's rainfall damaged 24 houses and several stores , while the flooding closed several major highways in the New York City area . Overall damage was light , and no fatalities occurred in New York due to Allison . Similarly , rainfall in Connecticut peaked at 7 @.@ 2 inches ( 183 mm ) in Pomfret , closing several roads and causing minor damage to numerous houses . The <unk> River at <unk> crested at 11 @.@ 1 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) , while a state road was closed when a private dam in Hampton failed from the rainfall . In Rhode Island , Allison produced up to 7 @.@ 1 inches ( 180 mm ) of rainfall in North Smithfield , washing out several roads and houses , and destroying a log house in Foster . 
 An isolated severe thunderstorm in the outer bands of Allison produced an F1 tornado in Worcester and Middlesex Counties in Massachusetts , impacting over 100 trees and damaging one house and one small camper . A microburst in Leominster and another in Shirley damaged several trees . Lightning from the storm hit two houses , causing significant damage there but little elsewhere . Allison also produced moderate rainfall in the state , mainly ranging from 3 to 5 inches ( 75 to 125 mm ) . The rainfall caused drainage and traffic problems . Damage in Massachusetts totaled to $ 400 @,@ 000 ( 2001 USD , $ 520 @,@ 000 2012 USD ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Within weeks of the disaster , President George W. Bush declared 75 counties in Texas , southern Louisiana , southern Mississippi , northwestern Florida , and southeastern Pennsylvania as disaster areas . The declarations allowed affected citizens to receive aid for temporary housing , emergency home repairs , and other serious disaster @-@ related expenses . The Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) also provided 75 % for the cost of debris removal , emergency services related to the disaster , and repairing or replacing damaged public facilities , such as roads , bridges and utilities . 
 A few weeks after Allison , FEMA opened six disaster recovery centers across southeast Texas , which provided recovery information to those who applied for disaster assistance . The American Red Cross and the Salvation Army opened 48 shelters at the peak of need for people driven from their homes , which served nearly 300 @,@ 000 meals . The National Disaster Medical System deployed a temporary hospital to Houston with 88 professionals , aiding nearly 500 people . Thirty @-@ five volunteer services provided aid for the flood victims in Texas , including food , clothing , and volunteers to help repair the houses . After nearly 50 @,@ 000 cars were flooded and ruined , many people attempted to sell the cars across the country without telling of the car 's history . Following the extreme flooding , a mosquito outbreak occurred , though FEMA provided aid to control the problem . By six months after the storm , around 120 @,@ 000 Texas citizens applied for federal disaster aid , totaling to $ 1 @.@ 05 billion ( 2001 USD , $ 1 @.@ 36 billion 2012 USD ) . 
 Like in Texas , a mosquito outbreak occurred in Louisiana . Only pesticides acceptable to the US Environmental Protection Agency and the US Fish and Wildlife Service were allowed to be used . FEMA officials warned homeowners of the dangers of floodwaters , including mold , mildew , and bacteria . By three months after the storm , just under 100 @,@ 000 Louisiana citizens applied for federal aid , totaling to over $ 110 million ( 2001 USD , $ 143 million 2012 USD ) . $ 25 million ( 2001 USD , $ 32 million 2012 USD ) of the total was for business loans , while an additional $ 8 million was for public assistance for communities and state agencies . More than 750 flood victims in Florida applied for governmental aid , totaling to $ 1 @.@ 29 million ( 2001 USD , $ 1 @.@ 5 million 2007 USD ) . In Pennsylvania , 1 @,@ 670 flood victims applied for federal aid , totaling to $ 11 @.@ 5 million ( 2001 USD , $ 14 @.@ 3 million 2012 USD ) . $ 3 @.@ 4 million ( 2001 USD , $ 4 @.@ 4 million 2012 USD ) of the total was to replace a SEPTA rail bridge over Sandy Run in Fort Washington . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Due to extreme destruction , the name Allison was retired in spring 2002 and will never again be used in the Atlantic basin ; the 2001 incarnation of Allison was the only Atlantic tropical system to have its name retired without reaching hurricane strength until the name Erika was retired following a storm in 2015 . The name was replaced with Andrea in the 2007 season . 
 = The Wall = 
 The Wall is the eleventh studio album by the English rock band Pink Floyd , released as a double album on 30 November 1979 by Harvest Records in the United Kingdom and by Columbia Records in the United States . It is the last studio album released with the line @-@ up of guitarist David Gilmour , bass guitarist / lyricist Roger Waters , keyboardist Richard Wright , and drummer Nick Mason before Wright left the band . It was supported by a tour with elaborate theatrical effects , and adapted into a 1982 feature film , Pink Floyd – The Wall . The album features the band 's only single to top various charts , " Another Brick in the Wall , Part 2 " . 
 As with Pink Floyd 's prior three albums , The Wall is a concept album , exploring themes of abandonment and personal isolation . It is a rock opera that follows Pink , a character whom Waters modelled after himself and the band 's original leader , Syd Barrett . Pink 's life begins with the loss of his father during the Second World War and continues with abuse from his schoolteachers , an overprotective mother , and the breakdown of his marriage ; all contribute to his eventual self @-@ imposed isolation from society , represented by a metaphorical wall . Waters conceived the album during Pink Floyd 's 1977 In the Flesh Tour , when his frustration with the audience became so acute that he imagined a wall between the audience and the stage . The album features a harsher and more theatrical style than Pink Floyd 's previous albums . Wright left the band during its production but remained as a salaried musician , performing with Pink Floyd during the Wall tour . 
 The album was one of the best selling of 1980 , and by 1999 it had sold over 23 million RIAA @-@ certified units ( 11 @.@ 5 million albums ) , making it the third highest certified album in the United States . Rolling Stone placed The Wall at number 87 on its list of " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Pink Floyd 's In the Flesh Tour was their first playing in large stadiums , and in July 1977 – on the final date at the Montreal Olympic Stadium – a small group of noisy and excited fans near the stage irritated Waters to such an extent that he spat at one of them . He was not the only band member who felt disaffected at the show , as guitarist David Gilmour refused to perform the band 's usual encores ( " Money " and " Us and Them " ) , leaving the rest of the band , with backup guitarist Snowy White , to improvise a slow , sad twelve @-@ bar blues , which Waters described as " some music to go home to " . Later that night , while returning from hospital to treat an injury sustained to his foot while play @-@ fighting backstage with manager Steve O 'Rourke , Waters spoke with music producer Bob Ezrin , and a friend of Ezrin 's , a psychiatrist sharing their car , about the feelings of alienation he was experiencing on the tour . He articulated his desire to isolate himself by constructing a wall across the stage between the performers and the audience . He later said , " I loathed playing in stadiums ... I kept saying to people on that tour , ' I 'm not really enjoying this ... there is something very wrong with this . ' " While Gilmour and Wright were in France recording solo albums , and Nick Mason was busy producing Steve Hillage 's Green , Waters began to write new material . The spitting incident became the starting point for a new concept , which explored the protagonist 's self @-@ imposed isolation after years of traumatic interactions with authority figures and the loss of his father as a young child . To execute The Wall concept was to attempt to analyse the performer 's psychological separation from the audience , using a physical structure as a metaphorical and theatrical device . 
 In July 1978 the band reconvened at Britannia Row Studios , where Waters presented two new ideas for concept albums . The first was a 90 @-@ minute demo with the working title Bricks in the Wall . The second , a project about a man 's dreams across one night that dealt with marriage , sex , and the pros and cons of monogamy and family life versus promiscuity . The first option was chosen by the group for the new Pink Floyd project and the second idea eventually became Waters 's first solo effort , a concept album titled The Pros and Cons of Hitch Hiking . 
 By September , the band was experiencing financial difficulties . Financial planners Norton Warburg Group ( NWG ) had invested £ 1 @.@ 3 – 3 @.@ 3 million ( up to £ 17 @.@ 1 million in contemporary value ) of the group 's money in high @-@ risk venture capital to reduce their tax liabilities . The strategy failed as many of the businesses NWG invested in lost money , leaving the band facing tax rates potentially as high as 83 per cent . Pink Floyd terminated their relationship with NWG , demanding the return of <unk> funds . The band thus urgently needed to produce an album to make money . Because the project 's 26 tracks presented a challenge greater than the band 's previous albums , " Waters decided to bring in an outside producer and collaborator . " He later said , " I needed a collaborator who was musically and intellectually in a similar place to where I was . " 
 Producer Bob Ezrin had worked with Alice Cooper , Lou Reed , and Kiss , as well as producing Peter Gabriel 's debut solo album . At the suggestion of Waters 's then @-@ girlfriend , Lady Carolyne Christie , who had worked as Ezrin 's secretary , the band hired him to co @-@ produce the album . From the start , Waters made it very clear who was in charge : " You can write anything you want . Just don 't expect any credit " . Ezrin , Waters , and Gilmour read Waters 's concept , keeping what they liked , and discarding what they thought was not good enough . Waters and Ezrin worked mostly on the story , improving the concept . A 40 @-@ page script was presented to the rest of the band , with positive results : " The next day at the studio , we had a table read , like you would with a play , but with the whole of the band , and their eyes all twinkled , because then they could see the album . " Ezrin broadened the storyline , distancing it from the autobiographical work Waters had written , and instead basing it on a composite , or gestalt character named Pink . Engineer Nick Griffiths later said of the Canadian producer , " Ezrin was very good in The Wall , because he did manage to pull the whole thing together . He 's a very forceful guy . There was a lot of argument about how it should sound between Roger and Dave , and he bridged the gap between them . " Waters wrote most of the album 's material , with Gilmour sharing credit on " Comfortably Numb " , " Run Like Hell " , and " Young Lust " , and Ezrin co @-@ writing " The Trial " . 
 = = Concept and storyline = = 
 The Wall is a rock opera that explores abandonment and isolation , symbolised by a metaphorical wall . The songs create an approximate storyline of events in the life of the protagonist , Pink , a character based on Syd Barrett as well as Roger Waters , whose father was killed during the Second World War . Pink is oppressed by his overprotective mother , and tormented at school by tyrannical , abusive teachers . All of these traumas become metaphorical " bricks in the wall " . The protagonist eventually becomes a rock star , his relationships marred by infidelity , drug use , and outbursts of violence . As his marriage crumbles , he finishes building his wall , completing his isolation from human contact . 
 Hidden behind his wall , Pink sinks into a deep depression . In order to get him to perform , a doctor <unk> him . This results in a hallucinatory on @-@ stage performance where he believes that he is a fascist dictator performing at concerts similar to Neo @-@ Nazi rallies , at which he sets brownshirts @-@ like men on fans he considers unworthy . Upon realizing the horror of what he has done , Pink becomes overwhelmed and wishes for everything around him to cease . Showing human emotion , he is tormented with guilt and places himself on trial , his inner judge ordering him to " tear down the wall " , opening Pink to the outside world . The album turns full circle with its closing words " Isn 't this where ... " , the first words of the phrase that begins the album , " ... we came in ? " , with a continuation of the melody of the last song hinting at the cyclical nature of Waters ' theme . 
 The album includes several references to former band member Syd Barrett , including " Nobody Home " , which hints at his condition during Pink Floyd 's abortive US tour of 1967 , with lyrics such as " wild , staring eyes " , " the obligatory Hendrix perm " and " elastic bands keeping my shoes on " . " Comfortably Numb " was inspired by Waters 's injection with a muscle relaxant to combat the effects of hepatitis during the In the Flesh Tour , while in Philadelphia . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The album was recorded in several locations . In France , Super Bear Studios was used between January and July 1979 , with Waters recording his vocals at the nearby Studio Miraval . Michael Kamen supervised the orchestral arrangements at CBS Studios in New York , in September . Over the next two months the band used Cherokee Studios , Producers Workshop and The Village Recorder in Los Angeles . A plan to work with the Beach Boys at the Sundance Productions studio in Los Angeles was cancelled . For a week in November they worked at the Producers Workshop . 
 James Guthrie , recommended by previous Floyd collaborator Alan Parsons , arrived early in the production process . He replaced engineer Brian Humphries , emotionally drained by his five years with the band . Guthrie was hired as a co @-@ producer , but was initially unaware of Ezrin 's role : " I saw myself as a hot young producer ... When we arrived , I think we both felt we 'd been booked to do the same job . " The early sessions at Britannia Row were emotionally charged , as Ezrin , Guthrie and Waters each had strong ideas about the direction the album would take . Relations within the band were at a low ebb , and Ezrin 's role expanded to that of an intermediary between Waters and the rest of the band . As Britannia Row was initially regarded as inadequate for The Wall the band upgraded much of its equipment , and by March another set of demos were complete . However , their former relationship with NWG placed them at risk of bankruptcy , and they were advised to leave the UK by no later than 6 April 1979 , for a minimum of one year . As non @-@ residents they would pay no UK taxes during that time , and within a month all four members and their families had left . Waters moved to Switzerland , Mason to France , and Gilmour and Wright to the Greek Islands . Some equipment from Britannia Row was relocated in Super Bear Studios near Nice . Gilmour and Wright were each familiar with the studio and enjoyed its atmosphere , having recorded there during the production of their solo albums . While Wright and Mason lived at the studio , Waters and Gilmour stayed in nearby houses . Mason later moved into Waters 's villa near Vence , while Ezrin stayed in Nice . 
 Ezrin 's poor punctuality caused problems with the tight schedule dictated by Waters . Mason found the producer 's behaviour " erratic " , but used his elaborate and unlikely excuses for his lateness as ammunition for " tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek resentment " . Ezrin 's share of the royalties was less than the rest of the band and he viewed Waters as a " bully " , especially when the bassist mocked him by having badges made that read <unk> ( No Points Ezrin ) , alluding to his lesser share of the album 's royalties . Ezrin later admitted that he had marital problems and was not " in the best shape emotionally " . 
 More problems became apparent when Waters 's relationship with Wright broke down . The band were rarely in the studio together . Ezrin and Guthrie spliced Mason 's previously recorded drum tracks together , and Guthrie also worked with Waters and Gilmour during the day , returning at night to record Wright 's contributions . Wright , worried about the effect that the introduction of Ezrin would have on the band 's internal relationships , was keen to have a producer 's credit on the album ( their albums up to that point had always stated " Produced by Pink Floyd " ) . Waters agreed to a trial period with Wright producing , after which he was to be given a producer 's credit , but after a few weeks he and Ezrin expressed dissatisfaction with the keyboardist 's methods . A confrontation with Ezrin led to Wright working only at nights . Gilmour also expressed his annoyance , complaining that Wright 's lack of input was " driving us all mad " , and Ezrin later reflected : " it sometimes felt that Roger was setting him up to fail . Rick gets performance anxiety . You have to leave him alone to freeform , to create ... " Wright had his own problems , a failing marriage and the onset of depression , exacerbated by his non @-@ residency . The band 's holidays were booked for August , after which they were to reconvene at Cherokee Studios in Los Angeles , but Columbia offered the band a better deal in exchange for a Christmas release of the album . Waters therefore increased the band 's workload accordingly , booking time at the nearby Studio Miraval . He also suggested recording in Los Angeles ten days earlier than agreed , and hiring another keyboardist to work alongside Wright , whose keyboard parts had not yet been recorded . Wright , however , refused to cut short his family holiday in Rhodes . 
 Accounts of Wright 's subsequent departure from the band differ . In his autobiography , Inside Out , Mason says that Waters called O 'Rourke , who was travelling to the US on the QE2 , and told him to have Wright out of the band by the time Waters arrived in LA to mix the album . In another version recorded by a later historian of the band , Waters called O 'Rourke and asked him to tell Wright about the new recording arrangements , to which Wright allegedly responded : " Tell Roger to fuck off ... " Wright disagreed with this recollection , stating that the band had agreed to record only through the spring and early summer , and that he had no idea they were so far behind schedule . Mason later wrote that Waters was " stunned and furious " , and felt that Wright was not doing enough to help complete the album . Gilmour was on holiday in Dublin when he learnt of Waters 's ultimatum , and tried to calm the situation . He later spoke with Wright and gave him his support , but reminded him about his minimal contribution to the album . Waters , however , insisted that Wright leave , or he would refuse to release The Wall . Several days later , worried about their financial situation , and the failing interpersonal relationships within the band , Wright quit . News of his departure was kept from the music press . Although his name did not appear anywhere on the original album , he was employed as a session musician on the band 's subsequent The Wall tour . 
 By August 1979 the running order was largely complete . Wright completed his duties at Cherokee Studios aided by session musicians Peter Wood and Fred Mandel , and Jeff Porcaro played drums in Mason 's stead on " Mother " . His duties complete , Mason left the final mix to Waters , Gilmour , Ezrin and Guthrie , and travelled to New York to record his début solo album , Nick Mason 's Fictitious Sports . In advance of its release , technical constraints led to some changes being made to the running order and content of The Wall , with " What Shall We Do Now ? " being replaced by the similar but shorter " Empty Spaces " , and " Hey You " being moved from its original place at the end of side three , to the beginning . With the November 1979 deadline approaching , the band left the now @-@ incorrect inner sleeves of the album unchanged . 
 = = = Instrumentation = = = 
 Mason 's early drum sessions were performed in an open space on the top floor of Britannia Row Studios . The 16 @-@ track recordings from these sessions were mixed down and copied onto a 24 @-@ track master , as guide tracks for the rest of the band to play to . This gave the engineers greater flexibility , but also improved the audio quality of the final mix as the original 16 @-@ track drum recordings were finally synced to the 24 @-@ track master , and the duplicated guide tracks removed . Ezrin later related the band 's alarm at this method of working – they apparently viewed the erasure of material from the 24 @-@ track master as " witchcraft " . 
 While at Super Bear studios Waters agreed to Ezrin 's suggestion that several tracks , including " Nobody Home " , " The Trial " and " Comfortably Numb " , should have an orchestral accompaniment . Michael Kamen , who had previously worked with David Bowie , was booked to oversee these arrangements , which were performed by musicians from the New York Philharmonic and New York Symphony Orchestras , and a choir from the New York City Opera . Their sessions were recorded at CBS Studios in New York , although Pink Floyd were not present . Kamen eventually met the band once recording was complete . 
 " Comfortably Numb " has its origins in Gilmour 's debut solo album , and was the source of much argument between Waters and Gilmour . Ezrin claimed that the song initially started life as " Roger 's record , about Roger , for Roger " , although he thought that it needed further work . Waters rewrote the song and added more lyrics for the chorus , but his " stripped @-@ down and harder " recording was not to Gilmour 's liking . The guitarist preferred Ezrin 's " grander Technicolor , orchestral version " , although Ezrin preferred Waters 's version . Following a full @-@ scale argument in a North Hollywood restaurant , the two compromised ; the song 's body eventually included the orchestral arrangement , with Gilmour 's second and final guitar solo standing alone . 
 = = = Sound design = = = 
 Ezrin and Waters oversaw the capture of the sound effects used on the album . Waters recorded the phone call used on the original demo for " Young Lust " , but neglected to inform its recipient , Mason , who assumed it was a prank call and angrily hung up . The call references Waters ' viewpoint of his bitter 1975 divorce from first wife Judy . Waters also recorded ambient sounds along Hollywood Boulevard by hanging a microphone from a studio window . Engineer Phil Taylor recorded some of the screeching tyre noises on " Run Like Hell " from a studio car park , and a television set being destroyed was used on " One of My Turns " . At Britannia Row Studios , Nick Griffiths recorded the smashing of crockery for the same song . Television broadcasts were used , and one actor , recognising his voice , accepted a financial settlement from the group in lieu of legal action against them . 
 The maniacal schoolmaster was voiced by Waters , and actress Trudy Young supplied the groupie 's voice . Backing vocals were performed by a range of artists , although a planned appearance by the Beach Boys on " The Show Must Go On " and " Waiting for the Worms " was cancelled by Waters , who instead settled for Beach Boy Bruce Johnston and Toni Tennille . Ezrin 's suggestion to release " Another Brick in the Wall , Part 2 " as a single with a disco @-@ style beat did not initially find favour with Gilmour , although Mason and Waters were more enthusiastic . Waters was opposed to the idea of releasing a single at all , but became more receptive once he listened to Ezrin and Guthrie 's mix of the song . With two identical verses the song was felt to be lacking , and so a copy was sent to Griffiths in London with a request to find children to perform several versions of the lyrics . Griffiths contacted Alun Renshaw , head of music at the nearby Islington Green school , who was enthusiastic about the idea , saying : " I wanted to make music relevant to the kids – not just sitting around listening to Tchaikovsky . I thought the lyrics were great – " We don 't need no education , we don 't need no thought control ... " I just thought it would be a wonderful experience for the kids . " 
 Griffiths first recorded small groups of pupils and then invited more in , telling them to affect a Cockney accent and shout rather than sing . He multitracked the voices , making the groups sound much larger than they were , before sending his recordings back to Los Angeles . The result was that Waters was " beaming " , and the song was released , becoming a Christmas number one hit . There was some controversy when the British press reported that the children had not been paid for their efforts ; they were eventually given copies of the album , and the school received a £ 1 @,@ 000 donation ( £ 4 @,@ 000 in contemporary value ) . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The cover design is one of Pink Floyd 's most minimal – a white brick wall and no text . Waters had fallen out with Hipgnosis designer Storm Thorgerson a few years earlier , when the latter had included the cover of Animals in his book Walk Away Rene , and The Wall is therefore the first Pink Floyd album cover since The Piper at the Gates of Dawn not created by the design group . Releases would include the now @-@ famous handwritten lettering of the artist name and album title by cartoonist Gerald Scarfe , either as a sticker on the sleeve wrapping or printed onto the cover itself in either black or red . Scarfe , who had previously done some animated segments for the band 's In the Flesh tour , also did the LP 's inside sleeve art , and labels of both records of the album showing the eponymous wall in various stages of construction , accompanied by characters from the story . The drawings would be translated into dolls for The Wall Tour , as well as Scarfe 's animated segments of the film based on the album . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 When the completed album was played for an assembled group of executives at Columbia 's headquarters in California , several were reportedly unimpressed by what they heard . Matters had not been helped when Columbia Records offered Waters smaller publishing rights on the grounds that The Wall was a double album , a position he did not accept . When one executive offered to settle the dispute with a coin toss , Waters asked why he should gamble on something he owned . He eventually prevailed . The record company 's concerns were alleviated when " Another Brick in the Wall Part 2 " reached number one in the UK , US , Norway , Portugal , Israel , West Germany and South Africa . It was certified platinum in the UK in December 1979 , and platinum in the US three months later . 
 The Wall was released in the UK and in the US on 30 November 1979 . Coinciding with its release Waters was interviewed by veteran DJ Tommy Vance , who played the album in its entirety on BBC Radio 1 . Critical opinion of its content ranged from The Village Voice critic Robert Christgau 's " too @-@ kitschy minimal maximalism with sound effects and speech fragments " and Rolling Stone writer Kurt Loder 's " a stunning synthesis of Waters 's by now familiar thematic obsessions " , to Melody Maker 's " I 'm not sure whether it 's brilliant or terrible , but I find it utterly compelling . " Nevertheless , the album topped the Billboard charts for 15 weeks , and in 1999 was certified <unk> platinum . It remains one of the best @-@ selling albums of all time in the US , between 1979 and 1990 selling over 19 million copies worldwide . The Wall is Pink Floyd 's second best selling album under 1973 's The Dark Side of the Moon . Engineer James Guthrie 's efforts were rewarded in 1980 with a Grammy award for Best Engineered Recording ( non @-@ classical ) . According to Acclaimed Music , The Wall is the 145th most ranked record on critics ' all @-@ time lists . Rolling Stone placed it at number 87 on its 500 Greatest Albums of All Time list in 2003 . 
 = = = Reissues = = = 
 The album was reissued in three versions as part of the Why Pink Floyd ... ? campaign , which featured a massive restoration of the band 's catalogue with <unk> by producer James Guthrie : in 2011 , a " Discovery " edition , featuring the remastered version with no extras ; and in 2012 , both the " Experience " edition , which adds a bonus disc of unreleased material and other supplementary items , and the " Immersion " version , a seven @-@ disc collection that also adds video materials . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 During each performance of the band 's subsequent The Wall Tour , a 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) high wall of cardboard bricks was gradually built between the band and audience . Gaps allowed the spectators to view various scenes in the story , as Scarfe 's animations were projected onto the completed parts of the wall . Several characters from the story were realised as giant inflatables , including a pig , replete with a crossed hammers logo . The tour opened at the Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena on 7 February 1980 . One of its more notable elements was the band 's performance of " Comfortably Numb " . While Waters sang his opening verse in front of the wall , Gilmour waited in darkness at the top of the wall , for his cue . When it came , bright blue and white lights would suddenly illuminate him , astonishing the audience . Gilmour stood on a flight case on casters , held steady by a technician , both precariously balanced atop a tall hydraulic platform . At the end of the concert , the wall was made to collapse , once again revealing the band . Along with the songs in the album , the tour featured an instrumental medley , " The Last Few Bricks " , which was played before " Goodbye Cruel World " to allow the construction crew to complete the scenographic wall . 
 Scarfe was employed to produce a series of animations for The Wall . At his studio in London he employed a team of 40 animators to create a series of nightmarish visions of the future , including a dove of peace exploding to reveal an eagle , a schoolmaster , and Pink 's mother . During the tour , relationships within the band were at an all @-@ time low ; four Winnebagos were parked in a circle , with the doors facing away from the centre . Waters remained isolated , using his own vehicle to arrive at the venue , and stayed in separate hotels from the rest of the band . Wright , returning to perform his duties as a salaried musician , was the only member of the band to profit from the venture , which lost about £ 400 @,@ 000 . 
 Scarfe 's animations were also to have been used in the film based on the album , accompanied by live concert footage , but the latter proved too impractical to film . Alan Parker agreed to direct the film that band mate Roger Waters had written , which kept the animated sequences but also used professional actors in each scene , with no dialogue . Bob Geldof took the role of Pink . A modified soundtrack was also created for some of the film 's songs . Pink Floyd The Wall was released in July 1982 . 
 In 1990 Waters and producer Tony Hollingsworth created The Wall – Live in Berlin , staged for charity at a site once occupied by part of the Berlin Wall . Beginning in 2010 and with dates lasting into 2013 , Waters performed the album worldwide on his tour , The Wall Live . This had a much wider wall , updated higher quality projected content and leading @-@ edge projection technology . Gilmour and Mason played at one show in London at The O2 . A movie of the live concert by Roger Waters was released on 29 September 2015 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Roger Waters , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Pink Floyd 
 Roger Waters – lead vocals , bass guitar , rhythm guitar , synthesizers , sound effects 
 David Gilmour – lead guitar , rhythm guitar , lead vocals , bass guitar , synthesizers 
 Nick Mason – drums , percussion 
 Richard Wright – piano , Hammond organ , electric piano , synthesizers , bass pedals 
 Additional musicians 
 Production team 
 = = Sales chart performance = = 
 Album 
 Singles 
 = = Selected album sales = = 
 = Oklahoma State Highway 30 = 
 State Highway 30 ( abbreviated SH @-@ 30 ) is a state highway in Oklahoma . It runs 84 @.@ 4 miles ( 135 @.@ 8 km ) south @-@ to @-@ north along the western edge of the state , from U.S. Highway 62 ( US @-@ 62 ) in Hollis to the town of Durham , two miles ( 3 km ) north of SH @-@ 33 . It passes through Harmon , Beckham and Roger Mills counties . SH @-@ 30 does not have any letter @-@ suffixed spur routes branching from it . 
 The SH @-@ 30 designation dates back to March 31 , 1936 , when it spanned from Erick to Sweetwater . The highway gradually evolved over the years , reaching its current form in 1970 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SH @-@ 30 begins at US @-@ 62 in Hollis , the seat of Harmon County . It travels north through very sparsely populated terrain to the unincorporated settlement of McKnight , about six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) north of Hollis . North of McKnight , the highway crosses the Salt Fork of the Red River . SH @-@ 30 has a junction with SH @-@ 9 , nine miles ( 14 km ) north of McKnight . For the next 22 miles ( 35 km ) through rural Western Oklahoma , SH @-@ 30 roughly parallels the Texas state line , lying generally about five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) west of it . The highway bridges over the Elm Fork of the Red River about two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) before crossing into Beckham County . 
 Two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of Erick , SH @-@ 30 intersects Interstate 40 Business . SH @-@ 30 begins a concurrency with the business loop , traveling east into the town . In Erick , SH @-@ 30 turns back to the north , interchanging with Interstate 40 , then crossing the North Fork of the Red River and running through the unincorporated settlement of Mayfield . About fifteen miles ( 24 km ) north of Erick , it comes to an intersection with SH @-@ 152 in Sweetwater . At this point , it crosses into Roger Mills County . 
 From Sweetwater , SH @-@ 30 travels north for fourteen miles ( 23 km ) to SH @-@ 47 , which it joins for three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) , to the town of Reydon . Leaving Reydon , SH @-@ 30 continues alone across the Black Kettle National Grassland , continuing north for twelve miles ( 19 km ) to its junction with SH @-@ 33 . After crossing SH @-@ 33 , SH @-@ 30 continues on for two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to its terminus at a local road at Durham . 
 = = History = = 
 State Highway 30 was added to the highway system on March 31 , 1936 . At this time , SH @-@ 30 began at US @-@ 66 in Erick and ended at what was then numbered SH @-@ 41 ( present @-@ day SH @-@ 152 ) in Sweetwater . On November 18 , the highway was extended west along US @-@ 66 , then south , setting its southern terminus at its present location at US @-@ 62 in Hollis . The 1937 state highway map was the first to show SH @-@ 30 . 
 The following year , a large portion of the highway was removed from the state highway system . On October 19 , 1937 , between the SH @-@ 9 junction and US @-@ 66 , the route ceased to be maintained by the Department of Highways . SH @-@ 30 still appeared as such on the 1938 state highway map , but with dashed lines , indicating the route was not maintained . By the 1940 edition , SH @-@ 30 was not marked at all on the map between just north of SH @-@ 9 to US @-@ 66 west of Erick . As a result , SH @-@ 30 was effectively in two sections , one running from Hollis to SH @-@ 9 , and another between Erick and Sweetwater . 
 On April 14 , 1941 , the southern SH @-@ 30 was extended further to the south . The highway proceeded east from Hollis along US @-@ 62 , then , at Gould , turned south along what was previously an unnumbered farm @-@ to @-@ market road . The route turned back east to end at SH @-@ 34 and SH @-@ 44 in Eldorado . This extension encompassed all of the present @-@ day western SH @-@ 5 . By January 1942 , however , this extension of SH @-@ 30 would be split off to form the new SH @-@ 90 . 
 The two sections of SH @-@ 30 were reunited on August 13 , 1945 , with the reincorporation of the SH @-@ 9 to Erick stretch into the route . The newly @-@ continuous highway was extended north three months later on November 21 , when it was extended north of Sweetwater for the first time , ending in Reydon ( concurrent with SH @-@ 47 ) . On February 7 , 1955 , SH @-@ 30 was extended north to Durham . 
 From the late 1950s through the 1960s , SH @-@ 30 extended south to the Texas state line . On February 18 , 1958 , the highway was extended to run west along US @-@ 62 , then split off to the south two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) east of the north – south Texas state line . The highway then ended at a bridge over the Prairie Dog Town Fork of the Red River , the southern Oklahoma – Texas boundary . The route was truncated back to Hollis on March 2 , 1970 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = Mareike Adermann = 
 Mareike Adermann ( born 3 August 1990 ) is a 4 @.@ 5 point wheelchair basketball player , who plays for the University of Wisconsin @-@ Whitewater in the United States . She has also played for the German national team , with which she won two European titles , was runner @-@ up at 2010 World Championships , and won a gold medal at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London . President Joachim Gauck awarded the team Germany 's highest sporting honour , the Silbernes Lorbeerblatt ( Silver Laurel Leaf ) . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Mareike Adermann was born on 3 August 1990 , the daughter of Karl @-@ Heinz and Kristin . She has a brother , Nils . She is nicknamed " MA " . 
 Adermann began playing basketball at the age of seven , and made her debut at the women 's regional championships in Germany when she was 14 . In that first game , she suffered a torn anterior cruciate ligament . Over the next four years , she underwent knee surgery four times , three in the right knee , and once in the left , leaving her knees scarred . On each occasion she took eight months to recover , and ruptured an anterior cruciate ligament within weeks of returning to playing . 
 At the age of 18 , Adermann was forced to give up her dream of playing basketball . However , a physical education teacher suggested that she try wheelchair basketball , a sport she had never heard of . Although she is a wheelchair basketball player , Adermann does not require a wheelchair for everyday activities , and is classified as a 4 @.@ 5 point player , the lowest level of disability . Being able to move her body fully gives the 180 centimetres ( 71 in ) tall center a height advantage , but she found that shooting from the free throw line in a chair requires as much force as shooting standing from the three @-@ point line . 
 When Adermann took up wheelchair basketball in 2008 , she was not thinking of making the national team , but with hard work and daily practice , she made it in just one year . She was captain of the German Under 25 ( U25 ) National team , competing at their first ever World Championships . In 2009 , she began attending University of Wisconsin @-@ Whitewater in the United States , where she studied business administration — particularly sports administration and coaching — with the idea of one day becoming a coach . She found the workload much higher than in Germany . Whereas most German clubs trained only two of three times a week , training in the United States was every day , with weight and training rooms available 24 hours a day , seven days a week . While in Germany , she trained with the second division team Essen Rolling Bears , also travelled twice a week to Cologne to train with the 99ers . 
 She also played for ASV Bonn in the German regional league . In March 2012 , her <unk> Warhawks team , coached by Daniel T. Price , defeated the University of Alabama 63 @-@ 34 to win the US Intercollegiate National Championships in a game in which <unk> scored 17 points and had 13 rebounds . Later that year , Team USA , which coached the Warhawks ' Price and including Warhawks Sarah <unk> , Desiree Miller and Becca Murray , headed for Charlotte , North Carolina for a last training camp before the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London . Meanwhile , Adermann played with the Germany team in Australia in July , and then to the Netherlands . 
 In the Gold Medal match in London , the team faced the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , who had defeated them 48 – 46 in Sydney just a few months before , in front of a capacity crowd of over 12 @,@ 000 at the North Greenwich Arena . The German team had been undefeated up to that point , but had started off slow in its games against the United States and China , winning these games by six @-@ point margins , and seemed to play its best basketball only in the final minutes of a game . Adermann scored 19 points , more than any other player in the match , and was a key factor in Germany winning 58 @-@ 44 . " Most of my shots weren ’ t even any crazy shots or any outside shots , ” Adermann said . " They were the same shots I took in the others games , but I played more in this game , and I had many more easy opportunities getting into the paint . " " I ’ m always one of the shooters , but I think Australia underestimated me and didn ’ t defend me as well as some of the other girls . They left me open a lot and I got some big shots , so it went well for me . It just worked out that I scored the most points in the final , but it wasn ’ t deliberate . " 
 It was the first gold medal that Germany had won in women 's wheelchair basketball at the Paralympics since 1984 . They were awarded the Silver Laurel Leaf by President Joachim Gauck in November 2012 , and were named Team of the Year for 2012 . " Many times , I was told that after winning a gold medal , I have achieved the most I can , so I could quit now , " Adermann later wrote , " But I disagree . " 
 = = Achievements = = 
 2009 : Gold at the European Championships 
 2009 : Silver at German Women 's National Championships 
 2010 : Silver at the Women 's World Championships 
 2010 : Bronze at the U22 mixed European Championships 
 2010 : Gold at German Women 's National Championships 
 2011 : Silver at German Women 's National Championships 
 2011 : Gold at the European Championships ( Nazareth , Israel ) 
 2012 : Silver at German Women 's National Championships 
 2012 : Gold at the Paralympic Games ( London , England ) 
 2013 : Silver European Championships ( Frankfurt , Germany ) 
 2014 : Silver at the World Championships ( Toronto , Canada ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 2012 : Team of the Year 
 2012 : Silver Laurel Leaf 
 = Blackrock ( play ) = 
 Blackrock is a play by Australian playwright Nick Enright that was first performed in 1995 . It was adapted from a 1992 play by Enright , entitled A Property of the Clan , which was inspired by the murder of Leigh Leigh in Stockton , Australia in 1989 . The plays were both well received critically , though they did attract criticism from both Leigh 's family and the media due to the fictionalisation of an actual murder . Despite repeated statements from Enright that the plays were a work of fiction , they have both often been considered by viewers to be a factual account . A Property of the Clan was shortlisted for a New South Wales Premier 's Literary Award in 1993 , and Blackrock won the AWGIE Award for Best Play in 1996 . Blackrock was developed into a feature film of the same name in 1997 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Blackrock is an Australian beachside working @-@ class suburb where surfing is popular among youths like Jared . He has his first serious girlfriend , Rachel , who comes from a much wealthier part of the city . One day Ricko , the local surfing legend , returns from an 11 @-@ month trip . Rachel 's brother Toby 's 18th birthday party is being held at the local beach club a few days later , and Jared decides to merge a ' welcome home ' party for Ricko with the event . The party is unsupervised with alcohol freely available . The following morning , it is revealed that 15 @-@ year @-@ old Tracy Warner was killed at the party . 
 Three youths from the party , Davo , Scott , and Toby , tell Ricko that they raped Tracy , though left her alive . The three boys are later arrested for the sexual assault . Ricko confesses to Jared that he killed Tracy . He says he was attempting to have sex with her when she bit him and kicked him , so in a moment of rage he grabbed a rock and struck her . He has already told police that he was with Jared all night and asks Jared to confirm his alibi in the name of mateship ; Jared is torn between telling the truth and protecting his friend . After witnessing Ricko 's abusive behaviour towards their friend Tiffany , Jared decides to tell the truth . Ricko is detained by police and hangs himself in his cell . 
 Jared 's silence leads to the breakdown of his relationships with both Rachel and his mother Diane . In the play 's last scene , Jared confesses to Diane that he witnessed the three youths raping Tracy , though he did not intervene . He is unsure why he did nothing though he believes it was out of loyalty to the boys who were his mates . Ricko left Jared a suicide note giving him his panel van , though Jared asks his cousin Cherie to throw the keys to the vehicle in the ocean when she goes out surfing . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origins as A Property of the Clan = = = 
 The play originated as Enright 's A Property of the Clan , a theatre @-@ in @-@ education piece written for Freewheels Theatre in Education in Newcastle which premiered in 1992 . Enright was approached by the director of Freewheels , Brian Joyce , who suggested the murder of Leigh Leigh as a subject for a play . Enright initially refused , but Joyce argued that the actual subject of the play would be the victim 's peer @-@ groups . Enright agreed , after being convinced a play could be made out of the conflicting responses to the crime . The title was taken from a quote in the psychological report that was made on Mathew Webster , the man who murdered Leigh , in preparation for his trial . The first decision regarding the play was to omit the criminal acts and the actual murder from it , instead focusing on the drama , its participants and the aftermath of the murder . 
 = = = Redevelopment as Blackrock = = = 
 In 1994 the Sydney Theatre Company commissioned Enright to develop the original 45 @-@ minute play into a full @-@ length production . Blackrock retained the original four characters but also added nine others . Associate professor Donna Lee Brien of Central Queensland University considered it to be a more fictionalised version of Leigh 's murder , though many viewers still considered it to be a factual account of the crime . The narrative and emphasis were reshaped for an adult audience outside of a specifically educational environment , also shifting the play 's focus . While A Property of the Clan focused on the possible motives for rape , Blackrock was said to centre on the boys involved in the crime , portraying them as victims of their society . 
 Blackrock was first performed at Wharf I , a theatre run by the Sydney Theatre Company , on 30 August 1995 . It also played at the Australian Theatre Festival in Canberra that same year . Blackrock continued to be performed at the Sydney Theatre Company throughout 1995 , and performed a sold @-@ out season at Wharf I in 1996 . It has since had many productions throughout Australia , including being performed by a Newcastle @-@ based theatre company , Tantrum Theatre , in 2010 . The 2010 version contained a few minor updates , such as referring to surfer Layne <unk> instead of Wendy Botha . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = A Property of the Clan = = = 
 Leigh 's family , who had learned of the play , attended a private screening of it ; some of them had not seen each other for two years . Leigh 's mother Robyn objected to the fictionalisation of her daughter 's murder , stating she would have preferred a documentary account . The rape and murder victim in A Property of the Clan was named Tracy , which Leigh 's family also objected to , as ' Tracey ' was the name of Leigh 's cousin and best friend . One of Leigh 's aunts asked Brian Joyce to change the character 's name out of respect for the family , however , the name remain unchanged , even after the play was rewritten and retitled Blackrock . The local media reported on the family objections to the play , and the day after the play opened , Freewheels faced " mounting disapproval " , and attempted to distance themselves from Leigh 's murder . Both Enright and Freewheels chairperson Sharon McMillan respond to the growing controversy . McMillan wrote in The Newcastle Herald , stating that media coverage of the play was " unfortunately " focusing on Leigh 's murder instead of the play 's message , also stating that some people reporting on it in this manner had not even watched the play . Enright stated that while the comparison to Leigh 's murder was of interest to the media , the play was actually about how any group of boys abuse any girl , and how they came to do it . Nevertheless , many viewers considered the play to be a factual account of the murder . Even though the rape and murder were not shown in the play , the audience were said to be able to fill in their blanks from their knowledge of Leigh 's killing . 
 Despite the controversy , the play was shown at various high schools in the Newcastle area , and following its positive critical reception , was shown nationally at high schools across the country over a period of eighteen months . However Newcastle High School , where both Leigh and Webster had been students , declined to book the play . The play was also shown at the National Institute of Dramatic Art in 1993 , and was shortlisted for a New South Wales Premier 's Literary Award that year . 
