 = = = Blackrock = = = 
 John McCallum from The Australian gave a favourable review of the redeveloped play , also stating that the decision to transform the play from its original educational environment to a mainstream audience was a " bold move " that was " triumphantly successful . " Blackrock won an AWGIE Award for Best Play in 1996 . When the play was shown in Sydney , Joyce expressed disappointment at how it was misinterpreted as being about Leigh and " that community " . 
 People came up to me after and said " Is it really like that in Newcastle ? " ... I was very disheartened because I grew up on the Northern Beaches in Sydney and I didn 't see it as any different whatsoever . It was happening 20 years ago when I was young . I remember there was violence , there was rape , there was party rape and there was party rape with alcohol and a lot of violence associated with that . 
 When interviewed in 1996 while Blackrock was being adapted into a film , Joyce expressed regret that the media continually drawing connections between the play and Leigh 's murder had caused additional suffering for Leigh 's family , as he had initiated the play with the intention of aiding in the healing process of all the people affected by the murder . Reviewing a version of the play that was performed in 2010 , Caroline Wake from RealTime Arts likened the actors performing in the play to several of the initiation ceremonies that occur in the play itself , stating that to perform in Blackrock is to be " initiated into Newcastle ’ s history , to learn that along with the mines and the beaches , the death of Leigh Leigh too is your ambivalent inheritance . " 
 The New South Wales Department of Education and Communities hosts curriculum material for high school classwork on both plays . 
 = = Premiere production = = 
 Blackrock 's premiere production was directed by David Berthold , and featured the following cast : 
 Jared : Simon Lyndon 
 Cherie : Rebecca Smart 
 Ricko : Paul Bishop 
 Davo : Dan Wyllie 
 Scott : Teo Gebert 
 Toby : Joel Edgerton 
 Tiffany : Kristina <unk> 
 Stewart / Len / Roy : John Walton 
 Marian / Glenys : Julie Godfrey 
 Rachel : Kym Wilson 
 Diane : Angela Punch McGregor 
 All other roles were played by members of the company . 
 = = Film adaptation = = 
 While the revisions to the play Blackrock were still being finalised , Enright started working with first @-@ time director Steven Vidler to produce a film version , which would also be titled Blackrock . Blackrock was released in 1997 . Rebecca Smart reprised her role as Cherie in the film . Simon Lyndon who portrayed Jared in the play was cast as Ricko in the film . 
 = 2007 Groundhog Day tornado outbreak = 
 The 2007 Groundhog Day tornado outbreak was a localized but devastating tornado event that took place in central Florida early on February 2 , 2007 . Early morning temperatures had risen well above average for the season ; combined with increased moisture and a powerful jet stream , this created enough instability and wind shear for thunderstorms to rotate and spawn tornadoes . Due to the conditions , a long @-@ tracked supercell formed and produced three tornadoes over one hour and seventeen minutes . The supercell resulted in a 70 @-@ mile ( 110 @-@ kilometer ) trail of damage . 
 Twenty @-@ one people were killed and 76 others were injured in the outbreak . The first tornado damaged 1 @,@ 145 homes and destroyed 200 others in Sumter County before hitting the Lady Lake area where it killed eight people , damaged 180 homes and destroyed 101 homes in Lake County where it killed 21 people . The second tornado killed 13 people in the Lake Mack area and damaged and destroyed over 500 homes during its existence . The final tornado damaged roofs , car ports and garage doors along its path through New Smyrna Beach . The outbreak was the second @-@ deadliest on record for Florida , with damages of $ 218 million . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 In east central Florida , a warm sector , a region of warm surface air between a cold front and a warm front , was positioned ahead of a progressing cold front . Large scale lift was supported by a very strong jet stream aloft , with strong vertical shear evident , conducive for rotating thunderstorms and tornadoes . Instability increased overnight with temperatures and dew points increasing through the pre @-@ dawn hours . For example , northwest of Orlando , temperatures were still at 75 ° F ( 24 ° C ) , which was about 3 degrees warmer than the average high for the day and 14 degrees warmer than the average low . The conditions helped to form a long @-@ tracked supercell thunderstorm that traveled from Sumter County to the coastal waters of Volusia County during the early morning hours of February 2 , 2007 , producing three tornadoes along its track . 
 At 3 : 06 am EST ( <unk> UTC ) , the National Weather Service ( NWS ) issued a tornado warning for northern Lake County until 4 : 00 am EST ( 0900 UTC ) . At 3 : 10 am EST ( 0810 UTC ) , the first tornado touched down near The Villages and traveled at 55 miles per hour ( 89 km / h ) into Lake County . Five minutes after the tornado touched down , a severe weather update bulletin was issued by the NWS stating that there was a high likelihood of an extremely dangerous tornado and people in the path were in a life @-@ threatening situation . The tornado received an EF3 rating on the Enhanced Fujita Scale and had a track length of 16 @.@ 5 miles ( 26 @.@ 6 km ) . Initially , the tornado was thought to have still been on the ground and a third bulletin was released at 3 : 34 am EST ( 0834 UTC ) . At this time , Doppler radar indicated that a tornado was forming or was on the ground roughly 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) north of Umatilla . 
 The mesocyclone that produced the first tornado restrengthened and formed another tornado near Paisley at 3 : 37 am EST ( <unk> UTC ) in Lake County . A second tornado warning was issued at 3 : 52 am EST ( <unk> UTC ) for Volusia County as the tornado was tracking toward the area . It went east northeast toward the Lake Mack area , exceeding 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) . The tornado received an EF3 rating on the Enhanced Fujita Scale and traveled a total of 26 miles ( 42 km ) . A third tornado warning was issued in Volusia County at 4 : 13 am EST ( <unk> UTC ) , nearly ten minutes before the third tornado touched down . The supercell produced its last tornado east of Interstate 95 at 4 : 22 am EST ( <unk> UTC ) and dissipated five minutes later at the Intracoastal Waterway , 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from where it touched down . The tornado had a maximum width of 100 yards ( 91 m ) around the time it reached peak intensity . The tornado was rated EF1 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale and traveled for 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) . 
 = = Confirmed tornadoes = = 
 = = = February 2 event = = = 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The outbreak was the second @-@ deadliest on record for Florida , behind one that killed 42 people in February 1998 . Damages from the tornado outbreak totaled $ 218 million ( 2007 US $ ) . Christopher Patton , spokesman for the Lake County emergency operations center , described the damage as " unlike even perhaps the hurricanes of 2004 when we had minor roof damage , screen damage , pool damage . This is way far more devastating . " The tornadoes were the first to be rated on the Enhanced Fujita Scale , which replaced the original Fujita Scale . 
 U.S. President George W. Bush signed a declaration to designate Sumter , Lake , Volusia and Seminole counties as disaster areas . A state of emergency was declared by Governor Charlie Crist for the same counties . More than 400 American Red Cross volunteers from across several states went to help in central Florida . The Tampa Bay chapter of the American Red Cross sent six volunteers with emergency response vehicles to the main area of damage . The Walt Disney Company donated $ 50 @,@ 000 to the American Red Cross to help aid victims and Feed The Children sent two truckloads of relief supplies to the central Florida area . The Salvation Army brought several mobile kitchens to offer relief to victims and Verizon Wireless helped by offering citizens the use of a wireless emergency communication center , in addition to cleaning and repairing cellular phones damaged by the storms . A moment of silence was held before Super Bowl XLI in Miami to honor the victims of the tornadoes . 
 = Scott Doe = 
 Scott Mark Doe ( born 6 November 1988 ) is an English semi @-@ professional footballer who plays as a defender for National League club Dagenham & Redbridge . 
 Doe started his career with Swindon Town as a youth player before joining Conference Premier club Weymouth . In February 2009 , he left Weymouth due to financial problems at the club and registered with Kettering Town to allow him to join Dagenham & Redbridge on loan until the end of the 2008 – 09 season . He was refused permission to join Dagenham on a permanent basis by The Football Association as the move was outside the transfer window . Doe has also represented the England C team , making one appearance against Malta under @-@ 21s . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Doe was born in Reading , Berkshire . As a youth player , he played as a forward for AFC Newbury and Newbury and District Schools alongside Theo Walcott , before the duo signed for Swindon Town . They played together for four years . He said in one season , that his partnership with Walcott consisted of them scoring about 150 goals . During a tournament in Cardiff , Doe was converted into a centre @-@ back . Doe was with Swindon Town from the age of 10 , until he was deemed surplus to requirements by manager Paul Sturrock , and he left in July 2007 . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Weymouth = = = 
 Doe joined Conference Premier club Weymouth on 1 July 2007 , along with Swindon Town youth teammate Jon Stewart , where he signed a one @-@ year contract . His debut for Weymouth was in the 3 – 0 home win during a pre @-@ season friendly against League Two side Bournemouth on 17 July . He made his competitive debut for his new club on 15 September in the 3 – 1 away win at Droylsden , replacing <unk> Platt as a substitute in the 65th minute . Doe 's first start for Weymouth was against Torquay United on 25 September , in their 3 – 2 away defeat . His first goal for the club was scored on 26 January 2008 , away at Rushden & Diamonds , as Weymouth were defeated 3 – 2 . Paolo <unk> took a free kick in the 25th minute after Stuart Beavon was fouled just outside the penalty area by Curtis Osano . Doe scored with a header , which took a slight deflection as the ball crossed the goal line . During Weymouth 's 2 – 1 away defeat on 1 March to Halifax Town , Doe was controversially sent off three minutes into stoppage time . He was sent off for a tackle on Andy Campbell , but manager John Hollins claimed " there is no doubt that Scott got the ball " . Weymouth finished the season in 18th position , defying relegation , with Doe ending the 2007 – 08 season having made 33 appearances in the Conference , scoring once . Doe won the " Supporters Player of The Year " award , describing it as " the best thing in the World " . He admitted he did not expect to play more than 15 games during the season , saying " when I first came to the club I thought I might play 15 games throughout the whole season but I have ended up playing over twice that and it has just been fantastic " stated Doe . 
 Along with Anton Robinson , Marcus Browning and Stuart Beavon , Doe signed a new contract with Weymouth in May 2008 . His only goal for Weymouth in the 2008 – 09 season was against Forest Green Rovers on 25 August , after scoring the equalizer to make the score 1 – 1 in the 71st minute , with a tap @-@ in following a cross from Ryan Williams . In September , Doe was transfer listed , alongside James Coutts , Danny Knowles , Josh Webb and Michael Malcolm to generate money and bring new players to the club . He responded to being transfer listed by saying " I do not see it as a big deal . It 's not like the club has said to me we are putting you on the transfer list because we do not want you anymore " , and suggested it could benefit both parties if a bigger club were willing to " pay a bit of money " . On 4 October , Doe was sent off in Weymouth 's 3 – 2 home win over Eastbourne Borough , after he committed a foul on Andy Atkin in the penalty area , which resulted in a penalty kick that was later saved . Southern League Premier Division club Farnborough approached Doe on 30 December . He turned the offer down saying ; " moving to Farnborough would mean stepping down two levels which is not what I want to do " . His last game for Weymouth was against Stevenage Borough on 14 February , in the 3 – 0 home defeat . 
 = = = Dagenham & Redbridge = = = 
 Doe agreed to sign for League Two side Dagenham & Redbridge on a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year contract in February 2009 , initially on loan . He was also offered a contract at League One club Peterborough United . Financial troubles at Weymouth resulted in a number of first @-@ team players not being paid . Due to the situation at Weymouth , The Football Association gave him special dispensation to move anywhere , although the Football League refused to allow him to join Dagenham as it was outside the transfer window . Subsequently , Doe registered for another Conference Premier team , Kettering Town , and joined Dagenham on an emergency loan until the end of the 2008 – 09 season . He signed for Dagenham on a permanent basis on a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year contract in March . He made his debut on the opening day of the 2009 – 10 season , after starting in a 2 – 1 victory over Crewe Alexandra . At the end of the season , Doe was runner @-@ up to Mark <unk> for Dagenham & Redbridge 's " Player of the Year " award . In June 2015 , Doe rejected a new contract extension and left the club having made 266 appearances , scoring 11 goals . 
 = = = Boreham Wood = = = 
 After leaving Dagenham & Redbridge , Doe signed for newly promoted National League side Boreham Wood in July 2015 . 
 = = = Return to Dagenham = = = 
 In May 2016 , he re @-@ signed for Dagenham & Redbridge after their relegation to the National League along with Luke Howell on a free transfer , re @-@ uniting with former manager John Still . 
 = = International career = = 
 Doe was called up to the England C squad in February 2009 , by manager Paul Fairclough , to face the Malta under @-@ 21 team . He came on as a second @-@ half substitute in the 4 – 0 victory at Hibernians Football Ground , Paola , on 17 February . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Doe is able to play as a centre @-@ back or full @-@ back and is a " strong player " with good positional sense . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 30 April 2016 . 
 = Paul S. Walsh = 
 Paul Steven Walsh ( born 15 May 1955 ) is an English businessman . He was the chief executive of Diageo , the world 's largest spirits group , for twelve years between 2000 and 2013 . 
 Walsh was criticised in the press for what was seen as his excessive remuneration , but received admiration for his ability to build brands . He spent the majority of his career at Diageo and its precursor Grand Metropolitan . His most notable decision was the acquisition of the Seagram drinks company , which added Captain Morgan rum and Crown Royal Canadian whisky to Diageo 's roster of brands . 
 Walsh 's tenure in charge of Diageo closely mirrored his behaviour as head of the Pillsbury food business : selling off non @-@ essential assets such as Burger King and aggressively marketing a select number of " core " brands . He was disciplined regarding prices paid for the acquisition of assets . Towards the end of his Diageo career , he increased the company 's exposure to developing markets such as India and China . 
 In February 2014 Walsh became the non @-@ executive chairman of Compass Group , the world 's largest catering company . His role as an advisor to Diageo ended in September 2014 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Walsh was born in Middleton , and raised in the former mill town of Chadderton , Lancashire , in the North West of England . The only child of Arthur and Anne Walsh , his father was a pipe fitter who later ran a small thermal engineering company , and his mother was a housewife . Walsh claims to have inherited his work ethic from his father , his organisational skills from his mother , and his confidence from both parents , who he has described as " strict " but " loving " . His great grandfather emigrated from Ireland , hence he bears the common Irish surname of Walsh . 
 Walsh was educated at his local comprehensive , the Royton and Crompton School , followed by Oldham College . He initially aspired to become a fighter pilot after becoming influenced by his " hero " , a mathematics teacher who had been in the Royal Air Force during World War II . Walsh gained his pilot licence , but failed the medical examination to fly fighter jets due to colour blindness . 
 Instead , Walsh took a sandwich degree in accounting and economics at Manchester Polytechnic in 1973 , with a work placement at the Co @-@ operative Group 's soft drinks operation . He did not enjoy accounting , but reasoned that the skill would provide a good gateway into business . < He moved to London to work for International Computers Limited , and later the American Eaton Corporation , a manufacturer of industrial equipment , which he says he learnt a " can @-@ do attitude " . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Grand Metropolitan = = = 
 Walsh joined London @-@ based property and brewing conglomerate Grand Metropolitan ( Grand Met ) in 1982 as a financial planner and account manager for their brewing division Watney , Mann & Truman . By 1984 – 5 , at his request , he had moved into a sales and marketing role . In 1986 he became the brewing division 's chief financial officer ( CFO ) , where he came to the attention of Grand Met 's chairman Allen Sheppard after he reformed the financial reporting system . In 1987 , Walsh moved to New York to become CFO of Grand Met 's 100 property @-@ strong Intercontinental Hotels division . There he was tasked with acquiring properties , but having arrived at the height of what he identified as a real estate bubble , he argued that , " at that price we should be selling , not buying " . In 1988 , he helped to negotiate the sale of the chain for $ 2 @.@ 3 billion in cash ( a price to earnings ratio of 52 ) to the Saison Group , in what he later described as " the deal of the decade " . Even before the bubble burst , it was suggested that the Japanese company was overpaying for the chain ; one analyst described their valuation of Intercontinental as " off the chart " . Saison sold the chain in 1998 for $ 2 @.@ 8 billion , having added a further 87 hotels . 
 Following the divestment , Walsh joined Grand Met 's US @-@ headquartered food division as CFO . In 1989 , Grand Met used the proceeds from the Intercontinental sale to initiate a hostile takeover of Pillsbury , owner of the Green Giant and Häagen @-@ Dazs brands , for $ 5 @.@ 7 billion . The Grand Met offer was held by analysts to be a generous one for a struggling company that was under @-@ performing in its industry . Walsh subsequently admitted to <unk> the Green Giant vegetables division . Grand Met was attempting to diversify , and was attracted to Pillsbury 's brands , which they believed held under @-@ exploited potential for international growth . Writing in Businessweek , Mark <unk> accused Pillsbury of being " lax " in exploiting Häagen @-@ Dazs ' potential overseas . Walsh said : 
 We thought Pillsbury had powerful brands , but it had kind of lost its way . We felt we could leverage its brands and its technologies . They had under @-@ resourced their R & D and done a number of things to make the number , make the number . Cost reduction is a way of life , but you have to be responsible about it . You have to protect the seed today because that will be the tree that bears fruit in the future . I don 't think Pillsbury had done that . 
 In January 1992 Walsh was made chief executive of Pillsbury , in addition to his job as CFO of the Grand Met food division . He identified the various divisions of Pillsbury as poorly integrated and reined in their independence to make them more accountable to head office . He also invested heavily in research and development , technology , IT systems and marketing . A boosted marketing budget helped to grow Häagen @-@ Dazs from a well known US brand to a product with global reach , and one of the best known names in luxury ice cream . 
 Concentrating the company on consumer food , in 1994 he sold the Alpo pet food business to Nestlé for $ 510 million in cash . In February 1995 he participated in Grand Met 's friendly takeover of Pet , Inc . , the makers of Old El Paso branded Tex @-@ Mex foods , for $ 2 @.@ 6 billion . A number of analysts feared at the time that Grand Met had overpaid for the company , and was taking on too much debt , but Walsh defended the acquisition , arguing , " we are paying a fair price for attractive brands " , adding that he had faith in the continued growth of the Tex @-@ Mex food sector . In October 1995 he joined the Grand Met board of directors and assumed additional responsibility for Grand Met 's Paris @-@ based European food operations . In 1996 he was made chairman and president of Pillsbury . Investors Chronicle described Pillsbury as " well managed " under his leadership . Walsh was credited with re @-@ energising the company , and operating profits grew from $ 250 million to $ 660 million between 1992 and 1996 . 
 = = = Diageo = = = 
 In 1997 , Grand Met merged with Guinness , a major drinks concern , and the new company was named Diageo . In 1999 Walsh returned to England , and was elected chief operating officer of Diageo in January 2000 , and CEO in September 2000 . He took over a company that had stagnated since its merger three years earlier , and that The Economist deemed " mediocre " . As head of Diageo he transformed the consumer goods company into a streamlined premium drinks business . Walsh said : 
 " While Diageo had positions in drinks , that leadership was marginal – capital was not limitless . My view , supported by colleagues on the board , was that we should focus on where we can be a global leader . We couldn 't aspire to that in food – that slot was taken by the <unk> and <unk> and <unk> of this world – but we could command that position in premium drinks . " 
 Walsh identified drinks as the central Diageo business , and began selling off assets that did not fit this model . He sold Pillsbury to General Mills in 2001 for $ 10 @.@ 1 billion , and Burger King to the private equity firm Texas Pacific Group in 2002 for $ 1 @.@ 5 billion . He suggested that he would have liked to have sold Burger King earlier , but was worried about Diageo 's capacity to handle both transactions simultaneously . In a strategy to bolster Diageo 's drinks sales , in 2001 he acquired the Seagram drinks business from Vivendi Universal in conjunction with Pernod Ricard for $ 8 @.@ 2 billion , an action that was later credited with refocusing and re @-@ energising Diageo . At the time , analysts suggested that Walsh had overpaid , and that Pernod Ricard had gained control of the better brands . Despite having entered into an alliance with Pernod in order to avoid regulatory issues , Diageo was still forced to divest the Malibu Rum brand after acquiring Captain Morgan . Walsh defended the deal on the basis of efficiency savings and the fact that the deal was almost entirely financed by the sale of Pillsbury . Of the acquisition he says : 
 We moved in on that Seagram deal and forced their hand very quickly while our competitors were still trying to get their act together . If you look at what we paid it will go down in history as the bargain of the century . It was an $ <unk> total price of which our part was about $ <unk> and it was at economic profit break even at the end of year two . It ’ s produced phenomenal returns . If you look at Pernod ’ s Allied <unk> acquisition , it is 30 per cent higher in multiple terms and you ’ re not getting as good a collection of brands . 
 The Seagram deal cemented Diageo 's decision to focus on drinks , and strengthened its leadership position in the key US market by adding Captain Morgan rum and Crown Royal Canadian whisky to the company 's portfolio of products . 
 Meanwhile , inspired by the success of Smirnoff Ice , Walsh invested heavily in ready to drink products , termed " <unk> " by the British press . However , with the exception of Smirnoff Ice , none of the new products developed by Diageo was able to establish itself in the marketplace , and the <unk> trend was quickly dubbed a " fad " by the media . Some of these failures proved costly : Captain Morgan Gold lost £ 24 million for the company in 2002 . 
 In 2005 Diageo acquired the <unk> Irish whiskey brand and distillery from Pernod Ricard for € 295 million . In 2008 Diageo acquired a 50 per cent stake in the <unk> One brand for US $ 900 million . 
 Walsh received an Honorary Doctorate from Heriot @-@ Watt University in 2009 
 In 2011 , Walsh threatened to move Diageo 's headquarters away from the United Kingdom , following the introduction of a 50 per cent income tax rate for high earners . He said : " I believe the 50 per cent tax rate will lead to the long @-@ term damage of this nation ’ s competitive edge . " In April 2012 , the Daily Mail accused him of personal income tax avoidance . Later that same year , Walsh criticised the Cameron government again , suggesting that the London Olympics ought to have been followed up with greater infrastructure spending to tackle unemployment . 
 In May 2013 , Walsh announced that he would be stepping down as the chief of Diageo in September , but would stay with the company as an advisor until June 2014 to aid the transition process . 
 = = = Reception and appraisal = = = 
 Walsh has repeatedly spoken of the need for companies to genuinely be socially responsible . 
 Under Walsh 's management , Diageo has been careful to " manage for value " , and to avoid overpaying for assets . According to Nick Goodway of The Independent , Walsh " has been canny in allowing others to bid for the really big rivals and then pick up the brands that fall out of those deals cheaply " . Walsh has been criticised for his decision to exit the Indian spirits market in 2002 by disposing of Gilbey 's Green Label , a strategy which he reversed in 2012 with the acquisition of a stake in United Spirits . David <unk> commented in The Times that Diageo 's acquisition of United Spirits had seen the company 's owner , Vijay Mallya , " utterly outmanoeuvred by a canny rival prepared to play the long game . " 
 William Hopper , a former director of merchant bank Morgan Grenfell , described Walsh as a " bean counter " , and criticised the size of his salary . In 2012 , one leading Diageo shareholder said , " We have a very , very positive view of this company and Paul Walsh as well . We do not have a problem with [ his ] pay . " 
 = = = Other responsibilities = = = 
 In addition to his responsibilities at Diageo , Walsh has been a non @-@ executive director at FedEx Corporation since 1996 , at Unilever since 2009 , and at Avanti Communications since 2012 . From 1991 - 2007 he was a non @-@ executive director of Control Data Corporation and its successor company <unk> . He sat on the board of General Mills from 2000 until 2004 , stepping down after Diageo reduced its stake in the company . He was a non @-@ executive director of the energy company <unk> from March 2003 until May 2009 . He is former chairman of the governors at Henley Management College . He became a council member of the Scotch Whisky Association in 2001 and served as its chairman from 2008 until 2011 . During 2012 he was a member of David Cameron 's Business Advisory Group . In August 2013 , Walsh joined the United Spirits board . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Walsh was described by Philippe Naughton in The Times as " tall , paunchy , balding and thickset ... [ with ] a burly confidence that exudes from every pore ... a bluff Mancunian whose <unk> humour masks a fiercely competitive nature " . Walsh claims to lead a " relatively modest " life that is dominated by work . At Diageo , he spent around half of his time in various foreign countries , totalling over 5 million air miles . 
 Walsh met Manchester @-@ born Nicolette ( Nikki ) in London in 1978 when she was a Laker Airways flight attendant . They married in 1980 and have a son , Dean Paul Walsh ( born 27 April 1981 ) . Due to Paul 's work , in 1987 they moved to the United States , first New York , followed by Orono , Minnesota from 1990 . The couple returned to the United Kingdom in 1999 . They separated in 2006 , and she received a divorce settlement of around £ 15 million , which ranks among the largest payouts in British history . In October 2012 it was reported that Walsh was engaged to marry his longterm girlfriend Julie Lewis , a public relations executive , and they married in May 2013 . 
 Walsh is one of the highest @-@ paid businessmen in Britain , earning £ 11 @.@ 2 million between June 2011 and June 2012 from his work at Diageo . He lives in a farmhouse with 20 @-@ acre ( 8 @.@ 1 ha ) grounds at <unk> , near Horsham in West Sussex , and also maintains a penthouse apartment near Chelsea Bridge in London where he lives on weekdays . He holds a minority stake in a 2 @,@ 400 @-@ acre ( 970 ha ) game ranch in South Africa , where he enjoys big game hunting . 
 = Arthur Eve = 
 Arthur O. Eve ( born March 23 , 1933 ) is a retired American politician who served as a Democratic member of the New York State Assembly ( 1967 – 2002 ) and Deputy Speaker of the Assembly ( 1979 – 2002 ) representing districts in Buffalo , New York . He was the first African American to win the Buffalo Mayoral Democratic Primary but was defeated in the following mayoral election . 
 Eve was elected a New York State Assemblyman in 1966 and by the time of his retirement in 2002 had served in the New York State Assembly ( 143rd District 1967 – 82 , 141st District 1983 – 2002 ) longer than any other incumbent member . As Deputy Speaker , he was the highest ranking African American in the New York State Legislature . During his political career he became a political foe of Western New York politician James D. Griffin and of New York State Governors Mario Cuomo and George Pataki . He was a founding member of the New York State Black and Puerto Rican Legislative Caucus . At the national level , Eve was once one of three alternates to the 15 @-@ person 1984 Democratic Party Platform Committee . 
 Eve was an observer and negotiator during the 1971 Attica Prison riot and the first official to enter the facility to hear the demands of the inmates . An advocate for liberal causes such as economic development , education , job training and development , social services , crime prevention and parole reform , day care and housing , Eve was also a leader in the movement to legislate Harriet Tubman Day as a New York State holiday . He is the father of attorney and former candidate for Lieutenant Governor of New York Leecia Eve . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Eve was born in New York City , but was raised in Florida . After studies at West Virginia State College he arrived in Buffalo in February 1953 as a product of the segregated south , with less than $ 10 ( $ 90 today ) in his pocket . Eve served in the United States Army from 1953 – 1955 and achieved the rank of corporal . Eve holds an Associate 's degree from Erie Community College and a Bachelor of Science from West Virginia . He had been an All @-@ High basketball player in Florida and became an All @-@ Europe player during his Army tour of duty in Germany , where he ran a program for orphans . After completing his Army service he returned to Buffalo in 1955 . Eve 's first job in Buffalo was in a Chevrolet plant . While working there he became aware of drugs problems with local youths in the city 's parks , and observed a lack of guidance for youth in the community . He surrendered his job to pursue a post in parks recreation , but learned that such jobs were doled out by political patronage to party loyalists . Eve joined the Democratic Party and got one of the patronage parks jobs . By 1958 , he was blossoming as an independent activist within the party , pursuing minority rights , and was the only ward leader who was not part of the political establishment . This role led to his 1966 New York State Assembly election victory . 
 Eve and Constance Bowles ( born July 14 , 1932 ) , also an alumnus of West Virginia State College , were married in June 1956 . They have one daughter and four sons : Leecia Roberta Eve , Arthur O. Eve , Jr . ; Eric Vincent Eve , Martin King Eve , and Malcolm X. Eve . Leecia is a Democratic politician and attorney and a former candidate for Lieutenant Governor of New York during the 2006 election as well as a contender to replace Hillary Clinton as United States Senator when Clinton became United States Secretary of State in 2009 . Eric , who was a White House aide under Bill Clinton , ran Al Gore 's New York State 2000 Democratic presidential primary campaign . Malcolm also worked for the Clinton administration , and currently works for the Obama administration . 
 Eve , who was an Episcopalian , has a history of being a religious man . He was a deacon in his church in the 1970s . After his retirement from politics , he became an evangelist . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = Assemblyman 1967 – 1978 = = = 
 Eve was elected to the New York State Assembly in 1966 following several years of service as an independent ward leader in Buffalo . He remained in the Assembly until 2002 , sitting in the 177th , 178th , 179th , 180th , 181st , 182nd , 183rd , 184th , 185th , 186th , 187th , 188th , 189th , 190th , 191st , 192nd , 193rd and 194th New York State Legislatures . Eve rose to prominence in the mid @-@ 1960s during Buffalo 's civil disturbances and rights . He expanded his notability during the Attica Prison riots . In Buffalo 's Civil Rights Movement riots , Eve attempted to organize formal meetings in order to avert physical confrontations . Eve fought against union policies which disallowed minority participation in apprentice programs that led to high paying union jobs on state construction sites . He threatened New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller that he would lie down in front of bulldozers at one of these sites . In 1968 , he delayed construction on the State University of New York at Buffalo 's Amherst Campus to push through an agreement that New York State and the unions would promote minority access into the construction industry . The protests by supporters of Eve 's effort caused Rockefeller to call for an eleven @-@ month construction moratorium starting in March 1969 . 
 In April 1969 , the construction of the Adam Clayton Powell Jr . State Office Building ( originally known as the Harlem State Office Building ) at 125th Street and Seventh Avenue became a political quagmire . Originally , Rockefeller had proposed a 20 @-@ story office building and a 10 @-@ story cultural and civic center , but the legislature only approved funding for the office building . Eventually , there was protesting by the Harlem community that halted construction . Eve brokered discussions between Rockefeller and State Senator Basil Paterson , who represented the disgruntled Harlem community . 
 During Eve 's first term as an assemblyman , he led the effort to obtain an initial $ 500 @,@ 000 ( $ 3 @.@ 5 million as of 2016 ) of funding to establish the State University of New York system 's <unk> / Educational Opportunity Program . Since the 1970s , colleges in New York State have administered the Arthur O. Eve Higher Education Opportunity Program to assist students who may otherwise be unable to attend college because of educational and financial circumstances . Later , in 1988 , he would received the Kennedy Center Distinguished Leadership in Arts @-@ in @-@ Education award . 
 In the late 1960s , Eve drove a constituent to Attica State Prison , which is 35 miles ( 56 km ) from Buffalo . After observing the prison 's conditions , he began to introduce prison reform legislation to the state assembly . Since most legislators were fearful of political backlash and avoided prison reform issues , Eve became the primary channel through which prisoners could forward their complaints and requests . His compassion for the prisoners was recognised by them . For example , in the months following the eight @-@ hour November 4 , 1970 seizure of the Auburn Correctional Facility , Eve was the only legislator named as a recipient of prisoner complaints . 
 Eve served as an observer and negotiator in the wake of the 1971 Attica Prison riot . Believing that the situation called for people who were credible to both the prison population as well as to people involved with and observing the situation from outside the prison , he joined Tom Wicker and John Dunne , among others , in entering the prison to hear the inmates ' demands . Eve was the first mediator to arrive at the scene of the rebellion . He was the first elected official to enter the prison yard following the riot in which 42 prisoners were taken , and he led the September 11 tour by the requested visitors to the seized <unk> D as well as other areas of the prison . The prisoners requested direct communication with the Commissioner of Corrections , Russell G. Oswald , and that specific individuals hear their demands , naming Louis Farrakhan , Huey Newton , and William Kunstler ; Kunstler eventually agreed to serve as their legal counsel . The primary prisoner demand was that , upon surrendering control of the prison back to the guards , they not be beaten . Farrakhan refused to attend to the situation in person , however , which Eve felt was a turning point in the negotiations . Eve has expressed the belief that Governor Rockefeller was responsible for the massacre that subsequently occurred in the prison , and that Rockefeller made a deliberate decision to escalate the conflict knowing that there would likely be some loss of life . After negotiations stalled over a demand for amnesty , a rescue operation saved 29 hostages and led to 10 inmate deaths . Eve was critical of Rockefeller 's decision to not come observe the prison and the negotiations but rather pursue tactical measures : " I think Governor Rockefeller ought to be indicted . " In the 1992 Attica civil @-@ liability trial , Eve testified on behalf of the inmates . In March 2001 , then New York Governor George Pataki appointed Eve to the Attica Task Force that met with families of Attica prison employees who survived the 1971 uprising and negotiated reparations . 
 In February 1971 , Eve sponsored two bills . One called for a minimum of 0 @.@ 5 % of construction funds be allocated to on @-@ the @-@ job training for construction workers . The other was an initiative to have Buffalo Public Schools be decentralized like New York City Public Schools had been the prior year . 
 In the 1974 elections , New York State Democratic Chairman , Joseph Crangle , attempted to block Eve from obtaining the Democratic nomination . After the 1974 election , Eve was the senior Assemblyman among the blacks and Puerto Ricans . Following the 1974 elections in which 15 of the 18 newly Democratic seats were from non @-@ New York City Democrats , the upstate delegation was credited with giving the democrats a majority . That year marked the year in which upstate democrats demanded that there be some division of the Democratic minority leader , Democratic deputy minority leader , Assistant minority leader , minority whip , and ranking member of the Ways and Means committee , which had all previously been given to New York City officials . Incoming Governor Hugh Carey was also interested in a geographic division of key positions in order to promote party unity . Eve sat on a 1978 Medicaid reimbursement evaluation committee . 
 = = = 1977 Mayoral campaign = = = 
 On March 3 , 1977 , Buffalo 's incumbent mayor Stanley Makowski announced he would not seek reelection in May ; on the same day , Eve announced his candidacy for the post . Despite his numerous successes at fostering communication , he was described as a militant civil rights leader . Eve 's primary campaign was described by Frank <unk> of The New York Times as a campaign against Crangle rather than his handpicked candidate , Leslie Foschio . Eve declared his intentions early to add incentive to a voter registration drive , and he modeled his campaign after Carl Stokes ' 1967 Mayor of Cleveland election , which used decentralized election districts . Although he was expected to finish no better than third in the four @-@ way race , he believed in a strategy to take 90 percent of the black vote and 10 percent of the rest . 30 % of the 425 @,@ 000 Buffalo residents were black at the time . Eve 's candidacy blossomed during the four televised Democratic debates . Eve capitalized on Jimmy Griffin 's late campaign strategy of describing the Mayor job as simple like all jobs . Eve and his supporters supposedly registered 10 @,@ 000 new black voters . 
 Eve became the first African @-@ American to win the Democratic Party 's Buffalo Mayoral Primary election . Eve won the primary for the Democratic nomination by a 25 @,@ 538 – 23 @,@ 579 ( approximately 37 % – 34 % ) margin over Griffin . Griffin subsequently became the Conservative Party 's nominee ; third @-@ placed primary finisher Foschio also threatened to enter the general election . Eve was supported by Erie County Democratic Chairman Joseph Crangle , who hoped to prevent a third Democrat , such as Foschio , from running in the general election by endorsing Eve publicly , but Eve campaigned without Crangle 's backing or that of the Democratic Party . Eve spurned Chairman Crangle 's endorsement because the endorsement would have caused him to be associated with the Crangle machine . He subsequently distanced himself from Crangle by announcing that he was not supporting the chairman 's bid for re @-@ election in 1978 . The 1977 Buffalo Mayoral primary had had a voter turnout of 77 – 80 % in the Black community , the highest ever for an African American community in the Northeast , and surpassed nationwide in terms of African American voter turnout only by the 1967 Mayor of Cleveland election of Carl Stokes . 
 = = = Deputy Speaker era 1979 – 2003 = = = 
 By 1978 Eve had attained the title of Deputy Majority Leader . Eve , who had been chairperson of the Black and Puerto Rican Legislative Caucus in 1975 and 1976 , was appointed Deputy Speaker of the New York State Assembly during the 1979 legislative session . Because of the lack of minority representation in either chamber of the New York State Legislature , as Deputy Speaker , Eve was the highest @-@ ranking black legislator while in office . In 1979 , the Democratic majority fell from 90 – 60 to 86 – 64 , while the caucus ' Assembly membership had grown from 15 to 16 . This meant that the caucus had a much stronger position to obstruct legislation by withholding it votes , since 76 votes were necessary for legislation to pass . In 1980 , Eve resumed his chairmanship of the Black and Puerto Rican Legislative Caucus . The following year , Eve was elected unanimously to a committee to study state election law when he complained that no blacks were on the committee even though he said his complaint should have not been taken as an effort to lobby for a position . 
 Eve and fellow Democrat Griffin remained political rivals throughout their careers . In 1982 , Griffin and New York City Mayor Ed Koch , each of whom had first been elected as the mayor of one of New York State 's two largest cities in 1977 , were considering running together for Governor and New York State Lieutenant Governor . Eve adamantly opposed the ticket , speaking in support of Mario Cuomo . Eventually , Griffin decided not to pursue statewide office . In 1983 , Deputy Speaker Eve was no longer Caucus Chairman . 
 In 1984 , Eve joined with James F. Notaro , the Liberal Party of New York chairman to create the " Coalition for a Better Buffalo " , with the sole intention of identifying a candidate for the Democratic and Liberal party lines who could unseat Griffin . Following Cuomo 's 1982 New York State Governors general election victory , Eve became critical of Cuomo 's supply side approach to budget balancing , and was acknowledged by Cuomo as a voice of opposition which represented interests such as public housing . Eve also served as an adviser to Jesse Jackson during his 1984 presidential campaign , and after Jackson named his two delegates to the 1984 Democratic Party platform committee , he named Eve as his first alternate . In 1984 , Eve was among those involved in a controversy over the use of a state plane to attend a dinner for Paterson . Questions arose about whether it was a community event or a political event due to the possibility that the funds raised at the dinner might be used for a Mayoral campaign . Even after Cuomo was succeeded by Pataki , Eve continued to voice opposition to any attempts to balance the state 's budget by cutting taxes . In 1985 , Eve sponsored legislation to provide scholarships for the underprivileged and to fund <unk> enrichment programs that was described by President of the Associated Medical Schools of New York Dr. Robert Friedlander as landmark . 
 In 1986 , Eve was a contender to replace Stanley Fink as Speaker of the New York State Assembly , but the Black and Puerto Rican Caucus was not unified in its efforts to endorse a candidate . Most minority assembly members voted for Brooklyn 's Mel Miller due to the influence of downstate party organizers . Eve was outspoken in his opposition to the status quo ; in 1988 , he opposed all three incumbents for the New York State Board of Regents . In June 1988 , Eve spearheaded a group of 12 black state ticket <unk> who protested the absence of a black on the state ticket of Cuomo , Stan <unk> and Herman <unk> , by voting for another candidate , but he was not joined in protest by Manhattan leaders David Dinkins and Herman Farrell . In November 1988 , he was also among the few lawmakers to vote against the budget cuts and the first to call for a delay in their enactment . Eve 's outspokenness occasionally attracted opposition to his own interests , as it did later that same year . During his 1988 re @-@ election campaign , he encountered opposition from the minority ranks within the legislature , caused by his alleged involvement in the orchestration of a campaign against Queens , NY Democrat Cynthia Jenkins . As a result , she campaigned on behalf of Eve 's opponent Dorsey Glover ; Jenkins prevailed in her primary election . During the 1988 Democratic Party presidential primaries , Eve endorsed Jackson over Al Gore and Michael Dukakis . In 1993 , he endorsed H. Carl McCall , the president of the New York City Board of Education , for New York State Comptroller in a race against Carol Bellamy , Fernando Ferrer , the Bronx Borough President , Assemblyman Robin <unk> , and Joel <unk> . In both 1989 and 1993 , Eve considered running for mayor . His wife opposed the 1989 campaign . In 1993 , he felt he would have the opportunity to have a Buffalo Mayor he had a working relationship with if Anthony Masiello were to become mayor , and he , therefore declined to run so that he could endorse Masiello . 
 In 2000 , Eve was challenged by Crystal Peoples @-@ Stokes , a member of Grassroots and the majority leader of the Erie County Legislature . The race was described by The New York Times as the toughest election contest of Eve 's political career . During the race , which was Eve 's 18th and final New York State Assembly election campaign , Peoples depicted him as part of the antiquated old guard . Eve responded by summoning political connections including New York State Comptroller H. Carl McCall , United States Representative Charles B. Rangel , New York State Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver , Representative Maxine Waters and his son Eric , who was a veteran New York State campaign manager . Peoples @-@ Stokes 's Democratic primary election challenge was almost successful , and it was credited with energizing minority voters to elect Byron Brown as a New York State Senator . 
 In 2000 , Eve proposed that Pataki declare March 10 as Harriet Tubman day , in honor of the African @-@ American abolitionist who helped bring about the emancipation of many slaves . In 2001 Eve began efforts to have the day declared a state holiday , but the legislation failed passage in the New York State Senate . Tubman had lived over 50 years in Auburn , New York , where the Harriet Tubman House is located . The movement to commemorate her spread to her birthplace state , Maryland . Eve continued his efforts in 2002 , but the legislation did not pass until 2003 , after his retirement . 
 = = = Political themes = = = 
 Eve is recognized as " a leader on just about every issue that 's important to families " , according to Al Gore , and for his services to the New York State Black and Puerto Rican Legislative Caucus , as well as to the committee of public officials who attempted to resolve the conflict at the Attica State Prison . Eve 's major emphasis is on those at the very bottom of society ; he believes that a nation should be judged by how it attends to the needs of its lowest citizens — the homeless , the chronically poor , and the working poor , among whom blacks are numbered disproportionately . 
 Eve campaigned for the increased availability of health care services . He legislated against hate crimes and advocated against the expansion of legalized gambling to casinos that would effectively tax the economically disadvantaged , although the gambling legislation was nevertheless approved . Eve noted that the vast majority of lottery tickets were bought by those in the lower income bracket , and advocated for greater representation in the New York State jury pools by the economically disadvantaged . He also urged restraint in banking deregulation . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 New York State Senator George D. <unk> has described Eve 's retirement as a significant loss and an example of why he opposes term limits . A few months after retiring from political office Eve established a foundation whose first mission was to fight for the money allocated for the tutoring of students from underperforming schools , which was being redirected to other purposes . By 2004 , New York State approved Eve 's foundation to provide afterschool tutoring . He continued to serve on the Pataki task force that had been created in March 2001 to compensate family members of the 11 state workers killed in the 1971 Attica prison riots , and he remained active in discussions regarding the allocation of the state sales tax . In February 2008 , the Brighter Choice Charter School for Boys in Albany dedicated its new conference hall in his honor . 
 In 2005 , Eve 's daughter Leecia announced her intention to run for Lieutenant Governor of New York in 2006 . When Eliot Spitzer announced he had selected David Paterson to be his running mate for the 2006 New York State Elections , there was some controversy because Eve had been joined by Dinkins , Rangel , Percy Sutton and Basil Paterson ( who is David Paterson 's father ) in endorsing his daughter . 
 = Sex Ed ( The Office ) = 
 " Sex Ed " is the fourth episode of the seventh season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's 130th episode overall . Written and directed by Paul Lieberstein , the episode aired on NBC in the United States on October 14 , 2010 . The episode features the return of several recurring characters , most notably Melora Hardin as Jan Levenson , Linda Purl as Helene Beesly , and Nancy Carell as Carol Stills . Actresses Amy Pietz and Amy Ryan — who portray Donna and Holly Flax — only make vocal cameos . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) comes to work thinking he has a pimple , but it turns out to actually be a cold sore . When he is told that it is a form of herpes , Michael contacts all his ex @-@ girlfriends — Jan , Holly , Helene , Donna , and Carol . Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) holds a sex education meeting in the office hoping to learn if Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) is having sex with her boyfriend , Gabe Lewis ( Zach Woods ) . 
 Along with several actresses reprising their characters , " Sex Ed " also saw the introduction of Nate , played by Mark Proksch ; he would go on to feature in this season , as well as the following two . " Sex Ed " was viewed by 7 @.@ 36 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 8 rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , marking a slight increase in the ratings when compared to the previous week . The episode was also the highest @-@ ranked NBC series of the night , but it received mixed reviews from critics , many of whom felt that Michael was characterized as too stupid and that Andy 's subplot was not compelling . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) arrives to the office with a fake mustache to hide what he thinks is a pimple over his mouth . Michael soon learns that it is a cold sore , and he over @-@ reacts , thinking he has herpes . With some prodding from Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) , Michael decides to tell his former lovers he has herpes , despite not yet having gone to a doctor . He calls Donna ( Amy Pietz ) first , abruptly telling her to get tested . Michael then calls Holly Flax ( Amy Ryan ) , joking around with her before they have a more serious discussion . Much to Michael 's dismay , she claims that he over @-@ romanticized their relationship , and he hangs up without telling her about the herpes . Michael and Dwight drive out to tell Carol Stills ( Nancy Carell ) , Jan Levenson ( Melora Hardin ) , and Pam 's mother , Helene Beesly ( Linda Purl ) . 
 Michael and Dwight meet with Jan , who is now a fairly successful office manager for a hospital and single mother . After Jan gives Michael a brutal description of why their relationship failed and he watches her play with her daughter Astrid , Michael reveals that he has herpes . He meets with Helene , Pam 's mother , who is playing with Cece at a playground ; after an awkward conversation in which she also points out his skewed memory , he insults her and walks off . He meets with Carol while she is conducting an open house . Carol attempts to be polite , but then abruptly points out his faults too . Finally , Michael calls Holly one last time , only to get her voicemail . He leaves her a heartfelt message that what she said hurt him and that when he saw all his other exes , he had not been happy to see any of them , but when he talked to her , he was happy . He says that does not understand why she wants to downplay what they had , but he remembers their relationship perfectly and considers it special . Before hanging up , he awkwardly adds that she should be tested for herpes . 
 Meanwhile , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) uses the situation to host a sex education class in order to learn if his former girlfriend Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) has been having sex with her current boyfriend Gabe Lewis ( Zach Woods ) . Distraught after realizing that they are having sex and after everyone mocks him , Andy throws a tantrum , hurling a box of pizza at the wall and storming out of the conference room . Gabe takes Andy to his cubicle and admonishes him for his behavior , revealing he is aware why Andy hosted the sex ed class . He explains to Andy that the only reason he asked Erin out was because Andy gave his blessing , which Andy reveals was just a result of his difficulty saying no to how politely Gabe asked him . Gabe tells Andy that he is going to let this whole situation slide this time and advises Andy to put Erin behind him . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Sex Ed " was written and directed by showrunner and executive producer Paul Lieberstein , who also plays Toby Flenderson on the show . The episode features several return appearances of former recurring characters . Amy Ryan appears in a voice @-@ only role as Holly Flax , who was last seen in the fifth season finale , " Company Picnic " . Melora Hardin appears as Jan Levenson , who was last seen in the fifth season episode , " Baby Shower " . Amy Pietz appears as Donna , also in a voice @-@ only role ; she had a recurring role near the end of the sixth season . Linda Purl appears as Helene Beesly , who had a recurring role in the sixth season . Nancy Carell , the actual wife of Steve Carell , appears as Carol Stills , who was last seen in the third season episode , " A Benihana Christmas " . Ryan would return later in the season as a way to provide Carell an exit from the series . Hardin would make a cameo appearance in the later season seven episode " Threat Level Midnight " , as well as two appearances in the ninth season episodes " The Whale " and " Couples Discount " . " Sex Ed " is the first episode to feature Dwight 's assistant Nate , played by YouTube star Mark Proksch . After the producers of The Office saw a series of prank videos that Proksch did under the name " Kenny Strasser " , they hired him to become a recurring character . 
 The official website of The Office included one deleted scene from " Sex Ed " . In the clip , Kelly asks Jim how she should deal with Ryan not completely loving her . The Season Seven DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . The cut scenes include Dwight looking up how herpes is spread , Dwight discussing how Holly brings out " a child @-@ like wonder in Michael " , Michael contacting the French @-@ Canadian concierge he had a brief relationship with in the fifth season episode " Business Trip " , and more cut scenes from Andy 's sex ed discussion . In addition , an entire subplot was deleted from the episode . This story involved the camera crew catching Pam and Jim in the middle of a fight ; the crew then tries to determine what caused them to fight in the first place . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Michael compares himself to Canadian pop punk musician Avril Lavigne , noting that both of them get pimples . Andy sings a parody of Foreigner 's 1978 hit single " Hot Blooded " about pizza . Jan mentions that she released " an album of Doris Day covers on [ her ] own label " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Sex Ed " first aired on NBC on October 14 , 2010 . In its original American broadcast it was viewed by an estimated 7 @.@ 36 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 8 rating / 10 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that 3 @.@ 8 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old households watched the episode , and ten percent of that demographic had their televisions tuned to the channel at any point . This marked a slight increase in viewers from the previous episode . 
 Jonathan Teigland of Starpulse called the episode " simple and silly " . He applauded the final scene with Holly , writing that it was the " best " of Michael 's reconnection with his ex @-@ girlfriends . Dan Forcella of TV Fanatic awarded the episode three out of five stars , calling it " a miss " . He felt that none of the encounters with Michael 's former girlfriends were " funny " , and that " the meetings themselves left a lot to be desired " . He was also critical of Andy 's subplot , writing that " very little about the execution worked . " Forcella did , however , call Michael 's conversation with Holly " classic " . 
 Myles McNutt of The A.V. Club gave the episode a " C + " and felt that Michael 's antics — largely the fact that he easily believes he has herpes — were too stupid to be believable ; however , he felt that the episode 's main story largely worked as planned . However , McNutt panned the episode 's secondary story focusing on Andy , noting that it " lazily tapped into the series ' basic structure " . He ultimately concluded that " without any particularly strong jokes , it fell entirely on Andy 's character , and there just wasn 't enough there to support it " . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix wrote that , while Michael 's story " had its moments " , it was largely " creepy and uncomfortable " . He also criticized Andy 's characterization , noting that , in the episode , he was written extremely similar to Michael . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 The episode served as inspiration for the Brazilian web series Viral . 
 = 2012 Tour de France = 
 The 2012 Tour de France was the 99th edition of the Tour de France , one of cycling 's Grand Tours . It started in the Belgian city of Liège on 30 June and finished on the Champs @-@ Élysées in Paris on 22 July . The Tour consisted of twenty @-@ one race stages , including an opening prologue , and covered a total distance of 3 @,@ 496 @.@ 9 km ( 2 @,@ 173 mi ) . As well as the prologue , the first two race stages took place in Belgium , and one stage finished in Switzerland . Bradley Wiggins ( Team Sky ) won the overall general classification , and became the first British rider to win the Tour . Wiggins 's teammate Chris Froome placed second , and Vincenzo Nibali ( Liquigas – Cannondale ) was third . 
 The race leader 's yellow jersey was worn for the first week by Fabian Cancellara ( RadioShack – Nissan ) , who won the prologue . Wiggins , second in the prologue , took the leadership of the race on stage seven , the first mountainous stage , which was won by Froome , and maintained his lead for the remainder of the race , winning the two longest time trials , and not losing time to his main challengers for the overall title in the mountains . Froome came second in both the long time trials , and was alongside Wiggins on the mountainous stages . 
 The points classification was won by Nibali 's teammate Peter Sagan , who won three stages . André Greipel of Lotto – Belisol and Team Sky rider Mark Cavendish both also won three stages . Team Europcar 's Thomas Voeckler , winner of two mountain stages , won the mountains classification . BMC Racing Team 's Tejay van Garderen , in fifth place overall , won the young rider classification . The team classification was won by RadioShack – Nissan and Chris Anker Sørensen ( Saxo Bank – Tinkoff Bank ) was given the award for the most combative rider . 
 = = Teams = = 
 Twenty @-@ two teams participated in the 2012 edition of the Tour de France . All eighteen UCI ProTeams were entitled , and obliged , to enter the race . On 6 April 2012 , the organiser of the Tour , Amaury Sport Organisation ( ASO ) , announced the four second @-@ tier UCI Professional Continental teams given wildcard invitations , of which one was Dutch @-@ based and three French . The presentation of the teams – where each team 's roster are introduced in front of the media and local dignitaries – took place outside the Prince @-@ Bishops ' Palace in Liège , Belgium , on 28 June , two days before the opening stage held in the city . 
 The number of riders allowed per squad was nine , resulting in a start list total of 198 riders . From the riders that began the race , 153 crossed the finish line in Paris . The riders came from 31 countries ; France , Spain , Netherlands , Italy , Belgium , Germany and Australia all had 12 or more riders in the race . The average rider age was 30 @.@ 17 , with 22 @-@ year @-@ old Thibaut Pinot ( FDJ – BigMat ) as the youngest rider , and 40 @-@ year @-@ old Jens Voigt ( RadioShack – Nissan ) as the most senior . Saur – Sojasun was the youngest team and RadioShack – Nissan the oldest . 
 The teams entering the race were : 
 = = Pre @-@ race favourites = = 
 According to many observers before the race the favourite for the general classification was Bradley Wiggins . His closest rivals were thought to be Cadel Evans ( BMC Racing Team ) and Vincenzo Nibali ( Liquigas – Cannondale ) . 2007 and 2009 winner Alberto Contador was serving a doping suspension and did not start in 2012 Tour . 2010 winner and 2011 runner @-@ up Andy Schleck was not able to recover from an injury suffered in the Critérium du Dauphiné . The riders considered outsiders for the general classification were Ryder Hesjedal ( Garmin – Sharp ) , Fränk Schleck ( RadioShack – Nissan ) , Samuel Sánchez ( Euskaltel – Euskadi ) , Jurgen Van den Broeck ( Lotto – Belisol ) , Tony Martin ( Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step ) , Denis Menchov ( Team Katusha ) , Levi Leipheimer ( Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step ) , Alejandro Valverde ( Movistar Team ) and Robert Gesink ( Rabobank ) . 
 Wiggins 's highest finishes in a Grand Tour were fourth in the 2009 Tour ( later promoted to third after Lance Armstrong 's result was annulled in 2012 ) and third in the 2011 Vuelta a España . He had shown his form in the season by winning the general classifications in three stage races , the Paris @-@ Nice , Tour de Romandie and Dauphiné . Being a time trialist , Wiggins was thought to have been the rider most suited the race 's course . The 2011 Tour winner Evans came back from an illness earlier in the season to win the two @-@ day Critérium International and place third at the Dauphiné . The 2010 Vuelta a España winner Nibali had shown his form in the season by winning the Tirreno – Adriatico stage race . 
 The sprinters considered favourites for the points classification and wins in bunch sprint finishes were Mark Cavendish ( Team Sky ) , André Greipel ( Lotto – Belisol ) , Matthew Goss ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) , Peter Sagan ( Liquigas – Cannondale ) and Marcel Kittel ( Argos – Shimano ) . Cavendish was the world road race champion and defending points classification winner , but would not have the full support of Team Sky , with the focus being with Wiggins ' general classification ambitions . He had won the four @-@ stage race Ster ZLM Toer thirteen days before the start of the Tour . Greipel , who would have the full backing of his team , had shown his form in the season with thirteen victories . Goss was second to Cavendish at the world championships and was the new sprint leader of his team , although he had only one win in the year . Sagan was equal in wins with Greipel , of which five came in the Tour of California and four in the Tour de Suisse . Kittel won two stages in both the Tour of Oman and Ster ZLM Toer . 
 = = Route and stages = = 
 On 29 October 2010 , the ASO announced that Liège would host the 2012 edition 's Grand Départ ( the Tour 's opening stages ) , before further details of the first three stages held in Belgium at an event at the city 's Prince @-@ Bishops ' Palace on 18 November . It was the first time a Grand Départ outside France had been hosted in the same location twice , with other occasion in 2004 . The entire route of the race was accidentally published on the ASO website on 10 October 2011 , eight days before the official presentation at the Palais des Congrès in Paris . Due to a clash with the start of the Olympics in the end of July , the Tour was moved forward a week earlier than usual . 
 After the opening prologue in Liège , stage one left the city with the finish in Seraing . The second stage took place between Visé to Tournai , before the race moved into north @-@ west France . The third stage ended in the coastal city of Boulogne @-@ sur @-@ Mer , before the fourth ending in Rouen , and fifth in Saint @-@ Quentin . Stage six took the race east , with the seventh ending in the Vosges Mountains . Stage eight entered Switzerland the finish in Porrentruy . A return to France saw the next stage take place between Arc @-@ et @-@ <unk> to Besançon . The next stages , ten and eleven , went into the Alps , with the two after taking the Tour down to the Mediterranean Sea at Cap d 'Agde . Stage fourteen moved the race into the east of Pyrenees , before a transitional stage taking it to the western side for the next two in the mountain range . The eighteen stage was between Blagnac to Brive @-@ la @-@ Gaillarde in the south of the country , before an air transfer took the race back to the north east to finish with the Champs @-@ Élysées stage in Paris . 
 There were 21 stages in the race , covering a total distance of 3 @,@ 496 @.@ 9 km ( 2 @,@ 173 mi ) , 133 @.@ 1 km ( 82 @.@ 7 mi ) shorter than the 2011 Tour . The longest race stage was the twelfth at 226 km ( 140 mi ) , and stage 21 the shortest at 120 km ( 75 mi ) . The race featured a total of 101 @.@ 1 km ( 63 mi ) in individual time trials and three summit finishes : stage 7 , to La Planche des Belles Filles ; stage 11 , to La Toussuire - Les Sybelles ; and stage 17 , to Peyragudes . The Col du Grand Colombier in the Alps , was included for the first time , and was among six hors catégorie ( English : beyond category ) rated climbs in the race . The rest days were after stage 9 , in Mâcon , and 15 , in Pau . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 The opening 6 @.@ 4 km ( 4 mi ) prologue stage in Liège was won by RadioShack – Nissan 's Fabian Cancellara . Bradley Wiggins and Sylvain Chavanel ( Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step ) placed second and third respectively , both seven seconds in arrears , with Wiggins fractionally faster . Cancellara claimed the yellow jersey as leader of the general classification and the green jersey as leader of the points classification . In stage one a large group of riders reached the ending climb , the Côte de Seraing . Cancellara attacked 1 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 9 mi ) out , followed by Peter Sagan and Edvald Boasson Hagen ( Team Sky ) , before Sagan won the sprint finish at the summit . Michael Mørkøv of Saxo Bank – Tinkoff Bank took the first polka dot jersey as leader of the mountains classification . The next stage was won by Mark Cavendish from a bunch sprint finish in Tournai , Belgium , with Sagan taking the green jersey . Stage three , the first in France , saw the Sagan win again , crossing the finish line with a comfortable margin on the short steep climb in Boulogne @-@ sur @-@ Mer . The fourth ended with a bunch sprint won by André Greipel . A crash with 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) remaining took Cavendish out of contention . Another bunch finish came in the next stage , with Greipel victorious again . The sixth stage was won by Sagan in another field sprint . 
 In the stage seven , the first at altitude , the last of the day 's breakaway riders were caught with 1 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 9 mi ) remaining , on the final climb to La Planche des Belles Filles . A select group of five – Wiggins and his compatriot and teammate Chris Froome , Cadel Evans , Vincenzo Nibali and Rein Taaramäe of Cofidis – then pulled clear in the final kilometre , before Evans attacked and Froome countered and to win stage and take the polka dot jersey . Cancellara lost almost two minutes on the day and surrendered the yellow jersey to Wiggins , who became the fifth British rider to wear the jersey , and first since David Millar in 2000 . The eighth stage saw breakaway rider Thibaut Pinot attack a reduced break on the final climb , the Col de la Croix , and solo to the finish in Porrentruy , Switzerland , taking the victory by margin of twenty @-@ six seconds . Breakaway rider Fredrik Kessiakoff ( Astana ) took the polka . Stage nine 's 41 @.@ 5 km ( 25 @.@ 8 mi ) individual time trial was taken by Wiggins , with Froome 35 seconds down in second and Cancellara a further 22 . Froome moved up to third overall . The next day was the first rest day of the Tour . 
 The tenth stage was the first classified as mountainous . The Col du Grand Colombier broke apart a 25 @-@ rider breakaway , leaving small group to contest the finish at Bellegarde @-@ sur @-@ Valserine ; Thomas Voeckler ( Team Europcar ) claimed the stage win and the polka dot jersey . Another mountain stage followed the next day , which again saw a large breakaway . The break crossed the two hors catégorie climbs – the col de la Madeleine and the Col de la Croix de Fer – before being caught chasing group containing the overall contenders . A number of attacks followed , until Team Europcar 's Pierre Rolland escaped with 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) to go and took the win at the Les Sybelles ski resort . The group of overall contenders followed , 55 seconds later . Evans was absent and dropped from second to fourth overall , over three minutes in arrears . Kessiakoff took back the lead of the mountains classification . In stage twelve , a large breakaway formed 20 km ( 12 @.@ 4 mi ) in , later reduced to five riders across the Col du Granier . They stayed together until the finish , where , with a kilometer remaining David Millar ( Garmin – Sharp ) escaped to take victory , closely followed by Jean @-@ Christophe Péraud ( Ag2r – La Mondiale ) . A transitional stage came next , with a bunch sprint finish in Cap d 'Agde . Greipel took the win , with Sagan second . 
 In the first stage in the Pyrenees , the fourteenth , a large breakaway escaped 50 km ( 31 @.@ 1 mi ) in , and had at one point amassed a lead of fifteen minutes . Of five remaining riders from the final climb of Mur de Péguère , Luis León Sánchez of Rabobank attacked on an ascent with 11 @.@ 5 km ( 7 @.@ 1 mi ) remaining and soloed to the finish in Foix . As the peloton ( the main group ) passed the Mur de Péguère , the race was sabotaged as a large number of riders had suffered tyre punctures from carpet tacks . Evans waited over a minute to get a replacement wheel , then had a further two punctures on the descent . Wiggins then forced the peloton to wait for Evans to return to the group . The next stage ran through the foothills of the Pyrenees . A five @-@ rider breakaway made it to the finish in Pau , where with 6 km ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) to go , Christian Vande Velde ( Garmin – Sharp ) and Pierrick Fédrigo ( FDJ – BigMat ) escaped and Fédrigo won the sprint finish . The following day was the Tour 's second rest day . 
 In the sixteenth stage , the race entered the high mountains with the queen stage crossing two hors catégorie climbs – the Col d 'Aubisque and the Col du Tourmalet – followed by the first @-@ category climbs of the Col d 'Aspin and the Col de Peyresourde , completing the so @-@ called " Circle of Death " . A 38 @-@ rider breakaway crossed the Aubisque , before fracturing on the Tourmalet . Voeckler attacked on the Peyresourde and took the stage win with a margin of one minute forty seconds . His stage victory and maximum points over all summits , put Voeckler in the lead of the mountains classification . Wiggins , Froome and Nibali came in seven minutes after Voeckler , while Evans lost almost five minutes to the trio , falling from fourth to seventh in the general classification . In the final stage in the Pyrenees , after a number on the leading group containing the overall contenders , Alejandro Valverde moved clear over the hors <unk> Port de Balès . He held his lead to the summit finish at the Peyragudes ski resort . In the group behind Wiggins and Froome attacked their rivals to finish nineteen seconds later . Nibali came in seventh , a further eighteen down . In the following stage , six riders from a breakaway were caught on finishing straight in Brive @-@ la @-@ Gaillarde by the head of the chasing peloton , with Cavendish taking the victory ahead of Matthew Goss and Sagan respectively . Wiggins secured the general classification in penultimate stage 's 53 @.@ 5 km ( 33 @.@ 2 mi ) individual time trial . Froome place second , one minute and sixteen seconds in arrears , with Sánchez a further thirty @-@ four . 
 In the final stage , Cavendish won a fourth consecutive Champs @-@ Élysées stage , his third stage win of the race . Wiggins finished the race to become the first British rider to win the Tour de France . Wiggins finished three minutes and twenty @-@ one seconds clear of compatriot and teammate Froome . Nibali placed third at six minutes and nineteen seconds . Sagan won the points classification with a total of 421 , 141 ahead of Greipel in second . Voeckler the mountains classification with 135 points , 12 ahead of second @-@ placed Kessiakoff . The best young rider was BMC Racing Team rider Tejay van Garderen , followed by Pinot and Steven Kruijswijk ( Rabobank ) respectively . RadioShack – Nissan finished as the winners of the team classification , over five minutes and forty @-@ six seconds ahead of second @-@ placed Team Sky . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 There were four main individual classifications contested in the 2012 Tour de France , as well as a team competition . The most important was the general classification , which was calculated by adding each rider 's finishing times on each stage . The rider with the least accumulated time is the race leader , identified by the yellow jersey ; the winner of this classification will be considered the winner of the Tour . If a crash happened within the final 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) of a stage , not including time trials and summit finishes , the riders involved received the same time as the group they were in when the crash occurred . There were no time bonuses given for this edition of the Tour . 
 The points classification leader was identified with a green jersey . Riders received points for finishing among the highest placed in a stage finish , or in intermediate sprints during the stage . The points available for each stage finish were determined by the " coefficient " ranking scale . 
 No changes were made to the mountains classification , where points were awarded to the riders that reached the top of the most difficult ascents first . The climbs were categorised as either hors catégorie , first , second , third , or fourth @-@ category , with more points available for the higher @-@ categorised climbs . The overall leader wore a polka dot jersey . Double points were awarded on the summit finishes on stages 1 , 11 and 20 . 
 The young rider classification , denoted by a white jersey , was calculated the same way as the general classification , but the classification was restricted to riders who were born on or after 1 January 1988 . The team classification was calculated using the finishing times of the best three riders per team on each stage ( not the team time @-@ trial ) ; the leading team was the team with the lowest cumulative time . The number of stage victories and placings per team determined the outcome of a tie . The riders in the team that lead this classification were identified with yellow number bibs on the back of their jerseys . For the time in the Tour 's history the leading wore yellow helmets . In addition , there was a combativity award , given after each stage to the rider considered , by a jury , to have " made the greatest effort and who has demonstrated the best qualities of sportsmanship " . The winner wore a red number bib the following stage . At the conclusion of the Tour , Chris Anker Sørensen won the overall super @-@ combativity award . 
 A total of € 2 @,@ 414 @,@ 246 was awarded in cash prizes in the race . The overall winner of the general classification received € 450 @,@ 000 , with the second and third placed riders getting € 200 @,@ 000 and € 100 @,@ 000 respectively ; all finishers of the race were awarded with money . The holders of the classifications benefited on each stage they lead ; the final winners of the points and mountains were given € 25 @,@ 000 , while the best young rider and most combative rider got € 20 @,@ 000 . Team prizes were available , with € 10 @,@ 000 for the team time trial and € 50 @,@ 000 for the winners of the team classification . There were also two special awards each with a prize of € 5000 , the Souvenir Jacques Goddet , given to the first rider to pass Goddet 's memorial at the summit of the Col du Tourmalet in stage sixteen , and the Souvenir Henri Desgrange , given to first rider to pass the summit of the highest climb in the Tour , the Col de la Croix de Fer in stage eleven . Thomas Voeckler won the Jacques Goddet and Pierre Rolland the Henri Desgrange . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = UCI World Tour rankings = = 
 The race was the eighteenth of the twenty @-@ nine events in the UCI World Tour , with riders from the WorldTeams competing individually for points that contributed towards the rankings . Points were awarded to the top twenty finishers in the general classification and to the top five finishers in each stage . Wiggins moved in to the lead of the individual ranking , with Joaquim Rodríguez dropping to second . The points accrued by Chris Froome moved him from 52nd to 6th . Team Sky retained their lead of the team ranking , ahead of Liquigas – Cannondale . Spain remained as leaders of the nations ranking , with Italy second . 
 = Richard O 'Connor ( politician ) = 
 Richard Edward O 'Connor QC ( 4 August 1851 – 18 November 1912 ) was an Australian politician and judge . 
 A barrister and later Queen 's Counsel , O 'Connor was active in the campaign for Australian Federation and was a close associate of Edmund Barton . He served as New South Wales Minister for Justice in the Dibbs ministry from 1891 to 1893 while a member of the New South Wales Legislative Council ( 1888 – 98 ) , and was a member of the constitutional committee at the Federal Convention that drafted the Australian Constitution . A member of the first federal ministry as Vice @-@ President of the Executive Council , O 'Connor led the government in the Senate from 1901 to 1903 , playing a key role in the development of that chamber 's role in Australian politics . 
 O 'Connor resigned from Parliament in 1903 to become one of the inaugural justices of the High Court of Australia , which he had helped to create . He had a reputation as a liberal and independent @-@ minded justice who occasionally voted with the progressives on industrial matters after 1906 . He was also the first president of the Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration from 1905 to 1907 , and he continued to serve on the High Court until his early death in 1912 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Richard Edward O 'Connor was born in the Sydney suburb of Glebe on 4 August 1851 . His mother was Mary Anne , née Harnett , while his father was Richard , an Irish @-@ born Catholic who at that time served as librarian to the New South Wales Legislative Council , and would later become Clerk of the Legislative Assembly , chairing its first meeting . His family believed itself to be descended from the Irish republican rebel Arthur O 'Connor , and also counted the prominent Tasmanian pioneer Roderic O 'Connor among their relations . Richard Edward , sometimes known as Dick , attended St Mary 's College , a Benedictine school in Lyndhurst , from 1861 to 1866 before matriculating at Sydney Grammar School in 1867 and studying at the University of Sydney . From a young age his closest friend was Edmund Barton , in whose Cabinet O 'Connor would later serve . He won the Wentworth medal for the best English essay in 1870 , and received a Bachelor of Arts in 1871 and a Master of Arts in 1873 . 
 While studying for his master 's degree from 1871 to 1874 , O 'Connor worked as a clerk in the New South Wales Legislative Council , after which he was articled with Frederick Darley ( afterwards Chief Justice ) , remaining solvent with contributions to the Freeman 's Journal , the Echo and the Evening News . He was admitted to the bar on 15 June 1876 . An enthusiastic debater , he was a regular participant at the Sydney School of Arts Debating Club , encountering future political foes and personal friends William McMillan and George Reid . Establishing his own law practice , he served as Crown Prosecutor for the northern district . He married Sarah Jane Hensleigh on 30 October 1879 at St Joseph 's Catholic Church in Delegate on the border between New South Wales and Victoria ( Sarah came from <unk> ) . 
 = = Colonial politics = = 
 In the dispute between protection and free trade that formed the backbone of Australian colonial politics in the late nineteenth century , O 'Connor was a committed protectionist . Despite this , Sir Henry Parkes , the Premier of New South Wales and a free trader , had him appointed to the New South Wales Legislative Council on 8 February 1888 . The protectionist George Dibbs appointed him Minister for Justice on 23 October 1891 , a position in which he worked closely with his friend Barton , who was Attorney General . O 'Connor also served as Solicitor General from 19 July to 13 September 1893 . In these portfolios he worked for electoral reform and supported the cause of Federation . After becoming Leader of the Government in the Legislative Council in 1892 he exercised considerable control over that body , but his influence was greatly diminished after he and Barton were forced to resign from the ministry on 14 December 1893 , having accepted briefs in a case in which they were required to argue against the railway commissioners , a government department . O 'Connor remained in the Legislative Council but embarked on an overseas tour , travelling to Egypt , Italy , England and Ireland . 
 In 1895 , O 'Connor returned to New South Wales and successfully defended the protectionist demagogue Paddy Crick against conspiracy charges relating to the George Dean attempted murder case ; he was appointed Queen 's Counsel in 1896 and acted as a judge on the Supreme Court from November 1898 to March 1899 . He also remained active politically . As a founding member of the Australian Federation League in 1893 , he was appointed a vice @-@ president of the People 's Federal Convention held at Bathurst in November 1896 . He was elected as a delegate to the Australian Federal Convention in 1897 and served on the constitutional committee with Barton and the former South Australian Premier Sir John Downer . He organised the " nexus clause " which guaranteed the Senate half as many members as the House of Representatives , arguing that this would act as an incentive to keep parliamentary numbers , and therefore expenditure , comparatively low . 
 O 'Connor resigned from the Legislative Council on 16 July 1898 , in order to contest the lower house seat of Young against the sitting Labour member , Chris Watson . He focused his campaign on Federation issues but was surprised to be easily defeated by 1 @,@ 244 votes to 876 . Financial difficulties necessitated his focus on legal work rather than campaigning during the second Constitution referendum in 1899 , although he still managed to speak most nights . Following the success of Federation , O 'Connor was to be a member of the first Commonwealth ministry , and was instrumental in the affair that became known as the Hopetoun Blunder . Lord Hopetoun , Australia 's first Governor @-@ General , had commissioned Sir William Lyne to form a government , since Lyne was Premier of the largest state , New South Wales . O 'Connor was one of those who refused to serve under Lyne , who had been lukewarm on the issue during the Federation campaigns , and was significant in the negotiations that led to Lyne 's resignation of the commission in Barton 's favour . On 1 January 1901 , O 'Connor was appointed Vice @-@ President of the Executive Council , an honorary post , in Barton 's Cabinet . 
 = = Federal politics = = 
 O 'Connor stood for the Senate at the 1901 federal election in March and was elected in the fourth position , with 40 % of the vote ( electors cast six votes , with the six candidates with the highest totals winning election ) . The only Protectionist Senator from New South Wales , he was appointed Leader of the Government in the Senate , and was instrumental in the evolution of that house as subordinate to the House of Representatives , although he encouraged the introduction of legislation into the Senate . 
 O 'Connor , who had only one ministerial colleague in the upper house , tabled standing orders for the Senate on 10 May 1901 in conjunction with those tabled in the House of Representatives , but the chamber instead adopted a committee to formulate standing orders of its own . He was a vigorous supporter of the White Australia policy , although he also supported voting rights for Aborigines and other " coloured persons who are naturalised subjects " , and supported Dalgety as the site for the national capital . He was also an advocate of proportional representation for the Senate as representative of the " true majority " , and managed to guide the 1902 Customs Tariff Act through the Senate with minimal interference . He worked during this period under great financial difficulty as his position as Vice @-@ President of the Executive Council carried with it no salary beyond that of a Senator , and parliamentary sessions in Melbourne greatly interfered with the running of his Sydney law practice . He had been offered a knighthood by Barton in 1902 but refused , lest he appear as " Sir Richard " before the bankruptcy courts . The number of salaried ministers was capped by the Constitution , but O 'Connor was forced to write to the Attorney General , his friend Alfred Deakin , that he could not continue to work without remuneration . As a result , Deakin arranged for O 'Connor 's ministerial colleagues to each contribute £ 200 a year to a fund for honorary ministers . 
 On 29 July 1903 , O 'Connor introduced legislation for the establishment of a High Court of Australia , describing it as vital in " maintaining the balance of the Constitution " . Attacked as extravagant , the Judiciary Act was nonetheless passed , and O 'Connor resigned his portfolio on 24 September , resigning from the Senate on 27 September . He and Barton , who had likewise resigned , were appointed the first <unk> Justices of the High Court , with Sir Samuel Griffith as Chief Justice . 
 = = High Court justice = = 
 O 'Connor was a liberal justice who saw judges as " not only the interpreters , but also the guardians of the Constitution " , advocating the Court 's primacy over the Privy Council on these matters . He worked well with Griffith and Barton , although he was the most frequent dissenter in their decisions . The Court demanded a high standard of advocacy and acquired a reputation for overturning decisions made by the state supreme courts , and the justices ' travelling expenses were cut by Sir Josiah Symon , Attorney General in the short @-@ lived Reid government , in December 1904 . O 'Connor argued that abolishing <unk> was a more efficient way of dealing with the Court 's increasing expenses and no decision was reached until Isaac Isaacs , taking office with the expansion of the Court in July 1906 , was able to broker a compromise . 
 O 'Connor was appointed the first president of the Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration in February 1905 , a position he accepted with reluctance . He found it difficult to keep up with both positions , despite taking " a good deal of trouble with [ arbitration ] decisions " , and resigned from the Arbitration Court in 1907 . With the appointment of H. B. Higgins to the High Court with Isaacs in 1906 , that body had become far less unanimous , with O 'Connor sometimes agreeing with the two new justices on industrial matters . Assailed by ailing health but forced to continue working since he still lacked a pension , he travelled overseas in 1907 – 08 and 1912 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 O 'Connor , still a sitting justice , died from pernicious anaemia at St Vincent 's Hospital in the suburb of Darlinghurst on 18 November 1912 , aged 61 ; he had suffered from chronic nephritis for some years . He was buried in the Anglican section of Rookwood Cemetery , though with Catholic rites . He was survived by his wife Sarah , who died in 1925 , and by six of his seven children . Of his two daughters , Winifred married Alexander Maclay ( son of the Russian anthropologist and explorer Nicholas <unk> @-@ Maclay ) , and Kathleen married the pianist and composer Roy Agnew . His eldest and youngest sons , Richard and Roderic , were killed at Armentières in 1916 ; the others , Arthur and Desmond , survived . After his death he received tributes from , among others , Barton , who believed " that assiduous toil did much to shorten a life that was most precious " , and Griffith , who described O 'Connor as " absolutely fearless in the performance of his judicial duties " . Billy Hughes , then serving as Attorney General in the Fisher Labor government , recalled that O 'Connor " never exhibited any trace of personal enmity " . The suburb of O 'Connor in Canberra is named in his honour . 
 = Get Up ( Ciara song ) = 
 " Get Up " is a song by American recording artist Ciara . Released on July 25 , 2006 , the song serves as the first single from the original soundtrack to the film Step Up ( 2006 ) , as well as the lead single for her second album , Ciara : The Evolution . It features American rapper Chamillionaire . The song was written by the singer and rapper with her mentor Jazze Pha , who produced the song . The song is a hip @-@ hop number , accompanied by R & B and dance music sounds , while integrating a mild crunk beat . The song received generally positive reviews from music critics , who compared it to her previous work , namely " 1 , 2 Step . " 
 The single received generally positive reviews from music critics with most of them praising the production of the song and the songs genre ; the song was noted for containing " minimalist crunk grind which helped her debut sell three million copies " . Additionally , the song was noted for being one og the highlights of the album being called " catchy , blipping track . " " Get Up " peaked in the top ten in the New Zealand and the United States , becoming her seventh top ten hit . It was later certified gold in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 The song 's accompanying music video , which takes place in a club surrounded by a cityscape , makes use of several visual effects including CGI animation and <unk> strobes . Ciara performed the song a number of times , including at the 2006 Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade , and on the second season of So You Think You Can Dance . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 In an interview with MTV News , Ciara confirmed that she wrote and produced the song with mentor and previous collaborator Jazze Pha , and would be included on the soundtrack to the film , Step Up , starring Channing Tatum and Jenna Dewan . The song was sent for urban airplay on June 26 , 2006 , and mainstream airplay on August 21 . It was released for digital download and vinyl single on July 25 , 2006 . The song was released as a CD single in several international markets on September 11 , 2006 . 
 " Get Up , " described to be in a moderate hip @-@ hop groove , is a R & B song with a length of three minutes and seventeen seconds , with inclinations toward dance @-@ pop . Set in common time , it is written in the key of C minor . Ciara 's vocals span from the low note of E ♭ 3 to C5 It carries a minimalist crunk beat , accompanied by Ciara 's signature " shimmering vocals . " Baz <unk> of Blender noted similarities between the song and " 1 , 2 Step . " Dorian Lynskey of The Guardian said the song " winks " at Kraftwerk 's " Tour de France . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Andy Kellman of Allmusic and Bill Lamb of About.com noted the song as one of the top tracks on Ciara : The Evolution . Jody Rosen of Entertainment Weekly called the song a " catchy , blipping track . " Dan Gennoe of Yahoo ! Music UK said that songs such as " Get Up , " " That 's Right , " and " Like A Boy " " revive the minimalist crunk grind which helped her debut sell three million copies . " Tammy La Gorce , an editorial reviewer for Amazon.com said that the " Chamillionaire @-@ pumped " song was " a play @-@ it @-@ loud club number , full of hip @-@ hop heat . " Although he said the song lacked " emotional impact " and that it " cries out for bass , " Matt Cibula of PopMatters said the track was " bidding far to be the big dance hit from this album , " calling Chamillionaire 's rap " nifty . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 After garnering strong airplay , prior to its release , " Get Up " entered the Billboard Hot 100 at ninety @-@ three . After it was released for digital download , it debuted at number three on the Hot Digital Songs chart , and reached its peak of number seven on the Hot 100 . Later , it also peaked at number seven on the Hot 100 Airplay , and at thirteen on the Pop 100 . The song became Ciara 's fourth top ten hit on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . " Get Up " was later certified Gold in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America , denoting shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies . On the New Zealand Singles Chart , the song entered at number nine and peaked at number five the following week . The week of October 8 , 2006 , " Get Up " opened at number seventeen on the Swiss Singles Chart , where it peaked . The song 's success in Europe resulted in its peak of eighty @-@ six on the European Hot 100 . On the Austrian Singles Chart , it debuted at number seventy @-@ two , later peaking at number fifty @-@ nine during the week of October 20 , 2006 . " Get Up " peaked at number twenty @-@ nine on the German Singles Chart , spending seven weeks on the chart . The song managed to reach number 187 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for the song was filmed on June 30 , 2006 in Los Angeles , California , directed by Joseph Kahn . It features several special effects , which include the effects of macro lenses on real bodies , intermediate CGI bodies , and 2 @-@ D wipes and morphs . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video follows Ciara as she goes clubbing . The clip begins with the singer waking up at midnight , in a black , reflective apartment , as she is dressed in black and proceeds to leave through the building 's fire escape . When she arrives outside , the windows of the building brighten and fade , and the moon , stars , and lamp posts create a strobe effect . White reflectors on the street sweep around Ciara and she is surrounded by dancers , many of whom are from the film , as they ascend a dark staircase and enter the club . When everyone arrives on the roof , Ciara meets up with Chamillionaire for his verse , and thereafter Channing Tatum and Jenna Dewan , the stars of Step Up , make appearances in dance sequences . The lights of the cityscape begin to pulse to the music , and rain falls on the crowd . <unk> strobes are used to highlight the rain . 
 The video ends with the camera pulling out of the sequence , with the flashing lights on the cityscape making up the flashing lights of Ciara 's alarm clock from the beginning of the video . Henry Adaso of About.com gave the video three and a half out of five stars , stating that even though the song was a summer hit , when up against the recently released " Déjà Vu " video , Adaso said , " While Ciara gives Beyoncé a run for her money , the dance moves are unoriginal . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The singer performed the song on several occasions . She performed the song on the second season finale of So You Think You Can Dance . She later appeared on The Ellen DeGeneres Show to perform the song on December 5 , 2006 , as well as the 2006 Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade , the 2006 St. Lucia Jazz Festival , and MTV Goes Gold : New Year 's Eve 2007 . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Ciara Harris – vocals , writer 
 Hakeem <unk> – vocals , writer 
 Phalon Alexander – writer , producer 
 Lesli Brathwaite – mixing 
 Cedric Williams – keyboard 
 Source 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang ( novel ) = 
 Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang ( [ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; translated to English as The Rose of Cikembang ) is a 1927 vernacular Malay @-@ language novel written by Kwee Tek Hoay . The seventeen @-@ chapter book follows a plantation manager , Aij Tjeng , who must leave his beloved njai ( concubine ) Marsiti so that he can be married . Eighteen years later , after Aij Tjeng 's daughter Lily dies , her fiancé Bian Koen discovers that Marsiti had a daughter with Aij Tjeng , Roosminah , who greatly resembles Lily . In the end Bian Koen and Roosminah are married . 
 Inspired by the lyrics to the song " If Those Lips Could Only Speak " and William Shakespeare 's A Midsummer Night 's Dream , Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang was initially written as an outline for the stage drama troupe Union Dalia . Kwee intermixed several languages other than Malay , particularly Dutch , Sundanese , and English ; he included two quotes from English poems and another from an English song . The novel has been interpreted variously as promotion of theosophy , a treatise on the Buddhist concept of reincarnation , a call for education , an ode to njais , and a condemnation of how such women are treated . 
 The novel was initially published as a serial in Kwee 's magazine Panorama ; it proved to be his most popular work . By 1930 there had been a number of stage adaptations , not all of which were authorised , leading Kwee to ask readers to help him enforce his copyright . The work was filmed in 1931 by The Teng Chun and then in 1975 by Fred Young and Rempo Urip . Though not considered part of the Indonesian literary canon , the book ranks amongst the most reprinted works of Chinese Malay literature . It has been translated into Dutch and English . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Oh Aij Tjeng is a young ethnic Chinese man who runs a plantation in West Java . He lives there with his njai ( concubine ) , a Sundanese woman named Marsiti . The two are deeply in love and promise to be faithful forever . However , not long afterwards Aij Tjeng 's father Oh Pin Loh comes to tell Aij Tjeng that he has been betrothed to Gwat Nio , the daughter of the plantation 's owner <unk> Keng Djim . Marsiti is sent away by the elder Oh and , after Aij Tjeng orders his manservant Tirta to find her , Tirta disappears as well . After the marriage , Aij Tjeng finds in Gwat Nio all of the same traits which made him fall in love with Marsiti , but even more polished owing to her better education . He falls in love with her and begins to forget Marsiti , and the couple have a daughter , Lily . 
 One day Keng Djim calls Aij Tjeng and Gwat Nio to his deathbed , where he confesses that he has recently learned that Marsiti was his daughter from a native njai he had taken as a youth , and that Marsiti had died . He greatly regrets that he and Pin Loh had her chased away from the plantation . Keng Djim hints that there is another secret to be shared , but dies before he can reveal it . Aij Tjeng calls for his father , to discover the secret , but finds that he too has died . 
 Eighteen years pass , and Lily is betrothed to a rich Chinese youth named Sim Bian Koen . Lily , although beautiful and talented , is obsessed with death and sadness ; she believes that she is destined to die young . She eventually tells Bian Koen to find another fiancée as she will soon leave him . She falls ill shortly thereafter , and doctors are unable to save her . In the aftermath , Bian Koen considers suicide and Aij Tjeng and Gwat Nio become sick from their despair . 
 By the following year Aij Tjeng and Gwat Nio have mostly recovered , having moved far away and turned to religion . Bian Koen , however , remains suicidal , and intends to go to war in China to find death ; the only thing restraining him is his promise to wait for the anniversary of Lily 's death . One day , as he is passing through the village of Cikembang , he finds a well @-@ kept grave . As he examines the area , he sees a woman who he thinks is Lily . She rejects his embrace and runs away . When Bian Koen chases her , he falls and passes out . 
 When he wakes up at his home , Bian Koen tells his parents that he saw Lily in Cikembang . After investigating , the Sims discover that " Lily " is in fact Aij Tjeng 's daughter with Marsiti , Roosminah , who was raised in secret by Tirta . Because of her beauty , equal to that of Lily in every way , she is known as " The Rose of Cikembang " . The Sims are able to contact Aij Tjeng , and after discovering Roosminah 's background they have Roosminah take over Lily 's identity . Her extravagant wedding with Bian Koen is attended by thousands , including Marsiti 's spirit . 
 Five years later , Bian Koen and Roosminah live with their two children at the plantation Aij Tjeng used to manage . While Aij Tjeng and Gwat Nio are visiting , their granddaughter <unk> ( guided by Marsiti 's spirit ) brings them flowers from a tree Marsiti had planted . The family take it as a sign of her love . 
 = = Writing = = 
 Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang was written by journalist Kwee Tek Hoay . Born to an ethnic Chinese textile merchant and his wife , Kwee had been raised in Chinese culture and educated at schools that focused on preparing students for life in a modern world , as opposed to promoting tradition for its own sake . By the time he wrote the novel , Kwee was an active proponent of Buddhist teachings . He also wrote extensively on themes relating to native Indonesians and was a keen social observer . Kwee read extensively in Dutch , English , and Malay ; he drew on these influences after becoming a writer . His first novel , <unk> Korbannja " Perempoean Hina " ( The Victim of a " <unk> Woman " ) , was published in 1924 . 
 According to his original introduction , Kwee was inspired to write the novel after hearing his daughter singing Charles Ridgewell and Will Godwin 's " If Those Lips Could Only Speak " ( identified by Kwee as " Mimi d 'Amour " ) . He was struck by the melancholic lyrics and decided to write a " sad story or stage play " based on it . However , he did not begin the writing process until February 1927 , when the Union Dalia Opera requested permission to perform his earlier work Allah jang Palsoe ( A False God ; 1919 ) . As he considered the work too difficult for the native troupe , he began writing an original outline for their performance , based on his musings . Union Dalia performed Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang on 5 March 1927 , using an outline Kwee had written ; the novel was not completed until 20 April . During a conversation with fellow writer Khouw Sin Eng , Kwee said that part of the story had been based on William Shakespeare 's A Midsummer Night 's Dream , particularly the appearance of a dead person coming back to life . 
 Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang is divided into seventeen chapters and , in its first printing , was 157 pages in length . As such , it is considerably shorter than some of Kwee 's other works . Translator George A. Fowler writes that , unlike works published by Balai Pustaka , the book did not receive a professional <unk> before publication ; this was common for works of Chinese Malay literature , which " never had , nor indeed wanted , the corrective , prescriptive ' good literary taste ' filter of European editors " . 
 = = Style = = 
 Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang was written in vernacular Malay , as common for works by contemporary Chinese writers in the Dutch East Indies . Indonesian literary critic Jakob Sumardjo writes that Kwee 's use of the language , one common within contemporary society , was more " modern " than most of the more formal Balai Pustaka publications ( perhaps excepting Abdoel <unk> ' Salah Asuhan [ Never the Twain ] , published the following year ) : it remained focused on key events , those required to advance the story as a whole . The book uses non @-@ Malay words commonly : Sumardjo counts 87 Dutch words , 60 from Sundanese , and 14 English ones . 
 During dialogue , diction is dependent on the character 's social background : Sumardjo writes that Marsiti speaks as a poor villager with little education would , and that Aij Tjeng 's father and father @-@ in @-@ law use constructions and give advice only plausible if coming from older people . He finds only one character , the Columbia University @-@ educated Bian Koen , to be unrealistic : Sumardjo criticises Bian Koen 's emotionality , considering it unfitting of an individual with the character 's education and life experiences . In other instances Kwee builds suspense by extended use of ellipses , a form which Sumardjo suggests was inspired by contemporary silat ( traditional martial arts ) stories . 
 As was conventional in contemporary novels such as Marah Roesli 's Sitti Nurbaya ( 1922 ) , Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang integrates poetic verse into its narrative . One example , an original work in Sundanese , is sung by Marsiti after confiding her dream to Aij Tjeng . Two others are quoted from English poems . The first is an untitled work by Irish poet Thomas Moore , beginning with the lines " Go , let me weep " . The second is the epigraph from the novel Hyperion ( 1839 ) by American writer Henry Wadsworth Longfellow . A final piece of verse consists of the lyrics that inspired Kwee to write the novel . Malay @-@ language translations are provided for all English and Sundanese quotations . An example is one of three quatrains sung by Marsiti : 
 = = Themes = = 
 In his foreword , Kwee wrote that Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang was intended to lead readers to consider how fate is often at odds with the wants of those involved . Critical readings have , however , been diverse . The sinologist Myra Sidharta notes that the book is replete with mysticism common at the time , as does another sinologist , John Kwee . The latter cites four examples : a dream of Marsiti 's , later shown to be prophetic , in which she is forcibly separated from Aij Tjeng despite his previous promise that they would never part ; a discussion of reuniting with loved ones after death ; Marsiti 's spirit attending her daughter 's wedding ; and a scene towards the end of the novel in which Marsiti 's spirit guides Roosminah 's daughter to pick flowers for Aij Tjeng and Gwat Nio . Nio Joe Lan , in his history of Chinese Malay literature , notes that Kwee was the only Chinese writer of romances to also write on Eastern ( particularly Chinese ) philosophy . He finds mysticism to be a common theme in Kwee 's works , noting it as particularly well @-@ developed in the later novel <unk> Boenga <unk> ( The Joy of the <unk> Flowers ) . 
 Eric Oey of the University of California , Berkeley , writes that the novel 's mysticism builds into a promotion of theosophy and Buddhist ideals : Aij Tjeng and Gwat Nio read about both , then leave their materialistic lives to become more spiritual . Ultimately , he writes , the concept of reincarnation is put forth when Roosminah is discovered soon after Lily 's death . Faruk of Gadjah Mada University also notes the novel 's concept of reincarnation , drawing on its repeated emphasis on the parallels ( both physical and psychological ) between the half @-@ sisters Marsiti and Gwat Nio , as well as Lily and Roosminah . 
 Sidharta , considering the same interrelations between Marsiti / Gwat Nio , does not suggest reincarnation , instead writing that the novel showed that there is no difference in the love of a njai and a lawfully wedded wife . Translator Maya Sutedja @-@ Liem , in a similar vein , notes a " modern " message against mistreatment of njais . However , she concludes that the emphasis on the mystical powers which Marsiti seems to possess causes an abandonment of realism , thus rendering the book " anti @-@ modern " . 
 Much commentary has focused on the novel 's depiction of njais , a subject common in contemporary Chinese Malay literature . Sumardjo describes the novel as an ode to njais , citing Marsiti 's loyalty to Aij Tjeng and her pureness of purpose ; Marsiti is ultimately recognised for her devotion when her grave in Cikembang is moved to Batavia , with empty spaces on either side for Aij Tjeng and Gwat Nio . Sumardjo finds subtle criticism of the Dutch and Chinese men who kept njais , showing the women as often becoming victims of their lovers . He suggests that this was manifested in the character of Keng Djim 's unnamed njai ( Marsiti 's mother ) , who is banished after rumours spread that she has been unfaithful . Sutedja @-@ Liem likewise emphasises the role of the njai within the story , considering the novel to be an ode to the love and loyalty of the concubines . 
 Sidharta suggests that the novel was written as an argument that the illegitimate children of njais would be able to develop as any other person , given the proper education . Sutedja @-@ Liem likewise finds that the need for education ( including an understanding of music ) is a subtext found in the novel . However , unlike Sidharta she considers this message directed not only at the children of njais , but women in general . Only through receiving an education and following Chinese and European etiquette , she writes , could a woman be considered truly " modern " . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang was originally published in 1927 , as a serial in Kwee 's magazine Panorama , running from March to September . The story was compiled as a book later that year and published by Hoa Siang In Kiok . This print run of 1 @,@ 000 copies , with the slogan " Roh <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> / The soul ripens in tears " on its cover , sold out . However , in the foreword to the second edition Kwee suggested that " writing Malay novels ... was not enough to live on " . 
 The book has since proved to be one of Kwee 's most popular novels , and is one of the most commonly reprinted works of Chinese Malay literature . Its second printing was in 1930 , by Kwee 's publishing house Panorama , with a third printing by Swastika in 1963 ; at the time it was the only work of Chinese Malay literature to have been republished after the Indonesian National Revolution ( 1945 – 49 ) . Sidharta records a fourth printing in 1972 , although she does not note a publisher . A new printing , adapting the 1972 spelling reform , was included in the second volume of Kesastraan Melayu Tionghoa dan Kebangsaan Indonesia , an anthology of Chinese Malay literature . 
 Several translations have been made . In 2007 Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang was translated to Dutch as De <unk> uit Tjikembang by Sutedja @-@ Liem ; this edition was published by <unk> Press as part of the anthology De Njai : Moeder van Alle <unk> : ' De Roos uit Tjikembang ' en <unk> <unk> ( The Njai : Mother of All Peoples : ' De Roos uit Tjikembang ' and Other Stories ) . In 2013 the Lontar Foundation published an English @-@ language translation by Fowler under the title The Rose of Cikembang . This included an introduction to the subject and social conditions , penned by Fowler . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 Stage performances and adaptations of Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang began before the novel was completed , beginning with the Union Dalia performance in 1927 . By 1930 numerous native and ethnic @-@ Chinese troupes had performed the story ; some received direct help from Kwee . Though these stage performances were sometimes credited for the novel 's success , Kwee discounted the idea , writing that the two mediums were different and , in adaptations , changes were necessary . He noted the tendency of native troupes to emphasise Marsiti 's role as one such change and considered most such adaptations – excepting those performed by Dardanella – to be of poor quality . He also found wrote that Native troupes generally did not pay him for the right to use the story , and in the 1930 edition Kwee asked readers to help him enforce his copyright by informing Panorama of any illegal performances . Stage performances have continued into the 2000s . 
 The novel has twice been adapted for film . The first adaptation , released in 1931 , was directed by The Teng Chun . The sinologist Leo Suryadinata lists it as the first domestically produced sound film in the Dutch East Indies , although the film historian Misbach Yusa Biran suggests that there was already a domestic talkie released in 1930 . In 1975 an adaptation was made by Fred Young and Rempo Urip under the title Bunga Roos dari Cikembang . Although the main points of the story remained the same , several of the Chinese names were <unk> . Oh Aij Cheng , for example , was renamed <unk> , while Gwat Nio 's name was changed to <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Modern reviews of the novel have been positive . Nio describes the book as a " beautiful tragic romance " that " enchants the heart . " The Indonesian scholar of Indonesian literature Jakob Sumardjo writes that , though in most of his works Kwee appeared to be strongly impressing his point of view on the reader to the point of " tearing the novels ' structural balance " , this flaw was not present in Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang ; instead , Sumardjo finds it " truly good in its form and technique , though the ideals contained within may not be that significant " . 
 Fowler writes that the love between Aij Tjeng and Marsiti is handled with " unusual delicacy and tenderness " despite the social ostracism faced by njais . In a review of the English edition for The Jakarta Post , <unk> <unk> describes it as " the ultimate weekend read " , " tugging at emotions with the intrigues of love , lies and sacrifice " while at the same time providing an interesting insight into the now @-@ forgotten society in which it takes place . She describes Fowler 's introduction as " worth reading by itself " . 
 As with all works written in vernacular Malay , the novel has not been considered part of the Indonesian literary canon . In his doctoral thesis , J. Francisco B. Benitez posits a socio @-@ political cause for this . The Dutch colonial government used Court Malay as a " language of administration " , a language for everyday dealings , while the Indonesian nationalists appropriated the language to help build a national culture . Chinese Malay literature , written in " low " Malay , was steadily marginalised . Sumardjo , however , sees a question of classification : though vernacular Malay was the lingua franca of the time , it was not Indonesian , and as such , he asks whether works in vernacular Malay should be classified as local literature , Indonesian literature , or simply Chinese Malay literature . 
 = Rex Grossman = 
 Rex Daniel Grossman III ( born August 23 , 1980 ) is an American football quarterback who is currently a free agent . Grossman played college football for the University of Florida . He was selected by the Chicago Bears in the first round of the 2003 NFL Draft , and has also played professionally for the NFL 's Houston Texans and Washington Redskins . 
 As a college quarterback , Grossman led the Florida Gators to the 2000 Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) championship , the 2001 Sugar Bowl , the 2002 Orange Bowl and the 2003 Outback Bowl . He was a consensus first @-@ team All @-@ American and was the runner @-@ up for the Heisman Trophy in 2001 . 
 Grossman spent most of his first three NFL seasons with the Chicago Bears sidelined with injuries . He completed his first full NFL season in 2006 , leading the Bears to a National Football Conference Championship and a Super Bowl berth . He lost his starting job three weeks into the 2007 season , and primarily served as the team 's backup quarterback afterward . He spent a year as a back @-@ up quarterback for the Houston Texans in 2009 , before becoming the Washington Redskins ' starting quarterback in the final three games of 2010 ; and throughout the 2011 season . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Grossman was born in Bloomington , Indiana in 1980 , the son of Rex Daniel Grossman II and Maureen Grossman . Under the motivation and guidance of his father , he began playing football at an early age in grade school . He originally started his football career as a running back . Despite his success running the ball , his mother asked his coach to convert him to a quarterback while he was in the sixth grade . 
 Grossman attended Bloomington High School South , where he played high school football for the Bloomington South Panthers . In three seasons as the Panthers ' quarterback , he threw for <unk> yards and 97 touchdowns . He threw for 3 @,@ 080 yards and forty @-@ four touchdowns as a senior in 1998 , including a game where he threw six touchdowns . His senior season reached its climax when he led the Panthers to a 35 – 14 victory over the Homestead High School Spartans in the Indiana Class 5A state championship game . Grossman completed seventeen of twenty @-@ six pass attempts for 216 yards and five touchdowns , setting an Indiana record for the most touchdowns thrown in a championship game . 
 Grossman was recognized as the 1998 Indiana Player of the Year by USA Today , was ranked among the top fifteen players in the nation by the National Recruiting Advisor , and Parade magazine named him to its high school All @-@ America team . He received statewide honors when he was named Indiana 's Mr. Football later that year . Bloomington High School South retired his jersey in the summer of 2007 to commemorate his success during the Chicago Bears 2006 season . 
 = = College career = = 
 Grossman accepted an athletic scholarship to attend the University of Florida in Gainesville , Florida , where he played for coach Steve Spurrier and coach Ron Zook 's Florida Gators football teams from 1999 to 2002 . 
 After redshirting his freshman year in 1999 , Grossman competed for playing time with returning starter Jesse Palmer and the top high school recruit in the country Brock Berlin , in 2000 . Grossman started his first game as a Florida Gator on October 7 , 2000 against LSU . Grossman had gotten the opportunity to start after completing 13 of 16 pass attempts for 232 yards and two touchdowns against Mississippi State the week before in the Gators ' only SEC conference loss of the season . Grossman solidified his position as Florida 's starting quarterback during the next two games by throwing for over 500 yards , eight touchdowns and no interceptions in lopsided wins over LSU and Auburn . He led the Gators to the SEC championship and was named Most Valuable Player of the SEC Championship Game . For the season , Grossman completed 61 @.@ 8 percent of his passes for 1 @,@ 866 yards , 21 touchdowns , and only seven interceptions . His passer efficiency rating of 161 @.@ 8 was the third best in NCAA Division I football . 
 Grossman passed for over 300 yards in nine consecutive games during his sophomore season in 2001 . He led the nation in passing efficiency , passing completion percentage and yards per attempt . Grossman was recognized as a consensus first @-@ team All @-@ American , was voted the Associated Press Player of the Year , and came in second in the balloting for the 2001 Heisman Trophy in one of the closest Heisman votes in the history of the award . At the time , his 55 touchdown passes through his sophomore season were the most in NCAA history . On October 6 , 2001 Grossman passed for 464 yards and five touchdowns as No. 2 Florida defeated the No. 18 LSU Tigers 44 @-@ 15 . In a 2006 interview with the Chicago Tribune , Grossman cited the victory as his most memorable game as a Gator . He finished second to University of Nebraska quarterback Eric Crouch in one of the closest votes in Heisman Trophy history , losing by only 62 votes . He earned accolades as a consensus first @-@ team All @-@ American , the AP National Player @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Year , and finalist for other awards , including the Walter Camp National Player @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Year Award , the Maxwell College Player @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Year Award , and the Davey O 'Brien National Quarterback @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Year Award . He ended his sophomore season with a 56 – 23 victory over the Maryland Terrapins in the 2002 Orange Bowl . 
 As a junior team captain in 2002 , Grossman led the Gators in the famed " <unk> ' in the Rain " game against the Tennessee Volunteers , in which he threw three touchdowns and 22 completions in 32 attempts en route to a 30 @-@ 13 victory over the Vols . Grossman led the Gators to the 2003 Outback Bowl , where they lost to the Michigan Wolverines 38 – 30 despite his completing 21 of 41 passes for 323 yards and two touchdowns . After the season was over , Grossman decided to forgo his final year of college eligibility and declared for the NFL Draft . 
 In his three @-@ season college career , Grossman threw for 9 @,@ 164 yards and seventy @-@ seven touchdowns . He earned a 146 @.@ 77 passer rating , becoming the third most efficient passer in the Southeastern Conference 's history . He was twice chosen by his teammates as the Gators ' most valuable player , in 2000 and 2001 . In one of a series of articles about the top 100 Gators from the first century of Florida football , The Gainesville Sun recognized Grossman as the No. 10 all @-@ time Gator in 2006 . He was inducted into the University of Florida Athletic Hall of Fame as a " Gator Great " in 2013 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Chicago Bears = = = 
 The Chicago Bears selected Grossman during the first round of the 2003 NFL Draft , and he played for the Bears from 2003 to 2008 . Under the leadership of coach Dick Jauron , Grossman was sidelined as a rookie in favor of veteran quarterbacks Chris Chandler and Kordell Stewart . Grossman only saw playing time during the later portion of the season after the Bears had been eliminated from playoff contention . His season ended when he was forced to leave the final game with a broken finger . Prior to the start of the 2004 NFL season , the Bears fired Jauron and hired Lovie Smith , who declared Grossman the team 's starting quarterback . Grossman was criticized when he threw a game @-@ ending interception against the Detroit Lions on opening day . Criticism of his durability intensified when he damaged his knee ligaments while scrambling for a touchdown against the Minnesota Vikings . The injury forced Grossman to spend the remainder of the season recuperating . 
 Grossman missed most of the 2005 season after breaking his ankle in a preseason game . On December 18 , 2005 , Grossman returned to the field , leading the Bears to a 16 – 3 victory over the Atlanta Falcons . In the following game against the Green Bay Packers , he completed eleven of sixteen passes for 166 yards for a touchdown and one interception in a 24 – 17 victory . Grossman ’ s victory enabled the Bears to clinch a playoff berth and the National Football Conference 's second playoff seed . In his first playoff game , Grossman struggled to anchor the Bears ’ offense , completing 17 of 41 passes for 192 yards for one touchdown and an interception in a 29 – 21 loss against the Carolina Panthers . 
 During the 2006 Chicago Bears season , Grossman became the first Bears quarterback to start all sixteen games since Erik Kramer in 1995 . In a season dubbed as a " roller coaster ride " by Grossman himself , the fourth @-@ year quarterback had several productive performances , which were seemingly diluted by a handful of turnover @-@ ridden games , especially in Week 6 against the Arizona Cardinals , where Grossman fumbled twice and threw four interceptions . While earning a passer rating of at least 100 in seven games , he earned a sub 50 rating in five games during the latter portion of the season . Grossman , who was named as the NFC Offensive Player of the Month in September , concluded the season 's final month with a 64 @.@ 4 passer rating , including a zero rating during the season ’ s finale game against the Packers . Grossman 's work ethic drew criticism , when he admitted that he was not adequately prepared to play , and later claimed the game to be " meaningless . " After noticing that his words had been misinterpreted , he rationalized his statement days later . His inconsistent performance drew criticism , and calls for Smith to bench Grossman in favor of the veteran Brian Griese . 
 Nevertheless , Smith , who supported Grossman throughout the season , declared that Grossman would remain the Bears ’ starting quarterback throughout the playoffs , causing much skepticism within the Chicago area . He temporarily silenced his critics by leading the Bears to a 27 – 24 victory over the Seattle Seahawks , completing 21 of 38 passes for 282 yards and one interception , fumble , and touchdown . The following week , he led the Bears to a 39 – 14 victory over the New Orleans Saints , which allowed the Bears to claim the NFC Championship and advance to Super Bowl XLI . In the Super Bowl , Grossman completed 20 of 28 passes , including a one @-@ yard touchdown pass . However , in this game he threw two interceptions , including one that was returned for a touchdown , and fumbled twice due to miscues between him and center Olin Kreutz . Despite additional criticism from his detractors , Grossman received the Ed Block Courage Award after the season ended . The award is given to one player from every team who exemplifies commitments to the principles of sportsmanship and courage , and is believed to be positive role models to their community . 
 Before the 2007 season , Grossman vowed that he would improve his performance by simply " protecting the ball . " Smith named him as the team ’ s starting quarterback for the 2007 season , despite inconsistent and lackluster play throughout the preseason . Grossman struggled in his first three outings of the season , and committed ten turnovers with a 45 @.@ 2 passer rating . After week three , several news sources reported that Smith demoted him in favor of Brian Griese . The official announcement came the next day , when Smith announced that Griese would start in the team 's next game . On November 11 , 2007 , Grossman reclaimed his first @-@ string role after a shoulder injury sidelined Griese . Though Grossman only played for roughly one half , he led the Bears to a 17 – 6 victory over the Oakland Raiders with a 59 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Bernard Berrian . After reclaiming his starting role , Grossman threw three touchdowns and one interception over the course of three and a half games . He sustained a knee injury during his fifth consecutive start , and was replaced once again by Griese . Grossman was forced to relinquish his starting position to Kyle Orton , who had previously temporarily relieved him after his 2005 preseason injury . 
 Grossman became an unrestricted free agent after the 2007 season , but said he wished to return to the Bears . Bears general manager Jerry Angelo said , " We would like to have Rex back in the mix . " He added that Grossman will face additional competition if he returns , emphasizing the team 's need for a stable passing game . Smith had also voiced similar opinions . Grossman signed a new one @-@ year contract with the Bears on February 23 , 2008 . Under terms of the deal , Grossman had a $ 3 million base salary . The Bears also granted Orton a contract extension and planned to have the two compete for a starting position . On August 18 , 2008 , after two preseason games , Coach Smith named Orton as the team 's starting quarterback for the 2008 season . 
 Grossman remained the team 's back @-@ up quarterback until week nine against the winless Detroit Lions when he was called to replace Orton who left the game due an ankle injury . Grossman completed nine of nineteen passes for 58 yards , including a touchdown and interception . He also scored the game 's winning touchdown on a quarterback sneak . During the course of the game , Grossman was repeatedly jeered by Bears fans . After the game , Brian Urlacher defended Grossman , commenting , " We 've got a quarterback who comes in off the bench and leads us to a victory , and they boo him right out of the gate . Poor guy . Lucky for him he 's resilient and he came back and led us to two scoring drives . But man , it 's tough . " Lovie Smith named Grossman the team 's starting quarterback for the Bears next contest against the Tennessee Titans . Grossman threw one touchdown and interception , and also scored a one @-@ yard rushing touchdown , en route to a 21 – 14 loss . Grossman received his final snaps of the season in the following week , when he was called to relieve Orton in a 37 – 3 loss to the Green Bay Packers . 
 = = = Houston Texans = = = 
 Grossman became a free agent on March 1 , 2009 . Bears Head Coach Lovie Smith said that Grossman was not in the team 's plans for the 2009 season . During the offseason , Grossman worked out with the Cincinnati Bengals in March , but was not offered a contract . <unk> reported that Grossman would be participating in drills in a United Football League " Pro Day " . However , Grossman 's agent , Drew Rosenhaus , denied these claims , stating that " Rex will be playing in the NFL this season . We have not considered any other leagues . He will be on a NFL roster by the start of training camps . " 
 On June 12 , Grossman came to terms with the Houston Texans and signed a one @-@ year contract , worth $ 620 @,@ 000 . Grossman beat out Dan <unk> during the preseason for the backup quarterback position . Grossman only played in a single game during the 2009 season , temporarily relieving Matt Schaub in a 23 – 18 loss to the Jacksonville Jaguars . He threw nine passes for three completions , 33 yards , and one interception . 
 = = = Washington Redskins = = = 
 Grossman signed a one @-@ year contract with the Washington Redskins for the 2010 season on March 17 , 2010 . Grossman made his first appearance for the Redskins against the Detroit Lions on October 31 , 2010 , but he was sacked and lost a fumble on his first play , which was returned by Lions defensive tackle Ndamukong Suh for a touchdown . On December 17 , Redskins coach Mike Shanahan benched Donovan McNabb in favor of Grossman , who had not been a starter since 2008 . The Redskins fell behind the Dallas Cowboys early in the game , but Grossman threw for 322 yards , four touchdowns , and two interceptions to erase a 20 @-@ point deficit . The Cowboys still managed to win the game , 33 – 30 . Grossman won his second start with Washington in a close and important game for the Jaguars in Jacksonville . 
 On August 2 , 2011 , Grossman re @-@ signed with the Redskins . At the end of the 2011 pre @-@ season , after a quarterback battle with John Beck , Grossman was chosen to be the opening day starting quarterback of the Redskins . Grossman started the 2011 season with a win against the New York Giants , completing 21 of 34 attempts while throwing for 305 yards and two touchdowns . Grossman would lead the Redskins to a 3 @-@ 1 start before being benched in a four @-@ interception week 5 performance against the Eagles in favor of Beck . Grossman returned week 10 in a loss to the Dolphins . He led a last @-@ minute touchdown drive the next week to tie Dallas but lost in overtime . He helped the Redskins snap a six @-@ game skid the next week with a 23 @-@ 17 win over the Seattle Seahawks in which he threw 314 yards , two interceptions , and two touchdowns . 
 The Redskins re @-@ signed Grossman to another one @-@ year contract on March 17 , 2012 . The Redskins drafted Robert Griffin III ( second overall ) and Kirk Cousins ( 102nd overall ) in the 2012 NFL Draft . Grossman became the team 's third string quarterback and did not play in a single game for the team in 2012 . 
 On April 3 , 2013 , Grossman signed another one @-@ year contract to stay with the Redskins for 2013 . He remained the team 's third string quarterback and primarily served to advise Griffin and Cousins . 
 = = = Cleveland Browns = = = 
 The Cleveland Browns signed Grossman on August 12 , 2014 and cut him on August 31 . On December 22 , the Browns offered Grossman a one @-@ week $ 53 @,@ 529 NFL veteran league minimum contract after losing Johnny Manziel and Brian Hoyer to injuries . Grossman passed on the offer in order to spend the holidays in Palm Beach with his family . 
 = = = Atlanta Falcons = = = 
 On August 26 , 2015 , Grossman signed a one @-@ year contract with the Atlanta Falcons . The Falcons released him on September 4 . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Grossman 's gunslinger attitude is illustrated in his desire to throw long passes , similar to his youth idol , Brett Favre . During the 2006 season , Grossman had an above average completion rate when throwing passes of twenty or more yards , but struggled to complete shorter passes . According to columnist Paul <unk> of Sporting News , this attitude contributed to Grossman 's inconsistent play . During Week 12 of the 2006 season , Grossman threw a game @-@ ending interception while attempting a deep pass to Rashied Davis . However , during the divisional game in the 2006 playoffs , he threw a 68 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Berrian on the opening play of the Bears ’ second drive . 
 Additionally , Grossman 's ability to elude pursuers and scramble has significantly decreased since his season ending leg injury in 2004 . Although he only played three games in 2004 , Grossman amassed more rushing yards than he did in sixteen games in 2006 . However , he showed his potential to scramble during a game against the St. Louis Rams , after he converted a third and long with a twenty @-@ two yard run . Though the run was the longest of Grossman 's career , it only gave him five net yards for the season at that point . 
 Grossman has also earned several nicknames over the course of his football career . While at the University of Florida , head coach Steve Spurrier dubbed him " Sexy <unk> . " The nickname earned national recognition when teammate Muhsin Muhammad used the nickname while introducing Grossman during a starting line @-@ up segment on Monday Night Football . Grossman was also infamously known as " Rex Glassman " and " Wrecks Grossman " due to his injury @-@ prone years . After the midpoint of the 2006 season , commentators and fans would refer to Grossman as either " Good Rex " or " Bad Rex " depending on how he performed in a game . 
 = = Family and personal life = = 
 Grossman 's family has a long football history . His father and grandfather were football players for Indiana University . His grandfather , Rex , also played for the Baltimore Colts ( 1948 – 1950 ) and Detroit Lions ( 1950 ) , playing in 12 games during his career . He resides in Bloomington , Indiana during the offseason with his wife Alison <unk> , to whom he has been married since July 9 , 2005 . Grossman also has a sister and nephew who live in Lincolnwood , Illinois , and his parents are friends with Archie Manning . 
 Grossman has been a longtime admirer of former Packers , Jets , and Vikings quarterback , Brett Favre and former Bears quarterback Jim Harbaugh . Grossman was also an avid fan of the Indianapolis Colts and Indiana Pacers fan during his childhood . Outside of football , he enjoys playing basketball and watching movies . Additionally , he was a regular guest on FOX News Chicago ’ s The Final Word , a Sunday night sports show that is co @-@ hosted by former Bears wide receiver Tom Waddle . He also appeared on the cover of Sports Illustrated for Kids ' February 2007 issue . The cover featured Grossman with teammates Devin Hester and Tommie Harris posing with bears in a museum exhibit . 
 It was reported that Grossman absorbed a $ 680 @,@ 000 loss on his September 2008 purchase of a 36th floor condo in the Trump International Hotel & Tower Chicago when it sold in January 2010 , losing 25 % of his initial investment . 
 On June 28 , 2007 , Grossman 's hometown of Bloomington , Indiana declared the day " Rex Grossman Day " for his accomplishments in football and the community . For the past four years , Grossman has held a charity golfing event for the Boys and Girls Club of America , raising over $ 100 @,@ 000 for them . 
 = = NFL career statistics = = 
 The following is a list of Grossman 's statistics from his regular and postseason games . Grossman has occasionally recorded notable statistics ; among all quarterbacks during the 2006 season , Grossman ranked tenth in number of pass attempts , seventh in touchdowns thrown , and third in interceptions . He completed his first full season with a 73 @.@ 9 quarterback rating . This was better than quarterback ratings of Favre , Peyton Manning , and Terry Bradshaw during their first full seasons ; many other quarterbacks have performed similarly or better in their first years , including Grossman 's former backup Brian Griese . His twenty @-@ three touchdowns in one season rank Grossman among the best Bears quarterbacks in the franchise ’ s history . However , his twenty interceptions in one season are among the most thrown by any Bears ’ quarterback in almost two decades . The unusual combination ranked Grossman as statistically the most inconsistent quarterback in almost a decade in 2006 . 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 Source , ' Retrieved January 6 , 2010 . 
 = = = Postseason = = = 
 = Fighting in ice hockey = 
 Fighting in ice hockey is an established tradition of the sport in North America , with a long history that involves many levels of amateur and professional play and includes some notable individual fights . Fighting is usually performed by enforcers , or " goons " — players whose role it is to fight and intimidate — on a given team , and is governed by a complex system of unwritten rules that players , coaches , officials , and the media refer to as " the code " . Some fights are spontaneous , while others are premeditated by the participants . While officials tolerate fighting during hockey games , they impose a variety of penalties on players who engage in fights . 
 Unique among North American professional team sports , the National Hockey League ( NHL ) and most minor professional leagues in North America do not eject players outright for fighting ( although they may eject players for more flagrant violations as part of a fight ) but major European and collegiate hockey leagues do , and multi @-@ game suspensions may be added on top of the ejection . Therefore , the vast majority of fights occur in the NHL and other North American professional leagues . 
 Physical play in hockey , consisting of allowed techniques such as checking and prohibited techniques such as elbowing , high @-@ sticking , and cross @-@ checking , is inextricably linked to fighting . Although often a target of criticism , it is a considerable draw for the sport , and some fans attend games primarily to see fights . Those who defend fighting in hockey say that it helps deter other types of rough play , allows teams to protect their star players , and creates a sense of solidarity among teammates . The debate over allowing fighting in ice hockey games is ongoing . Despite its potentially negative consequences , such as heavier enforcers ( or " heavyweights " ) knocking each other out , administrators at the professional level are not considering eliminating fighting from the game , as some players consider it essential . Additionally , the majority of fans , as well as players , oppose eliminating fights from professional hockey games . However , considerable opposition to fighting exists and efforts to eliminate it continue . 
 = = History = = 
 Fighting has been a part of ice hockey since the sport 's rise in popularity in 19th century Canada . There are a number of theories behind the integration of fighting into the game ; the most common of which is that the relative lack of rules in the early history of hockey encouraged physical intimidation and control . Other theories include the poverty and high crime rates of rural Canada in the 19th century . The implementation of some features , such as the blue lines in 1918 , actually encouraged fighting due to the increased level of physical play . Creation of the blue lines allowed forward passing , but only in the neutral zone . Therefore , puck handlers played at close quarters and were subject to a great deal of physical play . The emergence of enforcers , who protected the puck handlers and fought when necessary , followed shortly thereafter . 
 In 1922 , the NHL introduced Rule 56 , which formally regulated fighting , or " fisticuffs " as it was called in the official NHL rulebook . Rather than ejecting players from the game , as was the practice in amateur and collegiate hockey , players would be given a five @-@ minute major penalty . Rule 56 and its language also filtered down to the minor professional and junior leagues in North America . Promoters such as Tex Rickard of Madison Square Garden , who also promoted boxing events , saw financial opportunities in hockey fights and devised marketing campaigns around the rivalries between various team enforcers . 
 In the current NHL rulebook , the archaic reference to " fisticuffs " has been removed ; fighting is now governed under Rule 46 in the NHL rulebook . Referees are given considerable latitude in determining what exactly constitutes a fight and what penalties are applicable to the participants . Significant modifications from the original rule involve penalties which can be assessed to a fight participant deemed to have instigated the fight and additional penalties resulting from instigating a fight while wearing a face @-@ shield . 
 Although fighting was rarer from the 1920s through the 1960s , it was often brutal in nature ; author Ross Bernstein said of the game 's early years that it " was probably more like rugby on skates than it was modern hockey . " Star players were also known to fight for themselves during the Original Six era , when fewer teams existed than in later years . However , as the NHL 's expansion in the late 1960s created more roster spots and spread star players more widely throughout the league , enforcers ( who usually possess limited overall skill sets ) became more common . Multiple fights during the era received significant media attention . In an NHL preseason game between the Bruins and St. Louis Blues in 1969 , Bruins defenceman Ted Green and Blues left wing Wayne Maki , attacking Green , engaged in a bloody stick @-@ swinging fight that resulted in Green sustaining a skull fracture . That year , World Hockey Association Birmingham Bulls enforcer Dave Hanson , known for his 11 @-@ year professional career and role in the movie Slap Shot , fought Hall of Famer Bobby Hull and in the process got Hull 's wig caught in his knuckles . The incident landed Hanson in the news , and irate Winnipeg fans attempted to assault him on his way out of the arena . 
 In addition , the rise of the " Broad Street Bullies " in the 1973 – 74 and 1974 – 75 Philadelphia Flyers served as an example for future NHL enforcers . The average number of fights per game rose above 1 @.@ 0 during the 1980s , rising as high as 1 @.@ 17 in 1983 – 84 . Many teams signed enforcers to protect and fight for smaller offensive stars . By 2009 – 10 , however , the amount of fights in the NHL declined to .58 per game . A further decrease in the frequency of fighting happened over the next five seasons . The 2014 – 15 season had 0 @.@ 32 fights per game , as teams placed a greater emphasis on skating ability and fewer young players became enforcers . 
 Since the 1970s , three rules have curtailed the number and scope of fights in the NHL . In 1971 , the league created the " Third Man In " rule which attempts to eliminate the bench @-@ clearing brawl by providing for the ejection of the first player that joins a fight already in progress . Another rule automatically suspends the first player from each team that leaves the bench to join a fight when it is not their shift . In 1992 , the " Instigator " rule , which adds an additional two @-@ minute minor penalty to the player who starts a fight , was introduced . 
 = = Rules and penalties = = 
 Rules of the NHL , the North American junior leagues , and other North American professional minor leagues punish fighting with a five @-@ minute major penalty . What separates these leagues from other major North American sports leagues is that they do not eject players simply for participating in a fight . However , fighting is frequently punishable by ejection in European leagues , and in Olympic competition . 
 The rulebooks of the NHL and other professional leagues contain specific rules for fighting . These rules state that at the initiation of a fight , both players must drop their sticks so as not to use them as a weapon . Players must also " drop " or shake off their protective gloves in order to fight bare @-@ knuckled , as the hard leather and plastic of hockey gloves would increase the effect of landed blows . Players must also heed a referee warning to end a fight once the opponents have been separated . Failure to adhere to any of these rules results in an immediate game misconduct penalty and the possibility of fines and suspension from future games . In the NHL , when a player is fined , his lost pay goes towards the NHL emergency assistance fund . A fined coach 's lost pay goes to the NHL Foundation . 
 = = = North American professional leagues = = = 
 In the NHL , American Hockey League ( AHL ) , ECHL , Southern Professional Hockey League , and other notable minor leagues , officials punish combatants with five @-@ minute major penalties for fighting ( hence the phrase " five for fighting " ) . A player is automatically ejected and suspended if the player tries to leave the bench to join a fight , or for using weapons of any kind ( such as using a skate to kick an opponent , using a stick to hit an opponent , wrapping tape around one 's hands , or spitting ) , as they can cause serious injury . A player who receives two instigator penalties or participates in three fights in a single game is also ejected automatically . Furthermore , his coach can be suspended up to ten games for allowing players to leave the bench to join a fight . 
 A player who commits three major penalties ( including fighting ) during a game is automatically ejected , suspended , and fined . A player ejected for three major penalties in a game , or for use of weapons , cannot be replaced for five minutes . In 2003 , the ECHL added an ejection , fine , and suspension of an additional game for any player charged as an instigator of a fight during the final five minutes of the third period or any overtime . The NHL and AHL adopted the rule in 2005 – 06 , and the NHL includes a fine against the ejected player 's head coach . 
 = = = Collegiate , European , and Olympic = = = 
 In Division I and Division III National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) hockey , the fighters are given a Game Disqualification , which is an ejection from the game and a suspension for as many games as the player has accrued Game <unk> during the course of a season . For example , if a player engages in a fight having already received a Game Disqualification earlier in the season , he is ejected from that game and suspended for his team 's next two games . This automatic suspension has made fighting in college hockey relatively rare . 
 Fighting is strictly prohibited in European professional hockey leagues and in Olympic ice hockey . The international rules ( by the International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) ) specify in rule 141 – Fighting the following penalties ( among others ) : 
 Match penalty ( the player is ejected from the game and another player serves 5 minutes in addition to any other penalties imposed in the penalty box ) for a player who starts fisticuffs . 
 Minor penalty ( 2 minutes ) for a player who retaliates with a blow or attempted blow . 
 Game misconduct penalty ( ejection from the game ) in addition to any other penalties for any player who is the first to intervene in fisticuffs which are already in progress . 
 Double minor penalty ( 4 minutes ) , major penalty and game misconduct penalty ( 5 minutes and ejection from the game ) , or match penalty ( at the discretion of the referee ) for a player who continues fisticuffs after being told by officials to stop . 
 Misconduct penalty ( 10 minutes ; second misconduct penalty in one game means automatic ejection ) for a player who intentionally takes off his gloves in fisticuffs . 
 Despite the bans , there have been fights in European leagues . In 2001 , a game between the Nottingham Panthers and the Sheffield Steelers in the British Superleague saw " one of the worst scenes of violence seen at a British ice hockey rink " . When Sheffield enforcer Dennis Vial crosschecked Nottingham forward Greg Hadden , Panthers enforcer Barry Nieckar subsequently fought with Vial , which eventually escalated into a 36 @-@ man bench @-@ clearing brawl . Referee Moray Hanson sent both teams to their locker rooms and delayed the game for 45 minutes while tempers cooled and the officials sorted out the penalties . Eight players and both coaches were ejected , and a British record total of 404 penalty minutes were incurred during the second period . The league handed out 30 games in suspensions to four players and Steelers ' coach Mike Blaisdell and a total of £ 8 @,@ 400 in fines . Russia 's Kontinental Hockey League ( KHL ) had a bench @-@ clearing brawl between Vityaz Chekhov and Avangard Omsk in 2010 . Officials were forced to abandon the game as there were only four players left . Thirty @-@ three players and both teams ' coaches were ejected , and a world record total of 707 penalty minutes were incurred during the game . The KHL imposed fines totaling 5 @.@ 7 million rubles ( $ 191 @,@ 000 ) , suspended seven players , and counted the game as a 5 – 0 defeat for both teams , with no points being awarded . 
 = = Enforcers = = 
 The role of " enforcer " on a hockey team is unofficial . Enforcers occasionally play regular shifts like other players , but their primary role is deterring opposing players from rough play . Coaches often send enforcers out when opposing enforcers are on the ice or any time when it is necessary to check excessively physical play by the opposing team . Enforcers , particularly those with questionable playing skills , can be colloquially referred to as goons . 
 = = Causes = = 
 There are many reasons for fights during a hockey game . Some reasons are related to game play , such as retaliation , momentum @-@ building , intimidation , deterrence , attempting to draw " reaction penalties " , and protecting star players . There are also some personal reasons such as retribution for past incidents , bad blood between players , and simple job security for enforcers . Fights often start in response to an opponent 's rough play . 
 = = = Game @-@ related reasons = = = 
 Of the many reasons for fighting , the foremost is retaliation . When players engage in play that members of the opposing team consider unscrupulous , a fight can ensue . The fight may be between the assailant and the victim , between the assailant and an enforcer from the victim 's team , or between opposing enforcers . Fights that occur for retaliation purposes can be in immediate response to an on @-@ ice incident , to incidents from earlier in the game , or to actions from past games . Enforcers who intend to start a fight have to consider their timing due to the Instigator rule . For example , putting the opposing team on a power play due to penalties incurred from fighting is less advisable when the game is close . 
 Enforcers sometimes start fights to build game momentum and provide a psychological advantage over the opposing team . These fights usually involve two enforcers , but may involve any player who is agitating the opposition . This type of fight raises morale on the team of the player who wins , and often gets the home crowd into the game as well . For that reason , it can also be a gamble to start a fight for momentum ; if an enforcer loses the fight , the momentum can swing the wrong way . 
 Intimidation is an important element of a hockey game and some enforcers start fights just to intimidate opposing players in hopes that they will refrain from agitating skilled players . For example , in the late 1950s , Gordie Howe helped establish himself as an enforcer by defeating Lou <unk> , a notable tough guy who tallied over 1 @,@ 200 penalty minutes in his career . <unk> suffered a broken nose from the fight . After that incident , Howe got a lot more space on the ice and was able to score many goals over the span of his career because he intimidated other players . Conversely , games in European professional leagues are known to be less violent than North American games because fighting is discouraged in Europe by ejection and heavy fines . Since the penalties for fighting are so severe , the enforcers are less able to intimidate opposing players with fighting and said players take more liberties on the ice . 
 For teams that face each other frequently , players may fight just to send the message to the opposing players that they will be the target of agitation or aggression in future games . Teams that are losing by a considerable margin often start these fights near the end of the game when they have nothing to lose . Enforcers may start fights with more skilled players to draw what is called a " reaction penalty " , an undisciplined reaction to aggressive play on the part of the enforcer . This practice is also known to be difficult due to the Instigator rule . 
 Another reason is the protection of star players . Fighting within the game can also send a message to players and coaches from other teams that cheap shots , dirty plays , and targeting specific players will not be tolerated and there will be consequences involved . Fighting can provide retribution for a team 's player getting targeted or injured . Overall , fighting is known to be a beneficial policing that the game needs to keep players in line . Over the history of hockey , many enforcers have been signed simply to protect players like Gretzky , who was protected by Dave <unk> , Marty McSorley , and others , and Brett Hull , who was protected by Kelly Chase and others . Many believe that without players protecting each other , referees would affect the game play by having to call more penalties , and the league would have to suspend players for longer periods . 
 = = = Personal reasons = = = 
 Many young enforcers need to establish their role early in their career to avoid losing their jobs . Due to the farm systems that most professional hockey leagues use , enforcers who get a chance to play at the level above their current one ( for example , an American Hockey League player getting a chance to play in an NHL game ) need to show other players , coaches , and fans that they are worthy of the enforcer role on the team . Players and coaches enjoy being with enforcers who fight for their teams , not for themselves . 
 There are also times when players and even entire teams carry on personal rivalries that have little to do with individual games ; fights frequently occur for no other reason . An infamous rivalry that produced many fights was between the Detroit Red Wings and the Colorado Avalanche during the 1990s . 
 = = Effect on game = = 
 Statistics indicate that fights are detrimental to teams ' play , or have inconsequential benefits . Since the 1979 – 80 season , teams in the bottom three of fighting @-@ related major penalties have finished at the top of the regular @-@ season standings 10 times and have won the Stanley Cup 11 times , while teams in the top three have won the regular season and Stanley Cup only twice each . One statistical analysis calculated that winning a fight benefited a team by about 1 / 80th of a win in the standings . Two others showed that fights increase scoring , but does so evenly for both teams so do not significantly affect wins . 
 = = Efforts to ban fighting = = 
 The Canadian Academy of Sport Medicine announced in Position Statement in 1988 that " Fighting does cause injuries , which range from fractures of the hands and face to lacerations and eye injuries . At present , it is an endemic and ritualized blot on the reputation of the North American game . " 
 Criticism often arises after single acts of violence committed during fights . For example , on March 21 , 2007 , Colton Orr of the New York Rangers fought with Todd Fedoruk of the Philadelphia Flyers and ended up knocking Fedoruk unconscious . Fedoruk already had titanium plates in his face from a fight earlier in the season with Derek Boogaard . The resulting media coverage of the incident renewed calls for a fighting ban . Some players acknowledge that there is no harm in discussing the issue ; however , most players and administrators continue to insist that fighting stay as a permanent element of organized ice hockey . Some league administrators , such as former NHL senior vice @-@ president and director of hockey operations Colin Campbell , have been circulating the idea of banning fighting in response to incidents such as the Fedoruk – Orr fight . 
 Sports journalists have articulated the idea with increasing frequency that fighting adds nothing to the sport and should be banned . Among the reasons they cite are that it is unsportsmanlike , is a " knee @-@ jerk " reaction that detracts from the skillful aspects of the game , and that it is simply a waste of time . The Journal of Sport and Social Issues ' Ryan T. <unk> and Oscar E. Palma believe that fighting shows a lack of discipline on the part of participants , as well as a lack of fairness in certain cases , including when fighters have a size disparity . However , supporters of fighting say it provides a means of security for players , that fighting is a tool players use to keep opposing players in check ; essentially allowing players to police which hits and dirty plays are unacceptable . 
 Various politicians and hockey figures have expressed opposition to fighting . In 2012 , David Johnston , the Governor General of Canada , said that fighting should not be part of the sport . IIHF president Rene Fasel has protested against fighting , deeming it " Neanderthal behavior . " Wayne Gretzky , considered by many to be the greatest hockey player of all time , has often spoken out against fisticuffs , although he expressed support for fighting in 2004 . 
 NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman , at a 2007 press conference broadcast on CBC Sports , said , " Fighting has always had a role in the game ... from a player safety standpoint , what happens in fighting is something we need to look at just as we need to look at hits to the head . But we 're not looking to have a debate on whether fighting is good or bad or should be part of the game . " 
 Community members often become involved in the debate over banning fighting . In December 2006 , a school board trustee in London , Ontario attended a London Knights game and was shocked by the fighting and by the crowd 's positive reaction to it . This experience led him to organize an ongoing effort to ban fighting in the Ontario Hockey League , where the Knights compete , by attempting to gain the support of other school boards and by writing letters to OHL administrators . On the advice of its Medical Health Officer , the Middlesex @-@ London Health board has supported recommendations to ban fighting across amateur hockey and to increase disciplinary measures to ensure deterrence . 
 The first known death directly related to a hockey fight occurred when Don Sanderson of the Whitby <unk> , a top @-@ tier senior amateur team in Ontario 's Major League Hockey , died in January 2009 , a month after sustaining a head injury during a fight : Sanderson 's helmet came off during the fight , and when he fell to the ice , he hit his head . His death renewed calls to ban fighting among critics . In reaction , the league has stated that they are reviewing the players ' use of helmets . 
 Fighters such as Bob Probert and Boogaard have been posthumously diagnosed with chronic traumatic encephalopathy , a degenerative disease of the brain caused by repeated brain trauma . While the NHL took steps to limit head trauma from <unk> hits , it was criticized for doing nothing to reduce fighting , which consists of repeated deliberate blows to the head . It is unknown if Boogaard 's death was mainly attributed from his repeated head trauma from fighting and hits or from a possible addiction to painkillers while simultaneously abusing alcohol . His brain has been sent to Boston University for further testing . 
 Beginning in the 2016 – 17 season , the American Hockey League will impose a fighting major counter , similar to the National Basketball Association 's unsportsmanlike technical foul counter and soccer 's accumulated cards . A player who collects ten major penalties for fighting during the season will be suspended one game , and will be suspended one game for each fighting major for the next three penalties ( the 11th , 12th , and 13th fighting majors ) . A player is suspended two games for his 14th and subsequent major penalty for fighting . If one player involved in the fight is charged with an instigator penalty , the opponent will not have the fighting major count towards suspension . 
 = = Etiquette = = 
 There are several informal rules governing fighting in ice hockey that players rarely discuss but take quite seriously . The most important aspect of this etiquette is that opposing enforcers must agree to a fight , usually via a verbal or physical exchange on the ice . This agreement helps both players avoid being given an instigator penalty , and helps keep unwilling participants out of fights . 
 Enforcers typically only fight each other , with only the occasional spontaneous fight breaking out between one or two opponents who do not usually fight . There is a high degree of respect among enforcers as well ; they will respect a rival who declines a fight because he is playing with injuries , a frequent occurrence , because enforcers consider winning a fight with an injured opponent to be an empty victory . This is also known as granting a " free pass " . Enforcer Darren McCarty described fighters as being divided into " heavyweights " and " light heavyweights " , and said that players in the former category " end up dancing with some guys who could end ( their ) career with a single punch . " 
 Long @-@ standing rivalries result in numerous rematches , especially if one of the enforcers has to decline an invitation to fight during a given game . This is one of the reasons that enforcers may fight at the beginning of a game , when nothing obvious has happened to agitate the opponents . On the other hand , it is bad etiquette to try to initiate a fight with an enforcer who is near the end of his shift , since the more rested player will have an obvious advantage . 
 Another important aspect of etiquette is simply fighting fairly and cleanly . Fairness is maintained by not wearing equipment that could injure the opposing fighter , such as face shields , gloves , or masks , and not assaulting referees or linesmen . Finally , whatever the outcome of the fight , etiquette dictates that players who choose to fight win and lose those fights gracefully . Otherwise , they risk losing the respect of their teammates and fans . 
 = = Tactics = = 
 Fighting tactics are governed by several actual rules and enforcers will also adopt informal tactics particular to their style and personality . One tactic adopted by players is known as " going for it " , in which the player puts his head down and just throws as many punches as he can , as fast as he can . In the process , that player takes as many punches as he delivers , although some of them are to the hard forehead . Fighters usually must keep one hand on their opponent 's jersey since the ice surface makes maintaining balance very difficult . For this reason , the majority of a hockey fight consists of the players holding on with one hand and punching with the other . 
 Other examples include Gordie Howe 's tactic of holding the sweater of his opponent right around the armpit of his preferred punching arm so as to impede his movement . Probert , of the Detroit Red Wings and Chicago Blackhawks , was known to allow his opponents to punch until they showed signs of tiring , at which time he would take over and usually dominate the fight . Some consider long @-@ time Buffalo Sabres enforcer Rob Ray to be the reason that hockey jerseys are now equipped with tie @-@ down straps ( " fight straps " ) that prevent their removal ; he would always remove his jersey during fights so his opponents would have nothing to grab on to . This is commonly referred to as the " Rob Ray Rule " . 
 = = Officials ' role = = 
 Throughout a game , the referee and linesmen have a role in preventing fights through the way they are managing the game — calling penalties , breaking up scuffles before they escalate , etc . Despite an official 's best efforts , though , fights do occur and once they do , the referee and linesmen have a certain set of responsibilities to follow in order to safely break up the fight . None of these responsibilities are written in the NHL 's rule book , but often are guided by " common sense " , according to officials . 
 In a single fight situation the linesmen will communicate with each other as to which player they will take during the fight , clear out any sticks , gloves , or other equipment that has been dropped and wait for a safe time to enter the fight , which they will do together . If both players are still standing while the linesmen enter , the linesmen will approach from each side ( never from behind ) , bring their arms over the combatants ' arms and wrap them around , pushing downwards and breaking the players apart . If the players have fallen , the linesmen will approach from the side ( never over the skates ) , getting in between the two players . One linesman will use his body to shield the player on the bottom from the other player while his partner will remove the top player from the fight . Most linesmen will allow a fight to run its course for their own safety , but will enter a fight regardless if one player has gained a significant advantage over his opponent . Once the players have been broken up , the linesmen then escort the players off the ice . During this time the referee will keep other players from entering the fight by sending them to a neutral area on the ice and then watching the fight and assessing any other penalties that occur . 
 In a multiple fight situation the linesmen will normally break up fights together , one fight at a time using the same procedures for a single fight . The linesmen will communicate with each other which fight to break up . In a multiple fight situation the referee will stand in an area of the ice where he / she can have a full view of all the players and will write down — on a pad of paper commonly known as a " riot pad " — the numbers of the players that are involved in the fights , watching for situations that warrant additional penalties , such as players removing opponents ' helmets , players participating in a second fight , players leaving a bench to participate in a fight , or third players into a fight . The referee will not normally break up a fight unless the linesmen need assistance , or a fight is occurring where a player has gained a significant advantage over the other player , leading to concerns of significant injury . 
 = = Notable fights and brawls = = 
 Some fights have attracted significant media attention due to injuries sustained by one or both participants and other factors . 
 On December 23 , 1979 , at the end of a 4 – 3 Boston Bruins victory over the New York Rangers , an altercation led to most of the Bruins scaling the plexiglass and fighting several fans at Madison Square Garden . Terry O 'Reilly , Mike Milbury , and Peter McNab were fined and suspended several games . The incident led to higher plexiglass in the arena , and has entered sports lore . 
 April 20 , 1984 – A bench @-@ clearing brawl broke out at the end of the second period of a second @-@ round playoff matchup between the Quebec Nordiques and the Montreal Canadiens . A second bench @-@ clearing brawl erupted before the third period began , provoked by the announcement of penalties ; a total of 252 penalty minutes were incurred and 11 players were ejected . This game is commonly referred to as the Good Friday Massacre . 
 January 4 , 1987 – The Punch @-@ up in Piestany : A World Junior Ice Hockey Championships game between Canada and the Soviet Union was the scene of a bench @-@ clearing brawl that lasted 20 minutes and prompted officials to turn off the arena lights in an attempt to stop it , forcing the IIHF to declare the game null and void . The fighting was particularly dangerous as fighting was a surprise and a custom unknown to the Soviet players , some of whom escalated the fighting beyond what was considered acceptable in North America . Both teams were ejected from the tournament , costing Canada an assured medal , and the Soviet team was barred from the end @-@ of @-@ tournament dinner . A book by Gare Joyce was written regarding the event . 
 March 26 , 1997 , Brawl in Hockeytown – The Avalanche and the Red Wings engaged in nine fights , including bouts between Darren McCarty and Claude Lemieux and goalies Patrick Roy and Mike Vernon . 
 April 1 , 1998 – A game between the Avalanche and Red Wings involved a fight between goaltenders Chris Osgood and Roy in which both goaltenders received minor , major , and game misconduct penalties . 
 March 5 , 2004 – A Philadelphia Flyers – Ottawa Senators game resulted in five consecutive brawls in the closing minutes of the game , including fights between many players who are not known as enforcers and a fight between Flyers goalie Robert Esche and Senators goalie Patrick Lalime . The game ended with an NHL record 419 penalty minutes , and an NHL record 20 players were ejected , leaving five players on the team benches . The officials took 90 minutes to sort out the penalties that each team had received . 
 January 18 , 2014 – A game between the Vancouver Canucks and the Calgary Flames erupted into a line brawl from the opening face @-@ off . Vancouver had just returned from a one @-@ goal , no @-@ win road trip . Calgary then inflamed the Canucks further by starting with their fourth line . Vancouver line @-@ matched , and Calgary instigated the fight . Significant penalties and more than a few ejections were assessed , but since the incident did not involve the goalies or the star players , play eventually resumed although sporadic fights erupted throughout the game . 
 April 18 , 2015 – The Flames and Canucks engaged in another line brawl , this time near the end of the third period of Game 2 of their Western Conference quarterfinal series . 
 October 7 , 2015 – Yet another Canucks – Flames incident saw opposing enforcers Derek Dorsett ( Canucks ) and Micheal Ferland ( Flames ) fight immediately after the opening face @-@ off of the season . Eight minutes after play resumed , the Flames ' Brandon <unk> and Canucks ' Brandon Prust squared off . 
 January 2 , 2016 – During an ECHL game between the Tulsa Oilers and the Rapid City Rush , two consecutive brawls broke out in the final seconds of the game . The first brawl occurred with 27 seconds left in the third period , and resulted in significant penalties and some ejections as players on both teams attempted to leave their benches to join an altercation . However , once the third period expired , a more violent brawl erupted between the two teams , as more players fought each other on the ice for more than three minutes . In all , 216 penalty minutes were assessed ( 132 of them for the brawl that occurred following the game ) , and a total of eight players from both teams were ejected . The day after the game , the league suspended five players for a combined total of 22 games and fined both organizations for their roles in the brawl . 
 = Lost operas by Claudio Monteverdi = 
 The Italian composer Claudio Monteverdi ( 1567 – 1643 ) , in addition to a large output of church music and madrigals , wrote prolifically for the stage . His theatrical works were written between 1604 and 1643 and included ten operas , of which three — L 'Orfeo ( 1607 ) , Il ritorno d 'Ulisse in patria ( 1640 ) and L 'incoronazione di Poppea ( 1643 ) — have survived with their music and librettos intact . In the case of the other seven operas , the music has disappeared almost entirely , although some of the librettos exist . The loss of these works , written during a critical period of early opera history , has been much regretted by commentators and musicologists . 
 Opera , as a musical and theatrical genre , began to emerge during the early part of Monteverdi 's career , initially as a form of courtly entertainment . With other composers he played a leading part in its development into the main form of public musical theatre . His first opera , L 'Orfeo , written in 1607 for the Mantuan court , which employed him , was a great success . In the years that followed , at Mantua and in his later capacity as maestro di capella ( director of music ) at St Mark 's Basilica in Venice , Monteverdi continued to write theatrical music in various genres , including operas , dances , and intermedi ( short musical interludes inserted into straight plays ) . Because in Monteverdi 's times stage music was rarely thought to have much utility after its initial performance , much of this music vanished shortly after its creation . 
 Most of the available information relating to the seven lost operas has been deduced from contemporary documents , including the many letters that Monteverdi wrote . These papers provide irrefutable evidence that four of these works — L 'Arianna , Andromeda , Proserpina rapita and Le nozze d 'Enea con Lavinia — were completed and performed in Monteverdi 's lifetime , but of their music , only the famous lament from L 'Arianna and a trio from Proserpina are known to have survived . The other three lost operas — Le nozze di Tetide , La finta pazza Licori and Armida abbandonata — were abandoned by Monteverdi before completion ; how much of their music was actually written is unknown . 
 = = Background = = 
 Monteverdi 's creative life covered more than 50 years . Between 1590 and 1612 he served as a musician in the Gonzaga court in Mantua , followed by 30 years ( 1613 – 43 ) as maestro di capella at St Mark 's Basilica in Venice . This timespan saw opera develop , from its beginnings as a limited form of court entertainment , to become part of the mainstream of public musical theatre . Before the Italian word " opera " — short for opera in musica ( " musical work " ) — came into general use around 1634 , musical stage works were typically termed favola in musica ( musical fable ) , <unk> in musica ( musical drama ) , or tragedia in musica ( " musical tragedy " ) ; Monteverdi used these and similar descriptions for many of his early operatic projects . 
 The first work now generally considered as an opera is Jacopo Peri 's Dafne of 1597 , closely followed by Euridice ( 1600 ) , for which Peri and Giulio Caccini wrote separate musical settings . Ottavio Rinuccini was the librettist for both Dafne and Euridice . In the new genre a complete story was told through characters , and in addition to choruses and ensembles the vocal parts included recitative , aria and arioso . This was a development from various older forms of musical theatre that had existed since the earliest years of the Italian Renaissance ; such forms included the maschera ( " masque " ) , the ballo ( a dance entertainment , often with sung passages ) , and particularly the intermedio or intermezzo , a short dramatic musical episode inserted as a prologue or entr 'acte between the acts of straight plays . Another format in the later renaissance period was the torneo , or " tournament " , a stylised dramatic spectacle in which the main singing was performed by a narrator . Sub @-@ operatic forms of dramatic music continued to thrive as opera itself developed ; the blurred boundaries that existed for many years between these forms and " opera " has led to debate about how to categorise some works . For example , the precise genre of Monteverdi 's Il combattimento di Tancredi e Clorinda ( 1624 ) has proved particularly difficult to define . 
 Monteverdi 's first acknowledged opera is L 'Orfeo ( 1607 ) . He composed , in all , 24 works for the stage . Of these , 10 are usually classified as operas , of which the music for 7 has been lost apart from a few fragments . Most of what is known about the missing works comes from surviving librettos and other documentation , including Monteverdi 's own extensive correspondence . Tim Carter , a leading Monteverdi scholar , suggests that the high rate of loss is explicable because , in Monteverdi 's times , " memories were short and large @-@ scale musical works often had limited currency beyond their immediate circumstances " . 
 = = For Mantua = = 
 Monteverdi wrote six acknowledged operas for the Mantua court , of which only L 'Orfeo survives with libretto and music intact . Four of the five lost Mantuan works were written after the composer had left the service of the <unk> in 1612 and was ensconced in Venice , but still retained contacts with Mantua . L 'Arianna and Andromeda were completed and performed ; the others were all abandoned incomplete . 
 = = = L 'Arianna ( 1607 – 08 ) = = = 
 ( English : " Ariadne " ) 
 L 'Arianna was composed as a festive piece for the wedding of the heir to the duchy , Francesco Gonzaga , to Margherita of Savoy , in May 1608 . Monteverdi received the commission following L 'Orfeo 's successful premiere at the court in February 1607 . The libretto for L 'Arianna was by Rinuccini , whose literary skills had earlier impressed Duke Vincenzo I of Mantua after a performance of Euridice . The composition of L 'Arianna became a fraught affair for Monteverdi , being only one of three works that the duke required from him for the wedding — he had also to compose a musical prologue for Giovanni Battista Guarini 's play L <unk> , and write the music for a dramatic dance , Il ballo delle ingrate . His life had been disrupted by the fatal illness of his wife Claudia ; she died on 10 September 1607 , but Monteverdi was given no respite by the duke . L 'Arianna was largely composed in the last two months of 1607 , an exertion that Monteverdi 's biographer Hans Redlich describes as " superhuman " . Monteverdi felt slighted by the lack of acknowledgement from the duke for his efforts ; nearly 20 years later , in a letter to the Mantua court secretary Alessandro Striggio , he wrote that he had almost killed himself when writing L 'Arianna in such a hurry . 
 Rinuccini used numerous classical sources as the basis for his libretto , in particular works of Ovid — the Heroides and the Metamorphoses — and poems from Catullus . After a prologue , the main action begins as Venus tells Cupid that Ariadne and her lover Theseus , fleeing from Crete after his slaying of the Minotaur , will shortly arrive in Naxos . Theseus , she reports , will then abandon Ariadne , as he believes her to be unacceptable to the people of Athens as their queen . Venus plans to match her instead with the god Bacchus , and asks Cupid to arrange this . Theseus and Arianna arrive ; Theseus <unk> over his decision to abandon her , but is advised by his counsellor that he is wise in his resolve , and departs . In the morning Ariadne , finding herself abandoned , searches vainly for Theseus on the shore , where she sings her lament . A fanfare indicates an imminent arrival ; Ariadne hopes this is Theseus returning , but it is Bacchus and his entourage . Jupiter speaks from the heavens , and amid festive scenes Bacchus promises Ariadne immortality with the gods in return for her love . 
 Rinuccini extended the libretto during the rehearsals , after complaints from the duchess that the piece was " too dry " ; as a result the early scene between Venus and Cupid , and Jupiter 's blessing from heaven , were added . Preparations for the opera 's performance were disrupted when , in March 1608 , the leading soprano Caterina Martinelli died of smallpox . A replacement had to be found rapidly , and the title role fell to Virginia <unk> , a renowned actress @-@ singer who used the stage name " La Florinda " ; she reportedly learned the part in only six days . In his analysis of Monteverdi 's theatrical works , Carter suggests that the lament may have been added to the work to make the most of Andreini 's acting and vocal abilities . The premiere , on 28 May 1608 , was staged in a specially erected temporary theatre , which according to contemporary reports could hold an audience of several thousands . The production was lavish ; apparently 300 men were required to manipulate the stage machinery . Federico Follino , who prepared the Mantuan court 's official report on the occasion , praised the beauty of the work , the magnificence of costumes and machinery , and the sweetness of the music . Monteverdi 's fellow @-@ composer Marco da Gagliano was equally complimentary , writing that the opera had " visibly moved the entire audience to tears . " It is possible that L 'Arianna was performed in Florence in 1614 ; a projected performance in Mantua in May 1620 to celebrate Duchess Caterina 's birthday was cancelled for unknown reasons . Otherwise , there are no records of the opera 's performance before its revival in 1640 at the Teatro San Moisè , Venice . In his study of late renaissance opera , Gary Tomlinson surmises that the work 's enthusiastic reception in Venice was a significant factor in Monteverdi 's decision to resume opera composition during his final years . 
 Of the music , only the lament survives . It was published independently from the opera in various forms ; an adaptation for five voices was included in Monteverdi 's Sixth Book of Madrigals in 1614 , and two versions of the original solo were published in 1623 . Other composers emulated the lament 's format ; Redlich asserts that it initiated a musical subgenre that lasted to the end of the 17th century and beyond . The libretto has been preserved ; versions were published in Mantua in 1608 , and in Venice in 1622 and 1639 . 
 = = = Le nozze di Tetide ( 1616 – 17 ) = = = 
 ( English : " The Marriage of Thetis " ) 
 After Duke Vincenzo 's death in February 1612 , Monteverdi found himself out of favour at the Mantuan court . Vincenzo 's successor Francesco had no high regard for Monteverdi , and dismissed him from his post . Upon Francesco 's sudden death in December 1612 , the dukedom passed to his brother Ferdinando , but Monteverdi was not recalled to the court and was appointed maestro di capella in August 1613 at St Mark 's , Venice . However , he remained in contact with Striggio and other highly placed Gonzaga courtiers , through whom he was able to secure occasional commissions to compose theatrical works for the Gonzaga court . Thus , late in 1616 , Striggio asked him to set to music Scipione Agnelli 's libretto Le nozze di Tetide , as part of the celebrations for Duke Ferdinando 's forthcoming marriage to Catherine de ' Medici . This story , based on the wedding of the mythical Greek hero Peleus to the sea @-@ goddess Thetis , had previously been offered to the Mantuan court by Peri , whose setting of a libretto by Francesco Cini had been rejected in 1608 in favour of L 'Arianna . 
 Initially , Monteverdi had little enthusiasm for Le nozze di Tetide , and sought ways of avoiding or delaying work on it . He would accept the commission , he informed Striggio on 9 December 1616 , because it was the wish of his feudal lord the duke . However , the verses he was given were not , he felt , conducive to beautiful music . He found the tale difficult to understand , and did not think he could be inspired by it . In any event he was occupied for most of December in writing a Christmas Eve mass for St Mark 's . On 29 December , perhaps hoping that the commission would be withdrawn , Monteverdi told Striggio that he was ready to begin work on Le <unk> di Tetide " if you tell me to do so " . In January 1617 , however , he became more enthusiastic on learning that the project had been scaled down and was now being projected as a series of intermedi . He informed Striggio that what he had first considered a rather monotonous piece he now thought fully appropriate to the occasion . He began work on the recitative sections , but before he could start setting the more expressive numbers , the duke had a change of heart and cancelled Monteverdi 's commission . Le nozze di Tetide was abandoned ; its libretto and whatever music existed have disappeared . 
 = = = Andromeda ( 1618 – 20 ) = = = 
 Monteverdi 's next commission from Mantua came early in 1618 , when he was asked to provide the music for Andromeda , an opera based on the ancient Greek myth of the princess chained to a rock . The libretto was written by Duke Ferdinando 's chancellor , Ercole Marigliani , and the project was sponsored by the duke 's younger brother , Don Vincenzo Gonzaga . It is probable that the work was intended for performance at the Mantua Carnival of March 1618 , but as Carter records , Monteverdi 's approach to his Mantua commissions was often dilatory and half @-@ hearted ; his inability or unwillingness to work on Andromeda delayed its performance , first to 1619 and then to 1620 . 
 Monteverdi 's letters during the 1618 – 20 period , mainly to Striggio but occasionally to Don Vincenzo or Marigliani , offer various excuses for his lack of progress on Andromeda , including his duties at St Mark 's , his health , and his obligations to provide ceremonial music for the Doge ( ruler ) of Venice . In February 1619 , Monteverdi had started work on another Mantuan project , a ballo ( dance with sung parts ) to Striggio 's libretto entitled Apollo . On 9 January 1620 , still with 400 lines of the Andromeda libretto to set to music , Monteverdi proposed to Striggio that the entire opera project be abandoned and the ballo substituted . This idea was rapidly quashed ; Don Vincenzo ordered that the remaining Andromeda music be sent to him forthwith . The final segment of Andromeda , an eight @-@ part song , was delivered to Marigliani on 15 February 1620 . 
 None of Monteverdi 's music for Andromeda has survived . The libretto was also thought to have been lost , until its rediscovery in 1984 . As was customary in Monteverdi 's time , the manuscript makes no mention of the composer 's name — librettos were often the subject of numerous settings by different composers . The libretto 's frontispiece confirms that Andromeda was performed during Mantua 's Carnival , 1 – 3 March 1620 . An analysis of its contents reveals some influence from Rinuccini 's libretto for Arianna , such as use of identical metre and length in the prologues of each work , and several common characters in the respective cast lists . The document remains in private hands and has not been published . 
 Monteverdi recorded no apparent interest in the performance of Andromeda after the 1620 Carnival ; the long letter that he wrote to Striggio on 13 March 1620 makes no reference to the event and is chiefly concerned with financial matters . The letter implies that the Gonzaga court was trying to persuade Monteverdi to return to Mantua ; in courtly language Monteverdi evades the issue , while comparing the relative generosity of his Venetian employers with the parsimony of the Gonzaga court . 
 = = = Two abortive projects ( 1627 – 28 ) = = = 
 After Andromeda there followed a period of several years in which Mantua made little use of Monteverdi 's services . Duke Ferdinando died on 26 October 1626 and was succeeded by Don Vincenzo , who became Duke Vincenzo II . Early in 1627 Striggio approached Monteverdi with a request for theatrical music , possibly for the festivities that would celebrate Vincenzo 's accession . Monteverdi replied offering three options : first , Il combattimento di Tancredi e Clorinda ( " The Battle of Tancred and Clorinda " ) , a setting from Torquato Tasso 's epic poem Gerusalemme liberata ( " Jerusalem Delivered " ) , which had been performed at the 1624 Venice Carnival ; secondly , a setting from another part of Tasso 's poem , covering the story of the sorceress Armida and her abandonment by the Christian hero Rinaldo ; finally , he offered to set the words of a new play by Giulio Strozzi , Licori finta pazza <unk> d <unk> , about a woman who feigns madness for the sake of love . Monteverdi sent Striggio a copy of Strozzi 's play on 7 May 1627 ; Striggio liked it and instructed Monteverdi to begin the music . 
 = = = = La finta pazza Licori = = = = 
 ( English : " The feigned madwoman Licori " ) 
 Strozzi was a Venetian , born in 1583 , whose literary works included plays and poetry as well as opera libretti ; Monteverdi had first met him in 1621 . Strozzi knew Monteverdi 's music , and had developed a strong appreciation of the composer 's innovative style . On 20 June 1627 , Monteverdi informed Striggio that Strozzi had expanded and arranged the text into five acts , under the new title La finta pazza Licori . <unk> madness was a standard theme in the commedia dell 'arte tradition that had established itself in Italian theatre in the 16th century . In Strozzi 's plot , the first known attempt at comic opera , the woman Licori disguises herself initially as a man , then as a woman , and then pretends to be mad , all as part of a strategy to win the heart of her lover , <unk> . 
 Monteverdi was , at least initially , much taken with the potential of the plot , and the opportunities the libretto provided for a variety of musical effects . Monteverdi stressed to Striggio the importance of finding a singer with real acting ability to play the role of Licori , someone capable of playing a man and a woman with appropriate emotions and gestures . Later he enthused about the chance to write a ballet for each of the five acts , all in different styles . Monteverdi 's letters continued throughout the summer , but his attitude slowly changed , from one of evident commitment to frustration at the delays in getting the libretto copied . The musicologist Gary Tomlinson , in his analysis of the opera 's genesis , suggests that Monteverdi may have been stalling . In September Striggio , having received , read and presumably not liked the expanded libretto , abruptly cancelled the commission and the work is heard of no more . Monteverdi was told instead to work on the Armida setting . 
 For many years it was assumed that Monteverdi had written much of the music for Licori before its sudden cancellation ; Redlich says the music was finished by 10 September 1627 . The work 's rejection and subsequent disappearance have been blamed on Striggio 's disregard for Monteverdi 's efforts . However , Tomlinson 's reading of the correspondence suggests a different conclusion : Monteverdi , in his view , " did not even come close to completing the score " and may have written very little of the music . It is likely that he stopped composing at the end of July , having become suspicious of Striggio 's true commitment to the work . Tomlinson suggests that , mindful of Mantua 's earlier cancellation of Le nozze di Tetide , Monteverdi avoided extending himself on the new project , while maintaining a diplomatic impression of activity . Tomlinson writes : " [ I ] t would hardly be surprising if Monteverdi were preternaturally sensitive to signs of Mantuan vacillation [ and ] if , at the first such signs in 1627 , he decided to move cautiously in the composition of Licori . " Strozzi 's libretto has vanished along with whatever music Monteverdi managed to write , but Strozzi wrote a second libretto under the same name , which was set by Francesco Sacrati and produced in Venice in 1641 . 
 = = = = Armida abbandonata = = = = 
 ( English : " Armida abandoned " ) 
 After the rejection of Licori , Monteverdi did not immediately turn his attention to Armida . Instead , he went to Parma , having been commissioned to provide musical entertainments for the marriage celebrations of the youthful Duke <unk> Farnese of Parma and Margherita de ' Medici . He spent several weeks in Parma working on these ; nevertheless , on 18 December 1627 he was able to tell Striggio that the music for Armida had been completed and was being copied . In the relevant section of Tasso 's poem , the enchantress Armida lures the noble Rinaldo to her enchanted island . Two knights arrive to persuade Rinaldo to return to his duty , while Armida pleads with him to stay , or if he must depart , to allow her to be at his side in battle . When he refuses and abandons her , Armida curses him before falling insensible . 
 Carter indicates several structural similarities to Il combattimento ; both works require three voices , one of which acts as a narrator . Despite these similarities , Armida abbandonata , unlike the earlier work , is generally considered by scholars of Monteverdi to be an opera , although Denis Stevens , translator of Monteverdi 's letters , has termed it a " <unk> " ( subsidiary work ) to Il <unk> . 
 Plans for Armida 's performance were , however , cancelled when Duke Vincenzo died at the end of December 1627 . On 4 February 1628 , Striggio was still asking for a copy of Armida , perhaps to use in connection with the next duke 's coronation . Monteverdi promised to send him one , but there is no confirmation that he did so . No trace of the music has been found , though Tomlinson has deduced some of its likely characteristics from Monteverdi 's correspondence , including extensive use of the stile concitato effect . Although there is no record that Armida was ever performed in Mantua , Stevens has mooted the possibility that it may have been staged in Venice in 1628 , since Monteverdi 's reply to Striggio 's February letter indicates that the work was in the hands of Girolamo Mocenigo , a wealthy patron of the arts at whose Venetian palace Il combattimento had been performed in 1624 . 
 Licori and Armida were Monteverdi 's final theatrical works for the Mantuan court . Vincenzo II 's death ended the main Gonzaga line ; the dukedom was inherited by a distant relative , Charles of Nevers , and Mantua was subsequently engulfed in a series of conflicts , which by 1630 had reduced much of the city to ruins . Monteverdi 's last known letter to Striggio is dated 8 July 1628 ; Striggio died in Venice on 8 June 1630 , while heading a mission requesting aid against the armies that were encircling Mantua . 
 = = For Venice = = 
 Between 1630 and 1643 Monteverdi wrote four operas for performance in Venice . All were staged in Monteverdi 's lifetime , but only Il ritorno d 'Ulisse in patria and L 'incoronazione di Poppea survive . 
 = = = Proserpina rapita ( 1630 ) = = = 
 ( English : " The Rape of Proserpine " ) 
 Proserpina rapita was the first of the theatrical works that Monteverdi wrote specifically for Venice , under a commission from Mocenigo for his daughter <unk> 's wedding celebrations . The libretto , by Strozzi , is based on the ancient Greek myth of Pluto and Proserpine . Symbolic rape was a common theme in wedding entertainments designed for Italian courts , intended in Carter 's words " both to proclaim the power of love and to set proper bounds on female behaviour " . 
 In Strozzi 's version of the story , an amorous shepherd Pachino invokes the aid of Pluto , ruler of the underworld , to cure his unrequited obsession with Proserpine . Pluto obliges by turning Pachino into a mountain , though promising his soul a place in Elysium . After being struck by a love @-@ dart fired by Cupid , Pluto falls for Proserpine and claims her as his queen . Initially she resists him , but when <unk> her protector is turned by Pluto into a spring of water , she is overcome . <unk> , she vows obedience ; the strength of her beauty is such that Pluto softens , and pledges that in future he will treat lovers less harshly . 
 The libretto was published in 1630 , in Venice , by Evangelista <unk> . Surviving copies indicate that the original scenery was created by Giuseppe <unk> , and that dances were arranged by Girolamo Scolari . The opera was staged on 16 April 1630 , in a salon of the Mocenigo palace . Carter is sceptical that , in such a restricted venue , the performance could have incorporated all the special effects stipulated by the libretto . Nevertheless , an account by one of those present shows that the occasion provided considerable spectacle : " [ I ] n the evening with torches there was acted and represented in music ... the Rape of Proserpina with most perfect voices and instruments , with aerial apparitions , scene changes and other things , to the astonishment and wonder of all present . " 
 One small fragment of the music for Proserpina rapita survives , a song for three voices : " Come dolce <unk> l <unk> " . This was published posthumously in Monteverdi 's ninth Madrigal Book ( <unk> e <unk> a due e tre voci ) ( 1651 ) . Otherwise , some indication of the musical character of the work is discernible from notes in the libretto , which Fabbri suggests , indicate that the work may not have been sung throughout . The work contained at least two sung <unk> , one of which concluded the opera with words that provided a thinly disguised tribute to the composer : " <unk> nel <unk> mondo / su <unk> <unk> <unk> / di te si <unk> ? " ( " How much in the clear world / on green Arcadian mountains / will be sung of you ? " ) . More information about the nature of the music and the instrumentation is included in notes within the published libretto . 
 According to Carter , Proserpina rapita is a transitional work . With its emphasis on dance , and in terms of its subject @-@ matter , it represents the courtly traditions of early 17th century opera . At the same time , in terms of characterisation it looks forward to the " modern " world of Monteverdi 's trio of late operas , specifically to L 'incoronazione di Poppea . Proserpina 's temperament anticipates the character Poppea in the later opera ; likewise Pachino may be a forerunner for Ottone , while some of the discourses in Proserpina have the rhetorical flavour of those between Nerone and Seneca in L 'incoronazione . Redlich records that in 1644 , the year following Monteverdi 's death , Proserpina rapita was added to the repertory of Venice 's Teatro San Moisè , but he provides no details of performances . A second edition of the libretto was published in Venice in that year . 
 = = = Le nozze d 'Enea con Lavinia ( 1641 ) = = = 
 ( English : " The Marriage of Aeneas to Lavinia " ) 
 In the three years before his death in 1643 , Monteverdi composed a trilogy of operas for the Venetian opera theatres following the opening in 1637 of the Teatro San Cassiano . Two of these three operas survive in complete , performable versions : Il ritorno d 'Ulisse in patria ( 1640 ) , to a libretto by Giacomo Badoaro , and L 'incoronazione di Poppea ( 1643 ) for which Giovanni Francesco Busenello provided the text . Between these , Monteverdi composed Le nozze d 'Enea con Lavinia ; the libretto survives in manuscript form , though no trace of the music has been found . In her analysis of Monteverdi 's late works , Ellen Rosand links the three operas together : " [ The ] ghost opera joins with the two survivors to form a coherent body of works that attests to Monteverdi 's position within the world of Venetian opera . " The trilogy encompasses a historical trajectory that moves through Troy and the birth of Rome to the decline of the Roman Empire , and points forward to the foundation and ultimate glory of the Venetian Republic . The common theme of the three works is the mythical power of love , at first beneficial but later destructive . 
 Because of textual and structural similarities with Ulisse , it was once assumed that Badoaro had written the Le nozze libretto . However , Rosand 's researches reveal the librettist to be a close friend of Badoaro 's , Michelangelo Torcigliani . In a lengthy preface Torcigliani introduces his story , taken from Virgil 's epic Aeneid , as a tragedia di <unk> fine ( tragedy with a happy ending ) . He acknowledges numerous departures from the original , including the introduction of a comic character , " <unk> " . This was done , he admitted , because " Iro " , an analogous character type in Ulisse , had proved popular with theatregoers . The text had been written to meet Monteverdi 's requirements for emotional variety , thus enabling him , said Torcigliani , to demonstrate the full range of his musical genius . 
 The principal theme of the story is the desire by Juno , who is feuding with Aeneas 's mother Venus to prevent the marriage of the Trojan Aeneas to Lavinia , daughter of King Latino of Latium . She uses an evil spirit to provoke disharmony between Trojans and Latins ; when a Trojan hunting party first wounds a deer and then kills a Latin shepherd , <unk> , there are calls for war , which Latino rejects . Aeneas , resting by the River Tiber , is unaware of these troubling incidents , though he is warned by the spirit of the river . Danger arrives in the person of Turnus , King of the Rutuli , an ally of the Latins whose love Lavinia has rejected . Spurred on by Turnus 's clamour for war , Trojans and Latins fight , and Aeneas kills Turnus . Latino invites Aeneas to take the hand of Lavinia , who is delighted to accept him . In the light of Aeneas 's bravery , Juno forgets her former enmity , and joins with Venus and Hymen to bless the marriage . The opera ends with predictions of the greatness of Rome and the distant future glories of Venice . 
 Le nozze d 'Enea con Lavinia was performed during the Venice Carnival of 1640 – 41 , at the Teatro Santi Giovanni e Paolo where it alternated with a revival of Ulisse . According to Carter the work was fairly undemanding in terms of its staging , the action taking place mainly on the banks of the Tiber with few changes of set . There is no record of the Venetian public 's response to the opera that , Rosand asserts , was clearly aimed at their patriotic impulses , with its final scene a celebration of " the birth and marvels of the city of Venice " . In a preface published with the libretto , Torcigliani refers to " the sweetness of the music of the never @-@ enough praised Monteverde " , but the libretto itself provides no specific guides to the music 's nature . Ringer records with regret that " [ t ] he words are all that remain of this Virgilian opera , offering faint hints of lost melodies " . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 Many of Monteverdi 's lost works date from the 1610s and 1620s , and the manuscripts may have disappeared in the wars that overcame Mantua in 1630 . Carter cites as a significant aspect of their loss the degree to which they might have provided musical links between the composer 's early Mantuan court operas and the public operas he wrote in Venice towards the end of his life : " Without these links ... it is hard to a produce a coherent account of his development as a composer for the stage " . In an essay on the opera orchestras of <unk> 's day , Janet Beat regrets that the 30 @-@ year gap between L 'Orfeo and the next Monteverdi opera to have survived , Il ritorno d 'Ulisse in patria , hampers the study of how opera orchestration developed during those critical years . 
 Carter also reflects on the intriguing possibility , however remote , that a discovery in an unexplored library might one day bring some of this missing music to light . As of 2015 this has not occurred ; however , a setting of Rinuccini 's libretto by the British composer Alexander Goehr was performed at London 's Royal Opera House on 15 September 1995 , under the title Arianna . Goehr worked from Rinuccini 's original script and , as a tribute to the historic opera , incorporated sections of Monteverdi 's setting of the lament into his score . 
 = 2007 Football League Cup Final = 
 The 2007 Football League Cup Final was a football match between Chelsea and Arsenal on 25 February 2007 at the Millennium Stadium , Cardiff . It was the final match of the 2006 – 07 staging of the Football League Cup , and last to be staged at the Millennium Stadium . Chelsea were making their fifth League Cup final appearance to Arsenal 's sixth . 
 Each club needed to get past four rounds to reach the final . Chelsea made comfortable progress ; they scored 12 goals while conceding only one to Wycombe Wanderers in the semi @-@ final . Arsenal fielded a relatively young team throughout the competition ; their wins against fellow league opponents Liverpool in the fifth @-@ round and Tottenham Hotspur in the semis were acclaimed by the British press . Chelsea entered the match as favourites and were undefeated against Arsenal in all competitions since 2004 . 
 Watched by a crowd of 70 @,@ 073 , Arsenal took the lead in the 12th minute when Theo Walcott scored . Chelsea equalised moments later through Didier Drogba , who also scored the match winner six minutes from the end of normal time . Midway through the second half , Chelsea captain John Terry was accidentally kicked in the face after attempting to score with a diving header ; he played no further part in the match having sought medical attention . <unk> time was extended because of the incident , at which point a fracas occurred between the Arsenal and Chelsea players . Kolo Touré and Emmanuel Adebayor were dismissed for their actions , together with Chelsea 's John Obi Mikel . Play came to an end in the 102nd minute . 
 Chelsea manager José Mourinho was delighted with his team 's win and credited his opponent 's performance . He felt the brawl in stoppage time was born out of Arsenal 's frustration after going behind in the match ; he did not want either team to be punished . Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger apologised for his players ' conduct and said he had no regrets over his team selection . Both finalists were fined £ 100 @,@ 000 each by The Football Association for their inability to control their players . Emmanuel Eboué was retrospectively banned for three matches as his punch on Wayne Bridge was missed by Howard Webb . Wenger was later found guilty of improper conduct and charged £ 2 @,@ 500 for his comments about the linesman . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 The Football League Cup is a football competition open to the 92 teams in the Premier League and the Football League . 
 = = = Chelsea = = = 
 Chelsea entered the competition in the third round , as one of the eight teams from the Premier League involved in European competition during the season . They were drawn against Blackburn Rovers ; the match took place at Ewood Park . A goal apiece from Joe Cole and Salomon Kalou ensured a 2 – 0 victory . 
 Chelsea 's opponent in the fourth round were Aston Villa . The match was played at Stamford Bridge on 8 November 2006 . Frank Lampard opened the scoring for Chelsea in the 32nd minute ; further goals by Andriy Shevchenko , Michael Essien and Didier Drogba in the second half secured a 4 – 0 win . 
 Newcastle United hosted Chelsea at St James ' Park in the fifth round of the competition . The home team came close to scoring after the midway point of the first half ; Obafemi Martins 's shot towards the Chelsea goal hit the underside of the crossbar and bounced down , before the ball was cleared . In the 79th minute , Drogba – on as a substitute – scored the winning goal of the match , from a free @-@ kick . 
 Wycombe Wanderers were Chelsea 's opponent in the semi @-@ final which was played over two @-@ legs . The first leg was staged at Wycombe 's home ground , Adams Park . A match preview in The Guardian noted the financial gap between the two sides : " Wycombe 's most expensive player , Jermaine Easter , cost £ 80 @,@ 000 ; Chelsea 's squad is valued at more than £ 300m . " In the game Wycombe started brightly , but the team were unable to convert their chances . Chelsea took the lead in the 36th minute when Wayne Bridge collected a pass from Kalou and chipped the ball over Ricardo Batista , the Wycombe goalkeeper . Easter equalised for Wycombe with 13 minutes of the match remaining ; neither side scored again and the match ended 1 – 1 . The second leg at Stamford Bridge saw Chelsea start better of the two sides and two goals apiece from Shevchenko and Lampard meant they won 4 – 0 on the night , 5 – 1 on aggregate score to progress to the final . 
 = = = Arsenal = = = 
 Arsenal entered the competition in the third round as they participated in European football during the season . They faced West Bromwich Albion at The Hawthorns , where striker Jérémie Aliadière scored twice to secure a 2 – 0 victory for the visitors . 
 Arsenal travelled to Goodison Park in the fourth round of the competition to play Everton . They won the match 1 – 0 courtesy of a late Emmanuel Adebayor goal , which came from a corner . For much of the game Everton played with a man disadvantage as striker James McFadden was sent off in the 19th minute for dissent . 
 Liverpool were Arsenal 's opponent in the fifth round . The match , scheduled on 19 December 2006 at Anfield , was postponed by referee Martin Atkinson because of heavy fog . Atkinson 's decision infuriated the managers of both clubs , with Rafael Benítez commenting : " There were a lot of people looking forward to the game and it 's really difficult to explain . " The tie was rescheduled for 9 January 2007 and on the night Arsenal took the lead when Aliadière scored in the 27th minute . Robbie Fowler equalised for Liverpool six minutes later . Later , two goals from Julio Baptista and goal from Alex Song put Arsenal 4 – 1 ahead at half time . In the second half , Baptista completed his hat @-@ trick ; although Steven Gerrard and Sami Hyypiä scored to close the scoreline gap for Liverpool , Baptista added his fourth goal of the match in the 84th minute . The final score was 6 – 3 , Liverpool 's heaviest defeat at Anfield in 76 years . In his match report for The Guardian , Daniel Taylor praised Arsenal 's reserve team and summarised : " The difference between the two teams was immense . Arsenal played with flair and purpose ; Liverpool were dishevelled and short of leadership . " 
 Tottenham Hotspur faced Arsenal in the semi @-@ final which was played over two @-@ legs . The first leg was at Tottenham 's home ground , White Hart Lane . A goal from Dimitar Berbatov gave Tottenham the lead in the 12th minute and they extended their advantage after Baptista inadvertently kicked the ball into his own goal . Baptista however made amends in the second half ; he scored twice in the space of 13 minutes to level the score at 2 – 2 . The second leg at the Emirates Stadium saw Arsenal dominate proceedings , but only took the lead in the 77th minute when Adebayor scored . Mido equalised for Tottenham , which took the match into extra time because of the away goals rule . Aliadière 's goal in the 105th minute restored Arsenal 's lead and an own goal scored by Pascal <unk> ensured the home team progressed to the final , winning 3 – 1 after extra time , and 5 – 3 on aggregate . 
 = = Build @-@ up = = 
 Chelsea , the match favourites , was appearing in their fifth League Cup final ; they had previously won the competition three times in 1965 , 1998 and 2005 , and lost one final in 1972 . By contrast Arsenal made their sixth League Cup final appearance ; they had won two in 1987 and 1993 and lost three in 1968 , 1969 and 1988 . Both clubs had played each other in the League Cup four times , with Chelsea and Arsenal each winning on two occasions . Chelsea 's biggest win against Arsenal in the competition was a 5 – 0 away win in November 1998 . Prior to the match Arsenal 's last win against Chelsea in all competitions came in February 2004 . 
 The relationship between both clubs had become strained , not least because of Chelsea 's financial advantage ; the club was owned by billionaire Roman Abramovich . The day after Chelsea announced losses of £ 80 million for 2005 – 06 , Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger expressed concern over his opponent 's conduct : " I have said many times that all the clubs should be balanced with their natural resources . That means they can only spend what they earn . " Chelsea manager José Mourinho refused to respond to Wenger 's comments in his UEFA Champions League pre @-@ match press conference , but made reference to his record in the competition in contrast to his counterpart : " Many great managers in the world have never won it . The big example is not far from us ; Arsène Wenger is a top manager in the world . He 's a big manager in the world of football and he never did it so when I did it once , I can thank God for that . I have that . " 
 Wenger replied to Mourinho 's comments by arguing that although plenty of managers have won the Champions League , most would not be considered greats – " What is important is that you look at their careers in 10 , 15 or 20 years . What kind of quality have you brought through in your work and on how consistent a level have you done it ? " He went on to suggest a manager 's importance is " ... over the longer distance . The continuity in his career . Can he get good teams together and play in a certain style ? " 
 Much was made of Arsenal 's policy of using the League Cup to field youngsters . In order to explain his team selection , Wenger made an analogy between his youth players and hopefuls on The X Factor , a television programme he admired . He ruled out playing his more experienced players for the match : " We battled very hard to be in this final and it would be a reward for this team , which has risen up to every challenge . " When contrasting the two teams , Wenger said : " The game of Chelsea is based on experience and power , ours will be based on mobility and movement . " Mourinho did not anticipate Arsenal would make a " crazy change " to their team : " Normally , they change players but keep their philosophy , their idea of football , their system . " He believed the final had the makings of a showpiece event as the competition was not a main target for both clubs ; emotions therefore would not dictate matters . 
 Both clubs received an allocation of approximately 30 @,@ 000 tickets . The competition sponsor Carling gave up its allocation ; they instead invited 200 fans of Arsenal and Chelsea to be seated in their suite . Supporters of the four semi @-@ final clubs were invited to participate in the " Carling <unk> " ; this gave them the opportunity to have their say about the matchday experience . Ticket prices for adults were priced £ 36 , £ 48 , £ 64 and £ 74 , with concessions for juniors and seniors . For every ticket sold , the Football League gave £ 1 to Children in Need ; the donation came at a total of £ 70 @,@ 000 . 
 Chelsea were expected to line up in a 4 – 4 – 2 formation , with Essien in central defence . They had doubts about the fitness of captain John Terry going into the final . He appeared to have damaged his ankle ligaments during the first leg of Chelsea 's Champions League tie with Porto , though passed a fitness test just days after . Arsenal were expected to line up in a similar formation , with Baptista and Aliadière up front . 
 Train delays caused by a " major signal failure " meant that on the day of the final over 2 @,@ 000 spectators were late for kick @-@ off . An accident on the M4 motorway trigged more chaos ; this led to requests for the game to be delayed , but South Wales Police were confident they could get everyone seated in time . Network Rail later apologised for the delay . 
 = = Match = = 
 Chelsea set up in a 4 – 1 – 3 – 2 formation with Terry partnering Ricardo Carvalho in defence . Claude Makélélé played behind a midfield three made up of Lampard , Ballack and Essien . By contrast Arsenal lined up in a 4 – 4 – 2 formation ; Abou Diaby and Theo Walcott were positioned either side of central midfielders Cesc Fàbregas and Denílson and provided width . Arsenal 's starting line up – averaging 21 years – was the youngest to play in a major English cup final . Before the match commenced , the national anthem was sung by Juliette <unk> . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Arsenal kicked @-@ off and started strongly , with Fàbregas dictating play in midfield . Baptista came close to scoring in the seventh minute , but for his shot to be blocked by Terry . Another shot of his three minutes later was saved by Petr Čech , who tipped the ball over the crossbar . This resulted in an Arsenal corner , which Drogba cleared . Walcott immediately collected the ball , passed it to Diaby before receiving it once more in the Chelsea penalty box . He <unk> the ball past Čech and into the Chelsea goal to give Arsenal a 1 – 0 lead ; it was his first goal for the club . Arsenal ’ s tempo and the speed in which they passed the ball continued to cause Chelsea problems . Walcott in the 14th minute used his pace to get the better of defenders Bridge and Carvalho and crossed the ball to Baptista , who lost his footing . 
 Chelsea created their first chance of the match after 18 minutes – a shot from Lampard which hit Kolo Touré . They fought back to equalise two minutes later . Ballack launched the ball to Drogba on the right @-@ hand side of Arsenal ’ s penalty area . Diverting his markers who attempted to set the offside trap , Drogba took the ball and shot it past Manuel Almunia 's goal to score . The equaliser led to Chelsea asserting themselves in the match as the team began to build up possession . Denílson , at the midway point of the half , received the game ’ s first yellow card for a foul on Essien ; the Chelsea midfielder was later booked for a tackle on Baptista . Sticks of celery were thrown at Fàbregas before he took a corner close to stoppage time ; targeting opponents with the vegetable was a Chelsea supporter ’ s ritual going back more than two decades and originated from song . 
 Chelsea made an attacking substitution before the start of the second half ; Arjen Robben came on for Makélélé . He made an immediate impact , running past the Arsenal defence in the 48th minute , but his pass failed to reach Shevchenko . Soon after Carvalho was booked for a foul on Aliadière and conceded a free @-@ kick at the edge of Chelsea ’ s penalty box , though nothing came out of it . Both teams continued to fashion chances – a well worked move by Arsenal finished with Fàbregas 's shooting low past Čech in goal , while Chelsea ’ s Robben from 20 yards curled the ball wide . Lassana Diarra was shown a yellow card in the 52nd minute for his challenge on Diaby ; the Arsenal midfielder managed to get past Ballack and Lampard before he was " deliberately bowled over " by his opponent . Robben earnt Chelsea a corner moments after ; from it , Terry attempted a diving header and Diaby , in an attempt to clear , ended up kicking the Chelsea captain , thus knocking him out . After receiving medical attention Terry was immediately stretchered off and taken to the hospital ; he was replaced by John Obi Mikel and Essien was moved to centre back . 
 The period immediately after Terry ’ s substitution saw few clear @-@ cut chances , with Walcott and Drogba barely testing their respective keepers . Arsenal made two substitutions in a three @-@ minute spell – Armand Traoré for Emmanuel Eboué and Alexander Hleb replacing the injured Diaby . In the 74th minute a shot by Lampard from 25 yards hit Almunia ’ s crossbar . Arsenal responded with a flowing move from left to right , which resulted in a corner . Chelsea cleared and countered , forcing Almunia to save . Arsenal made their final substitution in the 80th minute , replacing Aliadière with Adebayor . With six minutes remaining of the 90 , Chelsea scored the winning goal of the match . Arsenal gave away possession to Essien in midfield , who passed the ball to Robben wide on the left . He crossed the ball into the Arsenal penalty area , which reached the head of Drogba ; the striker headed it in past Almunia . 
 Shevchenko came close to scoring Chelsea ’ s third goal of the match , but his effort hit the crossbar . Seven minutes of stoppage time were added to the match due to Terry ’ s injury . A tussle between Touré and Mikel over shirt pulling resulted in a fracas between both sets of players . Both managers came onto the pitch in order to calm matters . Referee Howard Webb decided to send off Touré and Mikel for violent conduct and consulted with an assistant referee , before sending off Adebayor , who was alleged to have struck Bridge . Adebayor was irate and needed to be escorted off the field by Arsenal officials . The match restarted , by which point Kalou came on for Shevchenko . 
 No further goals were scored and the full @-@ time whistle eventually blew in the 102nd minute of play . Terry who was admitted to hospital later discharged himself and returned to the stadium to celebrate with his teammates . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match and aftermath = = 
 Chelsea ’ s victory meant they won the trophy for the sixth time . Mourinho was delighted to have won the League Cup and felt his team deserved to win on balance of play . He credited his opponents , with a sly dig : " A special word for them – they played very good . They have a great coach , great players – but football is about winning and the cup goes to us . " He was disappointed by the fracas and pointed out it was born out of Arsenal 's frustration , though stressed " We cannot kill a player because something happened . " Mourinho took time out to praise Arsenal ’ s medical staff for attending to Terry after his concussion and absolved Diaby from any fault . 
 Mikel believed his sending off was " harsh " and placed the blame on the Arsenal players , who he felt overreacted . Lampard described his teammate Drogba as “ … special , he 's the best in the world at the moment . He does it week in , week out and on the big occasions . " He argued the brawl near the end of the match highlighted how much the players from both sides wanted to win . Defender Ashley Cole , who left Arsenal in acrimonious terms to join Chelsea felt his decision to move was vindicated : " I 'm enjoying life , the manager 's good and after six or seven months here I 've already won a medal . That 's why I came here . " Journalist Ian McGarry reported that Abramovich chose not to join the Chelsea players in congratulating them on their cup win , noting the fractured relationship between him and Mourinho . 
 Wenger apologised for his team ’ s behaviour : " I feel we should not have reacted at all . Overall we are sorry for what happened . When you do not behave like you want to , then you have to apologise . " He had no regrets over his team selection and suggested it was part of the player 's learning process . Wenger said of Walcott : " … he had a very good performance and scored a great goal . That is good for us and good news for England . " Gilberto Silva described Arsenal ’ s defeat as a “ sad memory ” and wanted to use the loss to motivate the team for their coming matches . 
 The day after the final Arsenal and Chelsea submitted claims for wrongful dismissal of Adebayor and Mikel , respectively , to The Football Association ( FA ) . The FA denied both appeals and clarified their penalties . Eboué was charged with violent conduct for striking Bridge , whereas Adebayor was charged for his behaviour after being sent off . Both players were suspended for three matches – one less than Mikel . Arsenal and Chelsea were charged with misconduct concerning their inability to control their players and were fined £ 100 @,@ 000 each . Wenger criticised the FA 's treatment of his players and accused the linesman of lying in his account of Adebayor 's actions . This led to an investigation where Wenger was found guilty ; he was later fined £ 2 @,@ 500 and censured by the FA . 
 Journalists reviewing the match praised Arsenal ’ s young team ; some however went as far to criticise their conduct in the brawl . Henry Winter wrote in The Daily Telegraph of 26 February 2007 " … all feline grace and youthful ambition , [ Arsenal ] were the better team , moving the ball around exquisitely at times , " while Glenn Moore of The Independent reflected " the Arsenal manager can take great consolation from the quality of his young footballers . " The Guardian correspondent Kevin McCarra opened his match report with the line " To Chelsea the trophy , to Arsenal the future , " and felt the latter club deserved plaudits for the role they played in the final , and competition as a whole . He commended Chelsea ’ s adversity and singled out Carvalho as an example ; at fault for Arsenal ’ s goal , the defender ’ s performance thereafter was faultless . Matt Dickinson of The Times agreed that Arsenal had played the better football , but said their temperament was " brittle " – " [ They ] had lost the trophy before they lost their heads . " Football pundit Alan Hansen was scathing of Arsenal ’ s behaviour and suggested their inexperience had a part to play : “ When they reflect upon it , Arsenal will admit that they were largely in the wrong . " He was critical of Wenger ’ s team selection and felt the big clubs saw the competition , much like the FA Cup as an irrelevance . The violence and sendings off on the pitch led to some media outlets dubbing the match as the " <unk> Cup Final " , or in the case of Winter 's match report the " Carnage Cup final " . 
 This was the seventh and last League Cup final to be played at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff , before the opening of the new Wembley Stadium , the final 's traditional venue . The match was broadcast live in the United Kingdom on Sky Sports 1 ; the channel 's coverage averaged at 2 @.@ 7 million viewers , with a peak audience of 3 @.@ 2 million ( 24 @.@ 88 % ) at 5pm . At the time it was the biggest multichannel audience of 2007 , overtaking a football match between Arsenal and Manchester United in January . 
 Chelsea 's first match after the final was against Portsmouth in the Premier League . A 2 – 0 win ensured they remained in contention for the league , though by May finished in second place . Chelsea did however beat Manchester United to win the 2007 FA Cup Final and complete a cup double . Arsenal played Blackburn Rovers a few days after the final in a FA Cup replay . They lost the match 1 – 0 ; it was Arsenal 's third defeat in all competitions which represented their worst run of form in five years . 
 = Loggerhead sea turtle = 
 The loggerhead sea turtle ( Caretta caretta ) , or loggerhead , is an oceanic turtle distributed throughout the world . It is a marine reptile , belonging to the family Cheloniidae . The average loggerhead measures around 90 cm ( 35 in ) long when fully grown , although larger specimens of up to 280 cm ( 110 in ) have been discovered . The adult loggerhead sea turtle weighs approximately 135 kg ( 298 lb ) , with the largest specimens weighing in at more than 450 kg ( 1 @,@ 000 lb ) . The skin ranges from yellow to brown in color , and the shell is typically reddish @-@ brown . No external differences in gender are seen until the turtle becomes an adult , the most obvious difference being the adult males have thicker tails and shorter plastrons than the females . 
 The loggerhead sea turtle is found in the Atlantic , Pacific , and Indian Oceans , as well as the Mediterranean Sea . It spends most of its life in saltwater and estuarine habitats , with females briefly coming ashore to lay eggs . The loggerhead sea turtle has a low reproductive rate ; females lay an average of four egg clutches and then become quiescent , producing no eggs for two to three years . The loggerhead reaches sexual maturity within 17 – 33 years and has a lifespan of 47 – 67 years . 
 The loggerhead sea turtle is omnivorous , feeding mainly on bottom @-@ dwelling invertebrates . Its large and powerful jaws serve as an effective tool for dismantling its prey . Young loggerheads are exploited by numerous predators ; the eggs are especially vulnerable to terrestrial organisms . Once the turtles reach adulthood , their formidable size limits predation to large marine animals , such as sharks . 
 Loggerheads are considered an endangered species and are protected by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature . <unk> fishing gear is responsible for many loggerhead deaths . Turtles may also suffocate if they are trapped in fishing trawls . Turtle excluder devices have been implemented in efforts to reduce mortality by providing an escape route for the turtles . Loss of suitable nesting beaches and the introduction of exotic predators have also taken a toll on loggerhead populations . Efforts to restore their numbers will require international cooperation , since the turtles roam vast areas of ocean and critical nesting beaches are scattered across several countries . 
 Loggerhead turtles , along with green sea turtles , are the sea turtle species that are most commonly kept in captivity . 
 = = Description = = 
 The loggerhead sea turtle is the world 's largest hard @-@ shelled turtle . Adults have an average weight range of 80 to 200 kg ( 180 to 440 lb ) and a length range of 70 to 95 cm ( 28 to 37 in ) . The maximum reported weight is 545 kg ( 1 @,@ 202 lb ) and the maximum carapace length is 213 cm ( 84 in ) . The head and carapace ( upper shell ) range from a yellow @-@ orange to a reddish @-@ brown , while the plastron ( underside ) is typically pale yellow . The turtle 's neck and sides are brown on the tops and yellow on the sides and bottom . 
 The turtle 's shell is divided into two sections : carapace and plastron . The carapace is further divided into large plates , or scutes . Typically , 11 or 12 pairs of marginal scutes rim the carapace . Five vertebral scutes run down the carapace 's midline , while five pairs of costal scutes border them . The nuchal scute is located at the base of the head . The carapace connects to the plastron by three pairs of <unk> scutes forming the bridge of the shell . The plastron features paired gular , humeral , pectoral , abdominal , femoral , and anal scutes . The shell serves as external armor , although loggerhead sea turtles cannot retract their heads or flippers into their shells . 
 Sexual dimorphism of the loggerhead sea turtle is only apparent in adults . Adult males have longer tails and claws than females . The males ' plastrons are shorter than the females ' , presumably to accommodate the males ' larger tails . The carapaces of males are wider and less domed than the females ' , and males typically have wider heads than females . The sex of juveniles and subadults cannot be determined through external anatomy , but can be observed through dissection , laparoscopy ( an operation performed on the abdomen ) , histological examination ( cell anatomy ) , and <unk> assays ( immune study dealing with radiolabeling ) . 
 <unk> glands located behind each eye allow the loggerhead to maintain osmotic balance by eliminating the excess salt obtained from ingesting ocean water . On land , the excretion of excess salt gives the false impression that the turtle is crying . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The loggerhead sea turtle has a cosmopolitan distribution , nesting over the broadest geographical range of any sea turtle . It inhabits the Atlantic , Indian , and Pacific Oceans and the Mediterranean Sea . 
 In the Atlantic Ocean , the greatest concentration of loggerheads is along the southeastern coast of North America and in the Gulf of Mexico . Very few loggerheads are found along the European and African coastlines . Florida is the most popular nesting site , with more than 67 @,@ 000 nests built per year . Nesting extends as far north as Virginia , as far south as Brazil , and as far east as the Cape Verde Islands . The Cape Verde Islands are the only significant nesting site on the eastern side of the Atlantic . Loggerheads found in the Atlantic Ocean feed from Canada to Brazil . 
 In the Indian Ocean , loggerheads feed along the coastlines of Africa , the Arabian Peninsula , and in the Arabian Sea . Along the African coastline , loggerheads nest from Mozambique 's Bazaruto Archipelago to South Africa 's St Lucia estuary . The largest Indian Ocean nesting site is Oman , on the Arabian Peninsula , which hosts around 15 @,@ 000 nests , giving it the second largest nesting population of loggerheads in the world . Western Australia is another notable nesting area , with 1 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 000 nests per year . 
 Pacific loggerheads live in temperate to tropical regions . They forage in the East China Sea , the southwestern Pacific , and along the Baja California Peninsula . Eastern Australia and Japan are the major nesting areas , with the Great Barrier Reef deemed an important nesting area . Pacific loggerheads occasionally nest in Vanuatu and Tokelau . Yakushima Island is the most important site , with three nesting grounds visited by 40 % of all nearby loggerheads . After nesting , females often find homes in the East China Sea , while the Kuroshio Current Extension 's <unk> region provides important juvenile foraging areas . Eastern Pacific populations are concentrated off the coast of Baja California , where upwelling provides rich feeding grounds for juvenile turtles and subadults . Nesting sites along the eastern Pacific Basin are <unk> mtDNA sequence polymorphism analysis and tracking studies suggest 95 % of the population along the coast of the Americas hatch on the Japanese Islands in the western Pacific . The turtles are transported by the prevailing currents across the full length of the northern Pacific , one of the longest migration routes of any marine animal . The return journey to the natal beaches in Japan has been long suspected , although the trip would cross unproductive clear water with few feeding opportunities . Evidence of a return journey came from an adult female loggerhead named <unk> , which in 1996 , equipped with a satellite tracking device , made the <unk> @-@ km ( 9000 @-@ mi ) trip from Mexico across the Pacific . <unk> was the first animal of any kind ever tracked across an ocean basin . 
 The Mediterranean Sea is a nursery for juveniles , as well as a common place for adults in the spring and summer months . Almost 45 % of the Mediterranean juvenile population has migrated from the Atlantic . Loggerheads feed in the Alboran Sea and the Adriatic Sea . Greece is the most popular nesting site along the Mediterranean , with more than 3 @,@ 000 nests per year . Because of this , Greek authorities do not allow planes to take off or land at night in Zakynthos due to the nesting turtles . In addition to the Greek coast , the coastlines of Cyprus and Turkey are also common nesting sites . 
 One record of this turtle was made in Ireland washed ashore on <unk> Beach in Co . Wexford . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 Loggerhead sea turtles spend most of their lives in the open ocean and in shallow coastal waters . They rarely come ashore , except for the females ' brief visits to construct nests and deposit eggs . Hatchling loggerhead turtles live in floating mats of Sargassum algae . Adults and juveniles live along the continental shelf , as well as in shallow coastal estuaries . In the northwestern Atlantic Ocean , age plays a factor in habitat preference . Juveniles are more frequently found in shallow estuarine habitats with limited ocean access compared to non @-@ nesting adults . Loggerheads occupy waters with surface temperatures ranging from 13 @.@ 3 @-@ 28 @.@ 0 ° C ( 56 @-@ 82 ° F ) during non @-@ nesting season . Temperatures from 27 @-@ 28 ° C are most suitable for nesting females . 
 Juvenile loggerheads share the Sargassum habitat with a variety of other organisms . The mats of Sargassum contain as many as 100 different species of animals on which the juveniles feed . Some of the prey , such as ants , flies , bugs , leafhoppers , and beetles , are carried by the wind to these <unk> plant prey of the mats include barnacles , small crab larvae , fish eggs , and <unk> colonies . Marine mammals and commercial fish , such as tuna , also inhabit the mats . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 Loggerhead sea turtles observed in captivity and in the wild are most active during the day . In captivity , the loggerheads ' daily activities are divided between swimming and resting on the bottom . While resting , they spread their forelimbs to about <unk> swimming position . They remain motionless with eyes open or half @-@ shut and are easily alerted during this state . At night , captives sleep in the same position with their eyes tightly shut , and are slow to react . Loggerheads spend up to 85 % of their day submerged , with males being the more active divers than females . The average duration of dives is 15 – 30 min , but they can stay submerged for up to four hours . Juvenile loggerheads and adults differ in their swimming methods . A juvenile keeps its forelimbs pressed to the side of its carapace , and propels itself by kicking with its hind limbs . As the juvenile matures , its swimming method is progressively replaced with the adult 's alternating @-@ limb method . They depend entirely on this method of swimming by one year old . 
 Water temperature affects the sea turtle 's metabolic rate . Lethargy is induced at temperatures between 13 and 15 ° C ( 55 and 59 ° F ) . The loggerhead takes on a floating , cold @-@ stunned posture when temperatures drop to around 10 ° C. However , younger loggerheads are more resistant to cold and do not become stunned until temperatures drop below 9 ° C. The loggerheads ' migration helps to prevent instances of cold @-@ stunning . Higher water temperatures cause an increase in metabolism and heart rate . A loggerhead 's body temperature increases in warmer waters more quickly than it decreases in colder water ; their critical thermal maximum is currently unknown . 
 Female @-@ female aggression , which is fairly rare in other marine vertebrates , is common among loggerheads . <unk> aggression escalates from passive threat displays to combat . This conflict primarily occurs over access to feeding grounds . Escalation typically follows four steps . First , initial contact is stimulated by visual or tactile cues . Second , confrontation occurs , beginning with passive confrontations characterized by wide head @-@ tail circling . They begin aggressive confrontation when one turtle ceases to circle and directly faces the other . Third , sparring occurs with turtles snapping at each other ’ s jaws . The final stage , separation , is either mutual , with both turtles swimming away in opposite directions , or involves chasing one out of the immediate vicinity . Escalation is determined by several factors , including hormone levels , energy expenditure , expected outcome , and importance of location . At all stages , an upright tail shows willingness to escalate , while a curled tail shows willingness to submit . Because higher aggression is metabolically costly and potentially debilitating , contact is much more likely to escalate when the conflict is over access to good foraging grounds . Further aggression has also been reported in captive loggerheads . The turtles are seemingly territorial , and will fight with other loggerheads and sea turtles of different species . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The loggerhead sea turtle is omnivorous , feeding mainly on bottom @-@ dwelling invertebrates , such as gastropods , bivalves , and decapods . It has a greater list of known prey than any other sea turtle . Other food items include sponges , corals , sea pens , polychaete worms , sea anemones , cephalopods , barnacles , brachiopods , isopods , insects , bryozoans , sea urchins , sand dollars , sea cucumbers , starfish , fish ( eggs , juveniles , and adults ) , hatchling turtles ( including members of its own species ) , algae , and vascular plants . During migration through the open sea , loggerheads eat jellyfish , floating molluscs , floating egg clusters , squid , and flying fish . 
 Loggerheads crush prey with their large and powerful jaws . Projecting scale points on the anterior margin of the forelimbs allow manipulation of the food . These points can be used as " pseudo @-@ claws " to tear large pieces of food in the loggerhead 's mouth . The loggerhead will turn its neck sideways to consume the torn food on the scale points . Inward @-@ pointing , mucus @-@ covered papillae found in the fore region of the loggerhead 's esophagus filter out foreign bodies , such as fish hooks . The next region of the esophagus is not <unk> , with numerous mucosal folds . The digestion rate in loggerheads is temperature @-@ dependent ; it increases as temperature increases . 
 = = = Predators = = = 
 Loggerheads have numerous predators , especially early in their lives . Egg and nestling predators include ghost crabs , oligochaete worms , beetles , fly larvae , ants , parasitoid wasp larvae , flesh flies , snakes , gulls , corvids , opossums , bears , rats , armadillos , mustelids , skunks , canids , procyonids , cats , pigs , and humans . During their migration from their nests to the sea , hatchlings are preyed on by dipteran larvae , crabs , toads , lizards , snakes , seabirds such as frigatebirds , and other assorted birds and mammals . In the ocean , predators of the loggerhead juveniles include fish , such as parrotfish and moray eels , and <unk> crabs . Adults are more rarely attacked due to their large size , but may be preyed on by large sharks , seals , and killer whales . Nesting females are attacked by flesh flies , feral dogs , and humans . Salt marsh mosquitos can also pester nesting females . 
 In Australia , the introduction of the red fox ( Vulpes vulpes ) by British settlers in the 19th century led to significant reductions in loggerhead sea turtle populations . In one coastal section in eastern Australia during the 1970s , predation of turtle eggs destroyed up to 95 % of all clutches laid . Aggressive efforts to destroy foxes in the 1980s and 1990s has reduced this impact ; however , it is estimated that it will be the year 2020 before populations will experience complete recovery from such dramatic losses . 
 Along the southeastern coast of the United States , the raccoon ( Procyon lotor ) is the most destructive predator of nesting sites . Mortality rates of nearly 100 % of all clutches laid in a season have been recorded on some Florida beaches . This is attributed to an increase in raccoon populations , which have flourished in urban environments . Aggressive efforts to protect nesting sites by covering them with wire mesh has significantly reduced the impact of raccoon predation on loggerhead sea turtle eggs . On Bald Head Island in North Carolina , wire mesh screens are used on every confirmed nest to prevent excavation by resident red foxes . A new concern with the steel cage technique is interference with the normal development of the nestlings ' magnetic sense due to the use of ferrous wire , which may disrupt the turtles ' ability to navigate properly . Efforts are underway to find a nonmagnetic material that will prevent predators gnawing through the barrier . 
 Up to 40 % of nesting females around the world have wounds believed to come from shark attacks . 
 = = = Disease and parasites = = = 
 Infectious bacteria such as Pseudomonas and Salmonella attack loggerhead hatchlings and eggs . Fungi such as Penicillium infect loggerhead sea turtle nests and cloacae . 
 <unk> disease caused by a form of the herpes @-@ type virus threatens loggerheads with internal and external tumors . These tumors disrupt essential behaviors and , if on the eyes , cause permanent blindness . Trematodes of the family <unk> inhabit tissues throughout the body of the loggerhead , including vital organs , such as the heart and the brain . Trematode infection can be highly debilitating . For example , inflammatory trematode lesions can cause endocarditis and neurological disease . A nematode , <unk> <unk> , also infects loggerheads , causing histologic lesions in the respiratory tract . 
 More than 100 species of animals from 13 phyla , as well as 37 kinds of algae , live on loggerheads ' backs . These parasitic organisms , which increase drag , offer no known benefit to the turtle , although the dulling effect of organisms on shell color may improve camouflage . 
 = = Life history = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Hatchlings range in color from light brown to almost black , lacking the adult 's distinct yellows and reds . Upon hatching , they measure about 4 @.@ 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) and weigh about 20 g ( 0 @.@ 7 oz ) . The eggs are typically laid on the beach in an area above the high @-@ tide line . The eggs are laid near the water so the hatchlings can return to the sea . The loggerhead 's sex is dictated by the temperature of the underground nest . Incubation temperatures generally range from 26 @-@ 32 ° C ( 79 @-@ 90 ° F ) . Sea turtle eggs kept at a constant incubating temperature of 32 ° C become females . Eggs incubating at 28 ° C become males . An incubation temperature of 30 ° C results in an equal ratio of male to female hatchlings . Hatchlings from eggs in the middle of the clutch tend to be the largest , grow the fastest , and be the most active during the first few days of sea life . 
 After incubating for around 80 days , hatchlings dig through the sand to the surface , usually at night , when darkness increases the chance of escaping predation and damage from extreme sand surface temperatures is reduced . Hatchlings enter the ocean by navigating toward the brighter horizon created by the reflection of the moon and starlight off the water 's surface . 
 Hatchlings can lose up to 20 % of their body mass due to evaporation of water as they journey from nest to ocean . They initially use the undertow to push them five to 10 m away from the shore . Once in the ocean , they swim for about 20 hours , bringing them far offshore . An iron compound , magnetite , in their brains allows the turtles to perceive the Earth 's magnetic field , for navigation . Many hatchlings use Sargassum in the open ocean as protection until they reach 45 cm ( 18 in ) . Hatchling loggerheads live in this pelagic environment until they reach juvenile age , and then they migrate to nearshore waters . 
 = = = Maturation = = = 
 When ocean waters cool , loggerheads must migrate to warmer areas or hibernate to some degree . In the coldest months , they submerge for up to seven hours at a time , emerging for only seven minutes to breathe . Although outdone by freshwater turtles , these are among the longest recorded dives for any air @-@ breathing marine vertebrate . During their seasonal migration , juvenile loggerheads have the ability to use both magnetic and visual cues . When both aids are available , they are used in conjunction ; if one aid is not available , the other suffices . The turtles swim at about 1 @.@ 6 km / h ( 0 @.@ 9 kn ; 0 @.@ 4 m / s ) during migration . 
 Like all marine turtles , the loggerhead prepares for reproduction in its foraging area . This takes place several years before the loggerhead migrates to a mating area . Female loggerheads first reproduce at ages 28 – 33 in Southeastern United States and Australia , and at ages 17 – 30 in South Africa . Age at first reproduction in the Mediterranean , Oman , Japan , and Brazil are unknown . Nesting loggerheads have a straight carapace length of 70 – 109 cm ( 28 – 43 in ) . Because of the large range , carapace length is not a reliable indicator of sexual maturity . Their estimated maximum lifespan is 47 – 67 years in the wild . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Female loggerheads first reproduce between the ages of 17 and 33 , and their mating period may last more than six weeks . They court their mates , but these behaviors have not been thoroughly examined . Male forms of courtship behavior include nuzzling , biting , and head and flipper movements . Studies suggest females produce cloacal pheromones to indicate reproductive ability . Before mating , the male approaches a female and attempts to mount her , while she resists . Next , the male and female begin to circle each other . If the male has competitors , the female may let the males struggle with each other . The winner then mounts the female ; the male 's curved claws usually damage the shoulders of the female 's shell during this process . Other courting males bite the male while he is attempting to copulate , damaging his flippers and tail , possibly exposing bones . Such damage can cause the male to dismount and may require weeks to heal . While nesting , females produce an average of 3 @.@ 9 egg clutches , and then become quiescent , producing no eggs for two to three years . Unlike other sea turtles , courtship and mating usually do not take place near the nesting beach , but rather along migration routes between feeding and breeding grounds . Recent evidence indicates ovulation in loggerheads is mating @-@ induced . Through the act of mating , the female ovulates eggs which are fertilized by the male . This is unique , as mating @-@ induced ovulation is rare outside of mammals . In the Northern Hemisphere , loggerheads mate from late March to early June . The nesting season is short , between May and August in the Northern Hemisphere and between October and March in the Southern Hemisphere . 
 Loggerheads may display multiple paternity . Multiple paternity is possible due to sperm storage . The female can store sperm from multiple males in her oviducts until ovulation . A single clutch may have as many as five fathers , each contributing sperm to a portion of the clutch . Multiple paternity and female size are positively correlated . Two hypotheses explain this correlation . One posits that males favor large females because of their perceived higher fecundity ( ability to reproduce ) . The other states , because larger females are able to swim more quickly to mating grounds , they have longer mating periods . 
 All sea turtles have similar basic nesting behaviors . Females return to lay eggs at intervals of 12 – 17 days during the nesting season , on or near the beach where they hatched . They exit the water , climb the beach , and scrape away the surface sand to form a body pit . With their hind limbs , they excavate an egg chamber in which the eggs are deposited . The females then cover the egg chamber and body pit with sand , and finally return to the sea . This process takes one to two hours , and occurs in open sand areas or on top of sand dunes , preferably near dune grasses that the females can use to camouflage the nest . The nesting area must be selected carefully because it affects characteristics such as fitness , emergence ratio , and vulnerability to nest predators . Loggerheads have an average clutch size of 112 @.@ 4 eggs . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Carl Linnaeus gave the loggerhead its first binomial name , Testudo caretta , in 1758 . Thirty @-@ five other names emerged over the following two centuries , with the combination Caretta caretta first introduced in 1902 by Leonhard Stejneger . The English common name " loggerhead " refers to the animal 's large head . The loggerhead sea turtle belongs to the family Cheloniidae , which includes all extant sea turtles except the leatherback sea turtle . The subspecific classification of the loggerhead sea turtle is debated , but most authors consider it a single polymorphic species . Molecular genetics has confirmed hybridization of the loggerhead sea turtle with the Kemp 's ridley sea turtle , hawksbill sea turtle , and green sea turtles . The extent of natural hybridization is not yet determined ; however , second @-@ generation hybrids have been reported , suggesting some hybrids are fertile . 
 = = = Evolutionary history = = = 
 Although evidence is lacking , modern sea turtles probably descended from a single common ancestor during the Cretaceous period . Like all other sea turtles except the leatherback , loggerheads are members of the ancient family Cheloniidae , and appeared about 40 million years ago . Of the six species of living Cheloniidae , loggerheads are more closely related to the Kemp 's ridley sea turtle , olive ridley sea turtle , and the hawksbill turtle than they are to the <unk> turtle and the green turtle . 
 Around three million years ago , during the Pliocene epoch , Central America emerged from the sea , effectively cutting off currents between the Atlantic and Indo @-@ Pacific Oceans . The rerouting of ocean currents led to climatic changes as the Earth entered a glacial cycle . Cold water upwelling around the Cape of Good Hope and reduction in water temperature at Cape Horn formed coldwater barriers to migrating turtles . The result was a complete isolation of the Atlantic and Pacific populations of loggerheads . During the most recent ice age , the beaches of southeastern North America were too cold for sea turtle eggs . As the Earth began to warm , loggerheads moved farther north , colonizing the northern beaches . Because of this , turtles nesting between North Carolina and northern Florida represent a different genetic population from those in southern Florida . 
 The distinct populations of loggerheads have unique characteristics and genetic differences . For example , Mediterranean loggerheads are smaller , on average , than Atlantic Ocean loggerheads . North Atlantic and Mediterranean loggerhead sea turtles are descendants of colonizing loggerheads from <unk> , South Africa . South African loggerhead genes are still present in these populations today . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Many human activities have negative effects on loggerhead sea turtle populations . The prolonged time required for loggerheads to reach sexual maturity and the high mortality rates of eggs and young turtles from natural phenomena compound the problems of population reduction as a consequence of human activities . 
 = = = Threats = = = 
 Loggerhead sea turtles were once intensively hunted for their meat and eggs ; consumption has decreased , however , due to worldwide legislation . Despite this , turtle meat and eggs are still consumed in countries where regulations are not strictly enforced . In Mexico , turtle eggs are a common meal ; locals claim the egg is an aphrodisiac . Eating turtle eggs or meat can cause serious illness due to harmful bacteria , such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Serratia marcescens , and high levels of toxic metals that build up through bioaccumulation . 
 The US West Coast is a critical migratory corridor for the Pacific loggerheads , in which these turtles swim across the Pacific to California ’ s coast from breeding grounds in Japan . Important foraging habitats for juveniles in the central North Pacific have been revealed through telemetry studies . Along with these foraging habitats , high levels of bycatch from industrial @-@ scale fisheries have been found to overlap ; with drift gillnets in the past and longline fisheries presently . Many juvenile loggerheads aggregate off the coast of Baja California Sur , Mexico , where small coastal fisheries increase these turtles ' mortality risk ; fishers have reported catching dozens of loggerheads with bottom @-@ set gear per day per boat . The most common commercial fishery that accidentally takes loggerheads are bottom trawls used for shrimp vessels in the Gulf of California . In 2000 , between 2 @,@ 600 and 6 @,@ 000 loggerheads were estimated to have been killed by pelagic <unk> in the Pacific . 
 Fishing gear is the biggest threat to loggerheads in the open ocean . They often become entangled in longlines or gillnets . According to the 2009 status review of loggerheads by the Fisheries Service , drowning from entanglement in longline and gillnet fishing gear is the turtles ’ primary threat in the North Pacific . They also become stuck in traps , pots , trawls , and dredges . Caught in this unattended equipment , loggerheads risk serious injury or drowning . Turtle excluder devices for nets and other traps reduce the number being accidentally caught . 
 Nearly 24 @,@ 000 metric tons of plastic are dumped into the ocean each year . Turtles ingest a wide array of this floating debris , including bags , sheets , pellets , balloons and abandoned fishing line . Loggerheads may mistake the floating plastic for jellyfish , a common food item . The ingested plastic causes numerous health concerns , including intestinal blockage , reduced nutrient absorption and malnutrition , suffocation , ulcerations , or starvation . Ingested plastics release toxic compounds , including polychlorinated biphenyls , which may accumulate in internal tissues . Such toxins may lead to a thinning of eggshells , tissue damage , or deviation from natural behaviors . 
 Artificial lighting discourages nesting and interferes with the hatchlings ' ability to navigate to the water 's edge . Females prefer nesting on beaches free of artificial lighting . On developed beaches , nests are often clustered around tall buildings , perhaps because they block out the man @-@ made light sources . Loggerhead hatchlings are drawn toward the brighter area over the water which is the consequence of the reflection of moon and star light . Confused by the brighter artificial light , they navigate inland , away from the protective waters , which exposes them to dehydration and predation as the sun rises . Artificial lighting causes tens of thousands of hatchling deaths per year . 
 Destruction and encroachment of habitat by humans is another threat to loggerhead sea turtles . Optimum nesting beaches are open @-@ sand beaches above the high @-@ tide line . However , beach development deprives them of suitable nesting areas , forcing them to nest closer to the surf . Urbanization often leads to the siltation of sandy beaches , decreasing their viability . Construction of docks and marinas can destroy near @-@ shore habitats . Boat traffic and dredging degrades habitat and can also injure or kill turtles when boats collide with turtles at or near the surface . 
 Annual variations in climatic temperatures can affect sex ratios , since loggerheads have temperature @-@ dependent sex determination . High sand temperatures may skew gender ratios in favor of females . Nesting sites exposed to unseasonably warm temperatures over a three @-@ year period produced 87 – 99 % females . This raises concern over the connection between rapid global temperature changes and the possibility of population extinction . A more localized effect on gender skewing comes from the construction of tall buildings , which reduce sun exposure , lowering the average sand temperature , which results in a shift in gender ratios to favor the emergence of male turtles . 
 = = = Conservation efforts = = = 
 Since the loggerhead occupies such a broad range , successful conservation requires efforts from multiple countries . 
 Loggerhead sea turtles are classified as endangered by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and are listed under Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species , making international trade illegal . In the United States , the Fish and Wildlife Service and National Marine Fisheries Service classify them as a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act . Loggerheads are listed as endangered under both Australia 's Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 and Queensland 's Nature Conservation Act 1992 . The Convention on Migratory Species works for the conservation of loggerhead sea turtles on the Atlantic coast of Africa , as well as in the Indian Ocean and southeast Asia . Throughout Japan , the Sea Turtle Association of Japan aids in the conservation of loggerhead sea turtles . Greece 's <unk> works for their conservation . The Marine Research Foundation works for loggerhead conservation in Oman . Annex 2 of the Specially Protected Areas and Wildlife Protocol of the Cartagena Convention , which deals with pollution that could harm marine ecosystems , also protects them . Conservation organizations worldwide have worked with the shrimp trawling industry to develop turtle exclusion devices ( TEDs ) to exclude even the largest turtles . TEDs are mandatory for all shrimp trawlers . 
 In many places during the nesting season , workers and volunteers search the coastline for nests , and researchers may also go out during the evening to look for nesting females for tagging studies and gather barnacles and tissues samples . Volunteers may , if necessary , relocate the nests for protection from threats , such as high spring tides and predators , and monitor the nests daily for disturbances . After the eggs hatch , volunteers uncover and tally hatched eggs , undeveloped eggs , and dead hatchlings . Any remaining live hatchlings are released or taken to research facilities . Typically , those that lack the vitality to hatch and climb to the surface die . Hatchlings use the journey from nest to ocean to build strength for the coming swim . Helping them to reach the ocean bypasses this strength @-@ building exercise and lowers their chances of survival . 
 = = Symbols = = 
 The loggerhead sea turtle appears on the $ 1000 Colombian Peso coin . In the United States , the loggerhead sea turtle is the official state reptile of South Carolina and also the state saltwater reptile of Florida . 
 = Wicked Lester = 
 Wicked Lester was a New York @-@ based rock and roll band that would later become known as Kiss . The band formed in 1970 , under the name Rainbow . Two notable members were bassist Gene Klein ( born Chaim Witz ) and rhythm guitarist Stanley Eisen , who later adopted the stage names Gene Simmons and Paul Stanley , respectively . In 1971 the band changed their name to Wicked Lester , and recorded an album for Epic Records , which was never officially released . 
 The sessions have been released in bootleg form as The Original Wicked Lester Sessions . Kiss officially released three tracks from these sessions on their 2001 Box Set release . Wicked Lester 's music featured elements of rock and roll , folk rock and pop . Simmons and Stanley , feeling that the group lacked a unifying musical vision , began forming a new band in late 1972 . Adopting a more straightforward , harder rock sound and an emphasis on stage theatrics , they became the band Kiss in early 1973 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Rainbow = = = 
 The origins of the band trace to 1970 , when bassist Gene Klein and keyboardist Brooke Ostrander recruited lead guitarist Stephen Coronel , a childhood friend and former bandmate of Klein . The group took the name Rainbow shortly thereafter . Coronel recommended rhythm guitarist Stanley Eisen , who had actually been rejected by the group after a previous audition . Shortly after Eisen joined , Ostrander recruited drummer Joe Davidson , and the first Rainbow lineup was completed . Davidson 's stay did not last long and he was replaced by Tony Zarrella . 
 In early 1971 , Rainbow played its first show , which consisted of two sets performed at Richmond Community College in Staten Island . After the show , the group discovered that there was already another band called Rainbow . They decided to drop the name , and came up with the name Wicked Lester , which Simmons liked because it was unusual . While the decision to change the group 's name came partly out of a desire to avoid any potential legal issues , it also reflected Klein and Eisen 's desire to start playing more original compositions . 
 = = = Crossroads = = = 
 During their brief existence , Wicked Lester performed in public twice . The first show took place at the Rivoli Theatre in South Fallsburg , New York on April 23 , 1971 . The second , in late summer 1971 , was at an Atlantic City , New Jersey hotel hosting a B 'nai B 'rith Youth Organization event . Not long after that show , the band suffered a major setback when they had all of their musical gear stolen . After a chance meeting with Electric Lady Studios engineer Ron Johnsen , Wicked Lester was given the opportunity to record some demos in late 1971 . Johnsen , who produced the demo tape , shopped it to a few labels , with no success . Eventually the tape was screened by Epic Records , who purchased the masters and agreed to fund the recording of a full album . One of the conditions , however , was that Stephen Coronel be fired and replaced with a better guitarist . 
 Coronel was replaced by session musician Ron Leejack , and the group continued their efforts to finish the album . Some songs were completely re @-@ recorded to accommodate Leejack 's different playing style . The entire recording process , which followed a haphazard schedule , took nearly a year to complete . When the completed album was presented to Don Ellis , Epic 's A & R director , he stated that he hated the album and was not going to release it . The next day , Wicked Lester manager Lew <unk> requested and received the group 's release from Epic Records . 
 = = = Kiss = = = 
 At this time , Klein and Eisen , now using the stage names Gene Simmons and Paul Stanley , decided that one of the reasons for Wicked Lester 's lack of success was their lack of a singular image and musical vision . They made the decision to move forward and start a new band . Wicked Lester began auditioning for a drummer in late 1972 . Soon after , Tony Zarrella left the group . Ostrander , feeling that the band was going nowhere , quit . He went on to teach music at <unk> Valley Union High School in Swanton , Vermont . Ostrander died on September 3 , 2011 from cancer . For a short time , Ron Leejack continued on with the new version of Wicked Lester . 
 Whereas Wicked Lester 's original sound was rooted in varied musical styles , including folk and pop , when Simmons and Stanley decided to recruit new members , they made the decision to focus on a more aggressive and simple style of rock and roll . The first new member they added was drummer Peter Criss , who had placed an ad in Rolling Stone . The ad stated , " <unk> . ROCK & roll drummer looking for <unk> <unk> doing soft & hard music . Peter , Brooklyn . " The new Wicked Lester , without a recording contract , began a strict and regular regimen of rehearsals . 
 In November 1972 , the group arranged a showcase with Don Ellis , the Epic Records executive who earlier had rejected Wicked Lester 's album . While one Epic executive , Tom <unk> , was impressed by the power and theatrics of this new incarnation of Wicked Lester , Ellis once again turned them down . As Ellis was leaving , Peter Criss 's brother , who was drunk , vomited on his foot . In early December , Paul Stanley placed an ad in The Village Voice stating , " <unk> <unk> <unk> with Flash and Ability . Album Out Shortly . No time <unk> please . " The ad ran for two issues , December 7 and December 14 , 1972 , leading to several audition sessions . One audition was by Paul " Ace " Frehley who showed up wearing different @-@ colored shoes , walked into the room without saying a word , hooked up his guitar and started playing . Frehley was asked back for a second audition and was a member of the band by Christmas 1972 . Within a few weeks , the group changed its name to Kiss and played their first concert on January 30 , 1973 . 
 = = Unreleased album = = 
 The recording of Wicked Lester 's album , which began in November 1971 at Electric Lady Studios in Greenwich Village , took place over multiple sessions and was finished in July 1972 . The album was a mixture of original material and covers , showcasing the group 's eclectic style . Three of the songs recorded for the Wicked Lester album would later resurface as Kiss songs , with varying degrees of similarity . 
 The chorus of their cover version of The Hollies ' " I Wanna Shout " would serve as the inspiration for " Shout It Out Loud " from 1976 's Destroyer , although the two songs otherwise bear little similarity . Two of the tracks , " Love Her All I Can " , written by Paul Stanley , and " She " , written by Simmons and Steve Coronel would resurface on 1975 's Dressed to Kill . " Love Her All I Can " featured similar arrangements in both versions while the Kiss version of " She " lacked the congas and flute of the original . 
 The only part of Wicked Lester 's album to initially be released was the cover art , which was used for The Laughing Dogs ' self @-@ titled debut album in 1979 . CBS Records , who owned the rights to the album , remixed it and planned to release it in late 1976 to capitalize on Kiss 's popularity at the time . Kiss and Neil Bogart , the president of their label , Casablanca Records , purchased the master tapes from CBS for $ 137 @,@ 500 and never released it . The label and band feared that if CBS released the tracks it would diminish their commercial appeal . The band worried that their hard rock image would be damaged by these more eclectic recordings . It was also feared that the release would be accompanied by pictures of Simmons and Stanley without their trademark makeup ; Kiss had yet to officially unmask themselves at the time . In later years the album surfaced as a bootleg named The Original Wicked Lester Sessions . The band bought Bogart 's share and eventually released three of the tracks , " Keep Me Waiting , " " She , " and " Love Her All I Can " , in 2001 as part of a five @-@ disc box set . 
 Track @-@ list : 
 01 " Love Her All I Can " ( 2 : 28 ) Stanley 
 02 " Sweet Ophelia " ( 2 : 56 ) Barry Mann / Gerry Goffin 
 03 " Keep Me Waiting " ( 3 : 04 ) Stanley 
 04 " Simple Type " ( 2 : 33 ) Simmons 
 05 " She " ( 2 : 54 ) Coronel / Simmons 
 06 " Too Many Mondays " ( 3 : 27 ) Barry Mann / Cynthia Weil 
 07 " What Happens In the Darkness " ( 2 : 59 ) <unk> Lester Smith 
 08 " When The Bell Rings " ( 3 : 11 ) Austin Roberts / Christopher Welch 
 09 " Molly " ( aka " Some Other Guy " ) ( 2 : 23 ) Stanley 
 10 " We Want To Shout It Out Loud " ( 2 : 04 ) The Hollies 
 The band also recorded a song called " Long , Long Road " that might have made it onto the album . 
 = = Members = = 
 Paul Stanley – rhythm guitar , vocals ( 1970 – 1973 ) 
 Gene Simmons – bass , vocals ( 1970 – 1973 ) 
 Brooke Ostrander – keyboards ( 1970 – 1972 ; died 2011 ) 
 Stephen Coronel – lead guitar ( 1970 – 1971 ) 
 Joe Davidson – drums ( 1970 ) 
 Tony Zarrella – drums ( 1970 – 1972 ) 
 Ron Leejack – lead guitar ( 1971 – 1972 ) 
 Peter Criss – drums ( 1972 – 1973 ) 
 Ace Frehley – lead guitar ( 1972 – 1973 ) 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = Tripura = 
 Tripura / <unk> / ( Bengali : <unk> ্ <unk> ) is a state in Northeast India . The third @-@ smallest state in the country , it covers 10 @,@ 491 km2 ( 4 @,@ 051 sq mi ) and is bordered by Bangladesh ( East Bengal ) to the north , south , and west , and the Indian states of Assam and Mizoram to the east . In 2011 the state had 3 @,@ 671 @,@ 032 residents , constituting 0 @.@ 3 % of the country 's population . The Bengali Hindu people form the ethno @-@ linguistic majority in Tripura . Indigenous communities , known in India as scheduled tribes , form about 30 per cent of Tripura 's population . The Kokborok speaking Tripuri people are the major group among 19 tribes and many subtribes . 
 The area of modern ' Tripura ' was ruled for several centuries by the Tripuri dynasty . It was the independent princely state of the Tripuri Kingdom under the protectorate of the British Empire which was known as Hill Tippera while the area annexed and ruled directly by British India was known as Tippera District ( present Comilla District ) . The independent Tripuri Kingdom ( or Hill Tippera ) joined the newly independent India in 1949 . Ethnic strife between the indigenous Tripuri people and the migrant Bengali population due to large influx of Bengali Hindu refugees and settlers from Bangladesh ( former East Pakistan ) led to tension and scattered violence since its integration into the country of India , but the establishment of an autonomous tribal administrative agency and other strategies have led to peace . 
 Tripura lies in a geographically disadvantageous location in India , as only one major highway , the National Highway 8 , connects it with the rest of the country . Five mountain ranges — <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Jampui Hills — run north to south , with intervening valleys ; Agartala , the capital , is located on a plain to the west . The state has a tropical savanna climate , and receives seasonal heavy rains from the south west monsoon . Forests cover more than half of the area , in which bamboo and cane tracts are common . Tripura has the highest number of primate species found in any Indian state . Due to its geographical isolation , economic progress in the state is hindered . Poverty and unemployment continue to plague Tripura , which has a limited infrastructure . Most residents are involved in agriculture and allied activities , although the service sector is the largest contributor to the state 's gross domestic product . 
 Mainstream Indian cultural elements , especially from Bengali culture , coexist with traditional practices of the ethnic groups , such as various dances to celebrate religious occasions , weddings and festivities ; the use of locally crafted musical instruments and clothes ; and the worship of regional deities . The sculptures at the archaeological sites Unakoti , Pilak and <unk> provide historical evidence of artistic fusion between organised and tribal religions . The Ujjayanta Palace in Agartala was the former royal abode of the Tripuri king ) 
 = = Name = = 
 On the face of it , the name Tripura is Sanskrit , meaning " three cities " ( corresponding exactly to the Greek Tripolis ) . The Sanskrit name is linked to Tripura Sundari , the presiding deity of the Tripura Sundari Temple at Udaipur , one of the 51 Shakti Peethas ( pilgrimage centres of Shaktism ) , and to the legendary tyrant king <unk> , who reigned in the region . <unk> was the 39th descendant of <unk> , who belonged to the lineage of Yayati , a king of the Lunar Dynasty . 
 One of the Puranas , the text about the " exploits of Shiva " , tells the story of the " sack of Tripura " . ( Carl Olson - 2007 , " Hindu Primary Sources : A Sectarian Reader " , p . 414 ) 
 However , there have been suggestions to the effect that " the origin of the name Tripura is doubtful " , raising the possibility that the Sanskritic form is just due to a folk etymology of a Tibeto @-@ Burman ( Kokborok ) name . Variants of the name include <unk> , <unk> and Tippera . A Kokborok etymology from tui ( water ) and pra ( near ) has been suggested ; the boundaries of Tripura extended to the Bay of Bengal when the kings of the <unk> Kingdom held sway from the Garo Hills of Meghalaya to Arakan , the present Rakhine State of Burma ; so the name may reflect vicinity to the sea . 
 = = History = = 
 Although there is no evidence of lower or middle Paleolithic settlements in Tripura , Upper Paleolithic tools made of fossil wood have been found in the <unk> and Khowai valleys . The Indian epic , the Mahabharata ; ancient religious texts , the Puranas ; and the Edicts of Ashoka – stone pillar inscriptions of the emperor Ashoka dating from the third century BCE – all mention Tripura . An ancient name of Tripura is Kirat Desh ( English : " The land of Kirat " ) , probably referring to the Kirata Kingdoms or the more generic term Kirata . However , it is unclear whether the extent of modern Tripura is coterminous with Kirat Desh . The region was under the rule of the <unk> Kingdom for centuries , although when this dates from is not documented . The Rajmala , a chronicle of Tripuri kings which was first written in the 15th century , provides a list of 179 kings , from antiquity up to Krishna Kishore Manikya ( 1830 – 1850 ) , but the reliability of the Rajmala has been doubted . 
 The boundaries of the kingdom changed over the centuries . At various times , the borders reached south to the jungles of the Sundarbans on the Bay of Bengal ; east to Burma ; and north to the boundary of the <unk> kingdom in Assam . There were several Muslim invasions of the region from the 13th century onward , which culminated in Mughal dominance of the plains of the kingdom in 1733 , although their rule never extended to the hill regions . The Mughals had influence over the appointment of the Tripuri kings . 
 Tripura became a princely state during British rule in India . The kings had an estate in British India , known as Tippera district or <unk> <unk> ( now the Comilla district of Bangladesh ) , in addition to the independent area known as Hill Tippera , the present @-@ day state . Udaipur , in the south of Tripura , was the capital of the kingdom , until the king Krishna Manikya moved the capital to Old Agartala in the 18th century . It was moved to the new city of Agartala in the 19th century . Bir Chandra Manikya ( 1862 – 1896 ) modelled his administration on the pattern of British India , and enacted reforms including the formation of Agartala Municipal Corporation . 
 Following the independence of India in 1947 , Tippera district – the estate in the plains of British India – became a part of East Pakistan , and Hill Tippera remained under a regency council until 1949 . The Maharani Regent of Tripura signed the Tripura Merger Agreement on 9 September 1949 , as a result of which Tripura became a Part C state of India . It became a Union Territory , without a legislature , in November 1956 and an elected ministry was installed in July 1963 . The geographic partition that coincided with the independence of India resulted in major economic and infrastructural setbacks for the state , as road transport between the state and the major cities of India had to follow a more circuitous route . The road distance between Kolkata and Agartala before the partition was less than 350 km ( 220 mi ) , and increased to 1 @,@ 700 km ( 1 @,@ 100 mi ) , as the route now avoided East Pakistan . The geo @-@ political isolation was aggravated by an absence of rail transport . 
 Some parts of the state were shelled by the Pakistan Army during the Indo @-@ Pakistani War of 1971 . Following the war , the Indian government reorganised the North East region to ensure effective control of the international borders – three new states came into existence on 21 January 1972 : Meghalaya , Manipur , and Tripura . Since the partition of India , many Hindu Bengalis have migrated to Tripura as refugees from East Pakistan ; settlement by Hindu Bengalis increased at the time of the Bangladesh Liberation War of 1971 . Hindu Bengalis migrated to Tripura after 1949 to escape religious persecution in Muslim majority East Pakistan . Before independence , most of the population was indigenous ; . Ethnic strife between the Tripuri tribe and the predominantly immigrant Bengali community led to scattered violence , and an insurgency spanning decades . This gradually abated following the establishment of a tribal autonomous district council and the use of strategic counter @-@ insurgency operations , aided by the overall socio @-@ economic progress of the state . Tripura remains peaceful , as of 2012 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Tripura is a landlocked state in North East India , where the seven contiguous states – Arunachal Pradesh , Assam , Manipur , Meghalaya , Mizoram , Nagaland and Tripura – are collectively known as the Seven Sister States . Spread over 10 @,@ 491 @.@ 69 km2 ( 4 @,@ 050 @.@ 86 sq mi ) , Tripura is the third @-@ smallest among the 29 states in the country , behind Goa and Sikkim . It extends from 22 ° <unk> to 24 ° <unk> , and 91 ° <unk> to 92 ° <unk> . Its maximum extent measures about 184 km ( 114 mi ) from north to south , and 113 km ( 70 mi ) east to west . Tripura is bordered by the country of Bangladesh to the west , north and south ; and the Indian states of Assam to the north east ; and Mizoram to the east . It is accessible by national highways passing through the <unk> district of Assam and <unk> district of Mizoram . 
 = = = Topology = = = 
 The physiography is characterised by hill ranges , valleys and plains . The state has five anticlinal ranges of hills running north to south , from <unk> in the west , through <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , to the Jampui Hills in the east . The intervening synclines are the Agartala – Udaipur , Khowai – <unk> , <unk> – <unk> , <unk> – Manu and Dharmanagar – <unk> valleys . At an altitude of 939 m ( 3 @,@ 081 ft ) , <unk> <unk> in the Jampui range is the state 's highest point . The small isolated hillocks interspersed throughout the state are known as <unk> , and the narrow fertile alluvial valleys , mostly present in the west , are called <unk> . A number of rivers originate in the hills of Tripura and flow into Bangladesh . The Khowai , <unk> , Manu , Juri and <unk> flow towards the north ; the Gumti to the west ; and the <unk> and Feni to the south west . 
 The <unk> data published by the Geological Survey of India dates the rocks , on the geologic time scale , between the Oligocene epoch , approximately 34 to 23 million years ago , and the Holocene epoch , which started 12 @,@ 000 years ago . The hills have red laterite soil that is porous . The flood plains and narrow valleys are overlain by alluvial soil , and those in the west and south constitute most of the agricultural land . According to the Bureau of Indian Standards , on a scale ranging from I to V in order of increasing susceptibility to earthquakes , the state lies in seismic zone V. 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The state has a tropical savanna climate , designated Aw under the Köppen climate classification . The undulating topography leads to local variations , particularly in the hill ranges . The four main seasons are winter , from December to February ; pre @-@ monsoon or summer , from March to April ; monsoon , from May to September ; and post @-@ monsoon , from October to November . During the monsoon season , the south west monsoon brings heavy rains , which cause frequent floods . The average annual rainfall between 1995 and 2006 ranged from 1 @,@ 979 @.@ 6 to 2 @,@ 745 @.@ 9 mm ( 77 @.@ 94 to 108 @.@ 11 in ) . During winter , temperatures range from 13 to 27 ° C ( 55 to 81 ° F ) , while in the summer they fall between 24 and 36 ° C ( 75 and 97 ° F ) . According to a United Nations Development Programme report , the state lies in " very high damage risk " zone from wind and cyclones . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 Like most of the Indian subcontinent , Tripura lies within the Indomalaya ecozone . According to the Biogeographic classification of India , the state is in the " North @-@ East " biogeographic zone . In 2011 forests covered 57 @.@ 73 per cent of the state . Tripura hosts three different types of ecosystems : mountain , forest and freshwater . The evergreen forests on the hill slopes and the sandy river banks are dominated by species such as Dipterocarpus , Artocarpus , Amoora , Elaeocarpus , Syzygium and Eugenia . Two types of moist deciduous forests comprise majority of the vegetation : moist deciduous mixed forest and Sal ( Shorea robusta ) <unk> forest . The <unk> of bamboo and cane forests with deciduous and evergreen flora is a peculiarity of Tripura 's vegetation . Grasslands and swamps are also present , particularly in the plains . Herbaceous plants , shrubs , and trees such as Albizia , <unk> , <unk> and Macaranga flourish in the swamps of Tripura . Shrubs and grasses include <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) , Phragmites and Saccharum ( sugarcane ) . 
 According to a survey in 1989 – 90 , Tripura hosts 90 land mammal species from 65 genera and 10 orders , including such species as elephant ( Elephas maximus ) , bear ( <unk> ursinus ) , binturong ( <unk> binturong ) , wild dog ( Cuon alpinus ) , porcupine ( <unk> assamensis ) , barking deer ( <unk> <unk> ) , sambar ( Cervus unicolor ) , wild boar ( Sus scrofa ) , gaur ( Bos <unk> ) , leopard ( Panthera pardus ) , clouded leopard ( Neofelis nebulosa ) , and many species of small cats and primates . Out of 15 free ranging primates of India , seven are found in Tripura ; this is the highest number of primate species found in any Indian state . The wild buffalo ( Bubalus <unk> ) is extinct now . There are nearly 300 species of birds in the state . 
 Wildlife sanctuaries of the state are <unk> , Gumti , Rowa and Trishna wildlife sanctuaries . National parks of the state are Clouded Leopard National Park and Rajbari National Park . These protected areas cover a total of 566 @.@ 93 km2 ( 218 @.@ 89 sq mi ) . Gumti is also an Important Bird Area . In winter , thousands of migratory waterfowl throng Gumti and <unk> lakes . 
 = = Divisions = = 
 In January 2012 , major changes were implemented in the administrative divisions of Tripura . Beforehand , there had been four districts – <unk> ( headquarters Ambassa ) , North Tripura ( headquarters Kailashahar ) , South Tripura ( headquarters Udaipur ) , and West Tripura ( headquarters Agartala ) . Four new districts were carved out of the existing four in January 2012 – Khowai , Unakoti , <unk> and Gomati . Six new subdivisions and five new blocks were also added . Each is governed by a district collector or a district magistrate , usually appointed by the Indian Administrative Service . The subdivisions of each district are governed by a sub @-@ divisional magistrate and each subdivision is further divided into blocks . The blocks consist of Panchayats ( village councils ) and town municipalities . As of 2012 , the state had eight districts , 23 subdivisions and 45 development blocks . National census and state statistical reports are not available for all the new administrative divisions , as of March 2013 . Agartala , the capital of Tripura , is the most populous city . Other major towns with a population of 10 @,@ 000 or more ( as per 2015 census ) are Sabroom , Dharmanagar , <unk> , Kailashahar , Pratapgarh , Udaipur , <unk> , Belonia , <unk> , <unk> , Khowai , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Melaghar , Ambassa , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 Tripura is governed through a parliamentary system of representative democracy , a feature it shares with other Indian states . Universal suffrage is granted to residents . The Tripura government has three branches : executive , legislature and judiciary . The Tripura Legislative Assembly consists of elected members and special office bearers that are elected by the members . Assembly meetings are presided over by the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker in case of Speaker 's absence . The Assembly is unicameral with 60 Members of the Legislative Assembly ( MLA ) . The members are elected for a term of five years , unless the Assembly is dissolved prior to the completion of the term . The judiciary is composed of the Tripura High Court and a system of lower courts . Executive authority is vested in the Council of Ministers headed by the Chief Minister . The Governor , the titular head of state , is appointed by the President of India . The leader of the party or a coalition of parties with a majority in the Legislative Assembly is appointed as the Chief Minister by the Governor . The Council of Ministers are appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister . The Council of Ministers reports to the Legislative Assembly . 
 Tripura sends two representatives to the Lok Sabha ( the lower house of the parliament of India ) and one representative to the Rajya Sabha ( parliament 's upper house ) . Panchayats ( local self @-@ governments ) elected by local body elections are present in many villages for self @-@ governance . Tripura also has a unique tribal self @-@ governance body , the Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council . This council is responsible for some aspects of local governance in 527 villages with high density of the scheduled tribes . 
 The main political parties are the Left Front and the Indian National Congress . Until 1977 , the state was governed by the Indian National Congress . The Left Front was in power from 1978 to 1988 , and then again from 1993 onwards . During 1988 – 1993 , the Congress and Tripura <unk> Juba Samiti were in a ruling coalition . In the last elections held in February 2013 , the Left Front won 50 out of 60 seats in the Assembly , 49 of which went to the Communist Party of India ( Marxist ) ( CPM ) . As of 2013 , Tripura is one of the two states in India where the communist party is in power . The other state is Kerala . Formerly , one more state — West Bengal — had democratically elected communist governments . 
 Communism in the state had its beginnings in the pre @-@ independence era , inspired by freedom struggle activities in Bengal , and culminating in regional parties with communist leanings . It capitalised on the tribal dissatisfaction with the mainstream rulers , and has been noted for connection with the " sub @-@ national or ethnic searches for identity " . Since the 1990s , there is an ongoing irredentist Tripura rebellion , involving militant outfits such as the National Liberation Front of Tripura and the All Tripura Tiger Force ( <unk> ) ; terrorist incidents involving the <unk> claimed a recorded number of 389 victims in the seven @-@ year period of 1993 to 2000 . The Armed Forces ( Special Powers ) Act , 1958 ( AFSPA ) was first enforced in Tripura on 16 February 1997 when terrorism was at its peak in the state . Ever since it was enforced in Tripura , the Act , as per its provisions , was reviewed and extended after every six months . However , in view of the improvement in the situation and fewer terrorist activities being reported , the Tripura government in June 2013 reduced operational areas of the AFSPA to 30 police station areas . The last six @-@ month extension to AFSPA was given in November 2014 , and after about 18 years of operation , it was repealed on 29 May 2015 . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Tripura 's gross state domestic product for 2010 – 11 was ₹ 129 @.@ 47 billion ( US $ 1 @.@ 9 billion ) at constant price ( 2004 – 05 ) , recording 5 @.@ 71 per cent growth over the previous year . In the same period , the GDP of India was ₹ 48 @,@ 778 @.@ 42 billion ( US $ 720 billion ) , with a growth rate of 8 @.@ 55 per cent . Annual per capita income at current price of the state was ₹ 38 @,@ 493 ( US $ 570 ) , compared to the national per capita income ₹ 44 @,@ 345 ( US $ 660 ) . In 2009 , the tertiary sector of the economy ( service industries ) was the largest contributor to the gross domestic product of the state , contributing 53 @.@ 98 per cent of the state 's economy compared to 23 @.@ 07 per cent from the primary sector ( agriculture , forestry , mining ) and 22 @.@ 95 per cent from the secondary sector ( industrial and manufacturing ) . According to the Economic Census of 2005 , after agriculture , the maximum number of workers were engaged in retail trade ( 28 @.@ 21 per cent of total non @-@ agricultural workforce ) , followed by manufacturing ( 18 @.@ 60 per cent ) , public administration ( 14 @.@ 54 per cent ) , and education ( 14 @.@ 40 per cent ) . 
 Tripura is an agrarian state with more than half of the population dependent on agriculture and allied activities . However , due to hilly terrain and forest cover , only 27 per cent of the land is available for cultivation . Rice , the major crop of the state , is cultivated in 91 per cent of the cropped area . According to the Directorate of Economics & Statistics , Government of Tripura , in 2009 – 10 , potato , sugarcane , <unk> , pulses and jute were the other major crops cultivated in the state . <unk> and pineapple top the list of horticultural products . Traditionally , most of the indigenous population practised <unk> method ( a type of slash @-@ and @-@ burn ) of cultivation . The number of people dependent on <unk> has declined over the years . 
 <unk> has made significant advances in the state . At the end of 2009 – 10 , the state produced a surplus of 104 @.@ 3 million fish seeds . Rubber and tea are the important cash crops of the state . Tripura ranks second only to Kerala in the production of natural rubber in the country . The state is known for its handicraft , particularly hand @-@ woven cotton fabric , wood carvings , and bamboo products . High quality timber including sal , <unk> , teak and <unk> are found abundantly in the forests of Tripura . Tata Trusts signed a pact with Government of Tripura in July , 2015 to improve fisheries and dairy in the state . 
 The industrial sector of the state continues to be highly underdeveloped – <unk> and tea industry are the only two organised sectors . Tripura has considerable reservoirs of natural gas . According to estimates by Oil and Natural Gas Corporation ( ONGC ) , the state has 400 billion metres3 reserves of natural gas , with 16 billion metres3 is recoverable . ONGC produced 480 million metres3 natural gas in the state , in 2006 – 07 . In 2011 and 2013 , new large discoveries of natural gas were announced by ONGC . Tourism industry in the state is growing – the revenue earned in tourism sector crossed ₹ 10 million ( US $ 150 @,@ 000 ) for the first time in 2009 – 10 , and surpassed ₹ 15 million ( US $ 220 @,@ 000 ) in 2010 – 11 . Although Bangladesh is in a trade deficit with India , its export to Tripura is significantly more than import from the state ; a report in the newspaper The Hindu estimated Bangladesh exported commodities valued at about ₹ 3 @.@ 5 billion ( US $ 52 million ) to the state in 2012 , as opposed to " very small quantity " of import . Alongside legal international trade , unofficial and informal cross @-@ border trade is rampant . In a research paper published by the Institute of Developing Economies in 2004 , the dependence of Tripura 's economy on that of Bangladesh was emphasised . 
 The economy of Tripura can be characterised by high rate of poverty , low capital formation , inadequate infrastructure facilities , geographical isolation and communication bottlenecks , inadequate exploration and use of forest and mineral resources , slow industrialisation and high unemployment . More than 50 % of the population depends on agriculture for sustaining their livelihood . However agriculture and allied activities to Gross State Domestic Production ( GSDP ) is only 23 % , this is primarily because of low capital base in the sector . Despite the inherent limitation and constraints coupled with severe resources for investing in basic infrastructure , this has brought <unk> progress in quality of life and income of people cutting across all sections of society . The state government through its Tripura Industrial Policy and Tripura Industrial Incentives Scheme , 2012 , has offered heavy subsidies in capital investment and transport , preferences in government procurement , waivers in tender processes and fees , yet the impact has been not much significant beyond a few industries being set up in the <unk> Industrial Growth Center . 
 The Planning Commission estimates the poverty rate of all North East Indian states by using head count ratio of Assam ( the largest state in North East India ) . According to 2001 Planning Commission assessment , 22 per cent of Tripura 's rural residents were below the poverty line . However , Tripura government 's independent assessment , based on consumption distribution data , reported that , in 2001 , 55 per cent of the rural population was below the poverty line . Geographic isolation and communication bottleneck coupled with insufficient infrastructure have restricted economic growth of the state . High rate of poverty and unemployment continues to be prevalent . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transport = = = 
 Only one major road , the National Highway 8 ( NH @-@ 8 ) , connects Tripura to the rest of India . Starting at Sabroom in southern Tripura , it heads north to the capital Agartala , turns east and then north @-@ east to enter the state of Assam . Locally known as " Assam Road " , the NH @-@ 8 is often called the lifeline of Tripura . However , the highway is single lane and of poor quality ; often landslides , rains or other disruptions on the highway cut the state off from its neighbours . Another National Highway , NH 8A , connects the town Manu in South Tripura district with <unk> , Mizoram . The Tripura Road Transport Corporation is the government agency overlooking public transport on road . A hilly and land @-@ locked state , Tripura is dependent mostly on roads for transport . The total length of roads in the state is 16 @,@ 931 km ( 10 @,@ 520 mi ) of which national highways constitute 88 km ( 55 mi ) and state highways 689 km ( 428 mi ) , as of 2009 – 10 . Residents in rural areas frequently use waterways as a mode of transport . 
 Agartala Airport , located 12 @.@ 5 km ( 6 @.@ 7 nautical miles ) northwest of Agartala at <unk> , is the second busiest airport in north east India after Guwahati . There are direct flight connections to Kolkata , Imphal , Delhi , Silchar , <unk> , Guwahati , Bangalore , Chennai , Ahmedabad and Mumbai . The major airlines are Air India , Jet Airways ( Operating Codeshare and connect Flights ) , Indigo Airlines and Spicejet . Passenger helicopter services are available between the capital and major towns ( Kailashahar , Dharmanagar ) as well as to more remote areas such as <unk> and <unk> . 
 Rail transport was absent in the state until 2008 – 09 when a rail connection was established between the capital Agartala and Lumding junction in Assam . This is a meter gauge rail track connecting to the usual Indian gauge at Lumding . The major railways stations in this line are in Agartala , Dharmanagar , and <unk> . As of 2009 – 10 , the total length of railway tracks in the state is 153 kilometres ( 95 mi ) . Extension of railway line from Agartala to the southernmost town of Sabroom is in progress , as of 2012 . 
 Tripura has an 856 km ( 532 mi ) long international border with Bangladesh , of which 730 @.@ 5 km ( 453 @.@ 9 mi ) is fenced , as of 2012 . Several locations along the border serve as bilateral trading points between India and Bangladesh , such as <unk> near Agartala , <unk> , <unk> , Belonia , Khowai and <unk> . A bus service exists between Agartala and Dhaka , the capital of Bangladesh . In 2013 , the two countries signed an agreement to establish a 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) railway link between Agartala and the <unk> junction of Bangladesh . Citizens of both countries need visa to legally enter the other country ; however , illegal movement and smuggling across the border are widespread . 
 = = = Media and communication = = = 
 As of 2014 , 56 daily and weekly newspapers are published in Tripura . Most of the newspapers are published in Bengali , except for one Kokborok daily ( <unk> Kok ) , one Manipuri weekly ( <unk> ) , two English dailies and three bilingual weeklies . Notable dailies include Daily <unk> Katha , <unk> Tripura , Dainik <unk> , and <unk> <unk> and popular news portal <unk> In a study by Indian Institute of Mass Communication in 2009 , 93 per cent of the sampled in Tripura rated television as very effective for information and mass education . In the study , 67 per cent of the sampled listened to radio and 80 – 90 per cent read newspaper . Most of the major Indian telecommunication companies are present in the state , such as Airtel , Aircel , Vodafone , Reliance , Tata Indicom , Idea and BSNL . Mobile connections outnumber landline connections by a wide margin . As of 2011 , the state @-@ controlled BSNL has 57 @,@ 897 landline subscribers and 325 @,@ 279 GSM mobile service connections . There are 84 telephone exchanges ( for landlines ) and 716 post offices in the state , as of 2011 . 
 = = = Electricity production = = = 
 Till 2014 , Tripura was a power deficit state . In late 2014 , Tripura reached surplus electricity production capacity by using its recently discovered natural gas resources , and installing high efficiency gas turbine power plants . The state has many power @-@ generating stations . These are owned by Tripura State Electricity Corporation ( <unk> ) , natural gas @-@ powered thermal power stations at <unk> and <unk> , and the ONGC Tripura Power Company in <unk> . The ONGC plant has a capacity of 726 @.@ 6 MW , with the second plant 's commissioning in November 2014 . It is the largest individual power plant in the northeast region . 
 The state also has a hydro power station on the Gumti River . The combined power generation from these three stations is 100 – 105 MW . The North Eastern Electric Power Corporation ( <unk> ) operates the 84 MW Agartala Gas Turbine Power Plant near Agartala . As of November 2014 , another thermal power plant is being built at <unk> . 
 With the newly added power generation capacity , Tripura has with enough capacity to supply all seven sister states of northeast India , as well export power to neighbouring countries such as Bangladesh . With recent discoveries , the state has abundant natural gas reserves to support many more power generation plants , but lacks pipeline and transport infrastructure to deliver the fuel or electricity to India 's national grid . 
 = = = Irrigation and fertilizers = = = 
 As of 2011 , 255 @,@ 241 hectares ( 985 sq mi ) of land in Tripura cultivable , of which 108 @,@ 646 hectares ( 419 sq mi ) has the potential to be covered by irrigation projects . However , only 74 @,@ 796 hectares ( 289 sq mi ) is irrigated . The state lacks major irrigation projects ; it depends on medium @-@ sized projects sourced from Gumti , Khowai ( at <unk> ) and Manu rivers , and minor projects administered by village @-@ level governing bodies that utilise tube wells , water pumps , tanks and lift irrigation . 
 ONGC and Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals are jointly building a fertiliser plant to leverage ONGC 's natural gas discoveries in Tripura . Expected to be in operation by 2017 , the 1 @.@ 3 million tonnes per year plant will supply the northeastern states . 
 = = = Drinking water = = = 
 Drinking Water and Sanitation ( DWS ) wing of Public Works Department manages the drinking water supply in the state . Schools and Anganwadi Centers have been specifically targeted to improve drinking water supply as well as attendance to these institutions . Many areas of Tripura have the problem of excessive iron content in ground water requiring installation of Iron Removal Plants ( <unk> ) . Tripura State has received the best State Award for Water & Sanitation under the category of Small States in the <unk> Diamond State Award function for doing commendable work to provide drinking water supply to the people with sparsely distributed tribal population in hamlets of hilly region of the State . However , a study by the DWS Department found depleting water table and excessive contamination . Still , packaged drinking water under brands " <unk> " , " Eco <unk> " , " Blue Fina " , " Life Drop " and " Aqua Zoom " among others is manufactured and sold in the state . Filters of many types and brands , in addition to locally manufactured ceramic type filters , are sold in the state although their acceptance in rural areas is less . 
