 = = = Sanitation = = = 
 Tripura has high incidence of open defecation , especially in the interior hilly and forest areas . The state has extensively implemented Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan and currently the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan and convergence with <unk> to address this problem . Schools and Anganwadi Center are focussed to provide with urinals and latrines , separate for boys and girls <unk> with baby friendly toilets in Anganwadi Centers to inculcate the habit of using sanitary latrines in young age . However many toilets lie <unk> due to lack of maintenance and damage . Earlier schemes of providing plastic squatting plates , free of cost to people , has not produced results as most of them lie unused as many people cannot afford to construct a toilet . Open defecation has created problems of diarrhoea and vulnerability to malaria . The Chief Minister of Tripura has envisioned to make the state Open <unk> Free ( <unk> ) by 2017 . 
 = = Education = = 
 Schools in Tripura are run by the state government , <unk> and private organisations , which include religious institutions . Instruction in schools is mainly in English or Bengali , though Kokborok and other regional languages are also used . Some of the special schools include Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya , Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya , residential schools run by Tripura Tribal Welfare Residential Educational Institutions Society ( <unk> ) , missionary organisations like St. Paul 's , St. Arnold 's , Holy Cross , Don Bosco , St. John 's etc . There are also many <unk> mostly located in cities like <unk> Agartala at 79 <unk> , GB in Agartala . The schools are affiliated to the Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations ( CISCE ) , the Central Board for Secondary Education ( CBSE ) , the National Institute of Open Schooling ( NIOS ) or the Tripura Board of Secondary Education . Under the 10 + 2 + 3 plan , after completing secondary school , students typically enroll for two years in a junior college or in a higher secondary school affiliated either to the Tripura Board of Secondary Education or to other central boards . Students choose from one of the three streams — liberal arts , commerce or science . As in the rest of India , after passing the Higher Secondary Examination ( the grade 12 examination ) , students may enroll in general degree programs such as bachelor 's degree in arts , commerce or science , or professional degree programs such as engineering , law or medicine . 
 According to the Economic Review of Tripura 2010 – 11 , Tripura has a total of 4 @,@ 455 schools , of which 2 @,@ 298 are primary schools . The total enrolment in all schools of the state is 767 @,@ 672 . Tripura has one Central University ( Tripura University ) and one private university ( a branch of the Institute of Chartered Financial Analysts of India ) . There are 15 general colleges , three engineering colleges ( Tripura Institute of Technology , National Institute of Technology , Agartala and <unk> , Agartala ) , two medical colleges ( Agartala Government Medical College and Tripura Medical College ) , three nursing or paramedical colleges , three polytechnic colleges , one law college , one Government Music College , one College of Fisheries , Institute of Advance Studies in Education , one Regional College of Physical Education at <unk> and one art college . Tripura University also houses the <unk> Agartala Regional Center . 
 = = Healthcare = = 
 Healthcare in Tripura features a universal health care system run by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare of the Government of Tripura . The health care infrastructure is divided into three tiers – the primary health care network , a secondary care system comprising district and sub @-@ divisional hospitals and tertiary hospitals providing speciality and super speciality care . As of 2010 – 11 , there are 17 hospitals , 11 rural hospitals and community health centres , 79 primary health centres , 635 sub @-@ centres / dispensaries , 7 blood banks and 7 blood storage centres in the state . Homeopathic and Ayurvedic styles of medicine are also popular in the state . The National Family Health Survey – 3 conducted in 2005 – 06 revealed that 20 per cent of the residents of Tripura do not generally use government health facilities , and prefers private medical sector . This is overwhelmingly less compared to the national level , where 65 @.@ 6 per cent do not rely on government facilities . As in the rest of India , Tripura residents also cite poor quality of care as the most frequent reason for non @-@ reliance over public health sector . Other reasons include distance of the public sector facility , long waiting time , and inconvenient hours of operation . As of 2010 , the state 's performance in major public health care indices , such as birth rate , infant mortality rate and total fertility rate is better than the national average . The state is vulnerable to epidemics of Malaria , Diarrhea , Japanese Encephalitis and Meningitis . In summer 2014 the state witnessed a major Malaria outbreak . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 = = = Population = = = 
 Tripura ranks second only to Assam as the most populous state in North East India . According to the provisional results of 2011 census of India , Tripura has a population of 3 @,@ 671 @,@ 032 with 1 @,@ 871 @,@ 867 males and 1 @,@ 799 @,@ 165 females . It constitutes 0 @.@ 3 per cent of India 's population . The sex ratio of the state is 961 females per thousand males , higher than the national ratio 940 . The density of population is 350 persons per square kilometre . The literacy rate of Tripura in 2011 was 87 @.@ 75 per cent , higher than the national average 74 @.@ 04 per cent , and third best among all the states . 
 Tripura ranked 6th in Human Development Index ( HDI ) among 35 states and union territories of India , according to 2006 estimate by India 's Ministry of Women and Child Development ; the HDI of Tripura was 0 @.@ 663 , better than the all @-@ India HDI 0 @.@ 605 . 
 In 2011 , the police in Tripura recorded 5 @,@ 803 cognisable offences under the Indian Penal Code , a number second only to Assam ( 66 @,@ 714 ) in North East India . The crime rate in the state was 158 @.@ 1 per 100 @,@ 000 people , less than the all @-@ India average of 192 @.@ 2 . However , 2010 reports showed that the state topped all the states for crime against women , with a rate of 46 @.@ 5 per 100 @,@ 000 people , significantly more than the national rate of 18 . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 In the 2001 census of India , Bengalis represented almost 70 per cent of Tripura 's population while the Tripuri population amounted to 30 per cent . The state 's " scheduled tribes " , historically disadvantaged groups of people recognised by the country 's constitution , consist of 19 ethnic groups and many sub @-@ groups , with diverse languages and cultures . In 2001 , the largest such group was the Kokborok @-@ speaking <unk> , which had a population of 543 @,@ 848 , representing 17 @.@ 0 per cent of the state 's population and 54 @.@ 7 per cent of the " scheduled tribe " population . The other major groups , in descending order of population , were the Reang ( 16 @.@ 6 per cent of the indigenous population ) , Jamatia ( 7 @.@ 5 per cent ) , Chakma ( 6 @.@ 5 per cent ) , Halam ( 4 @.@ 8 per cent ) , Mog ( 3 @.@ 1 per cent ) , Munda ( 1 @.@ 2 per cent ) , Kuki ( 1 @.@ 2 per cent ) and Garo ( 1 @.@ 1 per cent ) . Bengali is the most widely spoken language . Kokborok is a prominent language among the Tripura tribes . Several other languages such as Hindi , Mog , Odia , <unk> Manipuri , Manipuri , Halam , Garo and Chakma belonging to Indo @-@ European and Sino @-@ Tibetan families are spoken in the state . <unk> , a nearly extinct language , is spoken by only four people in one village , as of 2012 . 
 = = Religion = = 
 According to 2011 census , Hinduism is the majority religion in the state , followed by 83 @.@ 4 per cent of the population . Muslims make up 8 @.@ 6 per cent of the population , Christians 4 @.@ 35 per cent , and Buddhists 3 @.@ 41 per cent . The Muslim percentage in the state gradually declined from 1971 due to heavy influx of Hindu population from and the migration of Muslim population to Bangladesh . <unk> ( Barua & <unk> also comes under Mog community ) and <unk> are the followers of Buddhism in Tripura . 
 Christianity is chiefly followed by members of the <unk> , Kuki , Garo , Tripuri , Halam tribes and as per 2011 census has 159 @,@ 882 adherents . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The diverse ethno @-@ linguistic groups of Tripura have given rise to a composite culture . The dominant ethnic groups are Bengali , Tripuri ( <unk> , Tripura , Jamatia , Reang , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Chakma , Halam , Garo , Kuki , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Mogh , Manipuri , and other tribal groups such as Munda , <unk> and Santhal who migrated in Tripura as a tea labourers . Bengali people represent the largest ethno @-@ linguist community of the state . Bengali culture , as a result , is the main non @-@ indigenous , non @-@ Tripura culture . Indeed , many elite tribal families which reside in towns have actively embraced Bengali culture and language in the past , but in today 's generation more <unk> are embracing their culture . The Tripuri kings were great patrons of Bengali culture , especially literature ; Bengali language was the language of the court . Elements of Bengali culture , such as Bengali literature , Bengali music , and Bengali cuisine are widespread , particularly in the urban areas of the state . 
 Tripura is noted for bamboo and cane handicrafts . Bamboo , wood and cane are used to create an array of furniture , utensils , hand @-@ held fans , replicas , mats , baskets , idols and interior decoration materials . Music and dance are integral to the culture of the state . Some local musical instruments are the <unk> , <unk> ( both string instruments ) , and <unk> ( a type of flute ) . Each indigenous community has its own repertoire of songs and dances performed during weddings , religious occasions , and other festivities . The Tripuri and Jamatia people perform <unk> dance during the <unk> puja . <unk> dance ( also called <unk> dance ) , <unk> dance , <unk> dance , and <unk> <unk> dance are other Tripuri dance forms . Reang community , the second largest scheduled tribe of the state , is noted for its <unk> dance that is performed by young girls balanced on earthen pitchers . <unk> dance is performed by the <unk> during the <unk> festival ( the last day of the month of Chaitra in Hindu calendar ) . Other dance forms include <unk> dance of the Garo people , hai @-@ hak dance of the Halam branch of Kuki people , and <unk> dance and <unk> dance of the Mog . Alongside such traditional music , mainstream Indian musical elements such as Indian classical music and dance , Rabindra Sangeet are also practised . Sachin Dev Burman , a member of the royal family , was a maestro in the filmi genre of Indian music . 
 Hindus believe that <unk> is the patron goddess of Tripura and an aspect of Shakti . Durga Puja , Kali Puja , <unk> , <unk> and the worship of the <unk> deities are important festivals in the state . Some festivals represent confluence of different regional traditions , such as Ganga puja , <unk> puja , <unk> puja and Ker puja . Unakoti , Pilak and <unk> are historic sites where large collections of stone carvings and rock sculptures are noted . Like <unk> is a cultural Water Palace of this state . Sculptures are evidence of the presence of Buddhist and Brahmanical orders for centuries , and represent a rare artistic fusion of traditional organised religions and tribal influence . The State Museum in the Ujjayanta Palace in Agartala has impressive galleries that depict the history and culture of Tripura through pictures , videos and other installations . 
 = = Tourism = = 
 Within its small geographical area , Tripura offers plenty of attractions for the tourists in the form of magnificent palaces ( Ujjayanta Palace and <unk> Palace at Agartala and <unk> - Lake Palace at Melaghar ) , splendid rock @-@ cut carvings and stone images ( Unakoti near Kailashahar , <unk> near <unk> and Pilak in Belonia Sub @-@ divisions ) , important temples of Hindus and Buddhists including the famous Mata <unk> temple ( one of the 51 <unk> as per Hindu mythology ) at Udaipur , vast natural as well as artificial lakes namely <unk> lake in <unk> subdivision , <unk> at Melaghar , <unk> , Jagannath <unk> , Kalyan Sagar , etc. at Udaipur , the beautiful hill station of Jampui hill bordering Mizoram , wild life sanctuaries at <unk> , Gumti , Rowa and Trishna , eco parks created by forest department at Manu , <unk> , Ambassa and rich cultural heritage of Tribals , Bengalis and Manipuri communities residing in the state . The main attractions in Agartala are Ujjayanta Palace , State Museum , Heritage Park , Tribal Museum , <unk> Academy , <unk> College , Laxminarayan Temple , Uma <unk> Temple , Jagannath Temple , <unk> Bihar , <unk> Mian Mosque , <unk> Niwas , Rabindra Kanan , <unk> , Handicrafts Designing Centre , Fourteen Goddess Temple , Portuguese Church etc . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Football and cricket are the most popular sports in the state . The state capital Agartala has its own club football championships every year in which many local clubs compete in a league and knockout format . Tripura participates as an eastern state team in the Ranji Trophy , the Indian domestic cricket competition . The state is a regular participant of the Indian National Games and the North Eastern Games . In 2016 , <unk> <unk> from Agartala became the first ever female gymnast from India to qualify for the Olympics when she qualified for the women 's artistic gymnastics event of 2016 Summer Olympics . 
 = Quatermass II = 
 Quatermass II is a British science @-@ fiction serial , originally broadcast by BBC Television in the autumn of 1955 . It is the second in the Quatermass series by writer Nigel Kneale , and the oldest of those serials to survive in its entirety in the BBC archives . 
 The serial sees Professor Bernard Quatermass of the British Experimental Rocket Group being asked to examine strange meteorite showers . His investigations lead to his uncovering a conspiracy involving alien infiltration at the highest levels of the British Government . As even some of Quatermass 's closest colleagues fall victim to the alien influence , he is forced to use his own unsafe rocket prototype , which recently caused a nuclear disaster at an Australian testing range , to prevent the aliens from taking over mankind . 
 Although sometimes compared unfavourably to the first and third Quatermass serials , Quatermass II was praised for its allegorical concerns of the damaging effects of industrialisation and the corruption of governments by big business . It is described on the British Film Institute 's " Screenonline " website as " compulsive viewing . " 
 = = Production = = 
 On 22 September 1955 the ITV network was launched in the UK , bringing commercial television to Britain for the first time and ending the BBC 's broadcasting monopoly in the country . The new network 's creation had been established by the Television Act 1954 , and the BBC had known in advance that they would need programmes to combat the new rival for television audiences . Referring to the 1953 science @-@ fiction serial The Quatermass Experiment in a memo written in 1954 , BBC Television 's Controller of Programmes , Cecil McGivern , noted that : " Had competitive television been in existence then , we would have killed it every Saturday night while [ The Quatermass Experiment ] lasted . We are going to need many more ' Quatermass Experiment ' programmes . " 
 Having recently signed a two @-@ year extension to his BBC staff writer 's contract , Nigel Kneale was specifically commissioned to write a sequel to The Quatermass Experiment in early 1955 to challenge the new ITV network . Kneale was inspired by contemporary fears over secret UK Ministry of Defence research establishments such as Porton Down , and also by being required , as a BBC staff member , to sign the Official Secrets Act . As with The Quatermass Experiment , Quatermass II was produced and directed by Rudolph Cartier ; he and Kneale particularly enjoyed working together . Since the first Quatermass serial , the two men had collaborated on the literary adaptations Wuthering Heights ( 1953 ) and Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four ( 1954 ) , and on Kneale 's abominable snowman play The Creature ( 1955 ) . 
 Quatermass II comprised six half @-@ hour episodes , transmitted live from Studio G at the BBC 's Lime Grove Studios in London . The episodes — individually subtitled " The Bolts " , " The Mark " , " The Food " , " The Coming " , " The Frenzy " and " The Destroyers " — were shown every Saturday night at 8 p.m. from 22 October to 26 November 1955 ; because of the live nature of the performances , most of the episodes overran their allotted half @-@ hour slots slightly . Each episode was rehearsed on the Monday to Friday before transmission at Mansergh Woodall Boys Club in St John 's Wood , London , and then camera rehearsed in studio for most of the day on the Saturday . 
 Not every scene was performed live ; because of the increased budget — £ 7 @,@ 552 was spent on the serial , nearly double the amount spent on The Quatermass Experiment — Cartier was able to include a larger proportion of pre @-@ filmed inserts on 35 mm film , which were included during the live transmissions of each episode . Most of the pre @-@ filmed material was shot on location at the Shell Haven oil refinery in Stanford @-@ le @-@ Hope , doubling for the factory where the alien creature is being grown on Earth . Filming also took place in rural Essex for material showing the meteorites being discovered in fields , and in the boiler rooms of the under @-@ construction BBC Television Centre in London for scenes set inside the factory . The location film sequences were the most ambitious that had then been attempted in British television drama , which was usually predominantly studio @-@ bound . 
 Each episode of Quatermass II was telerecorded onto 35 mm film during its live transmission , for a scheduled repeat the following Monday night at 10 : 15 p.m. All six episodes survive intact in the BBC 's archives , although the telerecording copies in some cases suffer from poor quality sound and vision . Owing to either technical or artistic problems , Cartier had some scenes re @-@ performed by the cast immediately following the live performance on the Saturday evening , and these were telerecorded and used to replace the live versions in the Monday night repeats . Quatermass II was one of the first BBC drama productions to be repeated from a telerecording , rather than having the production re @-@ performed live for any second showing as had been the norm in the past . 
 Episode three , " The Food " , was repeated in a slightly edited form on BBC 2 on 26 August 1991 as part of The Lime Grove Story . This was a day of programming to commemorate the closure of the studios after forty years of use by the BBC . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = The Bolts = = = 
 Meteorites are falling over Northern England , one of which is observed by an Army radar unit . After a farmer finds one of the objects in a field , the soldiers become directly involved , and Captain Johnny Dillon decides to unofficially ask the father of his fiancée , Paula , to investigate . Paula 's father is Professor Bernard Quatermass of the British Experimental Rocket Group — " the rocket man ! " , as one of Dillon 's troops puts it . Quatermass and the Rocket Group , now including Paula and mathematical genius Dr. Leo Pugh , are recovering from the news that one of the two nuclear Quatermass II rockets has exploded during a ground test in Australia , killing hundreds of staff and ending their project to build permanent bases on the Moon . 
 Quatermass agrees to accompany Dillon on an investigation and the pair visit the farmer , who refuses to talk and sends them away . At a pub , they find out that the nearby village of Winnerden Flats has been leveled to build an enormous industrial plant protected by armed guards , which is identical to Quatermass ' moonbase design . Upon investigating a newly fallen meteorite , Dillon is sprayed from it with ammonia gas , and a distinctive mark appears on his face . 
 = = = The Mark = = = 
 Similarly ' marked ' armed guards arrive from the plant and take Dillon away . Whilst being taken Dillon threateningly tells Quatermass not to follow . After the guards ' departure Quatermass speaks with a tramp , who explains that there used to be a small government research unit consisting of a few huts by Winnerden Flats , and that a year ago they expanded and bulldozed the village , and built the plant and a prefab town for the construction workers . At the prefab town , Quatermass sees that ' the mark ' and strange behaviour are associated with those who find the fallen meteorites , but before he can find out more the community police order him away . 
 Quatermass returns to the Rocket Group , where Leo has reconstructed the meteorite , which can carry ammonia and other gases and travel through the atmosphere to the ground in one piece . In London , the Metropolitan Police claim they have no jurisdiction over the matter , so he goes to his contact Fowler at the ministry , who reveals that the plant is a top secret project to make synthetic food , but Vincent Broadhead MP , who is conducting an inquiry into the project , reveals that there are identical plants in Brazil and Siberia . Upon gaining entry to the inquiry , Quatermass notices that one of the civil servants has ' the mark ' . 
 = = = The Food = = = 
 As he tries to investigate further , Quatermass finds that other figures in high levels of government have gained ' the mark ' after coming across meteorites . Quatermass leaves the inquiry , then returns with Fowler to find that Broadhead has been ' marked ' and now claims there is no problem with the project . Fowler takes Quatermass to meet with civil servant Rupert Ward , who has the authority to inspect the plant . Back at the Rocket Group , Leo and Paula deduce and discover with a radio telescope that an asteroid is orbiting the Earth invisibly and discharging the meteorites when it reaches the near point , 400 000 miles over Southern England every 14 hours . 
 Ward helps Quatermass and Fowler gain entry to the plant and they find that Dillon has been discharged from the infirmary and has left . They then look around and discover that gases are pumped to the giant pressure domes from the pilot plant : ammonia , hydrogen , nitrogen and methane , as opposed to oxygen as in Quatermass ' moonbase pressure dome idea . Meanwhile , the guards intimidate and then murder a family who were having a picnic nearby . Back at the plant , Ward slips away to look inside a dome , and Quatermass and Fowler find him stumbling out of it dying and covered in black slime , which before his death Ward reveals was inside the dome instead of food . Fowler and Quatermass escape back to the Rocket Group and analyse Ward 's tie with Leo and Paula , finding that the slime is a corrosive , poisonous substance , fatal to all forms of life on Earth . Meanwhile , the asteroid is approaching its near point . 
 = = = The Coming = = = 
 Quatermass deduces that an alien life @-@ form which comes from one of the moons of Saturn , which lives on ammonia , hydrogen and methane , but to which oxygen is a deadly poison , travels to earth in the meteorites , and in the few seconds they spend out of their shells before dying they possess human minds , and transmit knowledge to each other in a collective consciousness . From this , they assume that it was the population of <unk> Flats itself who demolished the village and built the plant . Quatermass decides that they can use the remaining Quatermass II rocket like a nuclear bomb and destroy the asteroid , much to Leo 's protest at the rocket being unsafe to fly . Fowler tries to steal information about the other plants from the ministry , but is overcome and possessed by a makeshift meteorite hidden inside a filing cabinet . 
 That night Quatermass travels with journalist Hugh Conrad to the prefab town where they meet with construction workers who say that work has been suspended for all except the ' zombies ' ( ' marked ' people ) . They claim that the meteorites are only over @-@ shots from the plant after one of them lands in a pub . These recent meteorites are falling in hundreds and being collected by special guard teams then returned to the plant . Quatermass steals a guard 's uniform from a lorry to gain entry to the plant . As he does this Conrad returns to the pub to telephone his newspaper and reveal everything about the secret alien invasion , but he becomes ' marked ' before he can finish . The construction workers , however , hear what he says and decide to take action . Meanwhile , Quatermass is inside a pressure dome , where he sees guards putting meteorites into the tanks of poisonous slime that killed Ward , where together , in the recreated atmosphere of a moon of Saturn , they combine and grow into the first of the enormous <unk> alien creatures . 
 = = = The Frenzy = = = 
 Quatermass is narrowly saved from discovery by the rioting construction workers , who storm the plant and along with him are besieged inside the gas distribution centre , where they pump oxygen into the completed pressure dome to poison the ammonids , however some of the workers succumb to propaganda from the plant controllers , who offer them the chance to see inside the dome . The guards kill them by blocking the pipe with their bodies . In anger , the remaining workers fire on the dome with a bazooka , igniting the hydrogen and subsequently destroying the entire plant , killing the ammonids and releasing ammonia gas into the surrounding area . 
 Quatermass escapes the plant in a gas mask and meets up with Leo , whom he finds unconscious in his car nearby . With little time left to prevent more ammonids returning in meteorites , he and Leo are forced to use the Quatermass II to attempt to destroy the asteroid , despite the known flaws in the rocket 's design and its liability to explode . They return to the Rocket Group , but British Paratroopers led by Johnny Dillon take control of the firing base . 
 = = = The Destroyers = = = 
 The team invite Dillon up to the control room , where they see he has written orders from the very top , showing that the ammonids have long been in control of the government . They appeal to his human side to allow them to continue , which he does so after Leo tells him the rocket must launch . Despite both being old and unfit , Quatermass and Leo are the only two who have the scientific knowledge to make such a flight . They fly to the asteroid and land on it , but en route Quatermass finds out that the night the plant exploded Leo was possessed by the ammonids . 
 Leo intends to kill Quatermass to prevent the destruction of the asteroid , and also to allow the ammonids to travel back to Earth en masse in the Quatermass II . He tries to kill Quatermass with a gun , but the recoil sends him floating helplessly off into space . Quatermass returns to the rocket and jettisons the nuclear motor , then flies the rocket back to earth as the motor blows up the asteroid , killing the remaining ammonids and relinquishing control over Dillon and all the ' marked ' humans , returning mankind to its former freedom . 
 = = Casting and crew = = 
 Reginald Tate , who had played the title role in The Quatermass Experiment , collapsed and died on 23 August 1955 , aged 58 . This was less than a month before the shooting of the location filming for Quatermass II began , and necessitated the casting of a replacement lead actor at short notice ; John Robinson was chosen to fill the part . Robinson was an experienced actor from a range of different films and television programmes since the 1930s , but was uncomfortable about taking over from Tate , and had difficulty in learning some of the technical dialogue he was required to deliver . Robinson 's delivery of his lines has been criticised by some later reviewers . 
 Appearing as Quatermass 's chief assistant Dr Leo Pugh was Welsh actor Hugh Griffith . Griffith had been an actor on stage and screen since the 1930s , but gained his highest profile roles after Quatermass II ; he went on to win the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor as Sheikh Ilderim in Ben @-@ Hur ( 1959 ) . He also appeared in Lucky Jim ( 1957 ) and Oliver ! ( 1968 ) . 
 Monica Grey played Paula Quatermass ; she was chosen by BBC management rather than the production team , as she was the wife of the BBC 's head of radio drama , Val Gielgud . As Hugh Griffith also had problems with some of his technical dialogue , Grey learned his lines as well as her own , in case she needed to step in and assist him during the live performance . Dillon was played by John Stone ; Stone too had a long career as a supporting actor in a range of British television series , and in 1956 had a small role in the film X the Unknown , which Hammer Film Productions had intended as a sequel to their version of The Quatermass Experiment , until Kneale denied them the rights to use the character . 
 Four actors who each became well known for a particular role on British television had supporting parts in Quatermass II . Rupert Davies who played MP Vincent Broadhead would go on to find fame as Sûreté detective <unk> Jules Maigret , the title character of 1960s TV series Maigret , based on Georges Simenon 's novels . Roger Delgado , who found fame in the 1970s as the Master in Doctor Who ( 1971 – 73 ) , played a journalist who helps Quatermass before falling victim to " the mark " in episode four . Wilfrid Brambell , later star of the sitcom Steptoe and Son ( 1962 – 74 ) and The Beatles ' film A Hard Day 's Night ( 1964 ) , appeared as a tramp , and Melvyn Hayes , who played the small role of Frankie , became one of the stars of the popular sitcom It Ain 't Half Hot Mum ( 1974 – 81 ) . 
 Nigel Kneale not only wrote the serial but , previously an actor , had two speaking parts . He played the voice heard over the factory loudspeaker system in episode five , and narrated the recaps at the beginning of episodes two , three , four and six . Kneale went on to write feature film screenplays such as Look Back in Anger ( 1958 ) and The First Men in the Moon ( 1964 ) , as well as continuing to write for television , including two further Quatermass serials , until 1997 . 
 Kneale credited the director Rudolph Cartier with bringing to the screen in Quatermass II , with its ambitious location filming , an expansive style that had not been seen in British television drama beforehand . Cartier worked with Kneale again on the third Quatermass serial , Quatermass and the Pit , in 1958 , and had subsequent successes with plays such as Anna Karenina ( 1961 ) , Cross of Iron ( 1961 ) and Lee Oswald — Assassin ( 1966 ) . He continued directing for television until the 1970s . 
 = = Reception and influence = = 
 The available British television audience had doubled since The Quatermass Experiment had been shown in 1953 , and the viewing figures for Quatermass II were accordingly higher . The serial gained an audience of 7 @.@ 9 million viewers for its first three episodes , rising to 8 @.@ 3 million for the fourth and fifth and concluding with 9 million . A BBC audience research report commissioned after Quatermass II had finished found that 90 % of those questioned in the sample had watched at least five episodes of the production . 
 Quatermass II received positive newspaper reviews in the Daily Mail and the Daily Express , although the BBC 's Radio Times listings magazine published letters of both praise and criticism for the serial . The serial was also criticised internally at the BBC by Cecil McGivern , who felt it to be not as good as the original . One letter received by the production team before the transmission of episode five came from a woman in Haverfordwest who was concerned that she would never find out what happened in the end as the week before the final episode 's transmission she was due to move to Ireland to spend the rest of her life in a convent ; she wondered if the BBC could possibly write to her and let her know how the story resolved . After some debate as to whether the letter was a journalistic trick to uncover advance story details , Kneale eventually decided that it was genuine , and allowed Cartier to send a reply outlining the storyline 's conclusion . Following episode six , some viewers wrote in to the BBC concerned at Quatermass 's survival , as he had not been seen to definitely return to Earth in the experimental rocket ship . 
 The BBC 's own website regarded Quatermass II unfavourably when reviewing its DVD release in 2005 . " The script is too often let down by the production 's rougher edges . Your heart will break halfway through episode six as it all falls apart . And then there 's Monica Gray [ sic ] — less an actress than a finishing school on legs . " Writing in The Times in 2006 , Morgan Falconer claimed to find racist undertones in the serial . " Quatermass , for instance , often seemed to have an unhealthy preoccupation with blackness , a barely veiled commentary on racial change in Britain . In one scene in Quatermass II , the Professor stands outside a pub and watches the sky fill with dark asteroids . ' They ’ re coming in their thousands , ' he says , ' this is it . ' " However , this interpretation of the serial is not widespread , and is undermined in episode five where an Irish immigrant helps Quatermass sabotage the aliens ' food supply system . In any case , it is in direct contrast with Kneale 's deliberate attack on racial intolerance in Quatermass and the Pit . 
 Speaking in a 2003 television documentary about Nigel Kneale 's career , the writer and critic Kim Newman praised the underlying themes of Quatermass II , and their particular relevance to the British way of life . " Quatermass II is the British Invasion of the Bodysnatchers , but I don 't necessarily think that 's a bad thing ... What Quatermass II does is take that metaphor and apply it to the specific conditions of Britain in the 1950s ; not just the Cold War paranoia , but the traditional British grumbling resentment of bureaucracy as represented by the council , or in this case big business . " The British Film Institute 's " Screenonline " website also offers praise in its analysis of the serial . 
 " With its tale of an invasion by an invisible enemy indistinguishable from ourselves , Kneale 's story tapped into contemporary fears about the ' red ' ( i.e. communist ) threat , although in a less direct way than the American science fiction films of the 1950s , including Invasion of the Body Snatchers . At the same time , it reflected the widespread anxiety of the nuclear age — the story begins with a failed test of a nuclear @-@ powered rocket in Australia ( at a time when the country was in reality a site for a series of British nuclear weapons tests ) . In short , Quatermass II was the perfect cold @-@ war drama . " 
 Some science @-@ fiction fans have speculated that the Quatermass serials in general , and Quatermass II in particular — with its elements including a conspiracy of silence in the government concerning extraterrestrial life , secret government facilities for alien use , and the silencing of any critic who opposes the government 's plans — influenced the successful American series The X @-@ Files ( 1993 – 2002 ) . Kneale was invited to write for The X @-@ Files during the 1990s , but declined the offer . 
 Other genre productions that have been compared with the serial include the 1970 Doctor Who story Spearhead from Space . This serial features an alien entity falling to Earth in a meteorite shower ; a factory taken over for the growth of the alien creature , and governmental institutions being infiltrated by servants of the aliens . 
 = = Other media = = 
 As with The Quatermass Experiment , the film rights to the serial were purchased by Hammer Film Productions — in this case after they had only read the scripts , before the serial was even made . Titled Quatermass 2 , the film was released in 1957 and once again directed by Val Guest , with Brian Donlevy starring ; unlike the first film , Kneale wrote the screenplay himself . In the United States , the film was released under the title Enemy from Space . 
 Shortly after Quatermass II finished its run , comedian Bob Monkhouse included a spoof of the serial in an episode of his own BBC television series , which featured Monica Grey reprising her role as Paula Quatermass . Cartier and Kneale were greatly displeased with this , and complained to their superiors at the BBC about it . 
 Quatermass returned to the BBC in 1958 when Kneale 's third serial , Quatermass and the Pit , began transmission . That was the last television appearance of the character for twenty years , until Kneale brought Quatermass back for a final time in the 1979 serial Quatermass , this time produced for Thames Television . 
 A serialised novelisation of Quatermass II , written by Kneale , ran in the Daily Express newspaper in the UK from 5 December to 20 December 1955 , although Kneale was forced to draw the storyline to a premature conclusion as the paper lost interest in the project . The television scripts were released by Penguin Books in 1960 , with a selection of stills from the production also included . The book was re @-@ released in 1979 , with a new introduction by Kneale , to coincide with the transmission of the Thames Television serial . 
 In April 2005 BBC Worldwide released a DVD box set of all their existing Quatermass material . This included digitally restored versions of all six episodes of Quatermass II , with the sound and vision of the telerecording copies cleaned up as far as possible , and some of the existing special effects inserts that survived on their original film elements being re @-@ inserted into the episodes . 
 = Isaac Brock = 
 Major @-@ General Sir Isaac Brock KB ( 6 October 1769 – 13 October 1812 ) was a British Army officer and administrator from Guernsey . Brock was assigned to Lower Canada in 1802 . Despite facing desertions and near @-@ mutinies , he commanded his regiment in Upper Canada ( present @-@ day Ontario ) successfully for many years . He was promoted to major general , and became responsible for defending Upper Canada against the United States . While many in Canada and Britain believed war could be averted , Brock began to ready the army and militia for what was to come . When the War of 1812 broke out , the populace was prepared , and quick victories at Fort Mackinac and Detroit defeated American invasion efforts . 
 Brock 's actions , particularly his success at Detroit , earned him a knighthood , membership in the Order of the Bath , accolades and the sobriquet " The Hero of Upper Canada " . His name is often linked with that of the Native American leader Tecumseh , although the two men collaborated in person only for a few days . Brock died at the Battle of Queenston Heights , which was nevertheless a British victory . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Brock was born at St Peter Port on the Channel Island of Guernsey , the eighth son of John Brock ( 1729 – 1777 ) , a midshipman in the Royal Navy , and Elizabeth de Lisle , daughter of Daniel de Lisle , then Lieutenant @-@ Bailiff of Guernsey . The Brocks were an English family who had been established in Guernsey since the sixteenth century . Brock earned a reputation during his early education on Guernsey as an assiduous student , as well as an exceptional swimmer and boxer . At age ten , he was sent to school in Southampton but spent one year in Rotterdam learning French . 
 Despite his lack of an extensive formal education , Brock appreciated its importance . It seems that as an adult he often spent his leisure time sequestered in his room , reading books in an attempt to improve his education . He read many works on military tactics and science , but he also read ancient history and other less immediately practical topics . At the time of his death he was in possession of a modest library of books , including works by Shakespeare , Voltaire , and Samuel Johnson . 
 He kept a reputation as an " unusually tall , robust " man throughout his life , with an adult height of about 6 ft 2 in ( 188 cm ) . Measurements taken from his uniform show that at his death he had a waist size of 47 inches ( 120 cm ) and the inside brim of his hat measured 24 inches ( 61 cm ) in circumference . Though Brock was noted as a handsome man who enjoyed the company of women , he never married . 
 = = Military service = = 
 Brock had a successful pre @-@ war military career and a quick rise through the ranks which many commented on at the time . Some credited luck and others skill in his rapid promotions , and it is fair to say that Brock had substantial portions of both on his way to prominence . The fact that his promotions occurred in a time of peace and that Brock had no special political connections adds to how remarkable a rise it was . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 At the age of fifteen Brock joined the 8th ( The King 's ) Regiment of Foot on 8 March 1785 with the rank of ensign , and was likely given responsibility for the regimental colours . His elder brother John was already an officer in the same regiment . As was usual at the time Brock 's commission was purchased . On 16 January 1790 he bought the rank of lieutenant and later that year he raised his own company of men . As a result , he was promoted to captain ( of an independent company of foot ) on 27 January 1791 and transferred to the 49th ( Hertfordshire ) Regiment of Foot on 15 June 1791 . 
 His nephew and biographer ( Ferdinand Brock Tupper ) asserts that shortly after joining the regiment , a professional <unk> forced a match on him . As the one being challenged Brock had his choice of terms , and so he insisted that they fight with pistols . His friends were shocked as Brock was a large target and his opponent an expert shot . Brock however refused to change his mind . When the duellist arrived at the field he asked Brock to decide how many paces they would take . Brock insisted that the duel would take place not at the usual range , but at handkerchief distance ( i.e. , close range ) . The duellist declined and subsequently was forced to leave the regiment . This contributed to Brock 's popularity and reputation among his fellow officers , as this duellist had a formidable reputation and was reportedly regarded as a bully in the regiment . During his time with this regiment Brock served in the Caribbean , where he fell ill with fever and nearly died , only recovering once he had returned to England in 1793 . 
 Once back in Britain he spent much of his time recruiting and he was subsequently placed in charge of recruits on Jersey . He purchased his majority on 27 June 1795 , and rejoined his regiment in 1796 , when the rest of his men returned from the West Indies . 
 = = = First command = = = 
 On 28 October 1797 Brock purchased the rank of lieutenant @-@ colonel , and became acting commanding officer of the regiment , assuming substantive command on 22 March 1798 with the retirement of Lieutenant Colonel Frederick Keppel . The rank was apparently bought cheaply ; his predecessor from whom he purchased the rank was advised to sell up and leave the army rather than face a court martial and probable dismissal . In 1799 the 49th was assigned to the Helder Expedition against the Batavian Republic ( now known as the Netherlands ) , to be led by Sir Ralph Abercromby . During the troop landings Brock saw his first combat on 10 September 1799 under the command of then @-@ Major @-@ General John Moore . Given that the 49th was in poor shape when Brock took command they saw little of the actual combat . Likely Moore was sparing them and using more experienced troops to establish the beachhead . Finally on 2 October the 49th was actively involved in heavy combat at the Battle of Alkmaar , where they acquitted themselves well only sustaining thirty @-@ three fatalities . This was remarkable given the circumstances of the fight . The 49th had been ordered to proceed up the beaches of Egmont @-@ op @-@ Zee , a steep climb through sand dunes and poor terrain . The situation was exacerbated by harassment from French sharpshooters who had excellent cover . After about six hours of heavy fighting the attack was stopped about a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) short of their objective . After an hour of close combat the French began to withdraw . Brock himself was injured in the fighting when he was hit by a spent musket ball in the throat . A neck cloth prevented a possibly fatal injury . In his own words , " I got knocked down shortly after the enemy began to retreat , but never quitted the field , and returned to my duty in less than half an hour . " 
 In 1801 while aboard the 74 @-@ gun HMS Ganges ( commanded by Captain Thomas Fremantle , a personal friend of Brock 's ) , Brock was present at the Battle of Copenhagen where it was intended that his troops would lead an assault on the forts at Copenhagen . Although the outcome of the battle made such an assault unnecessary , Brock observed first @-@ hand the tactical brilliance of Lord Nelson . After the battle , along with Fremantle , he was among those who celebrated the victory with Nelson . In 1802 Brock and the 49th Foot were ordered to Canada . 
 = = = Transfer to Canada = = = 
 Brock arrived in Canada along with the rest of the 49th foot and was initially assigned to Montreal . Almost immediately , in 1804 he was faced with one of the primary problems in Canada : desertion . Seven soldiers stole a boat and fled across the border into the United States . Despite having no jurisdiction on American soil Brock sent a party across the border in pursuit and the men were captured . 
 = = = Mutiny = = = 
 A short time later Brock received a report from Fort George that some of the garrison were planning to imprison the officers and flee to the U.S. Immediately he boarded the schooner that had brought the message and proceeded to Fort George which was under the command of then @-@ Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Roger Hale Sheaffe . A hastily assembled honour guard formed to greet Brock 's unexpected arrival . Alone on entering the fort , Brock ordered the sergeant of the guard to disarm and had him confined . 
 As it was the dinner hour , all the soldiers were in barracks . Brock ordered the drummers to call out the men and sent the first officer on the scene , Lieutenant Williams , to bring him a soldier suspected of being one of the mutiny 's ringleaders . Pinning the man with a sabre Williams took him into custody . The other suspected mutineers were also captured . 
 Brock sent the twelve mutineers and the seven deserters to Quebec for court martial . The mutineers had planned to jail all the officers ( save Sheaffe , who was to be killed ) and then cross the Niagara River into the U.S. at Queenston . Seven soldiers were subsequently executed by firing squad . The mutineers testified that they were forced to such measures by the severity of Sheaffe and how , had they continued under Brock 's command , they would never have taken such action . Brock was evidently upset by the news that the conspirators had been shot . In a botched execution the firing squad discharged their weapons at too long a distance so that the condemned men were not killed instantly . 
 Interestingly Brock 's younger brother John Savery Brock was compelled to retire from the Royal Navy after his involvement in a mutinous incident ; he induced " his brother midshipmen of the fleet at Spithead to sign a round robin against their being subjected to the practice of mast @-@ heading " for which " he was recommended privately to retire from the service . " 
 = = = Pre @-@ war preparations = = = 
 After a period of leave in England over winter 1805 – 6 and promotion to colonel on 29 October 1805 , Brock returned to Canada to find himself temporarily in command of the entire British army there . By 1806 the United States was becoming increasingly hostile to the British Empire ; relations between the two nations continued to deteriorate until war finally broke out in 1812 . This hostility emerged from three sources : grievances at British violations of American sovereignty , restriction of American trade by Britain , and an American desire to gain territory by invading and annexing the poorly defended British North American colonies . American grievances included the impressment of American sailors by the Royal Navy , the blockade of French ports , and a belief that the British were inciting American Indians to attack U.S. settlements on the western frontier . War hawks in the U.S. called for an invasion of Canada to punish the British Empire and to lessen the threat to American interests represented by the Native Americans . At the same time the American states were becoming crowded and there was a growing attitude — later described by the phrase Manifest Destiny — that the United States was destined to control all of the North American continent . American hawks assumed that Canadian colonists would rise up and support the invading U.S. armies as liberators and that , as Thomas Jefferson famously wrote , conquering Canada would be " a mere matter of marching " . In response to this emerging threat Brock moved quickly to bolster Canadian defences . He strengthened the fortifications of Quebec by building walls and an elevated battery . Despite having little formal education Brock succeeded in creating a formidable defensive position largely due to his reading , which included several volumes on the science of running and setting up artillery . He also rearranged and strengthened the Provincial Marine ( responsible for transport on the lakes and rivers ) , which led to the development of a naval force capable of holding the Great Lakes . This was to be pivotal during the war . Nevertheless , Brock 's appropriation of civilian lands and labour for military use brought him into conflict with the civilian authorities led by Thomas Dunn . 
 In 1807 Brock was appointed brigadier <unk> by Governor General Sir James Henry Craig , the new commander of Canadian forces . He was to take command of all forces in Upper Canada in 1810 . During this time Brock continued to ask for a posting in Europe . In June 1811 he was promoted to Major General and in October of that year Lieutenant Governor Francis Gore left for England . Brock was sent to Upper Canada as Senior Officer Commander of the Troops and Senior Member of the [ Executive ] Council , putting him fully in charge of both the military and civil authority . He was usually referred to as President of the Council or Administrator of Upper Canada ( never as Lieutenant Governor ) . When permission to leave for Europe finally came in early 1812 Brock declined the offer , seeing it as his duty to defend Canada in war against the United States . 
 As Upper Canada 's administrator Brock made a series of changes designed to help Canada in the event of a war . He amended the militia act allowing the use of all available volunteers and ordered enhanced training of these raw recruits , despite opposition from the provincial legislature . Furthermore , he continued strengthening and reinforcing defences . Brock also began seeking out First Nations leaders such as the Shawnee chief Tecumseh to see if they would ally with him against the Americans in the event of war . Although the conventional wisdom of the day was that Canada would fall quickly in the event of an invasion , Brock pursued these strategies to give the colony a fighting chance . 
 Meanwhile , back in England Brock 's brother William faced financial difficulties , as the bank in which he was a senior partner failed . Isaac 's commissions had been purchased with a loan entered into the bank 's books by his brother and the Brocks now faced a demand for payment . Isaac could not meet the £ 3000 debt but made over the whole of his salary to another brother , Irving , to be used as Irving saw fit , either to pay the debt or the family 's other bills . 
 = = War of 1812 = = 
 = = = Early war and the capture of Detroit = = = 
 The United States declared war on Britain on 18 June 1812 . Brock 's preparations meant that Canada was not unprepared for the war ; however , Brock felt that those preparations would not be enough to keep the colony secure . In Upper Canada , besides the militia , there was only one British infantry regiment , a detachment of veterans and a company of artillery . These had to be dispersed between several widely separated posts . Brock did have one vital advantage in that the armed vessels of the Provincial Marine controlled the lakes , and allowed him to move his reserves rapidly between threatened points . 
 With war apparently imminent , Brock had continually kept the commanders of his posts informed of all developments . When news of the outbreak of war reached him , he sent a canoe party under the noted trader and voyager William McKay to the British outpost at St. Joseph Island on Lake Huron , with orders which allowed the commander ( Captain Charles Roberts ) to stand on the defensive or attack the nearby American outpost at Fort Mackinac at his discretion . Roberts immediately launched an attack on Fort Mackinac with a scratch force of regulars , fur traders and First Nations warriors . On 17 July , the American garrison was taken by surprise ( not being aware that war had been declared ) and surrendered . This victory immediately encouraged many First Nations tribes who had hitherto been neutral or undecided , to give their active support to the British . 
 Despite this complete success , Brock felt he needed to go further . He was hampered in these efforts by Governor General George Prevost , who had replaced Craig in late 1811 . Prevost 's orders from the government , and his own inclinations , were to place a strict emphasis on defence . Prevost kept the bulk of his forces in Lower Canada to protect Quebec , and opposed any attack into American territory . Brock also considered that he was handicapped by inertia and defeatism among the Legislature and other officials . He wrote to Prevost 's Adjutant General , 
 My situation is most critical , not from anything the enemy can do , but from the disposition of the people – The Population , believe me is essentially bad – A full belief possesses them that this Province must inevitably succumb – This <unk> is fatal to every exertion – Legislators , Magistrates , Militia Officers , all , have imbibed the idea , and are so sluggish and indifferent in all their respective offices that the artful and active scoundrel is allowed to parade the Country without interruption , and commit all imaginable mischief ... What a change an additional regiment would make in this part of the Province ! Most of the people have lost all confidence – I however speak loud and look big . 
 On 12 July , an American army under William Hull had invaded Canada at Sandwich ( later known as Windsor ) . The invasion was quickly halted , and Hull withdrew , but this gave Brock the excuse he needed to abandon Prevost 's orders . Having finally obtained limited support from the Legislature for his measures to defend the Province , Brock prorogued the Assembly and set out on 6 August with a small body of regulars and some volunteers from the York Militia ( the " York Volunteers " ) to reinforce the garrison at Amherstburg at the western end of Lake Erie , facing Hull 's position at Detroit . Travelling mainly by water in bad weather , Brock reached Amherstburg on 13 August . 
 Here , Brock met Tecumseh , and was immediately impressed . Brock also read American dispatches captured from Hull 's army , and quickly judged Hull to be timid and afraid of the First Nations in particular , and the American force to be demoralised and short of rations . Against the advice of the officers on the spot , Brock immediately prepared to launch an attack on Detroit . He later ( 3 September ) wrote to his brothers , 
 Some say that nothing could be more desperate than the measure , but I answer that the state of the Province admitted of nothing but desperate remedies . I got possession of the letters my antagonist addressed to the Secretary at War , and also of the sentiments which hundreds of his army uttered to their friends . Confidence in the General was gone , and evident despondency prevailed throughout . I have succeeded beyond expectation . I crossed the river contrary to the opinion of Cols . Procter , St. George etc . ; it is therefore no wonder that envy should attribute to good fortune what in justice to my own discernment , I must say , proceeded from a cool calculation of the pours and <unk> . 
 At this point , even with his First Nations allies , Brock was outnumbered approximately two to one . Brock thus decided to use a series of tricks to intimidate Hull . He dressed his militia contingent in worn @-@ out uniforms discarded by his regulars , making it appear ( at a distance ) as if his force consisted entirely of British regular infantry . Brock then laid siege to Fort Detroit , from established artillery positions across the river in Sandwich , and through a carefully crafted series of marches , made it appear he had far more warriors with him than he actually did . He had Tecumseh 's forces cross in front of the fort several times ( doubling back under cover ) , intimidating Hull with the show of a large , raucous , barely controlled group of First Nations warriors . Finally , he sent Hull a letter demanding his surrender , in which he stated , in part , " It is far from my inclination to join in a war of extermination , but you must be aware that the numerous body of Indians who have attached themselves to my troops will be beyond my control the moment the contest commences . " Brock then hammered the fort with cannon fire . On 16 August , the day after receiving Brock 's letter , Hull surrendered . Hull , elderly and without recent military experience , was terrified that the civilian population of the fort , including his own daughter and grandson , would face torture at the hands of the First Nations . 
 The capture of Detroit and Hull 's army wounded American morale , and eliminated the main American force in the area as a threat , while at the same time boosting morale among his own forces . It allowed Brock to take the American supplies at Detroit and use them for his own forces , particularly the ill @-@ equipped militia . Had Brock lived longer , he would probably have been freed from financial worries , since under prize regulations a substantial part of the value of the captured military stores would accrue to him . Brock himself valued the captured ordnance supplies at £ 30 @,@ 000 . Finally , the victory secured the support of Tecumseh and the other chiefs in his confederation , who took it as both a sign of competence and a willingness to take action . 
 Tecumseh evidently trusted and respected Brock , reportedly saying , " This is a man " after meeting him for the first time . Although Brock 's correspondence indicates a certain amount of paternal condescension for the First Nations , he seems to have regarded Tecumseh himself very highly , calling him " the Wellington of the Indians " , and saying " a more sagacious or a more gallant warrior does not I believe exist " . In enlisting the help of Tecumseh , Brock made a number of commitments to the Shawnee . He promised to negotiate no peace treaty without addressing the Shawnee 's vision of an independent homeland . Although this was undoubtedly because Brock needed the help of Tecumseh , there is no evidence Brock negotiated in bad faith . Brock 's personal integrity and respect for First Nations peoples has been well documented , and suggest that if he had lived he would have kept his word to the Shawnee . 
 The capture of Detroit led to British domination over most of Michigan Territory . Brock had planned to continue his campaign into the U.S. , but he was thwarted by the negotiation of an armistice by Prevost with American Major General Henry Dearborn . This stalled Brock 's momentum , and gave the Americans time to regroup and prepare for an invasion of Canada . Unable to predict the point of invasion , Brock frantically worked to prepare defences throughout Upper Canada . 
 The Prince Regent decreed a silver medal be struck for presentation to the senior officers to commemorate the event . 
 = = = Death at Battle of Queenston Heights = = = 
 Meanwhile , American general Stephen Van Rensselaer III , a Federalist political appointee , in command of a sizable army near Lewiston , came under presidential pressure to invade . Although Van Rensselaer had severe doubts about the quality of his troops , he had no choice but to attack . Making matters worse , Van Rensselaer was an inexperienced militia general , and thus not trusted by the majority of regular army troops . In the early morning of 13 October 1812 , he attempted to cross the Niagara River , leading to the Battle of Queenston Heights . Despite heavy fire from British artillery , the first wave of Americans ( under Captain John E. Wool ) managed to land , and then follow a fishermen 's path up to the heights . From this point , they attacked and routed the British artillery . Brock himself had arrived from nearby Fort George and moved up to the artillery battery to gain a better view only minutes before Wool attacked . He , his aides and the gunners were forced to beat a hasty retreat , leading their horses down the steep slope . 
 Fearing that the Americans , with the artillery out of the way , would move the rest of their troops across the river , Brock ordered an immediate attack on their position . True to his philosophy of never ordering men where he would not lead them , he personally led the charge on foot . Brock 's charge was made by Dennis ' and Williams ' two companies of the 49th and two companies of militia . The assault was halted by heavy fire and as he noticed unwounded men dropping to the rear , Brock shouted angrily that " This is the first time I have ever seen the 49th turn their backs ! Surely the heroes of Egmont will not tarnish their record ! " At this rebuke , the ranks promptly closed up and were joined by two more companies of militia , those of Cameron and Heward . Brock saw that the militia supports were lagging behind at the foot of the hill and ordered one of his Provincial aides @-@ de @-@ camp , Lieutenant Colonel John Macdonell , to " Push on the York Volunteers " while he led his own party to the right , presumably intending to join his party with that of Williams ' detachment who were beginning to make progress on that flank . 
 Brock was struck in the wrist of his sword arm by a musket ball but continued to press home the attack . His height and energetic gestures , together with his officer 's uniform and a gaudy sash given to him eight weeks earlier by Tecumseh after the Siege of Detroit , made him a conspicuous target for the unknown American who stepped forward from a thicket and fired at a range of barely fifty yards . The musketball struck Brock in the chest and he fell . His last words have been reported as " Push on , brave York Volunteers " ( in reference to a group of the militia Brock favoured ) or " Push on , don 't mind me " or <unk> ! ( Latin for " rise " or " push on " — now used as a motto by Brock University ) , and even " a request that his fall might not be noticed or prevent the advance of his brave troops , adding a wish , which could not be distinctly understood , that some token of remembrance should be transmitted to his sister . " These accounts are considered unlikely , as it is also reported that Brock died almost immediately without speaking , and the hole in his uniform suggests that the bullet entered his heart . His body was carried from the field and secreted in a nearby house at the corner of Queenston Street and Partition Street , diagonally opposite that of Laura Secord . 
 Following the death of Brock , Lieutenant @-@ Colonel John Macdonell became the senior officer present . Despite being a lawyer by trade and having little military experience , Macdonell led a second attempt to retake the redan . With Williams ' men of the 49th starting from brush to the right of the line near the escarpment and Macdonell 's anchoring the left , the force of between 70 and 80 men ( more than half of whom were militia ) advanced toward the redan . Wool had been reinforced by more troops who had just made their way up the path to the top of the Heights , and Macdonell faced some four hundred troops . During the charge , it is reported that the 49th used " Revenge the General " as a battle cry . Despite the disadvantage in numbers as well as attacking a fixed position , Williams ' and Macdonell 's small force was driving the opposing force to the edge of the gorge on which the redan was situated , and seemed on the verge of success before the Americans were able to regroup and stand firm . The momentum of the battle turned when a musket ball hit Macdonell 's mount ( causing it to rear and twist around ) and another shot hit him in the small of the back , causing him to fall from the horse . He was removed from the battlefield and succumbed to his injuries early the next day . Captain Williams was laid low by a wound to the head , and Dennis by a severe wound to the thigh ( although he continued to lead his detachment throughout the action ) . Carrying Macdonnell and the body of Brock , the British fell back through Queenston to Durham 's Farm a mile north near <unk> 's Point . 
 In the afternoon , Sheaffe arrived on the battlefield with reinforcements and took command of the British forces . In sharp contrast to his predecessors ' direct attacks , Sheaffe took a more cautious approach . This ultimately proved successful , leading to a total victory over the Americans . 
 = = = Burial = = = 
 After the battle , Sheaffe and his staff decided to entrust the funeral arrangements to Captain John <unk> , who had served with Brock for many years . On 16 October , a funeral procession for Brock and Colonel Macdonell went from Government House to Fort George , with soldiers from the British Army , the colonial militia , and First Nations warriors on either side of the route . The caskets were then lowered into a freshly dug grave at the northeast corner of Fort George . The British then fired a twenty @-@ one gun salute in three salvos , in a gesture of respect . Later that day , the American garrison at Fort Niagara respectfully fired a similar salute . Over five thousand people attended the funeral , a remarkable number given the population of Upper Canada at that time . 
 A small cairn at the foot of the Niagara Escarpment marks the spot where Brock fell . In 1824 , Brock 's and Macdonell 's remains were moved into Brock 's Monument , which overlooked the Queenston Heights . That original monument was bombed and heavily damaged in 1840 ( reputedly by Irish @-@ Canadian terrorist Benjamin Lett although a subsequent Assize failed to confirm this ) . It was replaced by a larger structure 185 feet ( 56 m ) high , built at public expense that still stands . Brock was finally buried inside the new Monument on 13 October 1853 . An inscription reads : " Upper Canada has dedicated this monument to the memory of the late Major @-@ General Isaac Brock , K.B. provisional lieutenant @-@ governor and commander of the forces in the province whose remains are deposited in the vault beneath . Opposing the invading enemy he fell in action near these heights on 13 October 1812 , in the forty @-@ third year of his age . Revered and lamented by the people whom he governed and deplored by the sovereign to whose services his life had been devoted . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = On British leadership = = = 
 British military leadership , which had been decisive up to Brock 's death , suffered a blow with his loss . His direct successor , Major @-@ General Sheaffe , although successful in his approach at Queenston Heights , was never able to live up to Brock 's reputation . He was criticised by many , including John Strachan , for his retreat at the Battle of York , and was shortly after recalled to England , where he continued a successful , if not brilliant , military career . 
 Brock 's successor at Detroit , however , fared much worse . Colonel Henry Procter faced an attack from a resurrected American Army of the Northwest under future President William Henry Harrison . Harrison set out to retake Detroit , but a detachment of his army was defeated at Frenchtown on 22 January 1813 . Procter , displaying poor judgement , left the prisoners in the custody of his First Nations allies , who proceeded to execute an indeterminate number of them . Subsequent American victories allowed Harrison to attempt another invasion of Canada , which led to the Battle of the Thames on 5 October 1813 . After a successful American charge , Procter 's forces turned and fled , leaving Tecumseh and his American Indian troops to fight alone . They fought on , eventually being defeated . Perhaps of more importance to the British , at this battle Tecumseh died , and their alliance with the American Indians effectively ended . 
 As for Governor General Prevost , who often clashed with Brock , he remained in command of all British forces until after the Battle of Plattsburgh , in 1814 . The battle was intended to be a joint naval / infantry attack , but Prevost did not commit his forces until after the naval battle had nearly ended . When he finally did attack , his forces proved unable to cross the Saranac River bridge , which was held by a small group of American regulars under the command of the recently promoted John E. Wool . Despite a heavy advantage in manpower , Prevost finally retreated upon hearing of the failure of the naval attack . For his failure at Plattsburgh , Prevost was recalled to England to face an inquiry , and a naval court martial determined that the blame for the loss at Plattsburgh primarily rested with Prevost . Prevost 's health failed him , and he died in early 1816 . 
 = = = In Canada = = = 
 Canadians regard Brock as one of their greatest military heroes . He was voted # 28 on the television show The Greatest Canadian , despite not actually being a Canadian . 
 Although many Canadians have come to view Brock as one of their own , Brock never really felt at home in Canada . On the whole , he viewed the country as a backwater , and earnestly wished to return to Europe to fight against Napoleon . Furthermore , Brock mistrusted the Canadian colonists , many of whom he suspected of being American sympathizers , and he was reluctant to arm them indiscriminately to help defend the colonies , instead favouring the expansion of volunteer forces , as well as the employment of British regulars and Tecumseh 's warriors . 
 Since his death , several legends and myths about Brock have arisen . In 1908 , the story of Brock 's betrothal to Sophia Shaw , the daughter of General <unk> Shaw , was first published . There is no supporting evidence for the claim and most biographers consider it apocryphal . Another legend , that of Brock 's horse Alfred , was first published in 1859 . The horse was supposedly shot and killed during the battle while being ridden by Macdonell , and it is commemorated in a monument erected in 1976 in Queenston near the cairn marking the spot where Brock fell . However , again there is little supporting evidence . The General 's horse " fully caparisoned , led by four Grooms " is listed as preceding the coffin at the General 's interment at Fort George . 
 In 1816 , a series of private half @-@ penny tokens were issued by an unknown company which honoured Brock with the title " The Hero of Upper Canada " . Private copper tokens became common in Canada due to initial distrust of " army bills " , which were paper notes issued by Brock in response to a currency shortage caused by economic growth . 
 Brockville and Brock in Ontario , Brock in Saskatchewan , General Isaac Brock Parkway on Highway 405 and Brock University in St. Catharines , Ontario are all named in tribute to Brock . Schools named in his honour include one in Winnipeg , and public schools in Toronto , Guelph , Hamilton , London and Windsor , Ontario . An Ontario Historical Plaque was erected by the province to commemorate Major @-@ General Sir Isaac Brock 's role in Ontario 's heritage . 
 In September 2012 , the Royal Canadian Mint issued a <unk> pure gold coin with a face value of 350 dollars to honor the bicentenary of Brock 's death . The reverse design was taken from a half @-@ penny token issued in 1816 as a memorial to Brock . In addition , there have been quarters that have been released , one with a coloured maple leaf and the other with a frosted maple leaf . 
 The Bathurst Street Bridge has been referenced by the Friends of Fort York as Sir Isaac Brock Bridge . 
 = = = In Britain = = = 
 Although Brock 's achievements were overshadowed by larger @-@ scale fighting in Europe , his death was still widely noted , particularly in Guernsey . In London , he is remembered at a memorial in St Paul 's Cathedral , paid for by £ 1575 voted by the House of Commons , which also granted pensions of £ 200 to each of his four surviving brothers . For his actions in the capture of Detroit , Brock was appointed a Knight Companion of the Order of the Bath ( KB ) on 10 October 1812 , though he died at the Battle of Queenston Heights before news of his knighthood reached him . As a mark of esteem , the Prince Regent made special grant to allow the heraldic supporters that would have been incorporated into his coat of arms if he had lived to be incorporated into the arms of Brock 's father 's descendants , and on monuments raised in Brock 's memory . A British naval vessel named in his honour , HMS Sir Isaac Brock , was destroyed while under construction at the Battle of York . The Regimental Depot of the 49th of foot , ( later the Royal Berkshire Regt ) , was established at Reading and named Brock Barracks in his memory . It survives as a Territorial Army Centre . 
 = = = In Guernsey = = = 
 Brock 's childhood home on High Street , St Peter Port , Guernsey still stands , and is marked with a memorial plaque . A memorial , paid for by Canada , is fitted into the side of the Town Church , the parish church of St Peter Port . 
 Brock University provides scholarships to Guernsey students who achieve sufficiently high grades . In 1969 , the Guernsey Post Office issued postage stamps to commemorate his life and achievements . 
 = Texan schooner Independence = 
 The Texan schooner Independence was one of the four schooners of the First Texas Navy ( 1836 – 1838 ) . In 1836 , Charles Hawkins , a veteran of the United States and Mexican navies , visited Texas Governor Henry Smith , seeking a commission in the new Texas Navy . Smith was impressed with his credentials and sent him to New Orleans , where he was given the task of acquiring the United States revenue cutter Ingham for the Texas Navy , which he did in early January 1836 , for $ 1 @,@ 710 . 
 After the Texas victory at the Battle of San Jacinto in April , 1836 , Independence carried the Texas President and his captive , General Santa Anna , to Velasco , where the Treaty of Velasco was negotiated and signed . 
 While being refitted in New Orleans in early 1837 , her skipper died and a new captain was appointed . When next she sailed in April 1837 , Independence was attacked and surrendered to a superior Mexican force and her officers and passengers were imprisoned . The ship was later commissioned in the Mexican Navy where she served against her former masters . 
 = = Service during the Texas Revolution = = 
 From January until March , 1836 , before Texas declared her independence from Mexico , Commodore Charles Hawkins cruised the Coahuila y Tejas coast between Galveston and Tampico , destroying " a considerable number of small craft , with all material on board that could be used to the injury of Texas . " By 12 March , the Independence returned to New Orleans for refitting , but she quickly returned to Matagorda to block supplies to the Mexican Army . However , with the retreat of Sam Houston 's army after the Texans ' defeats at the siege of the Battle of the Alamo and Battle of Goliad , Hawkins was forced to move his ship up the Texas coast from Matagorda to Galveston . With the rebel government in disarray during the Runaway Scrape , Independence 's mission was to defend Galveston from invasion and block resupply of Santa Anna 's nearby army . 
 = = The Treaty of Velasco and after = = 
 Thereafter , Independence was involved in two important diplomatic missions , first in May 1836 carrying San Jacinto President David G. Burnet , with his cabinet , and Santa Anna to sign the Treaty of Velasco after the Battle of San Jacinto and then , in June , setting sail for New Orleans with commissioners Peter William Grayson and James W. Collinsworth on board . These men continued their journey to Washington , D.C. , where they negotiated with the United States for the recognition of the independence of Texas . 
 In the summer of 1836 , Independence was the only ship of the Texas Navy on duty in the Gulf of Mexico ; Liberty having been sold to pay the cost of refurbishment and Invincible and Brutus in New York City for repairs . Mexican authorities had recently repudiated the Treaty of Velasco claiming that General Santa Anna did not have the capacity to bind Mexico to recognize Texas ' independence . With rumors of an imminent invasion of Texas by Mexico , Independence carried out a screening and patrol action at Matamoros , which the Texans had ordered blockaded . 
 In the fall of 1836 , Independence returned to New Orleans for refitting and while there Commodore Hawkins died of smallpox . When Independence sailed from New Orleans on 10 April 1837 , with Texas minister to the United States , William H. Wharton aboard , she was skippered by her new Captain , George W. Wheelwright , who had been left without a command after the forced sale of Liberty in May 1836 . 
 = = Battle of Brazos River = = 
 On her next cruise , Independence had smooth sailing for about seven days when on 17 April she encountered the Mexican brigs @-@ of @-@ war <unk> del <unk> and Libertador off the mouth of the Brazos River . The initial sighting of the two Mexican brigs was at about 5 : 30 am . Outgunned and <unk> , Independence fled up Brazos River for protection at the small riverside town of Velasco . The Mexican vessels pursued the Texans ; eventually the two brigs came within cannon range several hours later at 9 : 30 am . <unk> del Alamo of sixteen 8 @-@ pound guns and 140 men , sailed with Libertador of six 12 @-@ pound guns and one 18 @-@ pounder , crewed by about 100 men . 
 Independence of eight guns total , raised her colors followed by Libertador which then fired the first broadside that had no effect . Shortly afterward Independence fired a broadside with her weather battery of one 9 @-@ pound gun , three 6 @-@ pound guns , and one pivot gun . For two hours , Independence continued up Brazos River with the Mexican brigs in close pursuit , occasionally stopping to fire on each other . By 11 : 30 am the Texans had reached Velasco ; Captain Wheelwright had no choice but to fight to the end , apparently not being able to continue up the Brazos River any further . The final engagement took place right in front of the small Texan town and populace , including the Texas Secretary of the Navy Samuel Rhoads Fisher . The Mexicans not being far behind came within range and Captain Wheelwright ordered his men to engage once more . The shots managed to damage the main top @-@ gallant mast of the Libertador . After another broadside in Libertador 's direction , two Mexicans lay dead and a few more were wounded aboard the brig @-@ of @-@ war . More shots damaged Libertador 's foremast and knocked out one of her 12 pounders . However , these broadsides did not slow the Mexican ships ; Libertador approached Independence head on while <unk> del Alamo maneuvered around to Independence 's other side . The two brigs quickly came within pistol shots range and both fired a mixture of cannon projectiles . This is when a ball smashed through Independence 's quarter gallery wall and into the Texan captain , taking off three of his fingers on his right hand . Severely wounded and taken below , command of the schooner passed to Lieutenant John W. Taylor , who finished the last few moments of battle before receiving orders from Wheelwright to surrender . With this action , the battle was over . 
 Taylor surrendered the ship . Imprisoned in Matamoros , Independence 's officers and Wharton eventually escaped or were released by the Mexican government . The ship was taken into service of the Mexican Navy under the new name La Independencia . 
 = Agudath Israel Etz Ahayem = 
 Agudath Israel Etz Ahayem ( " Congregation of Israel Tree of Life " ) is a Conservative Jewish congregation located at 3525 Cloverdale Road in Montgomery , Alabama . 
 Agudath Israel was established as an Orthodox synagogue in 1902 by Yiddish speaking Ashkenazi Jews , recent Eastern European immigrants who rejected the Reform practices of Montgomery 's established Congregation Kahl Montgomery / Temple Beth Or . After renting quarters for a number of years , the congregation purchased its first permanent building on Monroe Street in 1914 , and constructed a new building at McDonough and High Street in 1928 . 
 Agudath Israel came to national attention in 1955 because of the Civil rights movement activism of then @-@ rabbi Seymour Atlas , who eventually left the synagogue as a result of it . In 1957 it constructed its current building on Cloverdale Road , and joined the United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism , though it subsequently hired several Orthodox rabbis . Cynthia " <unk> " Culpeper became Agudath Israel 's rabbi in 1995 , the first Conservative woman rabbi in Alabama , but left in 1997 to seek treatment for AIDS , the result of an accidental needle prick while working as a nurse . 
 Etz Ahayem , was established in 1912 by Ladino speaking Sephardi Jews , particularly from Rhodes . The congregation grew slowly , and completed construction of its first building in 1927 . In 1962 the congregation moved to a new building , but by the 1990s it had dwindled , as children of congregants moved away from Montgomery , and the synagogue had difficulty finding rabbis to lead it . 
 The congregations merged in 2001 , and adopted the current name . In 2007 Scott Kramer became Agudath Israel Etz Ahayem 's third rabbi since the merger . As of 2015 , Kramer was the rabbi and Joy <unk> was the president . 
 = = Agudath Israel = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Ashkenazi Jews immigrated to Montgomery from Russia , Poland , Romania , and Galicia in the late 19th century . Agudath Israel was established in 1902 by 16 of them , former members of Montgomery 's oldest synagogue , Temple Beth Or . Though originally organized as the Orthodox Congregation Kahl Montgomery by German Jews in 1849 , during the 1870s Kahl Montgomery had steadily adopted Reform practices . It changed its name to Temple Beth Or in 1874 , and officially joined the Reform movement in 1879 . The more recent Eastern European immigrant members wanted a service in Hebrew that followed Orthodox practice , and decided to organize their own synagogue . 
 The congregation 's first president was Max <unk> , a Hungarian Jew who had first immigrated to Galveston , Texas , then ran a small dry goods store in Montgomery . He donated two rooms in his house , where the new congregation held its first services . The congregation 's first constitution was written in Yiddish . Services were held in Hebrew and Yiddish , men and women sat separately , and men covered their heads , as mandated by the constitution . 
 Over the next few years the congregation grew , and moved to a number of rented locations , including " rented office space above the National Shirt Company on Court Square and an annex of the First National Bank . " By 1907 , the synagogue had 30 members , and an annual revenue of $ 500 ( today $ 12 @,@ 700 ) ; that year Temple Beth Or had 188 members and revenues of $ 9 @,@ 500 ( today $ 241 @,@ 000 ) . Reflecting the membership 's " growing assimilation " , in 1914 Agudath Israel re @-@ wrote its constitution in English . That same year the congregation dedicated its first permanent building , on Monroe Street , and hired its first full @-@ time rabbi . The State of Alabama purchased the building on Monroe in 1927 , and the congregation built a new synagogue on land at McDonough and High Street , a handsome , brick <unk> building , notable for its hexagonal shape , which they dedicated in 1928 . At the time Agudath Israel had 65 member families . 
 Morris <unk> Katz , a native of <unk> , Czechoslovakia ( now Velika <unk> , Ukraine ) was rabbi from 1923 to 1926 , his first pulpit before moving to Agudath Achim of Shreveport , Louisiana . Alexander Sandor Wiesel , a Chicago native , was rabbi in 1934 . He had previously served at Brith Achim Synagogue in Petersburg , Virginia , and would move to House of Israel Synagogue in Calgary , Alberta . Benjamin G. Eisenberg served as rabbi from 1938 until at least 1942 . By then membership had dropped to around 60 member families . 
 = = = Seymour Atlas era = = = 
 Agudath Israel came to national attention in the wake of the Montgomery Bus Boycott of 1955 . At that time , then @-@ rabbi Seymour Atlas had been serving as Agudath Israel 's rabbi for almost ten years . A southerner ( from Greenville , Mississippi ) , he was " in the 8th generation of a line of rabbis " , and had become friends with Martin Luther King , tutoring him in Hebrew , and speaking at his Dexter Avenue Church . As a result of his friendship with King , Atlas became involved in the Civil rights movement , and became known for his liberal sermons , and for frequently appearing on local television and radio stations with King , where he would discuss civil rights and issues including desegregation and the boycott . 
 In 1956 , during National Brotherhood Week Atlas spoke on a panel of clergy at the local <unk> radio station , which also included Michael Caswell , a white Roman Catholic priest from nearby Gunter Air Force Base , Roy Bennett , a black Baptist minister , and black activist Ralph Abernathy ; Bennett and Abernathy were subsequently arrested " on an obscure conspiracy charge " . A picture of Atlas , Bennett , and Abernathy appeared in Life magazine in an article about the boycott , and the leadership of Agudath Israel grew concerned that Atlas 's activism would lead to an antisemitic backlash . The trustees called an emergency meeting , and sent then congregational president Yale Friedlander to demand Atlas recant his support of the boycott , ask Life to withdraw the article , and agree to submit all public speeches to the board in advance for pre @-@ approval . Atlas refused , and insisted that his participation in Brotherhood Week was not an endorsement of the boycott . However , Atlas wrote a sermon for the following Shabbat which included a prayer for the participants of the boycott . The sermon , as with all others , was to be printed beforehand in the Montgomery Advertiser , and a typesetter there called one of the synagogue 's trustees to inform him of the contents . The trustee asked Atlas to modify the sermon , but he refused . 
 The trustees then ordered Atlas to stop inviting black clergymen to his weekly Hebrew class , " make no further speeches or statements outside the synagogue " , and , as long has he was rabbi there , " disassociate [ himself ] from the Negroes completely " . Atlas again refused , and the trustees responded by shunning him , refusing to visit his home , and literally turning their backs on him when he was around . 
 When his contract came up for renewal that year , Atlas argued that the matter should be put to a congregational vote . The trustees refused to do so , and voted 27 to 1 not to renew the contract . After Atlas left , the trustees unanimously voted that the next rabbi would have to sign an agreement not to discuss " Negroes " or segregation . 
 = = = Post Atlas to 2000 = = = 
 During the 1950s the synagogue had been " traditional " ( <unk> ) , rather than strictly Orthodox ; for example , the Monroe Street building had seating for men on the left , seating for women on the right , and mixed seating in the middle . Following Atlas 's departure , the congregation formally moved from Orthodox Judaism to Conservative , hiring a Conservative rabbi , Joseph Reich , and , in 1957 , moved to its current location at 3525 Cloverdale Road . In 1959 , however , it hired as rabbi Aaron Borow , who had just graduated from the Modern Orthodox Yeshiva University . While Borow did not undo the synagogue 's mixed seating , he did turn off the synagogue 's microphone , and turn the bimah so that the cantor faced the front of the synagogue ( rather than the congregation ) , in the Orthodox style . In November 1964 , Borow was hired as rabbi of the Orthodox Nusach Hari B ’ nai Zion Congregation of St. Louis , Missouri , where he served until his retirement in 1999 . 
 Borow was succeeded by Irving Rubin , also a graduate of Yeshiva University , who served from 1965 to 1968 , before moving to Kesher Israel Synagogue in West Chester , Pennsylvania . Raphael Gold was rabbi from the mid @-@ 1970s to the early 1980s . David <unk> , another a graduate of Yeshiva University , joined Agudath Israel in 1986 as director of the Hebrew education program , a position he has held since then . Upon receiving his ordination from the Conservative Jewish Theological Seminary of America ( JTSA ) in 1988 , Aaron Krupnick joined Agudath Israel as rabbi . He served until 1994 . 
 Agudath Israel hired Cynthia " <unk> " Culpeper as rabbi in 1995 . Culpeper , a convert from Catholicism and former nurse , had been posted at Agudath Israel as a rabbinical intern , and was hired there full @-@ time upon graduation from the JTSA , the first Conservative woman rabbi in Alabama . However , the following year she revealed that she had AIDS , the result of an accidental needle prick while working as a nurse . The congregation rallied around her , insisting she continue to work , and wearing red AIDS awareness ribbons , but in 1997 she gave up her position and moved to Birmingham , Alabama , where she could get " cutting edge " treatment at the University of Alabama at Birmingham 's AIDS research clinic . Culpeper died in 2005 . 
 Shalom Plotkin joined Agudath Israel as rabbi in 2000 . A graduate of the University of Maryland , and ordained by the JTSA in 1998 , he had been an " assistant rabbi at a synagogue in Marietta , Georgia " before coming to Agudath Israel . A chaplain in the United States Navy Reserve , he had been stationed with the U.S. Navy in the Adriatic Sea in 1995 , during the Bosnian War . During his tenure at Agudath Israel , he remained in the reserve . 
 = = = Notable members = = = 
 Aaron <unk> , former president of Agudath Israel , was inducted into the Alabama Academy of Honor in 1988 . Former Secretary of State , Attorney General , Lieutenant Governor and Governor of Alabama Don Siegelman and his family were also members of Agudath Israel . Though Siegelman is Catholic , his wife Lori — who grew up in Birmingham , Alabama — and two children are Jewish . His daughter Dana celebrated her Bat Mitzvah at the synagogue in February 1998 . 
 = = Etz Ahayem = = 
 Ralph Nace Cohen , a Sephardi Jew from Rhodes , settled in Montgomery in 1906 , sponsored by a Greek Orthodox friend . Other Sephardi Jews followed , first from Rhodes , and then from the rest of Greece and Turkey . By 1908 this small community celebrated held its first High Holiday services in the Orthodox Community Center , space which was rented by Agudath Israel . In 1912 , they named themselves Congregation Etz Ahayem ( " Tree of Life " ) , writing a constitution in Ladino . Temple Beth Or gave them a Torah scroll , and in 1916 they formally incorporated . The congregation bought a house at 450 Sayre Street in 1918 , but it was not until 1927 that they completed construction of a building there . At the time the congregation comprised 27 families . 
 During the German occupation of Greece almost all the Jews of Rhodes were sent to the Auschwitz concentration camp ; as a result , most members of Etz Ahayem had close family members who were killed in the Holocaust . Before the occupation , however , members of the Kal Grande congregation in Rhodes had buried their Torah scrolls . After the war the scrolls were retrieved and sent to Israel , and a Dr. Nace Cohen was able to procure one of them for Etz Ahayem . 
 During the 1950s Etz Ahayem added a great deal of English to its prayer services , which had formerly been conducted solely in Ladino and Hebrew . During the Montgomery Bus Boycott , then rabbi Solomon <unk> spoke in favor of the boycott and against segregation , " citing the demand in Torah for social justice " . However , after being followed , and told by gentile friends he could no longer come for dinner , and after Etz Ahayem received a bomb threat , he " toned down his support for desegregation . " 
 In 1962 , the congregation moved to a new building , but the children of the congregation generally moved away from Montgomery . By the 1990s the congregation dwindled , and had difficulty finding Sephardi rabbis , relying instead on " lay leaders and the occasional rabbinic services from nearby Maxwell Airforce Base . " In 2001 Maxwell Air Force Base ended its rabbinic services , and the congregation was down to 22 member families . The board of directors decided to accept an offer from Agudath Israel to enter into merger negotiations . 
 = = Agudath Israel Etz Ahayem = = 
 Agudath Israel and Etz Ahayem merged in 2001 . Agudath Israel 's Rabbi Plotkin oversaw the merger , and became the rabbi of the merged congregation , Agudath Israel Etz Ahayem . Along with the new name , the synagogues combined traditions , and Ashkenazi and Sephardi rituals . Plotkin moved to Albuquerque 's Congregation B 'nai Israel in May 2002 . 
 From 2002 to 2006 Stephen Listfield was the rabbi ; for the previous eight years he had been the rabbi of Congregation Beth Shalom in Pompton Lakes , New Jersey . Listfield led protests by the congregation against the posthumous induction into the Alabama Military Hall of Honor of prominent United States Navy officer , frequent political candidate , and outspoken antisemite John G. Crommelin . Listfield moved to Pittsburgh 's Tree of Life Congregation in August 2006 . 
 In 2007 , Scott Kramer became the congregation 's rabbi , his first rabbinic post . A native of Baltimore , Kramer had a Master 's degree in physics from the University of Utah , and for over two decades had worked as a software engineer . He began studying at the Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies at the American Jewish University in 2002 , and was ordained there in 2007 . As of 2015 , Kramer was Agudath Israel Etz Ahayem 's rabbi and Joy <unk> was the president . 
 = Catherine Zeta @-@ Jones = 
 Catherine Zeta @-@ Jones , CBE ( / <unk> / ; born 25 September 1969 ) is a Welsh actress . Born and raised in Swansea , Zeta @-@ Jones aspired to a theatrical career from an early age . In her early teens , she played roles in the West End productions of the musicals Annie and Bugsy Malone . She studied musical theatre at the Arts Educational Schools , London , and made her adult stage breakthrough with a leading role in a 1987 production of 42nd Street . Her screen debut came in the unsuccessful French @-@ Italian film 1001 Nights ( 1990 ) , and she found greater success as a regular in the British television series The Darling Buds of May ( 1991 – 93 ) . Dismayed at being typecast as the token pretty girl in British films , Zeta @-@ Jones relocated to Los Angeles . 
 Zeta @-@ Jones established herself in Hollywood with roles in the action film The Mask of Zorro ( 1998 ) and the heist film Entrapment ( 1999 ) . Critics praised her portrayal of a vengeful pregnant woman in Traffic ( 2000 ) and a murderous singer in the musical film Chicago ( 2002 ) . The latter won her Academy and BAFTA Awards for Best Supporting Actress , among other accolades . She starred in high @-@ profile films for much of the decade , including the black comedy Intolerable Cruelty ( 2003 ) , the heist film Ocean 's Twelve ( 2004 ) , the comedy The Terminal ( 2004 ) , and the romantic comedy No Reservations ( 2007 ) . Parts in smaller @-@ scale features were followed by a decrease in workload , during which she returned to stage and portrayed an ageing actress in A Little Night Music ( 2009 ) , winning a Tony Award . Zeta @-@ Jones continued to work intermittently in the 2010s , starring in the psychological thriller Side Effects ( 2013 ) and the action film Red 2 ( 2013 ) . 
 Zeta @-@ Jones has received such accolades as an Academy Award , a British Academy Film Award and a Tony Award , and in 2010 she was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) for her film and humanitarian endeavours . She supports various charities and causes , and is a prominent celebrity endorser of brands . Her struggle with depression and bipolar II disorder has been well @-@ documented by the media . She is married to the actor Michael Douglas with whom she has two children . 
 = = Early life and initial stage career = = 
 Zeta @-@ Jones was born in Swansea , Wales , on 25 September 1969 to David Jones , the owner of a sweet factory , and his wife Patricia ( née Fair ) , a seamstress . Her father is Welsh and her mother is of Irish Catholic descent . She was named after her grandmothers , Zeta Jones and Catherine Fair . She has an older brother , David , and a younger brother , Lyndon , who worked as a sales representative before venturing into film production . Zeta @-@ Jones was raised in the suburban area of Mumbles . Because Zeta @-@ Jones was a hyperactive child , her mother sent her to the Hazel Johnson School of Dance when she was four years old . She was educated at the Dumbarton House School , a private school in Swansea . The family came from a modest background , but their fortunes improved when they won £ 100 @,@ 000 in a bingo competition , allowing them to pay for Zeta @-@ Jones 's dance and ballet lessons . 
 Zeta @-@ Jones participated in school stage shows from a young age and gained local media attention when her rendition of a Shirley Bassey song won a Junior Star Trail talent competition . As part of a dance troupe , she routinely took trips to London , where she auditioned for roles in the theatre . At the age of nine she was selected to play one of the orphan girls in a West End production of the musical Annie , and at the age of 11 she became a national tap @-@ dancing champion . In 1981 she played the lead role of Annie in a production of the musical at the Swansea Grand Theatre . Two years later she played the lead role of Tallulah in a West End production of Bugsy Malone . When she was 15 Zeta @-@ Jones dropped out of school without obtaining O @-@ levels and decided to live in London to pursue a full @-@ time acting career ; she was engaged to perform in a touring production of The Pajama Game . Describing her teenage years in London , Zeta @-@ Jones said , " I would queue up for auditions and then change my costume or put on a different leotard and audition again . It might take me two tries , but I always got the job . I figured out what they wanted " . She went on to attend the independent Arts Educational Schools in Chiswick , London , for a three @-@ year course in musical theatre . 
 In 1987 , when she was 17 years old , Zeta @-@ Jones was picked as the second understudy to the lead actress in a West End production of 42nd Street . During one of the performances , both the star and the first understudy were unavailable , and Zeta @-@ Jones was asked to play the role of Peggy Sawyer — a chorus girl who becomes a star . Subsequently , the producer , impressed by her acting ability , allowed her to play the role for the next two years . Her next stage appearance was with the English National Opera at the London Coliseum in 1989 where she played Mae Jones in Kurt Weill 's Street Scene . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1990 – 96 : Screen debut and career struggles = = = 
 In 1990 Zeta @-@ Jones made her film debut in the director Philippe de Broca 's film 1001 Nights . An adaptation of the Persian fable One Thousand and One Nights , the French @-@ Italian production recounts the tale from the perspective of Scheherazade ( Zeta @-@ Jones ) , one of the brides of King Sharir ( Thierry Lhermitte ) . The film was not well received at the box office , and according to de Broca 's obituary in The Daily Telegraph , the film " is best remembered for its enjoyable nude scenes " . Greater success followed when she starred opposite David Jason and Pam Ferris in the British period comedy @-@ drama television series The Darling Buds of May from 1991 to 1993 . Adapted from H. E. Bates 's novel of the same name , Zeta @-@ Jones played the role of the eldest daughter of a family living in the countryside in 1950s Britain . The series was the highest @-@ rated television show in the country at the time , and Zeta @-@ Jones gained wide public recognition for it ; she said " Literally , with one hour of television my life completely changed . I couldn 't go anywhere " . 
 Following a brief appearance as Beatriz Enríquez de Arana in the unsuccessful adventure film Christopher Columbus : The Discovery ( 1992 ) , Zeta @-@ Jones featured as a belly dancer in disguise in a 1992 episode of George Lucas 's television series The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles . She next took on the part of a would @-@ be duchess in Splitting Heirs ( 1993 ) , a farcical period drama from the director Robert Young about two children ( Eric Idle and Rick Moranis ) who are separated at birth . Reviews for the film were negative , though the critic Vincent Canby of The New York Times found her to be " very funny " . In 1994 Zeta @-@ Jones played the melancholic <unk> Vye in the television film The Return of the Native , an adaptation of the novel of the same name ( 1878 ) by Thomas Hardy , and the wife of Lloyd Owen 's character in the television war drama The Cinder Path . She was then cast as the eponymous protagonist of the 1995 television biopic Catherine the Great . In a mixed review the critic Lisa <unk> of Variety found the miniseries to be " brightly colored " but " wooden and hollow " , though thought that Zeta @-@ Jones " imparts a certain grace and resolve to her sovereign @-@ in @-@ the @-@ making " . Zeta @-@ Jones next starred as the pragmatic girlfriend of Sean Pertwee 's character in Blue Juice ( 1995 ) , publicised as Britain 's first surf film , which the critic Leonard Maltin described as a " superficial and predictable " production . 
 Dismayed at being typecast as the token pretty girl in British films , Zeta @-@ Jones relocated to Los Angeles . She remarked , " There was all this fuss about who I was and wasn 't dating . I was a pretty face and a big bust and nothing else . People in the business believed what they read about me . So I decided to move away and start again . " She believed that the anonymity she faced in America helped her get roles on merit and not due to her public image . She earned the part of Sala , the henchwoman to the villainous Drax ( Treat Williams ) in the superhero film The Phantom ( 1996 ) , starring Billy Zane in the titular role . A reviewer for Variety considered Zeta @-@ Jones to be a standout in her part , but the film received a negative critical reception and earned little at the box office . The CBS television miniseries Titanic ( 1996 ) was better received . Starring opposite Peter Gallagher and George C. Scott , she portrayed the lead role of Isabella Paradine , a young mother engaged in an extramarital affair on the RMS Titanic . 
 = = = 1998 – 2000 : Hollywood breakthrough and success = = = 
 Steven Spielberg took notice of Zeta @-@ Jones in Titanic and recommended her to Martin Campbell , who was directing The Mask of Zorro ( 1998 ) for Spielberg 's production company . Campbell cast her as the leading lady in preference to Izabella Scorupco , who was his original choice for the part . Co @-@ starring Anthony Hopkins and Antonio Banderas , the film tells the story of Zorro ( Hopkins ) , a Latin warrior who sets out to avenge the death of his wife and find his lost daughter Eléna ( Zeta @-@ Jones ) . She found similarities between her " volatile " Celtic personality and the temperament of the Latin warrior she played , and in preparation she studied dancing , riding and sword @-@ fighting . Filming the action and dance sequences while wearing heavy corsets in the humid Mexican desert proved to be a challenge for Zeta @-@ Jones , but she found the experience " worth suffering for " . The Mask of Zorro was positively received by the critics and earned over US $ 250 million worldwide . Writing for Rolling Stone , the critic Peter Travers commented that " Zeta @-@ Jones needs no lessons in being gorgeous " and commended her for turning " the battle into a delicious game of strip @-@ fencing " . The role proved to be a breakthrough for her and she was nominated for the MTV Movie Award for Best Breakthrough Performance . 
 Zeta @-@ Jones ' first release of 1999 was the heist film Entrapment , in which she starred opposite Sean Connery as a seductive insurance agent on the lookout for an art thief . Despite a negative critical reception , the film was a commercial success ; Janet Maslin of The New York Times thought that the film provided Zeta @-@ Jones a platform to " show off her <unk> skills " and Andrew Anthony of The Observer praised a scene in which Zeta @-@ Jones is " all feline grace , balletic skill and wanton sexuality " , but showed concern that " her charms are not subtle and her range of expressions is narrow , but neither point need be a drawback in the kind of action films that are undoubtedly her metier " . Later that year Zeta @-@ Jones appeared alongside Liam Neeson and Lili Taylor in The Haunting , a remake of the 1963 film of the same name about a team of paranormal experts who look into strange occurrences in an ill @-@ fated mansion . The horror feature received generally poor reviews but found a large worldwide audience . In a scathing review , the critic Mick LaSalle wrote that " Zeta @-@ Jones seems less an actress and more a pretty face , and not an interesting one at that " . 
 After taking the supporting part of star John Cusack 's romantic interest in the comedy @-@ drama High Fidelity ( 2000 ) , Zeta @-@ Jones starred in Steven Soderbergh 's Traffic ( 2000 ) . In the ensemble thriller on drug abuse starring Michael Douglas and Benicio del Toro , she played Helena Ayala , the pregnant wife of a drug lord who takes over the business when her husband is arrested . Initially written by Soderbergh as a mother of two , he changed the part to that of a pregnant woman on Zeta @-@ Jones ' suggestion , to accommodate her own pregnancy . Highly profitable at the box office and critically acclaimed , Traffic was described by the Dallas Observer as " a remarkable achievement in filmmaking , a beautiful and brutal work " . Edward Guthman of the San Francisco Chronicle found Zeta @-@ Jones to be a standout among the ensemble and labelled her " sensational " in a scene in which she confronts a Tijuana dealer , adding that " through sheer conviction , she electrifies a moment that could have been absurd " . The ensemble of Traffic won the SAG Award for Outstanding Cast and Zeta @-@ Jones was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress . 
 = = = 2001 – 04 : Chicago and other roles = = = 
 The romantic comedy America 's Sweethearts was Zeta @-@ Jones ' sole film project of 2001 . She starred as a shrewd movie star , opposite Julia Roberts who featured as her character 's under @-@ confident sibling . The critic Roger Ebert compared the film unfavourably to the musical Singin ' in the Rain ( 1952 ) , but thought that Zeta @-@ Jones was aptly " chilly and manipulative " in her part . The following year , Zeta @-@ Jones starred alongside Renée Zellweger as the murderous nightclub singer Velma Kelly in Chicago ( 2002 ) , a film adaptation of the Broadway musical of the same name from the director Rob Marshall . She based her character 's look and mannerisms on the actress Louise Brooks , and as the script did not provide a backstory to Kelly , she worked to convey her character 's " flamboyance " and " desperation " through " little looks and nuances " . The film and her performance received critical acclaim . William Arnold of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer felt that the actress made " a wonderfully statuesque and bitchy saloon goddess " , and David Edelstein of Slate magazine wrote that she has " a smoldering confidence that takes your mind off her not @-@ always @-@ fluid dancing – although she 's a perfectly fine hoofer , with majestic limbs and a commanding cleavage " and particularly praised her rendition of the song " All That Jazz " . Chicago earned US $ 306 million worldwide , and was the recipient of the Academy Award for Best Picture . For her performance , Zeta @-@ Jones won the Academy Award , SAG Award , and the BAFTA Award for Best Supporting Actress , among other awards and nominations . 
 Following the success of Chicago , Zeta @-@ Jones voiced the part of Princess Marina in Sinbad : Legend of the Seven Seas ( 2003 ) , an animated film featuring Brad Pitt as the voice of Sinbad the Sailor . She was drawn to the project to give her young children an opportunity to " hear [ her ] and get a sense of [ her ] on film " , although the film proved to be a box office bomb . Later in 2003 Zeta @-@ Jones starred alongside George Clooney in the Coen Brothers ' black comedy Intolerable Cruelty . The film , which was a commercial success , saw her play the role of a serial divorcée who is drawn towards a divorce attorney ( Clooney ) . Writing for Empire magazine , the critic Damon Wise labelled the film a " dazzling screwball comedy " and felt that Zeta @-@ Jones showed an " an admirable facility for old @-@ school quickfire patter " . Other reviewers praised her onscreen chemistry with Clooney . 
 In 2004 Spielberg approached her to play an insecure air hostess in his comedy The Terminal , a film about a man ( Tom Hanks ) who is trapped at the JFK International Airport when he is denied entry into the United States . Spielberg was intent on her playing against type as a strong @-@ willed women , with a vulnerability in her character , but the critic A. O. Scott felt that it came across as using her for " her looks rather than for the arch , self @-@ mocking wit that is her secret weapon as a comic actress " . Commercially The Terminal performed well . She next worked with Soderbergh to film Ocean 's Twelve , a sequel to the heist film Ocean 's Eleven ( 2001 ) , which also reunited her with stars Clooney , Pitt , and Roberts . The production , which was filmed in several countries across Europe , saw Zeta @-@ Jones play Isabel Lahiri , a Europol agent , and the love @-@ interest of Pitt 's character . Paul Clinton of CNN notes that she " dominates the screen every time she takes a breath " . Conversely , Ken Tucker of New York magazine argued that her character was redundant to the film 's plot . Despite dividing critics , the sequel earned over US $ 360 million globally . 
 = = = 2005 – 10 : Decrease in workload and return to the stage = = = 
 The Legend of Zorro ( 2005 ) , a sequel The Mask of Zorro , saw Zeta @-@ Jones reprise her role of Eléna opposite Banderas . Set 10 years after the first film , the sequel follows Eléna struggling with married life . Unlike the original the film was disliked by critics and was a commercial disappointment . She did not have any film releases in 2006 . A biopic of Harry Houdini , entitled Death Defying Acts ( 2007 ) , starring Guy Pearce as the escapologist Houdini , featured Zeta @-@ Jones as a Scottish con @-@ artist . The unsuccessful production was only given a limited theatrical release . 
 In 2007 Zeta @-@ Jones starred alongside Aaron Eckhart and Abigail Breslin in the romantic comedy No Reservations , a remake of the German film Mostly Martha ( 2001 ) . No Reservations tells the story of an ambitious chef ( Zeta @-@ Jones ) whose life changes for the better when she takes in her young niece ( Breslin ) after her sister 's death . In preparation for her part , she worked in the kitchen and waited on tables at the <unk> <unk> restaurant in New York . Claudia Puig of USA Today thought that Zeta @-@ Jones " shines as a character that finely balances off @-@ putting reserve with sympathetic appeal " , and Ebert , despite disliking the film , found her to be " convincing " in her role . With a global gross of US $ 92 million , the film marked Zeta @-@ Jones ' final commercial success of the decade . 
 Following No Reservations Zeta @-@ Jones significantly decreased her workload in the next five years . She instead chose to focus on her family and health , having been diagnosed with bipolar II disorder , and her infrequent acting appearances were in smaller @-@ scale and less successful productions . She took on the role of a 40 @-@ year @-@ old mother attracted to a younger man ( Justin <unk> ) in the romantic comedy The Rebound . The production was released theatrically in markets outside of the United States from 2009 – 10 , but due to financial troubles of its distributor , The Film Development , the film failed to release theatrically in America . 
 Zeta @-@ Jones returned to the stage in 2009 with a revival of the musical A Little Night Music , which marked her Broadway debut . Set in Sweden during the early twentieth century , the musical follows the relationship between three people ( Zeta @-@ Jones , Angela Lansbury and Alexander Hanson ) during the course of an evening . She played <unk> <unk> , an ageing actress , and was particularly drawn to the complexities of the play , saying , " There 's no jazzy hands , no high kicks , no fishnet stockings , ... It 's not one of those shows where you can dig about three inches and come out the other end . You can keep digging and digging and digging " . She did not listen to past recordings of the songs in the play so she could bring her own interpretation to them . The critic Claire Prentice of The Daily Telegraph wrote that Zeta @-@ Jones brought in a " quiet , reflective poignancy " in her rendition of the song " Send in the Clowns " , but Emma Brocks of The Guardian was more critical , remarking that " with her pretty voice , head wresting this way and that , [ she ] seems to be auditioning for stage school " . For her performance , Zeta @-@ Jones won the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Actress in a Musical and the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Musical . 
 = = = 2012 – present : Return to film = = = 
 Following a three @-@ year sabbatical from acting , Zeta @-@ Jones made her screen comeback in Lay the Favorite ( 2012 ) , a comedy co @-@ starring Bruce Willis and Rebecca Hall , in which she played the jealous wife of a gambler ( Willis ) . Reviews for the film were negative , and the critic Betsy Sharkey of the Los Angeles Times found Zeta @-@ Jones to be " far too shrill to amuse " . In the ensemble musical comedy Rock of Ages , co @-@ starring Tom Cruise and Bryan Cranston , Zeta @-@ Jones played the part of a religiously conservative wife of a mayor . She was attracted to the idea of playing a " nightmare of a woman " and based the role on the politician Michele Bachmann ; the film received mixed reviews and failed commercially . Her final release of 2012 was Playing for Keeps , a romantic comedy with Gerard Butler , which proved to be her third box office failure of the year . 
 In 2013 Zeta @-@ Jones took on a leading role in the crime thriller Broken City , co @-@ starring Mark Wahlberg and Russell Crowe . The film tells the story of a private detective ( Wahlberg ) who is hired by the mayor of New York ( Crowe ) to spy on his wife ( Zeta @-@ Jones ) . Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter thought that Zeta @-@ Jones " looks like class itself and nicely underplays " , and Liam Lacey of The Globe and Mail observed that the actress " does a fair , if incongruous , impersonation of a forties vamp " . As with Zeta @-@ Jones ' previous few projects , the film was not widely seen , and received poor reviews . This changed when Zeta @-@ Jones collaborated with Soderbergh for the third time to film the critically acclaimed thriller Side Effects ( 2013 ) . Co @-@ starring with Channing Tatum , Jude Law and Rooney Mara , the film saw her play a mysterious psychiatrist who recommends an antidepressant drug with serious side effects . Peter Travers found the film to be a " hell of a thriller , twisty , terrific and packed with surprises " and considered Zeta @-@ Jones to be " dynamite " in it . 
 In the action @-@ comedy film Red 2 ( 2013 ) , which served as a sequel to the 2010 film Red , Zeta @-@ Jones played a seductive Russian double agent , alongside Bruce Willis , Helen Mirren , and Mary @-@ Louise Parker . She was drawn to the project , which follows the comic adventures of retired spies , for " the action , the humour , [ and ] the tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek quality of it " . Writing for The Hollywood Reporter , Justin Lowe remarked that Zeta @-@ Jones " nicely pulls off Russian spy Katja 's mix of allure and menace " , and with a worldwide gross of US $ 148 million , the film emerged as her biggest box office success since No Reservations . 
 Following Red 2 Zeta @-@ Jones took another sabbatical from acting , saying : " If I 'm going to leave my family for any length of time it had better be for a role that I haven 't played before , [ otherwise ] I would prefer to stay at home " . She found the role opposite Bill Nighy and Toby Jones in the British war comedy film Dad 's Army ( 2016 ) , based on the television sitcom of the same name . She was cast as a glamorous journalist reporting on a British Home Guard platoon based in <unk> @-@ on @-@ Sea . Catherine Bray of Variety found the film to be an " amiable but creaky resurrection " of the popular sitcom , and thought that while Zeta @-@ Jones " hits the required single note with some spirit " she was " generally underused " in it . As at April 2016 , Zeta @-@ Jones is scheduled to portray the Colombian drug lord Griselda Blanco in the biopic The Godmother . 
 = = Other work = = 
 In addition to her acting career , Zeta @-@ Jones supports various charities and causes . She is a patron of Swansea 's <unk> Day Centre for the disabled , and has made sizeable donations to the centre . In 2001 she auctioned an outfit she wore in The Mask of Zorro ( 1998 ) to raise funds for AIDS patients in Africa . In 2005 she became the ambassador of the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children charity , and launched the Full Stop appeal in Wales to raise awareness on child abuse . She has also given her support to other charitable organisations for children such as the International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children and the Noah 's Ark Appeal , among others . Zeta @-@ Jones is also the founding host for A Fine Romance , an annual charitable programme that helps raise funds for the Motion Picture & Television Fund , and is one of the members of the Cinema for Peace Foundation . 
 Zeta @-@ Jones briefly dabbled with a singing career in the early 1990s . In 1992 she provided her voice to the character of Jean Simmons in Jeff Wayne 's musical retelling of Spartacus , entitled Jeff Wayne 's Musical Version of Spartacus . Three years later she released her first single , " In the Arms of Love " , on Wayne 's Wow ! Records . She later sang " True Love Ways " , a duet with David Essex in 1994 . Zeta @-@ Jones has also featured as an advertising spokeswoman for several brands and products . She was named the global ambassador for the cosmetics company Elizabeth Arden , Inc. in 2002 . The same year she was signed on by the phone company T @-@ Mobile for an estimated US $ 10 million per year , making her the highest @-@ paid celebrity endorser at the time . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 The success of the television series The Darling Buds of May ( 1991 – 93 ) made Zeta @-@ Jones a popular celebrity in Britain , and her personal life has since been chronicled by the media . Her relationships in the early 1990s with the television personality John Leslie , David Essex , and the pop star Mick Hucknall were widely reported by the British press . In the mid 1990s she was briefly engaged to the Scottish actor Angus Macfadyen . In an interview with the Daily Mirror in 1995 , she described her lifestyle : " I drink , I swear , I like sex " . 
 Zeta @-@ Jones met the actor Michael Douglas , with whom she shares a birthday and who is 25 years her senior , at the Deauville Film Festival in France in August 1998 , after being introduced by Danny DeVito . They initially dated in secret as Douglas , even though separated , was then legally married . They became engaged on 31 December 1999 , and were married at the Plaza Hotel in New York on 18 November 2000 after Douglas 's divorce was finalised . The high @-@ profile ceremony , which cost an estimated £ 1 @.@ 5 million , was labelled as the " wedding of the year " by the BBC . The couple signed a £ 1 million deal with OK ! magazine to release pictures of the event , and the rest of the press were not permitted to enter . Despite this , journalists of the Hello ! magazine surreptitiously took pictures of the ceremony , and the couple successfully sued the magazine for invasion of privacy . 
 Douglas and Zeta @-@ Jones have two children , a son Dylan Michael ( born August 2000 ) and a daughter Carys Zeta ( born April 2003 ) . The family lived in Bermuda until 2009 , and as at 2016 , live in the country in New York . In 2010 Douglas was diagnosed with tongue cancer , and Zeta @-@ Jones faced an emotionally turbulent time ; she said , " When you get sideswiped like that [ with the illness ] it 's an obvious trigger for your balance to be a little bit off – not sleeping , worry , stress . " The trigger led to Zeta @-@ Jones struggling with depression , and despite initial apprehension , she spoke publicly about suffering from bipolar II disorder . She sought treatment for the condition by checking herself into the hospital in 2011 , and later in 2013 . Owing to the stress from both their illnesses , the couple decided to live separately in 2013 , though without taking legal action towards separation or divorce . They reconciled later in 2014 , with Douglas stating that they were " stronger than ever " . 
 = = In the media = = 
 In the early 2000s Zeta @-@ Jones was among the highest @-@ paid actresses in Hollywood , and the highest @-@ paid British actress in America , earning an estimated £ 6 million per film . The journalist Sheila Johnston of The Daily Telegraph , in 2010 , described Zeta @-@ Jones as " the ultimate self @-@ made success " who " constantly made bold decisions , and scrubbed up very nicely into a luscious star who radiates a classic ... brand of big @-@ screen glamour " . Guy Adams of The Independent considers her personality to be " self @-@ effacing and energetic " but takes note of her " steely core " in her off @-@ screen persona . Geoffrey Macnab , the editor of Sight & Sound magazine believes that she went on to establish herself as an actress by defying " skepticism from people who doubted she would succeed " ; he also considers she " is an accomplished actress who has great versatility . She has been prepared to mix comedy and musicals and switch from screen to stage " . 
 Zeta @-@ Jones is protective of her public image , and the use of her likeness is carefully controlled . In addition to the legal action against Hello ! magazine , she also sued a Nevada @-@ based topless club for including her image on their advertising . Addressing her perceived media image , Zeta @-@ Jones remarked in a 2004 interview to USA Weekend : " The biggest misconception of me is that I 'm some die @-@ hard , ambitious , do @-@ anything @-@ to @-@ get @-@ anything kind of person , I 'm not . I 'm very shy socially " . In 2003 , the celebrity biographer Cliff Goodwin wrote an unauthorised biography of the actress , titled Catherine Zeta Jones : The Biography , but the publication was indefinitely postponed after her lawyers threatened legal action . 
 = = Filmography and awards = = 
 = = = Selected filmography = = = 
 Zeta @-@ Jones ' films that have earned the most at the box office , as of 2016 , include : 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 For her role in Chicago ( 2002 ) , Zeta @-@ Jones was awarded the Academy Award , SAG Award , and the BAFTA Award for Best Supporting Actress . She has received two Golden Globe Award nominations : Best Supporting Actress for Traffic ( 2000 ) and Best Actress in a Comedy or Musical for Chicago ( 2002 ) . She was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in 2010 for her film and charity work . 
 = Naval Battle of Guadalcanal = 
 The Naval Battle of Guadalcanal , sometimes referred to as the Third and Fourth Battles of Savo Island , the Battle of the Solomons , the Battle of Friday the 13th , or , in Japanese sources , the Third Battle of the Solomon Sea ( <unk> , Dai @-@ san @-@ ji <unk> Kaisen ) , took place from 12 – 15 November 1942 , and was the decisive engagement in a series of naval battles between Allied ( primarily United States ) and Imperial Japanese forces during the months @-@ long Guadalcanal Campaign in the Solomon Islands during World War II . The action consisted of combined air and sea engagements over four days , most near Guadalcanal and all related to a Japanese effort to reinforce land forces on the island . The only two U.S. Navy admirals to be killed in a surface engagement in the war were lost in this battle . 
 Allied forces , primarily from the U.S. , had landed on Guadalcanal on 7 August 1942 and seized an airfield , later called Henderson Field , that was under construction by the Japanese military . There were several subsequent attempts by the Imperial Japanese Army and Navy , using reinforcements delivered to Guadalcanal by ship , to recapture the airfield , which ultimately failed . In early November 1942 , the Japanese organized a transport convoy to take 7 @,@ 000 infantry troops and their equipment to Guadalcanal to attempt once again to retake the airfield . Several Japanese warship forces were assigned to bombard Henderson Field with the goal of destroying Allied aircraft that posed a threat to the convoy . Learning of the Japanese reinforcement effort , U.S. forces launched aircraft and warship attacks to defend Henderson Field and prevent the Japanese ground troops from reaching Guadalcanal . 
 In the resulting battle , both sides lost numerous warships in two extremely destructive surface engagements at night . Nevertheless , the U.S. succeeded in turning back attempts by the Japanese to bombard Henderson Field with battleships . Allied aircraft also sank most of the Japanese troop transports and prevented the majority of the Japanese troops and equipment from reaching Guadalcanal . Thus , the battle turned back Japan 's last major attempt to dislodge Allied forces from Guadalcanal and nearby Tulagi , resulting in a strategic victory for the U.S. and its allies and deciding the ultimate outcome of the Guadalcanal campaign in their favor . 
 = = Background = = 
 The six @-@ month Guadalcanal campaign began on 7 August 1942 , when Allied ( primarily U.S. ) forces landed on Guadalcanal , Tulagi , and the Florida Islands in the Solomon Islands , a pre @-@ war colonial possession of Great Britain . The landings were meant to prevent the Japanese using the islands as bases from which to threaten the supply routes between the U.S. and Australia , and to secure them as starting points for a campaign to neutralize the major Imperial Japanese military base at Rabaul and support of the Allied New Guinea campaign . The Japanese had occupied Tulagi in May 1942 and began constructing an airfield on Guadalcanal in June 1942 . 
 By nightfall on 8 August , the 11 @,@ 000 Allied troops secured Tulagi , the nearby small islands , and a Japanese airfield under construction at Lunga Point on Guadalcanal ( later renamed Henderson Field ) . Allied aircraft operating out of Henderson were called the " Cactus Air Force " ( CAF ) after the Allied code name for Guadalcanal . To protect the airfield , the U.S. Marines established a perimeter defense around Lunga Point . Additional reinforcements over the next two months increased the number of U.S. troops at Lunga Point to more than 20 @,@ 000 men . 
 In response , the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters assigned the Imperial Japanese Army 's 17th Army , a corps @-@ sized command based at Rabaul and under the command of Lieutenant @-@ General Harukichi Hyakutake , with the task of retaking Guadalcanal . Units of the 17th Army began to arrive on Guadalcanal on 19 August , to drive Allied forces from the island . 
 Because of the threat by CAF aircraft based at Henderson Field , the Japanese were unable to use large , slow transport ships to deliver troops and supplies to the island . Instead , they used warships based at Rabaul and the Shortland Islands . The Japanese warships — mainly light cruisers or destroyers from the Eighth Fleet under the command of Vice Admiral Gunichi Mikawa — were usually able to make the round trip down " The Slot " to Guadalcanal and back in a single night , thereby minimizing their exposure to air attack . Delivering the troops in this manner , however , prevented most of the soldiers ' heavy equipment and supplies — such as heavy artillery , vehicles , and much food and ammunition — from being carried to Guadalcanal with them . These high @-@ speed warship runs to Guadalcanal occurred throughout the campaign and came to be known as the " Tokyo Express " by Allied forces and " Rat Transportation " by the Japanese . 
 The first Japanese attempt to recapture Henderson Field failed when a 917 @-@ man force was defeated on 21 August in the Battle of the Tenaru . The next attempt took place from 12 – 14 September , ending in the defeat of the 6 @,@ 000 men under the command of Major General Kiyotake Kawaguchi at the Battle of Edson 's Ridge . 
 In October , the Japanese again tried to recapture Henderson Field by delivering 15 @,@ 000 more men — mainly from the Army 's 2nd Infantry Division — to Guadalcanal . In addition to delivering the troops and their equipment by Tokyo Express runs , the Japanese also successfully pushed through one large convoy of slower transport ships . Enabling the approach of the transport convoy was a nighttime bombardment of Henderson Field by two battleships on 14 October that heavily damaged the airfield 's runways , destroyed half of the CAF 's aircraft , and burned most of the available aviation fuel . In spite of the damage , Henderson personnel were able to restore the two runways to service and replacement aircraft and fuel were delivered , gradually restoring the CAF to its pre @-@ bombardment level over the next few weeks . 
 The next Imperial attempt to retake the island with the newly arrived troops occurred from 20 – 26 October and was defeated with heavy losses in the Battle for Henderson Field . At the same time , Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto ( the commander of the Japanese Combined Fleet ) defeated U.S. naval forces in the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands , driving them away from the area . The Japanese carriers , however , were also forced to retreat because of losses to carrier aircraft and aircrews . Thereafter , Yamamoto 's ships returned to their main bases at Truk in Micronesia , where he had his headquarters , and Rabaul while three carriers returned to Japan for repairs and refitting . 
 The Japanese Army planned another attack on Guadalcanal in November 1942 , but further reinforcements were needed before the operation could proceed . The Army requested assistance from Yamamoto to deliver the needed reinforcements to the island and to support their planned offensive on the Allied forces guarding Henderson Field . To support the reinforcement effort , Yamamoto provided 11 large transport ships to carry 7 @,@ 000 army troops from the 38th Infantry Division , their ammunition , food , and heavy equipment from Rabaul to Guadalcanal . He also sent a warship support force from Truk on 9 November which included the battleships Hiei and Kirishima . Equipped with special fragmentation shells , they were to bombard Henderson Field on the night of 12 – 13 November and destroy it and the aircraft stationed there in order to allow the slow , heavy transports to reach Guadalcanal and unload safely the next day . The warship force was commanded from Hiei by recently promoted Vice Admiral Hiroaki Abe . Because of the constant threat by Japanese aircraft and warships , it was difficult for Allied forces to resupply their forces on Guadalcanal , which were often under attack from Imperial land and sea forces in the area . In early November 1942 , Allied intelligence learned that the Japanese were preparing again to try to retake Henderson Field . Therefore , the U.S. sent Task Force 67 ( TF 67 ) — a large reinforcement and re @-@ supply convoy , split into two groups and commanded by Rear Admiral Richmond K. Turner — to Guadalcanal on 11 November . The supply ships were protected by two task groups — commanded by Rear Admirals Daniel J. Callaghan and Norman Scott — and aircraft from Henderson Field on Guadalcanal . The transport ships were attacked several times on 11 and 12 November near Guadalcanal by Japanese aircraft based at Buin , Bougainville , in the Solomons , but most were unloaded without serious damage . Twelve Japanese aircraft were shot down by anti @-@ aircraft fire from the U.S. ships or by fighter aircraft flying from Henderson Field . 
 = = First Naval Battle of Guadalcanal , 13 November = = 
 = = = Prelude = = = 
 Abe 's warship force assembled 70 nmi ( 81 mi ; 130 km ) north of Indispensable Strait and proceeded towards Guadalcanal on 12 November with an estimated arrival time for the warships of early morning of 13 November . The convoy of slower transport ships and 12 escorting destroyers , under the command of Raizo Tanaka , began its run down " The Slot " ( New Georgia Sound ) from the Shortlands with an estimated arrival time at Guadalcanal during the night of 13 November . In addition to the battleships Hiei ( Abe 's flagship ) and Kirishima , Abe 's force included the light cruiser Nagara and 11 destroyers ( Samidare , Murasame , Asagumo , Teruzuki , Amatsukaze , Yukikaze , Ikazuchi , Inazuma , Akatsuki , <unk> , and Yūdachi ) . Three more destroyers ( Shigure , Shiratsuyu , and <unk> ) would provide a rear guard in the Russell Islands during Abe 's foray into the waters of " Savo Sound " around and near Savo Island off the north coast of Guadalcanal that would soon be nicknamed " Ironbottom Sound " as a result of this succession of battles and skirmishes . U.S. reconnaissance aircraft spotted the approach of the Japanese ships and passed a warning to the Allied command . Thus warned , Turner detached all usable combat ships to protect the troops ashore from the expected Japanese naval attack and troop landing and ordered the supply ships at Guadalcanal to depart by the early evening of 12 November . Callaghan was a few days ' senior to the more experienced Scott , and therefore was placed in overall command . 
 Callaghan prepared his force to meet the Japanese that night in the sound . His force consisted of two heavy cruisers ( San Francisco and Portland ) , three light cruisers ( Helena , Juneau , and Atlanta ) , and eight destroyers : Cushing , Laffey , Sterett , O 'Bannon , Aaron Ward , Barton , Monssen , and Fletcher . Admiral Callaghan commanded from San Francisco . 
 During their approach to Guadalcanal , the Japanese force passed through a large and intense rain squall which , along with a complex formation plus some confusing orders from Abe , split the formation into several groups . The U.S. force steamed in a single column in Ironbottom Sound , with destroyers in the lead and rear of the column , and the cruisers in the center . Five ships had the new , far @-@ superior SG radar , but Callaghan 's deployment put none of them in the forward part of the column , nor did he choose one for his flagship . Callaghan did not issue a battle plan to his ship commanders . 
 = = = Action = = = 
 At about 01 : 25 on 13 November , in near @-@ complete darkness due to the bad weather and dark moon , the ships of the Imperial Japanese force entered the sound between Savo Island and Guadalcanal and prepared to bombard Henderson Field with the special ammunition loaded for the purpose . The ships arrived from an unexpected direction , coming not down the slot but from the west side of Savo Island , thus entering the sound from the northwest rather than the north . Unlike their American counterparts , the Japanese sailors had drilled and practiced night fighting extensively , conducting frequent live @-@ fire night gunnery drills and exercises . This experience would be telling in not only the pending encounter , but in several other fleet actions off Guadalcanal in the months to come . 
 Several of the U.S. ships detected the approaching Japanese on radar , beginning at about 01 : 24 , but had trouble communicating the information to Callaghan due to problems with radio equipment , lack of discipline regarding communications procedures , and general inexperience in operating as a cohesive naval unit . Messages were sent and received but did not reach the commander in time to be processed and used . With his limited understanding of the new technology , Admiral Callaghan wasted further time trying to reconcile the range and bearing information reported by radar with his limited sight picture , to no avail . Lacking a modern Combat Information Center ( CIC ) , where incoming information could be quickly processed and co @-@ ordinated , the radar operator was reporting on vessels that were not in sight , while Callaghan was trying to coordinate the battle visually , from the bridge . ( Post battle analysis of this and other early surface actions would lead directly to the introduction of modern <unk> early in 1943 . ) 
 Several minutes after initial radar contact the two forces sighted each other , at about the same time , but both Abe and Callaghan hesitated ordering their ships into action . Abe was apparently surprised by the proximity of the U.S. ships , and with decks stacked with high explosive ( rather than armor penetrating ) munitions , was momentarily uncertain if he should withdraw to give his battleships time to rearm , or continue onward . He decided to continue onward . Callaghan apparently intended to attempt to cross the T of the Japanese , as Scott had done at Cape Esperance , but — confused by the incomplete information he was receiving , plus the fact that the Japanese formation consisted of several scattered groups — he gave several confusing orders on ship movements , and delayed too long in acting . 
 The U.S. ship formation began to fall apart , apparently further delaying Callaghan 's order to commence firing as he first tried to ascertain and align his ships ' positions . Meanwhile , the two forces ' formations began to overlap as individual ship commanders on both sides anxiously awaited permission to open fire . 
 At 01 : 48 , Akatsuki and Hiei turned on large searchlights and illuminated Atlanta only 3 @,@ 000 yd ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) away — almost point @-@ blank range for the battleship 's main guns . Several ships on both sides spontaneously began firing , and the formations of the two adversaries quickly disintegrated . Realizing that his force was almost surrounded by Japanese ships , Callaghan issued the confusing order , " Odd ships fire to starboard , even ships fire to port " , though no pre @-@ battle planning had assigned any such identity numbers to reference , and the ships were no longer in coherent formation . Most of the remaining U.S. ships then opened fire , although several had to quickly change their targets to attempt to comply with Callaghan 's order . As the ships from the two sides intermingled , they battled each other in an utterly confused and chaotic short @-@ range mêlée in which superior Japanese optic sights and well @-@ practiced night battle drill proved deadly effective . Afterward , an officer on Monssen likened it to " a barroom brawl after the lights had been shot out " . 
 At least six of the U.S. ships — including Laffey , O 'Bannon , Atlanta , San Francisco , Portland , and Helena — fired at Akatsuki , which drew attention to herself with her illuminated searchlight . The Japanese destroyer was hit repeatedly and blew up and sank within a few minutes . 
 Perhaps because it was the lead cruiser in the U.S. formation , Atlanta was the target of fire and torpedoes from several Imperial ships — probably including Nagara , Inazuma , and Ikazuchi — in addition to Akatsuki . The gunfire caused heavy damage to Atlanta , and a type 93 torpedo strike cut all of her engineering power . The disabled cruiser drifted into the line of fire of San Francisco , which accidentally fired on her , causing even greater damage . Admiral Scott and much of the bridge crew were killed . Without power and unable to fire her guns , Atlanta drifted out of control and out of the battle as the Japanese ships passed her by . The lead U.S. destroyer , Cushing , was also caught in a crossfire between several Imperial destroyers and perhaps Nagara . She too was hit heavily and stopped dead in the water . 
 Hiei , with her nine lit searchlights , huge size , and course taking her directly through the U.S. formation , became the focus of gunfire from many of the U.S. ships . ' ' Laffey ' ' passed so close to Hiei that they missed colliding by 20 ft ( 6 m ) . Hiei was unable to depress her main or secondary batteries low enough to hit Laffey , but Laffey was able to rake the Japanese battleship with 5 in ( 127 @.@ 0 mm ) shells and machine gun fire , causing heavy damage to the superstructure and bridge , wounding Admiral Abe and killing his chief of staff . Abe was thus limited in his ability to direct his ships for the rest of the battle . Sterett and O 'Bannon likewise fired several salvos into Hiei 's superstructure from close range , and perhaps one or two torpedoes into her hull , causing further damage before both destroyers escaped into the darkness . 
 Unable to fire her main or secondary batteries at the three destroyers causing her so much trouble , Hiei instead concentrated on San Francisco , which was passing by only 2 @,@ 500 yd ( 2 @,@ 300 m ) away . Along with Kirishima , Inazuma , and Ikazuchi , the four ships made repeated hits on San Francisco , disabling her steering control and killing Admiral Callaghan , Captain Cassin Young , and most of the bridge staff . The first few salvos from Hiei and Kirishima consisted of the special fragmentation bombardment shells , which reduced damage to the interior of San Francisco and may have saved her from being sunk outright . Not expecting a ship @-@ to @-@ ship confrontation , it took the crews of the two Imperial battleships several minutes to switch to armor @-@ piercing ammunition , and San Francisco , almost helpless to defend herself , managed to momentarily sail clear of the melee . She had landed at least one shell in Hiei 's steering gear room during the exchange , flooding it with water , shorting out her power steering generators , and severely inhibiting Hiei 's steering capability . Helena followed San Francisco to try to protect her from further harm . 
 Two of the U.S. destroyers met a sudden demise . Either Nagara or the destroyers Teruzuki and Yukikaze came upon the drifting Cushing and pounded her with gunfire , knocking out all of her systems . Unable to fight back , Cushing 's crew abandoned ship . Cushing sank several hours later . Laffey , having escaped from her engagement with Hiei , encountered Asagumo , Murasame , Samidare , and , perhaps , Teruzuki . The Japanese destroyers pounded Laffey with gunfire and then hit her with a torpedo which broke her keel . A few minutes later fires reached her ammunition magazines and she blew up and sank . 
 Portland — after helping sink Akatsuki — was hit by a torpedo from Inazuma or Ikazuchi , causing heavy damage to her stern and forcing her to steer in a circle . After completing her first loop , she was able to fire four salvos at Hiei but otherwise took little further part in the battle . 
 Yūdachi and Amatsukaze independently charged the rear five ships of the U.S. formation . Two torpedoes from Amatsukaze hit Barton , immediately sinking her with heavy loss of life . Amatsukaze turned back north and later also hit Juneau with a torpedo while the cruiser was exchanging fire with Yūdachi , stopping her dead in the water , breaking her keel , and knocking out most of her systems . Juneau then turned east and slowly crept out of the battle area . 
 Monssen avoided the wreck of Barton and steamed onward looking for targets . She was noticed by Asagumo , Murasame , and Samidare who had just finished blasting Laffey . They smothered Monssen with gunfire , damaging her severely and forcing the crew to abandon ship . The ship sank some time later . 
 Amatsukaze approached San Francisco with the intention of finishing her off . However , while concentrating on San Francisco , Amatsukaze did not notice the approach of Helena , which fired several full broadsides at Amatsukaze from close range and knocked her out of the action . The heavily damaged Amatsukaze escaped under cover of a smoke screen while Helena was distracted by an attack by Asagumo , Murasame , and Samidare . 
 Aaron Ward and Sterett , independently searching for targets , both sighted Yūdachi , who appeared unaware of the approach of the two U.S. destroyers . Both U.S. ships hit Yūdachi simultaneously with gunfire and torpedoes , heavily damaging the destroyer and forcing her crew to abandon ship . The ship did not sink right away , however . Continuing on her way , Sterett was suddenly ambushed by Teruzuki , heavily damaged , and forced to withdraw from the battle area to the east . Aaron Ward wound up in a one @-@ on @-@ one duel with Kirishima , which the destroyer lost with heavy damage . She also tried to retire from the battle area to the east but soon stopped dead in the water because the engines were damaged . 
 Robert Leckie , a Marine private on Guadalcanal , described the battle : 
 The star shells rose , terrible and red . Giant tracers flashed across the night in orange arches . ... the sea seemed a sheet of polished obsidian on which the warships seemed to have been dropped and were immobilized , centered amid concentric circles like shock waves that form around a stone dropped in mud . 
 Ira Wolfert , an American war correspondent , was with the Marines on shore and wrote of the engagement : 
 The action was illuminated in brief , blinding flashes by Jap searchlights which were shot out as soon as they were turned on , by muzzle flashes from big guns , by fantastic streams of tracers , and by huge orange @-@ colored explosions as two Jap destroyers and one of our destroyers blew up ... From the beach it resembled a door to hell opening and closing ... over and over . 
 After nearly 40 minutes of brutal , close @-@ quarters fighting , the two sides broke contact and ceased fire at 02 : 26 , after Abe and Captain Gilbert Hoover ( the captain of Helena and senior surviving U.S. officer ) ordered their respective forces to disengage . Admiral Abe had one battleship ( Kirishima ) , one light cruiser ( Nagara ) , and four destroyers ( Asagumo , Teruzuki , Yukikaze , and <unk> ) with only light damage and four destroyers ( Inazuma , Ikazuchi , Murasame , and Samidare ) with moderate damage . The U.S. had only one light cruiser ( Helena ) and one destroyer ( Fletcher ) that were still capable of effective resistance . Although perhaps unclear to Abe , the way was now clear for him to bombard Henderson Field and finish off the U.S. naval forces in the area , thus allowing the troops and supplies to be landed safely on Guadalcanal . 
 However , at this crucial juncture , Abe chose to abandon the mission and depart the area . Several reasons are conjectured as to why he made this decision . Much of the special bombardment ammunition had been expended in the battle . If the bombardment failed to destroy the airfield , then his warships would be vulnerable to CAF air attack at dawn . His own injuries and the deaths of some of his staff from battle action may have affected Abe 's judgement . Perhaps he was also unsure as to how many of his or the U.S. ships were still combat @-@ capable because of communication problems with the damaged Hiei . Furthermore , his own ships were scattered and would have taken some time to reassemble for a coordinated resumption of the mission to attack Henderson Field and the remnants of the U.S. warship force . For whatever reason , Abe called for a disengagement and general retreat of his warships , although Yukikaze and Teruzuki remained behind to assist Hiei . Samidare picked up survivors from Yūdachi at 03 : 00 before joining the other Japanese ships in the retirement northwards . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 At 03 : 00 on 13 November , Admiral Yamamoto postponed the planned landings of the transports , which returned to the Shortlands to await further orders . Dawn revealed three crippled Japanese ( Hiei , Yūdachi , and Amatsukaze ) , and three crippled U.S. ships ( Portland , Atlanta , and Aaron Ward ) in the general vicinity of Savo Island . Amatsukaze was attacked by U.S. dive bombers but escaped further damage as she headed to Truk , and eventually returned to action several months later . The abandoned hulk of Yūdachi was sunk by Portland , whose guns were still functioning despite other damage to the ship . The tugboat <unk> motored around Ironbottom Sound throughout the day of 13 November , assisting the damaged U.S. ships and rescuing U.S. survivors from the water . 
 Hiei was attacked repeatedly by Marine Grumman TBF Avenger torpedo planes from Henderson Field , TBFs and Douglas SBD Dauntless dive @-@ bombers from Enterprise , which had departed Nouméa on 11 November , and Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress bombers of the United States Army Air Forces 11th Bombardment Group from Espiritu Santo . Abe and his staff transferred to Yukikaze at 08 : 15 . Kirishima was ordered by Abe to take Hiei under tow , escorted by Nagara and its destroyers , but the attempt was cancelled because of the threat of submarine attack and Hiei 's increasing <unk> . After sustaining more damage from air attacks , Hiei sank northwest of Savo Island , perhaps after being scuttled by her remaining crew , in the late evening of 13 November . 
 Portland , San Francisco , Aaron Ward , and Sterett were eventually able to make their way to rear @-@ area ports for repairs . Atlanta , however , sank near Guadalcanal at 20 : 00 on 13 November . Departing from the Solomon Islands area with San Francisco , Helena , <unk> , and O 'Bannon later that day , Juneau was torpedoed and sunk by Japanese submarine I @-@ 26 ( 9 ° 11 ′ 10 ″ S 159 ° 53 ′ 42 ″ E ) . Juneau 's 100 + survivors ( out of a total complement of 697 ) were left to fend for themselves in the open ocean for eight days before rescue aircraft belatedly arrived . While awaiting rescue , all but ten of Juneau 's crew died from their injuries , the elements , or shark attacks . The dead included the five Sullivan brothers . 
 Most historians appear to agree that Abe 's decision to retreat represented a strategic victory for the United States . Henderson Field remained operational with attack aircraft ready to deter the slow Imperial transports from approaching Guadalcanal with their precious cargoes . Plus , the Japanese had lost an opportunity to eliminate the U.S. naval forces in the area , a result which would have taken even the comparatively resource @-@ rich U.S. some time to recover from . Reportedly furious , Admiral Yamamoto relieved Abe of command and later directed his forced retirement from the military . However , it appears that Yamamoto may have been more angry over the loss of one of his battleships ( Hiei ) than he was over the abandonment of the supply mission and failure to completely destroy the U.S. force . Shortly before noon , Yamamoto ordered Vice Admiral Nobutake Kondō , commanding the Second Fleet at Truk , to form a new bombardment unit around Kirishima and attack Henderson Field on the night of 14 – 15 November . 
 Including the sinking of Juneau , total U.S. losses in the battle were 1 @,@ 439 dead . The Japanese suffered between 550 and 800 dead . Analyzing the impact of this engagement , historian Richard B. Frank states : 
 This action stands without peer for furious , close @-@ range , and confused fighting during the war . But the result was not decisive . The self @-@ sacrifice of Callaghan and his task force had purchased one night 's respite for Henderson Field . It had postponed , not stopped , the landing of major Japanese reinforcements , nor had the greater portion of the ( Japanese ) Combined Fleet yet been heard from . " 
 = = Other actions , 13 – 14 November = = 
 Although the reinforcement effort to Guadalcanal was delayed , the Japanese did not give up trying to complete the original mission , albeit a day later than originally planned . On the afternoon of 13 November , Tanaka and the 11 transports resumed their journey toward Guadalcanal . A Japanese force of cruisers and destroyers from the 8th Fleet ( based primarily at Rabaul and originally assigned to cover the unloading of the transports on the evening of 13 November ) was given the mission that Abe 's force had failed to carry out — the bombardment of Henderson Field . The battleship Kirishima , after abandoning its rescue effort of Hiei on the morning of 13 November , steamed north between Santa Isabel and Malaita Islands with her accompanying warships to rendezvous with Kondo 's Second Fleet , inbound from Truk , to form the new bombardment unit . 
 The 8th Fleet cruiser force , under the command of Vice Admiral Gunichi Mikawa , included the heavy cruisers Chōkai , Kinugasa , Maya , and Suzuya , the light cruisers Isuzu and Tenryū , and six destroyers . Mikawa 's force was able to slip into the Guadalcanal area uncontested , the battered U.S. naval force having withdrawn . Suzuya and Maya , under the command of Shōji Nishimura , bombarded Henderson Field while the rest of Mikawa 's force cruised around Savo Island , guarding against any U.S. surface attack ( which in the event did not occur ) . The 35 @-@ minute bombardment caused some damage to various aircraft and facilities on the airfield but did not put it out of operation . The cruiser force ended the bombardment around 02 : 30 on 14 November and cleared the area to head towards Rabaul on a course south of the New Georgia island group . 
 At daybreak , aircraft from Henderson Field , Espiritu Santo , and Enterprise — stationed 200 nmi ( 230 mi ; 370 km ) south of Guadalcanal — began their attacks , first on Mikawa 's force heading away from Guadalcanal , and then on the transport force heading towards the island . The attacks on Mikawa 's force sank Kinugasa , killing 511 of her crew , and damaged Maya , forcing her to return to Japan for repairs . Repeated air attacks on the transport force overwhelmed the escorting Japanese fighter aircraft , sank six of the transports , and forced one more to turn back with heavy damage ( it later sank ) . Survivors from the transports were rescued by the convoy 's escorting destroyers and returned to the Shortlands . A total of 450 army troops were reported to have perished . The remaining four transports and four destroyers continued towards Guadalcanal after nightfall of 14 November , but stopped west of Guadalcanal to await the outcome of a warship surface action developing nearby ( below ) before continuing . 
 Kondo 's ad hoc force rendezvoused at Ontong Java on the evening of 13 November , then reversed course and refueled out of range of Henderson Field 's bombers on the morning of 14 November . The U.S. submarine Trout stalked but was unable to attack Kirishima during refueling . The bombardment force continued south and came under air attack late in the afternoon of 14 November , during which they were also attacked by the submarine Flying Fish , which launched five torpedoes ( but scored no hits ) before reporting its contact by radio . 
 = = Second Naval Battle of Guadalcanal , 14 – 15 November = = 
 = = = Prelude = = = 
 Kondo 's force approached Guadalcanal via Indispensable Strait around midnight on 14 November , and a quarter moon provided moderate visibility of about 7 km ( 3 @.@ 8 nmi ; 4 @.@ 3 mi ) . The force included Kirishima , heavy cruisers Atago and Takao , light cruisers Nagara and Sendai , and nine destroyers , some of the destroyers being survivors ( along with Kirishima and Nagara ) of the first night engagement two days prior . Kondo flew his flag in the cruiser Atago . 
 Low on undamaged ships , Admiral William Halsey , Jr . , detached the new battleships Washington and South Dakota , of Enterprise 's support group , together with four destroyers , as TF 64 under Admiral Willis A. Lee to defend Guadalcanal and Henderson Field . It was a scratch force ; the battleships had only operated together for a few days , and their four escorts were from four different divisions — chosen simply because , of the available destroyers , they had the most fuel . The U.S. force arrived in Ironbottom Sound in the evening of 14 November and began patrolling around Savo Island . The U.S. warships were in column formation with the four destroyers in the lead , followed by Washington , with South Dakota bringing up the rear . At 22 : 55 on 14 November , radar on South Dakota and Washington began picking up Kondo 's approaching ships near Savo Island , at a distance of around 18 @,@ 000 m ( 20 @,@ 000 yd ) . 
 = = = Action = = = 
 Kondo split his force into several groups , with one group — commanded by Shintaro Hashimoto and consisting of Sendai and destroyers Shikinami and Uranami ( " C " on the maps ) — sweeping along the east side of Savo Island , and destroyer Ayanami ( " B " on the maps ) sweeping counterclockwise around the southwest side of Savo Island to check for the presence of Allied ships . The Japanese ships spotted Lee 's force around 23 : 00 , though Kondo misidentified the battleships as cruisers . Kondo ordered the Sendai group of ships — plus Nagara and four destroyers ( " D " on the maps ) — to engage and destroy the U.S. force before he brought the bombardment force of Kirishima and heavy cruisers ( " E " on the maps ) into Ironbottom Sound . The U.S. ships ( " A " on the maps ) detected the Sendai force on radar but did not detect the other groups of Japanese ships . Using radar targeting , the two U.S. battleships opened fire on the Sendai group at 23 : 17 . Admiral Lee ordered a cease fire about five minutes later after the northern group disappeared from his ship 's radar . However , Sendai , Uranami , and Shikinami were undamaged and circled out of the danger area . 
 Meanwhile , the four U.S. destroyers in the vanguard of the U.S. formation began engaging both Ayanami and the Nagara group of ships at 23 : 22 . Nagara and her escorting destroyers responded effectively with accurate gunfire and torpedoes , and destroyers Walke and Preston were hit and sunk within 10 minutes with heavy loss of life . The destroyer Benham had part of her bow blown off by a torpedo and had to retreat ( she sank the next day ) , and destroyer Gwin was hit in her engine room and put out of the fight . However , the U.S. destroyers had completed their mission as screens for the battleships , absorbing the initial impact of contact with the enemy , although at great cost . Lee ordered the retirement of Benham and Gwin at 23 : 48 . 
 Washington passed through the area still occupied by the damaged and sinking U.S. destroyers and fired on Ayanami with her secondary batteries , setting her afire . Following close behind , South Dakota suddenly suffered a series of electrical failures , reportedly during repairs when her chief engineer locked down a circuit breaker in violation of safety procedures , causing her circuits repeatedly to go into series , making her radar , radios , and most of her gun batteries inoperable . However , she continued to follow Washington towards the western side of Savo Island until 23 : 35 , when Washington changed course left to pass to the southward behind the burning destroyers . South Dakota tried to follow but had to turn to right to avoid Benham , which resulted in the ship 's being silhouetted by the fires of the burning destroyers and made her a closer and easier target for the Japanese . 
 Receiving reports of the destruction of the U.S. destroyers from Ayanami and his other ships , Kondo pointed his bombardment force towards Guadalcanal , believing that the U.S. warship force had been defeated . His force and the two U.S. battleships were now heading towards each other . 
 Almost blind and unable to effectively fire her main and secondary armament , South Dakota was illuminated by searchlights and targeted by gunfire and torpedoes by most of the ships of the Japanese force , including Kirishima , beginning around midnight on 15 November . Although able to score a few hits on Kirishima , South Dakota took 26 hits — some of which did not explode — that completely knocked out her communications and remaining gunfire control operations , set portions of her upper decks on fire , and forced her to try to steer away from the engagement . All of the Japanese torpedoes missed . Admiral Lee later described the cumulative effect of the gunfire damage to South Dakota as to , " render one of our new battleships deaf , dumb , blind , and impotent . " South Dakota 's crew casualties were 39 killed and 59 wounded , and she turned away from the battle at 00 : 17 without informing Admiral Lee , though observed by Kondo 's lookouts . 
 The Japanese ships continued to concentrate their fire on South Dakota and none detected Washington approaching to within 9 @,@ 000 yd ( 8 @,@ 200 m ) . Washington was tracking a large target ( Kirishima ) for some time but refrained from firing since there was a chance it could be South Dakota . Washington had not been able to track South Dakota 's movements because she was in a blind spot in Washington 's radar and Lee could not raise her on the radio to confirm her position . When the Japanese illuminated and fired on South Dakota , all doubts were removed as to which ships were friend or foe . From this close range , Washington opened fire and quickly hit Kirishima with at least nine main battery shells and at least seventeen secondary ones , causing heavy damage and setting her aflame . Kirishima was hit below the waterline and suffered a jammed rudder , causing her to circle uncontrollably to port . 
 At 00 : 25 , Kondo ordered all of his ships that were able to converge and destroy any remaining U.S. ships . However , the Japanese ships still did not know where Washington was located , and the other surviving U.S. ships had already departed the battle area . Washington steered a northwesterly course toward the Russell Islands to draw the Japanese force away from Guadalcanal and the presumably damaged South Dakota . The Imperial ships finally sighted Washington and launched several torpedo attacks , but by the skilled seamanship of her captain she avoided all of them and also avoided running aground in shallow waters . At length , believing that the way was clear for the transport convoy to proceed to Guadalcanal ( but apparently disregarding the threat of air attack in the morning ) , Kondo ordered his remaining ships to break contact and retire from the area about 01 : 04 , which most of the Japanese warships complied with by 01 : 30 . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Ayanami was scuttled by Uranami at 2 : 00 , while Kirishima capsized and sank by 03 : 25 on 15 November . Uranami rescued survivors from Ayanami and destroyers Asagumo , Teruzuki , and Samidare rescued the remaining crew from Kirishima . In the engagement , 242 U.S. and 249 Japanese sailors died . The engagement was one of only two battleship @-@ against @-@ battleship surface battles in the entire Pacific campaign of World War II , the other being at the Surigao Strait during the Battle of Leyte Gulf . 
 The four Japanese transports beached themselves at Tassafaronga on Guadalcanal by 04 : 00 on 15 November , and Tanaka and the escort destroyers departed and raced back up the Slot toward safer waters . The transports were attacked , beginning at 05 : 55 , by U.S. aircraft from Henderson Field and elsewhere , and by field artillery from U.S. ground forces on Guadalcanal . Later , destroyer Meade approached and opened fire on the beached transports and surrounding area . These attacks set the transports afire and destroyed any equipment on them that the Japanese had not managed to unload . Only 2 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 000 of the embarked troops made it to Guadalcanal , and most of their ammunition and food were lost . 
 Yamamoto 's reaction to Kondo 's failure to accomplish his mission of neutralizing Henderson Field and ensuring the safe landing of troops and supplies was milder than his earlier reaction to Abe 's withdrawal , perhaps because of Imperial Navy culture and politics . Kondo , who also held the position of second in command of the Combined Fleet , was a member of the upper staff and battleship " clique " of the Imperial Navy while Abe was a career destroyer specialist . Admiral Kondo was not reprimanded or reassigned but instead was left in command of one of the large ship fleets based at Truk . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The failure to deliver to Guadalcanal most of the troops and supplies in the convoy prevented the Japanese from launching another offensive to retake Henderson Field . Thereafter , the Imperial Navy was only able to deliver subsistence supplies and a few replacement troops to Japanese Army forces on Guadalcanal . Because of the continuing threat from Allied aircraft based at Henderson Field , plus nearby U.S. aircraft carriers , the Japanese had to continue to rely on Tokyo Express warship deliveries to their forces on Guadalcanal . However , these supplies and replacements were not enough to sustain Japanese troops on the island , who – by 7 December 1942 – were losing about 50 men each day from malnutrition , disease , and Allied ground and air attacks . On 12 December , the Japanese Navy proposed that Guadalcanal be abandoned . Despite opposition from Japanese Army leaders , who still hoped that Guadalcanal could be retaken from the Allies , Japan 's Imperial General Headquarters — with approval from the Emperor — agreed on 31 December to the evacuation of all Japanese forces from the island and establishment of a new line of defense for the Solomons on New Georgia . 
 Thus , the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal was the last major attempt by the Japanese to seize control of the seas around Guadalcanal or to retake the island . In contrast , the U.S. Navy was thereafter able to resupply the U.S. forces at Guadalcanal at will , including the delivery of two fresh divisions by late December 1942 . The inability to neutralize Henderson Field doomed the Japanese effort to successfully combat the Allied conquest of Guadalcanal . The last Japanese resistance in the Guadalcanal campaign ended on 9 February 1943 , with the successful evacuation of most of the surviving Japanese troops from the island by the Japanese Navy in Operation Ke . Building on their success at Guadalcanal and elsewhere , the Allies continued their campaign against Japan , which culminated in Japan 's defeat and the end of World War II . U.S. President Franklin Roosevelt , upon learning of the results of the battle , commented , " It would seem that the turning point in this war has at last been reached . " 
 Historian Eric Hammel sums up the significance of the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal this way : 
 On November 12 , 1942 , the ( Japanese ) Imperial Navy had the better ships and the better tactics . After November 15 , 1942 , its leaders lost heart and it lacked the strategic depth to face the burgeoning U.S. Navy and its vastly improving weapons and tactics . The Japanese never got better while , after November 1942 , the U.S. Navy never stopped getting better . 
 General Alexander Vandegrift , the commander of the troops on Guadalcanal , paid tribute to the sailors who fought the battle : 
 We believe the enemy has undoubtedly suffered a crushing defeat . We thank Admiral Kinkaid for his intervention yesterday . We thank Lee for his sturdy effort last night . Our own aircraft has been grand in its relentless hammering of the foe . All those efforts are appreciated but our greatest homage goes to Callaghan , Scott and their men who with magnificent courage against seemingly hopeless odds drove back the first hostile attack and paved the way for the success to follow . To them the men of Cactus lift their battered helmets in deepest admiration . 
 = Leslie 's House = 
 " Leslie 's House " is the 14th episode of the second season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the twentieth overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on January 21 , 2010 . In the episode , Leslie holds a dinner party to impress her boyfriend Justin , but ends up recruiting town employees and potentially abusing her government power . 
 The episode was written by Daniel J. Goor and directed by Alex Hardcastle . The episode also continued a story arc involving Justin Theroux as Leslie 's boyfriend , which began in the previous episode . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Leslie 's House " was seen by 4 @.@ 35 million viewers , a slight drop from the previous episode , " The Set Up " . The episode received generally positive reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A remorseful Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) tells a group of Recreation Center teachers the Pawnee budget has been cut by $ 1 @,@ 000 , and five of their classes will have to be cut , but exactly which classes has not yet been determined . Later , Leslie and Justin Anderson ( Justin Theroux ) , who have been dating for weeks , have another excellent date in Indianapolis . At the end of the night , they decide their next date will be in Pawnee , and Leslie feels pressure to make their date equally exciting . While talking later with Ann ( Rashida Jones ) , Leslie decides to host a dinner party at her home with all her interesting friends . She invites Mark ( Paul Schneider ) , Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) and Ron ( Nick Offerman ) , specifically excludes Jerry ( Jim O 'Heir ) , and asks Andy ( Chris Pratt ) to work as the waiter . Andy agrees , even though he hates Justin , Ann 's former crush , and Mark , her current boyfriend . 
 Ann comes to Leslie 's house , and finds it full of stacks of boxes , papers and garbage . When they find themselves unable to clean it , Leslie calls Maria <unk> ( Bonita Friedericy ) , who teaches cleaning courses at the recreation center . She declines payment and hints she would prefer preferential treatment when Leslie cuts the classes , despite Leslie 's assurance this will not happen . When Leslie realizes she has not prepared any food for the party , she calls a culinary teacher from the recreation center . Later , at the party , Andy complains about Justin to April ( Aubrey Plaza ) , who makes Andy happy when she proposes putting chewed up gum in Justin 's pockets . Eventually , Tom 's ex @-@ wife Wendy ( Jama Williamson ) arrives . Tom expresses anger that Leslie invited her , especially because Ron is romantically interested in her . When Ron impresses Wendy by eating a hot red pepper , Tom attempts to eat a bigger one , but has to run to the bathroom in pain immediately . When Justin starts yawning , a worried Leslie calls in other recreation center teachers to make the party more interesting , including a belly @-@ dancer , a fencer , a cartoonist and an origami teacher . 
 Eventually , an accounting teacher arrives , believing demonstrations are being held to determine which class will be cut , much to the anger of Ron . He gives a very boring accounting lecture , which puts Justin to sleep . The next day , Leslie is before the Pawnee Disciplinary Committee on charges of abuse of power . Leslie calls Justin as a witness and questions him as to whether he enjoyed the party , to which he answers an emphatic yes . Afterward , the committee rules no further action will be taken , mainly because Leslie turned herself in and paid $ 1 @,@ 000 restitution to the recreation center so no classes would be cut . When Ann asks why she did it , Leslie said it was to get an honest answer from Justin about the date , under penalty of perjury . The episode ends with Justin encouraging Tom to ask Wendy out . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Leslie 's House " was written by Daniel J. Goor and directed by Alex Hardcastle . It featured one of a string of slated guest appearances by Justin Theroux as Justin , a love interest for Leslie . The episode also featured Jama Williamson in her recurring role as Wendy , the soon @-@ to @-@ be ex @-@ wife of Tom . " Leslie 's House " satirizes government officials abusing their positions of power for personal gain , marking a continuation throughout the second season to feature more topical storylines . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 While discussing how behind the times Pawnee is , Tom said residents are now only starting to become interested in the rock band Nirvana . Tom said , " I don 't have the heart to tell them what 's going to happen to Kurt Cobain in 1994 " , a reference to the suicide of the band 's lead singer . Before Tom eats a hot pepper at the dinner party , he sings , " This is how you eat it " to the tune of the 1995 Montell Jordan song " This Is How We Do It " . Leslie said she was saving an old newspaper because it had the " first rumblings of Iran @-@ Contra " , a reference to the scandal in which U.S. figures facilitated the sale of arms to Iran . Tom visits Wikipedia , the free online encyclopedia , to learn more about India when quizzed by Justin . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American NBC broadcast on January 21 , 2010 , " Leslie 's House " was seen by 4 @.@ 35 million viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research . It was a more than five percent drop in viewership from the previous week 's episode , " The Set Up " . " Leslie 's House " drew a 2 @.@ 0 rating / 5 share among viewers aged between 18 and 49 . The episode received generally positive reviews . Alan Sepinwall , television columnist with The Star @-@ Ledger , said the episode was very funny and farcical , but grounded in reality enough to keep it from being too unbelievable or over @-@ the @-@ top . Sepinwall said Mark was funnier than he is in most episodes , and said there was good development in the subplots between April and Andy , as well as the blossoming love triangle between Ron , Tom and Wendy . 
 Entertainment Weekly writer Sandra Gonzalez said she liked the pairing of Poehler and Theroux , but found " Leslie 's House " slower than previous episodes , and felt the comedic talents of Ansari and Offerman were underused . Matt Fowler of IGN praised the episode for its use of a wide range of characters to provide humor , saying " Everyone got a chance to shine in this episode . They all took turns giving us a laugh and ' Leslie 's House ' was a tremendous example of this series firing on all cylinders . " Steve Kandell of New York magazine praised the episode 's satirical bent about elected officials . Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club favorably compared " Leslie 's House " to " Dinner Party " , an episode of The Office , the other comedy series created by Parks co @-@ creator Greg Daniels . However , he said " Leslie 's House " was different in that her friends were willing to attend her party and help her out , whereas in the Office episode , the characters did not want to attend the dinner party held by protagonist Michael Scott . Heisler said the fact that the characters liked each other so much in Parks and Recreation differentiated itself from the other series in a positive way . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " Leslie 's House " , along with the other 23 second season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode . 
 = The Boat Race 1836 = 
 The 2nd Boat Race took place on the River Thames on 17 June 1836 . It was the first of the University Boat Races to be held in London , on a five @-@ and @-@ three @-@ quarter @-@ mile stretch between Westminster and Putney . For the first time , Cambridge sported light blue livery in the form of a ribbon on their boat while Oxford rowed in dark blue jerseys . In a race umpired by Lord Loftus and Mr <unk> , Cambridge won the race by 20 lengths to level the overall record at 1 – 1 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is an annual rowing eight competition between the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge . First held in 1829 , no attempt was made to organise the second race until 1834 . Cambridge had initially proposed a race from Westminster Bridge to Hammersmith , while Oxford suggested Maidenhead . Although Cambridge agreed to compromise to race on any stretch of the Thames between Westminster and Richmond , no agreement was reached until 1836 . This year , both universities issued a challenge to one another , and arrangements for the event were made in a meeting at the Star and Garter pub in Putney on 16 June 1836 . According to a journalist for The Morning Post , there was disagreement over the length of the race , with Oxford preferring a short course of a mile and a half , while Cambridge opted for the same course as the previous year . It was agreed that the race was to take place the following day along the 5 @.@ 75 @-@ mile ( 9 @.@ 3 km ) stretch of river between Westminster Bridge and Putney Bridge , a championship course for professional scullers . It was also agreed that both boats would be steered by university men rather than professional coxes . 
 The second Boat Race in the history of the event , it was the first to be conducted in London , with the inaugural race taking place at Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1829 race " easily " . Cambridge were coached by their cox Thomas Selby Egan . The umpires for the race were both Oxonians : Lord Loftus , of Balliol College and Mr <unk> ( or Mr Hickson ) of Christ Church . 
 According to author and former Oxford rower George Drinkwater , this was the first year that Cambridge adopted light blue as their racing colours : an R. N. Phillips provided a strip of Eton blue ribbon " which was fixed to the bows " of the boat . Oxford wore white jerseys with dark blue stripes , as they had done for the 1829 race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 11 st 8 @.@ 625 lb ( 73 @.@ 6 kg ) , 0 @.@ 875 pounds ( 0 @.@ 4 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . None of the competitors had taken part in a previous Boat Race , while all participants were registered as British . George Carter followed his brother J. Carter who had rowed for Oxford in 1829 race . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford were favourites to win the race ; Cambridge won the toss . Heavy rain began to fall two hours before the start of the race , yet " although the rain descended in torrents , all were gay " . The race was started by the umpires at 4 : 20 p.m. , with Cambridge starting well , taking an early lead . By Vauxhall Bridge Cambridge 's lead was significant . Rowing " gallantly " , author and former Light Blue rower William MacMichael noted that Cambridge had the race " all their own way " and passed under Putney Bridge about one minute and 20 lengths ahead of Oxford in a time of around 36 minutes . The victory levelled the series at 1 – 1 . 
 Sports writer Gordon Ross described the race as " a very hollow affair " in which Cambridge " completely outclassed their rivals " . Drinkwater noted that the quality of rowing " was a good deal criticised by the watermen and amateurs of the Tideway " . According to the reporter for The Morning Post , " the Oxonians never stood a shadow of a chance , although they looked bigger men " . The author of The Sportsman claimed that " Cambridge had the best boat . The one rowed by the Oxonians is too flat @-@ bottomed for the Thames " . 
 = Anstey Hill Recreation Park = 
 Anstey Hill Recreation Park is a 362 @-@ hectare ( 890 @-@ acre ) protected area established in 1989 and located approximately 19 kilometres ( 12 mi ) northeast of Adelaide , South Australia . The park is a significant reserve of bushland in the foothills of the Mount Lofty Ranges and is home to rare or vulnerable native plants and animals , and problematic invasive species . It is managed by the City of Tea Tree Gully , the Department of Environment , Water and Natural Resources and a volunteer group — The Friends of Anstey Hill . The park is designed for recreational walking and has no visitor facilities . It is managed in association with the regional planning initiative known as of Yurrebilla , the Greater Mount Lofty Parklands . 
 The park 's land was gradually acquired by the Government of South Australia beginning in 1966 , based on recommendations in a 1962 report . From 1981 onwards , plans were published that aimed to develop the area for commercial purposes , but public pressure led to its declaration as a public reserve in 1989 . The last land added was a small area in 2003 . Anstey Hill is a 371 @-@ metre ( 1 @,@ 217 ft ) high peak in the park 's south . Both hill and park are named after a road built by agricultural pioneer George Alexander Anstey . Fire authorities regard the park as an " arson hotspot " , and it is frequently burned by bushfires — mostly deliberately lit . There is no permanent water except for springs in Water Gully , adjacent to ruins of a nursery , although there are many seasonal creeks . Much of the land is steep , rising 200 m ( 660 ft ) across the park 's breadth , with gradients often steeper than one in three . Erosion and land movements due to a significant geologic fault zone created this land form . The Gun Emplacement , a listed Geologic Monument and remnant of an ancient land surface , lies in the southwestern corner . 
 The Adelaide – Mannum pipeline crosses the park and the Anstey Hill water filtration plant lies on its southern boundary ; together they supply 20 % of Adelaide 's reticulated water . Significant historical uses of the area are preserved as ruins and highlighted with interpretive signs . The ruins of Newman 's Nursery are all that remains of what was once the largest plant nursery in the Southern Hemisphere . Ellis Cottage is one of the earliest homes in the area , and the Rumps Bakery building housed the first bakery in Tea Tree Gully . Quarries supplied stone for significant Victorian buildings in Adelaide and aggregate for road building . Klopper 's quarries in the southwest hosted plays for the Festival of the Arts in 1980 and 1988 . 
 = = Today 's park = = 
 Anstey Hill Recreation Park is a reserved area of public land with short seasonal creeks , low hills and steep @-@ sided gullies . Its boundaries are largely formed by Lower North East , North East , Perseverance and Range Roads ; there is a small section south of Lower North East Road . It lies at the edge of the Mount Lofty Ranges ' foothills and forms part of the " hill 's face " that is visible from Adelaide 's metropolitan area . The park covers 362 hectares ( 890 acres ) of the City of Tea Tree Gully , approximately 19 km ( 12 mi ) northeast of Adelaide 's central business district , with parts in the suburbs of Tea Tree Gully , Vista , Highbury and Houghton . The Adelaide – Mannum water supply pipeline crosses the park 's south , and an associated filtration plant is sited on its southern boundary . Adjacent to the water filtration plant is Anstey Hill , reaching 371 @.@ 1 m ( 1 @,@ 218 ft ) above mean sea level . The hill is 50 m ( 160 ft ) shorter than a nearby unnamed peak . The park ’ s southern boundary abuts the Anstey Hill Quarry , a producer of white clay , and two large disused quarries . 
 Management of the park is influenced by the Department of Environment , Water and Natural Resources 's long term biodiversity goals for the hill face zone and is also being managed in the broader context of a planning initiative known as Yurrebilla – The Greater Mount Lofty Parklands . The Department manages the park in association with local council and a volunteer group — The Friends of Anstey Hill . This volunteer group makes significant contributions to revegetation , weed control , ruin stabilisation and creation of walking trails . There are no visitor facilities or amenities except for walking trails , most of which follow fire access tracks ; a single constructed pedestrian trail leads to Klopper ’ s Quarry . The park is mostly designated as a " conservation zone " where only passive recreation , including walking dogs on leads , is permitted . Horses and motor vehicles are not allowed and only the main tracks are maintained . 
 In recognition of the established and popular activity of mountain biking in the greater Adelaide area , and to better accommodate the mountain biking community in the north eastern suburbs , it was proposed in 2006 to permit cycling in designated zones on purpose @-@ built tracks and on certain management tracks within the park . The intention is to satisfy both biodiversity and recreation objectives in the park and reducing the incidence of illegal mountain bike riding in other non designated areas . 
 Anstey Hill Park lies between Bureau of Meteorology measured rainfall contour lines that denote an annual average from 580 to 820 mm ( 23 to 32 in ) . It has hot dry summers , as does all of Adelaide , and December to February 's average maximum daily temperatures 28 ° C ( 82 ° F ) to 29 ° C ( 84 ° F ) . Temperatures drop significantly in the wetter winters ; July 's average maximum temperature is 14 @.@ 6 ° C ( 58 @.@ 3 ° F ) . Apart from springs in Water Gully , the site of Newman 's Nursery ruins , all of the numerous creeks in the park are seasonal and dry for much of the year . The park rises from approximately 220 m ( 720 ft ) above mean sea level on its western side to 420 m ( 1 @,@ 380 ft ) at the highest point in the park 's southeast corner . Most of the park is steeply sloping with gradients steeper than one in four . Except for the base of Water Gully , topsoil throughout the park is shallow and low in plant nutrients . 
 There are frequent serious bushfires in the park . Much of the reserve was burned in 1980 , eastern parts burned in 1981 , and most of the park burned again in the 1983 Ash Wednesday fires ; Newman 's Nursery 's remains were devastated during the 1983 bushfire . As recently as 2004 , a major fire burned over 100 ha ( 247 acres ) of bushland next to Anstey Hill . Most fires in the park are deliberately lit and the park is regarded as a " hotspot " for arson . Arson in the park is not a recent phenomenon ; an early record comes from an 1869 <unk> inquiry . The park has more than one arson attack , on average , each year . In the hill 's face , encompassing Anstey Hill , approximately 60 % of all fires ( 1999 – 2004 ) are deliberately lit and less than 5 % are classed as naturally occurring . Most deliberately lit fires begin at the park 's boundaries and are contained within it . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 Elevation rise across the park results from land uplift along the Burnside @-@ Eden fault zone . This zone is a major land fault separating the Adelaide Plains from the Mount Lofty Ranges and runs north @-@ north @-@ east across the park from its southwest corner . The park is underlain by <unk> sedimentary rocks of the Burra Group overlying a Precambrian crystalline basement . Sediments were formed approximately 700 million years ago ( mya ) from sand washed into a shallow sea . Sand layers were then folded and slightly metamorphosed during the <unk> orogeny , a period of mountain building caused by tectonic plate movements and resulting east @-@ west compression of Australia . This pushed up a mountain range , on the site of the present Mount Lofty Ranges , approximately 450 mya . The range was eroded to a level plain over the following 350 million years . Approximately 40 mya , the location of today 's ranges and plains were flat , with a hard sedimentary capping . About 2 mya , block faulting raised the Mount Lofty Ranges , and much of the former land surface west of the ranges eroded away . The Gun Emplacement is a small remnant of this pre @-@ erosion surface . It is a raised semi @-@ circular flat area and has views over much of Adelaide from the southwestern corner of the park . The Emplacement is seen as an important regolith deposit , particularly for its role in understanding Adelaide 's landscape 's evolution . The Emplacement was declared a Geological Monument in 1978 for this geologic importance as well as its aesthetic and recreational value . 
 Across the park , different ages of exposed rocks are seen . <unk> quartzite , composed mostly of quartzite with sandstone and some siltstone , is the youngest . Woolshed flat shale is older and is composed of siltstone , dolomite and some sandstone . The oldest regular exposure is Montacute dolomite , which is a blue @-@ grey dolomite with magnesite , siltstone and sandstone . Quarries in the south of the park have been mined for <unk> Quartzite . This type of quartzite is a clean , white , <unk> quartzite with interbedded thin siltstone layers up to 30 cm ( 12 in ) thick occurring at gaps of 1 – 2 metres ( 3 ft 3 in – 6 ft 7 in ) . Ripple marks in this rock clearly indicate its shallow water origin . Next to Newman 's Nursery is a quarry with grey to blue silicaceous dolomite used for road material . It contains traces of pyrite and is overlain by phyllite . Tea Tree Gully freestone , as found in the largest quarry in the park , is a <unk> sandstone bedded with quartzite . Decay of the feldspar has enabled it to be cut and dressed as a quality building stone . The Tea Tree Gully iron ( or silver ) mine lies in an iron @-@ rich fault zone . The ore body is ironstone , 150 m long , 50 m wide and 30 m thick ( 490 ft by 160 ft by 100 ft ) . It is primarily limonite , detrital quartz and silica . It is thought to have been chemically deposited during the Paleogene and Neogene periods , 2 mya to 66 mya . 
 = = = Flora and fauna = = = 
 In the 1983 concept plan , 413 plant species were identified , including 124 that were not native to the park . The park was noted as one of the few remaining significant areas of bushland in the foothills . By 2006 , the flora list contained 411 species , with 107 of these non @-@ native . Five of the native species were then noted as rare or vulnerable , including Prasophyllum pallidum ( pale leek @-@ orchid ) . The park has significant stands of pink gums ( Eucalyptus <unk> ) and long @-@ leafed box ( Eucalyptus <unk> ) . button daisy , pussy tail ( <unk> macrocephalus ) , <unk> ( Hakea sericea ) , silky guinea flower ( Hibbertia sericea ) and black rapier sedge ( <unk> <unk> ) are <unk> black @-@ boys ( Xanthorrhoea ) , hop bush ( Dodonaea viscosa ssp. spatulata ) and tea @-@ tree form the understory in parts of the park . The area around the ruins of Newman 's Nursery is noted for its spring orchid display . Quarry floors have large plants typical of much of the Mount Lofty Ranges . Golden wattle ( Acacia pycnantha ) and drooping sheoak ( Allocasuarina verticillata ) , as well as red gums ( Eucalyptus camaldulensis ) , native pine ( Callitris preissii ) and blue gum ( Eucalyptus leucoxylon ) are common . 
 Invasive weeds are prevalent in , and damaging to , the park . Species common in other formerly occupied parts of the foothills are also common in the park . Of significant concern , largely for their impact on native flora , are bridal creeper ( Asparagus <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> monilifera ) , artichoke thistle ( Cynara <unk> ) , varieties of broom , Spanish heath ( Erica <unk> ) , fennel ( <unk> vulgare ) , olives , blackberries , common gorse ( Ulex europaeus ) and dog rose ( Rosa canina ) . In July 2001 , Phytophthora cinnamomi , a significant cause of plant disease in the Adelaide Hills , was found in the park . Mechanical countermeasures , in the form of boot scrubbing stations , have been introduced to control its spread . 
 The concept plan identified 145 species of birds as either known or expected to be found in the park . By 2006 , 98 species had been recorded in the park 's area , though not all specifically within the park 's boundaries . Of the park 's insects , seven species were found to be largely confined by its boundaries , with little presence in the rest of Adelaide . Their presence was unusual , as they were regarded as arid zone species . Approximately 35 reptile and amphibian species have been recorded within Anstey Hill park . Fauna in the park includes western grey kangaroo , common ringtail possum , common brushtail possum , short @-@ beaked echidna , Gould 's wattled bat , chocolate wattled bat , little forest bat , white @-@ striped free @-@ tailed bat and the lesser long @-@ eared bat . Koalas are present , though they are not native to the area , having been deliberately introduced to the Adelaide hills . 
 Foreign animals are also found , in common with much of Adelaide . While red foxes , cats , European rabbits , black rats , house mice and European hares are seen , there has been no systemic recording of alien fauna species . Exotic birds , including rock pigeons , European goldfinch , house sparrow , starlings and blackbirds are common . Introduced bees and European wasps are present , with the aggressive wasps an issue for the park 's visitors . 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 The name of the park derives from a road built by George Alexander Anstey , a South Australian pastoral and horticultural pioneer . Anstey established Highercombe Estate on two land sections east of the park that he purchased in 1840 . He built a private road to his estate , which ran along the base of a gully and up a steep hillside . The road was initially named " Anstey Hill Road " ; this name was later used for the hill , the subsequent land reserve and the current recreation park . 
 The Gun Emplacement was officially named as such in 1997 after a period of unofficial usage . This name was first used by Major William Hubert Edmunds , a Lieutenant cartographer in the Boer War who later enlisted in the Commonwealth of Australia forces . After leaving the military , Edmunds carried out " reconnaissance surveys " on the fringes of the Adelaide metropolitan area . As part of the work , he took particular note of an unusual plateau at the edge of what is now Tea Tree Gully . By the time his work was published in 1926 , he had named the plateau " The Gun Emplacement " , presumably for its suitability as a location for a field gun battery . 
 = = Foundation = = 
 In 1962 , the South Australian Planning Authority 's town planning committee released a report on the development of metropolitan Adelaide . The report , in part , recommended that a regional park be established north of Anstey Hill and southeast of Tea Tree Gully . The stated intention was preservation of the character of the face of the foothills , as visible from Adelaide ’ s suburbs . From 1966 to 1977 , land was purchased under the auspices of the State Planning Authority , for what was then " reserve 13 " . 
 One notable purchase was of 73 hectares ( 180 acres ) in 1969 , of which 16 hectares ( 40 acres ) was an active quarry operated by Quarry Industries . This quarry was known as the Tea Tree Gully freestone quarry and today lies in the park 's northwest . It had a permit to operate until December 1970 , which was later extended to December 1980 . Additional land affected by the quarrying was purchased in 1971 . By the end of the lease , rehabilitation work completed did not meet the standard required by the Planning Authority . Quarry Industries vacated the site in April 1982 , other firms then contracted to continue rehabilitation work . Land beneath the Gun Emplacement was subdivided for housing in 1966 . A developer unsuccessfully attempted to have the plateau subdivided in 1975 . The site was purchased by the government in 1978 and added to the then Anstey Hill Reserve . During the 1970s , part of the park 's area was earmarked to be subdivided and developed for housing . Significant opposition to this use , due to the land 's historical and scientific significance , came from the South Australian division of the Geological Society of Australia , the National Trust and the state 's Field Naturalists Society . 
 The Planning Authority established the Anstey Hill Joint Steering Committee in 1981 , initially to prepare a concept plan for development of the reserve . The draft report was published in late 1981 with a proposal to spend up to $ 3 @.@ 5 million establishing the park . Uses were explored including : a rock climbing area , motocross circuit , kiosk , cycle track , horse riding area , caravan and camping grounds and a restaurant . In 1983 , the then state Department of Environment and Planning published the final concept plan for the " Anstey Hill Regional Park " . The plan indicated that a caravan park , or possibly a velodrome , might be an appropriate development . There was significant interest by developers to use parts of the park commercially . Increasing public opposition to this concept led to the declaration of the entire reserve as a public recreation park . The Friends of Anstey Hill Recreation Park volunteer group was formed in 1990 . Most of the then 306 @.@ 5 ha ( 757 @-@ acre ) park was proclaimed on 31 August 1989 with a smaller 55 @.@ 5 @-@ hectare ( 137 @-@ acre ) addition in October 2001 . It was officially opened by Environment and Planning Minister Susan <unk> in a ceremony on 17 September 1989 . The Department for Environment and Heritage added one last section to the park in 2003 . A wedge of land 15 by 260 m ( 49 by 853 ft ) remained from a purchase by George Dickerson in 1857 . This land formed part of a cliff and had long been managed as part of the park . No known current owner was found and the Department compulsorily acquired the land and added it to the Recreation Park . 
 = = Land use = = 
 Although it lies within the traditional lands of the Aboriginal Kaurna people , no occupation sites have been found . Much of the park has been used for agriculture since European settlement . Significant European uses of the park 's land have been Newman 's Nursery , a main road , mines , quarries and a water filtration plant . 
 = = = Newman 's Nursery = = = 
 The remains of Newman 's Nursery , established by Charles Newman and his family in the second half of the 19th century , are situated within the park at the base of Water Gully . After living on a rural property near Houghton , he bought 68 acres ( 28 ha ) of unfenced land in 1854 . This land encompassed what became known as Water Gully , a gully with a creek and permanent springs . The first house , a simple slab hut set into a hill bank , was built on the property by 1855 . The Newmans added more land from 1866 ; at its largest the property covered 469 acres ( 190 ha ) and had a land tax valuation of GBP £ <unk> ( A $ 1 @.@ 64 million in 2005 ) by 1885 . From 1854 onwards , the initially heavily wooded land was continuously cleared , planted and developed . 
 The Newmans developed a nursery on the site between 1857 and 1871 , over time assisted by their 17 children . There were hothouses in operation by 1870 , and produce from the site was shown in exhibits from 1871 . At maximum extent in the late 19th century it had its own dairy and large numbers of glasshouses and hothouses . At the time it was the largest nursery in the southern hemisphere . Newman renamed it in 1875 to ' Newman 's Model Nursery ' , probably for promotional purposes . In 1889 plant stocks included over 100 @,@ 000 orange trees , the same number of mostly <unk> grape vines and 500 @,@ 000 other fruit trees . It grew 300 varieties of orchids , 350 of chrysanthemums and 700 of roses . The nursery was a frequent prize winner at agricultural fairs and exhibitions . At the Great Exhibition for the Queen ’ s Jubilee in 1887 , the Newmans won two " First Orders of Merit " , the exhibition 's highest award , and all three " Exhibition Diplomas " on offer . Charles Newman died in 1889 after falling from his horse , and control of the nursery passed to his sixth son , Frederick . 
 During a severe storm in February 1913 , 2 inches ( 51 mm ) of rain fell in an hour , setting the streams , creeks and roads awash and damaging the nursery . In October of the same year , another storm destroyed buildings and plantings . Due to the extent of the destruction , and the lack of funds for full repairs , the nursery never fully recovered . Frederick Newman left the nursery in 1925 to run a smaller one in Tea Tree Gully , next to North East Road ; control of the original nursery passed to Harry Newman . With the death of Charles ' wife Mary Ann in 1932 , the property was sold and subsequently used as a dairy . It changed ownership again in 1935 , then used for sheep grazing . The new owner removed everything of value from the property ; slate paving and benches were sold , buildings were stripped to walls and foundations , pine trees lining the entrance road were turned to box wood and some outbuildings were knocked down . Most remaining plants and fruit trees from the property 's nursery days were destroyed by bushfires during Ash Wednesday in 1983 . The ruins of Newman ’ s Nursery consist largely of foundations and walls and are listed on the State Heritage Register . 
 = = = Mining and quarrying = = = 
 Dolomite , sandstone and quartzite rock have been extensively mined in the park . Though traces of silver , copper and gold are present , there have been no economic finds . The park is scattered with many quarries ; the largest within the park is an open @-@ cut in the northwest corner . It was in operation until 1982 supplying stone for buildings , including Adelaide 's war memorial and St Peter 's Cathedral . Tea Tree Gully Freestone from some quarries has been used for the facades and ornamental dressing of many of Adelaide ’ s Victorian public buildings . Adelaide Town Hall , the General Post Office and Supreme Court Buildings in Adelaide were all built entirely of this stone . The quarries supplied dressing stock for ornamentation on buildings , including St Peter 's Cathedral , St Francis Xavier 's Cathedral , Flinders Street Baptist Church and the University of Adelaide 's Mitchell Building . 
 An ironstone mine was opened to work on a rock outcrop in 1853 . The mine was to supply flux for the Port Adelaide copper smelting works , but it apparently closed within a year . It was reopened in 1861 and operated until 1862 . The Tea Tree Gully Silver Mining Company began work in the area in 1888 , constructing a tramway , blacksmith shop and a new road . With no economic finds , the company closed in July 1889 . The quarry , in Water Gully adjacent to the nursery 's ruins , has been mined for blue dolomite , some of which was used for the nursery 's buildings . Quarries elsewhere in Water Gully were opened in the 1880s and intermittently supplied quartzite road metal for the District Council of Tea Tree Gully . A crushing plant was erected on the north side of the gully in 1912 to create this road material . 
 When the park was proclaimed , land zoning regulations allowed existing mining prospecting rights to continue . These rights were restricted to previously mined areas ; this coupled with further restrictions imposed by the National Parks and Wildlife Service Act ( 1972 ) make it unlikely that mining will occur in the future . 
 = = = Klopper 's quarries = = = 
 Klopper 's quarries , in the park 's south , were mined in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . They were established by Heinrich <unk> — later anglicised to Henry Klopper — who arrived at Adelaide in 1847 from Hamburg , Germany . He purchased land in Hope Valley and a section below Anstey Hill . On the Anstey Hill section he opened his first quarry in 1850 . The Klopper quarries supplied aggregate for road building and bluestone for home and road kerbs . After Klopper 's death in 1888 his wife and sons continued the quarries ' operation . Stone from the first quarry was used to build a family home , on the south east corner of nearby Valley and Grand Junction roads . Additional quarries were opened and supplied metal for most of the roads constructed in Highercombe . In 1905 the family opened a freestone quarry within the park that operated until its 1927 sale . 
 The freestone quarry was used to host plays as part of the Adelaide Festival of Arts . It seated about 800 people and its 20 m ( 66 ft ) face provided a backdrop to the performances . Three plays were performed over fifteen nights in the 1980 festival . A nine @-@ hour production of the Mahābhārata , by the theatre company of Peter Brook , was performed in 1988 . 
 = = = Ellis Cottage and Rumps Bakery = = = 
 The historic Ellis Cottage and Rumps Bakery buildings lie near the corner of Perseverance and North East roads . Built in 1854 , Ellis Cottage is a single room stone building built by John Stevens , founder of Steventon Estate that later become the suburb of Tea Tree Gully . It was named after the Ellis family , who owned and used the building for storage for many years until World War II . Rumps Bakery was built in 1854 with local stone . From 1867 to 1893 it was rented to Charles Rumps , who started Tea Tree Gully 's first bakery in the building in 1872 . In 1894 , the building was sold to Ernest <unk> , who continued to use it as a bakery . Until the mid @-@ 20th century , the Ellis family and an adjacent general store frequently used it for storage . Assisted by a government grant and supervised by the Department of Environment and Heritage , the Friends of Anstey Hill stabilised both buildings in 2000 . 
 = = = Water filtration plant = = = 
 In the 1970s , the Engineering and Water Supply Department chose an area at the top of the park , adjacent to Lower North East Road , to build a water treatment works . Based partly on seismic refraction traverses , a ridge underlain by dolomite and quartzite was deemed to be stable enough for construction . The site was also selected because of its hydraulic advantages ; all other sites would have required the construction of a major pumping station . The exact placement of the site was made so that it could not be seen from the metropolitan area . It has a design flow of 313 megalitres ( ML ) per day with a maximum capacity of 344 ML . The plant was commissioned in 1980 and uses filtration and sedimentation techniques to clean water from the Mannum to Adelaide pipeline . It was the second plant in Adelaide , after the opening of the Hope Valley plant in 1977 . Most of the water is piped directly from the River Murray , but some is sourced from Millbrook Reservoir . 
 The plant was intended to serve 70 @,@ 000 homes in the outer northeastern suburbs of Adelaide , specifically those north of the River Torrens . The total construction cost was $ 14 @.@ 5 million , including changes to the existing pipeline . As of 2005 , the plant filters approximately 20 % of Adelaide 's water supply . A small hydroelectric plant began operating in adjacent Hope Valley in 2003 , using the head of water as it flows down Anstey Hill . The plant is designed to supply 7 @,@ 000 megawatt hours per year . 
 = = = Roads = = = 
 Lower North East Road runs around Anstey Hill and up the escarpment of the Burnside @-@ Eden Fault Zone . It connects the suburbs — formerly villages — of Hope Valley and Houghton . Three roads were surveyed and built to connect the same locations . The first was a private road constructed by George Anstey in 1841 — although officially surveyed in 1844 — to reach his estate , as a mostly straight @-@ line extension of Grand Junction Road . It followed the base of a gully , before rising steeply up Anstey Hill . From 1842 to 1846 , Anstey constructed a replacement private road with a devil 's elbow ( double hairpin bend ) that followed the land 's contours more closely . As Chairman of Roads for the District of Yatala , Anstey allocated most of the district 's funding to his road , leading to a public outcry that forced him from office in 1851 . This <unk> road became known as Anstey Hill Road and remained in use for 20 years . New Road , later renamed Houghton Road and subsequently Lower North East Road , was constructed in 1873 as a replacement . It was longer than the preceding roads but lacked a devil 's elbow , was more evenly sloped , and was paved in 1930 . It now separates a small part of the park — that contains Klopper 's quarries and the Gun Emplacement — from the rest . Remains of the two previous roads can be seen near Klopper 's quarries . 
 Perseverance Road , and some housing , defines the western edge of much of the park . William Haines was the district clerk for Tea Tree Gully from 1867 to 1902 and Member of Parliament for Gumeracha from 1878 to 1884 . Since 1862 , he had lobbied for construction of a road to link Tea Tree Gully to Anstey Hill Road . The 1 – ½ mile road was eventually approved and subsequently opened in 1880 . Known as Haines ' Folly before its completion , it was officially called Haines ' Perseverance Road at the opening ceremony . 
 = Tropical Storm Aletta ( 2006 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Aletta was the first tropical cyclone of the 2006 Pacific hurricane season . Aletta developed from an area of disturbed weather located south @-@ southwest of the Mexican port of Acapulco , Guerrero . It gradually gained organized convection and was classified as a tropical depression early on May 27 , and became a tropical storm later that morning , the first of 2006 in the Western Hemisphere . Aletta strengthened to a tropical storm with 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) sustained winds , while moving towards the Guerrero coast in southwestern Mexico . The storm became stationary , though it later turned to the west and weakened on May 29 . Aletta continued to weaken until it dissipated on May 31 . The storm dropped moderate rainfall along the Mexican coast , and generated winds that downed trees and caused minor damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On May 21 , 2006 , a tropical wave crossed Central America and entered the East Pacific . The wave drifted westward , and after several days began to interact with a low @-@ level trough near the Gulf of Tehuantepec , and as a result deep convection increased . By May 25 , a large area of low pressure formed several hundred miles south of Acapulco , Mexico . Wind shear inhibited development initially , though conditions became slightly more favorable after a number of days , and at 0600 UTC on May 27 , a tropical depression formed about 190 mi ( 305 km ) south of Acapulco . 
 Moving very little , the depression was disorganized due to continued shear , leaving the center of circulation west of the convective activity . By later in the morning hours of May 27 , the system began to show overall signs of organization , primarily related to a burst of convection in the eastern semicircle . At the same time , the center of circulation either reformed or began to move farther north , possibly north @-@ northeast . Embedded within the steering currents of a ridge , most forecasts anticipated the storm would drift northward for several days , though some computer models predicted the storm would eventually move inland near Acapulco . At 1800 UTC on May 27 , the depression organized into a tropical storm , and as such was named Aletta by the National Hurricane Center . 
 With continued forecasting difficulty , a burst of new convection formed east of the center early on May 28 , as the storm began meandering southward . At 0600 UTC , Aletta attained peak winds of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) while nearly stationary in forward movement . Later in the afternoon , the storm 's center was obscured , thus subjecting the exact location to speculation . In addition , the circulation fluctuated in organization with the alternating intensity of the wind shear , and at the time maintained elongated cloud patterns , rather than the typical circulatory shape . As the storm drifted to the west and executed a small cyclonic loop by early on May 29 , increased shear and dry air became entrained in the system , causing it to weaken to a tropical depression at 1800 UTC . Little convection remained afterward , and the storm struggled for several days , becoming a remnant low by May 31 . The low dissipated shortly thereafter . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 When the storm began to move towards the coast , the Mexican government issued tropical storm watches between Punta Maldonado and Zihuatanejo . By 1800 UTC on May 29 , the advisory was discontinued after a series of modifications and extensions . 
 Aletta produced moderate rainfall across Mexico , including a 24 @-@ hour rainfall total of 100 @.@ 2 mm ( 3 @.@ 94 inches ) in <unk> , Oaxaca on May 30 , and 96 @.@ 0 mm ( 3 @.@ 78 inches ) in La Calera , Guerrero , the next day . High winds knocked down trees and caused minor structural damage . In Zihuatanejo , a ship with nine people was rescued after being reported as lost , which may have been a result of high seas generated by Aletta . However , there were no reports of fatalities associated with Aletta . 
 = Astaroth ( Soulcalibur ) = 
 Astaroth ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a fictional character in the Soul series of video games . Created by Namco 's Project Soul division , he first appeared in the original Soulcalibur and its subsequent sequels , later appearing in various merchandise related to the series . He is voiced in Japanese by Banjō Ginga for Soulcalibur and <unk> Ōtomo in later titles ; in all English @-@ language versions of Soulcalibur II , Astaroth was voiced by Jay S. Gilbert . 
 Introduced in Soulcalibur , Astaroth is a golem created by a cult worshiping the Greek god of war Ares to locate a cursed sword named " Soul Edge " . Though Astaroth has consistently pursued the sword , his character has changed as the series progresses , eventually transforming into a power hungering creature desiring to consume the sword . Regarded as an iconic character of the series , Astaroth has been noted as fitting a large character stereotype seen in fighting games , featuring strong attacks but slow speed . Astaroth has been described as having easy @-@ to @-@ master gameplay and being popular with fans of strong , hard @-@ hitting characters in fighting games . 
 = = Conception and creation = = 
 As a character introduced in Soulcalibur , Astaroth 's weapon , a giant axe , was decided upon before other aspects of the character were . His design revolved around it , starting with gender , then physical measurements , and lastly background details . Once established , his appearance and movement were fleshed out by the team 's concept artist Aya Takemura and rendered as a 3D model by a design team that worked solely on the character . Astaroth was then animated mainly by Nobuko <unk> using motion capture and working directly with the team , while other motion designers created the movements for his grapple attacks . During this phase the team additionally worked with the Soulcalibur story creators , refining the character 's own role in the plot as needed throughout development . Soulcalibur IV lead programmer Masaaki Hoshino called Astaroth his favorite character , stating that because he is " so powerful there 's always a chance to make a comeback " . 
 During development , a golem devoid of facial features , armed with a sword and shield , and accompanied by a small girl was considered as a possible character , but scrapped . Before finalizing his appearance several other designs were considered , ranging from a Frankenstein 's monster @-@ inspired character to a medieval berserker . Despite having a male voice and physical build , Astaroth was referred to as " it " in terms of gender for the character 's Soulcalibur background information . However the background information in other character profiles instead refer to him as male , and his background information in later titles followed suit . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Astaroth is shown to be a large , muscular , bald , dark @-@ skinned humanoid with solid white eyes . A black mask wraps around and covers the lower portion of his head , while a black open gorget covers the nape of his neck and spiked <unk> cover his shoulders . Black spiked braces and boots cover his hands to the elbows and feet to the knees respectively , and black garters wrap around the middle of each thigh . A large black belt surrounds his abdomen supporting a fauld and cloth loincloth . Two black straps of leather crisscross the vertical center of his chest from the gorget to the belt , in between which lies his exposed , protruding heart . During development of the design , a flame positioned over his head alongside flaming eyes were considered , but were cut from the finished product . Astaroth stands 7 feet 3 inches tall , making him the largest character with a recorded height in the series . 
 In subsequent titles of the series Astaroth 's appearance changed , showing more signs of damage and armor loss in II and in III shifting to a dark maroon <unk> . By Soulcalibur IV , Astaroth 's appearance was completely changed , altered to resemble a " rugged rocky " golem . Facial features were completely removed , replaced with a large @-@ <unk> fractured head design with a headscarf covering the area around his forehead , eyes , and the back of his head . The remaining areas of his body featured several cracks over his build with red veins glowing from within . Large stone spikes jutted from each shoulder , while a similar pair jutted from each knee . Broken metal armor pieces protected his arms , legs , and chest , while a fauld surrounded his waist . Fans reacted negatively to the character 's modified appearance once unveiled , complaining it was " monster @-@ ish " . 
 In most Soulcalibur titles , Astaroth 's secondary character models contrast heavily against his primary design . Amongst these have included designs with several bone or spike protrusions from Astaroth 's body , to designs inspired by punk fashion . This trend was discontinued in Soulcalibur IV , where his appearance from Soulcalibur was reused instead . 
 = = In video games = = 
 Introduced in Soulcalibur , Astaroth is a golem created by a cult of Ares to retrieve the cursed sword known as Soul Edge . Upon finding the blade , Astaroth realizes that it is damaged and allies himself with its wielder Nightmare to harvest living souls necessary to restore the blade , planning to steal the blade once completed . However , before he can complete this task , he is confronted by a survivor of his attacks , Maxi , and is slain . Revived by Ares in Soulcalibur II , Astaroth continues after the sword . However , the cult that created him regards this as a betrayal , and places a curse on the golem to dominate him . Astaroth resists and counterattacks the cult , learning in the process his design is not original but instead modeled after a human being , Rock . To assert himself as unique , Astaroth finds and nearly kills Rock at the conclusion of Soulcalibur III , breaking free of Ares ' control and transforming in the aftermath . Now hungering for power , he is offered it in return for servitude to Nightmare during the events of Soulcalibur IV , an offer he accepts with the secret goal of devouring Soul Edge itself . Destroyed instead by Maxi , Astaroth 's heart is retrieved by the cult responsible for his creation , and a new series of golems all bearing the name " Astaroth " are created from research conducted upon it . 
 Outside of the main games in the Soulcalibur series , Astaroth also appears in a Dreamcast VMU mini @-@ game called " Cannon Dare " , in which the player must shoot him out of a cannon by guessing the correct fuse , and later as a playable character in Namco 's Pac @-@ Man Fever . Astaroth also appears briefly in Soulcalibur : Broken Destiny 's Gauntlet storyline , a side story set after the events of Soulcalibur IV , tearing through a forest and challenging the protagonist and allies after they defeat a rampaging Maxi . In the prequel Soulcalibur Legends a similar prototype golem , Astaroth α , is discovered by game protagonist Siegfried . Upon defeat , he joins Siegfried 's party as a playable character . 
 = = = Gameplay = = = 
 Astaroth 's gameplay was developed around the concept of a powerful fighter that struck at a distance , and has been noted as one of the strongest characters in the Soul series , requiring few mistakes to be made when fighting against Astaroth to defeat him . Measures were put into effect to make the character unique by allowing the player to hold attack buttons in order to strengthen attacks , to contrast against other large character fighting styles in Soulcalibur such as Nightmare 's multiple fighting stances . 
 Though noted as having slow attacks , Astaroth has been described as being an easy @-@ to @-@ learn character capable of dealing high amounts of damage , though his advantages and disadvantages have been described as part of the " big guy " role he has in the game 's roster . Several of his attacks cover a wide range , while several of his grapple attacks allow room to deal with various defensive measures by opponents . Other attacks such as " Poseidon Tide " allow Astaroth to control the opponent 's distance from himself while simultaneously dealing damage , with the additional feature of offering defensive measures of their own . 
 = = Promotion and reception = = 
 In 2000 , Epoch C @-@ Works released a series of action figures based on characters from the original Soulcalibur , amongst them Astaroth . The semi @-@ posable figure of Astaroth was packaged with equipable weapons from the title . In August 2003 , Todd McFarlane Productions released an Astaroth sculpture amongst a set of five based on characters from Soulcalibur II . The immobile figure was modeled after his secondary outfit and stood six inches tall with a base . 
 Astaroth has been described as one of the " staple " and " stalwart " characters of the Soulcalibur franchise . He has been noted as being a stereotypical large character villain in the series , described commonly as " the big brute with the axe " . JIVE Magazine described him as a " total crutch for mediocre players " , due to his strength and attack power . GameDaily named him one of their favorite heavily muscled characters in video games , noting his strength and the impact of his weapon . Insert Credit 's Tim Rogers stated " It takes a certain kind of gamer to prefer Astaroth " , noting him to be a character popular with fans of " kickass " or " evil " characters . The New York Times noted his size and appearance alongside Nightmare 's as standouts in the series , adding " they offer characters made for the sort of player who would have preferred Sonny Liston to Muhammad Ali , or Shaquille O 'Neal to Michael Jordan " . In 2013 , Complex enlisted the 20 best characters from the series , ranking him the tenth best character . 
 = Randeep Hooda = 
 Randeep Hooda ( pronounced [ <unk> ̪ <unk> <unk> ] ; born 20 August 1976 ) is an Indian film actor who appears in Hindi @-@ language films . Hooda was born into a Jat family in Rohtak , Haryana ; he studied at the Motilal Nehru School at Sonepat , where he began acting in school productions , and later studied for a postgraduate degree in human resource management in Melbourne , Australia . He returned to India and began modelling and acting in stage productions . 
 Hooda made his Bollywood debut in Monsoon Wedding in 2001 , and he garnered praise for his performance . His next project was Ram Gopal Varma 's D ( 2005 ) , and he then worked on a series of critically and commercially unsuccessful projects . He then starred in the commercially successful Once Upon a Time in Mumbaai ( 2010 ) and was subsequently noted for his performance in Saheb , Biwi Aur Gangster ( 2011 ) , which earned him an IIFA Award for Best Supporting Actor nomination . He garnered further critical acclaim for his role in Imtiaz Ali 's drama Highway ( 2014 ) and Omung Kumar 's biographical drama <unk> ( 2016 ) . Hooda 's other notable films include Jism 2 ( 2012 ) , Murder 3 ( 2013 ) , Kick ( 2014 ) , and Rang <unk> ( 2014 ) . 
 In addition to his film career , Hooda has acted in numerous stage plays and made his debut as a playwright with an adaptation of Lee Blessing 's A Walk in the Woods . He is a professional equestrian who regularly participates in polo , show jumping and dressage events . He won a silver medal at an open dressage event in New Delhi that was organised by the Equestrian Federation of India . Hooda is also an activist and a blogger . 
 = = Early life and background = = 
 Randeep Singh Hooda was born on 20 August 1976 in Rohtak , Haryana , India , to Dr. Ranbir Hooda ( a surgeon ) and Asha Hooda ( a social worker ) . He has an elder sister , Dr. Anjali Hooda Sangwan , a US @-@ trained nutritionist and a younger brother Sandeep Hooda , a Software Engineer working in Singapore . 
 Hooda belongs to a Jat family . He was educated at Motilal Nehru School of Sports ( <unk> ) , a boarding school in Rai , Haryana , where he participated in swimming and equestrian sports and won medals at the national level . Hooda later developed an interest in theatre and participated in school productions , one of which he directed . In an interview with Rediff.com , he said he enjoyed appearing in front of people . However , his family wanted him to become a doctor and he was transferred to Delhi Public School , R. K. Puram in New Delhi . Hooda described the transition from an environment in which he was popular to one in which he was unknown as " difficult " . 
 After completing his schooling , Hooda moved to Melbourne , Australia , in 1995 , where he studied for a bachelor 's degree in marketing and a master 's degree in business management and human resource management . During that period , he worked in a Chinese restaurant , a car wash , as a waiter and for two years as a taxi driver . In 2000 , Hooda returned to India and worked in the marketing department of an airline . He subsequently started modelling and working in amateur theatre in Delhi . While rehearsing for the play To Teach His Own , director Mira Nair approached Hooda to audition for a role in her upcoming film . 
 = = Film career = = 
 = = = 2001 – 09 : Debut and struggle = = = 
 Hooda made his acting debut in Mira Nair 's film Monsoon Wedding ( 2001 ) , playing a non @-@ resident Indian from Australia . Although the film was a critical and commercial success , Hooda waited four years for a second project . In the meantime , he worked in theatre and appeared in television commercials to support himself financially . He also attended and assisted an imagination and improvisation workshop conducted by Naseeruddin Shah at the National School of Drama in New Delhi . 
 In 2005 , Hooda was cast as the male lead in Ram Gopal Varma 's gritty gangster film D. His performance in the film received positive reviews ; Taran Adarsh wrote , " D wouldn 't be what it is without Randeep . He changes his expressions like a chameleon changes colors and that 's where he scores . " After D , Hooda appeared in a series of critically and commercially unsuccessful films including Darna <unk> Hai ( 2006 ) , Risk ( 2007 ) , Ru Ba Ru ( 2008 ) , and Love <unk> ( 2009 ) . 
 = = = 2010 – present : Breakthrough and critical acclaim = = = 
 In 2010 , Hooda appeared in Milan Luthria 's Once Upon a Time in Mumbaai , a period action drama depicting the rise of organised crime in Mumbai . Co @-@ starring alongside Ajay Devgan , Emraan Hashmi , Kangana Ranaut and Prachi Desai , Hooda played ACP Agnel Wilson . His performance in the film was appreciated by critics , and proved to be a turning point in his career . Sudish Kamath of The Hindu wrote , " In the few scenes he gets , Randeep chews the scenery around him with his Bachchan @-@ like presence , his baritone firing away dialogue as if he were born to play this role . " Komal Nahta described him as a " revelation " . The film was a critical and commercial success , earning over ₹ 780 million ( US $ 12 million ) in India . Hooda later attributed his success to this film : " Things have really changed for me professionally because before Once Upon A Time In Mumbaai I did take a hiatus from acting , but that film brought me back in a big way . Now other directors and production houses look at me as an actor who can carry bigger parts and a longer screen presence . " 
 The following year , Hooda featured in Tigmanshu Dhulia 's romantic thriller Saheb , Biwi Aur Gangster with Jimmy Shergill and Mahie Gill . The film ( and his portrayal of a gangster who falls in love with a married woman while working as her driver ) earned rave reviews from critics . In an interview with Digital Spy , Hooda said " My inspiration for this character went back to my roots in Haryana , to the time I grew up and people I observed . My uncles were drivers and I thought of those times and people around me . " Nikhat Kazmi of The Times of India called him " absolutely mesmerising " ; <unk> Malani wrote , " Randeep Hooda plays the best character of his career so far and gets immense scope to show his performance prowess . The passion , obsession , emotions and expressions he brings to his character is simply outstanding . " 
 Hooda 's first film in 2012 was Kunal Deshmukh 's crime thriller Jannat 2 , a sequel to Jannat ( 2008 ) . Jannat 2 received mixed reviews from critics and Hooda was praised for his performance . Taran Adarsh wrote , " the actor delivers yet another knockout performance . He dominates in several sequences , making you realize that if given an opportunity , the guy can steal the thunder from the best of actors . " Sonia Chopra of Sify said , " Randeep Hooda is the best thing about the film . " It was a commercial success and earned a domestic revenue of over ₹ 410 million ( US $ 6 @.@ 1 million ) . Hooda 's next appearance was in Pooja Bhatt 's erotic thriller Jism 2 opposite Sunny Leone . The film and Hooda 's performance received mixed reviews from critics . Lisa Tsering of The Hollywood Reporter said Hooda " smolders to the best of his ability in the role of a violent criminal " . Rajeev Masand , who was less impressed by his performance , wrote , " The usually dependable Hooda , goes a little overboard with all the feeling ; alternating clunkily between melancholic and hyper , Hooda constructs a wildly implausible character that inspires most of the unintended laughs in this film " . Jism 2 was a moderate commercial success , earning ₹ 350 million ( US $ 5 @.@ 2 million ) in India . 
 Hooda 's final film of the year was Madhur Bhandarkar 's drama Heroine , starring Kareena Kapoor , in which he played cricketer <unk> Paul . Before the start of principal photography , <unk> Singh was chosen for the role but was dropped for unknown reasons . Media reports began speculating about several actors ( such as Ranbir Kapoor , Imran Khan and <unk> Babbar ) , although Bhandarkar later confirmed that he selected Hooda after seeing his performance in Saheb , Biwi Aur Gangster ( 2011 ) . The film received mixed to negative reviews , but Hooda 's performance was appreciated by the critics . Kanika Sikka of Daily News and Analysis wrote , " Randeep , as usual does justice to his role . " The film was fared poorly at the domestic and international box office . 
 In 2013 , Hooda starred opposite Aditi Rao Hydari and Sara Loren in Vishesh Bhatt 's Murder 3 , an official remake of the 2011 Colombian thriller The Hidden Face . The film and his portrayal of Vikram ( a fashion and wildlife photographer ) garnered mixed to negative feedback from critics . A review from Mint said that Hooda " is hundreds of shades below his ability to enact a character . " The film earned a worldwide gross of ₹ 250 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 7 million ) in ten days and was an average grosser . Hooda also featured in John Day and alongside Rani Mukerji and Saqib Saleem in a segment of anthology film Bombay Talkies directed by Karan Johar . 
 In 2014 , Hooda appeared opposite Alia Bhatt in Imtiaz Ali 's Highway . To get used to his character , who had a distant relationship with Bhatt 's character , Hooda avoided speaking to her for about 25 days . <unk> <unk> for Hindustan Times wrote , " He delivers a nuanced yet controlled performance . He perfects the Haryanvi accent to lend authenticity to his character . He 's able to get into the skin of his character Mahabir Bhati . His character opens up and frees himself from the self @-@ imposed shackles towards the end . " Hooda 's performance in Sajid Nadiadwala 's Kick , which emerged as one of the biggest blockbusters of 2014 , was praised . His last film appearance of 2014 was alongside Emraan Hashmi and Kangana Ranaut in Karan Johar 's film <unk> , which was a commercial failure . 
 In 2015 , Hooda starred in <unk> Raman 's , Main Aur Charles , which is based on the life of Charles <unk> and the 1986 jail escape . The film was released in India on 31 October 2015 to mostly positive response from critics . In 2016 , Hooda starred alongside Akshay Oberoi and <unk> Bajpai in Syed Ahmed Afzal 's action thriller <unk> Rang . The film was a box office failure and received a lukewarm response from critics . Hooda 's performance was highlighted as the only bright spot in the film . 
 = = Other works = = 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 Hooda has been associated with theatre since the beginning of his acting career ; he is an active member of Naseeruddin Shah 's Motley Theatre Troupe . In an interview with Daily News and Analysis he said , " My first stint with theatre was in school , where I was asked to wear a lion mask and roar for several minutes . My parents came to see me with a lot of expectations and sadly , they couldn 't even recognise me on stage because of the mask . " During his film career , Hooda has participated in theatrical productions . He said , " Juggling between the two [ theatre and films ] does get difficult , but I don 't see myself ever give up Theatre . It 's got a deeper connect with who I really am . So , if films give you the wings to fly , Theatre is a reality check , it keeps you grounded . Films can give you the satisfaction of feeling like a hero , but theatre gives you the real satisfaction of being an actor . " 
 Hooda has appeared in Kali <unk> Aur <unk> <unk> ( a play based on <unk> Hasan Manto 's short stories ) , To Teach His Own , and Arms and The Man . He described the latter as a typical George Bernard Shaw play ; " It is complete with elements to entertain an audience . It delves into true love , heroism and some confused relationships that are pretty baffling even in the current social structure . " Hooda made his theatrical debut as a writer , adapting Lee Blessing 's A Walk in the Woods into an Indian context . Ratna Pathak directed the play and <unk> Shah appeared in it . 
 = = = Equestrian sports = = = 
 Hooda is the only Bollywood actor who regularly participates in professional equestrian sports , including polo and show jumping . He started competing at a professional level after the release of his film D. Hooda was coached by Colonel SS <unk> and Brigadier <unk> in show @-@ jumping and dressage . He described riding as his " passion " ; " My first stint with horses happened when I was in class eight at the Motilal Nehru School of Sports in Haryana , but thereafter I didn 't ride horses for 17 years " . He owned eight horses , but gave away two of them new trainees . He keeps his horses at the Mahalaxmi Racecourse in Mumbai . 
 In December 2008 , Hooda underwent surgery after suffering a severe ankle injury in a fall from his horse during a polo match in Mumbai . The following year , he won a silver medal at an open dressage event organised by the Equestrian Federation of India in Delhi . Hooda has also won medals at equestrian events in Mumbai and Delhi , where he participated with riders from the Indian Army . In 2014 , Hooda won seven medals , including three gold and two silver and bronze medals respectively , at the National Equestrian Championship in dressage and show @-@ jumping events . Additionally , he has won a silver medal each at the Delhi Horse Show , in 2009 and the Bombay Horse Show , in 2011 . 
 = = = Journalism = = = 
 In 2009 , Hooda was a guest contributor to " In The Script " , a column published by Asian Correspondent . His article titled " Racism against Indians in Australia ... " discussed the violence against Indians in Australia controversy . Hooda wrote about his experience in Australia , where he was subjected to racial discrimination ; he said , " My experiences were not in my mind incidents of racial discrimination but more a challenge of an individual assertion of mental and physical superiority " . In conclusion , he wrote , " The point is to get tough inside out , play a sport apart from cricket , have heart and stand up in unity and say ' we 'll not take shit ' . All it needs is a few pioneers and I 'm proud to say that I tried [ and will continue to do so ] and I hope a few others do that too . " In 2011 , Hooda began writing a blog for Hindustan Times . 
 = = = Social activism = = = 
 In September 2010 , Hooda and <unk> <unk> appeared in a charity fashion show for Khushi , Kapil Dev 's NGO to improve poor communities in India . The following year , Hooda raised public awareness of chronic hunger in India . He presented a video to the cast and crew of Jism 2 , who shared it on their social media accounts . In December 2012 , Hooda participated in an anti @-@ suicide initiative with Imtiaz Ali , Rahul Bose , Mahesh <unk> , and <unk> Kamath . Hooda , who had failed Class 12 , said , " Don 't accept defeat . Fight back adversities . Failure is a myth . Every experience is a just fodder for the future . Suicide doesn 't solve the problem , It ends you . " 
 = = Image and personal life = = 
 Apart from his reputation as an intense actor , Hooda is considered one of India 's most attractive celebrities . In 2010 , he ranked 21st in The Times of India 's annual list of the 50 most desirable men . In 2011 , a global online survey conducted by Internet Movie Database ( IMDb ) ranked him seventh on its list of the " 20 sexiest men in the world " . Although he was surprised and grateful , Hooda said he is not influenced by such labels ; " I want people to know me for my body of work , than just my body ... Being sexy can always just be an added advantage , not the be @-@ all and end @-@ all for an actor " . During an interview with Mid Day , he said during his early years in the industry , people saw him as an " explosive Jat boy " who had a calculated approach to his work . He said , " Now , I 'm a bit more careful . I 've changed the way I express myself " . 
 Hooda lived in a hostel from a young age ; he said , " I 've always had a good time , it 's something that gives me my spirit and fuels my spirit as well . Now , I want my parents to live with me , I want to enjoy their company more . " He said he had a good relationship with his parents , who live in Faridabad , and that their openness to everything has helped him in life . He considers <unk> Shah to be his " mentor , friend and confidant " , saying , " He 's an inspiration and somebody who has helped nurture me as an actor not necessarily my career but my craft . He 's also the one who opened my eyes to the world of acting . " 
 Hooda had a relationship with former Miss Universe and actor Sushmita Sen from 2004 to 2006 . He later said ending their relationship changed his career ; " The break @-@ up was the best thing that happened to me and I realised that I gave it too much time in my life . It freed my energy to do things for myself . " Hooda owns a stray dog named Candy . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = A Shot in the Dark ( Homicide : Life on the Street ) = 
 " A Shot in the Dark " is the fourth episode of the first season of the American police drama television series Homicide : Life on the Street . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on February 24 , 1993 . The teleplay was written Jorge Zamacona based on a story by executive producer Tom Fontana , and the episode was directed by Bruce Paltrow . In the episode , Crosetti focuses his investigation into the shooting of Officer Thormann ( Lee Tergesen ) on one suspect , while Lewis continues to investigate . Meanwhile , Pembleton and Bayliss pursue different leads in the murder case of 11 @-@ year @-@ old Adena Watson . 
 The shooting of a police officer and the murder of young girl were both directly inspired by real @-@ life events chronicled in David Simon 's non @-@ fiction book , Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets , on which the series was based . " A Shot in the Dark " continued a string of guest appearances by actress Edie Falco as Eva Thormann , the wife of Officer Thormann . 
 " A Shot in the Dark " was seen by 8 @.@ 9 million households in its original broadcast . Although an improvement over the previous episode " Son of a Gun " , the rating was considered a disappointment , continuing the show 's downward trend in ratings . " A Shot in the Dark " suffered in particular due to direct competition from the 35th Grammy Awards . The episode , along with the rest of the first and second seasons of Homicide : Life on the Street was released on DVD in the United States on May 27 , 2003 . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 After being shot in the head during the previous episode , Officer Thormann ( Lee Tergesen ) has had a miraculous recovery and will live , although doctors say he will be blind all his life . Crosetti ( Jon Polito ) and Lewis ( Clark Johnson ) question prime suspect Alfred Smith ( Mojo Gentry ) , who was identified by eyewitness Charles Flavin ( Larry Hull ) as the shooter . Crosetti , a close personal friend of Thormann , is convinced Smith is the shooter , but Lewis insists on further investigation . Lewis later learns Flavin bragged about shooting a cop the day Thormann was shot . Crosetti confronts Flavin , who nonchalantly admits to shooting Thormann in frustration because Flavin was suffering a migraine . Although the police celebrate finding Thormann 's shooter , Lewis comforts a guilt @-@ stricken Crosetti , who feels he took the case too personally and almost let the true shooter go free . 
 Bayliss ( Kyle Secor ) and Pembleton ( Andre Braugher ) continue their struggling investigation into the murder of 11 @-@ year @-@ old Adena Watson . Bayliss wants to question an arabber who he maintains is the killer , but Pembleton believes that lead has already been exhausted . Pembleton instead pursues a theory posed by Felton ( Daniel Baldwin ) that Watson was killed one day earlier than they first believed , and rigor mortis was slowed because her body was stored in a cool place . Felton and Pembleton identify a possible suspect who lived near the murder scene , and learn his car was impounded shortly after her body was found . As they search impound lots for the car , the two detectives bicker with each other and Pembleton accuses Felton of racism . They eventually find the car , but uncover no evidence linking it to Watson . 
 Bayliss pursues a warrant for the arabber , believing he can get a confession by confronting the suspect with secret information about a metal pipe the killer used to molest Watson . His plan is ruined , however , when Captain Barnfather ( Clayton LeBouef ) tells the press about the pipe . A frustrated Bayliss yells at Barnfather and calls him a " <unk> " , but Gee ( Yaphet Kotto ) later convinces Bayliss to apologize or risk losing the Watson case . Later that night , Pembleton tells Bayliss a lab report revealed smudges on Watson 's dress was soot from the arabber 's barn . Pembleton acknowledges Bayliss was right all along , and the two prepare to arrest the arabber . 
 Bolander ( Ned Beatty ) and Munch ( Richard Belzer ) investigate a double shooting in which a drug dealer was killed and another man was badly injured . During the investigation they find a high @-@ class prostitute hiding in a nearby doghouse . After making unsuccessful advances on Bolander , she admits the drug dealer was killed by his own bodyguard , Newton Stuart ( Richard <unk> ) . After arresting him , Stuart says the other shooting victim used the drug dealer as a human shield . In a misguided attempt to follow his employer 's orders to kill anyone who threatens him , Stuart said he shot through the drug dealer to ensure the man threatening him would also be shot . 
 = = Production = = 
 " A Shot in the Dark " was written by Jorge Zamacona based on a story by executive producer Tom Fontana , and was directed by Bruce Paltrow . Paltrow , a television and feature film director , had a history of collaboration with Fontana starting with the drama series St. Elsewhere , where the two both served as producers . Paltrow told The Washington Post that Homicide " is to television what abstract expressionism is to art " . " A Shot in the Dark " continues the story arc of the Adena Watson murder case , which dominates much of the Homicide : Life on the Street first season . The Watson case was based on the real @-@ life 1988 Baltimore slaying of Latonya Kim Wallace , which is chronicled in Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets , the 1991 David Simon non @-@ fiction book about the Baltimore Police Department , which was adapted into the Homicide series . The animosity in the episode between Felton and Pembleton is based on the real @-@ life Detective Donald Kincaid , who was the inspiration behind Felton , and the strong dislike Kincaid had for Edgerton , as chronicled in Simon 's book . 
 The shooting of Officer Thormann was also adapted from true @-@ life events in Simon 's book , although Homicide writers added the twist of Crosetti taking the case personally based on his close friendship with the victim . Edie Falco made a guest appearance in " A Shot in the Dark " as Officer Thormann 's wife Eva . Fontana cast Falco after watching her performance in Laws of Gravity ( 1992 ) . Fontana said of her , " She 's an actress who 's unadorned by any embroidery . She does everything with such simplicity and honesty , it 's breathtaking . " Falco was a struggling actor at the time , and said her salary from one Homicide episode paid for one month 's worth of rent . Fontana cast Falco as a regular in his HBO series Oz based on her work in the Homicide episodes . 
 The scene in which Bayliss yells at Barnfather and calls him a " <unk> " was the only moment in Homicide : Life on the Street in which a detective openly criticizes the deputy commissioner , who often displays selfish and craven leadership throughout the duration of the series . As a result , David P. Kalat , author of Homicide : Life on the Street - The Unofficial Companion , called it a cathartic moment for home viewers . Those scenes were cut from the syndicated reruns when the episode was shown on Lifetime Television in 1997 . " A Shot in the Dark " includes consistency errors about the Frank Pembleton character . Framed photos on Pembleton 's desk include photos of his wife and apparent children , and Felton makes an <unk> joke , " Frank almost bought a dog for his wife and kid . " However , it is later revealed that Pembleton has no children until the fourth season , when his wife Mary becomes pregnant . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 A number of songs are featured throughout the episode , including " It 's You " by Zell Sanders , " Elephant Walk " by The Kings , " The Beat Goes On " by Sonny Bono and " Symphony No. 5 " by Ludwig van Beethoven . During the closing scene , Munch sings a karaoke version of " Mack the Knife " , a song by Kurt Weill . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on February 24 , 1993 , " A Dog and Pony Show " was watched by 8 @.@ 9 million households , according to Nielsen Media Research , earning the episode an 8 @.@ 9 rating . This constituted an increase in viewership compared to the previous week 's episode , " Son of a Gun " , which was seen by 6 @.@ 52 million household viewers . Nevertheless , Homicide ranked relatively low in the Nielsen ratings compared to other shows , ranking 65th for the week of February 22 to 28 , with the CBS news magazine series 60 Minutes ranking number one with 22 @.@ 8 million household viewers . 
 This marked a continued downward trend in Homicide viewership since the series debuted . " A Shot in the Dark " particularly suffered in the ratings because it aired at the same time as the 35th Grammy Awards ceremony on CBS . Nancy Nall of The News @-@ Sentinel praised the episode as " fabulous " . She especially complimented the performance of Richard Belzer , and said watching him sing " Mack the Knife " in karaoke was " a transcendent experience " . " Son of a Gun " and the rest of the first and second season episodes were included in the four @-@ DVD box @-@ set " Homicide : Life on the Street : The Complete Seasons 1 & 2 " , which was released by A & E Home Video on May 27 , 2003 for $ 69 @.@ 95 . 
 = Special Education ( Glee ) = 
 " Special Education " is the ninth episode of the second season of the American musical television series Glee , and the thirty @-@ first episode overall . It was written by series creator Brad Falchuk , directed by Paris Barclay , and aired on Fox in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . In " Special Education " , the McKinley High School glee club New Directions competes in the Sectionals round of show choir competition against the Hipsters and the Dalton Academy Warblers , while dealing with internal feuding that threatens to rip the club apart . 
 The episode shows the former member of New Directions , Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) , at his new school Dalton Academy , where he joins the rival Warblers . With his departure , New Directions must find a new twelfth member to remain eligible for the competition . Club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) decides to feature overlooked performers from the group for Sectionals , to the consternation of the usual lead singers , Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) and Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) . The episode received a wide range of reviews , with a small majority commenting favorably ; some viewed it as a lesser version of the first season 's Sectionals episode . By contrast , the six songs covered during the show received generally favorable reviews , with the most praise going to " Dog Days Are Over " and " Valerie " as performed by New Directions , and " Hey , Soul Sister " as sung by the Warblers . 
 Upon its initial airing , this episode was viewed by 11 @.@ 68 million American viewers and garnered a 4 @.@ 6 / 13 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , up significantly from the previous episode , " Furt " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The show choir Sectionals competition is imminent , and the New Directions glee club is one below the required minimum of twelve members now that Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) has enrolled at Dalton Academy , home of their Sectionals ' rivals the Warblers . At club director Will Schuester 's ( Matthew Morrison ) behest , Puck ( Mark Salling ) attempts to recruit from his football teammates , but they lock him in a port @-@ a @-@ potty . He is rescued the next day by AV Club president and wrestler Lauren Zizes ( Ashley Fink ) , and she agrees to join New Directions , though he has to bribe her first . 
 Will invites school guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) to accompany him to Sectionals . She accepts , and suggests he consider featuring other club members instead of his usual choices , co @-@ captains Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) and Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) . Will gives the lead vocals for one song to duets competition winners Quinn Fabray ( Dianna Agron ) and Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) , which upsets Rachel and Finn , while Brittany Pierce ( Heather Morris ) and Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) are given lead dancing roles on another number . When Brittany admits she is nervous about performing , her boyfriend Artie Abrams ( Kevin McHale ) gives her a " magic comb " to boost her confidence . She and Mike commence time @-@ consuming rehearsals for their dance routine , and Mike 's girlfriend Tina Cohen @-@ Chang ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) suspects that they are having an affair ; when Artie confronts Brittany about it , she confesses that she has been avoiding him because she lost his comb . Artie admits that the comb was never magical , and tells Brittany that she is magic . 
 Kurt attends his first meeting with the Dalton Academy Warblers . He learns that the setlist for Sectionals is selected by a council of upperclassmen , and is offered a chance to audition for a solo at Sectionals . He visits Rachel for advice , and at her recommendation sings " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " from the musical Evita . Kurt is not given a solo , and his friend Blaine ( Darren Criss ) suggests that he try to fit in rather than stand out . 
 Santana ( Naya Rivera ) tells Rachel that she and Finn had sex the previous spring , and Rachel is furious that Finn 's claim to be a virgin was a lie . Emma counsels them , and then realizes that she should not attend Sectionals with Will since her boyfriend Carl ( John Stamos ) would be hurt ; she and Carl fly to Las Vegas , Nevada for the weekend . 
 At sectionals , the Hipsters and the Warblers perform first , the latter singing Train 's " Hey , Soul Sister " with Blaine on lead . Despite much backstage drama , the New Directions set goes smoothly , with Quinn and Sam performing " ( I 've Had ) The Time of My Life " and Santana singing lead on Amy Winehouse 's cover of The Zutons ' " Valerie " ; Brittany and Mike receive several bursts of applause for their dancing . New Directions and the Warblers tie for first place , which means that both groups will advance to the Regionals competition . 
 Emma tells Will that she married Carl in Las Vegas , and despite his shock , Will says he is happy for her . Finn breaks up with Rachel after she confesses that she made out with Puck to get back at him over Santana . New Directions performs Florence and the Machine 's " Dog Days Are Over " to celebrate the club 's competition survival , with Tina and Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) singing lead . 
 = = Production = = 
 The competitors for Sectionals were announced three episodes prior in " Never Been Kissed " : the a cappella Warblers from Dalton Academy , an all @-@ male institution in Westerville — they were seen in that episode performing the song " Teenage Dream " — and the Hipsters from the Warren Township continuing education program , which consists of seniors working toward earning General Educational Development diplomas . While Criss sings lead on the Warblers song , the background vocals are sung by the Tufts Beelzebubs , a male a cappella group from Tufts University in Medford , Massachusetts , not the actors playing the Warblers on screen . The Beelzebubs had not yet met Criss at the time the episode aired . The scenes of the Warblers performance of " Hey , Soul Sister " were filmed in a theater over the course of two fifteen @-@ hour days , according to Chris Mann , one of the actors : from the front on the first day , and from the back on the second . 
 Cheyenne Jackson as Dustin Goolsby and John Stamos as Carl Howell were originally supposed to have scenes in this episode — the Fox publicity included a photograph of a scene between Dustin and Will — but Jackson 's was cut entirely , and only a brief shot of Stamos embracing Mays as Emma was retained in the final version . Recurring characters in this episode include glee club members Mike Chang ( Shum ) and Sam Evans ( Overstreet ) , school bullies Dave Karofsky ( Max Adler ) and Azimio ( James Earl ) , Stamos as Howell , and Criss as Blaine Anderson , lead singer of the Warblers . Vicki Woodlee , mother of Glee choreographer Zach Woodlee , plays one of the Hipsters ; as the youngest of the performers at 60 , she had to wear a great deal of makeup to emulate an older person 's appearance , including " pounds of powder " . Zach Woodlee instructed those cast as Hipsters , the oldest of whom was 83 , to limit their dance movements to seem more realistic . Scenes were filmed over the course of four days . Actress and former American Bandstand member Bunny Gibson plays another group member . Co @-@ stars include Fink , who appears as new glee club member Lauren Zizes , Telly Leung and Titus Makin , Jr . , who return as Warblers Wes and David , respectively , and Riker Lynch , Eddy Martin and Curt Mega , who debut as Warblers Jeff , Thad and Nick , respectively . 
 " Special Education " features cover versions of six songs : " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " from the musical Evita , Mike + The Mechanics ' " The Living Years " , Train 's " Hey , Soul Sister " , " ( I 've Had ) The Time of My Life " from the film Dirty Dancing , " Valerie " by The Zutons ( although specifically a cover of the version by Mark Ronson featuring Amy Winehouse ) , and Florence and the Machine 's " Dog Days Are Over " . Each song was released as a single , available for digital download , with two separate versions of " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " released — one by Chris Colfer ( Kurt ) and the other by Lea Michele ( Rachel ) . " Valerie " and " ( I 've Had ) The Time of My Life " are included on the fifth soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 4 , released on November 26 , 2010 , and " Hey , Soul Sister " was included on the seventh soundtrack album , Glee : The Music Presents the Warblers , released on April 19 , 2011 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings and viewership = = = 
 " Special Education " was first broadcast on November 30 , 2010 in the United States on Fox . It received a 4 @.@ 6 / 13 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and attracted over 11 @.@ 68 million American viewers during its initial airing , and thus won its time slot despite airing simultaneously with network specials , including Rudolph the Red @-@ Nosed Reindeer on CBS , Christmas In Rockefeller Center on NBC , Dr. Seuss ' How the Grinch Stole Christmas and Shrek the Halls on ABC , and CW 's usual offering , One Tree Hill . The total viewership and ratings for this episode were up significantly from those of the previous episode , " Furt " , which was watched by 10 @.@ 41 million American viewers and acquired a 4 @.@ 0 / 12 rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic upon first airing on television on November 23 , 2010 . 
 In Canada , 2 @.@ 32 million viewers watched the episode , ranking second for the week . In the UK , the episode was watched by 2 @.@ 602 million viewers ( 2 @.@ 218 million on E4 , and 384 @,@ 000 on E4 + 1 ) , which made it the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Special Education " received a wide range of reviews from television critics , though there seemed to be more positive than negative responses . The most enthusiastic reviewers were from The Atlantic , where both Kevin Fallon and Patrick Burns declared it the " best episode of Glee all season " , and Meghan Brown suggested that the show should " just do competition episodes from now on " . Aly Semigran of MTV was similarly laudatory , and said that the show was " back in top form " ; she added that the episode " felt very reminiscent of the magic the first season provided " . 
 Others were more tempered in their praise . James Poniewozik of Time said the episode was " grounded " and " solid @-@ if @-@ not @-@ spectacular " , and highlighted how Glee " has developed into a broad ensemble , where any of several characters is capable of taking the spotlight , even an originally comic @-@ relief character like Brittany . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club and the Houston Chronicle 's Bobby Hankinson both liked the episode — VanDerWerff gave it a " B + " — but they , like Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone who was less complimentary , were disappointed that it failed to measure up to the last time New Directions competed in Sectionals . VanDerWerff wrote , " When the show [ … ] remains , at some level , a show about a bunch of kids who just love to sing and dance and maybe have wacky adventures on the side , it remains fundamentally strong , as it does tonight . " He also stated , " The fact that the Warblers and New Directions tied , while probably necessary for whatever reason , is ridiculously anticlimactic and keeps this episode from an A- pretty much singlehandedly . " 
 Amy Reiter of the Los Angeles Times was disappointed with almost everything , and said the episode " felt more like a long , slow letdown after a season of gleeful highs " . She added , " New Directions ' sectionals performance wasn 't a total fumble , but it wasn 't the touchdown you might 've hoped for either " , and of the long @-@ awaited opportunity to see other members featured in competition : " the anticipated shining moment turned out to be so dull . " Reiter was one of a very few critics to note the absence of cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester in the episode , and only when she lamented the " relative lack of humor " . Futterman merely remarked on Sue 's non @-@ appearance in passing ; she came to the conclusion that " we got a spazzy , unfocused hour at the expense of emotional investment " , and though Anthony Benigno of the Daily News complimented the " solid acting " , he also wrote that " this is the first time the show 's started to feel genuinely boring as opposed to , you know , gleeful . " He made a general complaint as well : " This show is starting to suffer in a big way from making the music secondary to the plot . " Robert Canning of IGN gave the episode a 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 rating . He said that the show " tried to make it all work , and while the hour was enjoyable enough , each storyline felt just a little bit shy of going from good to great . " 
 A few reviewers remarked on how the Hipsters seemed to be a reflection of the New Directions crew in fifty years , with Futterman getting into specifics : " We see future Rachel start the number with a cane and future Mercedes break through to finish the song off with a riff , and it 's hard not to be endeared to them . " Poniewozik wrote that Rachel 's " silent reminder to Kurt to smile on stage was a perfect , sweet little moment " , a sentiment shared by Tim Stack of Entertainment Weekly . Poniewozik also noted that " Lea Michele had some of her strongest non @-@ singing moments of the season by showing not just how Rachel dealt with her problems with Finn but with being on the periphery of the group . " The storyline that featured the disintegration of the Rachel – Finn relationship , when commented on at all , was viewed unfavorably ; VanDerWerff called it a " stupid twist " . 
 Brown praised the addition of Fink as Lauren to New Directions , and declared , " I hope she 's on the team for keeps " , while Poniewozik was pleased that " the episode used Lauren for comedy without simply making her the butt of jokes " . Brown also wrote , " Kurt 's arc was subtler this week , and thereby about 50 times more interesting . I [ … ] am impressed that Glee 's handling his acclimation to Dalton so truthfully . " Canning was similarly impressed , and called Kurt at Dalton " the most solid story " of the episode . There was little approval among reviewers for the " canary in a cage " metaphor in the scene between Kurt and Blaine at the end of the episode , with Kurt the " canary " in his new Dalton cage ; Hankinson characterized it as " super ham @-@ fisted " , and others were nearly as harsh . 
 = = = Music and performances = = = 
 The musical performances in this episode were mostly praised by critics , though there was little said about the quality of the abbreviated performance by the Hipsters in competition . There was near @-@ universal approval for the first song heard , " Don 't Cry For Me Argentina " , which Stack called " totally beautiful " and gave an " A- " ; he , like Burns , who said it was " fantastic " , loved having " Rachel and Kurt get a chance to sing together " . Jen Harper of BuddyTV echoed Kurt 's words in the episode ; she said " Rachel really is as talented as she is irritating " , but wished she " didn 't always look like she 's crying while she 's singing " , and added that she was " really digging Kurt in a lower register " . Futterman noted that Rachel , as is usual with her " power ballads " , " uses the time to grapple with the latest obstacle to her future stardom , while we see Kurt deliver a clear , restrained take . Benigno called Michele 's voice " astounding " , and added that her solo alternated " with Kurt 's audition with the Warblers , which is predictably outstanding " , and gave the song a " B + " . Even those who disliked the song or the composer were won over by the performance : Berk gave it three stars out of five , and Burns thought it was " fantastic " ; both liked the song 's tag @-@ team presentation . 
 The performance of Train 's " Hey , Soul Sister " by the Dalton Academy Warblers received even more praise than " Don 't Cry For Me Argentina " . Benigno called it flawless , and gave it an " A + + " , and Hanh Nguyen of Zap2it gave it her " top prize " of the night . Berk gave it four stars out of five , Burns said " the Warblers sounded fantastic and fun " , and Harper said she loved it , and that , like the audience on the show , she " would have given it " a " standing ovation " . Stack said he " sorta " hated the song " from sheer overexposure " , but " Darren Criss sold it for me with his choreography and acting " , and gave it a " B + " . Pat Monahan , the lead singer of Train , said : " Loved it ! I thought they did an amazing job . " 
 The praise was more tepid for Sam and Quinn 's " ( I 've Had ) the Time of My Life " . Benigno called it " solid " , but added " overkill knocks it down to a solid B. " Both Futterman and Stack said the number " fell a little flat " , though Stack said the duo had " great physical chemistry " . Fallon characterized it as an " adorable duet " . Berk gave it five stars of five , his best grade for the episode , and called it " <unk> , curdling perfection " , while Reiter was the least impressed , and wrote that their " voices ( and romantic interplay ) seemed wan and thin . " 
 The New Directions closing number at Sectionals , " Valerie " , received the most commentary , with Santana 's solo given enthusiastic praise , though Brittany and Mike 's dancing was also lauded . Hankinson , who had tepidly called songs " nice " up to this point , shifted gears and said , " Then Santana burns the roof down with a rendition of Amy Winehouse 's ' Valerie ' . It was awesome . " Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal echoed that fervor : " But then Santana came on and killed . With an on @-@ spot rendition of Mark Ronson / Amy Winehouse 's ' Valerie , ' and wearing a Snooki bun , Santana was electrifying behind the mic , in an energizing display that revved up the audience " , and added , " Brittany and Mike 's pas de deux rocked " . Benigno opined that " Brittany and Mike Chang handle the moves ( extraordinarily well ) , but the vocals here are what steal it . Naya Rivera ( Santana ) is completely outstanding on lead vocals , and I can 't understand why she hasn 't gotten a solo before this " ; he gave it an " A " . Stack was slightly less generous with an " A- " , and wrote that it was a " great song choice for Santana " ; he gave " bonus points for the phenomenal Mike / Brittany choreography " , while Harper said that their dancing " totally made the song " . Nguyen liked the dancing , but she was critical of how the song sounded , as she felt " it lacked something and didn 't really feel worthy of the standing O " , while Futterman said " Santana 's sassy vocals are a perfect echo of Winehouse 's , but the rest of the song feels a bit like a circus " . Reiter felt the entire song " seemed kind of tacked on " , both the dancing and Santana 's solo . 
 " Dog Days Are Over " was the favorite song of several reviewers , including Hankinson , who said " it was the exact brand of high @-@ energy jubilation that I love the most . " Harper was also enthusiastic : " This performance for me represents what I like about New Directions — and why Kurt needs to come back <unk> . Everyone got to do their own individual thing , yet they still work really well as a group . I give it best song of the night . " In Semigran 's view , " From the cute choreographed claps to the unconventional ( but oddly fitting ) choice to have Tina and Mercedes sing the tune , I wish they 'd save this one for regionals . It was a winner " , while VanDerWerff wrote , " ' Dog Days Are Over ' is right in this show 's wheelhouse , so , naturally , it hits the song out of the park . " Benigno gave the song a " B + " , and Berk awarded three stars out of five , while Stack gave it an " A " , and said series creator Ryan Murphy " chose the perfect gals to pull off this cover . " 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 Five of the seven cover versions released as singles debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 , and appeared on other musical charts . The show 's rendition of " Dog Days Are Over " debuted at number twenty @-@ two on both the Hot 100 and Canadian Hot 100 , and pushed the original version of the song by Florence and the Machine ahead of it to number twenty @-@ one on the Hot 100 , up from number fifty @-@ eight in the previous week . The other songs on the Hot 100 were " Hey , Soul Sister " at number twenty @-@ nine , which also made number thirty @-@ two on the Canadian Hot 100 ; " ( I 've Had ) The Time of My Life " at number thirty @-@ eight , which also made number thirty @-@ nine on the Canadian Hot 100 ; " Valerie " at number fifty @-@ four , which also made number seventy on the Canadian Hot 100 ; and " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " in the Lea Michele version , at number ninety @-@ seven . 
 = Professor Layton and the Last Specter = 
 Professor Layton and the Last Specter , known in Japan as Professor Layton and the Devil 's Flute ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ kyōju to Majin no Fue ) and in Europe as Professor Layton and the Spectre 's Call , is a puzzle adventure video game produced by Level @-@ 5 for the Nintendo DS handheld game console . Last Specter is the fourth game in the Professor Layton series , and is a prequel that takes place three years before the first trilogy , detailing how Professor Layton met his apprentice , Luke Triton and introducing Layton 's assistant Emmy Altava . 
 Professor Layton and the Last Specter also includes an additional role @-@ playing game entitled Professor Layton 's London Life , available from the start of the game . London Life , in which players interact with various characters from the series in a town called " Little London " , was advertised as having over 100 hours of content . London Life was removed from the European versions of the game because the translation of texts would have significantly delayed the game 's release . 
 The game was released during 2009 in Japan , and was the highest @-@ selling game there during the week of its release . It saw release in North American and PAL regions during 2011 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Professor Layton and the Last Specter is a puzzle game presented in the style of an adventure game . The player controls the actions of a group of three protagonists as they move about a village called Misthallery : Professor Hershel Layton , his assistant Emmy Altava , and a young boy named Luke Triton . While in the village , the three of them are presented with several mysteries that are solved as the plot progresses . Misthallery is divided into several sections , although many require the plot to progress to a certain point before they can be accessed . In order to move about Misthallery , players tap a shoe @-@ shaped icon on the bottom @-@ right corner of the touch screen , and then the arrow representing the direction of the path they wish to take . While in Misthallery , the player is capable of tapping anywhere on the bottom screen of the Nintendo DS system to investigate objects and reveal bits of dialogue , hint coins , collectible items , or hidden puzzles . Likewise , if a non @-@ player character is visible on the screen , they can be tapped to initiate a conversation . 
 = = = Puzzles = = = 
 Initiating a conversation or investigating an object in the main game will often lead to the player being asked to solve a puzzle . If the plot progresses to a point at which a puzzle can no longer be accessed , it will be retrieved by a character named Keats the Cat for later solving . There are over 170 puzzles in the game , including brain teasers , sliding puzzles , logic puzzles , peg solitaire , and several other varieties . When a puzzle begins , the player is briefly presented with the puzzle 's name , number , and value in " Picarats " , the game 's system of points as well as an estimation of the puzzle 's difficulty . These points are not used during the main game , but if a player collects enough of these Picarats , they gain access to bonuses accessible from the main menu . 
 After this first screen , players are taken the main puzzle solving interface , which provides instructions for the current puzzle on the top screen while allowing the player to interact directly with the touch screen in order to solve the puzzle . The player has an infinite amount of time to complete each puzzle , and they have access to an in @-@ game memo pad function to aid them in solving each puzzle . If they do not wish to solve the puzzle at the time , they can hit the button labelled " Quit " in order to exit the interface without losing any Picarats . Additionally , all puzzles have three hints available that can be purchased with tokens called " hint coins " . If a player needs more help , they can also purchase a fourth " super hint " , a more detailed hint that costs two hint coins . However , there are a limited amount of hint coins , and the game recommends they be used wisely . The player starts with ten hint coins , but more can be obtained by thorough investigation of the village . 
 In order to solve a puzzle , the player must input an answer on the bottom screen . Sometimes , this will involve tapping a button labelled " Input Answer " and writing a word or number that solves the given puzzle . Other times , they might be asked to circle an answer or tap an area on the touch screen , and then hit " Submit " . Still others are solved automatically once the player finds the solution by interacting with objects on the bottom screen . If the player has made a mistake in solving a puzzle , they can hit the button labelled " <unk> " to reset the puzzle . <unk> Picarats and purchased hints are not reset if a puzzle is restarted . If the player submits an incorrect answer , they will be asked to repeat the puzzle , and a varying amount of Picarats will be deducted from the maximum possible for that puzzle . If the player submits a correct answer , they are rewarded with the amount of Picarats the puzzle is worth , and the plot will progress . After completing a puzzle , it can be played again at any time from the Puzzle Index , a section in the game 's interface that lists the puzzles a player has completed . Occasionally , after completing a puzzle , the player will receive small items that can be used in minigames . Fulfilling certain criteria , such as clearing all levels in a minigame , unlock additional puzzles in the Bonuses section . 
 Players are also capable of connecting to Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection in order to download additional puzzles in the " Bonuses " mode , which can be selected from the game 's title screen . These puzzles to be are made available each week following the game 's release . Hints for these puzzles could not be purchased with hint coins , but they were provided freely one week after the puzzle was made available , for 33 weeks . A 34th puzzle was produced but never issued . When a player connected to Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection , all puzzles and hints would be downloaded . After May 20 , 2014 , it 's no longer possible to download the additional content , as the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection service was terminated on that date . 
 = = = Minigames = = = 
 Professor Layton and the Last Specter also features several small minigames that are playable in the main game , available by selecting them from the Professor 's Suitcase located in the top @-@ right corner of the bottom screen while moving about the town . In order to play these minigames , the plot must have progressed far enough to have unlocked each of them , and more difficult levels require the completion of puzzles in the main game . 
 The Toy Train minigame involves laying a railroad track across a complex game board . The toy train must pass through every train station and reach a defined end point , and in harder levels , it must be timed to avoid cars and other trains . The toy train requires fuel to move , limiting the amount of track that can be placed by a player unless more fuel is collected before a track ends . 
 The Fish minigame involves manipulating a fish to collect every coin in its tank . The fish moves in a straight diagonal line , and the player can alter this line by placing bubbles at certain marked points , reflecting it in a different direction . In the Japanese version of Last Specter , the Fish minigame is instead based on trying to create words by feeding them to fish , who alter them in specific patterns . 
 In the Puppet Theater minigame , the player is tasked with finishing the script of an ongoing play so that it makes sense . If the player chooses a word that does not make sense in the context of the play , the play abruptly ends and the player is asked to try again ; if all of the right words are chosen , the play is given an epilogue and an audience applauds . 
 After progressing far enough into the story , the player can tap mice across Misthallery to earn " mouse badges " and gain access to another minigame , entitled Mouse Alley . Unlike the other minigames , this is accessed through a character in Misthallery and not through the Trunk . The goal of the minigame is to tap as many mice as possible within the time limit , while avoiding tapping Luke 's mouse , <unk> , by mistake . This is the only real @-@ time element in the game . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Professor Layton and the Last Specter takes place three years before the events of Professor Layton and the Curious Village in a fictional English village known as Misthallery . In Misthallery , citizens have long spoken of legends of a specter who rose from the mist to defend the village whenever the Specter 's Flute was played . Lately , a monster who is believed by the town 's population to be this specter has been attacking the village during the middle of the night , destroying homes and buildings . 
 Misthallery is a watery town in which traveling via gondola to move about the town 's canals is commonplace . By these canals , the town is divided into five distinct regions : the Crossroads , the Market , the East District , Ely Street , and Highyard Hill . The Crossroads contain the library as well as the home of the mayor , Clark Triton . The town market is a shady place controlled by a mysterious entity known as the Black Raven , the East District contains an abandoned warehouse , and Ely Street as well as Highyard Hill are primarily residential areas . On the outskirts of Highyard Hill lies the manor owned by the former mayor 's children , who live away from the rest of the village . The townspeople believe that the manor is home to a witch . The town is also rumored to contain the Golden Garden , hidden ruins of an ancient city . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 As the story begins , a woman named Emmy Altava is hired to be Professor Layton 's assistant at the fictional <unk> University . Upon her introduction to him , he reveals that he is currently heading towards a town named Misthallery . According to a letter allegedly sent by his close friend , Clark Triton , a specter is attacking the village at night . As the pair reach Clark 's house , though , they find that the letter was sent not by Clark , but by his son , Luke , who has learned how to predict the specter 's attacks and wished to enlist Layton 's help in putting an end to them . Luke sneaks out of his house to join Layton and Emmy 's investigation . After they finish exploring Misthallery for the day , they go to spend the night at a local hotel . As they look out from the window in their room , they hear the sound of a flute and see a large , shadowy figure emerge from the mist , which proceeds to forge a path of destruction through the town , including their hotel room , before vanishing without a trace . 
 The next day , Layton , Luke , and Emmy set off to find the town 's black market in order to discover information about the Specter 's Flute , an artifact which is said grant those who play it control over the specter . After winning the trust of the Black Raven , a group of children who run the market , Layton learns that the flute was auctioned to the now @-@ deceased Evan Barde , once the richest man in Misthallery , soon before the specter started attacking the town . The three then head to Barde Manor to visit his daughter , Arianna , a girl who was once close friends with Luke , but is now suffering from a terminal illness and is believed by the townspeople to be a witch . 
 Arianna refuses to talk to anyone , however , so Layton and Luke continue to question the townspeople while Emmy goes to the Scotland Yard for information regarding Evan Barde 's death . With the aid of Inspectors <unk> and <unk> , she uncovers the records for the case before heading back to Misthallery to reunite with Layton and Luke . Inspector <unk> returns with her , hoping that his own influence will help convince the town 's Chief of Police , Chief Jakes , to provide further information on the case . Regardless , Chief Jakes remains adamantly opposed to the investigation of Barde 's death , and demands that Layton and company leave the town within 24 hours . Despite Jakes ' threats , they visit Arianna to explain to her what has happened to the town and to her father . Arianna opens up to them , and proceeds to guide them to the nearby lake before playing the Specter 's Flute , which causes a prehistoric aquatic creature named Loosha to rise from the lake . 
 Chief Jakes then appears at the lake , revealing that he had followed the Professor , and takes Arianna and Loosha into police custody , claiming them to be behind the specter attacks . In his absence , the trio manage to find the real " specter " at an abandoned factory within the town . As Arianna and Loosha are being formally accused in front of the townspeople , Layton appears and exposes the true identity of the specter : an excavation machine destroying the town in search of the " Golden Garden " , ancient ruins believed to be beneath Misthallery . He goes on to describe Chief Jakes ' scheme to become mayor of the town and his accomplice : a man disguised as Clark 's butler , <unk> Noble , named Jean Descole , a scientist looking for the Golden Garden who had held hostage Clark 's wife along with his real butler . With Descole 's plan revealed , he combines his machines into a giant mecha in a final attempt to level the town in search of the Golden Garden . 
 With the combined efforts of Layton , Luke , Emmy , Loosha , and the Black Ravens , the mecha is eventually defeated and Descole is forced to retreat . Despite Loosha having been fatally wounded during the fight , she proceeds to destroy the floodgates of the town 's dam , drying the lake and revealing the entrance to the Golden Garden . As the group enter the garden , Loosha dies , and Arianna learns of Loosha 's true intentions . Loosha knew that the clean environment of the garden would help Arianna recover from her disease , and fought the specter to ensure the garden would survive long enough to cure her . She fully recovers from her illness a year later , and the Golden Garden 's discovery is then made public , marking the beginning of Layton 's fame in the field of archaeology . 
 As Luke leaves the garden , he realizes he still has much to learn about the world , and asks to become Layton 's apprentice . Layton obliges , and the game ends with Luke bidding farewell to the people of Misthallery before beginning his journeys with Layton . In a final scene , Jean Descole is seen on a cart , preparing his next plan . 
 = = Professor Layton 's London Life = = 
 Professor Layton 's London Life ( <unk> , Layton @-@ kyōju no <unk> Raifu ) is a role @-@ playing game developed in cooperation with Brownie Brown , included with Professor Layton and the Last Specter . In London Life , the player creates an avatar that can later be customized with clothing and accessories . With this avatar , players live in " Little London " , a small city inspired by London . Within Little London , the player can create and decorate their own room and perform errands for the townspeople , who consist of many characters from all four games in the Professor Layton series at the time of its creation . The game also includes characters from the animated movie released later the same year , Professor Layton and the Eternal Diva , such as singer Janice <unk> as well as Melina and Oswald Whistler . By aiding the townspeople , players can gain items or furniture that can be used to access new areas of the city , as well as wealth and happiness . Players can also use Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection to upload their avatar to the Internet , to be downloaded by other players with whom they have traded friend codes . London Life is advertised to contain over 100 hours worth of gameplay . Players can also trade in @-@ game items with others through the Nintendo DS 's tag mode feature , in which the Nintendo DS system communicates wirelessly with other Nintendo DS systems running the same game while in sleep mode . 
 Professor Layton 's London Life is based on another Level @-@ 5 title , Fantasy Life . London Life can only be played after completing the Japanese version of the main game Last Specter , but is accessible from the beginning of the game in North American and Australian versions of the game . The European versions do not include London Life , because the amount of time it would take to translate the game would otherwise have prevented the game from being released before the end of 2011 . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Every puzzle in Last Specter was created by Akira Tago , a Japanese professor and author of the <unk> no <unk> series of puzzle books , which has sold more than 12 million copies within Japan . The game was produced by Level @-@ 5 CEO Akihiro Hino , and designed around the concept of " <unk> × <unk> no Monogatari " ( 「 <unk> × <unk> 」 , Lit . " Puzzle @-@ solving and the Story of the Encounter " ) , detailing how Professor Layton met his apprentice , Luke . 
 The Professor Layton series was envisioned as a trilogy , to be completed with the release of the third game , Professor Layton and the Unwound Future . In spite of this , Hino said that , during the development of Unwound Future , Level @-@ 5 had received a lot of questions from gamers asking if it was " really the end [ of the series ] " , which was all of the inspiration he needed to create a " second season " of the Professor Layton series . In March 2009 , Akihiro Hino officially unveiled Professor Layton and the Last Specter in Famitsu , stating that , with the second season , each game would take longer to develop than before , to dispel beliefs that Professor Layton had not significantly changed with each passing game . The second season of the series was also scheduled to have animated movies that take place between the games , starting with Professor Layton and the Eternal Diva , which was announced alongside Last Specter . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 In Japan , the music featured within the game was released as a soundtrack : the Layton @-@ kyōju to Majin no Fue Original Soundtrack ( <unk> オリジナル ・ サウンドトラック , Professor Layton and the Specter 's Flute Original Soundtrack ) . The ending theme , " Paxmáveiti " ( Paxmáveiti <unk> <unk> , Paxmáveiti <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , sung by Yūko Andō , was omitted from the soundtrack , and was also replaced with an instrumental version of the song in international releases of the game . The game also reuses music from Diabolical Box and Unwound Future . 
 The game 's musical score has been met very positively . Square Enix Music Online rated the soundtrack an eight out of ten , stating that it " goes a little step further compared to its ancestors " , and praised the quality of the orchestral renditions , calling them " superior to Professor Layton and the [ Unwound Future ] , which already had fantastic arrangements . " <unk> likewise praised the orchestral songs , and also spoke highly of the rest of the soundtrack , particularly " The Last Specter 's Theme " , stating that it was " sure to win over most any video game music fan . " 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Though the game was released within Japan during November 2009 , the game did not appear at E3 2010 alongside Unwound Future and the Nintendo 3DS sequel to Last Specter , Professor Layton and the Miracle Mask , which were both announced at the event . The game would , for the next year , only be mentioned by Nintendo in passing during an interview involving the Nintendo DSi XL , where it was referred to as Professor Layton and the Specter 's Flute . At the end of May 2011 , Level @-@ 5 filed a trademark in the United States for Professor Layton and the Last Specter , and the game was officially unveiled internationally following E3 2011 . The game was released in North American and PAL regions during late 2011 . 
 After the game 's release in Japan during late 2009 , Professor Layton and the Last Specter quickly rose to the top of Japanese sales charts , moving over 300 @,@ 000 units during its first week , eventually totaling 659 @,@ 504 sales in Japan as of December 20 , 2010 . When it saw international release during late 2011 , it became the best @-@ selling Nintendo DS game in North America on the week of its release – although across all platforms , it was outsold by Batman : Arkham City and Just Dance 3 , among other titles . In the United Kingdom , it was the seventh @-@ highest selling game on its week of release , and the third @-@ highest on a single console following both the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions of Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 3 . By the end of 2011 , the game totaled 1 @.@ 19 million sales within North America and Europe , where it has sold 1 @.@ 25 million copies as of March 2012 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Professor Layton and the Last Specter received " favorable " reviews according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . Many critics noted that although the game feels similar to past titles , the series had found a working formula and did not need to change . IGN shared these sentiments , but found that the game had " an added attention to detail that makes the whole game feel a bit sharper and more magnificent " than its predecessors . The game 's puzzles received mixed reception . Reviewers often commented that they felt too similar to puzzles from the other games in the series , and several felt that they tended to be vague or inconsistent in difficulty . Despite this , GamePro felt that the game 's puzzles were " more balanced " than those from previous games . The game 's cutscenes and visuals were very well received , with GamesRadar describing the cutscenes as " near @-@ Ghibli quality " and IGN saying that " the graphics , which make use of a cartoony yet beautifully detailed , painterly art style , are simply gorgeous . " 
 Professor Layton 's London Life was also viewed as a worthwhile extension to the game , with 1UP.com stating that the main game was " almost a side diversion " in comparison . Critics often compared the gameplay to the popular Animal Crossing franchise . Response to the game was mixed . IGN felt it " surprising the game was included as a mere bonus " and GamePro praised the dialogue , calling it " clever and genuinely funny in ways that few other games are . " However , Game Revolution said that the game soon " becomes a chore " to play , and some reviewers were unhappy with the decision to remove the game from European versions of Professor Layton and the Last Specter . 
 The Escapist gave Last Specter a score of four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , saying , " Another Professor Layton game , another bit of puzzling brilliance . Some of the brain teasers feel a bit recycled - instead of foxes and chickens , you 're shuttling dogs and cats across the river , for example - but there 's more than enough variety to warrant doggedly tracking down every last one . But if you only solve the ones you need to move the story forward , that 's ok , too . " The Guardian gave it four stars out of five , saying , " If you 've not been a fan of the series , this isn 't the game that 's going to change your mind . For everybody else though , Professor Layton & The Spectre 's Call is several days of commute @-@ improving , grey cell stimulation in a mostly effective package . And bravo to Nintendo for keeping this franchise on the standard DS rather than – for the time being , at least – adding that third dimension . " However , The Daily Telegraph gave it two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , saying , " The Layton charm is undoubtedly still present , but it 's not enough to carry the series by itself . Upon solving certain puzzles , Layton exclaims ' I love the thrill of a good solution ' . So do we , Hershel , so do we . And in this Layton game , sadly , that thrill is all too rare . " 
 = French battleship Dunkerque = 
 Dunkerque was the lead ship of the Dunkerque class of battleships built for the French Navy in the 1930s . The class also included Strasbourg . The two ships were the first capital ships to be built by the French Navy after World War I ; the planned Normandie and Lyon classes had been cancelled at the outbreak of war , and budgetary problems prevented the French from building new battleships in the decade after the war . Dunkerque was laid down in December 1932 , was launched October 1935 , and was completed in May 1937 . She was armed with a main battery of eight 330mm / 50 Modèle 1931 guns arranged in two quadruple gun turrets and had a top speed of 29 @.@ 5 knots ( 54 @.@ 6 km / h ; 33 @.@ 9 mph ) . 
 Dunkerque and Strasbourg formed the French Navy 's 1ère Division de Ligne ( 1st Division of the Line ) prior to the Second World War . The two ships searched for German commerce raiders in the early months of the war , and Dunkerque also participated in convoy escort duties . The ship was badly damaged during the British attack at Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir after the Armistice that ended the first phase of France 's participation in World War II , but she was refloated and partially repaired to return to Toulon for comprehensive repairs . Dunkerque was scuttled in November 1942 to prevent her capture by the Germans , and subsequently seized and partially scrapped by the Italians and later the Germans . Her wreck remained in Toulon until she was stricken in 1955 , and scrapped three years later . 
 = = Development = = 
 The French Navy 's design staff spent the decade following the 1922 Washington Naval Treaty attempting to produce a satisfactory design to fill 70 @,@ 000 tons as allowed by the treaty . Initially , the French sought a reply to the Italian Trento @-@ class cruisers of 1925 , but all proposals were rejected . A 17 @,@ 500 @-@ ton cruiser , which could have handled the <unk> , was inadequate against the old Italian battleships , however , and the 37 @,@ 000 @-@ ton battlecruiser concepts were prohibitively expensive and would jeopardize further naval limitation talks . These attempts were followed by an intermediate design for a 23 @,@ 690 @-@ ton protected cruiser in 1929 ; it was armed with 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns , armoured against 203 mm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) guns , and had a speed of 29 kn ( 54 km / h ; 33 mph ) . Visually , it bore a profile strikingly similar to the final Dunkerque . 
 The German Deutschland @-@ class cruisers became the new focus for French naval architects in 1929 . The design had to respect the 1930 London Naval Treaty , which limited the French to two 23 @,@ 333 @-@ ton ships until 1936 . Drawing upon previous work , the French developed a 23 @,@ 333 @-@ ton design armed with 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns , armoured against the German cruisers ' 280 mm ( 11 in ) guns , and with a speed of 30 kn ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) . As with the final Dunkerque , the main artillery was concentrated entirely forward . The design was rejected by the French parliament in July 1931 and sent back for revision . The final revision grew to 26 @,@ 500 tons ; the 305 @-@ mm guns were replaced by 330mm / 50 Modèle 1931 guns , the armour was slightly improved , and the speed slightly decreased . Parliamentary approval was granted in early 1932 , and Dunkerque was ordered on 26 October . 
 = = = Characteristics = = = 
 Dunkerque displaced 26 @,@ 500 t ( 26 @,@ 100 long tons ) as built and 35 @,@ 500 t ( 34 @,@ 900 long tons ) fully loaded , with an overall length of 214 @.@ 5 m ( 703 ft 9 in ) , a beam of 31 @.@ 08 m ( 102 ft 0 in ) and a maximum draft of 8 @.@ 7 m ( 28 ft 7 in ) . She was powered by four Parsons geared steam turbines and six oil @-@ fired Indret boilers , which developed a total of 112 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 83 @,@ 900 kW ) and yielded a maximum speed of 29 @.@ 5 kn ( 54 @.@ 6 km / h ; 33 @.@ 9 mph ) . Her crew numbered between 1 @,@ 381 and 1 @,@ 431 officers and men . The ship carried a pair of spotter aircraft on the fantail , and the aircraft facilities consisted of a steam catapult and a crane to handle the floatplanes . The floatplanes were initially Gourdou @-@ Leseurre GL @-@ 832 HY , and later Loire 130 . 
 She was armed with eight 330mm / 50 Modèle 1931 guns arranged in two quadruple gun turrets , both of which were placed in a superfiring pair forward of the superstructure . Her secondary armament consisted of sixteen 130 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) / 45 dual @-@ purpose guns ; these were mounted in three quadruple and two twin turrets . The quadruple turrets were placed on the stern , and the twin turrets were located amidships . Close range antiaircraft defense was provided by a battery of eight 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns in twin mounts and thirty @-@ two 13 @.@ 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 52 in ) guns in quadruple mounts . The ship 's belt armor was 225 mm ( 8 @.@ 9 in ) thick amidships , and the main battery turrets were protected by 330 mm ( 13 in ) of armor plate on the faces . The main armored deck was 115 mm ( 4 @.@ 5 in ) thick , and the conning tower had 270 mm ( 11 in ) thick sides . 
 = = = Modifications = = = 
 Dunkerque was modified several times throughout her relatively short career . In 1937 , a funnel cap was added and four of the 37 mm guns , which were the Modèle 1925 variant , were removed . These were replaced the following year with new Modèle 1933 guns . The 13 @.@ 2 mm guns were also rearranged slightly , with the two mounts that were located abreast of the second main battery turret moved further aft . A <unk> m ( 46 ft ) rangefinder was installed in 1940 on the fore tower . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Dunkerque was laid down in the Brest Navy Yard , on 24 December 1932 , in the <unk> graving dock number 4 . The hull was completed except for the forward @-@ most 17 m ( 56 ft ) section , since the dock was only 200 m ( 660 ft ) long . She was launched on 2 October 1935 and towed to <unk> graving dock number 8 , where the bow was fitted . Sea trials were carried out , starting on 18 April 1936 , before the superstructure was complete . The trials lasted until late @-@ April 1937 . Dunkerque represented France at the British Naval Review in May 1937 , marking the coronation of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth . Later that month on May 27 , she took part in another review off Île de Sein , where the French Mediterranean and Atlantic squadrons were assembled following combined exercises ; Dunkerque hosted the Navy Minister and the new Chief of Staff of the French Navy , Vice Admiral François Darlan . 
 On 20 January 1938 , Dunkerque departed for a tour of French colonial possessions in the Atlantic ; ports of call included Fort @-@ de @-@ France in the Antilles and Dakar , Senegal . She returned to France on 6 March , where she was placed on active duty on 1 September . She joined the Atlantic Squadron and became the flagship of Vice Amiral d <unk> ( Squadron Vice Admiral ) Marcel @-@ Bruno Gensoul . The ship then went into drydock for drydock in Brest for periodic maintenance on 29 November ; repairs lasted until 27 February 1939 . After emerging from drydock , Dunkerque was assigned to the Force de Raid , a fast task force created in response to the Sudetenland Crisis with Germany . Strasbourg joined the Force de Raid in March ; the two Dunkerque @-@ class battleships formed the 1ère Division de Ligne ( 1st Division of the Line ) . The ships received division stripes on their funnels , one for Dunkerque as division leader , and two for Strasbourg . By that time , the Force de Raid consisted of the two <unk> , three light cruisers , and eight large destroyers . The squadron was based in Brest . The German Deutschland @-@ class cruisers were operating off Spain at the time tensions began to rise over the Sudetenland Crisis in early 1938 , so the Force de Raid was sent out to cover the return of the cruiser Jeanne d 'Arc on 14 – 16 April . The Sudetenland Crisis ultimately was resolved in the Munich Agreement in September 1938 and led to a temporary slackening of tensions in Europe . 
 The 1ère Division de Ligne made an official visit on 3 – 4 May 1939 to Lisbon , Portugal , commemorating the discovery of Brazil by Alvares Cabral . On 23 May , the two battleships and other ships of the Force de Raid visited Britain , including stops in Liverpool , Oban , Staffa , Loch Ewe , Scapa Flow , and Rosyth . They returned to Brest on 21 June . On 2 September 1939 , the day after Germany invaded Poland , the Force de Raid sortied from Brest , since the Deutschland @-@ class cruisers were reported to be operating in the Atlantic . After four days at sea , the squadron returned to Brest . In October , Dunkerque was assigned to Force L , along with Béarn and three cruisers ; the squadron was based in Brest . The ships were tasked with hunting down the cruiser Admiral Graf Spee . 
 On 25 November , Vice Admiral Gensoul ordered Dunkerque , the French 4th Cruiser Division , and the British battlecruiser HMS Hood to intercept the German battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , which had sunk the Armed Merchant Cruiser HMS Rawalpindi , north of the Faroe Islands on 23 November . While the German battleships attempted to break into the Atlantic , Dunkerque suffered bow damages in a huge North Atlantic tempest and had to be docked for repairs on 3 December . On 11 December , Dunkerque and the cruiser Gloire carried a shipment of part of the Banque de France 's gold reserve to Canada . The ships arrived on 17 December and covered a troop convoy on the return voyage . After returning to Brest on 4 January 1940 , Dunkerque underwent another period of maintenance , which lasted until 6 February . The ship then conducted sea trials and training maneuvers through March . 
 Faced with increasingly hostile posturing by Italy during the spring of 1940 , the Force de Raid was dispatched , on 2 April to the Mediterranean . The squadron was quickly ordered to return to Brest several days later , in response to the German landings in Norway on 9 April . The Force de Raid was transferred subsequently to Mers @-@ el Kebir on 24 April , arriving on 27 April . Reports of Axis vessels in the area on 9 – 10 May prompted Dunkerque and Strasbourg to sortie . Dunkerque remained in the Mediterranean when the Italians declared war on France and Britain on 10 June . Two days later , Dunkerque and Strasbourg sortied to intercept reported German and Italian ships that were incorrectly reported to be in the area . On 22 June , however , France surrendered to Germany following the Battle of France ; during the truce negotiations , the French Navy proposed <unk> Dunkerque and several other warships in Toulon . 
 = = = Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir = = = 
 The only test in battle for Dunkerque came in the attack on Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir on 3 July . The British Force H , commanded by Admiral Somerville and centered on HMS Hood and the battleships Revenge , and Valiant , arrived off Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir to coerce the French battleship squadron to join the British cause or scuttle their ships . The French Navy refused , as complying with the demand would have violated the Armistice signed with Germany . To ensure the ships would not fall into Axis hands , the British warships opened fire . Dunkerque was tied alongside the mole with her stern facing the sea , so she could not return fire . 
 Dunkerque 's crew loosed the chains and started to get the ship underway just as the British opened fire ; the ship was engaged by HMS Hood . She was hit by four 15 inch ( 381 mm ) shells in quick succession . The first was deflected on the upper 330 mm turret roof , though it killed all the men in the right half turret ; the left half remained operational . The second shell damaged the aircraft installations , the last two passed through the 225 mm armored belt , which had not been designed to resist 15 @-@ inch shells . The third shell penetrated the handling room of the starboard twin 130 mm turret and penetrated to the forward turbine room , putting it out of action . The fourth shell holed the belt and reached the central boiler room ( BR 2 ) , causing severe damage . The damage forced the crew to beach the ship on the other side of Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir roadstead . Part of the crew were then sent ashore . 
 The British fire ceased after less than twenty minutes , which limited the damage inflicted . Admiral <unk> , Admiral Sud ( C. in C. French Navy in North Africa , at Bizerta ) , reported to the French Admiralty that the ship had suffered " moderate " damage , and boasted , in a communiqué to the Algerian press , that Dunkerque would soon be able to return to Toulon on her own steam . After learning of the status of Dunkerque , the British Admiralty ordered Somerville to return to Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir and to put Dunkerque permanently out of action . Since Dunkerque was beached just in front of a village , Admiral Sommerville , preferred to attack with torpedo bombers to avoid causing serious collateral damages to civilians . The second attack took place on July 6 . One of the torpedoes hit the small patrol ship Terre @-@ Neuve , which carried a load of depth charges , and was moored alongside Dunkerque . The explosion of fourteen depth charges , equivalent of 1 @,@ 400 kg of TNT , ripped an enormous hole in the battleship 's hull and killed a further 40 seamen . Dunkerque sank in shallow water . Another torpedo struck the ship and tore a hole in two compartments . The ship probably escaped a total loss by flooding the 330 mm gun magazines which had been ordered as soon as the torpedo @-@ bombers appeared . The total number killed on Dunkerque during the two attacks of July 3 and July 6 reached 210 . 
 Temporary repairs began immediately , but due to the limited drydock space in the port , repairs to the hull were not effected until 11 September . Dunkerque was refloated on 27 September and her propulsion system was returned to operational status . A major fire broke out on 5 December , however , which slowed down the repair effort . Repair work lasted for the entirety of 1941 , and on 25 January 1942 another fire broke out . The temporary repairs were completed by 19 February , which permitted the ship to depart Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir , under heavy escort , bound for Toulon . She arrived the following day , and entered the large Vauban drydock for comprehensive repairs . 
 = = = Scuttling at Toulon = = = 
 Repair work proceeded slowly , owing to a shortage of material and labor . After the Wehrmacht occupied the Zone libre in retaliation for the successful Allied landings in North Africa , the Germans attempted to seize the French warships remaining under Vichy control on 27 November . To prevent them from seizing the ships , their crews scuttled the fleet in Toulon , including Dunkerque , which still lay incomplete in the Vauban drydock . Demolition charges were placed on the ship and she was set on fire . Her commanding officer , Capitaine de vaisseau ( Captain ) Amiel , initially refused to sink his ship without written orders , but was finally convinced to do so by the Commanding Officer of the nearby light cruiser La Galissonnière . 
 The Italians took control of the wreck , but they found her a total loss , and so began to dismantle Dunkerque . As part of this process , the ship was deliberately damaged to prevent the French from being able to repair her if she was recaptured ; the Italians cut down the main battery guns to render them unusable . The partially scrapped hulk was in turn seized by the Germans when Italy surrendered to the Allies in September 1943 . In 1944 , the Germans removed the ship 's bow to float her out of the drydock to free up the dock and continue the scrapping process . While in Axis possession , she was bombed several times by Allied aircraft . The hulk was condemned on 15 September 1955 and renamed <unk> . Her remains , which amounted to not more than 15 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 15 @,@ 000 long tons ; 17 @,@ 000 short tons ) , were sold for final demolition on 30 September 1958 for 226 @,@ 117 @,@ 000 francs . 
 = A Canterlot Wedding = 
 " A Canterlot Wedding " is the collective name for the twenty @-@ fifth and twenty @-@ sixth episodes of the second season of the Canadian @-@ American animated television series My Little Pony : Friendship Is Magic as well as the fifty @-@ first and fifty @-@ second episodes of the series overall . " A Canterlot Wedding " was directed by James Wootton and written by Meghan McCarthy . It premiered on The Hub on April 21 , 2012 , with both parts airing as an hour @-@ long event . In the episodes , Twilight Sparkle learns that her brother Shining Armor will be marrying Princess Celestia 's niece , Princess Cadance . Although Twilight becomes excited by the news of this royal wedding and realizes that she was a childhood friend , she begins to have concerns about the marriage when she notices Cadance isn 't behaving like the friendly , caring individual that she remembered her to be when she was her old babysitter . 
 The premiere of " A Canterlot Wedding " was preceded by a major marketing campaign by the channel , which featured interactive content on the network 's web site , promotional events , and a print advertisement taking the form of a formal wedding announcement in The New York Times newspaper . The episode debuted to excellent ratings and was positively received by critics , who felt that the hour @-@ long special was highly ambitious for a children 's program , and a further justification for the Brony community that the Friendship Is Magic series has developed . The first half of the episode was watched by over 483 @,@ 000 viewers and the second half was watched by over 475 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Part one = = = 
 Twilight Sparkle ( voiced by Tara Strong ) is surprised to learn that her older brother and Captain of the Royal Guard , Shining Armor ( Andrew Francis ) , is to be married , and that Princess Celestia ( Nicole Oliver ) has requested her and her friends from Ponyville to help organize the ceremony . Twilight is somewhat resentful , as she has considered Shining Armor as her " Big Brother Best Friend Forever " ( " <unk> " ) , yet only coming to learn of the marriage at this late date and the fact that he ( Shining Armor ) only sent a letter , rather than coming in person . Twilight and her friends arrive in Canterlot , surprised to find that security has been increased , including a magic shield shell cast by Shining Armor that protects the entire city , due to an unknown threat . 
 Twilight berates her brother for not informing her sooner and only sending a letter , but he apologizes , offering Twilight to be his " best mare " . Shining Armor then reveals that he is marrying Princess Mi Amore Cadenza ( Britt McKillip ) , whom Twilight knows as Cadance , her favorite " <unk> " , cheering Twilight up further . However , when Twilight first meets Cadance , she finds the bride to be cold and distant , seemingly having no memory of a special rhyme they had shared when Twilight was younger ( " Sunshine , Sunshine " ) . As Twilight observes the preparations for the ceremony , she further doubts Cadance 's purpose , as the bride criticizes every aspect that her friends are planning . Her friends dismiss Twilight 's claims as pressure from the upcoming ceremony mounts . She approaches Shining Armor about her concerns , but Cadance interrupts and takes her brother aside , casting an eerie spell on him that she purports to help him deal with the migraines caused by casting the shield spell around the city . 
 During the wedding rehearsal the next day , Twilight barges in and decries Cadance as a fraud . Shining Armor is furious with Twilight and explains the apparent reasons for Cadance 's behavior , and he , Princess Celestia and her friends refuse to believe Twilight 's claims , leaving a saddened Twilight alone with Cadance . When Twilight tries to apologize to her , Cadance reveals her evil side , casting a spell around Twilight which transports her underground to the caves beneath Canterlot . 
 = = = Part two = = = 
 Twilight finds herself in the long @-@ forgotten crystal caves beneath Canterlot . An image of Cadance appears and taunts her , explaining that the marriage will continue without Twilight 's interference . Using her magic to shatter a crystal wall , Twilight finds another Cadance waiting there , but the mare is bruised and battered . Twilight attacks her , but the weary alicorn proves that she is the real Cadance by demonstrating their shared rhyme from their youth . Cadance explains she was abducted by the impostor in the castle to marry Shining Armor herself . The two then work together to escape the caves and try to stop the wedding . Meanwhile , the fake Cadance revels in her victory , secretly plotting against Shining Armor and the others ( " This Day Aria " ) . 
 Just before the ceremony is completed , Twilight and Cadance arrive to expose the deception . The impostor is forced to reveal her true form as Queen Chrysalis ( Kathleen Barr ) , ruler of the black shapeshifting insect @-@ like Changelings that can take on the form of any other being , thus vindicating Twilight Sparkle . Chrysalis has been usurping Shining Armor 's power , weakening the shield to allow her Changeling army to invade Canterlot and take over Equestria , desiring to feed her armies off the love spread throughout the land . Princess Celestia attempts to stop her but is overpowered and defeated . Celestia implores Twilight and her friends to recover the Elements of Harmony to stop Chrysalis . Though they are able to fight through one troop of Changelings and make their way to the vault where the Elements are kept , they soon become outnumbered , and are surrounded and returned to the Queen as her captives . With no further resistance , Chrysalis declares her victory complete . Twilight uses the distraction to free Cadance so she may be with Shining Armor . Cadance 's magic is able to break Chrysalis 's spell on the groom , and with Cadance 's love and magic , Shining Armor is able to recast the shield at full strength , physically expelling Chrysalis and her army from Canterlot to parts unknown . 
 Applejack apologizes to Twilight for not believing her , and she forgives her . Princess Celestia commends Twilight Sparkle , for it was her instincts and conviction to them that ultimately saved the day . The wedding ceremony is quickly rescheduled , with Twilight eagerly overseeing preparations for a much happier and profoundly appreciative Cadance . Shining Armor and Princess Cadance are married , and a celebration ensues . During the ceremony and the reception , Twilight has her lingering anxiety of losing touch with her brother put to rest when Shining confesses that he persuaded Cadance to accept his proposal when he mentioned she would gain Twilight as a sister @-@ in @-@ law . Furthermore , just before the couple departs for their honeymoon , Shining thanks his sister for all she has done and the siblings reaffirm their love ( " Love is in Bloom " ) . 
 = = Production and promotion = = 
 The Hub heavily promoted " A Canterlot Wedding " in the lead @-@ up to its premiere through a " Royal Wedding " advertising campaign . This promotional campaign featured a microsite featuring new games and digital content themed around the episode , previews of the episode posted through social media ( including The Hub 's pages on Twitter and Facebook ) , and an advertisement placed in The New York Times ' wedding section on April 13 , 2012 — formally announcing the marriage of Princess Cadance and Shining Armor . Episode writer Meghan McCarthy explained that the ad was placed in the New York Times because the series wanted to " justify something big and crazy and exciting " . Actor and wedding aficionado Tori Spelling also made appearances during promotional events for the episodes , including appearances in segments aired on The Hub during the episode . Though she was scheduled to host a " bridle shower " event in Culver City the week before the episode 's airing , Spelling cancelled due to pregnancy sicknesses , with Brooke Burke stepping in to take her place . 
 The episode marks the last time that series developer Lauren Faust had any input . Faust had previously served as executive producer during season one , and as consulting producer during season two . The episode contains three songs written by series musician Daniel Ingram . For " This Day Aria " , a duet song by Princess Cadance and Queen Chrysalis in her Princess Cadance form , Ingram wanted to make the song more emotional than previous work he had done for the series . This has since made the song one of the most popular ones , with one version of the song on YouTube having reached over 30 million views as of May 2015 . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Both parts of " A Canterlot Wedding " premiered on The Hub in the United States on April 21 , 2012 , airing in an hour @-@ long special presentation hosted by Tori Spelling . The episodes were The Hub 's highest @-@ rated programs to date in the demographics of kids 6 @-@ 11 and households , with a total viewership of 483 @,@ 000 and 475 @,@ 000 recorded for both parts respectively . Part one saw an increase in Kids 6 @-@ 11 by 1 @,@ 047 % and Adults 18 @-@ 49 by 102 % , whereas part two saw an increase in Kids 6 @-@ 11 by 654 % and Adults 18 @-@ 49 by 46 % . Driven by the performance of " A Canterlot Wedding " , The Hub earned its second @-@ best Saturday rating in the network 's history , with an average of 184 @,@ 000 viewers and 129 @,@ 000 households watching the channel between 6 am to 12 am . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received largely positive reviews from critics . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave " A Canterlot Wedding " an " A- " rating , considering it to be one of the reasons why he felt Friendship Is Magic was currently one of the best children 's programs . VanDerWerff praised its continuing emphasis on themes surrounding the " painful uncertainties of growing up " , commenting that a fight scene between the main characters and the Changelings was " as colorful and fun as anything I 've seen on any TV program this season " , and also praised Daniel Ingram 's work on the soundtrack of the episodes — including the " This Day Aria " musical number between the good and evil Princess Cadance , which he compared to the " villain songs " of the Disney Renaissance . He also recommended " A Canterlot Wedding " to viewers who may be skeptical about the popularity of the series . 
 David Hinckley of the New York Daily News noted that the complex storyline and darker themes seen in " A Canterlot Wedding " would make it appeal just as well to older viewers , and made the episode also feel relatively ambitious for a children 's show . Hinckley and Michelle <unk> of Entertainment Weekly noted that the episode 's timing was also close to the one @-@ year anniversary of the royal wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton . Entertainment Weekly writer Hilary Busis , reporting about the " invitation " that appeared in The New York Times to promote the episode , noted that " Having seen it myself , I can concur ; the hour @-@ long special is ambitious , absorbing , and thoroughly entertaining , even to those who stopped playing with My Little Ponies [ sic ] back in the mid- ' 80s . ( Or , you know , never played with them at all . ) " 
 = = Home media release = = 
 Shout Factory released a DVD compilation titled " Royal Pony Wedding " on August 7 , 2012 . It contained both parts of this finale along with " Hearts and Hooves Day " ( Season 2 , Episode 17 ) , " Sweet and Elite " ( Season 2 , Episode 9 ) , and " The Best Night Ever " ( Season 1 , Episode 26 ) . It has also been released as part of the complete Season 2 DVD set . 
 = Ontological argument = 
 An ontological argument is a philosophical argument for the existence of God that uses ontology . Many arguments fall under the category of the ontological , and they tend to involve arguments about the state of being or existing . More specifically , ontological arguments tend to start with an a priori theory about the organization of the universe . If that organizational structure is true , the argument will provide reasons why God must exist . 
 The first ontological argument in the Western Christian tradition was proposed by Anselm of Canterbury in his 1078 work Proslogion . Anselm defined God as " that than which nothing greater can be conceived " , and argued that this being must exist in the mind ; even in the mind of the person who denies the existence of God . He suggested that , if the greatest possible being exists in the mind , it must also exist in reality . If it only exists in the mind , then an even greater being must be possible — one which exists both in the mind and in reality . Therefore , this greatest possible being must exist in reality . Seventeenth century French philosopher René Descartes deployed a similar argument . Descartes published several variations of his argument , each of which centred on the idea that God 's existence is immediately <unk> from a " clear and distinct " idea of a supremely perfect being . In the early eighteenth century , Gottfried Leibniz augmented Descartes ' ideas in an attempt to prove that a " supremely perfect " being is a coherent concept . A more recent ontological argument came from Kurt Gödel , who proposed a formal argument for God 's existence . Norman Malcolm revived the ontological argument in 1960 when he located a second , stronger ontological argument in Anselm 's work ; Alvin Plantinga challenged this argument and proposed an alternative , based on modal logic . Attempts have also been made to validate Anselm 's proof using an automated theorem prover . Other arguments have been categorised as ontological , including those made by Islamic philosopher Mulla Sadra . 
 Since its proposal , few philosophical ideas have generated as much interest and discussion as the ontological argument . Nearly all of the great minds of Western philosophy have found the argument worthy of their attention and criticism . The general consensus is that the argument is erroneous . However , consensus as to the exact nature of the argument 's error or errors has long proved elusive to the philosophical community . The first critic of the ontological argument was Anselm 's contemporary , Gaunilo of <unk> . He used the analogy of a perfect island , suggesting that the ontological argument could be used to prove the existence of anything . This was the first of many parodies , all of which attempted to show that the argument has absurd consequences . Later , Thomas Aquinas rejected the argument on the basis that humans cannot know God 's nature . Also , David Hume offered an empirical objection , criticising its lack of evidential reasoning and rejecting the idea that anything can exist necessarily . Immanuel Kant 's critique was based on what he saw as the false premise that existence is a predicate . He argued that " existing " adds nothing ( including perfection ) to the essence of a being , and thus a " supremely perfect " being can be conceived not to exist . Finally , philosophers including C. D. Broad dismissed the coherence of a maximally great being , proposing that some attributes of greatness are incompatible with others , rendering " maximally great being " incoherent . 
 = = Classification = = 
 The traditional definition of an ontological argument was given by Immanuel Kant . He contrasted the ontological argument ( literally any argument " concerned with being " ) with the cosmological and physio @-@ theoretical arguments . According to the Kantian view , ontological arguments are those founded on a priori reasoning . 
 Graham Oppy , who elsewhere expressed the view that he " see [ s ] no urgent reason " to depart from the traditional definition , defined ontological arguments as those that begin with " nothing but analytic , a priori and necessary premises " and conclude that God exists . Oppy admitted , however , that not all of the " traditional characteristics " of an ontological argument ( <unk> , necessity , and a priority ) are found in all ontological arguments and , in his 2007 work Ontological Arguments and Belief in God , suggested that a better definition of an ontological argument would employ only considerations " entirely internal to the theistic worldview " . 
 Oppy <unk> ontological arguments into definitional , conceptual ( or <unk> ) , modal , <unk> , experiential , mereological , higher @-@ order , or Hegelian categories , based on the qualities of their premises . He defined these qualities as follows : definitional arguments invoke definitions ; conceptual arguments invoke " the possession of certain kinds of ideas or concepts " ; modal arguments consider possibilities ; <unk> arguments assert " a distinction between different categories of existence " ; experiential arguments employ the idea that God exists solely to those who have had experience of him ; and Hegelian arguments are from Hegel . He later categorised mereological as arguments that " draw on … the theory of the whole @-@ part relation " . 
 William Lane Craig criticised Oppy 's study as too vague for useful classification . Craig argued that an argument can be classified as ontological if it attempts to deduce the existence of God , along with other necessary truths , from his definition . He suggested that proponents of ontological arguments would claim that , if one fully understood the concept of God , one must accept his existence . William L. Rowe defined ontological arguments as those that start from the definition of God and , using only a priori principles , conclude with God 's existence . 
 = = Development = = 
 Although the ontological argument may have been implicit in the works of Greek philosophers such as Plato and the Neoplatonists , the mainstream view is that the ontological argument was first clearly stated and developed by Anselm of Canterbury . Some scholars argued that the Islamic philosopher Avicenna ( Ibn Sina ) developed a special kind of ontological argument before Anselm , but other scholars have doubted this position . Daniel Dombrowski marked three major stages in the development of the argument : Anselm 's initial explicit formulation ; the eighteenth century criticisms of Kant and Hume ; and the identification of a second ontological argument in Anselm 's Proslogion by twentieth century philosophers . 
 = = = Anselm = = = 
 Theologian and philosopher Anselm of Canterbury ( 1033 – 1109 ) proposed an ontological argument in the second and third chapters of his Proslogion . Anselm 's argument was not presented in order to prove God 's existence ; rather , Proslogion was a work of meditation in which he documented how the idea of God became self @-@ evident to him . 
 In Chapter 2 of the Proslogion , Anselm defined God as a " being than which no greater can be conceived " . He suggested that even " the fool " can understand this concept , and this understanding itself means that the being must exist in the mind . The concept must exist either only in our mind , or in both our mind and in reality . If such a being exists only in our mind , then a greater being — that which exists in the mind and in reality — can be conceived ( this argument is generally regarded as a reductio ad absurdum because the view of the fool is proven to be inconsistent ) . Therefore , if we can conceive of a being than which nothing greater can be conceived , it must exist in reality . Thus , a being than which nothing greater could be conceived , which Anselm defined as God , must exist in reality . 
 Anselm 's argument in Chapter 2 can be summarized as follows : 
 It is a conceptual truth ( or , so to speak , true by definition ) that God is a being than which none greater can be imagined ( that is , the greatest possible being that can be imagined ) . 
 God exists as an idea in the mind . 
 A being that exists as an idea in the mind and in reality is , other things being equal , greater than a being that exists only as an idea in the mind . 
 Thus , if God exists only as an idea in the mind , then we can imagine something that is greater than God ( that is , a greatest possible being that does exist ) . 
 But we cannot imagine something that is greater than God ( for it is a contradiction to suppose that we can imagine a being greater than the greatest possible being that can be imagined . ) 
 Therefore , God exists . 
 In Chapter 3 , Anselm presented a further argument in the same vein : 
 By definition , God is a being than which none greater can be imagined . 
 A being that necessarily exists in reality is greater than a being that does not necessarily exist . 
 Thus , by definition , if God exists as an idea in the mind but does not necessarily exist in reality , then we can imagine something that is greater than God . 
 But we cannot imagine something that is greater than God . 
 Thus , if God exists in the mind as an idea , then God necessarily exists in reality . 
 God exists in the mind as an idea . 
 Therefore , God necessarily exists in reality . 
 This contains the notion of a being that cannot be conceived not to exist . He argued that if something can be conceived not to exist , then something greater can be conceived . Consequently , a thing than which nothing greater can be conceived cannot be conceived not to exist and so it must exist . This can be read as a restatement of the argument in Chapter 2 , although Norman Malcolm believed it to be a different , stronger argument . 
 = = = René Descartes = = = 
 René Descartes ( 1596 – 1650 ) composed a number of ontological arguments , which differed from Anselm 's formulation . Generally speaking , they are less formal arguments than natural intuition . 
 Descartes wrote in the Fifth Meditation : 
 But , if the mere fact that I can produce from my thought the idea of something that entails everything that I clearly and distinctly perceive to belong to that thing really does belong to it , is not this a possible basis for another argument to prove the existence of God ? Certainly , the idea of God , or a supremely perfect being , is one that I find within me just as surely as the idea of any shape or number . And my understanding that it belongs to his nature that he always exists is no less clear and distinct than is the case when I prove of any shape or number that some property belongs to its nature . 
 Descartes argued that God 's existence can be deduced from his nature , just as geometric ideas can be deduced from the nature of shapes — he used the deduction of the sizes of angles in a triangle as an example . He suggested that the concept of God is that of a supremely perfect being , holding all perfections . He seems to have assumed that existence is a predicate of a perfection . Thus , if the notion of God did not include existence , it would not be supremely perfect , as it would be lacking a perfection . Consequently , the notion of a supremely perfect God who does not exist , Descartes argues , is unintelligible . Therefore , according to his nature , God must exist . 
 = = = Gottfried Leibniz = = = 
 Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz saw a problem with Descartes ' ontological argument : that Descartes had not asserted the coherence of a " supremely perfect " being . He proposed that , unless the coherence of a supremely perfect being could be demonstrated , the ontological argument fails . Leibniz saw perfection as impossible to analyse ; therefore , it would be impossible to demonstrate that all perfections are incompatible . He reasoned that all perfections can exist together in a single entity , and that Descartes ' argument is still valid . 
 = = = Mulla Sadra = = = 
 Mulla Sadra ( c . 1571 / 2 – 1640 ) was an Iranian Shia Islamic philosopher who was influenced by earlier Muslim philosophers such as Avicenna and <unk> , as well as the Sufi <unk> Ibn ' Arabi . Sadra discussed Avicenna 's arguments for the existence of God , claiming that they were not a priori . He rejected the argument on the basis that existence precedes essence , or that the existence of human beings is more fundamental than their essence . 
 Sadra put forward a new argument , known as <unk> Argument or Argument of the Righteous . The argument attempts to prove the existence of God through the reality of existence , and to conclude with God 's pre @-@ eternal necessity . In this argument , a thing is demonstrated through itself , and a path is identical with the goal . In other arguments , the truth is attained from an external source , such as from the possible to the necessary , from the originated to the eternal origin , or from motion to the unmoved mover . In the argument of the righteous , there is no middle term other than the truth . His version of the ontological argument can be summarized as follows : 
 There is existence 
 Existence is a perfection above which no perfection may be conceived 
 God is perfection and perfection in existence 
 Existence is a singular and simple reality ; there is no metaphysical pluralism 
 That singular reality is graded in intensity in a scale of perfection ( that is , a denial of a pure monism ) . 
 That scale must have a limit point , a point of greatest intensity and of greatest existence . 
