 Hence God exists . 
 Mulla Sadra describes this argument in his main work al @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> ‘ a [ four journeys ] as follows : 
 Existence is a single , objective and simple reality , and there is no difference between its parts , unless in terms of perfection and imperfection , strength , and weakness … And the culmination of its perfection , where there is nothing more perfect , is its independence from any other thing . Nothing more perfect should be conceivable , as every imperfect thing belongs to another thing and needs to become perfect . And , as it has already been explicated , perfection is prior to imperfection , actuality to potency , and existence to non @-@ existence . Also , it has been explained that the perfection of a thing is the thing itself , and not a thing in addition to it . Thus , either existence is independent of others or it is in need of others . The former is the Necessary , which is pure existence . Nothing is more perfect than Him . And in Him there is no room for non @-@ existence or imperfection . The latter is other than Him , and is regarded as His acts and effects , and for other than Him there is no subsistence , unless through Him . For there is no imperfection in the reality of existence , and imperfection is added to existence only because of the quality of being caused , as it is impossible for an effect to be identical with its cause in terms of existence . 
 = = = Kurt Gödel = = = 
 Mathematician Kurt Gödel provided a formal argument for God 's existence . The argument was constructed by Gödel but not published until long after his death . He provided a logically valid argument based on modal logic ; he uses the conception of properties , ultimately concluding with God 's existence . 
 Definition 1 : x is God @-@ like if and only if x has as essential properties those and only those properties which are positive 
 Definition 2 : A is an essence of x if and only if for every property B , x has B necessarily if and only if A entails B 
 Definition 3 : x necessarily exists if and only if every essence of x is necessarily exemplified 
 Axiom 1 : If a property is positive , then its negation is not positive 
 Axiom 2 : Any property entailed by — i.e. , strictly implied by — a positive property is positive 
 Axiom 3 : The property of being God @-@ like is positive 
 Axiom 4 : If a property is positive , then it is necessarily positive 
 Axiom 5 : Necessary existence is positive 
 Axiom 6 : For any property P , if P is positive , then being necessarily P is positive 
 Theorem 1 : If a property is positive , then it is consistent , i.e. , possibly exemplified 
 Corollary 1 : The property of being God @-@ like is consistent 
 Theorem 2 : If something is God @-@ like , then the property of being God @-@ like is an essence of that thing 
 Theorem 3 : Necessarily , the property of being God @-@ like is exemplified 
 Gödel defined being " god @-@ like " as having every positive property . He left the term " positive " undefined . Gödel proposed that it is understood in an aesthetic and moral sense , or alternatively as the opposite of privation ( the absence of necessary qualities in the universe ) . He warned against interpreting " positive " as being morally or aesthetically " good " ( the greatest advantage and least disadvantage ) , as this includes negative characteristics . Instead , he suggested that " positive " should be interpreted as being perfect , or " purely good " , without negative characteristics . 
 Gödel 's listed theorems follow from the axioms , so most criticisms of the theory focus on those axioms or the assumptions made . Oppy argued that Gödel gives no definition of " positive properties " . He suggested that if these positive properties form a set , there is no reason to believe that any such set exists which is theologically interesting , or that there is only one set of positive properties which is theologically interesting . 
 = = = Modal versions of the ontological argument = = = 
 Modal logic deals with the logic of possibility as well as necessity . Paul Oppenheimer and Edward N. Zalta note that , for Anselm 's Proslogion chapter 2 , " Many recent authors have interpreted this argument as a modal one . " In the phrase ' that than which none greater can be conceived ' , the word ' can ' could be construed as referring to a possibility . Nevertheless , the authors write that " the logic of the ontological argument itself doesn 't include inferences based on this modality . " However , there have been newer , avowedly modal logic versions of the ontological argument , and on the application of this type of logic to the argument , James Franklin Harris writes : 
 [ D ] <unk> versions of the ontological argument , the so @-@ called " modal " versions of the argument , which arguably avoid the part of Anselm 's argument that " treats existence as a predicate , " began to emerge . The [ modal logic version ] of these forms of defense of the ontological argument has been the most significant development . 
 = = = = Hartshorne and Malcolm = = = = 
 Charles Hartshorne and Norman Malcolm are primarily responsible for introducing modal versions of the argument into the contemporary debate . Both claimed that Anselm had two versions of the ontological argument , the second of which was a modal logic version . According to James Harris , this version is represented by Malcolm thus : 
 If it [ that than which nothing greater can be conceived ] can be conceived at all it must exist . For no one who denies or doubts the existence of a being a greater than which is inconceivable , denies or doubts that if it did exist its nonexistence , either in reality or in the understanding , would be impossible . For otherwise it would not be a being a greater than which cannot be conceived . But as to whatever can be conceived but does not exist : if it were to exist its nonexistence either in reality or in the understanding would be possible . Therefore , if a being a greater than which cannot be conceived , can even be conceived , it must exist . 
 Hartshorne says that , for Anselm , " necessary existence is a superior manner of existence to ordinary , contingent existence and that ordinary , contingent existence is a defect . " For Hartshorne , both Hume and Kant focused only upon whether what exists is greater than what does not exist . However , " Anselm 's point is that what exists and cannot not exist is greater than that which exists and can not exist . " This avoids the question of whether or not existence is a predicate . 
 Referring to the two ontological arguments proposed by Anselm in Chapters 2 and 3 of his Proslogion , Malcolm supported Kant 's criticism of Anselm 's argument in Chapter 2 : that existence cannot be a perfection of something . However , he identified what he sees as the second ontological argument in Chapter 3 which is not susceptible to such criticism . 
 In Anselm 's second argument , Malcolm identified two key points : first , that a being whose non @-@ existence is logically impossible is greater than a being whose non @-@ existence is logically possible , and second , that God is a being " than which a greater cannot be conceived " . Malcolm supported that definition of God and suggested that it makes the proposition of God 's existence a logically necessarily true statement ( in the same way that " a square has four sides " is logically necessarily true ) . Thus , while rejecting the idea of existence itself being a perfection , Malcolm argued that necessary existence is a perfection . This , he argued , proved the existence of an <unk> great necessary being . 
 Jordon Sobel writes that Malcolm is incorrect in assuming that the argument he is expounding is to be found entirely in Proslogion chapter 3 . " Anselm intended in Proslogion III not an independent argument for the existence of God , but a continuation of the argument of Proslogion II . " 
 = = = = Alvin Plantinga = = = = 
 Christian Analytic philosopher Alvin Plantinga criticized Malcolm 's and Hartshorne 's arguments , and offered an alternative . He argued that , if Malcolm does prove the necessary existence of the greatest possible being , it follows that there is a being which exists in all worlds whose greatness in some worlds is not surpassed . It does not , he argued , demonstrate that such a being has unsurpassed greatness in this world . 
 In an attempt to resolve this problem , Plantinga differentiated between " greatness " and " excellence " . A being 's excellence in a particular world depends only on its properties in that world ; a being 's greatness depends on its properties in all worlds . Therefore , the greatest possible being must have maximal excellence in every possible world . Plantinga then restated Malcolm 's argument , using the concept of " maximal greatness " . He argued that it is possible for a being with maximal greatness to exist , so a being with maximal greatness exists in a possible world . If this is the case , then a being with maximal greatness exists in every world , and therefore in this world . 
 The conclusion relies on a form of modal axiom S5 , which states that if something is possibly true , then its possibility is necessary ( it is possibly true in all worlds ) . Plantinga 's version of S5 suggests that " To say that p is possibly necessarily true is to say that , with regard to one world , it is true at all worlds ; but in that case it is true at all worlds , and so it is simply necessary . " A version of his argument is as follows : 
 A being has maximal excellence in a given possible world W if and only if it is omnipotent , omniscient and wholly good in W ; and 
 A being has maximal greatness if it has maximal excellence in every possible world . 
 It is possible that there is a being that has maximal greatness . ( Premise ) 
 Therefore , possibly , it is necessarily true that an omniscient , omnipotent , and perfectly good being exists . 
 Therefore , ( by axiom S5 ) it is necessarily true that an omniscient , omnipotent and perfectly good being exists . 
 Therefore , an omniscient , omnipotent and perfectly good being exists . 
 Plantinga argued that , although the first premise is not rationally established , it is not contrary to reason . Michael Martin argued that , if certain components of perfection are contradictory , such as omnipotence and omniscience , then the first premise is contrary to reason . Martin also proposed parodies of the argument , suggesting that the existence of anything can be demonstrated with Plantinga 's argument , provided it is defined as perfect or special in every possible world . 
 Another Christian apologist , William Lane Craig , characterizes Plantinga 's argument in a slightly different way : 
 It is possible that a maximally great being exists . 
 If it is possible that a maximally great being exists , then a maximally great being exists in some possible world . 
 If a maximally great being exists in some possible world , then it exists in every possible world . 
 If a maximally great being exists in every possible world , then it exists in the actual world . 
 If a maximally great being exists in the actual world , then a maximally great being exists . 
 Therefore , a maximally great being exists . 
 According to Craig , premises ( 2 ) - ( 5 ) are relatively uncontroversial among philosophers , but " the epistemic <unk> of premise ( 1 ) ( or its denial ) does not guarantee its metaphysical possibility . " Furthermore , Richard M. Gale argued that premise three , the " possibility premise " , begs the question . He stated that one only has the epistemic right to accept the premise if one understands the nested modal operators , and that if one understands them within the system S5 — without which the argument fails — then one understands that " possibly necessarily " is in essence the same as " necessarily " . Thus the premise begs the question because the conclusion is embedded within it . On S5 systems in general , James Garson writes that " the words ‘ necessarily ’ and ‘ possibly ’ , have many different uses . So the acceptability of axioms for modal logic depends on which of these uses we have in mind . " 
 = = = Sankara 's dictum = = = 
 An approach to supporting the possibility premise in Plantinga 's version of the argument was attempted by Alexander R. Pruss . He started with the 8th – 9th century AD Indian philosopher Sankara 's dictum that if something is impossible , we cannot have a perception ( even a non @-@ <unk> one ) that it is the case . It follows that if we have a perception that p , then even though it might not be the case that p , it is at least the case that possibly p . If mystics in fact perceive the existence of a maximally great being , it follows that the existence of a maximally great being is at least possible . 
 = = = Automated reasoning = = = 
 Paul Oppenheimer and Edward Zalta used an automated theorem prover — <unk> — to validate Anselm 's ontological thesis . <unk> subsequently discovered a simpler , formally valid ( if not necessarily sound ) ontological argument from a single non @-@ logical premise . 
 = = Criticisms and objections = = 
 = = = Gaunilo = = = 
 One of the earliest recorded objections to Anselm 's argument was raised by one of Anselm 's contemporaries , Gaunilo of <unk> . He invited his reader to conceive an island " more excellent " than any other island . He suggested that , according to Anselm 's proof , this island must necessarily exist , as an island that exists would be more excellent . Gaunilo 's criticism does not explicitly demonstrate a flaw in Anselm 's argument ; rather , it argues that if Anselm 's argument is sound , so are many other arguments of the same logical form , which cannot be accepted . He offered a further criticism of Anselm 's ontological argument , suggesting that the notion of God cannot be conceived , as Anselm had asserted . He argued that many theists would accept that God , by nature , cannot be fully comprehended . Therefore , if humans cannot fully conceive of God , the ontological argument cannot work . 
 Anselm responded to Gaunilo 's criticism by arguing that the argument applied only to concepts with necessary existence . He suggested that only a being with necessary existence can fulfill the remit of " that than which nothing greater can be conceived " . Furthermore , a contingent object , such as an island , could always be improved and thus could never reach a state of perfection . For that reason , Anselm dismissed any argument that did not relate to a being with necessary existence . 
 Other parodies have been presented , including the devil corollary , the no devil corollary and the extreme no devil corollary . The devil corollary proposes that a being than which nothing worse can be conceived exists in the understanding ( sometimes the term lesser is used in place of worse ) . Using Anselm 's logical form , the parody argues that if it exists in the understanding , a worse being would be one that exists in reality ; thus , such a being exists . The no devil corollary is similar , but argues that a worse being would be one that does not exist in reality , so does not exist . The extreme no devil corollary advances on this , proposing that a worse being would be that which does not exist in the understanding , so such a being exists neither in reality nor in the understanding . Timothy Chambers argued that the devil corollary is more powerful than Gaunilo 's challenge because it withstands the challenges that may defeat Gaunilo 's parody . He also claimed that the no devil corollary is a strong challenge , as it " underwrites " the no devil corollary , which " threatens Anselm 's argument at its very foundations " . 
 = = = Thomas Aquinas = = = 
 Thomas Aquinas , while proposing five proofs of God 's existence in his Summa Theologica , objected to Anselm 's argument . He suggested that people cannot know the nature of God and , therefore , cannot conceive of God in the way Anselm proposed . The ontological argument would be meaningful only to someone who understands the essence of God completely . Aquinas reasoned that , as only God can completely know His essence , only He could use the argument . His rejection of the ontological argument caused other Catholic theologians to also reject the argument . 
 = = = David Hume = = = 
 Scottish philosopher and empiricist David Hume argued that nothing can be proven to exist using only a priori reasoning . In his Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion , the character Cleanthes proposes a criticism : 
 ... there is an evident absurdity in pretending to demonstrate a matter of fact , or to prove it by any arguments a priori . Nothing is demonstrable , unless the contrary implies a contradiction . Nothing , that is distinctly conceivable , implies a contradiction . Whatever we conceive as existent , we can also conceive as non @-@ existent . There is no being , therefore , whose non @-@ existence implies a contradiction . Consequently there is no being , whose existence is demonstrable . 
 Hume also suggested that , as we have no abstract idea of existence ( apart from as part of our ideas of other objects ) , we cannot claim that the idea of God implies his existence . He suggested that any conception of God we may have , we can conceive either of existing or of not existing . He believed that existence is not a quality ( or perfection ) , so a completely perfect being need not exist . Thus , he claimed that it is not a contradiction to deny God 's existence . Although this criticism is directed against a cosmological argument , similar to that of Samuel Clarke in his first Boyle Lecture , it has been applied to ontological arguments as well . 
 = = = Immanuel Kant = = = 
 Immanuel Kant put forward an influential criticism of the ontological argument in his Critique of Pure Reason . His criticism is primarily directed at Descartes , but also attacks Leibniz . It is shaped by his central distinction between analytic and synthetic propositions . In an analytic proposition , the predicate concept is contained in its subject concept ; in a synthetic proposition , the predicate concept is not contained in its subject concept . 
 Kant questions the intelligibility of the concept of a necessary being . He considers examples of necessary propositions , such as " a triangle has three angles " , and rejects the transfer of this logic to the existence of God . First , he argues that such necessary propositions are necessarily true only if such a being exists : If a triangle exists , it must have three angles . The necessary proposition , he argues , does not make the existence of a triangle necessary . Thus he argues that , if the proposition " X exists " is posited , it would follow that , if X exists , it exists necessarily ; this does not mean that X exists in reality . Second , he argues that contradictions arise only when the subject and predicate are maintained and , therefore , a judgement of non @-@ existence cannot be a contradiction , as it denies the predicate . 
 Kant then proposes that the statement " God exists " must be analytic or synthetic — the predicate must be inside or outside of the subject , respectively . If the proposition is analytic , as the ontological argument takes it to be , then the statement would be true only because of the meaning given to the words . Kant claims that this is merely a tautology and cannot say anything about reality . However , if the statement is synthetic , the ontological argument does not work , as the existence of God is not contained within the definition of God ( and , as such , evidence for God would need to be found ) . 
 Kant goes on to write , " ' being ' is evidently not a real predicate " and cannot be part of the concept of something . He proposes that existence is not a predicate , or quality . This is because existence does not add to the essence of a being , but merely indicates its occurrence in reality . He states that by taking the subject of God with all its predicates and then asserting that God exists , " I add no new predicate to the conception of God " . He argues that the ontological argument works only if existence is a predicate ; if this is not so , he claims the ontological argument is invalidated , as it is then conceivable a completely perfect being doesn 't exist . 
 In addition , Kant claims that the concept of God is not of one a particular sense ; rather , it is an " object of pure thought " . He asserts that God exists outside the realm of experience and nature . Because we cannot experience God through experience , Kant argues that it is impossible to know how we would verify God 's existence . This is in contrast to material concepts , which can be verified by means of the senses . 
 = = = Douglas Gasking = = = 
 Australian philosopher Douglas Gasking ( 1911 – 1994 ) developed a version of the ontological argument meant to prove God 's non @-@ existence . It was not intended to be serious ; rather , its purpose was to illustrate the problems Gasking saw in the ontological argument . 
 Gasking asserted that the creation of the world is the most marvellous achievement imaginable . The merit of such an achievement is the product of its quality and the creator 's disability : the greater the disability of the creator , the more impressive the achievement . Non @-@ existence , Gasking asserts , would be the greatest handicap . Therefore , if the universe is the product of an existent creator , we could conceive of a greater being — one which does not exist . A non @-@ existent creator is greater than one which exists , so God does not exist . Gasking 's proposition that the greatest disability would be non @-@ existence is a response to Anselm 's assumption that existence is a predicate and perfection . Gasking uses this logic to assume that non @-@ existence must be a disability . 
 Oppy criticized the argument , viewing it as a weak parody of the ontological argument . He stated that , although it may be accepted that it would be a greater achievement for a non @-@ existent creator to create something than a creator who exists , there is no reason to assume that a non @-@ existent creator would be a greater being . He continued by arguing that there is no reason to view the creation of the world as " the most marvellous achievement imaginable " . Finally , he stated that it may be inconceivable for a non @-@ existent being to create anything at all . 
 = = = Coherence of a maximally great being = = = 
 In his development of the ontological argument , Leibniz attempted to demonstrate the coherence of a supremely perfect being . C. D. Broad countered that if two characteristics necessary for God 's perfection are incompatible with a third , the notion of a supremely perfect being becomes incoherent . The ontological argument assumes the definition of God purported by classical theism : that God is omnipotent , omniscient , and morally perfect . Kenneth Einar Himma claimed that omniscience and omnipotence may be incompatible : if God is omnipotent , then he should be able to create a being with free will ; if he is omniscient , then he should know exactly what such a being will do ( thus rendering them without free will ) . This analysis would render the ontological argument incoherent , as the characteristics required of a maximally great being cannot coexist in one being , thus such a being could not exist . 
 = = = Other criticisms = = = 
 Bertrand Russell , during his early Hegelian phase , accepted the argument ; once exclaiming : " Great God in Boots ! — the ontological argument is sound ! " However , he later criticized the argument , asserting that " the argument does not , to a modern mind , seem very convincing , but it is easier to feel convinced that it must be fallacious than it is to find out precisely where the fallacy lies . " He drew a distinction between existence and essence , arguing that the essence of a person can be described and their existence still remain in question . 
 = Fuck ( film ) = 
 Fuck is a 2005 American documentary film by director Steve Anderson about the word " fuck " . The film argues that the word is an integral part of societal discussions about freedom of speech and censorship . It examines the term from perspectives which include art , linguistics , society and comedy , and begins with a segment from the 1965 propaganda film Perversion for Profit . Scholars and celebrities analyze perceptions of the word from differing perspectives . Journalist Sam Donaldson talks about the versatility of the word , and comedian Billy Connolly states it can be understood despite one 's language or location . Musician Alanis Morissette comments that the word contains power because of its taboo nature . The film features the last recorded interview of author Hunter S. Thompson before his suicide . Scholars , including linguist Reinhold Aman , journalism analyst David Shaw and Oxford English Dictionary editor Jesse Sheidlower , explain the history and evolution of the word . Language professor Geoffrey Nunberg observes that the word 's treatment by society reflects changes in our culture during the 20th century . 
 Anderson was exposed to public conceptions surrounding the word " fuck " by comedian George Carlin 's monologue " Seven Words You Can Never Say on Television " . He named the film Fuck despite anticipating problems with marketing . Animator Bill Plympton provided sequences illustrating key concepts in the film . The documentary was first shown at the AFI Film Festival on November 7 , 2005 , at ArcLight Hollywood in Hollywood . 
 Fuck 's reviews were mixed . Film critic A. O. Scott called the documentary a battle between advocates of morality and supporters of freedom of expression . The Washington Post and the New York Daily News criticized its length and other reviewers disliked its repetitiveness – the word " fuck " is used 857 times in the film . In his 2009 book Fuck : Word Taboo and Protecting Our First Amendment Liberties , law professor Christopher M. Fairman called the movie " the most important film using ' fuck ' " . The American Film Institute said , " Ultimately , Fuck is a movie about free speech ... Freedom of expression must extend to words that offend . Love it or hate it , fuck is here to stay . " 
 = = Content summary = = 
 Fuck begins with a segment from the 1965 propaganda film Perversion for Profit , followed by a clip from SpongeBob SquarePants which states that the word can be used as a " sentence enhancer " . The documentary includes commentary from film and television writers Kevin Smith and Steven Bochco ; comedians Janeane Garofalo , Bill Maher , Drew Carey and Billy Connolly ; musicians Chuck D , Alanis Morissette and Ice T ; political commentators Alan Keyes and Pat Boone ; and journalists Michael Medved and Judith Martin . The word " fuck " is used 857 times during the film . 
 Scholarly analysis is provided by <unk> publisher Reinhold Aman , journalism analyst David Shaw and Oxford English Dictionary editor Jesse Sheidlower . Language professor Geoffrey Nunberg says , " You could think of that [ word ] as standing in for most of the changes that happened in the 20th century , at least many of the important ones " . 
 The film next features author Hunter S. Thompson in his final documented interview . Fuck later includes archival footage of comedians Lenny Bruce and George Carlin , and analysis of the word 's use in popular culture , from MASH ( 1970 ) to Scarface ( 1983 ) and Clerks ( 1994 ) . Carlin 's 1972 monologue " Seven Words You Can Never Say on Television " is excerpted in the film . Journalist Sam Donaldson comments on the versatility of " fuck " : " It 's one of those all @-@ purpose words . " Bill Maher comments , " It 's the ultimate bad word " , observing that thanks to Lenny Bruce , comedy clubs have become " the freest free @-@ speech zone " in the United States . 
 Connolly states that " fuck " " sounds exactly like what it is " , noting that the emotional impact of saying " fuck off " cannot be translated . He says that if you are in Lhasa airport and someone is fiddling with your luggage , yelling " fuck off " will effectively communicate that they should stop and leave . Morissette says , " The f @-@ word is special . Everybody uses the word ' breakfast ' , but not everyone feels comfortable using the word ' fuck ' so there 's an extra power behind it . " Boone argues for less use of the word , saying that he uses his surname instead . Radio talk show host Dennis Prager says that it is acceptable for youths to hear the word on television and film , but not from their family members . In the film , opponents of the word " fuck " use an argument commonly known as " Think of the children " . 
 Fuck observes that the original use of the word is unknown to scholars , noting that its earliest written appearance was in the 1475 poem " <unk> <unk> " . It was not , as is often claimed , originally an acronym for " For Unlawful Carnal Knowledge " or " Fornication Under Consent of the King " . The word has been used by authors including Robert Burns , D. H. Lawrence ( in his 1928 Lady Chatterley 's Lover ) and James Joyce . The film explains that " fuck " established its current usage during the First and Second World Wars , and was used by General George S. Patton in a speech to his forces who were about to enter France . 
 Fuck states that the first use of the word in a large @-@ studio film was in M * A * S * H ( 1970 ) , and it entered the Oxford English Dictionary in 1972 . That year , the word was also recorded during the Apollo 16 United States mission to land on the Moon . The film includes a segment from the 1987 film Planes , Trains and Automobiles with actor Steve Martin , in which " fuck " is repeated for comedic effect . Fuck states that the most financially successful live action comedy film to date had the suggestive title of Meet the Fockers ( 2004 ) . The director analyzes the uses and connotations of " fuck " and the feelings it evokes on several levels . Bruce is quoted as saying , " If you can 't say ' fuck ' , you can 't say ' fuck the government ' " . Steve Anderson argues that " fuck " is an integral part of societal discussions about freedom of speech and censorship . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Fuck includes songs with similarly themed titles , including " Shut Up and Fuck " by American hard rock band Betty Blowtorch , " Fucking Fucking Fuck " by <unk> and " I Love to Say Fuck " by American horror punk supergroup Murderdolls . Journalist Sam <unk> of Culture Wars compared the film 's music to that in softcore pornography , and observed that the soundtrack was broad in scope and helped accentuate the film 's content . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Inspiration = = = 
 Anderson made his directorial debut in 2003 with the film The Big Empty , starring actors Daryl Hannah and Jon Favreau , and became fascinated by the usage of the word " fuck " . In an interview with the Democrat and Chronicle , Anderson suggested he cursed a lot more than he used to after the film 's production . He decided to research the film 's topic due to the word 's versatility and his interest in language as a writer . Early exposure by Anderson to public perception of the word " fuck " came from Class Clown by comedian George Carlin , which included his monologue " Seven Words You Can Never Say on Television " . 
 The director explained in an interview that he was fascinated with the word " fuck " because of its different uses . He originally proposed the idea of a film about the word in jest , later realizing that the topic could fuel a documentary . The Observer quoted him as saying that he was entertained by the word " fuck " , and intrigued with the idea of examining how the word had been incorporated into popular culture . He wanted to analyze why some people were offended by its use and others enjoyed it , noting that the word sharpened debate about taboo language in society . 
 Anderson explained to the Los Angeles Times the confusing , forbidden nature of the word " fuck " in the face of the increased pervasiveness of euphemisms for it . He commented on its taboo nature and demonstrated how it can be indirectly referred to , so youth understand the reference without using the word itself . In an interview with the South China Morning Post , Anderson said that film directors should fight against censorship , because it can block their true message . 
 The director told <unk> News Service that he hoped the documentary would provoke a wider discussion about freedom of speech , sexual slang and its media use . Anderson questioned whether the word should be used on NYPD Blue , and how parents should discuss its use with their children . He emphasized that artists and filmmakers should be free to express their views without censorship , deferring to public opinion on the appropriateness of his documentary 's title . 
 Anderson stated in an interview with IndieWire that freedom of speech was not guaranteed , but a concept requiring discussion and monitoring so it is not lost . He classified the word " fuck " as being at the core of discussion about freedom of speech . He acknowledged that there are terms considered by society more vulgar than " fuck " , but said that this particular word creates controversy and dialogue . Anderson said that its title alone distinguished his documentary from others , in terms of promotional difficulty . During production , Fuck was known as The Untitled F @-@ Word Film . 
 = = = Title and marketing = = = 
 In an interview about the film on his website , Anderson discussed problems he encountered in naming his film Fuck instead of a censored version of the word . Anderson always wanted to call it Fuck , because it succinctly described the film 's contents . There were inherent problems with this approach , including an inability to advertise the true title in mainstream media such as The New York Times and Los Angeles Times ( they used four asterisks instead ) , although the real title might be permitted in alternative newspapers such as LA Weekly . Anderson also anticipated problems displaying the film 's title during film festivals on theatre marquees . 
 Anderson explained that although the title of his documentary was Fuck , he allowed alternate designations using an asterisk . The film and content he controlled would refer to the title as Fuck , including theatrical and DVD editions . He concluded that his struggle reflected the debate alluded to by the documentary , and this realization motivated him to stand firm on the film 's title . Because the film is about how a taboo word can impact culture , it was important to keep Fuck as its title . 
 = = = Filming and distribution = = = 
 The film features animation by American graphic designer and cartoonist Bill Plympton . To illustrate key concepts , Fuck uses sound bites , music , video clips and archival film footage ; Anderson combined excerpts from five television series and twenty @-@ two films in the documentary . The interviews were cut so that different subjects appear to be talking to each other ; the interviewees in question generally had opposite views on the subject . The film was unrated by the Motion Picture Association of America . 
 <unk> Entertainment was confirmed in November 2003 to produce and finance the documentary , with production scheduled to begin in January 2004 . The film was completed in 2005 by Anderson 's company , Mudflap Films , and produced by <unk> Entertainment co @-@ founders Steven Kaplan and Gregg Daniel , and Bruce <unk> , Jory Weitz and Richard <unk> . Financial assistance was provided by Bad Apple Films of Spokane , Washington . 
 Thirty @-@ five media commentators were interviewed for the film . Jory Weitz helped obtain interviews ; he had cast Anderson 's previous film , The Big Empty , and had industry credibility as executive producer of Napoleon Dynamite . Anderson said he intended to select interviewees with a variety of perspectives , conservative as well as liberal . He described how , as confirmations of interview subjects came in , he was surprised when Pat Boone was among the first to confirm his participation . Anderson had previously worked as a cameraman on a piece with Boone about eight years before starting work on Fuck . After confirming Boone , Bill Maher and Janeane Garofalo on Fuck , it became easier for Anderson to confirm other interviewees . The film included the final video interview with Hunter S. Thompson before his suicide , and Anderson dedicated it to Thompson for his contributions to journalism . 
 Distribution rights to Fuck were obtained by THINKFilm in 2006 . Movie chains did not use the film 's title in their promotion , instead using references such as The Four @-@ Letter Word Film . Mark Urman , chief of the theatrical division of THINKFilm , told The Philadelphia Inquirer that it was especially difficult ( as an independent film distributor ) to promote a film with a title media outlets did not wish to print . Urman told Variety that the intent of the production staff during promotion was a creative , original marketing campaign . THINKFilm marketed the documentary as a comprehensive , humorous look at the dichotomy between the taboo nature and cultural universality of the word " fuck " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Fuck was shown for the first time on November 7 , 2005 , at the American Film Institute Film Festival at the ArcLight Hollywood on Sunset Boulevard in Hollywood , California . On March 10 , 2006 , interest increased after the opening night of the 20th South by Southwest Film Festival in Austin , Texas . At the 30th Cleveland International Film Festival , it sold out two screenings ( which were standing @-@ room only events ) . 
 Fuck was featured on March 31 and April 2 , 2006 , at the Florida Film Festival . It was screened in April 2006 during the Philadelphia Film Festival at Prince Music Theater in Philadelphia . It had its Washington , D.C. premiere in June 2006 , and was shown on June 15 at the Nantucket Film Festival . 
 Fuck opened in Los Angeles on August 23 , 2006 and in New York on November 10 . It made its Canadian debut at the 2006 Hot Docs Canadian International Documentary Festival , and began regular showings at the Bloor Cinema on December 1 . The documentary began screening at the Century Centre Cinema in Chicago on November 17 , 2006 . Fuck had two screenings in April 2007 during the Hong Kong International Film Festival in Tsim Sha Tsui . According to a 2011 interview with Anderson in the Santa Barbara Independent , the documentary was shown in about 100 film festivals worldwide and was screened in about 65 cities during its theatrical release . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Fuck received mixed reviews . The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 56 % approval rating with an average rating of 5 @.@ 8 / 10 based on 72 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " A documentary that sets out to explore a lingual taboo but can 't escape its own naughty posturing . " At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted @-@ mean rating from 0 – 100 based on reviews by film critics , the film has a rating score of 58 based on 23 reviews ( a mixed , or average , film ) . The American Film Institute wrote , " Ultimately , Fuck is a movie about free speech ... Freedom of expression must extend to words that offend . Love it or hate it , fuck is here to stay " . 
 Jack Garner of the Democrat and Chronicle gave the film a rating of 8 out of 10 , concluding that he was pleasantly surprised at the documentary 's entertainment value . He described it as educational , despite Fuck 's repetitive use of the word . In The Boston Globe Wesley Morris commented that the director 's flippant style was beneficial , enabling him to make serious educational points to the audience . Sally Foster of Film Threat said that the crux of the film was the debate about freedom of speech , and that the film was funny and thought @-@ provoking . A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times : " Mr. Anderson 's movie is staged as a talking @-@ head culture @-@ war skirmish between embattled upholders of propriety ( or repression , if you prefer ) and proponents of free expression ( or filth ) , but its real lesson is that the two sides depend upon each other . Or rather , that the continued vitality of the word — its unique ability to convey emphasis , relieve stress , shock grown @-@ ups and function as adverb , noun , verb , intensifier and what linguists call ' infix ' — rests on its ability to mark an edge between the permissible and the profane " . In the Chicago Reader , Jonathan Rosenbaum wrote that the documentary was an amusing film and an educational commentary on the word . According to Glenn Garvin of The Miami Herald , the film was an expansive merging of perspectives from politics , history and culture . 
 In a review for The Austin Chronicle Marjorie Baumgarten gave the film a rating of 4 @.@ 5 out of five stars , concluding that it helped unravel myths surrounding the word and describing it as captivating and educational . Steve Schneider reviewed the film for the Orlando Weekly , comparing it to an academic thesis despite its repeated use of off @-@ color humor . Noel Murray of The A.V. Club gave the film a grade of B @-@ minus , stating that Fuck succeeded where Kirby Dick 's This Film Is Not Yet Rated did not , by providing viewpoints from multiple perspectives . Karl French wrote in a review for the Financial Times that the documentary was unique and reasonably entertaining . Moira MacDonald asked , in a review for The Seattle Times , if viewers could embrace the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and still be leery of the word 's omnipresence in society . Mick LaSalle wrote in the San Francisco Chronicle that the commentators seemed monotonous and formulaic in debating freedom of speech , and criticized the film 's repetition of the word " fuck " . 
 Peter Keough reviewed the film for the Boston Phoenix ; giving it a rating of two out of four stars , he also said that the repeated use of " fuck " grew tiresome . In a critical review for The Observer Philip French wrote that the film had low comedic value , calling it arrogant , puerile and tedious . Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian gave the film two out of five stars , criticizing its lack of originality . In a review for Empire magazine , David Parkinson also gave the film a rating of two out of five stars and was frustrated that arguments by the director seemed guarded ; he said that the film 's scope was not comedic , amusing or provoking enough . In Time Out London David Jenkins gave the film one star out of six , writing that it lacked depth on the issues of linguistics , media , and censorship . A critical review by Noah Sanders of The Stranger concluded that the film was watchable and amusing , but poorly edited and organized . The St. Paul Pioneer Press criticized the film 's length , which was echoed by The Washington Post , the Deseret News , The Herald and the New York Daily News . In a review for the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer Bill White gave the film a grade C , calling it a dull compilation of childish observations and a failed attempt to spark a discussion about freedom of speech . Mike Pinksy of DVD Verdict concluded that the film 's main arguments were achieved by the beginning of the documentary , and criticized its lack of subsequent structure and light tone overall . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 THINKFilm reached an agreement to screen the documentary on the American premium cable channel Showtime in 2007 , and it aired on the Documentary Channel on May 28 , 2011 . The DVD for Fuck was released by THINKFilm on February 13 , 2007 , and a United Kingdom DVD edition was released in 2009 . For the DVDs , THINKFilm remastered the video for Fuck ; it was optimized for home viewing with 1 @.@ 85 : 1 anamorphic widescreen transfer to a 16 : 9 anamorphic full @-@ frame presentation and Dolby Digital Stereo 2 @.@ 0 audio . 
 Trailers for <unk> , Farce of the Penguins and The Aristocrats appear on the DVD before the documentary . Special features include a commentary track by Steve Anderson , interviews with Anderson and Bill Plympton , the film 's theatrical trailer , a gallery for the introductory trailers , deleted scenes and interviews with Hunter S. Thompson and Tera Patrick . The disc includes an optional on @-@ screen counter , giving viewers a running total of utterances ( and appearances ) of the word " fuck " during play . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 Fuck has been a resource for several university courses . Christopher M. Fairman discussed the documentary in his article , " Fuck " , published in February 2007 in the Cardozo Law Review . Fairman cited Anderson 's decision to call his film Fuck and the marketing problems this entailed , saying that he and Anderson both found the title of their works helped spur debate on word taboos in society . 
 In an interview with the Santa Barbara Independent , Anderson said that a schoolteacher in Philadelphia had been fired for showing the documentary to his students . The teacher had researched the documentary , and wanted to teach his students the history of the word because of its frequent use in his class . Anderson said it was not the use of the word " fuck " in the film that cost the teacher his job , but a 38 @-@ second scene from a Fuck for Forest concert in Europe where a couple engaged in sexual intercourse onstage as environmental advocacy . The teacher showed the DVD to his 11th @-@ grade journalism class at William Penn High School without previewing it or sending permission slips home to parents . He told the Philadelphia Daily News that before showing the documentary , he was unaware that it contained the clip showing sexual intercourse . He was dismissed from his position by the school principal , and his termination was upheld by the regional superintendent . The teacher did not appeal the decision , instead retiring . An analysis of the incident by the Philadelphia Daily News concluded that the school district 's decision to fire the teacher was appropriate , but also agreed with the teacher 's position that showing a 90 @-@ minute DVD should not have obliterated his 19 years as an educator . 
 Fuck was featured in a 2012 analysis in the academic journal Communication Teacher , " Do You Talk to Your Teacher with That Mouth ? F * ck : A Documentary and Profanity as a Teaching Tool in the Communication Classroom " , by Miriam Sobre @-@ Denton of Southern Illinois University Carbondale and Jana Simonis . Sobre @-@ Denton and Simonis discussed the documentary 's use for communication studies students studying university @-@ level intercultural relations . Their research incorporated interviews with Steve Anderson , students and data from graduate @-@ level classes in language and culture . Sobre @-@ Denton and Simonis ' conclusions correlated taboo words with social forms of power , rebelliousness , professionalism and gender roles . 
 = Oil shale geology = 
 Oil shale geology is a branch of geologic sciences which studies the formation and composition of oil shales – fine @-@ grained sedimentary rocks containing significant amounts of kerogen , and belonging to the group of sapropel fuels . Oil shale formation takes place in a number of depositional settings and has considerable compositional variation . Oil shales can be classified by their composition ( carbonate minerals such as calcite or detrital minerals such as quartz and clays ) or by their depositional environment ( large lakes , shallow marine , and lagoon / small lake settings ) . Much of the organic matter in oil shale is of algal origin , but may also include remains of vascular land plants . Three major type of organic matter ( macerals ) in oil shale are telalginite , lamalginite , and bituminite . Some oil @-@ shale deposits also contain metals which include vanadium , zinc , copper , uranium . 
 Most oil shale deposits were formed during Middle Cambrian , Early and Middle Ordovician , Late Devonian , Late Jurassic , and Paleogene times through burial by sedimentary loading on top of the algal swamp deposits , resulting in conversion of the organic matter to kerogen by diagenetic processes . The largest deposits are found in the remains of large lakes such as the deposits of the Green River Formation of Wyoming and Utah , USA . Oil @-@ shale deposits formed in the shallow seas of continental shelves generally are much thinner than large lake basin deposits . 
 = = Classification and varieties = = 
 Oil shale belongs to the group of sapropel fuels . It does not have a definite geological definition nor a specific chemical formula , and its seams do not always have discrete boundaries . Oil shales vary considerably in their mineral content , chemical composition , age , type of kerogen , and depositional history and not all oil shales would necessarily be classified as shales in the strict sense . Their common feature is low solubility in low @-@ boiling organic solvents and generation of liquid organic products on thermal decomposition . 
 There are varying classifications of oil shales depending on their mineral content , type of kerogen , age , depositional history , and organisms from which they are derived . The age of the oil shale deposits ranges from Cambrian to Tertiary age . <unk> range from shales to marl and carbonate rocks , all of which form a mixture of tightly bound organic and inorganic materials . 
 Oil shales have been divided into three categories based on mineral composition – carbonate @-@ rich shale , siliceous shale and <unk> shale . Carbonate @-@ rich shales derive their name from the large amount of carbonate minerals such as calcite and dolomite . As many as twenty carbonate minerals have been found in oil shale , the majority of which are considered <unk> or <unk> . Carbonate @-@ rich oil shales , particularly that of lacustrine @-@ sourced deposits , have usually the organic @-@ rich layers sandwiched between carbonate @-@ rich layers . These deposits are hard formations that are resistant to weathering and they are difficult to process using ex @-@ situ methods . <unk> oil shales are usually dark brown or black shales . They are not rich in carbonates but rather in siliceous minerals such as quartz , feldspar , clay , chert and opal . <unk> shales are not as hard and weather @-@ resistant as carbonate @-@ rich shales , and may be better suited for extraction via ex @-@ situ methods . <unk> shales are usually dark brown or black shales , which consist of organic matter that completely encloses other mineral grains . They are suitable for extraction via ex @-@ situ methods . 
 Another classification according to the type of kerogen , is based on the hydrogen , carbon , and oxygen content of oil shales ' original organic matter . This classification is known as the " van <unk> diagram " . The most used classification of oil shales was developed between 1987 and 1991 by Adrian C. Hutton of the University of Wollongong , adapting petrographic terms from coal terminology . According to this classification , oil shales are designated as terrestrial , lacustrine ( lake @-@ bottom @-@ deposited ) , or marine ( ocean bottom @-@ deposited ) , based on the environment where the initial biomass was deposited . Hutton 's classification scheme has proven useful in estimating the yield and composition of the extracted oil . 
 <unk> coal ( also called candle coal ) is a type of terrestrial shale , which is hydrogen @-@ rich brown to black coal , sometimes with shaly texture , composed of resins , spores , waxes , <unk> and corky materials derived from terrestrial vascular plants as well as varied amounts of vitrinite and <unk> . <unk> shales consist of <unk> and <unk> . <unk> is a pale @-@ brown and grayish @-@ brown to dark @-@ gray to black oil shale whose chief organic constituent is lamalginite derived from lacustrine planktonic algae . <unk> , named after <unk> Hill in Scotland , is a black oil shale whose organic matter is telalginite derived from lipid @-@ rich <unk> and related algal forms . Marine shales consist of three varieties , namely Kukersite , <unk> , and <unk> . Kukersite , named after Kukruse in Estonia , is a light @-@ brown marine oil shale whose principal organic component is telalginite derived from the green alga , Gloeocapsomorpha prisca . <unk> , named after Tasmania , is a brown to black oil shale whose organic matter consists of telalginite derived chiefly from unicellular <unk> algae of marine origin . <unk> is a gray to dark @-@ gray to black oil shale of marine origin in which the chief organic components are lamalginite and bituminite derived from marine phytoplankton with varied <unk> of bitumen , telalginite , and vitrinite . 
 = = Composition = = 
 As a sapropel fuel , oil shale differs from humus fuels in its lower content of organic matter . The organic matter has an atomic ratio of hydrogen to carbon of about 1 @.@ 5 – approximately the same as that of crude oil and four to five times higher than coals . The organic matter in oil shales forms a complex macromolecular structure which is insoluble in common organic solvents . It is mixed with varied amounts of mineral matter . For commercial grades of oil shale , the ratio of organic matter to mineral matter is about 0 @.@ 75 : 5 to 1 @.@ 5 : 5 . 
 The organic portion of oil shale consists largely of <unk> bituminous groundmass , such as remains of algae , spores , pollen , plant cuticles and corky fragments of herbaceous and woody plants , and cellular debris from other lacustrine , marine , and land plants . While terrestrial oil shales contain resins , spores , waxy cuticles , and corky tissues of roots and stems of vascular terrestrial plants , lacustrine oil shales include lipid @-@ rich organic matter derived from algae . Marine oil shales are composed of marine algae , <unk> , and marine dinoflagellates . Organic matter in oil shale also contains organic sulfur ( about 1 @.@ 8 % on average ) and a lower proportion of nitrogen . 
 Three major types of organic matter ( macerals ) in oil shale are telalginite , lamalginite , and bituminite . <unk> is defined as structured organic matter composed of large colonial or thick @-@ walled unicellular algae such as <unk> and <unk> . <unk> includes thin @-@ walled colonial or unicellular algae that occur as distinct laminae , but display few or no recognizable biologic structures . Under the microscope , telalginite and lamalginite are easily recognized by their bright shades of yellow under ultraviolet / blue fluorescent light . <unk> is largely amorphous , lacks recognizable biologic structures , and displays relatively low fluorescence under the microscope . Other organic constituents include vitrinite and <unk> , which are macerals derived from the humic matter of land plants . These macerals are usually found in relatively small amounts in most oil shales . 
 Mineral matter in oil shale contains fine @-@ grained silicate and carbonate minerals such as calcite , dolomite , siderite , quartz , rutile , orthoclase , <unk> , anorthite , muscovite , <unk> , marcasite , limonite , gypsum , nahcolite , <unk> and alum . Some oil @-@ shale deposits also contain metals such as vanadium , zinc , copper , uranium among others . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Most oil shale formations took place during mid @-@ Cambrian , early and middle Ordovician , late Devonian , late Jurassic and Paleogene periods . These were formed by the deposition of organic matter in a variety of depositional environments including freshwater to highly saline lakes , <unk> marine basins and subtidal shelves and were restricted to estuarine areas such as oxbow lakes , peat bogs , <unk> and coastal swamps , and <unk> . When plants die in such an anaerobic aquatic environment , low oxygen levels prevent their complete bacterial decay . 
 For <unk> organic matter to be preserved and to form oil shale , the environment must remain uniform for prolonged periods of time in order to build up sufficiently thick sequences of algal matter . Eventually , the algal swamp or other restricted environment is disrupted and oil shale accumulation ceases . Burial by sedimentary loading on top of the algal swamp deposits converts the organic matter to kerogen by the following normal diagenetic processes : 
 <unk> due to sediment loading on the coal , leading to compression of the organic matter . 
 With ongoing heat and compaction , removal of moisture in the peat and from the intracellular structure of fossilized plants , and removal of molecular water . 
 <unk> — similar to treating wood in a pressure cooker — results in methane being produced , removing hydrogen , some carbon , and some further oxygen . 
 Dehydration , which removes hydroxyl groups from the cellulose and other plant molecules , resulting in the production of hydrogen @-@ reduced coals or oil shales . 
 Though similar in their formation process , oil shales differ from coals in several distinct ways . The precursors of the organic matter in oil shale and coal differ in a sense that oil shale is of algal origin , but may also include remains of vascular land plants that more commonly compose much of the organic matter in coal . The origin of some of the organic matter in oil shale is obscure because of the lack of recognizable biologic structures that would help identify the precursor organisms . Such materials may be of bacterial origin or the product of bacterial degradation of algae or other organic matter . 
 Lower temperature and pressure during the diagenesis process compared to other modes of hydrocarbon generation result in a lower maturation level of oil shale . Continuous burial and further heating and pressure could result in the production of oil and gas from the oil shale source rock . The largest deposits are found in the remains of large lakes such as the deposits of the Green River Formation of Wyoming and Utah , USA . Large lake oil shale basins are typically found in areas of block faulting or crustal warping due to mountain building . Deposits such as the Green River may be as much as 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) and yield up to 40 gallons of oil for each ton ( 166 l / t ) of shale . 
 Oil @-@ shale deposits formed in the shallow seas of continental shelves generally are much thinner than large lake basin deposits . These are typically a few meters thick and are spread over very large areas , extending up to thousands of square kilometers . Of the three <unk> types of oil shales , siliceous oil shales are most commonly found in such environment . These oil shales are not as organically rich as lake @-@ deposited oil shales , and generally do not contain more than 30 gallons per ton of oil shale . Oil shales deposited in lagoonal or small lake environments are rarely extensive and are often associated with coal @-@ bearing rocks . These oil shales can have high yields – as much as 40 gallons per ton ( 166 l / t ) of oil shale . However , due to their small areal extent , they are considered unlikely candidates for commercial exploitation . 
 = = = Formations in the United States = = = 
 The United States has two significant oil @-@ shale deposits which are suited for commercial development due to their size , grade and location . The Eocene Green River Formation covers parts of Colorado , Wyoming and Utah ; the second significant deposit is Devonian oil shales in the eastern United States . In both places , there are sub @-@ basins varying in volume and quality of the reserves . Oil shale in the Green River Formation is found in five sedimentary basins namely , Green River , Uinta , <unk> Creek , Sand Wash and Washakie . The first three have undergone some significant exploration and attempts to commercialize the oil shale reserves since the 1960s . The Green River Formation includes deposits from two large lakes which covered an area of over 65 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 25 @,@ 100 sq mi ) during early to middle Eocene period . These lakes were separated by the Uinta uplift and the Axial Basin anticline . For significant periods during their 10 Ma life , the lakes became closed systems allowing many changes in size , salinity and sediment deposition . Oil shale is a result of abundant blue @-@ green algae that thrived in the lakes . 
 The oil shale that underlies almost 750 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 289 @,@ 580 sq mi ) in the eastern United States was formed in a marine depositional environment very different from the Green River Basins . These deposits have also undergone commercialization attempts ; they are also resources for natural gas and have been mined for low @-@ grade oil shale . These oil shales were formed during the Late Devonian and Early Mississippian periods . During this time , much of the eastern United States was covered by a large shallow sea . The oil shale is thought to have been the result of slow deposition of planktonic <unk> under anoxic conditions . In parts of the basin close to the shoreline , the organic mixture that helped form the oil shale contains organic @-@ rich sediment from the rising Appalachian mountains . 
 = = = Formations in Brazil = = = 
 Brazil has nine significant locations of oil shale deposits . The size , location and quality of oil shale deposits in the <unk> Valley and the Irati Formation have attracted the most attention . These two contain an estimated 1 @.@ 4 billion barrels of in @-@ situ shale oil with total resources as much as more than three billion barrels . While the " Irati formation " deposit is the smaller of the two , containing an estimated 600 million barrels in @-@ situ compared to 840 million in the <unk> valley formation , the former is more economically viable . 
 The " Irati formation " consists of two oil shale beds separated by 12 metres ( 40 ft ) of limestone and shale . The upper layer is thicker ( 9 metres ( 30 ft ) ) but the thinner lower bed ( 4 metres ( 10 ft ) ) is of greater value ; the weight percent of shale oil yield is around 12 % for the lower layer as compared to 7 % for the upper one . The oil shale yield varies laterally , and may be as little as 7 % for the lower layer and 4 % for the upper layer . The formation is a very fine grained and laminated deposit ranging in color from dark gray to brown to black . While 60 @-@ 70 % of the shale consists of clay minerals , the balance is made up of organic matter . 
 No consensus has been reached on the exact depositional nature of the Irati oil shale . One theory suggests that the organic material in the Irati oil shale originated from algae deposited in a lacustrine environment with salinity varying from that of freshwater to brackish water . Other theory suggests that the organic sediment may have been deposited in a shallow , partially restricted marine environment . Hutton 's classification describes it as a marine source oil shale . 
 = = = Formation in Estonia = = = 
 The kukersite oil shale of Ordovician age in Estonia is part of the Baltic oil shale basin and was deposited in shallow marine basins . The deposit is one of the world ’ s highest @-@ grade deposits with more than 40 % organic content and 66 % conversion ratio into shale oil and gas . The oil shale is located in a single calcareous layer 2 @.@ 5 – 3 meters in thickness and is buried at depths from 7 to 100 m . The total area of the basin is about 3 @,@ 000 km2 . Oil yield from Kukersite is 30 to 47 % . Most of the organic matter is derived from the fossil green alga , Gloeocapsomorpha prisca , which has affinities to the modern cyanobacterium , <unk> major , an extant species that forms algal mats in inter @-@ tidal to very shallow subtidal waters . Matrix minerals include low @-@ magnesium calcite , dolomite , and <unk> minerals . It is not enriched in heavy metals . 
 = = Reserves = = 
 As source rocks for most conventional oil reservoirs , oil shale deposits are found in all world oil provinces , although most of them are too deep to be exploited economically . As with all oil and gas resources , analysts distinguish between oil shale resources and oil shale reserves . " Resources " refers to all oil shale deposits , while " reserves " , represents those deposits from which producers can extract oil shale economically using existing technology . Since extraction technologies develop continuously , planners can only estimate the amount of recoverable kerogen . Although resources of oil shale occur in many countries , only 33 countries possess known deposits of possible economic value . Well @-@ explored deposits , potentially classifiable as reserves , include the Green River deposits in the western United States , the Tertiary deposits in Queensland , Australia , deposits in Sweden and Estonia , the El @-@ Lajjun deposit in Jordan , and deposits in France , Germany , Brazil , China , southern Mongolia and Russia . These deposits have given rise to expectations of yielding at least 40 liters of shale oil per tonne of oil shale , using the Fischer Assay . 
 A 2008 estimate set the total world resources of oil shale at 689 gigatons — equivalent to yield of 4 @.@ 8 trillion barrels ( 760 billion cubic metres ) of shale oil , with the largest reserves in the United States , which is thought to have 3 @.@ 7 trillion barrels ( 590 billion cubic metres ) , though only a part of it is recoverable . According to the 2010 World Energy Outlook by the International Energy Agency , the world oil shale resources may be equivalent of more than 5 trillion barrels ( 790 billion cubic metres ) of oil in place of which more than 1 trillion barrels ( 160 billion cubic metres ) may be technically recoverable . For comparison , the world 's proven conventional oil reserves were estimated at 1 @.@ 317 trillion barrels ( 209 @.@ 4 × 10 ^ 9 m3 ) , as of 1 January 2007 . The largest deposits in the world occur in the United States in the Green River Formation , which covers portions of Colorado , Utah , and Wyoming ; about 70 % of this resource lies on land owned or managed by the United States federal government . Deposits in the United States constitute 62 % of world resources ; together , the United States , Russia and Brazil account for 86 % of the world 's resources in terms of shale @-@ oil content . These figures remain tentative , with exploration or analysis of several deposits still outstanding . Professor Alan R. Carroll of University of Wisconsin – Madison regards the Upper Permian lacustrine oil @-@ shale deposits of northwest China , absent from previous global oil shale assessments , as comparable in size to the Green River Formation . 
 = Hill Street Station = 
 " Hill Street Station " is the first episode of the first season of the American serial police drama Hill Street Blues . " Hill Street Station " originally aired in the United States on NBC on Thursday January 15 , 1981 at 10 : 00 PM Eastern time as part of a two @-@ week five @-@ episode limited @-@ run pilot airing on Thursdays and Saturdays . The episode won numerous Primetime Emmy Awards ( Directing , Writing , Sound Editing , and Cinematography ) , a Directors Guild of America Award , a Writers Guild of America Award , and an Edgar Award as well as Emmy Award nominations for film editing , music composition , and art direction . The episode was directed by Robert Butler and written by Michael Kozoll and Steven Bochco . 
 Unlike other high @-@ profile debuts from the 1980 – 81 network television season that had two- and three @-@ hour premieres , such as Dynasty and Flamingo Road , this premiere episode debuted by itself as a one @-@ hour offering . That season , even some holdovers , such as B. J. and the Bear and Buck Rogers , had multi @-@ hour season premieres . The main storyline involves a hostage situation that arose from an attempted armed robbery . The episode also introduces a host of unique characters . At the time of the debut , Robert McLean described the cast as a " cast of unknowns " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The episode introduces the audience to a precinct station and the challenges that its police officers face in a setting of urban decay in a large anonymous city . Although anonymous , the city could easily represent the South Bronx in New York City , Watts in Los Angeles , or Central District in Miami . The episode also presents the precinct 's captain by demonstrating the wide variety of forces that challenge him continually , including superiors , gangs , an ex @-@ wife , defense counsel and <unk> men . In an article published in The Miami News , Tom Jicha compares him to the title character in Barney Miller , and The New York Times 's Tom Buckley compares the show to Barney Miller and Kojak . The episode 's storylines take five episodes to unravel cleanly . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 Hill Street precinct captain Frank Furillo ( Daniel J. <unk> ) deals with law enforcement issues while juggling personal crises . His precinct responds to a hostage situation at a local liquor store that becomes difficult when it evolves into a media circus , complicated by an aggressive SWAT team leader , Howard Hunter ( James B. Sikking ) , who encounters nervous young gang members . Furillo attempts to negotiate with their gang leader . His secret lover , public defender Joyce Davenport ( Veronica Hamel ) , appears to be his nemesis as she hounds him about a client who is the lost victim of police bureaucracy . Furillo 's ex @-@ wife , Fay ( Barbara Bosson ) , publicly demeans him in response to his bounced child @-@ support check . 
 Detective J.D. LaRue ( Kiel Martin ) attempts to woo Davenport using less and less ethical means , eventually calling her back to the precinct to pick up her lost client even though he was never found . When she realizes his ruse , she pours a cup of hot coffee in his lap . Undercover officer Belker ( Bruce Weitz ) arrests a bald @-@ headed pickpocket at the hostage situation and processes him at the precinct . Belker 's proclivity for biting the ankles of perpetrators redeems itself in this episode . Desk Sergeant Phil <unk> ( Michael Conrad ) confides in Fay about his teen @-@ age sweetheart , Cindy . When officers Hill ( Michael Warren ) and <unk> ( Charles Haid ) respond to a domestic situation , their police car is stolen , and they are shot after walking into a rundown building while trying to find a phone to call in the theft . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Regular cast = = = 
 Captain Frank Furillo ( Daniel J. <unk> ) 
 Joyce Davenport ( Veronica Hamel ) 
 Sgt. Phil <unk> ( Michael Conrad ) 
 Detective Mick Belker ( Bruce Weitz ) 
 Sgt. Henry <unk> ( Joe Spano ) 
 Officer Andy <unk> ( Charles Haid ) 
 Officer Bobby Hill ( Michael Warren ) 
 Sgt. Howard Hunter ( James B. Sikking ) 
 Officer Lucille Bates ( Betty Thomas ) 
 Detective J.D. LaRue ( Kiel Martin ) 
 Detective Neal Washington ( <unk> <unk> ) 
 Lt. Ray <unk> ( Rene Enriquez ) 
 Fay Furillo ( Barbara Bosson ) 
 = = = Details = = = 
 The episode was directed by Butler and written by Kozoll and Bochco . Kozoll and Bochco previously developed Quincy , M.E. , McMillan & Wife and Columbo . The pilot was produced by Mary Tyler Moore 's MTM Productions , which had produced Lou Grant and The White Shadow . That season NBC was attempting to gain ground on the other two major networks ( CBS and ABC ) after having moved to " within striking distance " the prior year according to Brandon Tartikoff . At the time of the debut , Robert McLean described the cast as a " cast of unknowns " . 
 The series ' January 15 , 1981 debut , which was announced on October 22 , 1980 , occurred amid the industry 's recovery from the 1980 Actors strike and NBC 's recovery from the 1980 Summer Olympics boycott . The show debuted on a night when both competing networks were airing reruns . Unlike other high @-@ profile debuts from the 1980 – 81 network television season that had two- and three @-@ hour premieres , such as Dynasty and Flamingo Road , this premiere episode debuted by itself as a one @-@ hour offering . That season , even some holdovers , such as B. J. and the Bear and Buck Rogers , had multi @-@ hour season premieres . 
 The show was marketed as being " grittier than the average cop show " according to Tony Schwartz of The New York Times , who described the setting as a San Francisco precinct . The Boston Globe 's Jack Thomas described the show 's debut as the " newest effort to dramatize the danger and frustration of police work " and as being set in the Midwest . William A. Henry III wrote in The Boston Globe that the show 's marketing endured so much conflict and confusion that it would have been sufficient to keep most shows from ever being scheduled to air . With all the confusion , Henry 's Globe colleague Bud Laughton described the pilot episodes and the series as " long @-@ awaited , on @-@ again , off @-@ again " . Henry noted that , " It is filmed to look like a documentary , with saturated color , a hand @-@ held camera , quick cuts from scene to scene , high @-@ decibel background noise , overlapping dialogue . The show creates atmosphere more than character . Like a documentary , it conveys a way of living more than a story . " The original version of the pilot had one mortal wound , but Henry correctly predicted that it would be re @-@ edited to reduce the violence and allow both officers to return to work . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Hill Street Station " originally aired in the United States on NBC on Thursday January 15 , 1981 at 10 : 00 PM Eastern time as part of a two @-@ week five @-@ episode limited @-@ run pilot airing on Thursdays and Saturdays . 
 = = = Critical review = = = 
 Schwartz wrote in August 1980 that " ... the pilot episode manages to stuff nearly every imaginable aspect of low life into its first hour : prostitution , panhandling , pickpocketing , hostage taking , drug addiction and , finally , the murder of two policemen . " William Beamon of the The Evening Independent noted that the opening episode introduces the audience to a vast array of characters masterfully intertwined in the storyline in a way that gives the series a " powerful start " . A review in the Spartanburg Herald @-@ Journal commented that public defender Davenport 's role adds professional intrigue that heightens the provocative nature of their illicit romance . However , The Miami News 's Jicha speculates that the romance was contrived to make the police show enticing to audiences . Jicha notes that the attack upon the police depicts the uncertainty of the daily life in law enforcement , but that the introduction of Belker 's persona shows the writers are a bit out of touch with reality . Buckley 's review in The New York Times claimed the episode " veers back and forth between comic situations that aren 't funny , serious matters that aren 't that convincing and a romance that is merely silly " and stated that various lighting and acting techniques were unsuccessful . The Boston Globe 's Henry III wrote that " The redeeming virtue is a visual style reminiscent of documentaries — hand @-@ held camera , saturated color , deliberately ragged editing . " He also described the show as " a wacky , black @-@ comic and frequently scary portrait of life in a big city police station " . Buckley claimed that the show attempts to present an entire force of police officers with foibles that make them unfit for duty . Henry describes the shooting of the officers as an " appallingly realistic random shooting " , but since they were not found for hours , he describes their survival and recovery in the next episode , " Presidential Fever " , as miraculous . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Butler won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series at the 33rd Primetime Emmy Awards and the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Drama Series at the Directors Guild of America Awards 1981 . Bochco and Kozoll won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series at the same Emmy ceremony , an Edgar Award for Best Television Episode as well as a Writers Guild of America Award for Best Screenplay – Episodic Drama at the Writers Guild of America Awards 1981 . In addition , Sam Horta , Bob Cornett , Denise Horta and Eileen Horta won an Emmy for Outstanding Achievement in Film Sound Editing and William Cronjager won an Emmy for Outstanding Cinematography for a Series . Other Emmy nomination received included Ray Daniels and A. David Marshall for Outstanding Achievement in Film Editing for a Series , Mike Post for Outstanding Achievement in Music Composition for a Series ( Dramatic Underscore ) and Jeffrey L. Goldstein ( art director ) and Joseph A. <unk> ( set decorator ) for Outstanding Art Direction for a Series . 
 = Félix Delahaye = 
 Félix Delahaye ( born 1767 and died 1829 ) was a French gardener who served on the Bruni d 'Entrecasteaux voyage ( 1791 – 93 ) that was sent by the French National Assembly to search for the missing explorer Jean @-@ François La Perouse . He was also one of the earliest European gardeners to work in Australia . 
 Delahaye was one of many gardener @-@ botanists employed on European colonial voyages of scientific exploration in the late 18th and early 19th centuries . Their duty was to assist with the collection , transport , cultivation and distribution of economic plants . They worked with the naturalists on these expeditions , but gave particular assistance to the botanists by collecting live plants and seed , as well as plant specimens for herbarium collections . They often maintained journals and records of their collections and made observations on the vegetation encountered during the voyage . On this particular expedition , Delahaye assisted the naturalist and botanist Jacques @-@ Julien <unk> de Labillardière — who accumulated one of the largest herbarium collections of that era and published what was , in effect , the first Flora of Australia based on the collections he made on the New Holland ( Australian ) leg of the expedition . Delahaye also made numerous botanical collections of his own . 
 On returning to France Delahaye eventually became Head Gardener to Empress Josephine at the Château de Malmaison . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Félix Delahaye was the son of Normandy labourer Abraham Delahaye and his wife Marie @-@ Anne @-@ Élisabeth <unk> who lived in the village of Caumont ( Seine @-@ Maritime ) about 20 kilometres from Le Havre . At the age of 17 he left his parents ’ farm and was employed as an apprentice gardener at the botanical garden of the Academie des Sciences in Rouen , historic capital of Normandy , under the direction of a Monsieur Varin . Just before the French Revolution in 1788 , at the age of 20 , he commenced work with André Thouin at the Jardin du Roi in Paris as a junior gardener , rising through the ranks to become Director of Horticulture at the city 's new school of horticulture ( Ecole Nationale d ’ Horticulture ) . His mentor , Thouin , was professor of horticulture in the Botany School of the Jardin du Roi . After the French Revolution this garden assumed its present name , the Jardin des Plantes . Thouin was also treasurer to the prestigious Société d ’ Histoire Naturelle and is commemorated by the name <unk> Bay in Tasmania . 
 = = Bruni d ’ Entrecasteaux expedition = = 
 The La Pérouse 's expedition was last seen on 10 March 1788 as it left Botany Bay in New Holland , Australia . It had been observed by ships of the First Fleet of convicts from England under the command of Arthur Phillip who was just leaving for Port Jackson after deciding that Botany Bay was unsuitable for settlement . In 1791 France ’ s National Assembly decided to send out a search mission led by Bruni d ’ Entrecasteaux . With Thouin ’ s recommendation Delahaye , who was at this time principal assistant gardener at the botany school of the Jardin du Roi , was invited to join the expedition 's team of " savants " ( more than ten scientists , engineers and artists ) as the expedition 's gardener . Thouin described Delahaye as “ ... strong , vigorous and well @-@ suited for voyages . Gentle , honest and of an exact probity . Active , hard @-@ working and passionately loving his calling . Knowing by theory and by practice the processes of gardening and knowing very well the plants cultivated in the Jardin du Roi . ” Delahaye 's annual salary on the expedition , paid by the navy , was 1000 livres ( 24 livres were equivalent to the gold coin , the Louis d 'or ) , and he was reimbursed 1 @,@ 236 livres for equipment . As a lowly gardener he was not permitted accommodation with the savants or to dine with the officers . Throughout the expedition he worked with diligence and honesty , keeping meticulous horticultural notes in his journal . Thouin wanted Delahaye to improve his schooling on the expedition and recommended that Delahaye study Latin , try to translate the works of Linnaeus and to read and write in French . His reading included Pierre Bulliard ’ s <unk> <unk> de Botanique ( 1783 ) and the works of Henri @-@ Louis Duhamel du Monceau ( 1700 – 1782 ) who published works on forestry , naval architecture ( especially relating to timber ) , agriculture , fruit tree cultivation , seed conservation and insect pests affecting seeds . Delahaye arrived in Brest , ready for the ship 's departure , with four cases of garden seeds , one of fruit tree nuts , one containing gardening tools and another gardener ’ s clothing . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The expedition consisted of two frigates , Recherche and Espérance . The first landfall was the Canary Islands , then the Cape of Good Hope followed by Van Diemen ’ s Land ( in Recherche Bay , Tasmania , named by d 'Entrecasteaux after the flagship of his expedition ) , then New Caledonia , Admiralty Islands , the Dutch colony of Ambon ( where Delahaye exchanged seeds with the Dutch governor ) then to south @-@ western Australia discovering and naming Esperance Bay ( d 'Entrecasteaux now commemorating his second ship ) . With water running low the ships then returned to the safety of Recherche Bay , thus completing a counterclockwise circumnavigation of the continent . The next destination was Tonga where Delahaye collected breadfruit for transport to the Isle de France ( now Mauritius ) , then to New Caledonia ( where Kermadec , captain of the Espérance died ) , past <unk> Island ( unaware that this is where La Pérouse had been shipwrecked ) then through the Solomons , Trobriand Islands and finally , just before the death of d ’ Entrecasteaux in July 1793 from scurvy , surveyed the coasts of eastern New Guinea and northern New Britain . The expedition was now under the new command of d ’ <unk> the ships arriving at Sourabaya , Java , in 1793 , to be told that France was now at war with European countries including Holland , Britain and Spain , also that Louis XVI had been guillotined and a French republic was now declared . The Dutch seized the ships . With one exception all the savants appeared to have revolutionary sympathies . They were interned at <unk> and the scientific collections confiscated to be eventually captured later by the British from a French ship returning them to France . Under the benign auspices of Joseph Banks , these were returned to France . Delahaye was not , like <unk> , interned at <unk> but was permitted to tend the breadfruit trees destined for the Isle de France . In the course of the expedition , and under the guidance of Labillardière , Delahaye had made a numbered collection of 2 @,@ 699 dried plant specimens as well as many collections of seed . 
 = = = A European vegetable garden = = = 
 In 1792 over the 25 days of the first landfall in Recherche Bay , Tasmania , Delahaye established a European vegetable garden . Its purpose was as a source of food and propagation material for the indigenous people , and also as a supply of provisions for future visiting European vessels . This was the first European garden on mainland Tasmania , planted just north of where the ships were anchored and , until recently , was last sighted by Lady Jane Franklin in the 1840s . Offshore , on Bruny Island , a small orchard had been planted a few months previously by Englishman William Bligh 's expedition , presumably planted by Bligh 's gardener David Nelson . Delahaye 's journal reports that he planted celery , chervil , chicory , cabbages , grey romaine lettuce , different kinds of turnip , white onion , radishes , sorrel , peas , black <unk> and potatoes ; he also had large quantities sewn in the woods , thrown at random where they might grow . Returning on 21 January 1793 the garden had not been productive , the seed having been planted in dry and sandy soil . This time Delahaye tried explaining to the Aboriginal people , referred to today as the <unk> , that the tubers , when cooked in fire embers , made fine eating . Calling in on the Adventure Bay side of Bruny Island Delahaye examined and tended the two pomegranate , one quince and three fig trees planted by Bligh ’ s expedition in 1792 . 
 = = = Rediscovery of garden in 2003 = = = 
 On 4 February 2003 , situated in the north @-@ eastern peninsula of Recherche Bay , environmental activists Helen Gee and Bob Graham found moss @-@ covered stones forming a rectangle roughly 9m x <unk> subdivided into four rectangles and enclosing a “ plinth ” ( suggested as a support for barrels of water ) measuring 1.8m x <unk> This seemed the possible remains of the garden established by Delahaye in 1792 . The site ( " NE peninsula " ) was placed on the Tasmanian Heritage Register on 20 February 2003 . The discovery was an important element in a protracted campaign to preserve the site and , indeed , the whole peninsula , which was then in private ownership , and under threat of being logged . 
 = = = Heritage listing entry = = = 
 In 2006 an archaeological survey of this site and others relating to the d 'Entrecasteaux expedition concluded that : 
 The geophysical and archaeological study of the area around the stone feature as well as the soil sampling strategy and the close observation of the 1792 @-@ 93 maps of the area suggest that the stone layout cannot be the garden of Delahaye . This study also indicated that the location of the garden shown on the maps is in a dry and rocky environment which does not fit he description of the French ... The stone layout found in 2002 is probably an uncompleted structure associated with the late 19th and early 20th century development of the area . It is obviously one of the few remaining witnesses of this part of the history of Coal Pit Bight and needs to be protected and further researched . 
 Archaeological work had failed to find artefacts and recognizable <unk> , also the site seemed too close to the sea — even though the dimensions , layout and orientation approximated published descriptions by both Delahaye and Labillardière . 
 The study also resulted in a Provisional Entry to the Tasmanian Heritage Register of 1 April 2010 D ’ Entrecasteaux Expedition Sites Recherche Bay & Adventure Bay : 
 1792 Garden ( Lot 2 ) . Exact location has not been identified . It is believed to be located in woodland near an intermittent stream , approximately 1 km north of Bennetts Point and 120 m inland ( approx <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , which is about 70 @-@ 100 metres to the south @-@ east of the stone structure discovered in 2002 ( Galipaud et al 2007 : 58 and 129 ) . The site of the 1792 garden is thought to be an area of flat land near to a small stream , with deep and <unk> soil ( Galipaud 2007 : 58 ) . Traces of the garden might today be covered by alluvial deposits ( Galipaud et al 2007 : 58 ) . 
 = = Transporting breadfruit to the French West Indies = = 
 After several weeks of productive <unk> in Recherche Bay , in 1793 the expedition ships set sail for Tongatapu ( main island in the kingdom of Tonga ) where Delahaye had specific instructions to collect quality breadfruit plants for transport to the Isle de France . The plants he selected were maintained in specially designed rectangular wooden chests with drainage holes and a frame that would hold glass or grills to assist temperature regulation . Accordingly , in Tonga he collected 200 breadfruit plants , emulating similar work of David Nelson , gardener @-@ botanist to British Captain Bligh on the Bounty . By the time the French reached Sourabaya in Java only 14 plants survived and this was reduced to 10 when Delahaye moved to Semarang about another 300 kilometres away . By careful care and layering ( a means of propagation ) he managed to double the number of plants before leaving Java in January 1797 for the Isle de France on the frigate Régénerée . He then cared for the plants at sea eventually delivering them to Jean @-@ Nicolas <unk> at the Jardin des Pamplemousses on the Isle de France . Here they prospered under his care until he returned to France . Thanks to Delahaye ’ s careful husbandry the breadfruit was subsequently successfully introduced to the French West Indies . Between March and April 1797 on the Isle de France he had collected 280 separately numbered plant specimens and these were added to his specimens and seed collected in Java and seed collected in Australia . When he left the island in May 1797 among his collections were a selection of live ornamental plants that he had collected from gardens on the Isle de France . 
 When the collections from the expedition were finally returned to Paris they filled 36 trunks and among the living plants brought back were two breadfruit trees . 
 = = Subsequent work = = 
 Delahaye had departed Mauritius in May 1797 , arriving in France and on 9 July to be appointed as an official on a commission sent to Italy to plunder the libraries and museums of northern Italy in the wake of Napoleon ’ s victories there . On his return he was appointed head gardener , first at Trianon in 1798 and then , in 1805 , on the Empress Joséphine ’ s estate at Malmaison . A Scotsman , Alexander <unk> , had been appointed Head Gardener at Malmaison . Napoleon did not like having an Englishman as an employee and being presented with an excessive bill by <unk> for transportation of shrubs to Malmaison , Napoleon had an opportunity to dispense with his services . The post of Superintendent of the Château de Malmaison gardens was given to the botanist Charles de Mirbel . It was through de Mirbel that Delahaye had obtained the position of Head Gardener at Malmaison , based on his successful restoration of the gardens at Le Trianon and also Marie Antoinette 's old garden at Versailles . This garden was probably the most important collection of living Australian plants in Europe in this period . For several decades Delahaye was the only gardener in Europe who had actually seen the plants from New Holland growing in their natural habitat , and many of the plants he grew he had collected himself . Although tensions developed between Delahaye and Empress Josephine 's chief botanist , Aimé Bonpland , Delahaye continued to work for Empress Joséphine until her death in 1814 after which he entered business ( possibly in 1826 when Malmaison was sold ) as manager of a successful private nursery at Montreuil , near Versailles , which also occupied his wife and sons . Here he kept a collection of natural history specimens and an extensive herbarium together with seeds and ethnographic specimens brought back from his voyage . 
 Delahaye died at his home , 6 rue Symphorien , Versailles on 20 August 1829 , aged 62 , and was buried in the cemetery at Montreuil . He was survived by his wife , Anne <unk> , two sons and a daughter . His daughter married Pierre Bertin who took over the business , handing it on to his son Émile Bertin who , in turn , passed it on to Jean @-@ Jaques Moser . 
 = = Plant collections = = 
 An extensive collection of living and dried plants was returned to Paris by Delahaye but these were scattered after his death , herbarium specimens now being housed in Paris , Geneva , Mauritius and Java . His original herbarium of 2 @,@ 699 plants included specimens dated and numbered in his journal as follows : New Ireland ( Bismarck Archipelago , Jul 17 – 24 1792 , collection numbers 699 @-@ 786 ) ; Ambon ( Sept 6 – Oct 12 , 1792 , nos . 787 @-@ 1113 ) , <unk> ( <unk> – 5 , 1793 , nos 1517 @-@ 1669 ) , Sourabaya , East Java ( Oct 29 1793 – Aug 1794 , nos 1670 @-@ 1962 ) , Java ( from 1794 – 96 , nos 1963 @-@ <unk> ) , Batavia , west Java ( Jun 1796 – Jan 1797 , nos <unk> @-@ 2419 ) and the remainder from Isle de France . 
 On 16 August 1879 the Museum National d ’ Histoire Naturelle purchased his herbarium , 84 @-@ folio catalogue and journal from the antiquarian bookseller <unk> for 295 francs . A small collection of seeds was also donated to the L 'École Nationale Supérieure d <unk> by Delahaye ’ s grandson Émile Bertin . A manuscript of his seed collections is held in the Museum library ( ‘ Notes des <unk> <unk> dans le voyage autour du monde ’ ) . 
 = = Honours = = 
 The name “ <unk> ” is commemorated on the Liénard obelisk in the Jardin des Pamplemousses , Mauritius . D ’ Entrecasteaux named an island in Port Espérance ( Tasmania ) in Delahaye ’ s honour , but it is now known as Hope Island . He was also commemorated by D ’ Entrecasteaux in a cape in the D 'Entrecasteaux Islands . 
 = Toil ( album ) = 
 Toil is a studio album by the Chicago Celtic punk band Flatfoot 56 , released on August 14 , 2012 , by Paper + Plastick . The release is the fourth studio album released by the group since they were signed by a label . Johnny Rioux , a member of the Celtic punk band Street Dogs , returned as the producer . 
 The album was released to generally favorable reviews . Critics and fans enjoyed the album 's diversity of sound and song writing . Reviewers described the album 's songs as working @-@ class anthems with Christian themes . The final track on the album , a Celtic punk cover of the hymn " I 'll Fly Away " , was well received by music critics . The album produced one single , " I Believe It " , that was released as a music video . Both the album and the single failed to chart . The track " Winter in Chicago " was featured on the soundtrack for the video game Watch Dogs . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 While on tour in 2011 , Flatfoot 56 played at Summerfest in Milwaukee with Less than Jake . Less than Jake drummer Vinnie Fiorello , owner of Paper + Plastick , saw the band play and was impressed by their energy and performance . When he discovered that the band was looking for a record label , he offered to sign them . 
 Johnny Rioux , who had produced Flatfoot 56 's last album , Black Thorn , was chosen as the album 's producer . The band felt that having the same producer improved communication and allowed the band to work more freely . According to frontman Tobin Bawinkel , this familiarity allowed Rioux to encourage the band to advance musically and think differently . During January 2012 , the band recorded the entire album at the Atlas Studios in Chicago , Illinois . 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 The album 's lyrics have been described as an <unk> examination of the struggles of the American working class and politically liberal . Along with highlighting the struggles of blue @-@ collar America , the lyrics portray the idea that there is hope even when things appear to be bleak and that giving up is not an option . While there are Christian themes throughout the songs , neither Christian nor secular reviewers found them to be preachy . 
 " Brother , Brother " , the first song on the album , is inspired by the band members ' experience with the drug use of friends . Bawinkel stated in an interview that " a bunch of the tunes cover what we wanted to say to them during those times [ when friends returned to using drugs ] . " Michael Weaver , writing for Jesus Freak Hideout , interpreted the song as an attempt to convince this individual to turn his or her life around and return to the Christian faith . The next track , named " The Rich , The Strong and The Poor " , tells the story of three men looking for happiness . The first tries to find it in money , but he returns unfulfilled . The second tries looking for happiness in physical strength . He believes that if he proves himself , that he will find peace . Like the first man , he ends up unfulfilled . The final man looks for happiness in basic life needs and likewise ends up in the same position as the first two men . Bawinkel explains that , " all three are very much in the same position in that happiness hasn ’ t been found in chasing these various desires . There is something more which is hopeful for some and frustrating for others . " 
 The third song on the album , " I Believe It " , was the subject of the band 's only music video from Toil . The video shows the band singing the song acoustically in the studio , much like the version that is featured on the album . Instrumentally , the song is guitar @-@ driven and features the mandolin . The lyrics remind the listener to continue going forward even if it is painful . The song has been seen as symbol of the band 's faith . The title track , " Toil " , is an acoustic protest song that was compared by one reviewer to the Bruce Springsteen album Wrecking Ball . The lyrics tell the story of an unhappy , overworked , working @-@ class man . The song ends with the lyrics , " I 'm a slave to that whistle call . I ’ m a slave . " The tenth song , " 6 ' 10 " " , is an alt @-@ country ballad that was written in response to people making jokes about <unk> 's height . The man depicted in the track is six feet ten inches ( 2 @.@ 08 meters ) tall and has to deal with people questioning him about why he does not play basketball . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Toil was received positively by reviewers , though the album and its single failed to chart . Absolute Punk 's reviewer commented that the album was " fun " and a " rabble @-@ <unk> . " Jesus Freak Hideout 's reviewer thought Toil was Flatfoot 56 's best work to date and that the album showed the band improving with age . Innocent Words ' reviewer agreed with Jesus Freak Hideout 's assessment , while David Von Bader , from Consequence of Sound , felt that the album was a step towards broader appeal . 
 The final song on the album was well received by reviewers . The song , a Celtic punk cover of " I 'll Fly Away " , is the band 's take on a widely recorded traditional hymn . AMP Magazine 's reviewer called the cover " perfectly @-@ executed " . Danny <unk> , writing for Punk News , called the song a " crowd favorite " for fans of the band 's live show . Jesus Freak Hideout 's reviewer viewed the release of another hymn on one of Flatfoot 56 's albums very favorably ; the band had covered " Amazing Grace " on an earlier album . He concluded stating " anyone who thought hymns were boring [ has ] not heard a Flatfoot 56 rendition . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Brother , Brother - 2 : 32 
 The Rich , The Strong and The Poor - 3 : 09 
 I Believe It - 2 : 44 
 Take Hold Again - 3 : 28 
 Toil - 3 : 37 
 Live or Die Trying - 3 : 24 
 Work For Them - 2 : 15 
 <unk> Truth - 2 : 45 
 Strongman - 2 : 56 
 6 ' 10 - 2 : 32 
 This Time - 3 : 15 
 Winter In Chicago - 3 : 10 
 I 'll Fly Away - 2 : 44 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Personnel as listed on Allmusic : 
 = Pennsylvania Route 171 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 171 ( also designated by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as SR <unk> ) is a 40 @.@ 17 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 64 @.@ 65 km ) north – south state highway located in northeast Pennsylvania . The southern terminus of the route is at U.S. Route 6 Business in Carbondale . The northern terminus is officially at an intersection with U.S. Route 11 , 250 feet ( 76 m ) to the west of I @-@ 81 . 
 PA 171 , at its southern end , was once part of the Providence and Carbondale Turnpike , which ran along US 6 Bus. from Dickson City to Carbondale and PA 171 from Carbondale to Forest City . The turnpike , chartered in 1851 , ran from Scranton until being abandoned in 1889 . In 1911 , after the Sproul Road Bill was signed , a large segment of PA 171 was designated as Legislative Route 10 . This was its designation for several years , and in 1928 , the mass amount of state highways in Pennsylvania were designated . 
 In the 1928 renumbering , the alignments of PA 171 were designated as Pennsylvania Route 70 , Pennsylvania Route 602 , and Pennsylvania Route 692 , which stretched the highway from U.S. Route 6 / U.S. Route 106 in Carbondale to the New York state line at Hallstead . In 1946 , PA 692 and PA 602 were later removed from the state system and replaced by an extended PA 70 . In 1961 , PA 70 was renumbered as PA 171 to prevent duplication with I @-@ 70 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Carbondale to Herrick Center = = = 
 Pennsylvania Traffic Route 171 begins at an intersection with U.S. Route 6 Business in the eastern part of Carbondale . The route progresses northward , along Belmont Street , passing several homes for several blocks . At an intersection with Spencer Street , the highway leaves downtown Carbondale and enters Fell Township , a nearby community . There , PA 171 changes names to Main Street , passing more residential homes and local businesses , until entering the community of Simpson . At Reservoir Street , PA 171 turns northward and leaves Simpson . After an intersection with Owego Street , PA 171 leaves Fell Township and becomes parallel to the Owego Turnpike through a residential community surrounded by forests . 
 After about a mile , PA 171 turns away from the residential and commercial buildings and winds through the local woodlands . This scenery continues for several miles , passing by a reservoir . After an intersection with Buffalo Road , the road turns to the northeast . After the turn , PA 171 enters the community of Richmondale . In Richmondale , the highway heads eastward , the development of the scenery around the highway once again . After leaving Richmondale , the highway enters Vandling , where the highway becomes highly developed . After an intersection with Clinton Street , Route 171 leaves Vandling and crosses into Susquehanna County , where the highway enters Forest City . 
 PA 171 continues into Forest City , where it curves along as Main Street , and enters downtown . In downtown Forest City , the highway is squeezed to two local lanes and PA 171 intersects with Pennsylvania Route 247 , which heads eastward . However , PA 247 westbound becomes concurrent with PA 171 through downtown Forest City , and the highway eventually splits off westbound , while PA 171 continues north through the northern ends of Forest City . The route bends around for a while in Forest City , where at an intersection with Cemetery Road , the route leaves the community . 
 North of Forest City , PA 171 heads north for several miles through deep forests . After a while , PA 171 crosses over the Lackawanna River , which straddles the Wayne County border . The route , at that point , changes names to Stillwater Road , parallelling Old Logging Road 296 until approaching Stillwater Lake , where the logging road merges back into the highway . PA 171 parallels the shores of Stillwater Lake and passes the Stillwater Dam , maintained by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers . While PA 171 continues to follow the lake , it enters the community of Union Dale . 
 PA 171 enters Union Dale , leaving forests that it was following . The route intersects and parallels Mausoleum Road , which heads through a cemetery in southern Union Dale . After an intersection with <unk> Drive , Stillwater Lake ends , and the community enters the center of Union Dale . The center consists of an intersection with Skyline Drive , and PA 171 leaves . The highway continues out of Union Dale , winding its way to the north . PA 171 continues running as Stillwater Road into the deep forests which break up soon after . 
 A short distance later , PA 171 becomes slightly developed , entering the small community of Herrick Center . There , the highway intersects with the eastern terminus of Pennsylvania Route 374 and the western terminus of Pennsylvania Route 371 , also known as the Great Bend Turnpike . The route leaves Herrick Center and heads northward through rural parts of Susquehanna County . 
 = = = Thompson to Oakland = = = 
 After leaving Herrick Center and PA 371 / 374 , PA 171 progresses through Susquehanna County , leaving Stillwater Road . The route continues through the rural parts of Susquehanna County . After a break in a patch of trees , PA 171 intersects with Township Road 592 , beginning a wind along the Wayne County border . The township road parallels for sometime , and the highways eventually enters the small community of <unk> , where the highway becomes slightly developed . North of <unk> , the route continues northward , entering the community of East Ararat , where Pennsylvania Route 370 's western terminus is located . 
 The route passes through East Ararat , leaving soon after . After that , PA 171 begins to progress through the rural areas once again , paralleling a short distance of PA 370 . After an intersection with Borden Hollow Road , the highway progresses through a deep area of forests . The route passes Dunn Pond , where it bends to the northwest , entering Ararat Township . Along this stretch , PA 171 passes to the north of the community of Ararat . The route continues for several miles , and after turning to the east , the highway enters the community of Thompson . Into the community of Thompson , PA 171 becomes known as Jackson Street and heads through a moderately developed region . The route , at an intersection with Main Street , leaves Jackson and continues northward . After the intersection with Erie Avenue , PA 171 leaves Thompson . A short distance later , the highway continues northward through deep forests and rural farms before continuing into Thompson Township . After that the road starts winding its way northward , it returns to the unpopulated area and intersects with local roads . 
 This pattern continues for several miles , with PA 171 passing a large pond and deep forests . At the intersection with Comforts Pond Road and <unk> Hill Road , the highway becomes slightly developed . This quickly reverts to the undeveloped rural farms , which follow PA 171 along its trip to the northwest . A short distance later , the highway becomes surrounded by forests once again , beginning to wind its way as the Belmont Turnpike . The forests quickly ends , and the surroundings become highly developed as the community enters Lanesboro . After entering Lanesboro , PA 171 becomes highly developed and continues as Belmont Turnpike until the intersection with Main Street , where the highway turns to the southwest . The route heads along Main Street , progressing along the developed parts of the Susquehanna River , and enters the community of Susquehanna Depot . In Susquehanna Depot , PA 171 runs along East Main Street through the eastern segment of the community . Near the dead @-@ end Jackson Street , the highway turns to the south , intersecting with Pennsylvania Route 92 . From there , the two highways are concurrent . 
 PA 92 and PA 171 head along Main Street , passing some local businesses and residences before crossing the Susquehanna River on the Susquehanna County Veterans Memorial Bridge . After crossing the bridge , PA 171 and PA 92 split onto State Street and River Street respectively . PA 171 continues westward , paralleling High Street , which merges in along the shores of the Susquehanna . Soon after the intersection with High Street , PA 171 progresses westward leaving Susquehanna Depot soon after . 
 = = = Hickory Grove to Great Bend = = = 
 After leaving Susquehanna Depot and Oakland Township , PA 171 heads on a westward progression along the Susquehanna River . To the south of the highway is the river , to the north of the highway is residential homes and deep forests behind those . After the intersection with Towner Road , PA 171 enters the small community of Hickory Grove , where the route and river makes a curve to the southwest , still paralleling each other . PA 171 quickly leaves Hickory Grove and enters another set of deep forests which separate the highway and the river . 
 The highway continues on its southwest progression , with the trees surrounding dissipating . After that , both the river and the highway pass to the north of Island Plain . There , the routes curve to the northwest once again , becoming more developed and now following a railroad line in the area . The route makes a curve to the west , progressing through a short development of residential homes . After that , the highway enters Great Bend and heads to the southwest . The designation crosses at Interchange 230 along Interstate 81 in downtown Great Bend , but continues to the intersection with U.S. Route 11 in Great Bend , where the route terminates . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ designation turnpikes = = = 
 A short segment of PA 171 , from Carbondale to the community of Forest City , was part of the Providence and Carbondale Turnpike , which went from the city of Scranton , Pennsylvania , following much of U.S. Route 6 and U.S. Route 106 ( current day U.S. Route 6 Business ) through many of the communities in the area : Dickson City , Jermyn , and Carbondale , before turning onto current day PA 171 . There , the turnpike followed the alignment through Carbondale , Fell Township , Vandling and into Forest City , where it ended , 20 miles ( 32 km ) from Scranton . This tolled turnpike provided the main highway through many of the communities , including the towns along PA 171 , until on December 7 , 1889 , when local citizens tore down the abandoned tollbooths in Blakely . Originally , the turnpike was chartered by the commonwealth of Pennsylvania in 1851 , and remained strong until 1889 , the year the tollbooths were torn down . After that the turnpike was abandoned , with control of the turnpike 's alignment turned over Lackawanna County for future maintenance . 
 In 1897 , the portion of PA 171 along Main Street in Susquehanna Depot was paved . The project to pave the main highway cost $ 10 @,@ 000 ( 1897 USD ) with funds split equally between the borough of Susquehanna Depot , the local businesses , and the nearby Erie Railroad . 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 The original route designation that follows current @-@ day PA 171 was a part of Legislative Route 10 , which ran from an intersection with Legislative Route 9 ( currently an intersection with Pennsylvania Route 706 ) in New Milford Township to the New York state line , where it follows current day PA 92 's alignment . When the mass state highway numbering in Pennsylvania occurred in 1928 , the alignment of PA 171 was <unk> as Pennsylvania Route 70 from U.S. Route 6 in Carbondale to Oakland at Pennsylvania Route 92 , from there to U.S. Route 11 in Great Bend , it was designated as Pennsylvania Route 692 , and from U.S. Route 11 to the New York state line at Hallstead , it was designated as Pennsylvania Route 602 . 
 The alignment of PA 70 was under construction in 1929 from the Thompson Township line to Lanesboro . It was completed the next year , when the Pennsylvania Department of Highways paved the highway from Herrick Center to Thompson and Stack Road to the Harmony Township line . These three routes remained intact ( in terms of alignment ) for eighteen years , until 1946 , when PA 692 and PA 602 were removed from the state highway system in favor of extending PA 70 to the north to Hallstead . The route , PA 70 , remained intact for another seventeen years , when in April 1961 , I @-@ 70 was already commissioned , and PA 70 was decommissioned . The PA 70 designation was renumbered to PA 171 to prevent duplication . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = D21 road ( Croatia ) = 
 D21 is a 80 @.@ 1 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 49 @.@ 8 mi ) , north – south state road in Istria County , Croatia . A short section of D21 is a part of the European route E751 . The northern terminus of the route is located at the Croatia – Slovenia border at the Dragonja River . There it connects to Koper , Slovenia , and Trieste , Italy , via the Slovene route G11 further north . D21 route is generally parallel to A9 motorway . The two form several junctions , either directly or via short connectors , at Buje , Bale and Vodnjan – towns served directly by D21 . The southern terminus of the route is found in the city of Pula , at the southern tip of the Istrian Peninsula . 
 The road , as well as all other state roads in Croatia , is managed and maintained by Hrvatske ceste , a state @-@ owned company . The road carries an annual average daily traffic of about 2 @,@ 000 vehicles , and the traffic volume increases by up to 1 @,@ 000 vehicles in summer as the road is used by tourists in the region . The southernmost portion of the road is significantly more congested as it carries Pula suburban traffic . 
 In classical antiquity , the western Istria route was first used by Via Flavia in the classical antiquity , but the roads in the area declined in the Middle Ages and subsequent division of the Istrian Peninsula by the Republic of Venice and the Habsburg Empire was not conductive to development of a road system . In the 19th century , the First French Empire started road construction , including the Trieste – Pula route now largely followed by D21 . The present @-@ day D21 route was a part of M2 Adriatic Highway route after the Second World War . It was made a separate state road and assigned its present route number in 1997 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 D21 is an 80 @.@ 1 @-@ kilometre ( 49 @.@ 8 mi ) state road situated in Istria County following a general north – south alignment . Most of the route runs through predominantly agricultural land and small settlements , except the route segment between Bale and Baderna , where the road is predominantly surrounded by forests . The southernmost 2 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 4 miles ) of the route runs through suburbs of Pula – the largest city in the region . D21 extends south from the Kaštel border crossing between Croatia and Slovenia situated at the Dragonja River . To the north of the D21 terminus , the route – a part of the European route E751 – connects the cities of Koper , Slovenia , and Trieste , Italy , via G11 in Slovenia . The first section of the D21 route follows an overall eastern orientation . About 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 feet ) away from the borderline , it reaches the Kaštel border crossing , and after 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 feet ) , there is an at @-@ grade intersection where the traffic defaults to D510 , which serves as a connector to the A9 motorway . D21 itself turns southwest towards the village of Kaštel , approximately two kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) away . 
 Just to the north of Kaštel , D21 turns south before proceeding to the city of Buje located about 3 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 2 miles ) down the road from Kaštel . In Buje , D21 forms at @-@ grade intersections with D200 and D300 . D200 provides a route to the Plovanija border crossing with Slovenia and D300 to the town of Umag and Umag interchange of A9 motorway . There are also at @-@ grade intersections with the county roads <unk> and <unk> in the city . South of Buje , the route turns southeast across hilly terrain until it reaches Ponte Porton in the Mirna River valley approximately 11 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 8 miles ) away from Buje . There D21 forms a roundabout junction at the north bank of the river . The roundabout connects D21 to D44 , which links the town of <unk> and <unk> to Novigrad and another A9 interchange . 
 After the route crosses the Mirna River , it continues about six kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) southeast to <unk> , where D21 forms an intersection with <unk> road to <unk> village . In <unk> , the route turns south once more as it reaches the <unk> intersection connecting Višnjan after another five kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) , and the village of Baderna 20 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 12 @.@ 7 miles ) south of the Mirna River crossing . At Baderna , D21 connects with <unk> extending to Poreč and the A9 motorway , located west of the road junction , as well as D48 leading to Pazin east of D21 . The intersection is built as a partial cloverleaf interchange . 
 Approximately four kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) south of Baderna , the route reaches the village of Sveti <unk> and proceeds due south to the Medaki interchange of the A9 – another partial cloverleaf interchange – about three kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) south of Sveti <unk> . D21 turns southwest at the Lim embayment of the Adriatic Sea after another two kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) . At that point , D21 forms an at @-@ grade intersection with Ž5002 road to Vrsar situated further west . Following the Ž5002 junction , D21 turns southeast to follow the contours of the Lim embayment valley . After approximately five kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) , the route reaches a grade separated intersection , a two @-@ ramp partial cloverleaf , with D303 . D303 , in turn , links to the Kanfanar interchange of the A9 motorway and the coastal city of Rovinj . 
 South of the D303 intersection , D21 runs south along a generally flat terrain and consists of relatively straight sections compared to the northern parts of the route . About six kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) south of the D303 junction , D21 forms an at @-@ grade intersection with <unk> to <unk> . Three kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) from there , D21 enters the town of Bale and intersects the <unk> road linking Rovinj . South of Bale , D21 turns southeast and approaches Vodnjan . It reaches a short connector to the Vodnjan @-@ <unk> ( north ) interchange of the A9 motorway eight kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) down the road . 
 After another two kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) , D21 reaches the city of Vodnjan and the <unk> road junction connecting to Fažana . There are two further significant junctions of D21 in the next 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 miles ) – one with <unk> to <unk> and the other with the Vodnjan @-@ jug ( south ) interchange of A9 . South of Vodnjan , D21 route proceeds another 5 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 4 miles ) due south to reach <unk> connecting the village of <unk> , and reaches outskirts of Pula after another three kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) . Within Pula , D21 route forms an at @-@ grade junction with the <unk> road to Fažana about 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 miles ) further along . The junction also serves the Brijuni National Park . The southern terminus of the route is found at a roundabout 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 feet ) further south , where D21 connects to <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 In classical antiquity , the Via Flavia road built by the emperor Vespasian in 78 AD ran through the same area spanned by modern D21 . The Via Flavia followed a north – south route in the western part of the Istrian Peninsula , connecting <unk> , present @-@ day Trieste , to Pula via Poreč . In Pula , the Roman road extended further to the northeast to <unk> and Tarsatica – modern @-@ day Trsat area of the city of Rijeka . 
 Following the decline of the Roman Empire , roads in the region deteriorated . Only the Via <unk> is known to have existed in the region by year 1030 . It was an east – west route spanning from Pazin to Poreč . Road transport in the region lost significance after the peninsula was divided between the Habsburg Monarchy and the Republic of Venice . From 1809 – 1813 , the Trieste – Pula route was rebuilt by the First French Empire , after the French captured the entire region from Venice and the Habsburgs . Upgrades to the regional road network continued after the Austrian Empire acquired Istria at the 1814 – 1815 Congress of Vienna . By 1830 , the road network in Istria had expanded to a degree that would not change for a century and a half . The only significant improvement of region 's roads was paving of the Trieste – Pula road in 1930s . 
 During the Second World War all the roads in Istria sustained significant damage . After the war the road became a part of the Adriatic Highway – a trunk road tracing the Adriatic Sea coast within the SFR Yugoslavia , signposted as M2 route . The next major addition to the road network on the peninsula was completion of the first section of the Istrian Y expressway in 1981 . The system was designed to replace M2 route as the main road route in Istria . The Yugoslav M2 designation was retained after the independence of Croatia , until 1997 , when the part of the Adriatic Highway spanning the Slovene border and Pula was designated as state road D21 . Since October 1991 , Hrvatske ceste , a company owned by the Government of Croatia , has been tasked with maintenance of the road . 
 = = Traffic volume = = 
 Volume of traffic flowing along D21 road is measured by Hrvatske ceste at six traffic counting stations distributed along the route . Three of the traffic counting stations work continuously , while the rest of them are operated intermittently . By 2002 , the road lost a significant portion of its north – south traffic as A9 motorway was gradually extended since 1991 , running parallel to the route . At the Kaštel traffic counting site , the average summer traffic volume declined from 12 @,@ 564 vehicles per day recorded in 2002 , to just 2 @,@ 989 vehicles in 2011 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Istria County . 
 Sources : Public roads classification and Regulation on motorway markings in Croatia 
 = Appalachian School of Law = 
 The Appalachian School of Law ( ASL ) is a fully accredited private law school on a four building campus in Grundy , Virginia , a small town near the convergence of Virginia , Kentucky , and West Virginia . The school offers a three @-@ year Juris Doctor degree , and enrolls approximately 370 full @-@ time students . The law school was founded in 1994 and it admitted its first class of students in August 1997 . ASL was started and brought to Buchanan County , Virginia as a tool of economic development for the region . The school is fully accredited by the American Bar Association . ASL is notable for its focus to community service and leadership , emphasizing professional responsibility and alternative dispute resolution in its curriculum and requiring students to complete 25 hours of community service per semester in order to graduate . Each student is also required to complete an externship before graduation . According to ASL 's 2013 ABA @-@ required disclosures , half of the Class of 2013 obtained full @-@ time , long @-@ term , JD @-@ required employment nine months after graduation . ASL was also the site of a triple homicide that took place on January 16 , 2002 . Princeton Review named ASL one of the 168 best law schools . According to law professor blog " The Faculty Lounge " , based on 2012 ABA data , 38 @.@ 5 % of graduates obtained full @-@ time , long term positions requiring bar admission , 9 months after graduation , ranking 178th out of a total of 197 law schools in the United States . 
 = = History = = 
 ASL traces its roots back to 1993 when Norton , Virginia lawyer Joe Wolfe came up with the idea to create a law school in Central Appalachia . His idea was well received by local business leaders and a steering committee was founded in 1994 and grew to eighty members . The committee surveyed lawyers and found that legal education needed to emphasize professional responsibility and alternative dispute resolution as these pillars of law school were becoming more important in today 's law practice . The committee gained permission from the Virginia General Assembly to start a law school in 1995 and continued to secure endorsements from local civic associations and industrial development authorities . Buchanan County , Virginia approached the committee in 1996 and offered the grounds and buildings of the former P.V. Dennis Elementary and Grundy Jr . High Schools to which the steering committee accepted . 
 A $ 1 million loan ( which was later converted into a grant ) financed the buildings ' renovations . 
 The State Council of Higher Education in Virginia granted the school the ability to enroll students studying for the Juris Doctor Degree in 1997 . The charter class of 71 students first attended classes on August 12 , 1997 . 
 Buchanan County brought ASL to Grundy in order to revitalize a town that had been in a steady economic decline since the town 's Flood of 1977 . ASL has brought a positive economic impact on its home town , including spurring construction of rental homes and the opening of additional businesses in the area . ASL has become a success story for the concept of higher education as an economic development tool . The school has brought in $ 12 million per year to the local economy . ASL 's economic success spurred the conception and implementation of the Appalachian College of Pharmacy ( formerly University of Appalachia College of Pharmacy ) , which was founded in 2003 and opened its doors in 2005 . 
 = = Costs = = 
 The total cost of attendance ( indicating the cost of tuition , fees , and living expenses ) at ASL for the 2014 @-@ 2015 academic year is $ 41 @,@ 950 . The Law School Transparency estimated debt @-@ financed cost of attendance for three years is $ 192 @,@ 424 . 
 = = Employment = = 
 According to ASL 's official 2013 ABA @-@ required disclosures , 50 % of the Class of 2013 obtained full @-@ time , long @-@ term , JD @-@ required employment nine months after graduation . ASL 's Law School Transparency under @-@ employment score is 39 @.@ 8 % , indicating the percentage of the Class of 2013 unemployed , pursuing an additional degree , or working in a non @-@ professional , short @-@ term , or part @-@ time job nine months after graduation . 
 = = = 2002 school shooting = = = 
 On January 16 , 2002 , ASL Dean Anthony Sutin , Professor Thomas Blackwell , and first @-@ year student Angela Dales were shot and killed by disgruntled student Peter Odighizuwa , 43 , of Nigeria . When Odighizuwa exited the building , he was subdued by two students armed with personal firearms . At his trial , Odighizuwa was found mentally competent , pleaded guilty to the murders to avoid the death penalty , and was sentenced to multiple life terms in prison . 
 = = Profile = = 
 According to law professor blog " The Faculty Lounge " , based on 2012 ABA data , 38 @.@ 5 % of graduates obtained full @-@ time , long term positions requiring bar admission , 9 months after graduation , ranking 178th out of 197 law schools . 
 According to the Law School Admissions Council 's 2005 profile , ASL 's student body demographic was as follows : 88 @.@ 5 % Caucasian , 2 @.@ 5 % African American , 2 @.@ 5 % Asian American , 0 @.@ 3 % Mexican American , 0 @.@ 3 % Native American , 0 @.@ 5 % Puerto Rican , and 0 @.@ 5 % Hispanic with 4 @.@ 9 % not reporting . 67 @.@ 6 % of the student body is male , while 32 @.@ 4 % of the student body is female . The student to faculty ratio in 2005 was 19 @.@ 3 to 1 and typical first year class size is 140 . For the fall 2005 entering class , 1 @,@ 302 applied for admission , of which 527 were granted admission and 149 matriculated into the first year class . The 25 @-@ 75 percentile range for LSAT scores and undergraduate GPA is 147 @-@ 152 and 2 @.@ 64 @-@ 3 @.@ 33 . 70 % of graduates are employed nine months after graduation and 70 % passed the Tennessee bar exam in 2005 . In 2008 , 92 % passed the Tennessee bar exam , with 82 % passing Virginia 's bar exam . ( A plurality of ASL graduates choose to take the Tennessee bar exam . Other graduates choose other states including Virginia . ) ASL was ranked " fourth tier " in the U.S. News and World Report law school listings , its first appearance since becoming fully accredited . 
 Appalachian School of Law was granted full accreditation by the American Bar Association on June 12 , 2006 . The school had been provisionally accredited by the ABA since February 2001 . Students who complete their course of legal study at this approved law school are eligible to take the bar examination in all 50 states and the District of Columbia . Prior to February 2001 , graduates of the school were allowed to sit for the bar examination in Virginia and West Virginia . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The ASL campus consists of three buildings , the main academic building , the Booth Center and the law library . The law school also uses the Booth Hall reception room as a classroom , as the Southwest Virginia Community College occupies all the classrooms . 
 The main academic building was created from the town 's former high school ( and junior high school ) and gymnasium complex ; these buildings were joined and extensively remodeled and expanded as part of a $ 1 million award @-@ winning architectural project . The main building contains an appellate courtroom ( which doubles as the auditorium for large events ) , a trial courtroom , five seminar rooms , student mailroom , the Lion 's Lounge , and faculty and staff offices . Most rooms are wired for internet access . The two @-@ story law library is adjacent to the main building . The building has 24 @,@ 780 square feet ( 2 @,@ 302 m2 ) and has facilities for seminar classes and group study rooms . The library contains almost 227 @,@ 000 volumes . Once the former Grundy Elementary School , this building has also been extensively remodeled and features individual and group study areas , a computer lab , and both wireless and wired internet access . 
 A third campus building , Booth Hall , has recently opened . Booth Hall is situated behind and to the rear of the main academic building and law library . The building will have 58 @,@ 000 square feet ( 5 @,@ 400 m2 ) of space on three floors . Thirty three parking spaces will be situated on the first floor . Additional classrooms , including one that seats 150 students , computer lab , student lounges , and a conference room will be included in the new building . The building is estimated to be completed in 2008 and will house the school 's Business Office and President 's Office . The building will also house facilities for Southwest Virginia Community College , which will share classroom space with ASL . 
 = = Academic program = = 
 Students at Appalachian complete the traditional law school curriculum as required by the American Bar Association ( ABA ) ; however , the school distinguishes itself from almost all of the other 192 ABA accredited law schools in the country , as its students are required to volunteer 25 hours each semester on community service projects , ranging from dispute resolution training to humane society management . Only 11 other law schools have similar mandatory programs . 
 ASL offers a Pre @-@ Admission Summer Opportunity ( PASO ) programs for students who have the potential to become good lawyers and law students but whose LSAT 's and GPA 's do not necessarily reflect their skills and talents . The program lasts four weeks , three of which are independent home study , the final week is the on @-@ campus lecture and final exam . The top scorers on the final exam may be offered admission to the fall 's first year class . 
 First year students arrive one week before the academic year starts to partake in a one credit course called Introduction to Law which covers the basic skills needed in order to succeed in law school . Students also register for classes and finalize their financial aid needs then . 
 First year students cover legal foundation courses : Torts ( 4 credits ) , Contracts ( 6 credits ) , Property ( 6 credits ) , Civil Procedure ( 5 credits ) , Criminal Law ( 3 credits ) and Legal Process ( 6 credits ) . Legal Process teaches students legal research and writing . First @-@ year students also take an orientation course to the community service program in the first semester and an additional legal research course in the second semester . First @-@ year students may not take any electives . Additionally , all first @-@ year students are required to complete a 200 @-@ hour unpaid externship over the summer before their second @-@ year . This requirement is usually met by students working as judicial clerks , interns in prosecutor and defense offices , state and federal governmental agencies , and private practices . Placements have included state supreme courts , the Environmental Protection Agency , and the United States Department of Justice . The school provides assistance in locating and obtaining these positions . Second year students cover additional legal foundation courses : Constitutional Law ( 6 credits ) , Evidence ( 4 credits ) , Professional Responsibility ( 3 credits ) , and Criminal Procedure ( 3 credits ) . Students also cover Trusts and Estates ( 4 credits ) and Business Associations ( 4 credits ) , and are allowed to take electives , such as Appellate Advocacy . Students also fulfill their alternative dispute resolution requirement in the second year . 
 Students in their third year have the most options when it comes to electives . Third year students are required to take Family Law ( 3 credits ) , Secured transactions ( 3 credits ) , Payment Systems ( 3 credits ) , and a <unk> ( 4 credits ) , which include : Trial Advocacy , Criminal Practice , Estate Planning , Pre @-@ Trial Practice , Real Estate Transactions , Insurance Law , or Employment Law . Additionally , students have their capstone experience in a writing @-@ intensive seminar . Each student takes two <unk> focusing on the practical aspects of legal practice . 
 = = = Alternative dispute resolution = = = 
 ASL is distinguished by its requirement that all second @-@ year students complete a mandatory Alternative Dispute Resolution ( ADR ) class . The school has also held ADR training in local schools ; this program drew national attention , particularly from former U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno , who has publicly congratulated the school on this effort . Students are given an overview of different types of conflict resolutions , particularly mediation , negotiation , and arbitration . Ethical issues are explored in addition to legal and policy ramifications . Students learn the strengths and weaknesses of each method of dispute resolution and learn which methods are appropriate for certain situations . Students also have the option of taking additional courses in their second and third years to earn certification for mediation under the " Lawyer as a Problem Solver " Certificate Program . Students must complete basic law school procedure courses , two ADR focused courses , and an additional problem solving skills course . ASL offers two courses to fulfill this requirement : certified civil mediation , and advanced negotiation . The school has two faculty members who solely teach alternative dispute resolution related courses . 
 = = Student life = = 
 ASL has an active student body involved in activities not only on campus but within the local community and the legal profession as well . 
 Officially recognized student organizations on campus : 
 ASL 's student body governs itself through the Student Bar Association . The SBA is divided into three branches , the Senate , Executive , and the Honor Court . The Senate consists of three elected senators for the first year , second year , and third year classes . The Executive Branch consists of the Student Body President , Vice President , Secretary , and Treasurer , plus any committees that the President appoints to assist in his or her endeavors . The Honor Court consists of five elected judges , one for the first year class and two per upper class . 
 ASL also fields moot court teams that compete in national competitions . Students can audition for the team through an annual intra @-@ school tournament that is composed of the Appellate Advocacy class in fall of the second year . 
 = = Law journal = = 
 The Appalachian Natural Resources Law Journal is a publication of the students at the Appalachian School of Law . The journal focuses on topics which relate to environmental law , natural resources law , and energy and mineral law . At least one issue per year is published , generally in the spring . 
 = Zion Square = 
 Zion Square ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> , Kikar <unk> ) is a public square in West Jerusalem , Israel , located at the intersection of Jaffa Road , Ben Yehuda Street , Herbert Samuel Street , and Yoel Moshe Salomon Street . 
 The square is one of the vertices of the Downtown Triangle commercial district . Since the British Mandate era , Zion Square has been the focal point of the cultural life of downtown Jerusalem . The square is busy day and night with tourists , elderly immigrants , overseas students , local youth , street performers , and religious activists . In recent decades , the square has become a hangout for disaffected and homeless youth . 
 From the 1930s to 2011 , the square was a popular site for mass protests and demonstrations . Zion Square was also the site of several Palestinian terrorist attacks and a 2012 assault on Palestinian youths by a group of Jewish youths . 
 = = Name = = 
 The square , originally called Zion Circus , was named for the Zion Cinema ( also called Zion Hall ) , a 400 @-@ seat silent movie house which occupied a hut on the site from 1912 to 1920 . After the hut collapsed under a heavy snowfall , the cinema was reconstructed as a 600 @-@ seat theater for film screenings and live opera performances . 
 = = History = = 
 The land on which Zion Square and the Downtown Triangle lies was purchased by the Jewish Colonization Association from the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate , which began selling off some of its holdings in Jerusalem after World War I. Mandate officials developed the field into a triangular district bordered by Jaffa Road , Ben Yehuda Street ( constructed by the British in 1922 ) and King George Street ( constructed by the British in 1924 ) . Zion Square was also designed by the British as a roundabout . 
 The popularity of the films , operas , plays , concerts and lectures presented at the Zion Cinema turned Zion Square into the “ center of cultural life in Jerusalem ” in the 1920s and 1930s . <unk> and theater @-@ goers gravitated between the cinema and the many cafes and coffee houses in the Downtown Triangle ; two of the popular cafes were located in Zion Square itself : the Vienna Cafe and the Europa Cafe . 
 = = = Political demonstrations = = = 
 Zion Square became a rallying point for political demonstrations and social protests beginning in the 1930s , when young Zionists held rallies here . From the 1950s to the 2000s , primarily right @-@ wing demonstrations were staged here . Several demonstrations turned violent , such as a 1971 protest by the Israeli Black Panthers in which Prime Minister Golda Meir was burned in effigy , and a 1995 protest against Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and the signing of the Taba Agreement ( Oslo II ) , after which thousands of protesters continued on to the Knesset , destroying property en route . The largest demonstrations in the square included a May 2000 protest decrying the handover of Arab settlements adjacent to the Mount of Olives , a November 2000 protest against Ehud Barak 's " policy of restraint " at the beginning of the Second Intifada , and a 2006 protest against the policies of acting prime minister Ehud Olmert , each of which drew around an estimated 100 @,@ 000 people . 
 With the opening of the Jerusalem Light Rail on Jaffa Road in August 2011 , Jerusalem police stopped issuing permits for demonstrations in Zion Square to avoid the disruption of light @-@ rail operations . 
 = = = Terrorist attacks = = = 
 The Zion Cinema was the site of two attempted bombings , one in 1951 and the other in 1967 . In both cases , an incendiary device was planted under the theater seats and was discovered before it detonated . 
 On July 4 , 1975 , a refrigerator loaded with 5 kilograms ( 11 lb ) of explosives detonated in Zion Square , killing 15 and wounding 77 . At the time , the attack was the deadliest ever against Israeli citizens by a booby @-@ trapped bomb . On March 24 , 1979 , a bomb exploded in a garbage can in Zion Square , killing one and wounding 13 . 
 On the night of August 16 – 17 , 2012 , dozens of Jewish teens chased four Palestinian teens in Zion Square and beat one of them unconscious , in what Israeli police and witnesses described as an attempted lynching . 
 = = = Decline and redevelopment = = = 
 Following the reunification of Jerusalem in 1967 , the city embarked on significant expansion . Large commercial centers were opened in the new , outlying neighborhoods of Talpiot , Givat Shaul , and Malha , weaning customers away from the city center . Government offices began moving out as well , precipitating the economic decline of the Downtown Triangle in the 1970s . The advent of television precipitated the closure of most of the Triangle 's cinemas . The Zion Cinema closed in 1972 and was demolished . In its place , a high @-@ rise building containing the Kikar Zion Hotel ( on the upper floors ) and a branch of Bank <unk> ( on the lower floors ) was erected . 
 In 1983 Zion Square was converted into a pedestrian promenade along with Ben Yehuda Street and other streets in the Downtown Triangle in a successful effort to revitalize the downtown district . 
 In 2006 the Jerusalem Foundation floated a secret proposal to rename the square Rapaport Plaza , after a Waco , Texas philanthropist who pledged $ 2 million toward the square 's renovation . Architect Ron Arad of London was hired and presented a plan to install a towering , red , reflective steel sculpture as a focal point for the square . The plan , which was not reported to the public , was spotted on the Jerusalem Foundation website and brought to public attention by <unk> , a grassroots citizens watch group , which launched a successful public protest against the name change and the sculpture . At the same time , <unk> produced its own <unk> for a round , six @-@ sided , steel " peace dome " to span the square and Jaffa Road . That idea , too , did not come to fruition . 
 = = Street scene = = 
 Zion Square is busy day and night as a meeting place and hangout for people from all walks of life , including tourists , elderly immigrants , seminary students , street performers , and Chabad and Breslov activists . Zion Square has been described as " always crowded , always crazy " . 
 The square is a hangout for drug users . An estimated 70 percent of teenagers who hang out in the square take drugs . The open , street @-@ level basement of the Kikar Zion Hotel is a well @-@ known haunt for both drug dealers and prostitutes . 
 School dropouts , disaffected religious immigrant teens , and homeless youth are also fixtures in the square . Street workers have identified large groups of Russian immigrant youth hanging out in the square and drinking vodka purchased with money <unk> off tourists . The square also attracts sizable numbers of settlement youth uprooted by the 2005 Israeli disengagement from Gaza . To reach out to at @-@ risk and disaffected " square dwellers " , several drop @-@ in centers operate in the vicinity of Zion Square , including Crossroads , <unk> , <unk> 's Squat , and The Zone . The <unk> – Youth Distress in Israel organization brings a mobile unit to Zion Square on weeknights to engage street youth in art projects . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 Zion Cinema was the central landmark of Zion Square from the 1920s until its closure in 1972 . Located on the south side of Zion Square , it was originally a 400 @-@ seat silent @-@ movie hut and , after snowfall destroyed the structure , was rebuilt into a 600 @-@ seat theatre that staged plays , concerts , lectures , and films . In the 1920s and 1930s the Zion Cinema was the cultural center of Jerusalem . After its closure , the building was demolished and a high @-@ rise containing the Kikar Zion Hotel and a branch of Bank <unk> was erected in its place . In 2013 the 117 @-@ room hotel was purchased by Orchid Hotel Management Ltd . , which is renovating the property for reopening as the Herbert Samuel Hotel . The hotel will have 137 rooms and suites , and a kosher rooftop restaurant with a 360 @-@ degree panoramic view . 
 Hamashbir <unk> , a seven @-@ story , 5 @,@ 000 square metres ( 54 @,@ 000 sq ft ) department store that opened on the east side of Zion Square in 2011 , is the largest department store in Israel and the flagship store of the 38 @-@ store chain . The store was originally established in 1947 on the opposite side of Jaffa Road , and moved to a location near King George and Ben Yehuda Streets from 1970 to 2010 . 
 On the north side of Zion Square stands the Jerusalem Hostel . This lodging opened as the Tel Aviv Hotel in 1926 and later became known as the Ron Hotel . Menachem Begin stood on one of the hotel 's balconies on August 3 , 1948 , to announce the dissolution of the Irgun and the sign @-@ up of his soldiers with the Israel Defense Forces . 
 On the west side of Zion Square stands the <unk> Building , erected in 1929 . This three @-@ story office and commercial building sports an " eclectic " , neo @-@ Renaissance and classical design . The building was commissioned by and named for a Christian Arab merchant from Bethlehem and originally housed Cafe Europe , a popular coffeehouse patronized by Jews , Arabs , and British in the 1930s and 1940s . In 1947 @-@ 48 it housed the Jerusalem Emergency Committee . 
 = Poitevin horse = 
 The Poitevin , also called Mulassier ( " mule @-@ breeder " ) , Poitevin Mulassier or Trait Mulassier is a draft horse from the Poitou area of France . It is a late @-@ maturing breed with strong bones , known for its calm nature . It is found in many solid coat colors , the result of crossbreeding with several other European draft breeds throughout its history , and is the only French draft horse to be found in bay dun . Today , Poitevins are used mainly for driving , although some are used for riding and equine therapy . 
 Enthusiasts claim descent from the horses painted on the cave walls of Lascaux , though this has not been verified by scientific studies . Horses have been recorded in the area since at least the 10th century , and the regional type was preferred by magistrates and clergy in medieval times . The Poitevin breed as it is known today began to take shape in the early 17th century , as engineers began draining the French marshes and brought with them their draft horses , which were crossed with native horses . Since early in its history , the Poitevin has been used extensively for the breeding of mules , and although commonly called a draft horse , was not favored for agricultural purposes . During the 19th century , the population of the Poitevin increased , reaching 50 @,@ 000 pure and crossbred mares by 1867 . Crossbreeding with other draft breeds led to concerns about the purity of the Poitevin population , but a small group of breeders worked to preserve the remaining purebred population . 
 A studbook was created for the breed in 1884 , and was closed in 1922 . A breeders ' association was created in 1923 . The first half of the 20th century saw declining populations of horses and mules due to increased mechanization , and , by 1945 , Poitevin breeding was oriented towards the production of meat . The population dropped precipitously , and between 1970 and 1990 varied between 250 and 300 animals , with still lower levels seen in the early 1990s . A genetic study released in 1994 showed genetic bottlenecking and a severe risk of inbreeding , and led to the establishment of a conservation plan . Despite a slight increase in popularity at the beginning of the 21st century , the Poitevin is still in danger of extinction , with a slightly downward @-@ trending population . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The body of the Poitevin is slender for a heavy horse and longer than other French draft breeds . It stands 15 @.@ 3 to 17 @.@ 1 hands ( 63 to 69 inches , 160 to 175 cm ) high , with stallions averaging 16 @.@ 2 hands ( 66 inches , 168 cm ) and mares 15 @.@ 3 hands . The heavy clay and rich minerals of its homeland help it to develop strong bones , and it is late to reach physical maturity , generally around 6 to 7 years . 
 The head is long and strong , with a convex profile and thick , long ears . The neck is long and the shoulders are sloping . The chest is broad and deep , the withers prominent , the back long and broad , and the hindquarters strong . The legs are well developed and powerful , with large joints . The Poitevin has large hooves , an advantage in wet environments , as an adaptation to the alternately hard and waterlogged marshes upon which it developed . The lower legs are well feathered , and the mane and tail are long and thick . The Poitevin is gentle , calm and robust . Historically the breed has been known for its slow movement and disinterest in pulling , although it can produce significant power if necessary . The breed enjoys human contact , and shows intelligence , although it can also be stubborn . Prolonged effort is its weak point , as the Poitevin sometimes lack endurance . 
 The Poitevin is found in a wide variety of colors , which are partly the result of the many breeds that influenced it . It is the only French draft horse that can be found in bay dun , a tan body color with black mane and tail and primitive markings . This color likely comes from the Spanish horses that influenced the Flemish horses that later contributed to the breeding of the Poitevin . The most popular colors are pure black and seal brown ( the latter called black pangaré by the breed registry , although these horses are genetically brown , not black with pangaré markings ) , which came from the influence of Flemish and Friesian horses . The breed standard accepts all colors , except for pinto and leopard spotted , and it is common to see gray , bay and bay roan horses , the last probably being inherited from the Brabant breed . Chestnut and chestnut roan are also seen , both being a legacy of Breton crosses in the breed . 
 = = History = = 
 The Poitevin breed was created in the marshes of the Poitou region , especially around Luçon , La Rochelle , Melle and Niort . It was developed through a mixture of human and natural selection to the marshy area that it inhabited . Although described as a draft horse , it was not selected for draft purposes , and was never popular for that use . 
 Remains of prehistoric horses have been found in the Poitou region , with Mesolithic remains ( 20 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 BC ) located near <unk> and <unk> . Some enthusiasts claim that the Poitevin horse is descended directly from these horses , based on physical similarities , and claim a common origin with the Tarpan horse painted on the Lascaux cave walls . However , this has not been confirmed by scientific studies , and numerous claims by other horse breeds of this same relationship have been invalidated by further research . Other horses were probably brought to the area by migrating Celts , and there is a record from the 10th century of a bishop from Rome asking the Count of Poitou for a mare from the region . These horses , like mules , were a favorite among the magistrates and ecclesiastical personnel in the medieval era , and were sold around Niort , Saint @-@ Maixent , Auvergne , Dauphiné , Languedoc and in Spain . The number of horses in the area , however , was not well known before the 17th century . 
 The Poitevin breed as it is known today began to develop in 1599 when King Henry IV of France requested that Dutch and Flemish engineers , led by Humphrey Bradley , begin draining the Poitou marshes . They brought with them Friesian , Brabant and a type of Flemish work horse that was well known in the 13th century . These horses stood under 16 @.@ 3 hands ( 67 inches , 170 cm ) and weighed up to 1 @,@ 200 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 600 lb ) . They were crossed with native Poitou mares , and this crossbreeding created a large , slow type , similar to the Flemish work horses of the Dutch marshes . This type was the forerunner of the modern Poitevin breed . 
 At the end of the 18th century , the French government tried to impose a system of crossing Poitevin horses with lighter @-@ weight Norman and Thoroughbred horses to create cavalry horses . Despite financial incentives , private breeders protested because they felt that the resulting crossbred horses created poor quality mules upon further breeding . The changes also affected the characteristics of the breed that had been developed for work in its marshy homeland , including large hooves and a calm manner . Some sources argue that at this point the breed was employed for agricultural and logging uses . Others state that they were not pulling horses , and were instead used almost solely for the production of mules . 
 = = = Production of mules = = = 
 Poitevin mares were crossbred with Poitou donkeys to create the famous Poitou mule , a large , hardy breed . As mules are hybrids , and thus sterile , they can only be created through crossing a donkey and a horse . The industry of mule breeding in Poitou has existed since at least the 18th century , when it was opposed by the government stud farm administration that was attempting to breed cavalry horses for French troops . At the beginning of the 19th century , the government prohibited breeding mules from mares taller than 11 @.@ 3 1 ⁄ 4 hands ( 47 @.@ 25 inches , 120 cm ) , and threatened to castrate all donkeys in the region . In the 1860s , equine historian Eugene Gayot described a horse that he called the " <unk> <unk> " , and stated that the main purpose of this breed was to produce mares from which to breed mules . He added that this breed was also called the Poitevin . Mares of many breeds were used to produce mules at that point in history , but Gayot noted that the heavy mares from the Poitou marshes produced the best mules , likely because the Poitevin mares bequeathed to their descendents the same heavy bone structure . 
 Although the Poitevin was not the only breed of horse used for the production of mules , the Poitou mule was known worldwide . They were in high demand in the United States from the late 19th century until the beginning of World War I. During the 1920s , livestock production began to decline . In the Deux @-@ Sèvres region , especially in the district of Melle , near Luçon and Saint @-@ Maixent , mule breeding began to be concentrated in ateliers ( workshops ) , which were relatively expensive for breeders . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 Poitevin colts and fillies were sold at fairs in <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Rochefort , Pont @-@ l <unk> and <unk> . In 1867 , there were 50 @,@ 000 pure and crossbred mares . By the early 20th century , there were tens of thousands of Poitevins in France , but this period saw the beginning of the breed 's decline . Poitevin colts , which were not used for the breeding of mules , were considered " soft " and less valuable than the major draft horse breed of the 19th century – the Percheron . Some horse dealers purchased young gray Poitevin horses , fed them heavily to make them larger and stronger , and then sold them at the age of four as Percherons . These " Percherons " were transported to areas such as Saintonge , Yonne , Nivernais and Gâtinais . 
 In the early 19th century , the breed was crossed with the Percheron , and with the Boulonnais between 1860 and 1867 . During the same time period , crosses were made with the Breton , a practice supported by some breeders and denounced by others . Farmers in the region also began to add Breton blood into the Poitou mule , giving that animal a more square head and shorter ears . In the Poitevin horse breed , the crosses resulted in the body becoming longer and lighter , the legs longer and with less bone , and gray becoming more common as a coat color . In 1860 , Eugene Gayot called the mares of the breed " heavy , common , soft and of medium size " . Breeders chose horses with large joints , thick coats and a high croup , and had a preference for a black coat color . 
 In 1861 , there were concerns that the old @-@ style Poitevin was becoming extinct , and questions about whether the Poitou mule retained the quality that it previously had . The large Poitevin mares became rarer , due to large amounts of crossbreeding and a lack of care shown towards breeding stock selection . Thoroughbreds and Thoroughbred crosses , especially at the stud farms in Saint @-@ Maixent and La Roche @-@ sur @-@ Yon , created the Anglo @-@ Poitevin type , a half @-@ blood used by the army . The continued draining of the marshes also influenced the breed . Many Poitevins at this point were actually a mix of Breton and old @-@ type Poitevin bloodstock . However , a distinction persisted between the real Poitevin and mixed @-@ blood horses , and farmers who preferred the former preserved the type , which formed the base for the creation of the breed studbook . 
 The studbook for the Poitevin horse was created by the Société Centrale d <unk> des Deux @-@ Sèvres on June 26 , 1884 , with a horse section and a donkey section . The first edition was released December 31 , 1885 , setting the physical criteria for the breeding and ending the practice of promoting crossbred horses as purebreds . It also marked the end of government intervention against the mule breeding industry , although bonuses were paid to encourage farmers to breed purebred horses . In 1902 , a breeding syndicate to promote Poitou mules was created , but disappeared after a lack of advertising by stock breeders . On August 6 , 1912 , the French government released a decree officially supporting the mule breeding industry , backed by the purchase of mules by the French National Stud and bonuses given to the best stallions . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 After several revisions , the studbook was closed in 1922 after registering 424 foundation horses . The closing of the studbook brought about additional purebred breeding and selection based on conformation , color and working ability . In 1923 , an association of Poitevin breeders was founded , but declining livestock production pushed the group to reorganize in 1937 in order to gain more support from the government , through bonuses and subsidies . 
 In the first half of the 20th century , the mule breeding industry collapsed with the advent of mechanization . By 1922 , Poitevin foals became difficult to sell , and the population dropped dramatically as there was no economic incentive for breeding . A continued breeding of mules caused the breed to decline faster than other draft breeds , as purebred horses were not bred as often . By 1945 , breed selection was oriented towards the production of meat , as the only remaining economic opportunity for farmers . The conformation of the breed changed slightly to become shorter , but the Poitevin remained unprofitable for horse meat , as breeders preferred to invest in herds of <unk> and Breton horses , which were faster growing and higher yielding . 
 By 1950 , there were only about 600 mares and 50 stallion left in the breed . Increasing mechanization and competition with other livestock hurt the Poitevin , as did a lack of promotion and protection . Between 1970 and 1990 , the population of the Poitevin varied between 250 and 300 animals , with an average of 20 new horses entering the studbook each year . By the early 1990s , population numbers fell to the lowest in history . Sources are unclear on the number of living Poitevins in the early 1990s , but by 1996 one author says there were 64 newly registered foals and 28 approved breeding stallions , while another gives a total population of 293 horses in 1997 . 
 = = = Conservation and genetic testing = = = 
 The breed owes its survival to a small group of enthusiasts , working with the French National Stud . A genetic study performed in 1994 revealed a genetic bottleneck in the mid @-@ 1900s , with the entire modern population of Poitevins tracing to one stallion , named Québec , foaled in 1960 . There is a significant risk of inbreeding , leading the Unité Nationale de Sélection et de Promotion de Race to promote a plan of managed breeding in 1998 . At the same time , crossbreeding with Friesian and Belgian horses was suggested to increase genetic diversity using morphologically and historically similar breeds . The French government distributes bonuses to the owners of the best stallions , a program more important to the Poitevin than to other draft breeds because of the significant possibility of extinction . 
 The Poitevin had a slight increase in popularity at the beginning of the 21st century , and could count approximately 100 farms perpetuating the breed . The association had around 300 members , as well as 83 stallions and 189 mares registered . However , by 2006 , the Poitevin was still considered the most endangered French horse breed , with less than 100 births per year and a slightly decreasing population . There is almost no crossbreeding done with outside breeds , in order to maintain the numbers of purebred stock . In 2008 , a second genetic study was conducted in partnership with the Institut national de la recherche agronomique ; this study considered the Poitevin and four other French breeds to be endangered . It suggested making these breeds a conservation priority in order to maintain maximum genetic diversity among the French horse population . 
 The studbook for the Poitevin is based in Niort , and the breed is the subject of a conservation breeding plan , the goal of which is to eventually revive the production of Poitou mules . The conservation plan includes an experimental infusion of blood from the Boulonnais , and is followed by 70 percent of breeders . L <unk> nationale des races <unk> du Poitou manages the studbook for the Poitevin horse , the Poitou donkey and the Poitou mule , and is recognized by the French Ministry of Agriculture . Its goals are to ensure the selection of breeding stock that meet the physical characteristics expected of the breeds , to maintain the studbooks , and to promote the breeds . There is a breed show held annually in the Poitou region . 
 The Poitevin breed has very low numbers . In 2011 , there were 71 new foals registered with the studbook . The same year , 227 mares were covered , with 171 being bred to Poitevin stallions . There were 33 stallions registered and 80 active breeders . These numbers represent a decrease from the previous year . Over the past decade , the highest number of foals registered was 113 in 2008 , and between 80 and 90 foals were registered in the other years . The majority of breeding farms are located in the Poitou area , including Vendée ( especially around Fontenay @-@ le @-@ Comte and Luçon ) , Deux @-@ Sèvres ( especially near Melle ) , Vienna and <unk> , and some in Charente , near Ruffec . There are National Studs located in Saintes and Vendée . There are a few breeders in Maine @-@ et @-@ Loire . 
 The breed is accessible to the public at l <unk> nationale de la <unk> , an experimental farm in Dampierre @-@ sur @-@ <unk> in Charente @-@ Maritime , and at the Saintes National Stud . Members of the breed are exhibited at the annual Paris International Agricultural Show . Approximately a dozen horses are exported each year , mainly to Germany , Sweden and Switzerland . A few breeding stallions have been exported to the United States . Breeders in the US have become interested in the conservation of the breed as a draft animal , as opposed to many Europeans , who are looking for a leisure animal . A stud farm also exists in Sweden , and one in the United States . 
 = = Uses = = 
 As the stallions of the Poitevin breed could not be used to produce mules , they were generally sold as two @-@ year @-@ olds at the summer fair in Vendée and the winter fair in Saint @-@ Maixent , as well as to horse merchants in Berry , Beauce , Perche and the Midi . In these areas , they were used for agriculture . In Paris , they were used for pulling omnibuses , and the French military used the Poitevin for pulling artillery . At the beginning of the 21st century there has been a new demand for mules for leisure purposes , but this demand cannot be filled by Poitevin mares until their numbers have recovered to a sufficient level . 
 Today , Poitevins are used mainly for driving , both in competitions and for leisure use . They are used to pull carriages for tourists . Members of the breed can be ridden more comfortably than other draft breeds due to their slimmer build . They are also used extensively for equine therapy in France . The Poitevin is used for light agricultural work in vineyards , and for maintenance of natural wetlands . The council of <unk> @-@ et @-@ <unk> acquired a herd of Poitevins to maintain the marshes in the area . The Poitevin also has been used in movies , as a mount for forest monitors in Melun , harnessed for urban work in Poitier and Niort , and for the collection of waste on the island of Ré . 
 = Pan Fusheng = 
 Pan Fusheng ( Chinese : <unk> ; December 1908 – April 1980 ) was a Chinese Communist revolutionary and politician . He was the first party secretary of the short @-@ lived Pingyuan Province of the People 's Republic of China , and also served as the First Secretary ( i.e. party chief ) of Henan and Heilongjiang provinces . 
 During the Great Leap Forward , Pan sympathized with Marshal Peng Dehuai , a critic of Mao Zedong 's collectivization policy . As a result , in 1958 he was dismissed as party chief of Henan and subjected to persecution , but was later rehabilitated . 
 When the Cultural Revolution began , Pan , then party chief of Heilongjiang province , embraced the rebel Red Guards movement and gained the support of Mao . However , he was soon involved in major factional violence , and was dismissed again in 1971 and put under investigation . In 1982 , the Communist Party of China posthumously criticized him for committing " serious mistakes " during the Cultural Revolution . 
 = = Republic of China = = 
 Pan Fusheng was born in December 1908 to a poor peasant family in Wendeng , Shandong province . His original name was Liu <unk> ( Chinese : <unk> ) , and courtesy name <unk> ( <unk> ) . Pan was an excellent student in Wendeng County Senior Elementary School , and was admitted to Wendeng County Normal School with the highest score in the entrance examination ; however , he was later forced to drop out owing to poverty , and taught in a rural senior elementary school for five years . 
 In 1929 , he was admitted to the Shandong Number One Rural Normal School , where he was influenced by communist classmates , and joined the Communist Party of China in 1931 . After the Mukden Incident , which led to the Japanese occupation of Manchuria , Pan organized the Shandong students to join the anti @-@ Japanese and anti @-@ Kuomintang ( KMT ) protests in the capital Nanjing . In March 1932 , he was arrested by the KMT government and held at the Jinan Number One Prison . He was sentenced to ten years for " endangering the Republic " , but was released in late 1937 , after the eruption of the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War . 
 After his release from prison , Pan organized and led the Communist guerrillas in Shandong , and later became a leader of the Hebei – Shandong – Henan ( Ji – Lu – Yu ) Communist base . He participated in the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War and the subsequent Chinese Civil War against the KMT government . 
 = = Early PRC = = 
 In August 1949 , just before the official establishment of the People 's Republic of China , Pan Fusheng was appointed Communist Party Secretary of the newly established Pingyuan Province . In March 1950 , a number of peasants and cattle froze to death when transporting grain to government storage in <unk> prefecture . Pan took partial responsibility for the " <unk> Incident " and was demoted to deputy party chief . 
 In November 1952 , Pingyuan Province was abolished and most of it was merged into Henan Province , and Pan Fusheng became the party chief ( then called First Secretary ) of Henan , succeeding Zhang Xi , and the Political Commissar of the Henan Military District . In September 1956 , he was elected as an alternate member of the 8th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China . 
 = = Great Leap Forward = = 
 During the Anti @-@ Rightist Movement and the Great Leap Forward , Pan Fusheng sympathized with Marshal Peng Dehuai , who criticized Mao 's disastrous collectivization policies . As a result , he became a major target of persecution by the fervent Mao loyalist Wu <unk> , the Second Secretary of Henan , with the approval of the CPC Central Committee . 
 During the 9th plenum of the Henan Provincial Party Congress in June 1958 , Pan Fusheng and two lower @-@ ranking officials , Yang Jue and Wang <unk> , were denounced as the " Pan , Yang , Wang right @-@ deviating anti @-@ party clique " , and subjected to brutal struggle sessions . In October 1958 , the Communist Party calculated that some 1 @.@ 6 billion big @-@ character posters denouncing them had been written . People who did not put up posters risked being labelled " little Pan Fusheng " . Pan was dismissed from office and sent to work as a laborer on a farm . Wu <unk> replaced Pan as First Secretary of Henan and zealously implemented Mao 's collectivization policy . Under Wu 's leadership , Henan was one of the worst affected provinces during the Great Chinese Famine , with nearly 3 million people starving to death from 1959 to 1961 . 
 After the end of the Great Leap Forward , Pan was rehabilitated in 1962 and became the minister @-@ level director of the All China Federation of Supply and Marketing Cooperatives . 
 = = Cultural Revolution = = 
 In October 1965 , Pan Fusheng was appointed First Secretary of Heilongjiang Province in Northeast China and Political Commissar of the Heilongjiang Military District . The Cultural Revolution erupted shortly afterwards , and on 31 January 1967 , Heilongjiang became the first province to set up a revolutionary committee . By enthusiastically embracing the " power seizure " movement by the rebel Red Guards , Pan was able to gain Mao 's support and became a well @-@ known figure throughout China . During the Cultural Revolution , Pan became chairman of the Heilongjiang revolutionary committee in March 1967 , one of the only three provincial party chiefs in the country to have transformed from an incumbent provincial First Secretary to head of the revolutionary committee . This was considered a rare feat , as the vast majority of provincial First Secretaries were overthrown through power seizures by radicals and Red Guards , or were removed from power through other means . In April 1968 , Pan was elected a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China , and in April 1969 , he became a member of the Central Military Commission . 
 Soon after the establishment of the revolutionary committee , however , a faction opposing Pan emerged and sought to remove him from power . Pan became involved in factional violence . He jailed people from the rival faction , including party members and ordinary people . His supporters and opponents fought each other in major armed conflicts , and Pan had serious disagreements with the local military leadership . In June 1971 , the central government dismissed him from his posts and put him under investigation . 
 = = Death = = 
 In April 1980 , Pan died of a stroke in Harbin . In 1982 , the CPC Central Committee issued a statement criticizing Pan for committing " serious mistakes " during the Cultural Revolution . 
 = Nothing Fails = 
 " Nothing Fails " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna from her ninth studio album , American Life ( 2003 ) . Written by Madonna , Guy Sigsworth and Jem Griffiths , and produced by the singer along with Mirwais Ahmadzaï and Mark " Spike " Stent , it was released as the third single from the album on October 26 , 2003 . Originally titled " Silly Thing " , " Nothing Fails " is a love song which has acoustic guitar chords and a gospel choir appearance . Lyrically , the song discusses a lover who is the one , and how their meeting was not just chance . A number of remixes of the song were done , with one of them being included on Madonna 's remix album Remixed & Revisited ( 2003 ) . 
 The song received generally positive reviews , with music critics praising it as one of the best tracks from American Life , while others compared it with Madonna 's previous single " Like a Prayer " ( 1989 ) , as both songs feature a gospel choir . " Nothing Fails " was released in the US in hopes of attaining sales from American Life . However , it did not chart on the US Billboard Hot 100 , making it the second single from the album to fail to chart in the US . However , the song reached number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs and Hot Singles Sales charts . Internationally , the song was a success , reaching the top ten in Australia , Belgium , Canada and Italy while topping the charts in Spain . 
 Although initially reported on the contrary , no music video was filmed for " Nothing Fails " . The song was performed during a promotional tour for American Life in 2003 , along with other songs from the album and her past hits . One of these performances was shown by MTV in a special named Madonna on Stage & on the Record . It was also performed during Madonna 's sixth concert tour , the Re @-@ Invention World Tour ( 2004 ) , with Madonna alone on stage singing the song accompanied by an acoustic guitar . Many reviewers noted that Madonna in the performance was a " solitary figure " as it was herself alone playing the acoustic guitar . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 According to Lucy O 'Brien , author of Madonna : Like an Icon , the main concept of American Life was about " nothing " . This was evident in the titles of the songs like " Nobody Knows Me " , usage of " no " in " Love Profusion " , as well as " Nothing Fails " . Usage of the negative tone led Madonna to be sarcastic on people 's assumptions about her and emphasize about her knowledge of romantic love . " Nothing Fails " began as a humble track that musician @-@ producer Guy Sigsworth wrote for his wife . He asked singer Jem Archer to collaborate with him and during their first collaborative session , they wrote a song called " Silly Thing " , inspired by Sigsworth 's wife . He said : " I never write love songs , but I was moved to write one for her . I 've never had a problematic relationship with her , there 's not been a lot of drama . But I wanted to write something naive and honest . " The demo , which sounded like an offbeat folk song , was later played for Madonna , who loved it and added to and changed parts and the title of the song . In September 2012 , Sigsworth leaked the original version of " Nothing Fails " , describing it as a " work @-@ in @-@ progress demo of a song I originally wrote with Jem , and which later became ' Nothing Fails ' , co @-@ written and recorded by Madonna . It 's over ten years old " . On " Nothing Fails " , Archer said : 
 " When I actually heard it I was so shocked , [ be ] cause it was the first time I believed [ my career ] was actually going to happen . And to hear Madonna singing it was like , oh my [ God ] , so bizarre . My mom keeps calling me whenever it 's on . She 'll go to shops in the UK and hold the phone up to the thing and I 'm like , ' They 're going to arrest you . ' " 
 " Nothing Fails " was produced by Madonna , along with Mirwais Ahmadzaï and Mark " Spike " Stent . The recording sessions for American Life started at late 2001 , then was put on hold as Madonna filmed Swept Away in Malta and starred in the West End play Up for Grabs . She returned to the Olympic Recording Studios in late 2002 and finished off the sessions . The mixing for the track was done by Mark " Spike " Stent at the Westlake Recording Studios at West Hollywood , California , while Tim Young did the mastering of the song at Metropolis Studios in London . Michael Colombier did the string arrangement with Geoff Foster acting as the strings engineer , conducting at AIR Studios . For the instrumentation featured in the song , Ahmadzaï played the guitars , and Stuart Price played the piano . 
 = = Composition and remixes = = 
 " Nothing Fails " features an acoustic guitar introduction , which is a recurring theme of American Life . The guitar is accompanied by a " light " drum section and low @-@ pitched vocals from Madonna and also features a cello in the first part of the song , while gospel music comes in at the later half . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Publishing , " Nothing Fails " is written in the time signature of common time with a moderately slow tempo of 92 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of B ♭ major with Madonna 's voice spanning from F3 to B ♭ 4 . The song follows a basic sequence of Gm – F – E ♭ – B ♭ – Gm as its chord progression . 
 Lyrically , the song discusses a lover who is the one , and how their meeting was not just chance , a reference to the " tree of life " is made during the song while Madonna makes denouncements of religion by singing " I 'm not religious " but she wishes to pray . Bill Friskics @-@ Warren , author of I 'll Take You There : Pop Music and the Urge for Transcendence , described the lyrics as consisting of double entendre , talking about both spiritual and sexual rebirth . The London Community Gospel Choir , led by Nicki Brown , recorded backing vocals for the song . The strings engineer for the choir , Geoff Foster , recalls that the group consisted of " a bunch of great singers giving it loudly , it was impressive . " According to Rolling Stone and The Advocate , the song glides from a lean arrangement and then reaches its peak with the gospel chorus , which resembles that of Madonna 's single , " Like a Prayer " ( 1989 ) . 
 A remix version for the song , " Jackie 's In Love In The Club Mix " , done by DJ Jackie Christie , was made available as one of the exclusive tracks of the American and European maxi @-@ single release of the song . She maintained Madonna 's vocals and the gospel choir appearance , commenting that " I was asked to remix ' Nothing Fails ' [ ... ] I wanted it to be a <unk> mix with a big choir breakdown so you felt the magic of the Madonna and the choir , like church . " Peter Rauhofer 's remix of the song was added along with the remixes of the follow @-@ up single , " Love Profusion " . Another version , the " Jason Nevins Mix " , was included on Madonna 's 2003 remix album Remixed & Revisited . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic commented that on this remix , Madonna sounds as if she is out of step with the music of 2003 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Nothing Fails " received mostly positive reviews from music critics . O 'Brien listed it as a " hymn of devotion " and " the most majestic song on American Life " . She complemented the " dramatic , theatrical air " of the song and noted that the addition of the choir made the song revelatory and ecstatic . J. Randy Taraborrelli wrote in his book , Madonna : An Intimate Biography , that although the album was not a strong , cohesive package , " Nothing Fails " stood out as one of the few gems . In a review for the album as a whole , Michael Paoletta from Billboard called it a highlight of American Life , describing the song as " tear @-@ inducing " . Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker called it " lovely " and named it , among other songs from the album " refreshingly – hell , shockingly – earnest " . 
 Alexis Petridis from The Guardian praised its choral finale . Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani labeled it one of the moments of greatness on the album . Ian Youngs from BBC Music gave a positive review for " Nothing Fails " , writing that less is more when it comes to Mirwais ' electronic tricks . Johnny Davis from NME commented that " only ' Nothing Fails ' and ' Intervention ' dip beneath the frenetically poppy , with neither a ' Ray of Light ' -style glitterball stomper , nor a big ballad to act as a breather " . Josh Tyrangiel from Time found Madonna 's singing in " Nothing Fails " as relaxed and woeful , consisting of " plenty of soul " . A review in the Telegram & Gazette complimented the song for successfully blending between the " spiritual and the sensual " . 
 Jon Pareles from The New York Times believed that " Nothing Fails " was able to raise sentiments likened by other people and was prone to introspection , unlike other Madonna tunes . Stephen Thompson of The A.V. Club considered the song " emotionally resonant " , but characterized the introduction of a choir as " busy " . Instead of praising " Nothing Fails " , Chuck Taylor from Billboard said that the song " illustrates everything that makes [ American Life ] a grind " . Ben Ratliff from Rolling Stone compared it negatively to " Like a Prayer " and commented it is much closer to what she 's become good at : the idea of transfiguration through love , declaring that the difference in 2003 is she doesn 't have the ambition . Stylus Magazine also compared it negatively to " Like a Prayer " , calling it " an off @-@ hand denouncement of religion " and stating that " the same old song , over 10 years later , just doesn 't cut it anymore " . Jim DeRogatis of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times found the lyric " I 'm not religious " to be " confusing and befuddling " , as Madonna references Jesus Christ and Satan in other songs on the album . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Following the commercial disappointment of " American Life " and " Hollywood " — the first two singles from American Life — Maverick sent a radio remix of " Nothing Fails " in hopes of attaining sales . The song was sent to Mainstream Top 40 radio on October 28 , 2003 . " Nothing Fails " did not chart in the United States ; however , it was a commercial success on the dance charts . According to Fred Bronson , the single release of the remixes of the song debuted at number @-@ one on the Hot Singles Sales and Hot Dance Single Sales chart , on the issue dated December 27 , 2003 , the same week it also moved up to the top @-@ twenty of the Dance Club Songs chart . " Me Against the Music " by Britney Spears , on which Madonna was featured , and " Nobody Knows Me " , both were also present in the top @-@ twenty , making Madonna the only artist to have three songs within the top @-@ twenty on the chart simultaneously . However , the single sold less than 10 @,@ 000 units according to Nielsen SoundScan , marking the lowest total for a number @-@ one song on the chart . At the year @-@ end Hot Dance Singles Sales recap , " Nothing Fails " was at number two position , while " Me Against the Music " and " Love Profusion " was at numbers one and three respectively . Billboard reported that Madonna was the first artist in its chart history to have the top three Dance Sales song . 
 In Australia , Warner Bros. Records released a maxi @-@ CD single of " Nothing Fails " . The release was considered an album by ARIA due to the number of different tracks ; it failed to chart on the ARIA Albums Chart . However , it did appear on the ARIA Dance Albums Chart at number six . The song also reached the top ten in Canada . In Europe , " Nothing Fails " achieved moderate success on the charts . In Austria , " Nothing Fails " had moderate success , debuting at number 74 , and one week later , reached number 51 , and spent only six weeks inside the chart . On January 3 , 2004 , " Nothing Fails " debuted at its peak of number 50 on the Belgian Flanders Singles Chart . However , it peaked at number three on the Ultratip chart of Wallonia . The song debuted at number 16 on the Danish Singles Chart , peaking at number 11 the next week . The song debuted at its peak of number 34 on the French Singles Chart on November 30 , 2003 . In its second week , the song began its decline , falling out of the chart at number 97 , almost four months later . The song had commercial success in Italy , reaching the top ten on its singles chart , and also in Spain where it reached the top of the chart . On the German Singles Chart , the song peaked at number 36 . 
 = = Promotion and live performances = = 
 No music video was filmed for promotion of " Nothing Fails " . Initially it was reported by Daily Mirror that Madonna planned to shoot the video in Israel with actor Michael Douglas . According to Polly Graham from the newspaper , Warner Bros. executives were concerned about the singer 's safety in Israel , but Madonna was adamant . " Her record bosses are really worried about it . They are trying to talk her around , but she 's having none of it . She has told them it makes sense to shoot it in Israel as the Kabbalah originates from there . Madonna is not particularly bothered about her safety and potential risks . She doesn 't think it 's as bad as it seems . " Her then husband Guy Ritchie was also facing difficulty with his project , Revolver , which was rejected by Sony Pictures executives since it contained references to Kabbalah , and they asked Ritchie to re @-@ write the script . Since the video itself would have included symbolism from Kabbalah , Madonna ultimately decided to not film the music video . These reports were later refuted by the artist during an interview with San Francisco radio station Alice 97 @.@ 3 , where she explained that no music video would be shot for the single . 
 To start marketing American Life , Madonna embarked on a promo tour . One of these performances , presented at the Total Request Live studios in New York , was shown by MTV in a special named Madonna on Stage & on the Record . Hosted by Carson Daly , she sang " Nothing Fails " and other songs from American Life while answered questions from the audience . Madonna also performed the song at HMV store in Oxford to around 500 people . She wore a black beret , polka @-@ dot blouse , black trousers and heels . The setlist included " American Life " , " Hollywood " , " Nothing Fails " , " X @-@ Static Process " and " Mother and Father " before performing her previous singles " Like a Prayer " and " Don 't Tell Me " . She also played the acoustic guitar during some songs and played the wrong chords at the beginning of " X @-@ Static Process " . 
 The next year , Madonna performed the song on the Re @-@ Invention World Tour as the first song from the acoustic segment of the concert . As the " Bedtime Story " interlude , in which three acrobatic dancers on swings dropped from the ceiling ended , Madonna arrived on stage dressed in a black Stella McCartney suit and accompanied by an acoustic guitar to sing the song . Jane Stevenson from Toronto Sun described Madonna in the performance as a " solitary figure " as it was herself alone playing the acoustic guitar . Bret McCabe from Baltimore City Paper described it as a " warm @-@ up " performance . During the concert in Dublin , Ireland , she wore a black coat and was protected by an umbrella while performing the song during the rain . This occurrence was shown in the I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret documentary , which chronicled the whole tour . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – lead vocals , songwriting , producer 
 Mirwais Ahmadzaï – guitar , producer , programming 
 Stuart Price – piano 
 Guy Sigsworth – songwriting 
 Jem Griffiths – songwriting 
 Mark " Spike " Stent – production , audio mixing 
 London Community Gospel Choir – choir arrangement 
 Michael Colombier – string arrangement 
 Tim Young – audio mastering 
 Credits for " Nothing Fails " are adapted from American Life liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Springbok = 
 The springbok / <unk> / ( Antidorcas marsupialis ) is a medium @-@ sized antelope found mainly in southern and southwestern Africa . The sole member of the genus Antidorcas , this bovid was first described by the German zoologist Eberhard August Wilhelm von Zimmermann in 1780 . Three subspecies are identified . A slender , long @-@ legged antelope , the springbok reaches 71 to 86 cm ( 28 to 34 in ) at the shoulder and weighs between 27 and 42 kg ( 60 and 93 lb ) . Both sexes have a pair of black , 35 @-@ to @-@ 50 @-@ centimetre ( 14 to 20 in ) long horns that curve backward . The springbok is characterised by a white face , a dark stripe running from the eyes to the mouth , a light brown coat marked by a reddish brown stripe that runs from the upper foreleg to the buttocks across the flanks , and a white rump flap . 
 Active mainly at dawn and dusk , springbok form harems ( mixed @-@ sex herds ) . In earlier times , springbok of the Kalahari desert and Karoo would migrate in large numbers across the countryside , a practice known as <unk> . A feature unique to the springbok is pronking , in which the springbok performs multiple leaps into the air , up to 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) above the ground , in a stiff @-@ legged posture , with the back bowed and the white flap lifted . Primarily a browser , the springbok feeds on shrubs and succulents ; this antelope can live without drinking water for years , meeting its requirements through eating succulent vegetation . Breeding takes place year @-@ round , and peaks in the rainy season , when forage is most abundant . A single calf is born after a five to six month long pregnancy ; weaning occurs at nearly six months of age , and the calf leaves its mother a few months later . 
 Springbok inhabit the dry areas of south and southwestern Africa . The International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) classifies the springbok as a Least Concern species . There are no major threats to the long @-@ term survival of the species ; the springbok , in fact , is one of the few antelope species considered to have an expanding population . They are popular game animals , and are valued for their meat and skin . The springbok is the national animal of South Africa . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The common name " springbok " ( pronounced / <unk> @-@ ˌbäk / ) comes from the Afrikaans words spring ( " jump " ) and bok ( " antelope " or " goat " ) ; the first recorded use of the name dates to 1775 . The scientific name of the springbok is Antidorcas marsupialis ; anti is Greek for " opposite " , and <unk> for " gazelle " – identifying that the animal is not a gazelle . The specific epithet marsupialis comes from the Latin marsupium ( " pocket " ) ; it refers to a pocket @-@ like skin flap which extends along the midline of the back from the tail . In fact , it is this physical feature that distinguishes the springbok from true gazelles . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 The springbok is the sole member of the genus Antidorcas and is placed in the family Bovidae . It was first described by the German zoologist Eberhard August Wilhelm von Zimmermann in 1780 . Zimmermann assigned the genus Antilope ( blackbuck ) to the springbok . In 1845 , Swedish zoologist Carl Jakob Sundevall placed the springbok in Antidorcas , a genus of its own . 
 In 2013 , Eva Verena <unk> ( of the University of Cambridge ) and colleagues undertook a revision of the phylogeny of the tribe Antilopini on the basis of nuclear and mitochondrial data . They showed that the springbok and the gerenuk ( <unk> <unk> ) form a clade with saiga ( Saiga tatarica ) as sister taxon . The study pointed out that the saiga and the springbok could be considerably different from the rest of the antilopines ; a 2007 phylogenetic study even suggested that the two form a clade sister to the gerenuk . The cladogram below is based on the 2013 study . 
 Fossil springbok are known from the Pliocene ; the antelope appears to have evolved about three million years ago from a gazelle @-@ like ancestor . Three fossil species of Antidorcas have been identified , in addition to the extant form , and appear to have been widespread across Africa . Two of these , A. bondi and A. australis , became extinct around 7 @,@ 000 years ago ( early Holocene ) . The third species , A. <unk> , probably gave rise to the extant form A. marsupialis during the Pleistocene , about 100 thousand years ago . Fossils have been reported from Pliocene , Pleistocene and Holocene sites in northern , southern and eastern Africa . Fossils dating back to 80 and 100 thousand years ago have been excavated at <unk> Bay Cave ( Western Cape Province , South Africa ) and Florisbad ( Free State ) respectively . 
 Three subspecies are recognised : 
 A. m. angolensis ( Blaine , 1922 ) – Occurs in Benguela and <unk> ( southwestern Angola ) . 
 A. m. hofmeyri ( Thomas , 1926 ) – Occurs in <unk> and Great <unk> ( southwestern Africa ) . Its range lies north of the Orange River , stretching from <unk> and <unk> through Botswana to Namibia . 
 A. m. marsupialis ( Zimmermann , 1780 ) – Its range lies south of the Orange River , extending from the northeastern Cape of Good Hope to the Free State and Kimberley . 
 = = Description = = 
 The springbok is a slender antelope with long legs and neck . Both sexes reach 71 – 86 centimetres ( 28 – 34 in ) at the shoulder with a head @-@ and @-@ body length typically between 120 and 150 cm ( 47 and 59 in ) . The weights for both sexes range between 27 and 42 kilograms ( 60 and 93 lb ) . The tail , 14 to 28 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 5 to 11 @.@ 0 in ) long , ends in a short black tuft . There are major differences in the size and weight of the subspecies . A study tabulated average body measurements for the three subspecies . A. m. angolensis males stand 84 cm ( 33 in ) tall at the shoulder , while females are 81 cm ( 32 in ) tall . The males weigh around 31 kg ( 68 lb ) while the slightly heavier females weigh 32 kg ( 71 lb ) . A. m. hofmeyri is the largest subspecies ; males are nearly 86 cm ( 34 in ) tall , and the notably shorter females are 71 cm ( 28 in ) tall . The males , weighing 42 kg ( 93 lb ) , are heavier than females , that weigh 35 kg ( 77 lb ) . On the other hand , A. m. marsupialis is the smallest subspecies ; males are 75 cm ( 30 in ) tall and females 72 cm ( 28 in ) tall . Average weight of males is 31 kg ( 68 lb ) while for females it is 27 kg ( 60 lb ) . Another study showed a strong correlation between the availability of winter dietary protein and the body mass . 
 Dark stripes extend across the white face , from the corner of the eyes to the mouth . A dark patch marks the forehead . In juveniles the stripes and the patch are light brown . The ears , narrow and pointed , measure 15 – 19 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 9 – 7 @.@ 5 in ) . Typically light brown , the springbok has a dark reddish @-@ brown band running horizontally from the upper foreleg to the edge of the buttocks , separating the dark back from the white underbelly . The tail ( except the terminal black tuft ) , buttocks , the insides of the legs and the rump are all white . There are two other varieties – pure black and pure white forms – artificially selected in some South African ranches . Though born with a deep black sheen , adult black springbok are two shades of chocolate @-@ brown and develop a white marking on the face as they mature . White springbok , as the name suggests , are predominantly white with a light tan stripe on the flanks . 
 The three subspecies also differ in their colour . A. m. angolensis has a brown to tawny coat , with thick dark brown stripes on the face extending two @-@ thirds down to the snout . While the lateral stripe is nearly black , the stripe on the rump is dark brown . The medium brown forehead patch extends to eye level and is separated from the bright white face by a dark brown border . There is a brown spot on the nose . A. m. hofmeyri is a light fawn , with thin dark brown face stripes . The stripes on the flanks are dark brown to black , and the posterior stripes are moderately brown . The forehead patch , dark brown or fawn , extends beyond the level of the eyes and mixes with the white of the face without any clear barriers . The nose may have a pale smudge . A. m. marsupialis is a rich chestnut brown , with thin light face stripes . The stripe near the rump is well @-@ marked , and that on the flanks is deep brown . The forehead is brown , fawn or white , the patch not extending beyond the eyes and having no sharp boundaries . The nose is white or marked with brown . 
 The skin along the middle of the dorsal side is folded in , and covered with 15 to 20 cm ( 6 to 8 in ) white hair erected by arrector pili muscles ( located between hair follicles ) . This white hair is almost fully concealed by the surrounding brown hairs until the fold opens up , and this is a major feature distinguishing this antelope from gazelles . Springbok differ from gazelles in several other ways ; for instance , springbok have two premolars on both sides of either jaw , rather than the three observed in gazelles . This gives a total of 28 teeth in the springbok , rather than 32 of gazelles . Other points of difference include a longer , broader and rigid bridge to the nose and more muscular cheeks in springbok , and differences in the structure of the horns . 
 Both sexes have black horns , about 35 – 50 cm ( 14 – 20 in ) long , that are straight at the base and then curve backward . In A. m. marsupialis , females have thinner horns than males ; the horns of females are only 60 to 70 percent as long as those of males . Horns have a girth of 71 – 83 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 3 in ) at the base ; this thins to 56 – 65 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 6 in ) towards the tip . In the other two subspecies , horns of both sexes are nearly similar . The spoor , narrow and sharp , is 5 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) long . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 Springbok are mainly active around dawn and dusk . Activity is influenced by weather ; springbok can feed at night in hot weather , and at midday in colder months . They rest in the shade of trees or bushes , and often bed down in the open when it is cooler . The social structure of the springbok is similar to that of the Thomson 's gazelle . Mixed sex herds or harems have a roughly 3 : 1 sex ratio ; bachelor individuals are also observed . In the mating season , males generally form herds and wander in search of mates . Females live with their offspring in herds , that very rarely include dominant males . Territorial males round up female herds that enter their territories and keep out the bachelors ; mothers and juveniles may gather in nursery herds separate from harem and bachelor herds . After weaning , female juveniles stay with their mothers until the birth of their next calves , while males join bachelor groups . 
 A study of vigilance behaviour of herds revealed that individuals on the borders of herds tend to be more cautious ; vigilance decreases with group size . Group size and distance from roads and bushes were found to have major influence on vigilance , more among the grazing springbok than among their browsing counterparts . Adults were found to be more vigilant than juveniles , and males more vigilant than females . Springbok passing through bushes tend to be more vulnerable to predator attacks as they can not be easily alerted , and predators usually conceal themselves in bushes . Another study calculated that the time spent in vigilance by springbok on the edges of herds is roughly double that spent by those in the centre and the open . Springbok were found to be more cautious in the late morning than at dawn or in the afternoon , and more at night than in the daytime . Rates and methods of vigilance were found to vary with the aim of lowering risk from predators . 
 During the rut , males establish territories , ranging from 10 to 70 hectares ( 25 to 173 acres ) , which they mark by urinating and depositing large piles of dung . Males in neighbouring territories frequently fight for access to females , which they do by twisting and levering at each other with their horns , interspersed with stabbing attacks . Females roam the territories of different males . Outside of the rut , mixed sex herds can range from as few as three to as many as 180 individuals , while all @-@ male bachelor herds are of typically no more than fifty individuals . Harem and nursery herds are much smaller , typically including no more than ten individuals . 
 In earlier times , when large populations of springbok roamed the Kalahari desert and Karoo , millions of migrating springbok formed herds hundreds of kilometres long that could take several days to pass a town . These mass treks , known as <unk> in Afrikaans , took place during long periods of drought . Herds could efficiently retrace their path to their territories after long migrations . <unk> is still observed occasionally in Botswana , though on a much smaller scale than earlier . 
 Springbok often go into bouts of repeated high leaps of up to 2 m ( 6 ft 7 in ) into the air – a practice known as pronking ( derived from the Afrikaans <unk> , " to show off " ) or stotting . In pronking , the springbok performs multiple leaps into the air in a stiff @-@ legged posture , with the back bowed and the white flap lifted . When the male shows off his strength to attract a mate , or to ward off predators , he starts off in a stiff @-@ legged trot , leaping into the air with an arched back every few paces and lifting the flap along his back . Lifting the flap causes the long white hairs under the tail to stand up in a conspicuous fan shape , which in turn emits a strong scent of sweat . Although the exact cause of this behaviour is unknown , springbok exhibit this activity when they are nervous or otherwise excited . The most accepted theory for pronking is that it is a method to raise alarm against a potential predator or confuse it , or to get a better view of a concealed predator ; it may also be used for display . Springbok are very fast antelopes , clocked at 88 km / h ( 55 mph ) . They generally tend to be ignored by carnivores unless they are breeding . Caracals , cheetah , leopards , spotted <unk> and wild dogs are major predators of the springbok . African wild cats , black @-@ backed jackals , black eagles , martial eagles and tawny eagles target juveniles . Springbok are generally quiet animals , though they may make occasional low @-@ pitched bellows as a greeting and high @-@ pitched snorts when alarmed . 
 = = = Parasites = = = 
 A 2012 study scrutinised the effects of rainfall patterns and parasite infections on the body of the springbok in Etosha National Park . It was observed that males and juveniles were in better health toward the end of the rainy season . Health of females was more affected by parasites than by rainfall ; parasite count in females peaked prior to and immediately after parturition . Studies show that springbok host helminths ( Haemonchus , Longistrongylus and Trichostrongylus ) , ixodid ticks ( Rhipicephalus species ) , lice ( Damalinia and Linognathus species ) . Eimeria species mainly affect juveniles . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Springbok are primarily browsers and may switch to grazing occasionally ; they feed on shrubs and young succulents ( such as <unk> species ) before they <unk> . They prefer grasses such as Themeda triandra . Springbok can meet their water needs from the food they eat , and are able to survive without drinking water through dry season . In extreme cases , they do not drink any water over the course of their lives . Springbok may accomplish this by selecting flowers , seeds , and leaves of shrubs before dawn , when the food items are most succulent . In places such as the Etosha National Park , springbok seek out water bodies where they are available . Springbok gather in the wet season and disperse during the dry season , unlike other African mammals . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Springbok mate year @-@ round , though females are more likely to enter oestrus during the rainy season , when food is more plentiful . Females are able to conceive at as early as six to seven months , whereas males do not attain sexual maturity until two years ; rut lasts 5 to 21 days . When a female approaches a rutting male , the male holds his head and tail at level with the ground , lowers his horns and makes a loud grunting noise to attract her . The male then urinates and sniffs the female 's perineum . If the female is receptive , she urinates as well , and the male makes a flehmen gesture , and taps his leg till the female leaves or permits him to mate . 
 Gestation lasts five to six months , after which a single calf ( or rarely twins ) is born . Most births take place in the spring ( October to November ) , prior to the onset of the rainy season . The infant weighs 3 @.@ 8 to 5 kg ( 8 @.@ 4 to 11 @.@ 0 lb ) ; the female keeps her calf hidden in cover while she is away . Mother and calf rejoin the herd about three to four weeks after parturition ; the young are weaned at five or six months . When the mother gives birth again , the previous offspring , now 6 to 12 months old , deserts her to join herds of adult springbok . Thus a female can calve twice a year , and even thrice if one calf dies . Springbok live for up to ten years in the wild . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Springbok inhabit the dry areas of south and southwestern Africa . Their range extends from northwestern South Africa through the Kalahari desert into Namibia and Botswana . The Transvaal marks the eastern limit of the range , from where it extends westward to the Atlantic and northward to southern Angola and Botswana . In Botswana , they mostly occur in the Kalahari desert in the southwestern and central parts of the country . They are widespread across Namibia and the vast grasslands of the Free State and the shrublands of Karoo in South Africa ; on the other hand , they are confined to the Namib desert in Angola . 
 The historic range of the springbok stretched across the dry grasslands , bushlands and shrublands of south @-@ western and southern Africa ; springbok migrated sporadically in southern parts of the range . These migrations are rarely seen nowadays , but seasonal congregations can still be observed in preferred areas of short vegetation , such as the Kalahari desert . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 The springbok has been classified as Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) . There are no major threats to the long @-@ term survival of the species . In fact , the springbok is one of the few antelope species with a positive population trend . 
 Springbok occur in several protected areas across their range : <unk> and <unk> National Park ( Botswana ) ; Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park between Botswana and South Africa ; Etosha National Park and Namib @-@ Naukluft Park ( Namibia ) ; <unk> and Karoo National Parks and a number of provincial reserves in South Africa . In 1999 , Rod East of the IUCN SSC Antelope Specialist Group estimated the springbok population in South Africa at more than 670 @,@ 000 , noting that it might be an underestimate . However , estimates for Namibia , Angola , Botswana , Transvaal , Karoo and the Free State ( which gave a total population estimate of nearly 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 animals in southern Africa ) , were in complete disagreement with East 's estimate . Springbok are under active management in several private lands . Small populations have been introduced into private lands and provincial areas of KwaZulu @-@ Natal . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 Springbok are hunted as game throughout Namibia , Botswana and South Africa because of their attractive coats ; they are common hunting targets due to their large numbers and the ease with which they can be supported on farmlands . The export of springbok skins , mainly from Namibia and South Africa , is a booming industry ; these skins serve as taxidermy models . The meat is a prized fare , and is readily available in South African supermarkets . As of 2011 , the springbok , the gemsbok and the greater kudu collectively account for around two @-@ thirds of the game meat production from Namibian farmlands ; nearly 90 tonnes ( 89 long tons ) of the springbok meat is exported as mechanically deboned meat to overseas markets . 
 A 2007 study indicated that the latissimus dorsi muscle of the springbok comprises 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 3 % ash , 1 @.@ 3 – 3 @.@ 5 % fat , 72 – 75 % moisture and 18 – 22 % protein . <unk> acid is the main fatty acid , accounting for 24 – 27 % of the fatty acids . The cholesterol content varies from 54 @.@ 5 to 59 milligrams ( 0 @.@ 841 to 0 @.@ 911 gr ) per 100 grams ( 3 @.@ 5 oz ) of meat . The pH of the meat increases if the springbok is under stress or cropping is done improperly ; consequently , the quality deteriorates and the colour darkens . The meat might be adversely affected if the animal is killed by shooting . The meat may be consumed raw or used in prepared dishes . <unk> can be prepared by preserving the raw meat with vinegar , spices and table salt , without fermentation , followed by drying . Springbok meat may also be utilised in preparing salami ; a study found that the flavour of this salami is better than mutton salami , and feels <unk> than salami of beef , horse meat or mutton . 
 The springbok has been a national symbol of South Africa since the white minority rule in the 20th century . It was adopted as a nickname or mascot by several South African sports teams , most famously by the national rugby union team . The springbok is the national animal of South Africa . Even after the decline of apartheid , Nelson Mandela intervened to keep the name of the animal for the reconciliation of rugby fans , the majority of whom were whites . 
 = On the Banks of the Wabash , Far Away = 
 " On the Banks of the Wabash , Far Away " was among the best @-@ selling songs of the 19th century , earning over $ 100 @,@ 000 from sheet @-@ music revenues . Written and composed by American songwriter Paul Dresser , it was published by the Tin Pan Alley firm of Howley , Haviland and Company in October 1897 . The lyrics of the ballad reminisce about life near Dresser 's childhood home by the Wabash River in Indiana , United States . The song remained popular for decades , and the Indiana General Assembly adopted it as the official state song on March 14 , 1913 . The song was the basis for a 1923 film of the same title . Its longtime popularity led to the emergence of several lyrical versions , including an 1898 anti @-@ war song and a Swedish version that was a number @-@ one hit . 
 The song was composed during a transitory time in musical history when songs first began to be recorded for the phonograph . It was among the earliest pieces of popular music to be recorded . Dresser 's inability to control the distribution of phonograph cylinders led him and his company to join other composers to petition the United States Congress to expand federal copyright protections over the new technology . 
 Dresser 's ballad was the subject of some controversy after his death in 1906 . His younger brother , novelist Theodore Dreiser , publicly claimed to have authored part of the song , but the validity of his claim was never proven . The ambiguity of United States copyright laws at the time and the poor management of Dresser 's estate left the song vulnerable to plagiarism . The 1917 song " Back Home Again in Indiana " borrowed heavily from Dresser 's song , both lyrically and musically , and led to a dispute with Dresser 's estate that was never resolved . 
 = = Composition and popularity = = 
 Paul Dresser , a prominent 19th @-@ century lyricist and music composer , was born in Terre Haute , Indiana . Dresser 's boyhood home was near land adjacent to the Wabash River , the primary internal waterway in the state of Indiana . He later became a traveling musician , comedian , and actor who also composing music for the acts . In 1893 Dresser joined Howley , Haviland and Company , a Tin Pan Alley music publisher based in New York City , as a silent partner . In 1896 , after more than twenty years of traveling the country as a performer , Dresser grew tired of the theater and turned his attention to composing music and his music publishing business . By that time Dresser was a nationally @-@ known talent who had traveled throughout the United States . While he occasionally returned to Terre Haute for performances and brief visits , Dresser 's songs and letters to his friends often reminisced about Indiana and his childhood home . In the first half of 1897 Dresser began to write the song " On the Banks of the Wabash , Far Away " in remembrance of his Indiana home . He tended to compose songs over the course of months , usually in private during the evening hours . He refined his songs by playing the melody repeatedly , making changes and altering notes until it reached his satisfaction . It is believed that Dresser began " Wabash " in New York City in April 1897 ; continued working on it in May , when he was on vacation at West Baden Springs , Indiana ; and completed the ballad in Chicago , while staying at the Auditorium Hotel in the summer of 1897 . It is believed that the song 's first public performance took place at the Alhambra Theater in Milwaukee , Wisconsin , probably in June 1897 . After " professional copies " ( printed samples of the sheet music ) of the song were released in July , the final version was published in October as part of a series of " mother @-@ and @-@ home " songs . 
 Dresser officially dedicated the song to fourteen @-@ year @-@ old Mary South , a native of Terre Haute , whom he had never met . The second verse of " Wabash " contains reference to " Mary " , but Dresser told a reporter that the name was " fictitious " and used only for " rhythmical purposes " , and denied that the inspiration for the name came from a girl he once courted in his youth . When asked what led him to write the song Dresser said , " The same sweet memory that inspired that other Hoosier , James Whitcomb Riley , to sing of the ' Old Swimmin ' Hole ' ... I was born on the banks of the Wabash at Terre Haute ... My fondest recollections are of my mother and of my early days along this stream . " 
 To spur interest in the song , Howley , Haviland and Company , the song 's publisher , distributed 5 @,@ 000 copies of the sheet music to singers , musicians , theaters , and other musical venues in the month after the song was released . Restaurants , theaters , and street musicians were paid to play the song , while handbills with the lyrics were distributed when the song was performed publicly to help listeners to quickly learn the song . Using the nationwide network of music distribution controlled by Tin Pan Alley , Dresser 's publishing company was able to have the song well advertised , which pushed sales on a large scale . " Wabash " became an immediate success . One Chicago department store claimed to have sold 1 @,@ 471 copies of the song in a single day . In its first year , over 500 @,@ 000 copies of sheet music for the song were sold . 
 Dresser 's biographer , Clayton Henderson , attributed the success of the song to the " perfect marriage of words and music . " An Indiana newspaper compared the song in popularity to " Swanee River " and wrote , " Mr. Dresser ... has endeavored to perpetuate the beauties of the Wabash as did Stephen Foster that of the Suwannee River , and certainly no song since the latter has awakened so much interest among lovers of a good song , nor has any other American author seemed as capable of filling the void left vacant by Foster . The song is a gem and a welcome relief from some of the so @-@ called popular songs sprung on the public from time to time . " 
 One example attesting to the widespread popularity of Dresser 's song occurred in June 1900 , when the lighting failed at the Coney Island arena during a prize fight between Terry McGovern and Tommy White . The announcer calmed the panicking crowd of 5 @,@ 000 by whistling the tune of " On the Banks of the Wabash " and the crowd began to sing along in the dark until the lighting was repaired . 
 By the end of 1898 Dresser reported that nearly one million copies of sheet music would soon be sold , making " Wabash " a " sensation " , the " great hit of the day . " In a newspaper interview Dresser said , " I can ’ t tell you just how much I have cleared off of the song , but the $ 50 @,@ 000 estimate I have seen in some papers is very modest . You see I am a publisher as well as a composer and have a big printing house of my own in New York . I also write the words for all my songs , dictate the circumstances and stage settings for their public introductions , write my own ads , and sometimes sing my own songs . Now what do you think of that for a monopoly . Eh ? " Dresser earned a substantial income from the song , including royalties through the sale of sheet music . 
 The music industry was in a period of transition at the time the song was published as new technologies allowed music to be recorded . U.S. copyright laws at the time did not allow music composers to control the distribution of phonograph cylinders or music rolls for player pianos . Edison Records paid popular singers like Harry Macdonough to sing the songs and then sold the recordings without paying any royalties to the composer or publisher of the music . Dresser joined with other prominent composers to seek a change in U.S. copyright laws . In 1902 Dresser met with U.S. senators and the Secretary of State in Washington , D.C. He also submitted papers with the U.S. State Department asking for an extension of copyright protection outside the United States , especially in Canada and England . 
 By 1900 " Wabash " had sold millions of copies , becoming the best selling song of its time in terms of sheet music sold . The ballad remained popular during the 1920s , becoming a staple song in many singing acts , including male quartet performances . In addition , J. Stuart Blackton directed a 1923 silent film of the same title that was based partially on the song 's lyrics . The song was later featured prominently in the 1942 film My Gal Sal , the title of another song by Dresser . 
 = = Lyrics and analysis = = 
 The ballad speaks of the Wabash River , which flows through Indiana , and reminisces about events that occurred there . The song has two verses and a chorus . The first verse is about the narrator 's childhood on a farm and his love for his mother . The second verse is about his lost love , Mary . While the subjects of the verses are connected , the narrative of the chorus is detached from the verses as it seemingly reminisces nostalgically . 
 Without speaking directly of death , both verses indicate the absence of a loved one , and the narrator 's sadness and inability to cope with the grief . In the second verse , the narrator cannot bring himself to come near to his lost love 's grave . The effort to avoid the subject of death and the focus on fond memories is typical of songs and societal sensibilities at the time . 
 The melody of the song is a memorable tune made easy to learn because of its combination of harmonic repetition and contrast — elements that make music easy to remember while avoiding monotony . The recurrence and dissimilarity within the melody is similar to the patterns in many popular folk songs . Dresser , however , avoided the common 19th @-@ century practice of using a portion of the refrain 's melody in the verse . With little formal training in music theory , it is unlikely that Dresser purposefully made any methodical calculations when he composed the melody . 
 Written for piano , guitar , and mandolin , the music begins in the key of G major with an Andante Moderato tempo . The verses follow a chord progression of G – C – G. The chorus transitions to B minor , and progresses as B – E – E , before returning to G – C – G in its final bars . Although the melody of the chorus is unique within the piece , it is in harmonic unity with the verses . An upbeat version played at a Andantino tempo was also adapted for play by small orchestras and big bands . 
 On the Banks of the Wabash , Far Away 
 ( Verse ) 
 Round my Indiana homestead wave the cornfields , 
 In the distance loom the woodlands clear and cool . 
 Oftentimes my thoughts revert to scenes of childhood , 
 Where I first received my lessons , nature 's school . 
 But one thing there is missing from the picture , 
 Without her face it seems so incomplete . 
 I long to see my mother in the doorway , 
 As she stood there years ago , her boy to greet . 
 ( Chorus ) 
 Oh , the moonlight 's fair tonight along the Wabash , 
 From the fields there comes the breath of <unk> hay . 
 Through the sycamores the candle lights are gleaming , 
 On the banks of the Wabash , far away . 
 ( Verse ) 
 Many years have passed since I strolled by the river , 
 Arm in arm , with sweetheart Mary by my side , 
 It was there I tried to tell her that I loved her , 
 It was there I begged of her to be my bride . 
 Long years have passed since I strolled thro ' the churchyard . 
 She 's sleeping there , my angel , Mary dear , 
 I loved her , but she thought I didn 't mean it , 
 Still I 'd give my future were she only here . 
 = = Disputes and plagiarism = = 
 A year after the song was published Dresser 's brother Theodore , who later became a famous novelist , privately claimed to have authored its lyrics . In 1917 , after Dresser 's 1906 death , Theodore made his controversial claim public in a newspaper article . Already a controversial figure because of his open support for communism and tendency to make negative comments about his home state , Theodore 's claims were ridiculed in many papers and by prominent Hoosiers who dismissed it as a hoax . Although Theodore never retracted his assertion that he wrote the first verse and chorus of the song , he downplayed the importance of his alleged contribution in later years . It is possible that Theodore did give his brother the idea for the song , and may have even authored a portion of the lyrics , some of which reflect his writing style . The line stating " where I first received my lessons , nature 's school " is a possible link , reflecting Theodore 's obsession with nature during his youth and his belief that it held the answers to life , a topic he wrote of on several occasions . 
 Dresser died penniless after his publishing business failed . Known for his generosity , he also had a tendency to <unk> and give money to his friends and family . In addition , copyrights to Dresser 's music were poorly managed after the Haviland and Dresser Company went bankrupt in 1905 . Maurice Richmond Music , who purchased the bankrupt company 's copyrights , gave Ballard MacDonald and James Hanley permission to use two bars from Dresser 's ballad in a song they published in 1917 . MacDonald and Hanley 's " Back Home Again in Indiana " has since eclipsed " On the Banks of the Wabash , Far Away " in public use . Their song borrowed heavily from " On the Banks of the Wabash , Far Away " in the chorus , both musically and lyrically , using far more than just the two bars granted to them . 
 Twenty @-@ six bars from the last two lines of the chorus are copied almost identically . The lyrics of these same lines , " Through the sycamores the candle lights are gleaming , On the banks of the Wabash , far away " is also borrowed from , and changed to " the gleaming candle lights , are still shining bright , through the sycamore trees " . The first part of the chorus , " Oh the moonlight 's fair tonight along the Wabash " , is also reused and changed to " When I think about the moonlight on the Wabash , then I long for my Indiana home " . Under Theodore 's guidance , Dresser 's estate accused Hanley of plagiarism and threatened to bring a suit against Paull @-@ Pioneer Music Corporation , the publisher of " Back Home Again in Indiana " . Despite lengthy discussions no action was ever taken to resolve the dispute , largely due to the ambiguous nature of U.S. copyright laws in the early 20th century and the estate 's lack of finances . 
 = = State song = = 
 On March 14 , 1913 , the Indiana General Assembly adopted " On the Banks of the Wabash , Far Away " as the official state song . The song 's lyrics and required uses were added to the Indiana Code . The state song was the first official symbol of Indiana , adopted four years before the state flag . In 1925 Indiana General Assembly passed legislation that required Indiana 's public school teachers to teach the song as part of their curriculum . That same year the New York Times reported that 20 @,@ 000 copies of the song were distributed to the state 's public school teachers . The song is often played at major sporting events , including the Indianapolis 500 . 
 Although " On the Banks of Wabash , Far Away " is Indiana 's official song , " Back Home Again in Indiana " is more widely used and is falsely believed by many to be the state song . One of the leading causes of the state song 's fall into obscurity was a change in its use at the Indianapolis 500 during the 1940s . " On the Banks of the Wabash , Far Away " is played at the event as the race cars move into their starting positions , a period that receives little television coverage , while " Back Home Again in Indiana " is sung just before the start of the race and is broadcast publicly . The change to singing " Back Home Again in Indiana " at public events continued in the following years , and it is often played in the place of " On the Banks of the Wabash , Far Away " at state college football games and other prominent events . In 1997 , to commemorate the song 's centennial anniversary , the Indiana General Assembly passed a resolution reconfirming " On the Banks of the Wabash , Far Away " as the state 's official song and urged state institutions to make more use of it and return it to popularity . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 in 1898 Andrew B. Sterling wrote a folk adaptation of the song about the Spanish – American War , entitled " On the Shores of Havana , Far Away " . The lyrics consisted of a verse lamenting the dead from the explosion of the USS Maine , a second hoping to avoid the draft , and a third criticizing and ridiculing the war . The chorus expressed sorrow for soldiers who had to occupy Havana and those who died in the war . Howley , Haviland and Company published the song , giving Sterling credit for the words , but paying royalties to Dresser for use of the melody . 
 In 1914 Karl @-@ Ewert Christenson wrote Swedish lyrics to the melody of Dresser 's song . Christenson titled the new song " <unk> " ( " The Childhood Home " ) . The Swedish lyrics describe emigration from Sweden to the United States and was made popular by cabaret and revue artist Ernst Rolf , who had one of his first major hits with the song . A 1970 version of " <unk> " sung by Dan Eriksson reached number one on <unk> , the Swedish hit list . 
 = Tylopilus plumbeoviolaceus = 
 Tylopilus plumbeoviolaceus ( formerly Boletus plumbeoviolaceus ) , commonly known as the violet @-@ grey bolete , is a fungus of the bolete family . First described in 1936 , the mushroom has a disjunct distribution , and is distributed in eastern North America and Korea . The fruit bodies of the fungus are violet when young , but fade into a chocolate brown color when mature . They are solid and relatively large — cap diameter up to 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) , with a white pore surface that later turns pink , and a white mycelium at the base of the stem . Like most boletes of genus Tylopilus , the mushroom is inedible due to its bitter taste . A number of natural products have been identified from the fruit bodies , including unique chemical derivatives of ergosterol , a fungal sterol . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first named 1936 as Boletus felleus forma plumbeoviolaceus by American mycologist Walter H. Snell and one of his graduate students , Esther A. Dick , based on specimens found in the Black Rock Forest near Cornwall , New York . Regarding his decision to use the taxonomic rank forma , Snell wrote : 
 " The writer hesitates to multiply the number of forms ( <unk> ) and varieties with distinctive names , because of the ease with which one develops the habit of interpreting slight variations as definite taxonomic units ... the word " form " is used instead of " variety " as making no commitment as to the actual status of the variable segregate under consideration , until further information is available . " 
 The first collections made of the mushroom were of young , immature specimens , from which authors were unable to obtain spores for examination . It was not until a few years after that they found mature fruit bodies , which revealed that the rosy color of the pore surface took some time to develop . They concluded that this and other differences in physical characteristics , as well as differences in spore size , were enough to justify it being a species distinct from B. felleus , so in 1941 they raised the taxon to species status with the name Boletus plumbeoviolaceus . Noted Agaricales taxonomist Rolf Singer later transferred the taxon to Tylopilus in 1947 , a genus characterized by a spore print that is pink , or wine red ( vinaceous ) , rather than brown as in Boletus . 
 The specific name " plumbeoviolaceus " is coined from the Latin adjectives plumbeus ( " leaden " or " lead @-@ colored " ) and violaceus ( " purple " ) . The mushroom is commonly known as the " violet @-@ grey bolete " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of the fruit body is 7 to 15 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 to 5 @.@ 9 in ) in diameter , initially convex in shape but becoming centrally depressed , with a broadly arched and rounded margin . Young specimens are rather hard and firm , and the cap has a finely velvet @-@ textured surface that soon wears off to become smooth . The color of the fruit body is violet when young , but dulls as it ages , becoming a dull violet @-@ purplish @-@ gray , then eventually chocolate @-@ brown at maturity . The flesh is solid , white , and does not change color when cut or bruised . The taste is bitter , and the odor is not distinctive . Mycologist David Arora calls the mushroom " beautiful , but bitter @-@ tasting " . 
 The tubes on the underside of the cap are 0 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 7 in ) deep , 2 or three per millimeter , depressed at the stem ( resulting in an adnate attachment ) . The color of the pore surface is initially white , and it remains so for a while before turning a rosy color at maturity . The stem is 8 to 13 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 to 5 @.@ 1 in ) long and 2 @.@ 5 to 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 to 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick , enlarged at the base , and sometimes bulbous . The surface is slightly reticulate at the top , and smooth lower of the stem . Its color is buff to light brown , often with darker brown bruises or stains , and it has whitish mycelium at the base . The flesh of the stem is white , and it does not change color when cut or bruised . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 Collected in deposit , like with a spore print , the spores of T. plumbeoviolaceus appear to be a light pink to flesh color . When viewed with a light microscope , they are elliptical , with smooth walls and dimensions of 9 @.@ 1 – 12 @.@ 3 by 3 @.@ 4 – 4 @.@ 5 µm . The basidia ( cellular structures that produce the spores ) are club @-@ shaped , and measure about 26 by 6 @.@ 5 µm . The cuticle of the cap ( the pileipellis ) is made of a tangle of smooth @-@ walled , narrow , brownish hyphae . When stained in potassium hydroxide , the hyphal contents tend to form beads , while staining in Melzer 's reagent causes the pigment to form globules . Cystidia are common in the hymenial tissue ; they are swollen at the base and narrow at the apex ( lageniform ) , measuring 30 – 40 µm long by 7 – 9 µm thick . Clamp connections are absent in the hyphae . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Like most <unk> species , the fruit bodies of T. plumbeoviolaceous are not recommended for consumption because of its bitter taste . The presence of a bitter bolete may spoil a meal , as the bitter taste does not disappear with cooking . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 There are few other species that might be confused with Tylopilus plumbeoviolaceus ; according to one source , it " is one of the most remarkable and easily identified boletes in the USA . " Tylopilus violatinctus , found under both hardwoods and conifers and known from New York to Mississippi , has an appearance similar to T. plumbeoviolaceus . It can be distinguished by a paler , lilac @-@ colored cap that , in older specimens , is discolored rusty purple along the edge of the cap . Its spores are 7 – 10 by 3 – 4 µm . Tylopilus violatinctus was not described until 1998 , so some older literature may confuse the two similar species . 
 Young specimens of Tylopilus <unk> have a purplish cap , but unlike T. plumbeoviolaceous , their stems are never purple . The species Tylopilus microsporus , known only from China , is characterized by pale violet to violet cap , paler purple to purplish brown stem , and flesh color to pale purplish red pores . In addition to its different distribution , it can be distinguished from T. plumbeoviolaceus by its smaller spores . Another similar Asian species , T. <unk> , is only known from the Yaeyama Islands in southwestern Japan . It differs from T. plumbeoviolaceous in having a cap that does not fade in color to grayish or brownish when mature , shorter spores ( 6 – 7 @.@ 2 by 3 @.@ 3 – 4 µm ) , and other microscopic characteristics . 
 = = Habitat , distribution , and ecology = = 
 Tylopilus plumbeoviolaceous is a mycorrhizal species , and the bulk of the fungus lives underground , associating in a mutualistic relationship with the roots of various tree species . The fruit bodies are found growing singly , scattered or clustered together during mid @-@ summer to autumn in deciduous forests , often under beech or oak trees ; however , it sometimes occurs in mixed hardwood @-@ conifer forests under hemlock . A preference for sandy soil has been noted in one source . In North America , the mushroom can be found east of the Rocky Mountains , ranging from Canada to Mexico . The species has also been collected in North Korea . Fruit bodies can serve as a food source for fungus @-@ feeding Drosophila flies . 
 = = Bioactive compounds = = 
 Two derivatives of ergosterol have been isolated from the fruit bodies of T. plumbeoviolaceus : <unk> A ( 3β @-@ hydroxy @-@ 8α , 9α @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 @,@ 9 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 @,@ 9 ( 11 ) , 22 @-@ <unk> ) and <unk> B ( 3β @-@ hydroxy @-@ 8α , 9α @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 @,@ 9 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 12 @-@ one ) . These sterols are unique to this species . Additionally , the compounds ergosta @-@ 7 @,@ 22 @-@ dien @-@ 3β @-@ ol , uridine , <unk> , ergosterol , ergosterol 5α , 8α @-@ <unk> , <unk> , adenosine , and uracil have been identified from the mushrooms . 
 = Passenger ( Powderfinger song ) = 
 " Passenger " is a song from Powderfinger 's third studio album Internationalist . It was released as a single on 9 August 1999 , and reached # 30 on the Australian music chart . The single was nominated for Single of the year in 2000 at the Australian ARIA Music Awards . " Passenger " was also featured as the opening song performed by Powderfinger while supporting Crowded House 's Farewell to the World charity concert in November 1996 . 
 = = Single release and history = = 
 The single for " Passenger " included five companion tracks , including two live tracks . These were " Passenger " and " Pick You Up " , both performed on 11 October 1998 at Sydney Opera House . A version of " These Days " was also included , and this was the first time the song was released . " Passenger " was released on 9 August 1999 in Australia , and was one of two Powderfinger songs that were actively being played on commercial radio at the time ; the other being " These Days " , which also appeared on the soundtrack for Two Hands . At the time , Powderfinger were performing in clubs and universities around Australia on their P2K tour , and the release of the single resulted in a large boost in ticket sales . 
 = = Song structure = = 
 In " Passenger " , a recurring theme in Bernard Fanning ’ s song writing emerged ; " a fascination with the banality of routine " . <unk> Magazine ’ s <unk> Munro cited the lines " So many places you ’ d prefer to be / Than framed by a picket fence and salary " as an example of this , as well as examples from future songs " These Days " and " My Kind of Scene " . When asked about this , Fanning offered no direct explanation , saying it wasn ’ t a conscious theme , but did suggest that it could be a " part guilt @-@ complex " because of his relatively care @-@ free lifestyle . 
 In " Passenger " , the key signature is D major , however the verses begin with the G chord , while the choruses and outro are in the D major 's relative minor key , B minor . The song is a completely straight rock feel in the time signature of 4 / 4 . 
 " Passenger " featured Brisbane trio Tiddas for the first time , providing backing vocals . Tiddas also accompanied Powderfinger live , although some of the elements of " Passenger " , such as the brass sections , were replicated using a keyboard . Powderfinger 's Drummer Jon Coghill described some elements of " Passenger " , including the horn section , as being based on the work of Elvis Presley , and his big band . Coghill said " We tried to do it like Elvis would , in a big band arrangement . There are backing vocals , horns and a la la sound . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 Powderfinger enlisted Brisbane @-@ based production company Fifty Fifty Films to direct and produce the music video for " Passenger " . This was the group 's first experience with Fifty Fifty , and its success encouraged the group to direct future videos . 
 The video for " Passenger " begins with the band members packing themselves and their musical instruments into suitcases . They are transported to an airport while the song 's first verse is played . During the first chorus , the cases are loaded onto a baggage carousel with a bomb , whilst security personnel are distracted . The suitcases and bomb are then loaded onto an aeroplane . During the second verse , the bomb explodes , and the suitcases containing the band members fall out of it and are swallowed by an unnamed creature resembling a whale . They are later ejected from the blowhole of the creature into zero @-@ gravity , when the second chorus commences . At the end of the chorus , the suitcases re @-@ enter the Earth ’ s atmosphere . The video ends with the suitcases floating in the ocean . 
 Carmine <unk> , in an article about the band ’ s P2K tour , wrote that " Passenger " was " ... accompanied by an excellent video " . 
 = = Response = = 
 Powderfinger ’ s bass guitarist , John Collins , jokingly noted in an interview with Rod Yates of Massive Magazines that " the guitars are out of tune at the start of Passenger " , whilst guitarist Darren Middleton explained that " there are not regrets with any of that sort of stuff , it ’ s part of who we are and what we ’ ve done " , in reference to the out of tune guitars . 
 Upon its release , " Passenger " was hailed as one of the songs on Internationalist to come close to " the big FM radio hits of Double Allergic " , according to lead singer Bernard Fanning . Not that it mattered to him - he still believed Internationalist was a better record , but was probably not as " likable " as its predecessor . Juice 's Simon Wooldridge agreed with Fanning , stating that " Passenger " " demonstrated their flair for the big hook was no longer being suppressed " . On 2 August 2007 , Australian television station Max published the Top 500 90s Songs , placing " Passenger " as the only Powderfinger song in the top 100 , at # 48 , just ahead of Fatboy Slim 's " Praise You " . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 The single for " Passenger " achieved a peak position of # 30 on the Australian ARIA Singles Chart in 1999 . The single reached # 33 in its first week , then reached its # 30 peak in the second week and remained on the singles chart for eleven weeks . The single failed to chart outside of Australia . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 As the final single from Internationalist , " Passenger " received nominations and awards from various institutions Australia @-@ wide . Most notably , it was nominated three times by the Australian Recording Industry Association in 2000 for the ARIA Music Awards for Best Cover Art , Single of the Year and earned Powderfinger the nomination for Best Group , though won none of these awards . The song was also nominated and did win the award for Song of the Year from the Australasian Performing Right Association for their annual APRA Awards . The song also achieved the 100th position on the 1999 Triple J Hottest 100 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks written and performed by Powderfinger . 
 " Passenger " – 4 : 09 
 " These Days " – 4 : 59 
 " Passenger ( Live ) " – 4 : 41 
 " Pick You Up ( Live ) " – 4 : 47 
 " Maxwell 's Great Mistake " – 2 : 58 
 " That Ol ' Track " – 3 : 47 
 = 2012 Daytona 500 = 
 The 2012 Daytona 500 was the first stock car race of the 2012 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series season and the 54th iteration of the event . It was held between February 27 – 28 , 2012 at Daytona International Speedway in Daytona Beach , Florida , before a crowd of 140 @,@ 000 . The race , extended to 202 laps and 505 miles ( 813 km ) due to a green @-@ white @-@ checker finish , was won by Matt Kenseth driving for Roush Fenway Racing as his first win of the season and his second Daytona 500 victory . Dale Earnhardt , Jr. finished second and Greg Biffle came in third . 
 The race was scheduled for February 26 but heavy rain forced NASCAR officials to delay it until the next day . When it got underway at 7 : 02 p.m. EST , pole @-@ sitter Carl Edwards was immediately passed by Biffle before the first turn . Biffle maintained this position until he was passed by David Ragan on lap eleven . Denny Hamlin took over the lead after a second caution period and led the race for 57 laps , during which Biffle also led . Matt Kenseth assumed the first place on lap 146 and maintained it until a seventh caution period twelve laps later . The race was stopped for one hour and fifty @-@ seven minutes after Juan Pablo Montoya hit a jet dryer on lap 160 , causing fuel to seep onto the track and catch fire . Kenseth regained the first position at the lap 166 restart , and maintained it during the remaining thirty @-@ four laps to win the race . 
 The race had ten cautions and saw twenty @-@ five lead changes by ten different drivers . The result meant Kenseth led the Drivers ' Championship with 47 points , five ahead of Earnhardt , Biffle , and Hamlin . Jeff Burton followed in fifth place on 41 points . Ford led the Manufacturers ' Championship with nine points , three ahead of Chevrolet in second . Toyota was third with four , and Dodge was in fourth . The race attracted an average of 13 @.@ 69 million television viewers , with 36 @.@ 5 million watching part or all of the race , making it the second most @-@ watched 500 in history . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Daytona International Speedway is one of six superspeedways to hold NASCAR races ; the others are Michigan International Speedway , Auto Club Speedway , Indianapolis Motor Speedway , Pocono Raceway , and Talladega Superspeedway . Its standard track is a four @-@ turn , 2 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) superspeedway . Daytona 's turns are banked at 31 degrees , and the front stretch — the location of the finish line — is banked at 18 degrees . Trevor Bayne was the race 's defending champion . 
 The Daytona 500 was conceived by NASCAR founder Bill France Sr. , who built the Daytona International Speedway . The race was first held in 1959 ; it is the successor to shorter races held on beaches around Daytona Beach , Florida . The race has been the opening round of the NASCAR season since 1982 , and from 1988 it has been one of four events that require cars to run restrictor plates . The Daytona 500 is often regarded as the most prestigious race in NASCAR because it offers the most prize money of all auto races held in the United States . Victory in the race is considered equal to winning either the World Series , the Super Bowl or The Masters . The race is often called the " Great American Race " or the " Super Bowl of Stock Car Racing " . 
 On February 20 , 2011 , NASCAR vice president of operations Steve O 'Donnell announced that the 2012 Daytona 500 would be preponed to the final Sunday of February from its traditional Washington 's Birthday weekend slot . The decision was based on the possibility of an extended NFL schedule ; the Daytona 500 would be moved away from potential conflicts with the Super Bowl . This shortened the NASCAR season by one week ; the company planned to maintain momentum during the early part of the year . 
 After the two @-@ car style draft — also called tandem racing — dominated races held on restrictor plate tracks during 2011 , NASCAR reduced the size of the radiators from five liters to two and the air intakes were moved towards the cars ' fascia section . The size of the restrictor plate was reduced by 1 ⁄ 64 inch ( 0 @.@ 4 mm ) and the cars were required to run with softer springs and a smaller rear spoiler . These changes were intended to reduce the effectiveness of two @-@ car style drafting and to make the cars more challenging to turn . Sprint Cup Series director John Darby stated , " We want to be able to give the teams more options when it comes to drafting and we want to be able to reduce the difference in the speeds between the tandem style of racing and more of the pack style of racing that the fans are accustomed to seeing " . 
 In preparation for the race and to test the new car package , NASCAR held several test sessions on January 12 – 14 , 2012 . Test sessions began at 9 a.m. EST , stopped at 12 : 00 – 1 : 00 p.m. EST , and concluded at 5 : 00 p.m. Thirty @-@ one drivers participated in the first session on the morning of January 12 ; Jeff Gordon was quickest with a speed of 192 @.@ 773 miles per hour ( 310 @.@ 238 km / h ) , while Kyle Busch had the highest speed of 202 @.@ 402 miles per hour ( 325 @.@ 734 km / h ) during the second session in the afternoon . At the end of the second session , NASCAR announced that the opening of the restrictor plate would be increased by 1 ⁄ 32 inch ( 0 @.@ 79 mm ) to be 15 ⁄ 16 inch ( 2 @.@ 4 cm ) wide and the pressure release valve settings were reduced from 30 psi ( 2 @.@ 1 bar ) to 25 psi ( 1 @.@ 7 bar ) . 
 On the second day , NASCAR allowed drivers to draft in packs to check the cars ' responses . During the third session on the morning of January 13 , in which 32 drivers took part , Martin Truex Jr. and Clint Bowyer were both quickest with a speed of 204 @.@ 722 miles per hour ( 329 @.@ 468 km / h ) , and Kurt Busch recorded the fastest speed of 206 @.@ 058 miles per hour ( 331 @.@ 618 km / h ) in the fourth session held in the afternoon . Ryan Newman and Casey Mears decided to leave after the session . During the fifth session , held on the morning on January 14 , 30 drivers took part ; Kasey Kahne and Gordon were both quickest with a speed of 201 @.@ 545 miles per hour ( 324 @.@ 355 km / h ) . After the session , Danica Patrick , Tony Stewart , Kurt Busch and Ricky Stenhouse Jr. left the circuit and NASCAR increased the pressure value from 20 psi ( 1 @.@ 4 bar ) to 25 psi ( 1 @.@ 7 bar ) . Gordon was fastest in the sixth and final session held in the afternoon , with a speed of 200 @.@ 562 miles per hour ( 322 @.@ 773 km / h ) . 
 During the 2012 Budweiser Shootout , some of the cars ' engines overheated while driving in packs ; NASCAR increased the engines ' pressure release values from 25 psi ( 1 @.@ 7 bar ) to 28 psi ( 1 @.@ 9 bar ) to help reduce overheating and alleviate the effects of driving at high temperatures . 
 = = = Practice and qualification = = = 
 Seven practice sessions were held before the race . The first two were held on February 18 and ran for 120 and 105 minutes each . The next two on February 22 were shortened to 90 minutes each . Two days later , two more practice sessions were scheduled , which both ran for 60 minutes . The final practice session was held on February 25 and ran for 60 minutes . Greg Biffle was fastest with a time of 46 @.@ 537 seconds in the first session , 0 @.@ 011 seconds faster than Marcos Ambrose . Jeff Gordon ( with a time of 46 @.@ 596 seconds ) was third , with Bayne , Paul Menard and Dale Earnhardt Jr. in the next three positions . Stewart , Matt Kenseth , Aric Almirola and Carl Edwards rounded out the session 's top ten drivers . In the second practice session , Biffle remained fastest with a time of 46 @.@ 574 seconds , with Bayne 0 @.@ 021 seconds slower than Biffle 's lap time . Truex was third quickest , ahead of Stewart and Mark Martin . Menard with sixth fastest with a time of 46 @.@ 632 seconds . Edwards , Ambrose , Gordon and A.J. Allmendinger completed the top ten ahead of qualifying . 
 Although forty @-@ nine cars were entered in the qualifier , according to NASCAR 's qualifying procedure only forty @-@ three could race . Each driver ran two laps , and unlike most races during the season , the qualifying session determined the first two positions , while the rest of the drivers qualified by the 2012 Gatorade Duels . Edwards clinched his eleventh pole position of his career , his first in the Daytona 500 , with a time of 46 @.@ 216 seconds . The time had the fastest recorded average speed since Jeff Gordon 's pole lap in the 1999 race . He was joined on the front row of the grid by teammate Biffle . It was the first time since the 2007 race that Ford cars had the top two starting positions . Bowyer who recorded the 22nd fastest time , had his car twice fail the post @-@ race inspection for height sticks and was required to start at the rear of the field in the second Gatorade Duel race . After the qualifier , Edwards commented , " It 's huge to start this year for us and this company with the run today . This is the result of a lot of hard work this offseason and we are now ready to focus on how to win this Daytona 500 . " 
 Kenseth was quickest in the third practice session , with a time of 44 @.@ 809 seconds . Bayne was second quickest with a lap 0 @.@ 009 seconds slower . Stenhouse ( who set a time of 44 @.@ 849 seconds ) was third fastest , ahead of Ambrose and Martin . Bowyer , Michael McDowell , Kevin Harvick were in the next three positions . Menard and Kahne followed in the top ten . Brad Keselowski slowed to avoid Newman which caused Bowyer to turn into Keselowski , sending him spinning into the grass on the backstretch . Keselowski 's car had sustained minor damage which meant he was not required to use his back @-@ up car as mechanics were able to repair the damage . Almirola led fourth practice ( where twenty @-@ five drivers took part ) with a lap of 45 @.@ 065 seconds , nearly one @-@ tenth of a second faster than David Stremme . David Ragan was third ahead of Robert Richardson Jr. and Biffle . During the session ( where drivers ran in packs and drafted off each other ) , Juan Pablo Montoya made contact with Kahne , who was sent spinning into the grass on the frontstretch which caused parts of his car 's nose to be torn off . Kahne was required to use his back @-@ up car for the rest of <unk> . Stewart and Kenseth were the winners of the Gatorade Duels . The qualifying grid was finalized with Stewart in third and Kenseth in fourth . Earnhardt , Regan Smith , Ambrose , Jimmie Johnson , Jeff Burton and Elliott Sadler completed the top ten . The drivers that failed to qualify were Michael Waltrip , Richardson , Bill Elliott , Mike Wallace , Kenny Wallace and J.J. Yeley . After the duels , Patrick , David Gilliland , Montoya and Menard went to back @-@ up cars because they were involved in wrecks during the first duel . 
 Edwards was fastest in fifth practice with a 45 @.@ 301 seconds lap , one @-@ thousand of a second in front of Almirola . Ambrose ( with a lap of 46 @.@ 067 ) was third quickest , ahead of Montoya and Biffle . Kahne and Gordon were sixth and seventh quickest , within one second of Edwards ' time . Kyle Busch ( with a time of 45 @.@ 026 ) led the sixth session ahead of Joey Logano who set an identical time to Kyle Busch . Kurt Busch had the third @-@ fastest time . Denny Hamlin was next with a 45 @.@ 204 seconds lap ahead of Stewart who set a lap of 45 @.@ 308 seconds . Truex , Stenhouse , Allmendinger , <unk> and Gordon followed in the top ten . Gilliland 's lap of 44 @.@ 969 seconds topped the final practice session ( where thirty @-@ seven drivers participated ) , followed by Bayne and Stenhouse . Almirola and Jeff Gordon rounded out the top five drivers , claiming the fourth and fifth positions respectively . During the final practice session , Kurt Busch hit a bird which tore a small hole in the bottom of his radiator causing water to be drained from his car . He changed his car 's engine because the damage could not be repaired . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The 2012 Daytona 500 was the first race of the 2012 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series season and was televised live in the United States by Fox . The race was due to start at 1 : 00 p.m. EST , but heavy rain fell on the track and NASCAR officials delayed the race until the afternoon of February 27 , making it the first Daytona 500 to be postponed . Further rain fell during February 27 , delaying the race until 7 : 02 p.m. EST , making it the first race to start in primetime . Pastor Sonny <unk> of Central Baptist Church , Daytona , began the pre @-@ race ceremonies with the invocation . Daytona Beach resident Melisa <unk> performed the U.S. national anthem , and Wood Brothers Racing co @-@ founder Leonard Wood gave the command for the drivers to start their engines . During the pace laps , Patrick , Menard , Montoya and Gilliland had to move to the back of the grid because they had switched to their backup cars ; Kurt Busch did the same because he had changed his car 's engine . Kahne did not move to the rear because he changed to his backup car before the Gatorade Duels . 
 Weather conditions at the start of the race were cloudy with the air temperature at 69 ° F ( 21 ° C ) . Biffle accelerated from the start line more quickly than teammate Edwards , leading him at the first turn . At the start of lap two a five car crash was triggered by Sadler making contact with Johnson in the tri @-@ oval ; Johnson 's car spun sideways and caught those of Patrick , Kurt Busch , Ragan and Bayne . The incident triggered the first caution of the race and the pace car . Johnson and Ragan were forced to retire but Patrick , Bayne and Kurt Busch drove back to their garages for repairs . The race restarted on lap seven with Biffle leading Kenseth . On the eleventh lap , Smith had moved into the lead position ; one lap later Biffle moved back into the lead in turn three with aid from teammate Edwards . On lap 13 , Newman looped his car on the backstretch without making contact with the wall ; a second caution was issued , during which the leaders , including Biffle , made pit stops . Menard and Hamlin — both of whom chose not to pit — led the field back to speed at the restart ; by the end of the lap <unk> had the lead . Hamlin began to pull away from the rest of the field , with Menard in his tow as the leaders began to run in single file . After starting the race in 26th , Truex had moved up 18 positions to eighth by lap 21 , and Bowyer had moved up 20 positions to be running in tenth . 
 Biffle tried to pass Truex for seventh on the 23rd lap but Truex kept the position . Both drivers continued to battle for the next two laps . By lap 25 , Hamlin was still leading with Menard , Ragan , Logano , Jeff Burton , Ambrose and Truex in the top seven positions . Bayne rejoined the race on lap 37 . On lap 44 , Burton , with assistance from Biffle , moved into the lead on the outside of the exit of turn two . Hamlin , who had dropped to third , attempted a passing <unk> around the outside for the lead one lap later but dropped to sixth . Green flag pit stops began on lap 56 ; most of the leaders , including Burton , made pit stops on lap 59 . Gordon moved into the lead on lap 61 and began to pull away from Burton . Three laps later , debris was reported in turn two , triggering the third caution . Some drivers , including Gordon , made pit stops for fuel during the caution . During Kenseth 's pit stop on lap 66 , his team made repairs to his car , which had a water pressure problem . His mechanics changed the car 's water and Kenseth rejoined the race in 33rd . 
 Burton led the field at the restart , followed by Biffle , Ambrose , Truex and Kyle Busch . Biffle passed Burton to gain the lead in turn one , with Ambrose moving into second by turn three . Burton had dropped to sixth position by lap 76 ; Truex had moved ahead of Biffle around the outside for the lead on the same lap . Biffle reclaimed the lead momentarily on lap 78 but Truex overtook him . Three laps later , the fourth caution of the race was prompted when Jeff Gordon 's engine exploded and flames appeared from his car going into turn three . Most of the drivers , including Truex , made pit stops under caution . 
 Terry Labonte chose not tos top and led the field at the lap 86 restart , followed by Biffle , who reclaimed the lead one lap later . Ambrose made contact with Terry Labonte coming off the fourth turn on lap 88 and rested at the side of the pit road ; the race 's fifth caution was issued . Some drivers chose to pit under caution . The race restarted on lap 92 with Biffle leading from Ambrose and Truex . Eight laps later , Truex , assisted by Hamlin , passed Biffle going into the third turn to take the lead and earned $ 200 @,@ 000 for leading at the half @-@ way point . On the 102nd lap , Stewart took over the lead on the backstretch before Hamlin went underneath him betweens turns three and four to reclaim the first position . Two laps later , Truex had moved back into second place . By lap 110 , pole position driver Edwards was running in 21st and was reporting <unk> in his car 's fuel pressure . 
 Bowyer started to slow on lap 127 , running out of fuel . He could not go to pit road because two faster cars blocked his entry . He coasted on the side of the track before stopping at turn two , triggering the sixth caution on the 129th lap . Most of the leaders , including Hamlin , made pit stops under caution . Martin led the field up to speed at the restart on lap 132 ; he was followed by Smith and Biffle . On the next lap , Biffle , with aid from Hamlin , passed Martin for the lead going into the third turn . Biffle lost the lead when Hamlin passed him on lap 138 ; five laps later his teammate Logano took over first place . Kenseth carried extra momentum and drove to the high side of the fourth turn to take the lead from Logano on the 145th lap . Two laps later , Earnhardt moved into second after passing Logano . The top fifteen drivers were separated by less than a second by lap 154 . 
 Stremme 's engine failed on lap 157 and his car spun in front of a small pack of traffic after his car dropped oil on the track , causing the seventh caution . The leaders , which included Kenseth , made pit stops and some for two tires . Under caution , Montoya reported to his team that he felt a vibration on his car after leaving pit road ; he returned to his pit box on lap 159 where his pit crew checked underneath his car for the vibration which they could not find . He then drove at racing speed after rejoining the track at turn two to catch up with the pace car when a rear trailing arm on his car broke at turn three where two jet dryers were clearing debris . He lost control , skidded up the banking and collided with a trailer @-@ mounted jet engine filled with 200 US gallons ( 760 l ; 170 imp gal ) of jet kerosene , destroying it and rupturing the fuel tank , which started leaking fuel onto the track . Montoya drifted down the track onto the infield grass . Seconds later , Terry Labonte drove over the stream ; a spark caused the fuel to ignite , creating a wall of fire across the track . The conflagration caused a red flag to be shown . 
 Over the course of one hour and fifty @-@ seven minutes , NASCAR officials extinguished the fire and cleaned and <unk> the track . Montoya climbed out of his car on his own , but the driver of the safety truck , 52 @-@ year @-@ old Duane Barnes , had to be assisted down the banking . Montoya and Barnes were taken to the nearby Halifax Medical Center for examination . The jet dryer and the truck it was attached to was removed from the track by two forklifts . Light rain hit at the track and later broke up . Keselowski gained a large amount of attention during the red flag when he used an iPhone to photograph the accident scene and post it to Twitter . Dave Blaney , Landon Cassill , Tony Raines and Gilliland were the leaders prior to the red flag , having not made pit stops under caution . Edwards and Kyle Busch removed tear @-@ offs from their windshields and were required to go to the back of the field . 
 The race resumed under caution at 11 : 57 p.m. EST . Mears ran out of fuel at turn two and had to be pushed to pit road by the recovery truck . Blaney , Cassill , Raines and Gilliland made pit stops for fuel , allowing Kenseth to take the lead for the lap 166 restart , ahead of teammate Biffle and Earnhardt in third , and maintained the lead for the next ten laps . On lap 176 , the eighth caution was issued after Mears made contact with Almirola , who regained control of his car , but Mears went into the side of Ambrose in the first turn . The restart was delayed for one lap because Logano was moved to the back of the field for failing to maintain car speed . Kenseth led the field at the lap 182 restart , followed by Biffle . 
 Five laps later , however , a multi @-@ car collision occurred on the frontstretch after Jamie McMurray cut a tire , veered off and collided with Kahne , triggering an eleven car chain @-@ reaction accident involving Edwards , Stewart , Almirola , Keselowski and Smith . Earnhardt 's and Stewart 's cars sustained minor damage ; the ninth caution of the race was issued . The race restarted on lap 194 , with Kenseth again leading . As the cars were running single file , A second multi @-@ car collision occurred on lap 197 the entry to turn one , collecting a total of 18 cars including Stewart , Blaney , Stenhouse , Cassill , Kyle Busch and Ryan Newman , triggered the final caution of the race . At the lap 201 restart , a green – white – checker finish extended the race to 202 laps , with Kenseth leading Biffle , Hamlin , Earnhardt and Burton . Kenseth withstood pressure from Biffle and Earnhardt over the final two laps and crossed the finish line on lap 202 to win his second Daytona 500 . Biffle weaved on the backstretch to block Earnhardt but the Hendrick Motorsports driver passed Biffle at the finish for second . Hamlin finished fourth , and Burton was fifth . Menard , Harvick , Edwards , Logano and Martin completed the top ten finishers . The race had a total of ten cautions and twenty @-@ five lead changes among ten different drivers . 
 = = = After the race = = = 
 Kenseth appeared in the victory lane to celebrate his first victory of the season ; earning $ 1 @,@ 589 @,@ 390 for the victory . Kenseth 's victory was the 300th for his team Roush Fenway Racing in all three major series of NASCAR . Following his win , Kenseth said , " It feels great . I wasn ’ t expecting to win when I woke up this morning . It feels good to be sitting here " , and , " I think the 16 [ Biffle ] had one of the strongest cars all week , and ours was right there as well . It took a long time to get to the front , but like Thursday , once we were in the front it was hard for anyone to get locked on to you . " Earnhardt , who finished in second place , said , " We couldn 't ever get to Matt . I kind of waited until the last minute . I thought it was a great race . I want to thank the fans for sticking around on a Monday night and everyone who tuned in at home . Sorry about the delay and everything . " Biffle , who took third , said , " We had a great speed weeks . Coming out of here with a third place finish is really exciting for us . " 
 Montoya expressed his surprise over the crash where he hit a jet dryer under the race 's seventh caution , " I 've hit a lot of things — but a jet dryer ? " . He also said his helmet was singed in the fire and he suffered from an aching foot . NASCAR President Mike Helton was also surprised over the incident , " You would think after 65 years and running all the races that NASCAR has run ... that you 've seen about everything . You do think about , ' Oh , my gosh , if that can happen , what else can happen ? ' " Barnes , who worked at Michigan International Speedway and was loaned to Daytona for the 500 , thanked the fans and Montoya for their concerns . International Speedway Corporation president Joie Chitwood III said that track officials abided by standard procedures when clearing the track , " The team was prepared . The expertise was there . The training was there . The teamwork with NASCAR was there . " A NASCAR spokesperson said , " Things were operating in a normal fashion ... it was an extraordinary circumstance that occurred when something went awry in the No. 42 car . " , and , " Under caution , it is standard for a car to ' catch up ' to the rest of the field , which is what the No. 42 car was doing . " Montoya 's car was examined by NASCAR officials before it returned to Earnhardt Ganassi Racing 's shop in Concord , North Carolina . NASCAR did not fine Keselowski for tweeting during the red flag period and was allowed to keep his iPhone in his pocket for the rest of the season . 
 Later in the week , track officials conducted a thorough analysis of the track in turn three and determined the damage was worse than originally thought . A second patch job was conducted for the track 's upcoming Daytona Bike Week events in March . After the Bike Week , the affected area of track was completely removed and resurfaced by Lane Construction — the same company that resurfaced the entire track prior to the 2011 Daytona 500 . Repairs were completed in time for the Coke Zero 400 in July . From the Subway Fresh Fit 500 onward , NASCAR required that an additional pace car would be behind the last jet dryer on track in all three national series and jet dryer drivers were allowed to wear helmets and fire suits for extra protection . The jet dryer incident was described as " one of the most bizarre events " in the history of NASCAR and the Daytona 500 by various American media organizations . 
 Two days after the race , Hendrick Motorsports was penalized for Johnson 's car . The penalty , for " actions detrimental to stock car racing " , included a $ 100 @,@ 000 fine and a six @-@ race suspension for crew chief Chad Knaus and car chief Ron Malec and the loss of 25 owner and driver points for Jeff Gordon and Johnson . Both Knaus and Malec were placed on probation until May 9 , 2012 , and were suspended from NASCAR until April 18 , 2012 . Speed analyst and former driver Kyle Petty thought the penalties went too far , stating that the car was never raced and questioned why NASCAR issued the penalties . Hendrick Motorsports immediately announced it would appeal the decision ; Knaus and Malec were allowed to work with the team during the appeal . The team lost the initial appeal on March 13 , and made a final appeal to NASCAR National Commissioner John Middlebrook . As a result of the final appeal held on March 20 , Knaus and Malec 's six @-@ race suspension was lifted and the points penalties to Johnson and Jeff Gordon were rescinded ; however , the $ 100 @,@ 000 fine administered to Knaus was upheld . 
 As this was the first race of the season , Kenseth led the Drivers ' Championship with 47 points , followed by Earnhardt , Biffle and Hamlin , who were all tied for second on 42 points . Burton followed in fifth on 40 points . Ford became leader in the Manufacturers ' Championship with nine points . Chevrolet was in second with six points , Toyota in third place with four points , one point ahead of Dodge in fourth . The race had an average television audience of 13 @.@ 69 million viewers . An estimated 36 @.@ 5 million total viewers watched all or part of the race , which was a 22 % increase from the previous year 's event . It became the most viewed NASCAR race in Fox 's history and was the network 's highest rated Monday night since Game Five of the 2010 World Series sixteen months previously . The race garnered the highest ratings in the 18 – 49 demographic , and was also the second most watched Daytona 500 behind the 2006 race . The race took three hours , thirty @-@ six minutes and two seconds to complete , and the margin of victory was 0 @.@ 210 seconds . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race results = = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 = Gliese 876 = 
 Gliese 876 is a red dwarf approximately 15 light @-@ years away from Earth in the constellation of Aquarius . 
 It is the second closest known star to the Sun confirmed to possess a planetary system ( after Gliese 674 ) and the closest such system known to consist of multiple planets . As of 2011 , four extrasolar planets have been found to orbit the star . 
 The planetary system is also notable for the orbital properties of its planets . It is the only known system of orbital companions to exhibit a triple conjunction in the rare phenomenon of Laplace resonance ( a type of resonance first noted in Jupiter 's inner three Galilean moons ) . It is also the first extrasolar system around a normal star with measured <unk> . 
 Two of the middle planets are located in the system 's habitable zone , however they are giant planets believed to be analogous to Jupiter . 
 = = Distance and visibility = = 
 Gliese 876 is located fairly close to the Solar System . According to astrometric measurements made by the Hipparcos satellite , the star shows a parallax of 213 @.@ 28 milliarcseconds , which corresponds to a distance of 4 @.@ 69 parsecs ( 15 @.@ 3 ly ) , currently making it the third closest known star with orbiting planets , after Epsilon Eridani and Gliese 674 . Despite being located so close to Earth , the star is so faint that it is invisible to the naked eye and can only be seen using a telescope . 
 = = Stellar characteristics = = 
 As a red dwarf , Gliese 876 is much less massive than the Sun : estimates suggest it has only 32 % of the mass of the Sun . The surface temperature of Gliese 876 is cooler than the Sun and the star has a smaller radius . These factors combine to make the star only 1 @.@ 24 % as luminous as the Sun , and most of this is at infrared wavelengths . 
 Estimating the age and metallicity of cool stars is difficult due to the formation of diatomic molecules in their atmospheres , which makes the spectrum extremely complex . By fitting the observed spectrum to model spectra , it is estimated that Gliese 876 has a slightly lower abundance of heavy elements compared to the Sun ( around 75 % the solar abundance of iron ) . Based on chromospheric activity the star is likely to be around 6 @.@ 5 to 9 @.@ 9 billion years old , depending on the theoretical model used . However , the low rotational period of the star as well as its membership among the young disk population suggest that the star is between 0 @.@ 1 – 5 billion years old . 
 Like many low @-@ mass stars , Gliese 876 is a variable star . Its variable star designation is IL <unk> and it is classified as a BY Draconis variable . Its brightness fluctuates by around 0 @.@ 04 magnitudes . This type of variability is thought to be caused by large starspots moving in and out of view as the star rotates . Gliese 876 emits X @-@ rays . 
 = = Planetary system = = 
