 = = = Observation history = = = 
 On June 23 , 1998 , an extrasolar planet was announced in orbit around Gliese 876 by two independent teams led by Geoffrey Marcy and Xavier <unk> . The planet was designated Gliese 876 b and was detected by Doppler spectroscopy . 
 Based on luminosity measurement , the circumstellar habitable zone ( <unk> ) is believed to be located between 0 @.@ 116 and 0 @.@ 227 AU . 
 On April 4 , 2001 , a second planet designated Gliese 876 c was detected , inside the orbit of the previously @-@ discovered planet . The relationship between the orbital periods initially disguised the planet 's radial velocity signature as an increased orbital eccentricity of the outer planet . Eugenio Rivera and J. <unk> found that the two planets undergo strong gravitational interactions as they orbit the star , causing the orbital elements to change rapidly . 
 On June 13 , 2005 , further observations by a team led by Rivera revealed a third planet , designated Gliese 876 d inside the orbits of the two Jupiter @-@ size planets . 
 In January 2009 , the mutual inclination between planets b and c was determined using a combination of radial velocity and astrometric measurements . The planets were found to be almost coplanar , with an angle of only 5 @.@ 0 + 3 @.@ 9 
 − 2 @.@ 3 ° between their orbital planes . 
 On June 23 , 2010 , astronomers announced a fourth planet , designated Gliese 876 e . This discovery better constrained the mass and orbital properties of the other three planets , including the high eccentricity of the innermost planet . This also filled out the system inside e 's orbit ; additional planets there would be unstable at this system 's age . 
 In 2014 , evidence of the presence of newly Gliese 876 f and Gliese 876 g was discovered . These planets have been having almost the same mass as Gliese <unk> . 
 If this system has a comet disc , it is undetectable " brighter than the fractional dust luminosity 10 − 5 " of a recent Herschel study . 
 None of these planets transit the star from the perspective of Earth , making it difficult to study their properties . 
 = = = Orbital arrangement = = = 
 Gliese 876 has a notable orbital arrangement . It is the first planetary system around a normal star to have mutual inclination between planets measured without transits ( previously the mutual inclination of the planets orbiting the pulsar PSR B1257 + 12 had been determined by measuring their gravitational interactions ) . Later measurements reduced the value of the mutual inclination , and in the latest four @-@ planet models the incorporation mutual inclinations does not result in significant improvements relative to coplanar solutions . 
 The system has the second known example of a Laplace resonance with a 1 : 2 : 4 resonance of its planets . The first known example was Jupiter 's closest Galilean moons - Ganymede , Europa and Io . Numerical integration indicates that the coplanar , four @-@ planet system is stable for at least another billion years . This planetary system comes close to a triple conjunction between the three outer planets once per orbit of the outermost planet . 
 = = = Planets = = = 
 The outermost three of the known planets likely formed further away from the star , and migrated inward . 
 Gliese 876 d 
 Gliese <unk> , discovered in 2005 , is the innermost known planet . With an estimated minimum mass only 5 @.@ 88 times that of the Earth , it is possible that it is a dense terrestrial planet . 
 Gliese 876 c 
 Gliese 876 c , discovered in 2001 , is a giant planet at 0 @.@ 62 Jupiter @-@ mass planet . It is in a 1 : 2 orbital resonance with the outermost known planet , taking 30 @.@ 340 days to orbit the star . The planet orbits within the habitable zone . Its mass makes it more likely to be a Class II planet in the Sudarsky extrasolar planet classification . The presence of surface liquid water is possible on sufficiently massive satellites should they exist . 
 Gliese 876 b 
 Gliese 876 b , discovered in 1998 is around twice the mass of Jupiter and revolves around its star in an orbit taking approximately 61 days to complete , at a distance of only 0 @.@ 208 AU , less than the distance from the Sun to Mercury . Its mass makes it more likely to be a Class II or Class III planet in the Sudarsky model . The presence of surface liquid water is possible on sufficiently massive satellites should they exist . 
 Gliese 876 e 
 Gliese 876 e , discovered in 2010 , has a mass similar to that of the planet Uranus and its orbit takes 124 days to complete . 
 = Dope ( Lady Gaga song ) = 
 " Dope " is a song recorded by American singer Lady Gaga for her third studio album , Artpop ( 2013 ) . It was released on November 4 , 2013 , by Interscope Records as the second promotional single from the record , following " Venus " . It was written by Gaga , Paul " DJ White Shadow " Blair , Dino Zisis , and Nick Monson and produced by Gaga and Rick Rubin . Following her hip surgery and cancellation of the Born This Way Ball tour , Gaga became addicted to drugs , which helped her get relief from the pain of surgery and also to cope with her sabbatical . " Dope " was written about this addiction and evolved from a song she had previously composed for her fans , about her confessions . It was added to Artpop because Gaga felt the album needed something more autobiographical . 
 The song received positive reviews , with critics complimenting its simple production , the songwriting and Gaga 's vocals . An electronic rock lament , in the vein of Irish folk ballad rue , " Dope " is a bittersweet song centered on a dark theme . It has a minimal production and is only composed off Gaga 's vocals sung in an intoxicated slur . Lyrically it talks about substance abuse and the yearning for a long lost love . Previous to the release Gaga uploaded an image of herself on Instagram , wearing a snapback featuring the word DOPE . She also posted the song 's lyrics there , triggering the social media website 's concern . The artwork featured Gaga with a big blazer , her face covered with a hat and a grill that made her teeth appear larger . Media outlets found the picture to be " odd " and compared it to different horror films . 
 Gaga performed the song at the 2013 YouTube Music Awards , wearing a red shirt and playing the piano while crying . The performance in its musical aspect was praised for its emotional quotient . After its release , " Dope " reached the top of the music charts in Hungary and Spain , while attaining top @-@ ten positions in Belgium , France , Greece , Italy and Luxembourg . The streams from the YouTube Music Awards performance helped the song become Gaga 's 13th top @-@ ten on the Billboard Hot 100 reaching number eight , as well as her highest charting promotional single to date . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 After Gaga suffered a labral tear of her right hip in February 2013 during her Born This Way Ball tour , which she had embarked to promote her second studio album , Born This Way ( 2011 ) , she cancelled the remainder of the tour and underwent surgery . She subsequently had to be on rest for the next six months . The singer later told Attitude magazine that she had a serious marijuana addiction during that time in order to bear the pain of the surgery . " I would break the habit and it would sneak back in , and I would break it and sneak back in , " Gaga confessed , adding that her life had become a smoke @-@ filled cycle : sleep , sing , smoke . Having cancelled the tour and taken a sabbatical , Gaga started working on the songs for Artpop . 
 I was just numbing , numbing , numbing myself then sleeping it off , then getting on stage , killing it in pain , then getting off and smoking , smoking , smoking , not knowing what pain was . Fuck , if I know what hurts the most , you know ? I would break the habit and it would sneak back in and I would break it and sneak back in . 
 — Gaga talking about her addiction to drugs . 
 Following her comeback with lead single " Applause " from the album , Gaga performed few songs from the record at the iTunes Festival in London in September 2013 . One of the songs , known as " I Wanna Be with You " , was performed as an acoustic version on the festival ; Gaga called it an ode to her fans and about how much she had missed them while recuperating from the surgery . The song , later renamed to " Dope " , was written by Gaga , Paul " DJ White Shadow " Blair , Dino Zisis and Nick Monson and produced by Gaga and Rick Rubin . Described by Gaga as an electronic ballad , " Dope " was revealed to be " the evolution of a fan song that became a deep confession in me . " In an interview with Kiss FM ( UK ) Gaga said that " Dope " was the most personal song she had ever created . Feeling that the album needed something more autobiographical and confessional and a song which would show her vulnerable side , Gaga worked with Rubin who let her do the song in the way she wanted and just assisted in recording it . He had contacted Gaga for producing the track , while she was on her sabbatical ; Gaga consulted with Paul " DJ White Shadow " Blair , her main producer for Artpop and then decided to enlist Rubin 's help . " ' Dope ' is actually about me battling all sorts of addiction since I was growing up " , she explained to the interviewers . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Dope " was recorded at Shangri @-@ La Studios , Malibu , California , by Jason Lader , Ryan Hewitt and Sean Oakley , with Lader also working on the digital editing of the song and playing keyboards for it . Bill Malina completed the additional recording for the track at CRC Recording Studios , Chicago , Illinois with Steve Faye . The mixing for " Dope " was performed by Manny Marroquin at Larrabee Sound Studios , North Hollywood , California , with assistance from Chris Galland and Delbert Bowers , additional mixing being done by Andrew Scheps at <unk> @-@ Pad Mobile Studios . Other instrumentation for " Dope " included piano by Gaga and Adam MacDougall at keyboards . Finally , Gene Grimaldi did the audio mastering at Oasis Mastering Studios in Burbank , California . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com , " Dope " is set in the time signature of common time , with a moderate tempo of 66 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of E ♭ major with Gaga 's vocals spanning the tonal nodes of D3 to E ♭ 5 . The song follows a basic sequence of Cm – B ♭ – A ♭ – B ♭ – Cm – B ♭ as its chord progression . 
 According to Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine , " Dope " is an electronic rock lament , in the vein of Irish folk ballad rue . Rolling Stone said that " Dope " reveals a " dark mood " of Gaga as she plays the piano and utters the lyrics . She begins the song with intoxicated , slur @-@ like vocals and the lines , " I promise this drink is my last one / I know I fucked up again / Because I lost my only friend " . The composition and the musical elements associated with the track resembled Gaga 's own song , " Hair " , from Born This Way ( 2011 ) with its contemplative nature , and singer Rihanna 's 2013 single , " Stay " , with the piano driven melody and the powerful vocals . It is more like theatrical music , but devoid of any genre . There is not much instrumentation accompanying the singer 's vocals , except for piano sounds and distant synths , making Gaga 's singing the focal point of " Dope " . In order to give the production an intimate feeling and make it emotional , Rubin did not apply any pitch correction to Gaga 's vocals , as noted by Jon Pareles from The New York Times . 
 The lyrics talk about substance abuse and the yearning for a long lost love more than drugs . " Just one last puff and two last regrets / Three spirits and 12 lonely steps " , Gaga sings , before uttering the hook , " I need you more than dope " . The lyrics meant that the singer wanted her lost love more than an addict pines for drugs . " Dope " is one of the most personal songs of Gaga , according to Joe Lynch from Fuse . With lines like " I promise this drink is my last one / I know I fucked up again / Because I lost my only friend " , Lynch believed that Gaga was referring to her former assistant Jennifer O 'Neil who had months ago moved to court against the singer for unpaid wages . 
 = = Release and artwork = = 
 Gaga had posted two handwritten notes of the lyrics to " Dope " on social media site Instagram . The verses , then believed to be from the song , included references to drug intake with lines such as " Been hurtin ' low from living high , Toast one last puff and two last regrets " and " each day I cry , I feel so low , from living high " , along with the hashtag # DOPE . The images raised concern from Instagram who felt that Gaga needed help and decided to reach out to her . They mailed the singer with the following message : " Hi , Members of the Instagram community have raised concern for your well @-@ being after seeing posts you ’ ve shared . We ’ re reaching out to provide you with some important safety information . " Gaga mockingly responded to the letter and was dismissive of their concern ; she posted on her Twitter account about the mail from the social media . Following the release of the full tracklist for Artpop , Gaga posted an image of herself on Instagram , wearing a snapback hat , emblazoned with the NASA " meatball " insignia , but replacing the word NASA with DOPE , referring to the design label with the same name . 
 On October 31 , 2013 , Gaga revealed via Twitter that " Dope " would be the final song available for purchase before the release of Artpop , accessible for digital download from November 4 . The single 's cover art was also revealed , depicting Gaga wearing a black floppy hat with her brunette hair falling over her shoulders , an oversized " boxy " double @-@ breasted blazer , sheer underwear , one black leather boot and a grill that made her teeth appear larger . Her eyes are covered by a scarf and she has bruises on her belly and around her crotch area . Idolator writer Mike Wass named the cover art " a cross between Frankenstein and Michael Jackson " . Matthew Jacobs from The Huffington Post found the cover relatively modest compared to the previous single covers of songs from Artpop . John Walker from MTV News compared the cover to director Tim Burton 's works and called it " terrifying " . He described Gaga 's face and the grills as " [ resembling ] the gum @-@ less teeth of a long @-@ buried skull cast in titanium " and believed that the hands and legs were prosthetic . Walker concluded by saying that the cover reminded him of a " bizarro world " version of singer Janet Jackson 's infamous shot for a 1993 Rolling Stone issue . Lily Harrison from E ! Online complimented Gaga for taking the fashion of grills to a " whole new level " . She commended the singer 's ability to portray her toned figure in spite of the " odd ensemble " . A writer for Metro felt that the singer was as " peculiar as ever " on the artwork . Emma Kelly from Daily Star called the cover " creepier " than any horror film and felt that the wide jacket made the singer appear as a rugby player . She compared the digitally altered smile on the single cover to the cover of electronic musician Aphex Twin 's EP , Come to Daddy ( 1997 ) which features similar inflated grills . Fashion website Refinery29 's Leila Brillson felt that the artwork was more of a surrealist move which made Gaga look like a " nightmarish " version of virtual band Gorillaz . Brillson was also unclear if the bruises were related to the song . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon its release , " Dope " received acclaim from music critics . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine was initially dismissive of the version performed at the iTunes Festival due to its " bland " arrangement and " elementary " melody , but reacted well to the new version on Artpop , saying : " Gaga has been very public about her supposed battle with addiction , and whether or not it 's just another costume for the singer to wear , she 's nonetheless composed a convincing anthem of remorse . " Idolator reviewer Christina Lee believed that with " Dope " , Gaga had found another novel way of stripping herself down in the song , and complimented the singer 's vocals in the song . Michael Cragg from The Guardian , who was granted an early listen to Artpop , felt that the song was an emotional highlight of the album , denoting it as the record 's " one real moment of calm " and " the album 's most tender moment " . However , Cragg was skeptical about the line " I need you more than dope " , feeling it to be a less impressive comparison . Jon Pareles from The New York Times found " Dope " to be similar to the piano ballads by singer Elton John . 
 Georgina Littlejohn from Entertainmentwise called the track " a passionate love song that proves that Gaga is as much a songwriter as an entertainer . " Alex Young from Consequence of Sound praised Gaga 's vocals and deemed the track " easily the best track to surface from Artpop thus far " . Jason Lipshutz from Billboard called the song a " Broadway show @-@ stopper " , adding that Gaga 's broken vocals are brilliant and bruising . Jim Farber from New York Daily News felt the song expressed " great need in the lyrics while displaying only bravado in her delivery . " Bradley Stern from MuuMuse found the " wailing piano ballad " to be among the weakest tracks from Artpop . Kory Grow of Rolling Stone felt that the emotional high point of " Dope " is its chorus , and is a turning point for the song . While reviewing Artpop , Jerry Shriver from USA Today commented that amongst the loud music of the other songs , " Dope " sounded like " too much of a slog " to provide any change of pace while listening to the record . Leila <unk> from Refinery29 felt that with " Dope " Gaga allowed her " operatic voice " to soar ; the song itself is a heart @-@ aching ballad and an unforgettable moment on Artpop . This view was shared by Spencer Kornhaber from The Atlantic who added that the song was " a histrionic piano ballad " . London Evening Standard 's John Aizlewood criticized the song 's lyrics for being submissive , instead of Gaga 's empowerment themes . Another negative review came from Chris Bosman from Time , saying that although " Dope " was the most " streamlined " release of Gaga 's discography , " the effect would be more powerful if ' Dope ' didn 't hit every excruciating piano ballad cliché ( and feature the hilariously clunky line ' I need you more than dope ' ) . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Dope " debuted at number 60 on the US Hot Digital Songs chart with 31 @,@ 000 downloads for the issue dated November 23 , 2013 . The song also debuted at number eight on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming the singer 's 13th top ten on the chart , as well as her highest charting promotional single to date . The low sales of " Dope " were due to iTunes Store 's " Complete My Album " program , where the customers have the option of buying the full album and hence earlier song purchases are deducted from the song 's current week 's total . Despite the low sales , the high debut was fueled by the heavy streams of the song of about 8 @.@ 2 million , and a number one entry on the Billboard Streaming Songs chart , which is one of the components of the Hot 100 . About 95 % of the online streams came from YouTube views of the live video of Gaga performing " Dope " at the YouTube Music Awards of 2013 . Dating to her first top ten single , " Just Dance " on the issue of December 6 , 2008 , Gaga 's total of 13 top ten songs in that time frame is preceded by Taylor Swift , with 14 songs to her tally , followed by Bruno Mars and Katy Perry with 11 songs each . The next week , " Dope " tumbled down the Hot 100 to number 71 . 
 " Dope " debuted at number 34 on the Australian Singles Chart for the issue dated November 9 , 2013 . In New Zealand , " Dope " debuted at number 20 on the New Zealand Singles Chart , for the week of November 11 , 2013 , and on the Irish Singles Chart the song entered at number 12 . Following the release of Artpop , " Dope " also debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 124 with sales of 1 @,@ 666 copies . It has sold 10 @,@ 218 digital downloads in South Korea , as reported by Gaon . " Dope " ' s highest position was attained in Hungary and Spain , where it reached the top of the charts . It also attained top @-@ ten positions in Belgium , France , Greece , Italy and Luxembourg . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Gaga performed the song at the 2013 YouTube Music Awards on November 3 , 2013 . She arrived on the red carpet of the event wearing black top hat , black shades and a black leather shirt , while wearing the same pair of rotten , yellow teeth she wore on the cover art . John Walker from MTV News analyzed Gaga 's look to be a combination of the snake from Tim Burton 's 1988 fantasy film , Beetlejuice , the Scarecrow character from DC Comics and the rocker Marilyn Manson . During the performance , the singer wore a flannel shirt , her natural hair and a snapback with the NASA symbol altered to read DOPE and her face was devoid of any make @-@ up . She performed a piano only version of " Dope " , without any other instrumentation and with tears falling down her face . Shot in dim light , the ending of the performance found the singer facing towards the audience , uttering " I need you more than dope / I need you more than dope " Gaga exited the stage while shaking hands and hugging the members of the audience . 
 <unk> Tiwari from International Business Times favored the performance , calling it " stupendous " and " emotionally draining " . Gil Kaufman from MTV News found the performance to be pensive , saying that " leave it to Lady Gaga to go completely the other direction [ than the tone of the show ] " . Jon Caramanica from The New York Times complimented Gaga 's " easiest @-@ to @-@ consume " performance for being " taut and focused " without any error in its execution . A review in Spin called it one of the most bare performances of the show . Conversely , Jason Lipshutz from Billboard was critical of the performance , feeling that it " failed to be the emotional stunner it desperately deserved to be " . He believed that although directors Spike Jonze and Chris Milk kept the focus on Gaga 's tear @-@ stricken face to give it an intimate feel , the screaming of the audience ruined the performance . Liam O 'Brien from The Independent reported that around 4 @,@ 000 people left the online stream during Gaga 's performance , although the number of audience streaming the show was not much . 
 While promoting Artpop , Gaga appeared on The Howard Stern Show and performed another piano @-@ only version of the song . Also , on December 6 , Gaga performed both " Dope " and an acoustic rendition of Artpop 's second single " Do What U Want " on Alan Carr : Chatty Man . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Recorded at Shangri @-@ La Studios , Malibu , California and CRC Recording Studios , Chicago , Illinois 
 Stefani Germanotta P / K / A Lady Gaga ( BMI ) Sony ATV Songs LLC / Haus of Gaga Publishing , LLC / GloJoe Music Inc . ( BMI ) , Maxwell and Carter Publishing , LLC ( ASCAP ) 
 Personnel 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Artpop album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = 1998 North Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 1998 North Indian Ocean cyclone season was an active season in annual cycle of tropical cyclone formation . The season has no official bounds but cyclones tend to form between April and December . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northern Indian Ocean . There are two main seas in the North Indian Ocean — the Bay of Bengal to the east of the Indian subcontinent and the Arabian Sea to the west of India . The official Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre in this basin is the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) , while the Joint Typhoon Warning Center releases unofficial advisories . An average of four to six storms form in the North Indian Ocean every season with peaks in May and November . Cyclones occurring between the <unk> 45 ° E and 100 ° E are included in the season by the IMD . 
 With eleven depressions and eight tropical cyclones , this was one of the most active seasons in the ocean along with 1987 , 1996 , and 2005 . The season caused a large loss of life , most of which was from one storm . Over 10 @,@ 000 people were killed in India when Tropical Cyclone 03A brought a 4 @.@ 9 @-@ metre ( 16 ft ) storm surge to the Kathiawar Peninsula , inundating numerous salt mines . Total damages from the storm amounted to Rs . 120 billion ( US $ 3 billion ) . Tropical Cyclone 01B killed at least 26 people and left at least 4 @,@ 000 fishermen missing in eastern Bangladesh on May 20 . A short lived depression in mid @-@ October killed 122 people after triggering severe flooding in Andhra Pradesh . In November , Tropical Cyclone 06B killed six people and caused property damage worth BTN 880 million ( US $ 20 @.@ 7 million ) in eastern India . An additional 40 people were killed and 100 fishermen were listed as missing after Tropical Cyclone 07B affected Bangladesh . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The first storm of the season developed on May 18 out of an area of low pressure over the Bay of Bengal . It reached its peak intensity with winds of 130 km / h ( 70 mph ) before making landfall near Chittagong , Bangladesh . The storm dissipated shortly after . Later that month , a short @-@ lived storm developed over the Arabian Sea and dissipated the next day without impacting land . The most intense storm of the season formed in early June off the southwestern coast of India . It slowly traveled towards the west , remaining relatively weak before turning towards the north and intensifying . The storm reached its peak intensity with winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) shortly before making landfall near Porbandar in the Indian state of Gujarat . The cyclone rapidly dissipated on the same day . 
 After three months of inactivity , five storms developed in late September and October . Two of them strengthened into tropical storms , neither of which impacted land . In early November , the sixth tropical cyclone of the season developed in the Bay of Bengal . The storm quickly developed and reached its peak intensity upon landfall with winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) . The storm rapidly dissipated the same day it made landfall . Shortly after 06B dissipated , the remnants of Tropical Storm Chip triggered the development of a new cyclone over the Bay of Bengal . The storm tracked along the edge of a subtropical ridge , reaching its peak intensity over open waters with winds of 140 km / h ( 80 mph ) . The cyclone entered an area of higher wind shear shortly after and rapidly weakened before making landfall . Then it dissipated in Bangladesh . The final cyclone of the season developed in the Arabian Sea during mid @-@ December . It reached its peak intensity with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) before weakening due to strong wind shear . It made landfall in Oman on December 17 as a minimal tropical storm shortly before dissipating . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Severe Cyclonic Storm BOB 01 ( 01B ) = = = 
 The first cyclone in the region developed as a tropical disturbance on May 13 over the southern Bay of Bengal to the southeast of Sri Lanka . With little development , the disturbance initially traveled towards the north @-@ northeast before turning west . On May 16 , the system slowed down near the southeastern coast of India and began to turn towards the northeast once more . At 0700 UTC on May 17 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert ( TCFA ) . Shortly after , the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) declared that the disturbance developed into Depression BOB 01 . A second TCFA was issued later that day as a new circulation associated with the system developed further towards the northeast . At 0600 UTC on May 18 , the first advisory on Tropical Cyclone 01B was issued by the JTWC . At the time of the advisory , winds were estimated at 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) . The IMD also upgraded BOB 01 to a deep depression at this time . 
 Continuing on a northeasterly track , BOB 01 gradually intensified as it neared Bangladesh . About 12 hours after being designated a cyclone , it strengthened to the equivalent of a tropical storm . The winds had reached 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . At that time , it was located 555 km ( 345 mi ) south @-@ southeast of Chittagong . Early on May 20 , BOB 01 reached its peak intensity as a severe cyclonic storm with winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 972 mbar ( hPa ) . The JTWC assessed the storm to have peaked with winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) , equivalent to a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . An eye developed and the system made landfall several hours later near Chittagong . After making landfall , the storm quickly weakened , dissipating later that day . 
 Ahead of the storm , officials in Bangladesh relocated an estimated 650 @,@ 000 people , resulting in a lower loss of life . But BOB 01 adversely affected low @-@ lying areas , destroying 6 @,@ 000 homes and damaging another 9 @,@ 945 . It produced a storm surge of 1 @.@ 8 to 3 m ( 6 to 10 ft ) , inundating coastal towns . A total of 1 @,@ 876 hectares ( 4 @,@ 635 acres ) of salt fields and 25 hectares ( 61 acres ) of shrimp farms were damaged . At least 35 people were killed by the storm and 504 others were injured . Five of the fatalities occurred in Chittagong and another five on an island in the Cox 's Bazar District . Sixteen more of the fatalities occurred when three fishing vessels sank near Chittagong . Additionally , an estimated 4 @,@ 000 fishermen were listed as missing at sea . A total of 108 @,@ 440 people were affected in Bangladesh . An oil tanker anchored near Chittagong was tossed by rough seas into another vessel and sustained significant damage . Large quantities of crude oil spilled into the water due to a hole in the hull of the ship . Both of the ships involved in the incident were owned by the Bangladesh Shipping Corporation . Following the impacts of the storm , the United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization provided $ 40 @,@ 000 in immediate funds for rehabilitation efforts . The Government of Germany also provided $ 270 @,@ 166 to the affected population . The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies donated about $ 1 @.@ 2 million to Bangladesh . 
 = = = Depression ARB 01 ( 02A ) = = = 
 On May 27 , an area of low pressure developed over the central Arabian Sea . Early the next day , the JTWC issued their first advisory on Tropical Cyclone 02A while the system was located about 740 km ( 460 mi ) south of Masirah Island . The IMD only briefly monitored the system as a weak depression , designating it as ARB 01 . Upon being classified a tropical cyclone , 02A reached its peak intensity . The speed of its winds was 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . Soon , it began to dissipate due to increasing vertical wind shear . The center of circulation quickly became devoid of convection . The storm weakened below tropical storm intensity later that day before dissipating on May 29 over open waters . 
 = = = Extremely Severe Cyclonic Storm ARB 02 ( 03A ) = = = 
 On June 1 , an area of low pressure developed over the Laccadive Islands . Two days later , the JTWC issued a TCFA for the system as it became better organized . Early on June 4 , the JTWC issued its first advisory on Tropical Cyclone 03A . Around the same time , the IMD began monitoring the system as Depression ARB 02 . Shortly after , the depression was upgraded to a deep depression and further strengthened into a cyclonic storm the following day . The small storm moved slowly towards the west and weakened as wind shear began to increase . The storm weakened below tropical storm intensity later that day and the initial final advisory was issued . However , the system redeveloped and advisories resumed the next day . The storm gradually intensified as it moved towards the northwest . Dvorak satellite intensity estimates on June 6 reached <unk> , corresponding to an intensity of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . The IMD also marked the increase in intensity , upgrading ARB 02 to a severe cyclonic storm . Around this time , the storm began to turn towards the north and accelerate due to an approaching mid @-@ level trough . As the storm neared the Indian coastline , an eye developed and the storm strengthened into the equivalent of a major hurricane with winds reaching 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . The IMD assessed the storm to be a very severe cyclonic storm at this time , with winds up to 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 958 mbar ( hPa ) . After slightly weakening early on June 9 , 03A re @-@ strengthened , attaining its peak intensity with winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) . Then it made landfall near Porbandar in the Indian state of Gujarat between 0100 and 0200 UTC . The storm weakened following landfall and the JTWC issued their final advisory later that day . The IMD continued to monitor ARB 02 until June 10 , by which time it had weakened to a depression before dissipating . 
 Tropical Cyclone 03A brought a large storm surge of 4 @.@ 9 m ( 16 ft ) which devastated coastal communities and salt mines . An estimated 10 @,@ 000 people were killed by the storm , many of whom were salt mine workers who did not own a radio and received little or no warning of the cyclone . The large loss of life was partially attributed to contractors who wanted to continue making profits and did not inform their workers of the approaching storm . Also , the region had witnessed only 17 cyclones since 1890 , all of which were weaker than 03A . As a result , its vulnerability was miscalculated by the local population and the disaster management administration . Power supply to numerous residences was lost due to the storms high winds . A microwave tower in Porbandar collapsed , causing widespread disruption in telecommunication . Hundreds of other power transmission towers also fell , causing an estimated loss of Rs 10 billion for the Gujarat Electricity Board . At least 893 people were injured by the storm and over 11 @,@ 000 animals were killed . Over 162 @,@ 000 structures were damaged or destroyed throughout the affected area and damages amounted to Rs . 120 billion ( US $ 3 billion ) . Over the next one month , insurance companies had lost approximately Rs . 13 billion ( US $ 266 @.@ 5 million ) . The remnants of the storm produced heavy rains over Pakistan which electrocuted 12 people . In the wake of the storm , the United States Government provided US $ 25 @,@ 000 for rehabilitation of the affected population . The Government of Denmark also contributed $ 72 @,@ 992 in funds for relief efforts . The Gujarat government deployed approximately 330 medical teams to the affected areas . Local aid , amounting to Rs 1 billion ( US $ 20 @.@ 5 million ) was provided to assist victims . 
 = = = Deep Depression BOB 02 = = = 
 On June 13 , the IMD began monitoring a depression over the central Bay of Bengal . Tracking towards the west , the depression intensified into a deep depression , peaking with winds of 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) and a minimum pressure of 992 mbar ( hPa ) . Around 1500 UTC on June 14 , the deep depression made landfall near Visakhapatnam . Shortly thereafter , it weakened to a depression and dissipated early the following day . 
 = = = Depression ARB 03 ( 04A ) = = = 
 In late September , an area of low pressure developed over the Arabian Sea within an east @-@ west oriented surface trough while located about 740 km ( 460 mi ) west of Mumbai , India . The system gradually intensified as it moved slowly towards the west . Early on September 30 , the JTWC issued its first advisory on Tropical Cyclone 04A . Its winds peaked at 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . Located within an area of moderate wind shear , the storm quickly weakened and dissipated early on October 1 . 
 = = = Deep Depression ARB 04 = = = 
 On October 8 , the IMD began monitoring a tropical depression located about 835 km ( 520 mi ) southwest of Mumbai . The depression was briefly classified as a deep depression with winds of 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) and a minimum pressure of 998 mbar ( hPa ) as it moved towards the west @-@ northwest . Shortly after reaching its peak intensity , the depression weakened . The last advisory was issued the next day while the storm was over open waters . 
 = = = Deep Depression BOB 03 = = = 
 On October 13 , the IMD began monitoring a tropical depression off the eastern coast of India . The depression remained relatively weak , with winds peaking at 45 km / h ( 30 mph ) before the storm made landfall near <unk> in the Andhra Pradesh early on October 14 . The depression dissipated shortly after landfall . Heavy rains produced by the depression damaged croplands and property . Twenty @-@ four @-@ hour rainfall totals reached 110 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) in localized areas , triggering flash floods in areas severely impacted by another system a week earlier . In Hyderabad , schools and government offices were closed . During the morning of October 14 , overflow from a dam inundated the Srisailam power house , forcing officials to shut down the plant . Numerous highways were also closed due to flowing water . The following day , the water level of the dam continued to rise , leading to the evacuation of nearly 53 @,@ 000 residents in the area . Throughout Andhra Pradesh , flooding from the depression resulted in 122 fatalities . 
 = = = Cyclonic Storm ARB 05 ( 05A ) = = = 
 The IMD began monitoring an area of low pressure over the Laccadive Islands on October 10 . The low traveled towards the northwest with little development . On October 15 , the JTWC issued a TCFA as the system became better organized . Although wind shear increased , the first advisory was issued the next day . With minimal convection , the storm never intensified past 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . The system traveled towards the northeast and weakened due to strong wind shear . On October 17 , the storm fell below tropical storm status and made landfall on the Kathiawar Peninsula , near the same area where 03A made landfall in early June . The storm dissipated shortly after landfall . 
 As the storm neared land , officials in Gujarat evacuated hundreds of residents from coastal areas . Due to the low @-@ intensity of the storm , no damage was reported on land and only light rain fell . However , offshore , more than 250 people were reported as missing when contact was lost with numerous fishing vessels . One @-@ hundred @-@ twenty people on twelve ships from <unk> village were among the missing . One of the ships capsized ; however , the crew of 12 swam to shore . One boat from Vasai carrying 20 people was also missing . Ten fishermen from Colaba were reported as missing , three of which later swam to shore . The Indian Coast Guard immediately dispatched search and rescue ships and naval helicopters to find the missing people . 
 = = = Deep Depression BOB 04 = = = 
 Early on October 28 , the IMD began monitoring a tropical depression located about 555 km ( 345 mi ) south @-@ southeast of Visakhapatnam in the Andhra Pradesh . The depression strengthened to a deep depression later that day with winds peaking at 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) before undergoing a weakening trend . The depression dissipated the next day near the Andhra Pradesh coastline . The outer bands of the depression produced light rainfall over the coast of Andhra Pradesh . 
 = = = Very Severe Cyclonic Storm BOB 05 ( 06B ) = = = 
 On November 10 , an area of low pressure developed over the Bay of Bengal within a monsoonal trough . Moving towards the northwest , the low gradually developed and the JTWC issued a TCFA early on November 13 . The next day , the first advisory on Tropical Cyclone 06B was issued . A brief period of rapid development took place as the storm strengthened just below Category 1 status . Shortly before making landfall near Visakhapatnam , 06B reached its peak intensity with winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) . At this time , the IMD classified the cyclone as a Very Severe Cyclonic Storm and reported that it had a 60 km ( 37 mi ) wide eye . Rapid weakening followed shortly after landfall and the storm dissipated early on November 16 . 
 Major crop losses , property damage , and six fatalities were reported from the affected areas . Four of the fatalities were in Visakhapatnam and the other two were in east Godavari . Hundreds of trees and power lines had fallen . At least 116 @,@ 000 acres ( 470 km2 ) of cropland and more than 2 @,@ 000 homes were damaged . Waves produced by the storm at Visakhapatnam were recorded up to 5 @.@ 74 m ( 18 @.@ 8 ft ) . The storm dropped rainfall in excess of 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) throughout the region . Damages from the storm were estimated at BTN 880 million ( US $ 20 @.@ 7 million ) . 
 = = = Very Severe Cyclonic Storm BOB 06 ( 07B ) = = = 
 Tropical Storm Chip dissipated over Vietnam on November 15 , 1998 . The remnants of Chip crossed the Malay Peninsula on November 17 and entered the Bay of Bengal . The system moved along the edge of a subtropical ridge within an area of strong wind shear . After turning towards the northwest , the low entered an area of lower wind shear and began to become better organized . Between November 18 and 20 , the JTWC issued three <unk> before issuing first advisory on Tropical Cyclone 07B early on November 20 . While recurving towards the northeast , 07B reached its peak intensity on November 22 with winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . Shortly after reaching peak intensity , the cyclone entered an area of strong wind shear which caused convection associated with the storm to become dislocated from the center . This caused 07B to rapidly weaken before making landfall to the west of Chittagong , Bangladesh . It dissipated on November 23 . 
 Tropical Cyclone 07B produced a storm surge of 1 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 4 m ( 4 to 8 ft ) which inundated coastal areas of Bangladesh , killing 40 people and leaving at least 103 others missing . Winds gusting up to 80 km / h ( 47 mph ) and heavy rains impacted a large area of the country . A large area of rice paddies was lost due to flooding and numerous homes were buried in mud . A total of 5 @,@ 780 families were left homeless . About 8 @,@ 755 homes sustained severe damage and an estimated 300 @,@ 000 people were affected by 07B . 
 = = = Severe Cyclonic Storm ARB 06 ( <unk> ) = = = 
 On December 7 , a broad area of low pressure developed near southern India within an area of moderate wind shear . On December 11 , the JTWC issued a TCFA for the system as it drifted towards the northwest over the Arabian Sea . Two days later , the first advisory on Tropical Cyclone <unk> was issued . The large cyclone slowly organized and intensified as it turned towards the north . By December 15 , the storm reached its peak intensity with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Then , it turned towards the west into an area of higher wind shear . The cyclone gradually weakened as it traveled towards Oman . It made landfall in the country on December 17 with winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) and dissipated later that day . Although it made landfall as a tropical storm , no known damage was reported . The remnants of the storm sank a ship , killing 18 fishermen . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This is a table of the storms in 1998 and their landfall ( s ) , if any . Deaths in parentheses are additional and indirect ( an example of an indirect death would be a traffic accident ) , but are still storm @-@ related . 
 = Leslie Douglas Jackson = 
 Leslie Douglas ( Les ) Jackson , DFC & Bar ( 24 February 1917 – 17 February 1980 ) was an Australian fighter ace of World War II , credited with five aerial victories . Born in Brisbane , he was a businessman when he joined the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) Reserve in 1937 . Called up for active duty shortly after the outbreak of war in September 1939 , he served with No. 23 Squadron in Australia before posting to the South West Pacific theatre with No. 21 Squadron in Singapore . In March 1942 he joined No. 75 Squadron in Port Moresby , New Guinea , flying P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks under the command of his eldest brother , John . During the ensuing Battle of Port Moresby , Les shot down four Japanese aircraft . 
 Jackson took over command of No. 75 Squadron after his brother was killed in action on 28 April 1942 , leading it in the Battle of Milne Bay later that year . Credited with a fifth aerial victory , he became the RAAF 's first ace in the New Guinea campaign , and was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) . By 1944 , Jackson was wing leader of No. 78 ( Fighter ) Wing in Western New Guinea , gaining promotion to wing commander in September that year . Awarded a bar to his DFC in March 1945 , he served as chief flying instructor at No. 8 Operational Training Unit in Australia , and saw out the war as commander of Air Defence Headquarters , Madang . After leaving the RAAF in 1946 , Jackson returned to the business world , running two garages . He died in Southport , Queensland , in 1980 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Les Jackson was born on 24 February 1917 in the Brisbane suburb of Newmarket , Queensland , the fourth son of businessman William Jackson and his wife Edith . His first job following education at Brisbane Grammar School was as an accountant in the family firm of J. Jackson & Co . Pty Ltd . He then set up his own business running a service station and garage in Surat , a rural area south @-@ west of Brisbane . In February 1935 , Jackson enlisted in the 2nd / 14th Light Horse Regiment , a Queensland @-@ based Militia unit . 
 Jackson followed his eldest brother , John , into the Royal Australian Air Force Reserve , known as the Citizen Air Force , in July 1937 . With the outbreak of World War II , Les was called up for active duty in the RAAF on 6 November 1939 . He learnt to fly as an air cadet at RAAF Station Point Cook , Victoria . Graduating as a pilot in February 1940 , he served initially with No. 23 Squadron at Archerfield , Queensland . In July 1941 , he was posted to the South West Pacific theatre with No. 21 Squadron in Singapore . Initially operating CAC Wirraways , the unit converted to Brewster Buffalos in September that year . 
 = = Combat service = = 
 = = = Port Moresby = = = 
 Completing his service with No. 21 Squadron in November 1941 , Jackson was again posted to No. 23 Squadron in Australia . In March 1942 , he joined No. 75 Squadron in New Guinea as a flight lieutenant , under the command of his brother , known as " Old John " . Operating P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks , the unit quickly became engaged in the defence of Port Moresby , one of the crucial early battles in the New Guinea campaign . As one of No. 75 Squadron ’ s flight commanders , Jackson took part in a surprise raid against Lae airfield on 22 March . Five Kittyhawks led by John Jackson attacked and destroyed a dozen Japanese planes on the ground , while four others including Les provided protective cover above ; he survived an encounter with three Mitsubishi Zeros that saw two of his fellow pilots shot down . Two days later he recorded his first aerial victory when he intercepted and destroyed a Zero escorting a force of bombers towards Port Moresby . 
 On 6 April , Jackson was forced to ditch his aircraft on a coral reef , but made it to shore with the aid of a life jacket that his brother John dropped to him . In the following weeks , Les accounted for another three Japanese aircraft shot down . On 5 April , he was attacked from behind by a Zero while firing on bombers front @-@ on , but was able to turn the tables on the Japanese fighter and shoot it down in flames . The next day he went head to head with more Zeros , damaging two before being forced to ditch on a reef with a smoking engine ; once down he scrambled out of the cockpit and danced on the wing to let his comrades know he was safe . Jackson shot down his third victim on 17 April . He achieved his fourth victory against another Zero on 24 April , to become the highest Australian scorer in the Battle of Port Moresby . On 28 April , John Jackson was shot down and killed while leading the interception of a Japanese raid ; Les took over command of No. 75 Squadron the next day . On 30 April , the squadron was recalled to Australia to refit and regroup ; Jackson flew one of its last remaining serviceable aircraft to Cairns , Queensland , on 9 May . 
 = = = Milne Bay and after = = = 
 Following re @-@ equipment in Australia , Jackson led No. 75 Squadron back to New Guinea , arriving at Milne Bay on 25 July 1942 in company with another Kittyhawk unit , No. 76 Squadron . During the Battle of Milne Bay , Jackson ’ s squadron was engaged in air defence against Japanese raiders and offensive strikes against convoys and other targets in support of Australian ground forces . On 25 August , the Kittyhawks launched an attack on enemy barges at Goodenough Island that resulted in all seven vessels being set on fire without the loss of any aircraft . The next day , Jackson personally led two of his unit 's five concerted strafing assaults on the main Japanese convoy approaching Milne Bay . On 27 August , he and a fellow pilot each claimed a Zero ; the Japanese fighters had been focussing on machine @-@ gunning one of their own aircraft that had crash @-@ landed following combat with a USAAF B @-@ 26 Marauder , presumably to prevent it falling into Allied hands , and were ' bounced ' by the Australian pilots . His victory made Jackson an ace , the first from the RAAF in New Guinea . By 28 August , Japanese troops were threatening to overrun the RAAF airfield at Milne Bay , and the Kittyhawk squadrons were ordered to withdraw to Port Moresby for one night . Returning to Milne Bay the next day , Jackson ’ s plane developed trouble and he had to ditch on the coast ; with the help of New Guinea natives , he reached Port Moresby by boat three days later . By 7 September the Japanese had withdrawn their troops from the Milne Bay area ; Generals Sydney Rowell and Cyril Clowes both described the efforts of Nos. 75 and 76 Squadrons as " the decisive factor " in repulsing the invading forces . 
 No. 75 Squadron was redeployed to Horn Island , Queensland , in September 1942 , and Jackson handed over command to Squadron Leader John Meehan the following January . In recognition of his " courage and leadership " in New Guinea , Jackson was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) , which was promulgated in the London Gazette on 26 March 1943 . Having served in staff positions in Australia during the year , he was appointed Wing Leader of No. 78 ( Fighter ) Wing , a component of the newly formed No. 10 Operational Group , in December 1943 . The wing participated in Operation Reckless , the assault on Hollandia and Aitape that opened the Western New Guinea campaign , in April 1944 . This was followed by the attack on Noemfoor , commencing in June . Jackson was promoted to acting Wing Commander in September 1944 . Completing his tour with No. 78 Wing in December , he was posted to No. 8 Operational Training Unit , New South Wales , as chief flying instructor . In March 1945 , Jackson was awarded a bar to his DFC for " determined and successful attacks on enemy installations and shipping " . That June , he took command of Air Defence Headquarters in Madang . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 Jackson continued to lead Air Defence Headquarters in Madang following the end of hostilities , before his commission was terminated in Brisbane on 8 February 1946 . Returning to the garage business in rural Queensland , he ran Active Service Motors at Roma and Western Queensland Motors in St George . He married Cynthia <unk> at St Andrew 's Presbyterian Church , Southport , on 25 January 1947 ; the couple had three sons . Predeceased by his wife in 1974 , Jackson died of a cerebral hemorrhage at Southport on 17 February 1980 . He was survived by his children , and cremated in an Anglican ceremony . 
 = Fred Waite ( politician ) = 
 Fred Waite , CMG , DSO , OBE , VD ( 21 August 1885 – 29 August 1952 ) was a New Zealand farmer , historian , politician , and soldier who served in both the First and Second World Wars . 
 Born in Dunedin , Waite was a farmer at the outbreak of the First World War . He joined the New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( NZEF ) and served in the Gallipoli Campaign , during which he received the Distinguished Service Order . He was evacuated from Gallipoli due to sickness and repatriated to New Zealand , where he saw out the war as an instructor in NZEF training camps . He wrote a history of New Zealand 's military efforts during the Gallipoli Campaign that was published in 1919 . He returned to his farm and soon became involved in politics , joining the Reform Party . In 1925 he was elected Member of Parliament for the Clutha electorate , serving two terms . He was appointed to the Legislative Council in 1934 . During the Second World War , Waite was overseas commissioner for the National Patriotic Fund Board and was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire for his services in this role . Two years later he was appointed a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George . He died in 1952 at the age of 67 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Waite was born in Dunedin on 21 August 1885 , one of eight children of George Waite , a storekeeper , and his wife . After leaving Mornington School , he worked for the regional newspaper , the Otago Daily Times , and for the Otago Witness . He was a typesetter when he married Ada Taylor in 1912 but the following year took up farming near Balclutha . He was interested in the military and was a member of an engineers unit in the Volunteer Force , which was later re @-@ organised into the Territorial Force ( TF ) . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Following the outbreak of the First World War , Waite volunteered for the New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( NZEF ) that was being raised for service overseas . He also undertook to send dispatches from the front for his previous employer , the Otago Witness , but this work proved short @-@ lived when he became a censor as part of his military duties . He was posted as a lieutenant in the New Zealand Engineers and sailed with the main body of the NZEF to the Middle East in October 1914 . 
 Promoted to captain , Waite participated in the Gallipoli Campaign . In early May 1915 , he restored order amongst personnel of the Otago Infantry Battalion following a failed attack on Turkish positions . He was awarded the Distinguished Service Order , the citation reading : " For gallantry and devotion to duty in connection with the operations at the Dardanelles ( Mediterranean Expeditionary Force ) . On the night of 2 @-@ 3 May 1915 during the operations in the neighbourhood of <unk> Tepe for gallantry and resource in rallying his men , and leading them forward at critical moments " . 
 Later in the campaign Waite served as the adjutant of the New Zealand Engineers and was twice mentioned in dispatches . Evacuated to England with dysentery , he was repatriated to New Zealand in 1916 . His service with the NZEF ceased and he returned to the TF in his pre @-@ war rank of major . He took up an appointment as Chief Engineer Instructor of the NZEF training camps . 
 Shortly before the end of the war , Waite wrote a brief account of New Zealand 's contributions to the Gallipoli Campaign . Authorities invited him to prepare a more substantial work and this resulted in the The New Zealanders at Gallipoli , the first volume in a series of the Official History of New Zealand 's Effort in the Great War , published in 1919 . Two years later it was republished as a revised edition . Waite also worked on the production of the three other volumes in the series , which were published around the same time . 
 = = Interwar period = = 
 After the war , Waite returned to his Balclutha property which he converted to dairy farming . He remained a member of the TF for several years and was a major in the Otago Mounted Rifles Regiment before being promoted to lieutenant colonel and becoming its commander from 1927 to 1930 . For his prolonged service with the TF , he eventually received the Colonial Auxiliary Forces Officers ' Decoration . In 1935 he was awarded the King George V Silver Jubilee Medal . Already involved in the dairying industry , he began to participate in the governance of the sector and set up the Co @-@ Operative Dairy Company of Otago . He later joined the New Zealand Farmer 's Union and was president of its Otago Branch . 
 As well as his work in the dairying sector , Waite soon became involved in local politics and joined the Reform Party . He first stood for election to the House of Representatives in 1925 , when he defeated the incumbent in the Clutha electorate , John Edie of the Liberal Party , with ease . He was one of 13 new members in a House of 80 representatives . In the 1928 election , he was challenged by Joseph Stephens , who was an independent candidate describing himself as Liberal @-@ Labour . Waite had a 523 @-@ vote margin , which represented 6 @.@ 5 % of the valid votes . In the 1931 election , Waite was defeated by Peter <unk> , who stood as an Independent , but had links to the United Party . 
 Prime Minister George Forbes had not made appointments to the Legislative Council since 1930 , with the exception of James Parr in 1931 , and membership dwindled during the years of the Great Depression . By 1934 , the membership had reduced to 19 , the lowest since 1860 , with two members about to retire . In 1934 , 14 new members were appointed by Forbes , including Waite . All appointments became effective on 22 June 1934 , and Waite , at age 49 , was the second youngest of the intake ; only Vincent Ward was younger . Waite was reappointed twice , and served until the abolition of the Upper House in 1950 . 
 When the National Party was formed in 1936 from the merger of Reform and the United Party , publicity was one of the major considerations . The party 's provisional council established a sub @-@ committee consisting of Henry Livingstone , Frederick <unk> , and Waite . This committee reported back in February 1937 , recommending the establishment of a Dominion publicity committee , and a trustee company for the purpose of publishing a party newsletter . Party Publications Ltd was thus created , and Waite was the first editor of The National News . Initially , all financial members were to receive this monthly newsletter , aimed at being a counterpart to Labour 's Standard . While The National News performed an important function during the party 's formative years , the venture was expensive and following the 1938 election , it was changed to a quarterly schedule , before being discontinued in September 1939 just after the outbreak of the war . 
 The seven @-@ member Dominion publicity committee , of which Waite was a member , engaged three advertising companies to jointly prepare for the 1938 election . Two of those companies , John <unk> and Charles Haines , remained joint agents for the National Party until 1973 . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 When the Second World War began , Waite was still a lieutenant colonel in the TF . He was appointed overseas commissioner for the National Patriotic Fund Board . Based in Egypt , he worked to provide the soldiers of the Second New Zealand Expeditionary Force with special supplies and treats . His services in this capacity were recognised in 1944 with his appointment as an Officer of the Order of the British Empire . He finished the war a colonel , working in Europe on the repatriation of New Zealand personnel recently released from prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camps in Germany . In 1946 , he travelled to Japan to inspect the infrastructure set up for J @-@ Force , New Zealand 's contribution to the British Commonwealth Occupation Force , following which he retired from the military . In the 1946 King 's Birthday Honours , he was appointed a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In his retirement , Waite wrote papers on archeology and history including one on Egyptian pottery . While in Cairo during the Second World War , he collected several historical antiquities on behalf of the Otago Museum . In 1951 Waite was granted the right to retain the title of " Honourable " , having served more than 10 years as a member of the Legislative Council . In his later years , his health was poor and he died in Balclutha in 1952 at the age of 67 . He was survived by his wife and a daughter . 
 = Auburn Dam = 
 Auburn Dam was a proposed dam on the North Fork of the American River east of the town of Auburn , California in the United States , on the border of Placer and El Dorado Counties . Slated to be completed in the 1970s by the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation , at a height of 685 feet ( 209 m ) the concrete arch @-@ gravity dam was to be the largest three @-@ centered thin arch dam in the world . Straddling a gorge downstream of the confluence of the North and Middle Forks of the American River and upstream of Folsom Lake , it would have regulated water flow and provided flood control in the American River basin as part of Reclamation 's immense Central Valley Project . 
 Proposals and studies for the dam emerged in the late 1960s , and construction work commenced in 1968 , involving the diversion of the North Fork American River through a tunnel and the construction of a massive earthen cofferdam . Following a nearby earthquake and the discovery of a seismic fault that underlay the dam site , work on the project was halted for fears that the dam 's design would not allow it to survive a major quake on the same fault zone . Although the dam was redesigned and a new proposal submitted by 1980 , spiraling costs and limited water storage offered by either design put an end to the project until heavy floods destroyed the cofferdam , sparking brief renewed interest in the dam . The California State Water Resources Control Board denied water rights for the dam project in 2008 due to lack of implementation . 
 Although new proposals surfaced from time to time after the 1980s , the dam was never built for a variety of reasons . Limited flood @-@ control capability , geologic instability , and potential harm on recreational and ecological values finally put an end to the Auburn Dam project . Many of the original groundworks and preliminary constructions at the Auburn Dam site still exist , and up to 2007 , the North Fork American River still flowed through the diversion tunnel that had been constructed in preparation for the dam . Reclamation and Placer County Water Agency completed a pump station project that year which blocked the tunnel , returned the river to its original channel , and diverted water through another tunnel under Auburn to meet local needs . However , some groups continue to support construction of the dam , which they claim would provide important water regulation and flood protection . 
 = = Early history = = 
 In the 1850s , the city of Sacramento was rapidly growing around the confluence of the Sacramento River and its tributary the American River , near the middle of the Central Valley of California . The city 's increasing population necessitated the construction of an extensive system of levees on the two rivers to prevent flooding , especially on the American . The flood control works were not enough to keep the rivers within their beds , however ; in 1862 , the city was inundated so completely that the state government was temporarily moved to San Francisco . In 1956 , the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers built the Folsom Dam on the lower American , near the confluence of its North and South Forks , to provide flood control for the Sacramento metropolitan area . However , the Folsom Dam provided inadequate flood storage , and has overflowed on several occasions since its construction . In fact , a flood in 1955 filled the Folsom Reservoir to capacity , before the dam was even completed . 
 Water demand in the Central Valley in the Sacramento area was also growing , mainly for agricultural usage . In 1854 , a diversion dam was constructed on the North Fork American River at the site of Auburn Dam , to divert water into a series of ditches that supplied irrigation water for downstream farms . Irrigation with dam and canal systems was favored because severe flow fluctuations in Central Valley rivers created floods in some years and droughts in others . It was in this light that the Auburn Dam was first contrived . As early as the 1950s , plans for a giant dam at the Auburn site were already being considered , in the name of flood control . Several designs , both earthfill and concrete , were considered . Before the dam could be built , however , the Auburn @-@ Foresthill Road , which crossed the river just upstream of the dam site , had to be relocated . Even before the project was authorized , several companies had already taken contracts for the construction of a high bridge to carry the road over the proposed reservoir and preliminary excavations at the dam site . 
 Auburn Dam was to be a massive flood @-@ control and storage structure on the North Fork of the American River , just upstream from Folsom Reservoir . It would create a reservoir with more than twice the capacity of Folsom , which could help reduce floods on the American . With the introduction of the Central Valley Project in the mid @-@ 1930s , came the Auburn @-@ Folsom South Unit , with the purpose to " provide new and supplemental water for irrigation , municipal and industrial use , and to replenish severely depleted ground water in the Folsom South region " . In 1965 , Congress authorized the Auburn @-@ Folsom South Unit of the Central Valley Project , the primary feature of which was to be Auburn Dam . The targeted completion date was 1973 . 
 As the proposals for the Auburn Dam evolved , the project saw a transformation from a purely flood @-@ control structure to a multipurpose high dam that would serve various purposes including storage , hydroelectricity generation , and recreational activities . One of the first ideas , publicized in the late 1950s , called for a 515 @-@ foot ( 157 m ) embankment dam impounding 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 dam3 ) of water . In 1963 , a 690 @-@ foot ( 210 m ) earthfill dam holding back 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 3 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 dam3 ) of water was proposed . The pre @-@ construction design was finalized in 1967 , for a concrete thin @-@ arch gravity structure over 680 feet ( 210 m ) high . This dam would be 4 @,@ 200 feet ( 1 @,@ 300 m ) long , 196 feet ( 60 m ) thick at the base , and equipped with five <unk> generators at its base for a total generating capacity of 700 MW . Two concrete @-@ lined flip bucket spillways would abut both sides of the dam . Construction work for the dam started in late 1968 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 = = = Site preparation = = = 
 Official groundbreaking of the Auburn Dam started on October 19 , 1968 with preparatory excavations and test shafts drilled into the mountainsides of the North Fork American River gorge . The contract for the diversion tunnel through the mountainside on river left , 33 feet ( 10 m ) in diameter , 2 @,@ 400 feet ( 730 m ) long , and equipped to handle a flow of 74 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 2 @,@ 100 m3 / s ) ( a roughly 35 @-@ year flood ) was given to Walsh Western for about $ 5 @.@ 1 million in 1968 . The actual construction of the tunnel itself did not begin until mid @-@ 1971 , and the tunnel was completed in late November 1972 . One construction worker was killed during the excavation of the tunnel . In 1975 , the earthen cofferdam for the Auburn project , 265 feet ( 81 m ) high , was completed and water began to flow into the diversion tunnel later that year . The diversion tunnel bypassed a roughly 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) section of the riverbed for construction of the main dam . 
 Upstream of the dam site , Auburn @-@ Foresthill Road , one of the only all @-@ weather thoroughfares of the region , would have been inundated by the proposed reservoir . In preparation for the reservoir 's filling , the road was raised high above the canyon on a three @-@ spanned , 2 @,@ 428 @-@ foot ( 740 m ) -long truss bridge rising 730 feet ( 220 m ) above the river . Even though the Auburn Dam was never built , the bridge was still required because the pool behind the cofferdam would inundate the old Foresthill crossing anyway , especially during high water . It also improved safety and reduced travel time by eliminating a steep , narrow and winding grade into the canyon on either side of the river , as comparisons to maps showing the old road alignment will attest . The contracts for various projects pertaining to the relocation of the roadway were given to O.K. <unk> and Sons , Hensel Phelps Construction Company , and Willamette @-@ Western Corporation , the latter for the construction of the actual bridge . The Foresthill Bridge , which still stands today , was completed in 1973 . 
 = = = Earthquake and redesigning = = = 
 A magnitude 5 @.@ 7 earthquake shook the Sierra Nevada near Oroville Dam in 1975 , about 50 miles ( 80 km ) north of the Auburn Dam construction site . This quake concerned geologists and engineers working on the project so much that the Auburn Dam construction was brought to a complete standstill while the site was resurveyed and investigations conducted into the origins of the earthquake . It was discovered that the quake might have been caused by reservoir @-@ induced seismicity , i.e. the weight of the water from Lake Oroville , whose dam had been completed in 1968 , was pressing down on the fault zone enough to cause geologic stress , upon which the fault might slip and cause an earthquake . As the concrete thin @-@ arch design of the Auburn Dam would be vulnerable to such a quake , the project had to be drastically redesigned . 
 Over the next few years , while all construction was halted , Reclamation conducted evaluations of the seismic potential of the dam site , even though these delays caused the cost of the project to rise with every passing year . Studies concluded that a major fault system underlay the vicinity of the Auburn Dam site , with many folds of metamorphic rock formed by the contact of the foothills rocks and the granite batholith of the Sierra Nevada . Reclamation predicted that the Auburn Reservoir could induce an earthquake of up to a 6 @.@ 5 , while the U.S. Geologic Survey came out with a higher magnitude of 7 @.@ 0 . Nevertheless , Reclamation redesigned the Auburn Dam based on their 6 @.@ 5 figure , even though a 7 @.@ 0 would be three times stronger . The design for the Auburn Dam was changed to a concrete thick @-@ arch gravity dam , to provide better protection against a possible earthquake induced by its own reservoir . 
 Through the rest of the 1970s , possible designs were looked at but never implemented , while preliminary work on the construction site was resumed . On April 29 , 1979 , the foundations for the Auburn Dam were completed . However , debates continued over whether to build an arched or straight @-@ axis dam , the latter of which was proposed because it might be less of an engineering challenge and withstand earthquakes better . 
 = = = <unk> failure = = = 
 In early 1986 a huge flood began pouring down from the Sierra Nevada mountains , as ten inches ( 254 mm ) of rain fell on the Sacramento region in 11 days . Later to be considered one of the largest regional floods in recorded history , Placer County was quickly designated a Federal Disaster Area . <unk> streams and rivers incurred some $ 7 @.@ 5 million in damages within the county . Flooding was so catastrophic , that the rating for Sacramento 's levees , supposedly designed to prevent a 125 @-@ year flood , was dropped to a 78 @-@ year flood . The floods tore out long stretches of levees along the American , Sacramento and Feather Rivers through the Sacramento Valley , and the city of Sacramento was spared by a close margin . Folsom Lake again filled to capacity , and began spilling 134 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 3 @,@ 800 m3 / s ) by late February . 
 The flood rapidly filled the pool behind the Auburn cofferdam to capacity , as the diversion tunnel could not handle the extra water pouring into the reservoir . At about 9 : 00 A.M. on February 18 , the rising water overtopped the cofferdam near the right abutment , creating a waterfall that quickly eroded into the structure . Although the cofferdam was designed with a soft earthen plug to fail in a controlled manner if any such event were to occur , the outflow reached 100 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 2 @,@ 800 m3 / s ) by noon ; several hours later the maximum discharge was reached at 250 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 7 @,@ 100 m3 / s ) , completely inundating the construction site and destroying almost half of the cofferdam . When the 265 @-@ foot ( 81 m ) high cofferdam collapsed , its backed @-@ up water surged downstream into already @-@ spilling Folsom Reservoir less than a mile downstream , deposited the dam debris and raised the lake level suddenly . Folsom Dam outflow exceeded the design capacity of levees downstream from re @-@ regulating Nimbus Dam downstream from Folsom , but the levees were not overtopped and severe flooding was avoided through Sacramento . The flood events spurred renewed interest in the Auburn Dam , since a permanent dam would have helped Folsom Dam store water without the flood from behind the cofferdam , but it became clear that the system of levees , dams and diversions on the American River needed to be re @-@ engineered . 
 = = Stopping the project = = 
 = = = Economic cost = = = 
 In the years following the 1980 @-@ era floods , some public opinion turned against the Auburn Dam because of its relatively small reservoir capacity related to its size , and the massive estimated cost to finish the project , which was then already rising into the billions of dollars . The best dam sites require a relatively small dam that can store massive amounts of water , and most of those sites in the U.S. have already been taken . A comparison with Hoover Dam , for example , reveals that the Auburn would store very little water compared to its structural size . Lake Mead , the reservoir behind Hoover , stores about 28 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 35 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 dam3 ) . The proposed Auburn Reservoir , with a mere 8 % of that capacity , would require the construction of a dam not only as tall as Hoover but over three times as wide . 
 As early as 1980 , the cost of building the Auburn Dam was estimated at $ 1 billion . As of 2007 , the cost to build the dam would be about $ 10 billion . Other flood @-@ control works to raise the height and improve the spillway capacity of Folsom Dam , and to increase the capacity of levees in the Sacramento area , would cost significantly less while providing protection against the same floods . Also , the United States National Research Council believes that existing flood records , which have been in place less than 200 years , are <unk> to justify the construction of a dam as large as Auburn . Finally , water from Auburn Dam , if connected to the long @-@ unfinished Folsom South Canal as originally planned by Reclamation , would be costly and in unreliable supply as the annual inflows to the reservoir would be a relatively modest 1 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 dam3 ) or 2 @,@ 209 cubic feet per second ( 62 @.@ 6 m3 / s ) , even though the river poses a high flood threat . 
 = = = Failure risk = = = 
 Due to the seismically active nature of the area , the Auburn Dam would also be at risk for failure from an earthquake , even one that the weight of its reservoir might induce on one of the fault lines that crosses the area , known as the Bear Mountain fault zone . Surface displacement of the ground might range from a few inches / centimeters to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) in each direction . Although a new concrete @-@ gravity design by Reclamation was tested to survive a magnitude 6 @.@ 5 earthquake , it performed poorly under the 7 @.@ 0 that the USGS had originally estimated . 
 A Bureau of Reclamation study released in 1980 proved that a failure of Auburn Dam would result in a giant wave reaching Folsom Lake within five minutes , and most likely would cause a cascading failure of Folsom and Nimbus Dams downstream as well within an hour , unleashing millions of acre @-@ feet of water which would cause far greater damage downstream than any possible natural flood . Folsom would collapse or at least get severely overtopped ; Nimbus Dam would be overtopped by 70 feet ( 21 m ) of water ; and the California State Capitol would be under 40 feet ( 12 m ) of water , as would be much of the rest of the Sacramento metropolitan area . In 1975 , a study predicted that a failure of Folsom Dam alone would result in over 250 @,@ 000 fatalities . With Auburn Dam 's capacity added in , the resulting flood would be over three times larger , and cause even greater damage , inundating land for miles on either side of the American and Sacramento rivers . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Filling of the Auburn Reservoir would result in a two @-@ pronged , 40 @-@ mile ( 64 km ) lake which would inundate numerous canyons and rapids of the North Fork and Middle Fork of the American River . In 1981 , the American River was acknowledged as the most popular recreational river in California . Over one million people visit the canyons of the North and Middle Forks of the American River each year to engage in various recreational activities not least of which include kayaking , rafting , hiking , hunting , biking , horseback riding , gold mining , off @-@ roading , and climbing . 900 @,@ 000 of these visitors go to the Auburn State Recreation Area , which surrounds the former dam site . The reservoir would inundate this popular recreational haven , and cause the silting and destruction of riverbeds and rapids in the canyons . Trails , including those for the Tevis Cup and Western States Endurance Run , would be among the ones submerged . The Auburn Reservoir would also result in the destruction of thousands of acres of riverine habitat , and the inundation of historic and archaeological sites . 
 In the end , the Auburn Dam project , once referred to as " the dam that wouldn 't die " and " with more lives than an alley cat " , was defeated by the intervention of environmentalists , conservationists , and cost @-@ conscious economists . Although four bills to revive the dam project were introduced in Congress over the next twenty years , all were turned down . Representative Norman D. Shumway introduced the Auburn Dam Revival Act of 1987 , which was rejected because of the phenomenally high costs . A flood control bill in 1988 involving the Auburn Dam was also defeated . In 1992 and 1996 , plans for restarting the Auburn project appeared in various water projects bills . However , even though the project was now leaning towards purely flood control instead of the original expensive multipurpose that environmental groups had opposed , both were denied . As the years dragged on , the cost of the project grew , and it officially ended with the revoking of USBR water rights to the site by the state on November 11 , 2008 . 
 = = Proposals for resurrecting the Auburn Dam = = 
 " Auburn Dam is the public works equivalent of a Hollywood zombie , rivaling any Tinseltown creation in its ability to withstand repeated attempts to kill it . First proposed nearly a half @-@ century ago for a site in the American River canyon near the Gold Rush town of Auburn , the dam has withstood attacks by U.S. presidents , member of Congress , state and federal agencies , environmentalists , tax watchdogs , scientists , engineers and even nature itself — the political equivalent of being shot , stabbed , drowned , poisoned , electrocuted and set on fire . " <unk> Flood Sensitivity <unk> Auburn Dam – California Planning and Development Report , August 8 , 2006 
 Although the Auburn Dam is now mostly considered history , there are still proponents and groups devoted to restarting the long @-@ inactive project . Advocates argue that the construction of Auburn would be the only solution for providing much @-@ needed flood protection to the Sacramento area ; that millions of dollars have already been spent making preparations ; that it would provide an abundant supply of reliable water and hydroelectricity ; and also that the recreational areas lost under the reservoir could be rebuilt around it . A major supporter of the revival of the dam is the Sacramento County Taxpayer 's League ; a recent survey revealed that up to two @-@ thirds of Sacramento citizens support construction of the Auburn . They also argue that the dam would only cost $ 2 @.@ 6 billion instead of $ 6 – 10 billion , and that it is the cheapest alternative to provide flood control for the American River . 
 Area Congressman John Doolittle was one of the largest proponents of the Auburn Dam , and he appropriated several million dollars for funds to conduct feasibility studies for the dam . About $ 3 million went into the main feasibility report , and the remaining $ 1 million was used for a study concerning the relocation of California State Route 49 , which runs through the site . After the Hurricane Katrina disaster in 2005 , Doolittle drew public attention to the flood vulnerability of the Sacramento region . He also used the flood @-@ protection " incompetence " of the Folsom Dam to his advantage , saying that " without an Auburn Dam we could soon be in the unenviable position of suffering from both severe drought and severe flooding in the very same year . " He led all 18 Republican members of the United States House of Representatives from California in a protest in 2008 , trying to convince Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger to revoke the water @-@ rights decision that California had made against Reclamation . Doolittle is sometimes known as the Auburn Dam 's " chief sponsor " . 
 In response to public outcry , most pro @-@ Auburn Dam groups now recommend the construction of a " dry dam " , or one that purely supports the purpose of flood control . Such a dam would stand empty most of the year , but during a flood the excess flow would pool temporarily behind the dam instead of flowing straight through , and therefore the dam could still provide flood control while leaving the American River canyons dry for most of the year ( hence " dry " ) . Water would be impounded for only a few days or weeks each year instead of all year long , minimizing damage on the local environment . The dam would be built to protect against a 500 @-@ year flood . Also , with the construction of a " dry " Auburn Dam , Folsom Lake could be kept at a higher level throughout the year because of reduced flood @-@ control pressure , therefore facilitating recreational access to the reservoir . Finally , regulations in flow could help groundwater recharge efforts ; the lower Sacramento Valley aquifer is acknowledged as severely depleted . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Since its inception , hundreds of millions of dollars have been poured into the Auburn Dam project , but no further work has been done since the 1980s . However , the Bureau of Reclamation continues to list the Auburn as a considered alternative for the future of its Auburn @-@ Folsom South Unit project . As of now , massive evidence of the dam 's construction still remain in the North Fork American River canyon , specifically the excavations for the abutments and spillway , with the consequences of increased erosion . 
 In recent decades , California has been struck with a series of severe droughts . In order to facilitate continued deliveries of water to the thirsty southern half of the state , the Central Valley and State Water Projects have been forced to cut water supplies for agriculture in much of the San Joaquin Valley . Annual deficits of water in the state are projected to rise from 1 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 dam3 ) in 1998 to an estimated 2 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 3 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 dam3 ) by 2025 . The state has proposed three or four solutions to the shortfall . One , the Peripheral Canal , would facilitate water flow from the water @-@ rich north to the dry south , but has never been built due to environmental concerns . The raising of Shasta Dam on the Sacramento or New Melones Dam on the Stanislaus , or the building of Sites Reservoir , has also been proposed . Lastly , the Auburn Dam has also been revived in light of this . According to supporters , it would cause the least environmental destruction of the multitude of choices , and would give the most reliable water yield , regardless of its skyrocketing costs . 
 In part as an alternative to Auburn Dam project , flood control for the lower American River is being improved through the USD $ 1 billion Joint Federal Project ( a collaboration of the US Bureau of Reclamation and the US Army Corps of Engineers ) at Folsom Dam which adds a new lower spillway and strengthens the eight dikes that serve as part of the dam . Additional work proposed includes a possible raise of Folsom Dam several feet to improve its flood control and storage capacity . Key levees downstream have also been improved for flood control in the Sacramento area by the US Army Corps of Engineers and the Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency . Sugar Pine Reservoir , an auxiliary component of the Auburn @-@ Folsom South Project upstream in the watershed , was transferred in title by the Bureau of Reclamation to Foresthill Public Utility District in 2003 . As a result of a court decision in 1990 ( Hodge Decision ) , the uses of Reclamation 's Folsom South Canal changed further when the Freeport Project came online in 2011 to <unk> water supplies for East Bay Municipal Utility District and Sacramento County Water Agency from the Sacramento River instead of from the canal via the lower American River , thereby reducing the need for additional supplies from Auburn Dam to the American River . Anticipated diversions from the Folsom South Canal had previously been reduced when the Sacramento Municipal Utility District decommissioned its Rancho Seco nuclear facility in 1989 and no longer required large quantities of cooling water from the canal . 
 A pumping station to supply water to the Placer County Water Agency was built in 2006 on the Middle Fork American River , supplying 100 cubic feet per second ( 2 @.@ 8 m3 / s ) to a northwest @-@ running pipeline , eliminating the need for Auburn Dam for this supply . The capacity of the station is eventually expected to be upgraded to 225 cubic feet per second ( 6 @.@ 4 m3 / s ) . By 2006 , the Bureau of Reclamation itself began to restore the dam site , which then had been untouched for more than a decade . The river diversion tunnel was sealed but not filled in , and the remnants of the construction site in the riverbed as well as the remains of the cofferdam excavated out of the canyon . After the riverbed was leveled and graded , an artificial riverbed with manmade Class III rapids was constructed to channel the river through the site . The restoration project also included the construction of other recreational amenities in the Auburn site . This act was seen as the final step of decommissioning the Auburn project and shelving it forever . 
 = Segundo Romance = 
 Segundo Romance is the tenth studio album by Mexican singer Luis Miguel , released on 30 August 1994 by Warner Music Latina . It is a follow @-@ up to his 1991 album , Romance , and features 11 cover versions of Latin ballads that were written between 1934 and 1993 . In addition to Miguel , the production involved Juan Carlos Calderón , Kiko Cibrian and Armando Manzanero ( who co @-@ produced Romance ) . Segundo Romance was recorded in early 1994 at the Record Plant in Los Angeles , California . 
 Miguel promoted the album by touring the United States and Latin America . Segundo Romance was generally well received by music critics , who praised its production , Miguel 's vocals and the choice of songs . The album earned Miguel several awards , including a Grammy Award for Best Latin Pop Performance . Four singles were released ; the first two , " El Día Que Me Quieras " and " La Media Vuelta " , reached number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States . " Todo y Nada " and " Delirio " peaked at numbers three and sixteen , respectively , on the same chart . By 1995 , Segundo Romance sold over four million copies and received multi @-@ platinum certifications in several Latin American countries , the United States and Spain . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 In 1991 Miguel released his eighth studio album , Romance , a collection of classic boleros , the oldest dating to the 1940s . The album , which was produced by Armando Manzanero and arranged by Bebu Silvetti , was a success in Latin America and sold over seven million copies worldwide . It revived interest in the bolero genre , and was the first record by a Spanish @-@ speaking artist to be certified gold in Brazil , Taiwan and the United States . In spite of Romance 's success , Miguel did not release an immediate follow @-@ up to the album and instead opted to record an album of original material . However , he affirmed that he would release another boleros album after the release of Aries . Four months later he confirmed that his next project would be another collection of boleros , initially entitled Romance II , and recording began in March 1994 . 
 The album was recorded at the Record Plant in Los Angeles and its final name , Segundo Romance , was announced in June 1994 . Miguel was its lead producer ; the co @-@ producers were Manzanero ( who also co @-@ produced Romance ) , Juan Carlos Calderón ( who worked with Miguel on 20 Años ) and Kiko Cibrian ( who co @-@ produced Aries ) . Manzanero helped with arrangements and song selection , Calderón was involved with the string section and Cibrian with production basics . Although the Mexican daily El Siglo de Torreón reported that the production would feature 12 or 14 tracks , with original compositions by Manzanero and Calderón , the album contains 11 covers . 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 Segundo Romance is a collection of classic Latin ballads , the oldest dating to 1934 . The album opens with a cover of Carlos Gardel and Alfredo Le Pera 's tango , " El Día Que Me Quieras " . Three of Manzanero 's compositions ( " Somos <unk> " , " Como Yo Te Amé " , and " Yo Sé Que Volverás " ) are covered by Miguel on the album . José Alfredo Jiménez 's " La Media Vuelta " , originally a ranchera bolero song , incorporates horns , strings , and Spanish guitars ; Agustín Lara 's " Solamente Una Vez " includes a harmonica section . Other boleros Miguel covers on the album include " Sin Ti " , " Todo y Nada " , " Historia de un Amor " , " Nosotros " and " Delirio " . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " El Día Que Me Quieras " was released as the album 's lead single on 5 August 1994 . It reached number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States for the week of 17 September 1994 , and topped the chart for five weeks . Its music video was directed by Kiko Guerrero and filmed at the Palacio de Bellas Artes in Mexico City with Miguel and a 36 @-@ piece orchestra . The second single , " La Media Vuelta " , was released in November 1994 and reached number one on the Hot Latin Songs chart for the week of November 26 , topping the chart for three weeks . Its music video , directed by Pedro Torres and filmed in black @-@ and @-@ white , features Miguel reminiscing at a bar about a woman who deceived him . The third single , " Todo y Nada " , reached number three on the Hot Latin Songs and number one on the Billboard Latin Pop Airplay charts . All three singles reached number one in Mexico . " Delirio " , the fourth single from the album , peaked at number 16 on the Hot Latin Songs chart ; its music video was filmed in Brazil . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 To promote the album Miguel began his Segundo Romance Tour with 16 shows at the National Auditorium in Mexico City , which drew an audience of over 155 @,@ 000 . The singer performed throughout Mexico , the United States , Peru and Argentina until 31 December 1994 , when the tour concluded in Acapulco . The first part of Miguel 's set list featured pop songs and contemporary ballads ; during the second half he sang boleros from Segundo Romance and ranchera songs before closing each performance with " Será Que No Me <unk> " , the Spanish version of the Jackson 5 's " Blame it on the Boogie " . 
 In October 1995 Warner Music released the El Concierto live album and video , a compilation of Miguel 's performances at the National Auditorium in Mexico City and his concert at the Estadio Vélez in Buenos Aires . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic praised its production and Miguel 's performance . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 AllMusic editor Jose F. Promis gave Segundo Romance four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars , calling it " a first @-@ rate collection of timeless Latin American standards " and praising Miguel 's vocals and the album 's production . According to Promis , the album " simply illustrates the lush production which went into this surefire hit , which further established Miguel as a first @-@ rate balladeer " . Enrique Lopetegui of the Los Angeles Times gave the album three out of four stars , saying that it contained " updated , well @-@ produced versions of classic romantic bolero and tango songs " . In Americas magazine , Mark Holston described Segundo Romance as a " superb encore that features performances of such memorable songs as Carlos Gardel 's ' El dia que me <unk> ' and Carlos E. <unk> 's ' Historia de un amor ' . " Howard Cohen of the Miami Herald was less pleased with the album , writing that it " pales in comparison to the original " and ( despite liking its music ) the " magic is gone " . Cohen criticized Miguel 's vocals , citing " El Día Que Me Quieras " and " Solamente Una Vez " as examples of a voice " on autopilot " , and called the singer 's production a " bad idea " . 
 In Argentina , Miguel received the Asociación de <unk> del Espectáculo award for Latin Ballad Album by a Male Solo Artist in 1994 . At the 1995 Grammy Awards Segundo Romance won the Best Latin Pop Album award despite competition from Cristian Castro , Juan Gabriel , La Mafia and Plácido Domingo , who was favored to win by John Lannert of Billboard for his album De Mi Alma Latina . At the 7th Lo Nuestro Awards in the same year , Miguel won three awards including Pop Male Artist of the Year , Pop Album of the Year for Segundo Romance and Video of the Year for " La Media Vuelta " ; " El Día Que Me Quieras " was nominated for a fourth , as Pop Song of the Year . Segundo Romance was the Pop Album of the Year by a Male Artist at the 1995 Billboard Latin Music Awards , and was named Best Album of the Year by the Association of Latin Entertainment Critics . Miguel was the Best @-@ Selling Latin Artist of the Year at the 1995 World Music Awards . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Within two days of its release , Segundo Romance sold over one million copies . In Mexico , the album was certified quintuple platinum for shipping 1 @.@ 25 million copies . In the United States it debuted at number 29 on the Billboard 200 the week of 10 September 1994 , the highest debut on the chart at the time for a Spanish @-@ language album . That week , Segundo Romance also debuted at number seven on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart ; the album reached number one a week later , replacing Selena 's Amor Prohibido . It spent a total of 29 nonconsecutive weeks atop the chart , and was the second @-@ bestselling Latin album of the year behind Mi Tierra by Gloria Estefan . The album topped the Billboard Latin Pop Albums chart for 30 weeks , and was the highest @-@ selling Latin pop album of the year in the U.S. Segundo Romance was certified platinum for shipping one million copies , making Miguel the first Latin artist with two platinum discs in the U.S. ( the other is Romance ) . 
 The album was also successful in Spanish @-@ speaking countries . It was certified triple platinum in Paraguay , Uruguay and Central America ; double platinum in Bolivia , Colombia , Peru , Spain and Venezuela , and platinum in Ecuador . In Brazil , Segundo Romance was certified gold for sales of 50 @,@ 000 copies . The album reached number one on the Chilean album charts , and was certified sextuple platinum for shipping 150 @,@ 000 copies . In Argentina , it was certified 11 × platinum and later received a diamond award for sales of 500 @,@ 000 copies . By 1995 , Segundo Romance sold over four million copies worldwide . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Like its predecessor , Romance , Segundo Romance continued to revive interest in bolero music . In the magazine Americas , Mark Holston wrote that the album " proves again that the bolero is back , its heart beating as strongly as ever , its soul alive with tropical passion , a music for every time and all times . " According to Enrique Lopetegui of the Los Angeles Times , both albums " created a revival for the bolero — the old @-@ fashioned , string @-@ based romantic messages of unrequited love were embraced even by young listeners . " Ed Morales wrote in his book , The Latin Beat : The Rhythms And Roots Of Latin Music From Bossa Nova To Salsa And Beyond , " Beyond merely being a revival , Romance and its 1994 follow @-@ up , Segundo Romance was a significant update of the genre " . Chicago Tribune editor Achy Obejas noted that the albums " scored in such unlikely places as Saudi Arabia and Finland . " Segundo Romance was followed by two more bolero albums : Romances ( 1997 ) and Mis Romances ( 2001 ) . In 1998 , WEA Latina released Todos Los Romances , a three @-@ disc compilation of the first @-@ three romance @-@ themed albums . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The following information is from AllMusic and from the Segundo Romance liner notes . 
 = = = Performance credits = = = 
 = = = Technical credits = = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Regional Holiday Music = 
 " Regional Holiday Music " is the tenth episode of the third season of the American television series Community , and 59th overall episode of the series . It was originally broadcast on December 8 , 2011 on NBC and is the final episode before the show went on hiatus during the 2011 – 12 midseason . The Christmas @-@ themed episode is a musical featuring original songs performed by cast members . After Greendale 's glee club members become incapacitated , the study group is asked to join . Despite their dislike of the club , each of them is lured into joining after their vulnerabilities are exploited . 
 The episode was directed by Tristram Shapeero and written by Steve Basilone and Annie Mebane . The musical format , along with other more subtle elements in the episode is a parody of the Fox television series Glee . Creator Dan Harmon is known to dislike Glee and the series has satirized aspects of the musical TV series in previous episodes . The premise of " Regional Holiday Music " also draws on an event in season 2 's " Paradigms of Human Memory " ( Community 's " clip show " ) and provides closure to it . Taran Killam guest @-@ starred as the glee club instructor . 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews , with many critics disagreeing with NBC 's decision to bench the series . Critics praised the episode 's high @-@ concept satire and character @-@ driven moments . Opinion was divided on the quality of the original songs . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Regional Holiday Music " was seen by an estimated 3 @.@ 6 million viewers , a drop from the previous week . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While meeting in the cafeteria , the study group reveal their plans for Christmas . Some are spending time away , disappointing Abed ( Danny Pudi ) , who had wished to spend the holidays with the group , even renting the critically reviled Inspector Spacetime holiday special to watch with them . Their conversation is interrupted by a performance by the obnoxious Greendale glee club . Midway through , Chang ( Ken Jeong ) stops them with a cease and desist order from ASCAP — tipped off by Jeff ( Joel McHale ) — for performing copyrighted music without permission . The glee club members suffer a nervous breakdown and are taken to the hospital . 
 The glee club instructor , Mr. Rad ( Taran Killam ) , invites the study group to join and perform the Christmas pageant but is rebuffed promptly due to their collective dislike for the club . However , through a series of events performed as songs , the members of the group are lured into joining the club one by one . 
 " Glee " : Mr. Rad manages to convince Abed to join the club by tapping into Abed 's desire to spend Christmas with the group . 
 " Christmas Infiltration " : Troy ( Donald Glover ) is next to join when Abed reaches out to his desire to celebrate Christmas with the group despite being a Jehovah 's Witness . 
 " Baby Boomer Santa " : Troy and Abed exploit Pierce 's ( Chevy Chase ) baby boomer narcissism . 
 " Teach Me How to Understand Christmas " : Before this song , Annie ( Alison Brie ) catches the glee club virus after being cornered by Troy , Abed , and Mr. Rad . She then dresses up in a sexy Santa outfit to seduce Jeff . 
 " Happy Birthday Jesus " : Pierce invites a children 's choir to sing to Shirley about how the public school system has thrown out the meaning of Christmas ( the birth of Jesus ) during its celebrations . Unable to resist her religious fervor , Shirley springs into song , proclaiming " Happy Birthday Jesus ! " 
 With Britta ( Gillian Jacobs ) the only non @-@ glee club member left , she seeks out Jeff , only to find that he too has been turned . 
 As the group are backstage preparing for the Christmas pageant , Mr. Rad informs Abed of his long @-@ term intentions for the group . As Abed had only made the group join to brighten up Christmas , he sets forth upsetting Mr. Rad 's plans . While the group performs " Planet Christmas " on stage , he asks Britta ( who was originally cast as the mute tree ) to replace him as the Mouse King . She does and ruins the pageant with her poor singing and bad , improvised lyrics and choreography .. Despite Mr. Rad 's objections , Dean Pelton ( Jim Rash ) and the audience supportively agree to ' let Britta finish her awkward song ' in the spirit of inclusion . However Mr. Rad then becomes enraged at the idea and inadvertently reveals that he caused the bus crash that killed the glee club members mentioned in " Paradigms of Human Memory " before distracting everyone and running off . Abed regretfully concedes that " forcing things to be bright just makes the darkness underneath it even darker . " 
 Back at the apartment , Abed is watching Inspector Spacetime alone . The group suddenly arrives and they announce that after a dark year , they have cancelled their plans in order to spend the holidays with him . The episode ends with them joining him in viewing the Inspector Spacetime holiday special . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Regional Holiday Music " was written by Steve Basilone and Annie Mebane , both their debut writing credits for the series . It was directed by Tristram Shapeero , his seventh directing credit . The music for the episode was composed by series composer Ludwig <unk> , with lyrics by the writing staff . 
 The episode took six days to shoot , which Danny Pudi said is one of the longest for a single episode . 
 Taran Killam , a cast member of Saturday Night Live , guest starred as glee club instructor Cory <unk> . Killam previously worked with Community executive producers Neil Goldman and Garrett Donovan in the pilot of Nobody 's Watching . The show was not picked up . 
 Series creator Dan Harmon has long been known to dislike Glee . Community has parodied the musical television series in previous episodes . In " Modern Warfare " , the show referenced Glee 's lack of original music . In " Paradigms of Human Memory " , the study group fills in for the glee club members who died in a bus crash , though they sing a song with no real lyrics . These events are brought up during " Regional Holiday Music " , which also reveals the true reason behind the crash . 
 Following the footsteps of season 2 's " Abed 's Uncontrollable Christmas " , Abed spends the episode trying to get the group to embrace the holiday spirit during Christmas . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Regional Holiday Music " is a satire @-@ at @-@ large of the television series Glee . The audio transitions for this episode mimic the a capella audio transitions featured in Glee , whilst the glee club instructor Cory <unk> ( " Mr. Rad " ) shares many similarities to Will Schuester ( " Mr. Schue " ) . The episode also makes reference to the concept of " Regionals " , which , similar to the nature of the television series , is never fully explained or clarified . Unlike most songs on Glee , the music on " Regional Holiday Music " is entirely original . 
 Jeff remarks in a scene that not liking the glee club does not make the group bullies , in reference to Glee creator Ryan Murphy 's criticism of musicians who don 't want their music on the show . When Mr. Rad reveals that he killed previous glee club members , he shouts " Look , Kings of Leon ! " to distract the audience before escaping . Kings of Leon had previously clashed with Murphy over permission to use their songs on Glee . 
 The song " Glee " speaks about the namesake series ' tendency to sing their feelings instead of " making a face . " While performing " Baby Boomer Santa " , Troy and Abed recreate musical styles from the 1940s to 1980s , including performing " Dancing in the Dark " and Troy impersonating Bob Dylan . The episode continues the show 's recurring spoof of the British television series Doctor Who through Inspector Spacetime , while also making a nod to the infamous 1978 Star Wars Holiday Special . While the group discusses their Christmas plans , Annie reveals she will spend time with her <unk> ( the Yiddish word for grandmother ) , which Troy confuses for " <unk> " ( breast ) . The scene where Britta discovers that Jeff has been turned is a spoof of the ending of the 1978 remake of Invasion of the Body Snatchers . 
 In the end tag , the heads of the Dean ( Jim Rash ) , Chang ( Ken Jeong ) , Magnitude ( Luke Youngblood ) , <unk> ( Dino <unk> ) and Leonard ( Richard Erdman ) are superimposed on ornaments as they perform a version of " Carol of the Bells " using their names and a few recurring lines . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Regional Holiday Music " was viewed by an estimated 3 @.@ 6 million households , with a Nielsen rating / share of 1 @.@ 5 / 4 in the 18 – 49 demographic . It finished fourth in its 8 pm time slot among broadcast networks and was outperformed by CBS sitcom The Big Bang Theory , which was seen by 14 @.@ 4 million households ; Fox reality show The X Factor , which was seen by 9 @.@ 9 million households ; and a special holiday episode of ABC reality show Wipeout , which was seen by 6 @.@ 6 million households . The episode outperformed a repeat airing of The Vampire Diaries on The CW , which was seen by 1 @.@ 2 million households . Community was NBC 's lowest performing show of the night in the demographic despite The Office , Parks and Recreation and Whitney all slipping to season lows . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Regional Holiday Music " received mostly positive reviews from critics , many of whom pleaded for the show to return . BuddyTV placed it # 17 in its list of 50 best TV episodes of 2011 , calling the songs the " best original songs TV has heard in a long time " . 
 Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode an ' A ' , saying " Community is going away for a while , but it 's going away with an episode that reminds me why I love the show so much . This is a very personal thing — since humor 's subjective like that — but for me , this was the funniest episode since the clip show ... I laughed myself silly at this one , to the point where I was devolving into hiccups at certain scenes , and I 'm glad we get to go out on an episode like this , one that plays around with form and makes me laugh . " Alan Sepinwall of HitFix also praised the Glee @-@ spoofing , saying " ' Regional Holiday Music ' was the logical , clever , funny endpoint to it . " Sean Gandert of Paste said , " As with its best theme @-@ episodes , the show bridged the gap between high @-@ concept parody and character @-@ based comedy . " TV Fanatic 's Leigh Raines gave the episode a 4 / 5 rating , saying while the show " definitely went out with a bang , it didn 't totally blow my socks off ... While there were a few moments that upped the <unk> factor , overall this episode fell on the positive side . " She praised Troy and Abed 's rap performance , but called the scene where Annie seduces Jeff " creepy " . Robert Canning of IGN said it was a " great " episode , but " faltered just a bit " at the end : " Abed 's realization that his attempts to brighten the holiday only made things darker , as Jeff had previously suggested , fit the character well enough , but the study group 's follow @-@ up felt a bit forced and holiday hokey . Of course , that could well have been the point . " 
 Kelsea <unk> of Hollywood.com gave the episode a bad review , calling the original songs " terrible " . She remarked , " fans merit a better episode , better commentary , and better parody of the subject at hand . " Nonetheless , she praised the episode 's ending and asked , " Who cares that the story was a bit weak this time around ? It 's the last episode we have before the dreaded undetermined hiatus gets underway , and it 's Christmas . Let 's just cherish the episode for what it is ... " Sean Campbell said although he enjoyed the episode 's concept , " the execution left much to be desired " and that the quality of the songs " varied from okay to bad " . 
 The Atlantic 's Kevin Fallon compared " Regional Holiday Music " to Glee 's own 2011 Christmas episode " Extraordinary Merry Christmas " which aired on December 13 . Fallon said " Regional Holiday Music " " relentlessly exposed Glee 's most repetitive cliches " and " couldn 't have invented better illustrations of Glee 's cringe @-@ inducing , everyone @-@ is @-@ loved @-@ as @-@ long @-@ as @-@ they @-@ sing @-@ a @-@ song motif . " However , on a final note , he highlighted the two shows ' similarities , explaining how both shows stick to their bold delivery and heartwarming moments . 
 = Boyz 4 Now = 
 " Boyz 4 Now " is the 21st episode of the third season of the American animated comedy series Bob 's Burgers . Written by Lizzie and Wendy Molyneux , the episode features guest appearances from actors Max Greenfield and Jack McBrayer and comedian Tig Notaro . Its main plot sees Louise Belcher ( Kristen Schaal ) becoming aghast to find herself developing a crush on a member of the boy band Boyz 4 Now ( Greenfield ) , after she reluctantly attends one of their concerts with her sister Tina ( Dan Mintz ) . In a subplot , Gene Belcher ( Eugene Mirman ) qualifies for a regional competition in tablescaping , an activity involving the setting of dining tables based on a selected theme . 
 The series ' production crew opted to make the group Boyz 4 Now a general parody of boy bands rather than base them on any specific artist , as they all had several different boy bands which " made them chuckle " while making the episode . Creator Loren Bouchard assigned several female staff members with the task of designing the physical appearances and wardrobes of Boyz 4 Now 's members . The episode originally aired on April 28 , 2013 on Fox , drawing an audience of 3 @.@ 50 million viewers , and was met with generally positive reviews from critics , who commended its main plot for exploring the more vulnerable , feminine side of Louise 's character and her sisterly relationship with Tina . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Tina and Louise 's aunt Gayle ( Megan Mullally ) has bought them tickets to an upcoming concert by the popular boy band Boyz 4 Now . Tina is excited , but Louise , who dislikes boy bands , only agrees to go at the insistence of her mother Linda ( John Roberts ) . Gene has qualified for a regional tablescaping competition , which Bob ( H. Jon Benjamin ) and Linda escort him to . Louise rejoices after a pet emergency leaves Gayle unable to bring the sisters to the concert , but reluctantly agrees to help find another ride after seeing Tina 's disappointment . They hitch a ride with Zeke ( Bobby Tisdale ) and his older cousin Leslie ( Jack McBrayer ) , who are going to the concert to sell bootleg T @-@ shirts and hot dogs . Bob and Linda later meet the arrogant father of a fellow competitor named Oscar Anthony , which drives them to push Gene to win . 
 At the concert venue , Louise scoffs at the band 's obsessed female fans , warns Tina that " a lot of puberty " awaits her at the concert , and plans to wait outside . However , she is forced to bring Tina inside to prevent her from fainting . Meanwhile , Gene impresses the judges with a magic @-@ themed table display and advances to the top four . Having not fully read the competition rule book , however , he is left unprepared to produce a second table display for the next round . The concert begins before Louise can exit , and she remains unimpressed until the band 's <unk> youngest member , Boo Boo , comes onstage . Louise is left frozen in awe by his looks , and once the band 's first song starts she starts excitedly screaming out his name . Horrified at what she has done , she runs out in denial about liking Boo Boo , having never had a previous crush . 
 Louise runs back to the concert and starts asking Tina questions about Boo Boo , and Tina correctly deduces that she has a crush on him . Seeing Louise 's panicked reaction , Tina promises to help and gets her to reveal her desire to slap Boo Boo 's " hideous , beautiful face . " Having been denied access to the band 's backstage room , Louise and Tina sneak into their tour bus after the concert . Their cover is blown by Louise , who emerges from their hiding place desperately wanting to meet Boo Boo . The bus pulls over and the sisters debark , but not before Louise fulfills her desire to slap Boo Boo in the face . Gayle picks them up , and on the way home Louise thanks Tina for her support and says that she is over her crush . At the tablescaping competition , Gene 's improvised menstruation @-@ themed display is deemed offensive by the judges and causes him to end up in fourth place ; nonetheless , the <unk> are satisfied to see Oscar 's father crying over losing . That night , Louise secretly pulls out a poster of Boo Boo , slapping his face gently before going to sleep . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Boyz 4 Now " was written by Lizzie and Wendy Molyneux and directed by Anthony Chun . Upon hearing the writers ' pitch of the episode , series creator Loren Bouchard found its plot to be " such an immediately appealing story " and " a great way to have Louise peek over the other side of adolescence and look into the abyss " . In an interview with Rolling Stone , Bouchard cited " Boyz 4 Now " as one of his favorite episodes of the series and revealed his liking of " episodes where Louise is a little vulnerable ... you don 't want her to be as invulnerable as she pretends to be . If you try to keep the show grounded , then you periodically have to say , she 's a nine @-@ year @-@ old girl . " He added that while the character has " an adult sensibility about a lot of stuff " , he and the writing staff try to " look for ways to bring her back down to earth , " citing the episode 's depiction of Louise " fighting against growing up " , with Tina acting as " her strange ambassador into that world ... in some ways , you couldn 't ask for a better guide . " 
 The eponymous group which " Boyz 4 Now " centers around was written as a general parody of boy bands , and not with any particular group in mind . Bouchard explained that the choice of using a non @-@ specific type of parody was not brought about by fears that the episode would become dated , but rather because the staff all had different boy bands that " made them chuckle . " He did , however , specifically research the English @-@ Irish boy band One Direction for the episode because he " wanted to see what the state of the art was " and " hadn 't been that interested in Boyz II Men or Backstreet Boys or ' N Sync . " The staff had differing opinions on what Boyz 4 Now 's clothes and hair would look like , choices which Bouchard ultimately left to " some of the many talented women who work on the show who had much stronger feelings about boy bands " . 
 Actor Max Greenfield guest stars in the episode voicing Boo Boo , a member of Boyz 4 Now whom Louise develops a crush on . Series writers Steven Davis , Kelvin Yu , and Scott Jacobson composed and recorded the song " Will You Be Mine ( Coal Mine ) " for the episode and completed it before its table read , while Greenfield was later asked to record vocals . The Bob 's Burgers writing staff later named it their fourth favorite song from the series . Other guests include stand @-@ up comic Tig Notaro , who voices the band 's tour bus driver Jody , and actor Jack McBrayer , who reprises his voice role as Zeke 's older cousin Leslie . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Boyz 4 Now " first aired in the United States on April 28 , 2013 on Fox , as a part of the Animation Domination programming block . The episode was watched by 3 @.@ 50 million viewers and received a 1 @.@ 7 / 5 Nielsen rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , becoming the fourth most @-@ watched program of the Animation Domination block for the night . Pilot <unk> of The A.V. Club graded the episode an A – , writing that it was " full of funny moments throughout . " <unk> felt that " Boyz 4 Now " was most successful at building the relationship between Tina and Louise , noting that the latter 's " three @-@ hour crush throws her for such a loop that she emerges with a newfound respect for Tina who deals with this every day . " She also praised the tablescaping competition subplot , labelling it as " equally hilarious and absurd " as the main plot . 
 Matt <unk> of Heave Media ranked " Boyz 4 Now " as the seventh @-@ best television episode of 2013 , stating that the episode 's handling of Louise 's crush " cracks through that little girl surface into the inevitable woman [ she ] will become , and the writing starts to show how even the most maniacal girl with a bunny hat can be humanized . " Phillip <unk> , writing for the Los Angeles Review of Books , named Kristen Schaal 's voice acting as Louise on Bob 's Burgers as his favorite television performance of the year and cited her performance in the episode : " Schaal 's handling of the anger and betrayal Louise feels as she finds herself attracting to a boy for the first time is actually quite moving . But , more than that , it opens up a new register of this top @-@ register performance as Louise ’ s murderous rage turns to murderous romance . " 
 = Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil = 
 Dona Maria Amélia ( 1 December 1831 – 4 February 1853 ) was a princess of the Empire of Brazil and a member of the Brazilian branch of the House of Braganza . Her parents were Emperor Dom Pedro I , the first ruler of Brazil , and Amélie of Leuchtenberg . The only child of her father 's second marriage , Maria Amélia was born in France after Pedro I abdicated the Brazilian throne in favor of his son Dom Pedro II . Before Maria Amélia was a month old , Pedro I went to Portugal to restore the crown of the eldest daughter of his first marriage , Dona Maria II . He fought a successful war against his brother Miguel I , who had usurped Maria II 's throne . 
 Only a few months after his victory , Pedro I died from tuberculosis . Maria Amélia 's mother took her to Portugal , where she remained for most of her life without ever visiting Brazil . The Brazilian government refused to recognize Maria Amélia as a member of Brazil 's Imperial House because she was foreign @-@ born , but when her elder half @-@ brother Pedro II was declared of age in 1840 , he successfully intervened on her behalf . 
 Maria Amélia became engaged to Archduke Maximilian of Austria in early 1852 , but before the marriage could take place she contracted tuberculosis , and was taken to the town of Funchal on the Portuguese island of Madeira . Despite its reputedly healthy climate , her health continued to deteriorate , and she died on 4 February 1853 . Her body was taken to mainland Portugal and interred in the Braganza Pantheon ; almost 130 years later , her remains were taken to Brazil . In honor of her daughter , Maria Amélia 's mother financed the construction of the " Princesa D. Maria Amélia " hospital in Funchal . Maria Amélia 's fiancé , Maximilian , made a pilgrimage to Brazil and Madeira , a journey that influenced his acceptance of the throne of Mexico in 1864 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Birth = = = 
 Maria Amélia was born on 1 December 1831 in Paris and christened Maria Amélia Augusta <unk> Josefina Luísa <unk> <unk> Francisco Xavier de Paula Gabriela Rafaela Gonzaga . She was the only daughter of Dom Pedro , the Duke of Braganza , and his second wife Amélie of Leuchtenberg . Through her father , Maria Amélia was a member of the Brazilian branch of the House of Braganza ( Portuguese : Bragança ) , and was referred to by the honorific Dona ( Lady ) from birth . She was the granddaughter of the Portuguese King João VI . Maria Amélia 's mother was the daughter of Eugène de Beauharnais , Duke of Leuchtenberg and the stepson of Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte of France . Eugène was married to Princess Augusta , eldest daughter of King Maximilian I of Bavaria . 
 Pedro had formerly been the first Emperor of Brazil , as Pedro I , and also King of Portugal , as Pedro IV . He was succeeded on the Portuguese throne by his eldest daughter , Maria II , Maria Amélia 's elder half @-@ sister . The young Queen was the child of Pedro 's first marriage to Archduchess Maria Leopoldina of Austria . In 1828 , Maria II 's crown was usurped by Dom Miguel I , Pedro 's younger brother . Eager to restore his daughter to her throne , Pedro abdicated the Brazilian crown in April 1831 and departed for Europe with Amélie , who was pregnant with Maria Amélia . 
 To acknowledge Maria Amélia 's rights as a Brazilian princess , Pedro invited several guests to observe her birth , including the Brazilian diplomatic envoy to France . The newborn 's godparents were the French King Louis Philippe I and his consort Maria Amalia of Naples and Sicily , after whom she was named . Pedro sent a letter to his children who had remained in Brazil — including his son , child @-@ emperor Dom Pedro II — with the message : " Divine Providence wanted to lessen the sorrow that my paternal heart feels in the separation from <unk> [ Your Imperial Majesty ] , giving me one more Daughter , and to <unk> , one more sister and subject " . 
 = = = Brazilian princess = = = 
 When Maria Amélia was only 20 days old , her father departed France to invade Portugal . For almost two years , she lived in Paris with her mother and half @-@ sister Maria II . When news arrived that the Portuguese capital , Lisbon , had fallen to Pedro 's forces , Amélie of Leuchtenberg left Paris with her infant daughter and stepdaughter for Portugal . They arrived in Lisbon on 22 September 1833 and disembarked the next day . Charles John Napier , a British naval officer who had fought alongside Pedro , wrote about the emotional reunion : " I never saw [ Pedro ] so happy and pleased ; he went onboard just a little above Belém ; he was received at the ladder by the empress [ Amélie ] who hugged and kissed him with the greatest affection : the queen [ Maria II ] was very moved and could not hold her tears . The little Princess [ Maria ] Amélia , his youngest daughter , took much of his attention : she became somewhat scared of seeing his bushy beard and did not warm to his caresses . " 
 With Miguel I defeated and in exile , and Maria II restored to the throne , Maria Amélia and her family remained in Portugal , first residing in <unk> Palace , and later in the Royal Palace of Queluz near Lisbon . But the war had taken its toll on Pedro 's health , and he was dying of tuberculosis . Maria Amélia , who was not yet three years old , was taken during the early hours of 24 September 1834 to Pedro 's deathbed . Very weak , Pedro raised his hands to bless her and said : " Always tell this child of the father who loved her so dearly ... not to forget me ... always to obey her mother ... those are my last wishes " . Pedro died in the early afternoon of the same day . 
 The widowed Amélie never remarried , and spent her time overseeing her daughter 's upbringing in Portugal , where they remained despite not being members of the Portuguese Royal Family , though closely related . Neither Amélie nor her daughter ever visited Brazil , but Amélie unsuccessfully petitioned the Brazilian government to recognize her daughter as a member of Brazil 's Imperial Family , which would have entitled her to an income . Maria Amélia 's half @-@ brother Pedro II was a minor , and the government of Brazil was in the hands of a precarious regency . The government refused to acknowledge Maria Amélia as a Brazilian princess owing to her foreign birth , and forbade both her and her mother from setting foot in Brazil . The situation would only change after Pedro II was declared of age in 1840 and was in a position to insist that she be recognized as a member of his household . Aureliano Coutinho ( later Viscount of Sepetiba ) , the Minister of Foreign Affairs , requested the Brazilian parliament to grant Maria Amélia recognition , which occurred on 5 July 1841 . 
 = = = Education and engagement = = = 
 With the purpose of refining her education , Maria Amélia moved with her mother in the middle 1840s to Munich , capital of Bavaria , where many of her relatives lived . A dedicated student , she was given classes that encompassed a broad array of subjects that included rhetoric , philosophy , history , geography , German literature , mathematics and physics . She learned to speak and write not only in Portuguese , but also in English , French and German . She became highly skilled in drawing , painting and playing the piano . An intelligent young woman with a fiery temper and shrewd mind , Maria Amélia was described by a teacher as having , " without knowing , an exceptional talent for dialectic , an ability that would make the fortune of a young law student . " 
 The memory of her father apparently motivated Maria Amélia 's dedication to her education . The late Duke of Braganza cast a large shadow in her life , and was always remembered by his daughter , who would often ask the people around her : " and my father , who looks at me from heaven , shall he be pleased with his daughter ? " She was never quite able to cope with her father 's death and it deeply touched her . Maria Amélia remarked after she saw a garden where Pedro planted a sycamore : " A profound sadness invaded me when contemplating these trees , which had survived my father and probably shall survive all of us . It is an image of human fragility . Man is the most frail of all beings ; he dies , while the objects which were seemingly created for his use , endure the centuries ! ... But I am digressing in my melancholic reflections " . 
 At the end of 1850 Maria Amélia and her mother returned to Portugal , and settled in the Janelas Verdes palace . In early 1852 , her cousin the Austrian Archduke Maximilian , then serving in the Austrian navy and on a stopover in Portugal , paid a visit to her . Maximilian 's mother was the younger half @-@ sister of Maria Amélia 's maternal grandmother , and both women were members of the House of Wittelsbach from Bavaria . He was also related to Maria Amélia 's older half @-@ siblings , as his father was the younger brother of Brazilian Empress Leopoldina . They had met previously at a family reunion in Munich in 1838 , when she was only a child . In this second meeting , however , they fell in love . Maximilian was enthralled by Maria Amélia , a kind young woman with blue eyes and blonde hair " of striking beauty as well as cultivated intelligence " . They were betrothed , but the engagement was never made official as a result of her early death . 
 = = Later years = = 
 = = = Death = = = 
 In February 1852 , Maria Amélia contracted scarlet fever . As the months passed , she did not recover and developed a persistent cough , the onset of tuberculosis . On 26 August , the princess departed from the Janelas Verdes palace , where she lived , and traveled to the island of Madeira . The island 's climate had a salutary reputation , as Maria Amélia noted : " the fevers disappear , they say , as if by magic ! " 
 Maria Amélia and her mother , who had accompanied her , disembarked on 31 August in Funchal , the capital of Madeira . The entire town greeted her joyfully , and a crowd followed the princess to her new home . She adored the island and told her mother : " If I one day recover my previous robust health , isn 't that so mommy , we will stay a long time in this island . We will make long excursions in the mountains , we will find new paths , just as we did in Stein ! " But her health worsened , and by the end of November , all hope was gone . By the beginning of 1853 , the princess was bedridden , and she knew death was approaching : " My strength diminishes from day to day ; I can feel it ... we are reaching the beginning of the end . " A little after midnight in the early hours of 4 February , a priest administered the last rites . Maria Amélia tried to comfort her mother : " Do not cry ... let God 's will be done ; may He come to my aid in my last hour ; may He console my poor mother ! " She died later that morning at around 04 : 00 . 
 The princess 's body remained in a chapel next to the house where she died until it was taken back to the Portuguese mainland on 7 May 1853 . On 12 May , the coffin was disembarked at Lisbon , and a grandiose funeral followed . Her remains were interred next to her father 's in the Braganza Pantheon , located in the Monastery of São Vicente de Fora . Almost 130 years later , in 1982 , Maria Amélia 's remains were carried to Brazil and placed in the Convento de Santo Antônio ( Convent of Saint Anthony ) in Rio de Janeiro , where other Brazilian royals are interred . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Emperor Pedro II had never met his younger sister in person , but had developed a strong relationship with her through her letters . He wrote in his journal seven years after her death : " I heard the mass for my sister [ Maria ] Amélia with whom I was so close and feel so sorry for never having met . " Amélie visited her daughter 's tomb every 4 February until her own death , and financed the construction of a hospital in Funchal called " Princesa D. Maria Amélia " in her daughter 's honor ; the hospital is still in existence . Amélie bequeathed her properties in Bavaria to Archduke Maximilian , " whom [ she ] would [ have felt ] happy having as a son @-@ in @-@ law , had God conserved [ her ] beloved daughter Maria Amélia " . 
 Archduke Maximilian was haunted by the memory of Maria Amélia , and after his marriage to Charlotte of Belgium he made a pilgrimage in 1859 – 60 to locations connected to his ex @-@ fiancée . Upon reaching the island of Madeira , he wrote : " Here died , of tuberculosis , on 4 February 1853 , the only daughter of the Empress of Brazil , an extraordinarily gifted creature . She left this flawed world , pure as an angel who returns to Heaven , her true native land . " 
 Maximilian visited the hospital in Funchal that bore Maria Amélia 's name , and until his death financed the maintenance of a double hospital room there . He also donated a statue of Our Lady of Sorrows in memory of Maria Amélia . Next he visited the house ( called Quinta das <unk> , or Anguished Villa ) where she died ; he wrote : " for a long time I stood silent amidst thoughts of sorrow and longing under the shadow of a magnificent tree that <unk> and protects the house where the angel , so bitterly wept for , ceased to exist " . In his memoirs , Maximilian also mentioned the island of Madeira , where " the life [ was ] extinguished that seemed destined to guarantee my own tranquil happiness " . 
 Following his arrival in Brazil on 11 January 1860 Maximilian became fascinated by the country , the only monarchy in South America , and then under the rule of his deceased fiancée 's elder brother . Inspired by the stability and prosperity he saw there , on 10 April 1864 he agreed to become emperor of the newly founded Mexican Empire , believing he could achieve the same results in Mexico . But instead Maximilian was executed on 19 June 1867 , after being captured by Mexican republicans . In a last homage to Maria Amélia , as he was stripped of his belongings to face a firing squad , Maximilian asked that the small medallion of the Blessed Virgin Mary she had given to him , and which he wore around his neck , be sent to her mother . While Maria Amélia 's life had little effect on events in either Brazil or Portugal , her death had significant , if indirect , repercussions on the history of Mexico . 
 = = Titles and honors = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 1 December 1831 – 4 February 1853 : Her Highness The Princess Dona Maria Amélia of Brazil 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 Princess Maria Amélia was a recipient of the following Brazilian Orders : 
 Grand Cross of the Order of Pedro I. 
 Grand Cross of the Order of the Rose . 
 She was a recipient of the following foreign honors : 
 Royal Order of Noble Ladies of Queen Maria Luisa . 
 Grand Cross of the Portuguese Order of the Immaculate Conception of Vila Viçosa . 
 Grand Cross of the Portuguese Order of Saint Isabel . 
 Insignia of the Austrian Order of the Starry Cross . 
 Insignia of the Bavarian Order of Saint Elizabeth . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = United States Military Academy = 
 The United States Military Academy ( USMA ) , also known as West Point , Army , The Academy or simply The Point , is a four @-@ year coeducational federal service academy located in West Point , New York . The academy , located in Orange County , sits on scenic high ground overlooking the Hudson River , 50 miles ( 80 km ) north of New York City . The Academy traces its roots to 1801 , when , shortly after his inauguration , President Thomas Jefferson directed that plans be set in motion to establish at West Point the United States Military Academy . The entire central campus is a national landmark and home to scores of historic sites , buildings , and monuments . The majority of the campus 's Norman @-@ style buildings are constructed from gray and black granite . The campus is a popular tourist destination complete with a large visitor center and the oldest museum in the United States Army . 
 Candidates for admission must both apply directly to the academy and receive a nomination , usually from a member of Congress or Delegate / Resident Commissioner in the case of Washington , D.C. , Puerto Rico , Northern Mariana Islands , Guam , American Samoa , and the Virgin Islands . Other nomination sources include the President and Vice President of the United States . Students are officers @-@ in @-@ training and are referred to as " cadets " or collectively as the " United States Corps of Cadets " ( USCC ) . Tuition for cadets is fully funded by the Army in exchange for an active duty service obligation upon graduation . Approximately 1 @,@ 300 cadets enter the Academy each July , with about 1 @,@ 000 cadets graduating . 
 The academic program grants a bachelor of science degree with a curriculum that grades cadets ' performance upon a broad academic program , military leadership performance , and mandatory participation in competitive athletics . Cadets are required to adhere to the Cadet Honor Code , which states that " a cadet will not lie , cheat , steal , or tolerate those who do . " The academy bases a cadet 's leadership experience as a development of all three pillars of performance : academics , physical , and military . 
 Most graduates are commissioned as second lieutenants in the Army . Foreign cadets are commissioned into the armies of their home countries . Since 1959 , cadets have also been eligible to " cross @-@ commission " , or request a commission in one of the other armed services , provided they meet that service 's eligibility standards . Every year , a very small number of cadets do this , usually in a one @-@ for @-@ one " trade " with a similarly inclined cadet or midshipman at one of the other service academies . 
 Because of the academy 's age and unique mission , its traditions have influenced other institutions . It was the first American college to have an accredited civil @-@ engineering program and the first to have class rings , and its technical curriculum was a model for later engineering schools . West Point 's student body has a unique rank structure and lexicon . All cadets reside on campus and dine together en masse on weekdays for breakfast and lunch . The academy fields fifteen men 's and nine women 's National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) sports teams . Cadets compete in one sport every fall , winter , and spring season at the intramural , club , or intercollegiate level . Its football team was a national power in the early and mid @-@ 20th century , winning three national championships . Its alumni and students are collectively referred to as " The Long Gray Line " , and its ranks include two Presidents of the United States ( as well as the President of the Confederate States of America ) , presidents of Costa Rica , Nicaragua and of the Philippines , numerous famous generals , and seventy @-@ five Medal of Honor recipients . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Colonial period , founding , and early years = = = 
 The Continental Army first occupied West Point , New York , on 27 January 1778 ; and it is the oldest continuously @-@ operating Army post in the United States . Between 1778 and 1780 , the Polish engineer and military hero Tadeusz Kościuszko oversaw the construction of the garrison defenses . The Great Hudson River Chain and high ground above the narrow " S " curve in the river enabled the Continental Army to prevent British Royal Navy ships from sailing upriver and thus dividing the Colonies . As commander of the fortifications at West Point , Benedict Arnold committed his act of treason , attempting to sell the fort to the British . After Arnold betrayed the patriot cause , the Army changed the name of the fortifications at West Point , New York , to Fort Clinton . With the peace after the American Revolutionary War , various ordnance and military stores were left deposited at West Point . 
 " Cadets " underwent training in artillery and engineering studies at the garrison since 1794 . In 1801 , shortly after his inauguration as president , Thomas Jefferson directed that plans be set in motion to establish at West Point the United States Military Academy . He selected Jonathan Williams to serve as its first superintendent . Congress formally authorized the establishment and funding of the school with the Military Peace Establishment Act of 1802 , which Jefferson signed on 16 March . The academy officially commenced operations on 4 July 1802 . The academy graduated Joseph Gardner Swift , its first official graduate , in October 1802 . He later returned as Superintendent from 1812 to 1814 . In its tumultuous early years , the academy featured few standards for admission or length of study . Cadets ranged in age from 10 years to 37 years and attended between 6 months to 6 years . The impending War of 1812 caused the United States Congress to authorize a more formal system of education at the academy and increased the size of the Corps of Cadets to 250 . 
 In 1817 , Colonel Sylvanus Thayer became the Superintendent and established the curriculum , elements of which are still in use as of 2015 . Thayer instilled strict disciplinary standards , set a standard course of academic study , and emphasized honorable conduct . Known as the " Father of the Military Academy , " he is honored with a monument on campus for the profound impact he had upon the academy . Founded as a school of engineering , for the first half of the 19th century , USMA produced graduates who gained recognition for engineering the bulk of the nation 's initial railway lines , bridges , harbors and roads . The academy was the only engineering school in the country until the founding of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1824 . It was so successful in its engineering curriculum that it significantly influenced every American engineering school founded prior to the Civil War . 
 The Mexican – American War brought the academy to prominence as graduates proved themselves in battle for the first time . Future Civil War commanders Ulysses S. Grant and Robert E. Lee first distinguished themselves in battle in Mexico . In all , 452 of 523 graduates who served in the war received battlefield promotions or awards for bravery . The school experienced a rapid modernization during the 1850s , often romanticized by the graduates who led both sides of the Civil War as the " end of the Old West Point era . " New barracks brought better heat and gas lighting , while new ordnance and tactics training incorporated new rifle and musket technology and accommodated transportation advances created by the steam engine . With the outbreak of the Civil War , West Point graduates filled the general officer ranks of the rapidly expanding Union and Confederate armies . 294 graduates served as general officers for the Union , and 151 served as general officers for the Confederacy . Of all living graduates at the time of the war , 105 ( 10 % ) were killed , and another 151 ( 15 % ) were wounded . Nearly every general officer of note from either army during the Civil War was a graduate of West Point and a West Point graduate commanded the forces of one or both sides in every one of the 60 major battles of the war . 
 = = = After the Civil War = = = 
 Immediately following the Civil War , the academy enjoyed unprecedented fame as a result of the role its graduates had played . However , the post @-@ war years were a difficult time for the academy as it struggled to admit and reintegrate cadets from former confederate states . The first cadets from Southern states were re @-@ admitted in 1868 , and 1870 saw the admission of the first black cadet , James Webster Smith of South Carolina . Smith endured harsh treatment and was eventually dismissed for academic deficiency under controversial circumstances in 1874 . As a result , Henry O. Flipper of Georgia became the first black graduate in 1877 , graduating 50th in a class of 76 . Two of the most notable graduates during this period were George Washington Goethals from the class of 1880 , and John J. Pershing from the class of 1886 . Goethals gained prominence as the chief engineer of the Panama Canal , and Pershing would become famous for his exploits against the famed Pancho Villa in Mexico and later for leading American Forces during World War I. 
 Besides the integration of southern @-@ state and black cadets , the post @-@ war academy also struggled with the issue of hazing . In its first 65 years , hazing was uncommon or non @-@ existent beyond small pranks played upon the incoming freshmen , but took a harsher tone as Civil War veterans began to fill the incoming freshman classes . The upper class cadets saw it as their duty to " teach the plebes their manners . " Hazing at the academy entered the national spotlight with the death of former cadet Oscar L. Booz on 3 December 1900 . Congressional hearings , which included testimony by cadet Douglas MacArthur , investigated his death and the pattern of systemic hazing of freshmen . When MacArthur returned as superintendent , he made an effort to end the practice of hazing the incoming freshmen by placing Army sergeants in charge of training new cadets during freshman summer . The practice of hazing continued on some levels well into the late 20th century , but is no longer allowed in the present day . 
 The demand for junior officers during the Spanish – American War caused the class of 1899 to graduate early , and the Philippine – American War did the same for the class of 1901 . This increased demand for officers led Congress to increase the size of the Corps of Cadets to 481 cadets in 1900 . The period between 1900 and 1915 saw a construction boom as much of West Point 's old infrastructure was rebuilt . Many of the academy 's most famous graduates graduated during the 15 @-@ year period between 1900 and 1915 : Douglas MacArthur ( 1903 ) , Joseph Stilwell ( 1904 ) , Henry " Hap " Arnold ( 1907 ) , George S. Patton ( 1909 ) , Dwight D. Eisenhower , and Omar Bradley ( both 1915 ) . The class of 1915 is known as " the class the stars fell on " for the exceptionally high percentage of general officers that rose from that class ( 59 of 164 ) . 
 The outbreak of America 's involvement in World War I caused a sharp increase in the demand for army officers , and the academy accelerated graduation of all four classes then in attendance to meet this requirement , beginning with the early graduation of the First Class on 20 April 1917 , the Second Class in August 1917 , and both the Third and Fourth Classes just before the Armistice of 11 November 1918 , when only freshman cadets remained ( those who had entered in the summer of 1918 ) . In all , wartime contingencies and post @-@ war adjustments resulted in ten classes , varying in length of study from two to four years , within a seven @-@ year period before the regular course of study was fully resumed . 
 Douglas MacArthur became superintendent in 1919 , instituting sweeping reforms to the academic process , including introducing a greater emphasis on history and humanities . He made major changes to the field training regimen and the Cadet Honor Committee was formed under his watch in 1922 . MacArthur was a firm supporter of athletics at the academy , as he famously said " Upon the fields of friendly strife are sown the seeds that , upon other fields , on other days , will bear the fruits of victory . " West Point was first officially accredited in 1925 , and in 1933 began granting bachelor of science degrees to all graduates . In 1935 , the academy 's authorized strength increased to 1 @,@ 960 cadets . 
 = = = World War II and Cold War = = = 
 As World War II engulfed Europe , Congress authorized an increase to 2 @,@ 496 cadets in 1942 and began graduating classes early . The class of 1943 graduated six months early in January 1943 , and the next four classes graduated after only three years . To accommodate this accelerated schedule , summer training was formally moved to a recently acquired piece of land southwest of main post . The site would later become Camp Buckner . The academy had its last serious brush with abolition or major reform during the war , when some members of Congress charged that even the accelerated curriculum allowed young men to " hide out " at West Point and avoid combat duty . A proposal was put forth to convert the academy to an officer 's training school with a six @-@ month schedule , but this was not adopted . West Point played a prominent role in WWII ; four out of five of the five @-@ star generals were alumni and nearly 500 graduates died . Immediately following the war in 1945 , Maxwell Taylor ( class of 1922 ) became superintendent . He expanded and modernized the academic program and abolished antiquated courses in fencing and horsemanship . 
 Unlike previous conflicts , the Korean War did not disrupt class graduation schedules . More than half of the army leadership during the war was composed of academy graduates . The Class of 1950 , which graduated only two weeks prior to the war 's outbreak , suffered some of the heaviest casualties of any 20th century class and became known sourly as " the class the crosses fell on . " A total of 157 alumni perished in the conflict . Garrison H. Davidson became superintendent in 1956 and instituted several reforms that included refining the admissions process , changing the core curriculum to include electives , and increasing the academic degree standards for academy instructors . The 1960s saw the size of the Corps expand to 4 @,@ 400 cadets while the barracks and academic support structure grew proportionally . West Point was not immune to the social upheaval of American society during the Vietnam War . The first woman joined the faculty of the all @-@ male institution amidst controversy in 1968 . The Army granted its first honorable discharge in 1971 to a West Point cadet , Cary E. Donham , of Illinois , who applied for conscientious objector status in 1970 . The academy struggled to fill its incoming classes as its graduates led troops in Southeast Asia , where 333 graduates died . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 Following the 1973 end of American involvement in Vietnam , the strain and stigma of earlier social unrest dissolved and West Point enjoyed surging enrollments . West Point admitted its first 119 female cadets in 1976 , after Congress authorized the admission of women to the federal service academies in 1975 . Women currently compose approximately 15 % of entering new cadets . In 1989 , Kristin Baker became the first female First Captain ( an effigy of her is now on display in the Museum ) , the highest ranking senior cadet at the academy . Three other females have been appointed as First Captain : Grace H. Chung in 2003 , Stephanie Hightower in 2005 , and Lindsey <unk> in 2013 . Rebecca <unk> became the academy 's first female valedictorian in 1995 . 
 In 1985 , cadets were formally authorized to declare an academic major ; all previous graduates had been awarded a general bachelor of science degree . Five years later there was a major revision of the Fourth Class System , as the Cadet Leader Development System ( <unk> ) became the guidance for the development of all four classes . The class of 1990 was the first one that issued a standard and mandatory computer to every member of the class at the beginning of Plebe year , the Zenith 248 SX . The academy was also an early adopter of the Internet in the mid @-@ 1990s , and was recognized in 2006 as one of the nation 's " most wired " campuses . 
 At the height of the Cold War in October 1987 , President Reagan visited the Academy and delivered a speech about ending the Evil Empire . 
 During the Gulf War , alumnus General Schwarzkopf was the commander of Allied Forces , and the American senior generals in Iraq , Generals Petraeus , Odierno and Austin , and Afghanistan , retired General Stanley McChrystal and General David Rodriguez , are also alumni . Following the September 11 attacks , applications for admission to the academy increased dramatically , security on campus was increased , and the curriculum was revamped to include coursework on terrorism and military drills in civilian environments . One graduate was killed during the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks and ninety graduates have died during operations in Afghanistan , Iraq , and the ongoing Global War on Terror . The Class of 2005 has been referred to as The Class of 9 / 11 as the attacks occurred during their first year at the academy , and they graduated 911 students . In 2008 gender @-@ neutral lyrics were incorporated into West Point 's " Alma Mater " and " The Corps " — replacing lines like " The men of the Corps " with " The ranks of the Corps . " In December 2009 , President Barack Obama delivered a major speech in Eisenhower Hall Theater outlining his policy for deploying 30 @,@ 000 additional troops to Afghanistan as well as setting a timetable for withdrawal . President Obama also provided the commencement address in 2014 . 
 After the Don 't Ask , Don 't Tell policy was lifted September 20 , 2011 , the academy began admitting and retaining openly gay cadets . By March 2012 , cadets were forming a gay @-@ straight alliance group called Spectrum . By March 2015 , Spectrum had two faculty and 40 cadet members , a mixture of gay , straight , bi , and undecided . According to a Vanity Fair essay , the LGBT cadets were well accepted . 
 Brig. Gen. Diana Holland became West Point 's first woman Commandant of Cadets in January 2016 . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The academy is located approximately 50 miles ( 80 km ) north of New York City on the western bank of the Hudson River . West Point , New York , is incorporated as a federal military reservation in Orange County and is adjacent to Highland Falls . Based on the significance both of the Revolutionary War fort ruins and of the military academy itself , the majority of the academy area was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1960 . In 1841 , Charles Dickens visited the academy and said " It could not stand on more appropriate ground , and any ground more beautiful can hardly be . " One of the most visited and scenic sites on post , Trophy Point , overlooks the Hudson River to the north , and is home to many captured cannon from past wars as well as the Stanford White @-@ designed Battle Monument . Though the entire military reservation encompasses 15 @,@ 974 acres ( 65 km2 ) , the academic area of the campus , known as " central area " or " the cadet area " , is entirely accessible to cadets or visitors by foot . 
 In 1902 , the Boston architectural firm Cram , Goodhue , and Ferguson was awarded a major construction contract that set the predominantly neogothic architectural style still seen today . Most of the buildings of the central cadet area are in this style , as typified by the Cadet Chapel , completed in 1910 . These buildings are nearly all constructed from granite that has a predominantly gray and black hue . The barracks that were built in the 1960s were designed to mimic this style . Other buildings on post , notably the oldest private residences for the faculty , are built in the Federal , Georgian , or English Tudor styles . A few buildings , such as Cullum Hall and the Old Cadet Chapel , are built in the Neoclassical style . 
 The academy grounds are home to numerous monuments and statues . The central cadet parade ground , the Plain , hosts the largest number , and includes the Washington Monument , Thayer Monument , Eisenhower Monument , MacArthur Monument , Kosciuszko Monument , and Sedgwick Monument . Patton Monument was first dedicated in front of the cadet library in 1950 , but in 2004 it was placed in storage to make room for the construction of Jefferson Hall . With the completion of Jefferson Hall , Patton 's statue was relocated and unveiled at a temporary location on 15 May 2009 , where it will remain until the completion of the renovation of the old cadet library and Bartlett Hall . There is also a statue commemorating brotherhood and friendship from the École Polytechnique in the cadet central area just outside <unk> Hall . The remaining campus area is home to 27 other monuments and memorials . 
 The West Point Cemetery is the final resting place of many notable graduates and faculty , including George Armstrong Custer , Winfield Scott , William Westmoreland , Earl Blaik , Maggie Dixon , and sixteen Medal of Honor recipients . The cemetery is also the burial place of several recent graduates who have died during the ongoing conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan . Many of the older grave sites have large and ornate grave markers , the largest belonging to Egbert <unk> ( class of 1847 ) , chief engineer of Brooklyn 's Prospect Park . The cemetery is also home to a monument to Revolutionary War heroine Margaret Corbin . 
 = = = Athletic facilities = = = 
 West Point is home to historic athletic facilities like Michie Stadium and Gillis Field House as well as modern facilities such as the <unk> Tennis Center , Anderson Rugby Complex , and the Lou Gross Gymnastics Facility . Michie Stadium recently underwent a significant upgrade in facilities for the football team , and the academy installed a new artificial turf field in the summer of 2008 . 
 = = = West Point Museum = = = 
 The visitor 's center is just outside the Thayer Gate in the village of Highland Falls and offers the opportunity to arrange for a guided tour . These tours , which are the only way the general public can access the academy grounds , leave the visitor 's center several times a day . The West Point Museum is directly adjacent to the visitor 's center , in the renovated Olmsted Hall on the grounds of the former <unk> College . Originally opened to the public in 1854 , the West Point Museum is the oldest military museum in the country . During the summer months , the museum operates access to the Fort Putnam historic site on main post and access to the 282 acre Constitution Island . One of the most notable items on display at the museum are George Washington 's pistols , Napoleon 's sword , a dagger carried by Hermann Goering when he was captured , a revolver that belonged to Goering and a silver @-@ plated party book , signed by Charles Lindbergh , Herbert Hoover and Mussolini etc . Arguably , the most prized artifact on display is a gold @-@ plated pistol that belonged to Adolf Hitler . 
 = = Administration = = 
 = = = Academy leadership = = = 
 The commanding officer at the USMA is the Superintendent . In recent years , the position of Superintendent has been held by a Lieutenant General ( three star general ) . The current Superintendent , Lieutenant General Robert L. <unk> , Jr . , took command on 17 July 2013 . Earlier in his career , <unk> served as the 70th commandant of Cadets . The academy is a direct reporting unit , and as such , the Superintendent reports directly to the Army Chief of Staff ( CSA ) . 
 There are two other general officer positions at the academy . Brigadier General Diana Holland is the Commandant of Cadets , and Brigadier General Timothy Trainor is the Dean of the Academic Board . General Holland is the first female commandant . There are 13 academic departments at USMA , each with a colonel as the head of department . These 13 tenured colonels comprise the core of the Academic Board . These officers are titled " Professors USMA " or <unk> . The academy is also overseen by the Board of Visitors ( BOV ) . The BOV is a panel of Senators , Congressional Representatives , and presidential appointees who " shall inquire into the morale and discipline , curriculum , instruction , physical equipment , fiscal affairs , academic methods , and other matters relating to the academy that the board decides to consider . " Currently the BOV is chaired by Representative John <unk> and is composed of three Senators , five Representatives and six presidential appointees . 
 = = = Admission requirements = = = 
 Candidates must be between 17 and 23 years old , unmarried , and with no legal obligation to support a child . Above average high school and / or previous college grades , and strong performance on standardized testing is expected . The interquartile range on the old SAT was 1100 – 1360 and 68 % ranked in the top fifth of their high school class . 
 To be eligible for appointment , candidates must also undergo a Candidate Fitness Assessment and a complete physical exam . Up to 60 students from foreign countries are present at USMA , educated at the expense of the sponsoring nation , with tuition assistance based on the GNP of their country . Of these foreign cadets the Code of Federal Regulations specifically permits one Filipino cadet designated by the President of the Philippines . 
 The actual application process consists of two main requirements : candidates apply to USMA for admission and separately provide a nomination . The majority of candidates receive a nomination from their United States Representative or Senator . Some receive a nomination from the Vice President or even the President of the United States . 
 The nomination process is not political . Applicants do not have to know their congressman to be nominated . The Academy applicant typically provides written essays and letters of recommendation . The applicant then submits to a formal interview . Admission to West Point is selective : 12 @.@ 75 % of applicants were admitted ( total of 1292 ) to the Class of 2012 . 
 Candidates may have previous college experience , but they may not transfer , meaning that regardless of previous college credit , they enter the academy as a fourth class cadet and undergo the entire four @-@ year program . If a candidate is considered academically disqualified and not selected , he or she may receive an offer to attend to the United States Military Academy Preparatory School . Upon graduation from <unk> , these candidates are appointed to the academy if they receive the recommendation of the <unk> Commandant and meet medical admission requirements . 
 The West Point Association of Graduates ( <unk> ) also offers scholarship support to people who are qualified but not selected . The scholarships usually cover around $ 7 @,@ 000 to civilian universities ; the students who receive these scholarships do so under the stipulation that they will be admitted to and attend West Point a year later . Those who do not must repay the AOG . New Mexico Military Institute , Marion Military Institute , Valley Forge Military College and the Greystone Preparatory School at Schreiner University in Kerrville , Texas , are programs that students often attend on the AOG scholarship prior to admission to West Point . 
 = = Curriculum = = 
 West Point is a medium @-@ sized , highly residential baccalaureate college , with a full @-@ time , four @-@ year undergraduate program that emphasizes instruction in the arts , sciences , and professions with no graduate program . There are forty @-@ five academic majors , the most popular of which are foreign languages , management information systems , history , economics , and mechanical engineering . West Point is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education . Military officers compose 75 % of the faculty , while civilian professors make up the remaining 25 % . 
 A cadet 's class rank , which determines his or her Army branch and assignment upon graduation , is calculated as a combination of academic performance ( 55 % ) , military leadership performance ( 30 % ) , and physical fitness and athletic performance ( 15 % ) . 
 = = = Academics = = = 
 The academy 's teaching style forms part of the Thayer system , which was implemented by Sylvanus Thayer during his tour as Superintendent . This form of instruction emphasizes small classes with daily homework , and strives to make students actively responsible for their own learning by completing homework assignments prior to class and bringing the work to class to discuss collaboratively . 
 The academic program consists of a structured core of thirty @-@ one courses balanced between the arts and sciences . The Academy operates on the semester system , which it labels as " terms " ( Term 1 is the fall semester ; Term 2 is the spring semester ) . Although cadets choose their majors in the fall of their sophomore year , all cadets take the same course of instruction until the beginning of their junior year . This core course of instruction consists of mathematics , information technology , chemistry , physics , engineering , history , physical geography , philosophy , leadership and general psychology , English composition and literature , foreign language , political science , international relations , economics , and constitutional law . Some advanced cadets may " validate " out of the base @-@ level classes and take advanced or accelerated courses earlier as freshmen or sophomores . Regardless of major , all cadets graduate with a Bachelor of Science degree . 
 = = = Military = = = 
 As all cadets are commissioned as second lieutenants upon graduation , military and leadership education is nested with academic instruction . Military training and discipline fall under the purview of the Office of the Commandant . Entering freshmen , or fourth class cadets , are referred to as New Cadets , and enter the academy on Reception Day or R @-@ day , which marks the start of cadet basic training ( CBT ) , known colloquially as Beast Barracks , or simply Beast . Most cadets consider Beast to be their most difficult time at the academy because of the transition from civilian to military life . Their second summer , cadets undergo cadet field training ( CFT ) at nearby Camp Buckner , where they train in more advanced field craft and military skills . During a cadet 's third summer , they may serve as instructors for CBT or CFT . Rising Firstie ( senior ) cadets also spend one @-@ month training at Camp Buckner , where they train for modern tactical situations that they will soon face as new platoon leaders . Cadets also have the opportunity during their second , third and fourth summers to serve in active army units and military schools around the world . The schools include Airborne , Air Assault , Sapper , Pathfinder , etc . 
 Active duty officers in the rank of captain or major serve as Company Tactical Officers ( TAC Officers ) . The role of the TAC is to mentor , train , and teach the cadets proper standards of good order and discipline and be a good role model . There is one TAC for every cadet company . There is also one senior Non @-@ Commissioned Officer to assist each TAC , known as TAC @-@ NCOs . 
 The Department of Military Instruction ( DMI ) is responsible for all military arts and sciences education as well as planning and executing the cadet summer training . Within DMI there is a representative from each of the Army 's branches . These " branch reps " serve as proponents for their respective branches and liaise with cadets as they prepare for branch selection and graduation . 
 = = = Physical = = = 
 The Department of Physical Education ( DPE ) administers the physical program , which includes both physical education classes , physical fitness testing , and competitive athletics . The head of DPE holds the title of Master of the Sword , dating back to the 19th century when DPE taught swordsmanship as part of the curriculum . 
 All cadets take a prescribed series of physical fitness courses such as military movement ( applied gymnastics ) , boxing ( men ) or self @-@ defense ( women ) , swimming , and beginning in 2009 , advanced combatives . Cadets can also take elective physical activity classes such as scuba , rock climbing , and aerobic fitness . 
 As with all soldiers in the Army , cadets also must pass the Army Physical Fitness Test twice per year . Additionally , every year , cadets must pass the Indoor Obstacle Course Test ( <unk> ) , which DPE has administered in Hayes Gymnasium since 1944 . 
 Since Douglas MacArthur 's tenure as superintendent , every cadet has been required to participate in either an intercollegiate sport , a club sport , or an intramural ( referred to as " company athletics " ) sport each semester . 
 = = = Moral and ethical training = = = 
 Moral and ethical development occurs throughout the entirety of the cadet experience by living under the honor code and through formal leadership programs available at the academy . These include instruction in the values of the military profession through Professional Military Ethics Education ( <unk> ) , voluntary religious programs , interaction with staff and faculty role models , and an extensive guest @-@ speaker program . The foundation of the ethical code at West Point is found in the academy 's motto , " Duty , Honor , Country . " 
 West Point 's Cadet Honor Code reads simply that : " A cadet will not lie , cheat , steal , or tolerate those who do . " Cadets accused of violating the Honor Code face an investigative and hearing process . If they are found guilty by a jury of their peers , they face severe consequences ranging from being " turned back " ( repeating an academic year ) to separation from the academy . Cadets previously enforced collective censure by an unofficial sanction known as " silencing " by not speaking to cadets accused of violating the honor code , but the practice ended in 1973 after national scrutiny . Also in 1976 , 151 junior cadets were found guilty of ' violating the honour code ' in their exams . 
 = = Cadet life = = 
 = = = Rank and organization = = = 
 Cadets are not referred to as freshmen , sophomores , juniors , or seniors . Instead they are officially called fourth class , third class , second class , and first class cadets . Colloquially , freshmen are plebes , sophomores are yearlings or yuks , juniors are cows , and seniors are <unk> . Some of the origins of the class names are known , some are not . Plebeians were the lower class of ancient Roman society , while yearling is a euphemism for a year @-@ old animal . The origin of cow is less known . There are a number of theories for the origin of the term cow ; however the most prevalent and probably accurate one is that cadets in years past had no leave until the end of their yearling year , when they were granted a summer @-@ long furlough . Their return as second classmen was heralded as " the cows coming home . " 
 The Corps of Cadets is officially organized into a brigade . The senior ranking cadet , the Brigade Commander , is known traditionally as the First Captain . The brigade is organized into four regiments . Within each regiment there are three battalions , each consisting of three companies . Companies are lettered A through I , with a number signifying which regiment it belongs to . For example , there are four " A " companies : A1 , A2 , A3 , and A4 . First class cadets hold the leadership positions within the brigade from the First Captain down to platoon leaders within the companies . Leadership responsibility decreases with the lower classes , with second class cadets holding the rank of cadet sergeant , third class cadets holding the rank of cadet corporal , and fourth class cadets as cadet privates . 
 = = = Life in the corps = = = 
 Because of the academy 's congressional nomination process , students come from all 50 states , Puerto Rico , the District of Columbia , the Mariana Islands , Guam , American Samoa , and the US Virgin Islands . The academy is also authorized up to 60 international exchange cadets , who undergo the same four @-@ year curriculum as fully integrated members of the Corps of Cadets . Cadets attend the United States Military Academy free of charge , with all tuition and board paid for by the Army in return for a service commitment of five years of active duty and three years of reserve status upon graduation . Starting on the first day of a cadet 's second class year , non @-@ graduates after that point are expected to fulfill their obligations in enlisted service . Cadets receive a monthly stipend of $ 1 @,@ 017 @.@ 00 for books , uniforms , and other necessities , as of 2015 . From this amount , pay is automatically deducted for the cost of uniforms , books , supplies , services , and other miscellaneous expenses . In addition the monthly pay that the remaining amount ranges from $ 100 to $ 400 in the first three years , cadets receive meals in the dining halls , and have access to the Internet and a phone in their barracks . The student population was 4 @,@ 487 cadets for the 2007 – 2008 academic year . The student body is 15 @.@ 1 % female . Ninety @-@ two percent of entering students re @-@ matriculated for a second year ; the four @-@ year graduation rate was 80 % and the six @-@ year rate was 81 % . 
 All cadets reside on campus for their entire four years in one of the seven barracks buildings . Most cadets are housed with one roommate , but some rooms are designed for three cadets . Cadets are grouped into companies identified by alpha @-@ numeric codes . All companies live together in the same barracks area . The academy has the cadets change companies after their freshman or sophomore years . This process is known as scrambling , and the method of scrambling has changed several times in recent years . All 4 @,@ 000 cadets dine together at breakfast and lunch in the Washington Hall during the weekdays . The cadet fitness center , Arvin Cadet Physical Development Center ( usually just called " Arvin " by cadets and faculty ) , which was rebuilt in 2004 , houses extensive physical fitness facilities and equipment for student use . 
 Each class of cadets elects representatives to serve as class president and fill several administrative positions . They also elect a ring and crest committee , which designs the class 's crest , the emblem that signifies their class and it is embossed upon their class rings . Each class crest is required to contain the initials USMA and their class motto . The class motto is proposed by the class during cadet basic training and voted on by the class prior to the beginning of their freshman academic year . Class mottos typically have verbiage that rhymes or is phonetically similar with their class year . 
 Cadets today live and work within the framework of the Cadet Leader Development System ( <unk> ) , which specifies the roles that a cadet plays throughout their four years at the academy . Cadets begin their USMA careers as trainees ( new cadets ) , then advance in rank , starting as CDT Privates ( freshmen ) and culminating as CDT Officers ( seniors ) . Freshmen have no leadership responsibilities , but have a host of duties to perform as they learn how to follow orders and operate in an environment of rigid rank structure , while seniors have significant leadership responsibilities and significantly more privileges that correspond to their rank . 
 = = = Activities = = = 
 Cadets have a host of extracurricular activities available , most run by the office of the Directorate of Cadet Activities ( DCA ) . DCA sponsors or operates 113 athletic and non @-@ sport clubs . Many cadets join several clubs during their time at the academy and find their time spent with their clubs a welcome respite from the rigors of cadet life . DCA is responsible for a wide range of activities that provide improved quality of life for cadets , including : three cadet @-@ oriented restaurants , the Cadet Store , and the Howitzer and Bugle Notes . The Howitzer is the annual yearbook , while Bugle Notes , also known as the " plebe bible , " is the manual of plebe knowledge . Plebe knowledge is a lengthy collection of traditions , songs , poems , anecdotes , and facts about the academy , the army , the Old Corps , and the rivalry with Navy that all plebes must memorize during cadet basic training . During plebe year , plebes may be asked , and are expected to answer , any inquiry about plebe knowledge asked by upper class cadets . Other knowledge is historical in nature , including information as found in Bugle Notes . However , some knowledge changes daily , such as " the days " ( a running list of the number of days until important academy events ) , the menu in the mess hall for the day , or the lead stories in The New York Times . 
 Each cadet class celebrates at least one special " class weekend " per academic year . Fourth class cadets participate in Plebe Parent Weekend during the first weekend of spring break . In February , third class cadets celebrate the winter season with Yearling Winter Weekend . In late January the second class cadets celebrate 500th Night , marking the remaining 500 days before graduation . First class cadets celebrate three different formal occasions . In late August , first class cadets celebrate Ring Weekend , in February they mark their last 100 days with 100th Night , and in May they have a full week of events culminating in their graduation . All of the " class weekends " involve a formal dinner and social dance , known in old cadet slang as a " hop , " held at Eisenhower Hall . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Since 1899 , Army 's mascot has officially been a mule because the animal symbolizes strength and perseverance . The academy 's football team was nicknamed " The Black Knights of the Hudson " due to the black color of its uniforms . This nickname has since been officially shortened to " Black Knights . " U.S. sports media use " Army " as a synonym for the academy . " On Brave Old Army Team " is the school 's fight song . Army 's chief sports rival is the Naval Academy due to its long @-@ standing football rivalry and the <unk> rivalry with the Navy in general . Fourth class cadets verbally greet upper @-@ class cadets and faculty with " Beat Navy , " while the tunnel that runs under Washington Road is named the " Beat Navy " tunnel . Army also plays the U.S. Air Force Academy for the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief 's Trophy . In the first half of the 20th century , Army and Notre Dame were football rivals , but that rivalry has since died out . 
 = = = Football = = = 
 Army football began in 1890 , when Navy challenged the cadets to a game of the relatively new sport . Navy defeated Army at West Point that year , but Army avenged the loss in Annapolis the following year . The rival academies still clash every December in what is traditionally the last regular @-@ season Division I college @-@ football game . The 2015 football season marked Navy 's fourteenth consecutive victory over Army , the longest streak in the series since inception . Navy quarterback Keenan Reynolds became the first Navy QB to beat Army in four consecutive seasons , and set the NCAA rushing touchdown record in the 2015 rivalry game . Army 's football team reached its pinnacle of success under coach Earl Blaik when Army won consecutive national championships in 1944 , 1945 and 1946 , and produced three Heisman trophy winners : Doc Blanchard ( 1945 ) , Glenn Davis ( 1946 ) and Pete Dawkins ( 1958 ) . Past NFL coaches Vince Lombardi and Bill Parcells were Army assistant coaches early in their careers . The football team plays its home games at Michie Stadium , where the playing field is named after Earl Blaik . Cadets ' attendance is mandatory at football games and the Corps stands for the duration of the game . At all home games , one of the four regiments marches onto the field in formation before the team takes the field and leads the crowd in traditional Army cheers . From 1992 through 1996 , Army won all of the games against Navy for the first time since the legendary days of Blanchard and Davis , and it introduced the fraternal group of players identifying themselves as the Fat Man Club , initiated by the offensive linemen of the Class of 1996 . Between the 1998 and 2004 seasons , Army 's football program was a member of Conference USA , but has since reverted to its former independent status . 
 = = = Other sports = = = 
 Though football may receive a lot of media attention due to its annual rivalry game , West Point has a long history of athletics in other NCAA sports . Army is a member of the Division I Patriot League in most sports , while its men 's ice hockey program competes in Atlantic Hockey . John P. Riley , Jr. was the hockey coach at West Point for more than 35 years . Every year , Army faces the Royal Military College of Canada ( RMC ) Paladins in the annual West Point Weekend hockey game . This series , conceived in 1923 , is the longest @-@ running annual international sporting event in the world . 
 The men 's lacrosse team has won eight national championships and appeared in the NCAA tournament sixteen times . In its early years , lacrosse was used by football players , like the " Lonesome End " Bill Carpenter , to stay in shape during the off @-@ season . The 2005 – 06 women 's basketball team went 20 – 11 and won the Patriot League tournament . They went to the 2006 NCAA Women 's Division I Basketball Tournament as a 15th @-@ ranked seed , where they lost to Tennessee , 102 – 54 . It was the first March Madness tournament appearance for any Army basketball team . The head coach of that team , Maggie Dixon , died soon after the season at only 28 years of age . Bob Knight , formerly the winningest men 's basketball coach in NCAA history , began his head coaching career at Army in the late 1960s before moving on to Indiana and Texas Tech . One of Knight 's players at Army was Mike Krzyzewski , who later was head coach at Army before moving on to Duke , where he has won five national championships . 
 Approximately 15 % of cadets are members of a club sport team . West Point fields a total of 24 club sports teams that have been very successful in recent years , winning national championships in judo , boxing , orienteering , pistol , triathlon , crew , cycling , and team handball . 
 The majority of the student body , about 65 % , competes in intramural sports , known at the academy as " company athletics . " DPE 's Competitive Sports committee runs the club and company athletics sports programs and was recently named one of the " 15 Most Influential Sports Education Teams in America " by the Institute for International Sport . The fall season sees competition in basketball , flag @-@ football , team handball , soccer , ultimate disc , and wrestling ; while the spring season sees competition in combative grappling , floor hockey , orienteering , flicker ball , and swimming . In the spring , each company also fields a team entry into the annual Sandhurst Competition , a military skills event conducted by the Department of Military Instruction . 
 = = Traditions = = 
 Due to West Point 's age and its unique mission of producing Army officers , it has many time @-@ honored traditions . The list below are some of the traditions unique to or started by the academy . 
 = = = Cullum number = = = 
 The Cullum number is a reference and identification number assigned to each graduate . It was created by brevet Major General George W. Cullum ( USMA Class of 1833 ) who , in 1850 , began the monumental work of chronicling the biographies of every graduate . He assigned number one to the first West Point graduate , Joseph Gardner Swift , and then numbered all successive graduates in sequence . Before his death in 1892 , General Cullum completed the first three volumes of a work that eventually comprised 10 volumes , titled General Cullum ’ s Biographical Register of the Officers and Graduates of the United States Military Academy , and covering USMA classes from 1802 through 1850 . From 1802 through the Class of 1977 , graduates were listed by general order of Merit . Beginning with the Class of 1978 , graduates were listed alphabetically , and then by date of graduation . Seven graduates have an " A " suffix after their Cullum Number . For various reasons these graduates were omitted from the original class roster , and a suffix letter was added to avoid renumbering the entire class and subsequent classes . 
 = = = Class ring = = = 
 West Point began the collegiate tradition of the class ring , beginning with the class of 1835 . The class of 1836 chose no rings , and the class of 1879 had cuff links in lieu of a class ring . Before 1917 , cadets could design much of the ring individually , but now only the center stone can be individualized . One side of the ring bears the academy crest , while the other side bears the class crest and the center stone ring bears the words West Point and the class year . The academy library has a large collection of cadet rings on display . Senior cadets receive their rings during Ring Weekend in the early fall of their senior year . Immediately after senior cadets return to the barracks after receiving their rings , fourth class cadets take the opportunity to surround senior cadets from their company and ask to touch their rings . After reciting a poem known to cadets as the Ring Poop , the senior usually grants the freshmen permission to touch the ring . In 2002 , the Memorial Class ring donor program began . Donations of class rings are melted and merged . A portion of the original gold is infused with gold from preceding melts to become part of the rings for each ' Firstie ' class . 
 = = = Thayer Award = = = 
 West Point is home to the Sylvanus Thayer Award . Given annually by the academy since 1958 , the award honors an outstanding citizen whose service and accomplishments in the national interest exemplify the academy 's motto , " Duty , Honor , Country . " Currently , the award guidelines state that the recipient not be a graduate of the academy . The award has been awarded to many notable American citizens , to include George H. W. Bush , Colin Powell , Tom Brokaw , Sandra Day O 'Connor , Henry Kissinger , Ronald Reagan , Barry Goldwater , Carl Vinson , Barbara Jordan , William J. Perry , Bob Hope , and Condoleezza Rice . 
 = = = Sedgwick 's spurs = = = 
 A monument to Civil War Union soldier general John Sedgwick stands on the outskirts of the Plain . Sedgwick 's bronze statue has spurs with <unk> that freely rotate . Legend states that if a cadet is in danger of failing a class , they are to don their full @-@ dress parade uniform the night before the final exam . The cadet visits the statue and spins the <unk> at the stroke of midnight . Then the cadet runs back to the barracks as fast as they can . According to legend , if Sedgwick 's ghost catches them , they will fail the exam . Otherwise the cadet will pass the exam and the course . Although being out of their rooms after midnight is officially against regulations , violations have been known to be overlooked for the sake of tradition . 
 = = = Goat @-@ Engineer game = = = 
 As part of the run @-@ up to the Navy football game , the Corps of Cadets plays the Goat @-@ Engineer game . First played in 1907 , it is a game between the " Goats " ( the bottom half of the senior ( Firstie ) class academically ) , and the " Engineers " ( the top half ) . The game is played with full pads and helmets using eight @-@ man football rules . The location has changed over the years , with recent venues being Shea Stadium , Michie Stadium , and Daly Field . Legend states that Army will beat Navy if the goats win , and the opposite if the engineers win . In recent years , female cadets have begun playing a flag football contest , so there are now two Goat @-@ Engineer games , played back to back the same night . 
 = = = Walking the area = = = 
 From the earliest days of the academy , one form of punishment for cadets who commit regulatory infractions has been a process officially known as punishment tours . This process is better known to the cadets as " hours " because as punishment , cadets must walk a specified number of hours in penalty . Cadets are " awarded " punishment tours based upon the severity of the infraction . Being late to class or having an unkempt room may result in as little as 5 hours while more severe misconduct infractions may result in upwards of 60 to 80 hours . In its most traditional form , punishment tours are " walked off " by wearing the dress gray uniform under arms and walking back and forth in a designated area of the cadet barracks courtyard , known as " Central Area . " Cadets who get into trouble frequently and spend many weekends " walking off their hours " are known as " area birds . " Cadets who walk more than 100 total hours in their career are affectionately known as " Century Men . " An alternate form of punishment to walking hours is known as " fatigue tours , " where assigned hours may be " worked off " by manual labor , such as cleaning the barracks . Certain cadets whose academics are deficient may also conduct " sitting tours , " where they have to " sit hours " in a designated academic room in a controlled study environment , for which they receive half credit towards their reduction of tours . Cadets ' uniforms are inspected before their tours begin each day . A small number of cadets may be relieved of their tours that day if their uniforms are exceptionally presentable . Another tradition associated with punishment tours is that any visiting head of state has the authority to grant " amnesty , " releasing all cadets with outstanding hours from the remainder of their assigned tours . 
 = = Notable alumni = = 
 An unofficial motto of the academy 's history department is " Much of the history we teach was made by people we taught . " Graduates of the academy refer to themselves as " The Long Gray Line , " a phrase taken from the academy 's traditional hymn " The Corps . " The academy has produced just under 65 @,@ 000 alumni , including two Presidents of the United States : Ulysses S. Grant and Dwight D. Eisenhower ; the president of the Confederate States of America , Jefferson Davis ; and three foreign heads of state : Anastasio Somoza Debayle of Nicaragua , Fidel V. Ramos of the Philippines , and José María Figueres of Costa Rica . Alumni currently serving in public office include Senator Jack Reed , Governor of Nebraska David Heineman , Governor of Louisiana John Bel Edwards and Congressmen Geoff Davis , Brett Guthrie , Mike Pompeo and John <unk> . 
 The academy has produced many notable generals during its 212 years . During the Civil War , graduates included John Bell Hood , Stonewall Jackson , Robert E. Lee , Simon Bolivar Buckner , James Longstreet , George G. Meade , Phillip Sheridan , William Tecumseh Sherman , J.E.B. Stuart and Oliver O. Howard George Armstrong Custer graduated last in his class of 1861 . The Spanish – American War saw the first combat service of Lt. ( later , Brigadier General ) John " Gatling Gun " Parker , the first Army officer to employ machine guns in offensive fire support of infantry . 
 During World War I , the academy produced General of the Armies John J. Pershing . West Point was the alma mater of many notable World War II generals , Henry H. Arnold , Omar Bradley , Mark Wayne Clark , Robert L. Eichelberger , James M. Gavin , Leslie Groves , Douglas MacArthur , George S. Patton , Joseph Stilwell , Maxwell D. Taylor , James Van Fleet , Jonathan Mayhew Wainwright IV , and Simon Bolivar Buckner , Jr. the highest ranking General to be killed in combat during World War II , with many of these graduates also serving in commanding roles in the Korean War . During the Vietnam War , notable graduates general officers included Creighton Abrams , Hal Moore , and William Westmoreland . West Point also produced some famous generals and statesmen of recent note including John Abizaid , Stanley A. McChrystal , Wesley Clark , Alexander Haig , Barry McCaffrey , Norman Schwarzkopf , Jr . , Brent Scowcroft , Lloyd Austin , and former Director of the Central Intelligence Agency , retired General David Petraeus . 
 A total of 76 graduates have been awarded the Medal of Honor . 
 West Point has produced 18 NASA astronauts , including five who went to the Moon . Other noted alumni include Jim Kimsey , founder of AOL ; Bob McDonald , CEO of Procter & Gamble who was later nominated to be the Secretary of Veteran Affairs ; Alex <unk> , CEO of Johnson & Johnson ; Keith McLoughlin , President and CEO of Electrolux and Alden Partridge , founder of Norwich University . West Point 's contributions to sport include three Heisman Trophy winners : Glenn Davis , Doc Blanchard , and Pete Dawkins . West Point has produced many high government officials , including Brent Scowcroft , the National Security Advisor under Presidents Gerald Ford and George H. W. Bush , and Eric Shinseki , former Secretary of Veterans Affairs under President Barack Obama . West Point graduate Frank Medina organized and led the nationwide campaign that brought the Congressional Gold Medal to the 65th Infantry Regiment , also known as the Borinqueneers . 
 Among American universities , the academy is fifth on the list of total winners for Rhodes Scholarships , seventh for Marshall Scholarships and fourth on the list of Hertz Fellowships . The official alumni association of West Point is the West Point Association of Graduates ( <unk> or AOG ) , headquartered at Herbert Hall . 
 = = Commemorations = = 
 On May 26 , 1937 , the U.S. Post Office issued a 5 @-@ cent commemorative stamp honoring West Point , which features several of its buildings along with the West Point 's motto , <unk> * HONOR * COUNTRY , inscribed under its name near the top . On the 200th anniversary of West Point 's founding the <unk> released a second stamp of 34 @-@ cents in its honor . 
 = Mediocre ( album ) = 
 Mediocre ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) is the Grammy Award and Latin Grammy nominated debut album of Mexican singer and actress Ximena Sariñana , released in the United States on July 15 , 2008 ( 2008 @-@ 07 @-@ 15 ) . Mediocre reached # 10 on Billboard 's Latin Pop Albums , and spawned the hit single " Vidas Paralelas " ( " Parallel Lives " ) . The album gained additional attention when the iTunes Store featured Sariñana 's song " Normal " as the canción de la <unk> — iTunes ' free Latino song of the week — during the week of July 8 , 2008 ( 2008 @-@ 07 @-@ 08 ) . 
 Mediocre garnered good reviews from many critics , receiving five stars from SoMinty , four stars from Time Out , and four stars from Rolling Stone magazine . Many critics praise Mediocre for being an eclectic album with a diverse style of songs featuring pop , rock , alternative , and nueva canción styles . 
 = = Theme = = 
 Sariñana clarified that her title choice , " Mediocre " , means to denounce mediocrity and conformity . She explained in an interview , " This whole idea of the perfect woman of the ‘ 50s is what the title song is about ... There was no possibility of being something different , and that , in turn , created a prototype of a woman who was mediocre . " 
 The album artwork for Mediocre meant to emulate the theme of mediocrity . Sariñana elaborated , " The cover is a take on the idea that women in the ‘ 40s and ‘ 50s had to be ‘ perfect . ’ Perfect hair , perfect clothes , sitting quietly and making perfect meals and embroidering perfectly . And , ironically , they were all perfect in the same , uninteresting way so that ended up making them all mediocre . That was the idea . " Sariñana stressed that she did not intend to produce mediocre content for the album : " It ’ s not to say that the material is mediocre , but rather that it ’ s a message of irony , and I think the public gets that , but there are some people out there who like to poke fun at the title . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Recording commenced in Buenos Aires , Argentina , on May 2007 and finished in August 2007 . Various studio musicians were brought in for the recording of Mediocre . Bruno <unk> , the drummer of <unk> , helped in the production process of the album , and also played the keyboard and tabla for its tracks . Argentine producer Tweety González and Uruguayan producer Juan <unk> produced the album in 2008 . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Mediocre showcases rock , pop , and hip @-@ hop influences . Jimmy Draper of Time Out New York describes the musical style as " full of buoyant , jazz @-@ inflected pop with occasional electronic underpinnings and outbursts of rock " . The album opens with " Mediocre " , a heavily rock @-@ influenced track , leading to the pop single " Vidas Paralelas " . Sariñana relies heavily upon the piano in the pop track " Normal " , which also features brass and vocal harmonies . " La Tina " displays a hip @-@ hop influence through its use of electronic beats . " No <unk> Más " features Sariñana 's use of additional vocal harmonies , as well as acoustic guitars . Ron Bronson of SoMinty points out that " Un Error " and " <unk> Rara " are slower songs reminiscent of Sariñana 's interest in jazz . 
 Lissette Corsa of Orlando Weekly points out that Mediocre follows a unique contemporary jazz style . Corsa praises Mediocre , calling it a " deftly crafted alt @-@ pop record " , but notes that " it ’ s the electronic embellishments , dub effects and jazz trimmings — in the form of loose piano lines , subtle tempo changes and vocal improvisations — that make it unique . " Corsa also praises Sariñana , whose " lyrics exhibit a remarkable depth for someone her age " , saying Sariñana has " a keen understanding of composition and melodic structure " . 
 = = = Genres = = = 
 Since Mediocre incorporates many different styles of music , the exact genre of the album is disputed . Allmusic classifies Mediocre as a pop / rock album with adult alternative pop / rock stylings . However , the iTunes Store classifies Mediocre as an <unk> album to accentuate its Latin American style as well as its alternative style . SoMinty classifies Mediocre as an indie pop album , and Rhapsody categorizes Mediocre as nueva canción , or " new song " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Criticism of Mediocre has been mostly positive , and many critics highly acclaim the album . The Rolling Stone staff rated Mediocre four stars , and Rolling Stone 's average viewer rating is four and a half stars . Mark Kemp , a music journalist from Rolling Stone , called Mediocre one of the strongest debuts from a female singer @-@ songwriter since Norah Jones ' Come Away with Me , exclaiming " There 's sultry torch songs , folky ballads , smart rock — and not a bum track among them . " Ron Bronson , a music journalist from the website SoMinty , awarded Mediocre five stars . He describes Sariñana 's voice on Mediocre as being " something along the lines of Nellie McKay meets countryman Julieta Venegas meets Sia . [ Her voice is ] original , in other words . Very original .... If you have any real desire to listen to music en español , you 'll be hard pressed to find a better singer on the indie scene these days . Ximena has got chops , folks . " Ernesto Sánchez of People en Español labeled Mediocre " one of the most promising Latin Music albums of [ 2008 ] " . Eric Danton of The Hartford Courant pointed out that " her prospects in the United States are less predictable thanks to a fragmented radio landscape and what for many English @-@ speaking listeners is a language barrier . " 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Sariñana was nominated for two awards at the Latin Grammy Awards of 2008 for Mejor Nuevo Artista ( Best New Artist ) and Mejor Canción Alternativa ( Best Alternative Song ) for her single " Normal " . Sariñana won an award at the MTV Latin America Awards 2008 for Artista <unk> ( Discovery Artist ) . 
 On December 4 , 2008 this album received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Latin Rock / Alternative Album . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Direct notes = = = 
 ^ a " La Tina " was remixed by Metronomy in 2008 and released as a single . 
 ^ b Originally performed by Erik <unk> 
 ^ c Originally performed by the Uruguayan band , Loop <unk> 
 ^ d Performed with <unk> . 
 ^ e The second version of " Reforma " is only available through the iTunes Store . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Vidas Paralelas " ( " Parallel Lives " ) , the first single from Mediocre , was released on January 24 , 2008 ( 2008 @-@ 01 @-@ 24 ) . The remix of " La Tina " ( " The Bathtub " ) by Metronomy was released in 2008 , and an official music video on YouTube was released by Warner Music Mexico in July 2008 ( 2008 @-@ 07 ) . " Normal " was promoted on iTunes to the public in the United States in July 8 , 2008 ( 2008 @-@ 07 @-@ 08 ) , when it became the iTunes Latino Free Single of the Week . Los 40 Principales has announced that a music video for the title song will be released in the near future . 
 = = Credits = = 
 The information below is provided by Allmusic , and the personnel are listed in alphabetical order . Clicking the arrows changes the sort order . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Air Combat Group RAAF = 
 The Royal Australian Air Force 's Air Combat Group ( ACG ) is the group which administers the RAAF 's fighter and bomber aircraft . ACG was formed on 7 February 2002 by merging the RAAF 's Tactical Fighter Group and Strike Reconnaissance Group in an attempt to improve the speed with which the RAAF can deploy its combat aircraft . The current commander of ACG is Air Commodore Anthony Grady . 
 Since the Group 's formation , ACG aircraft have deployed to Diego Garcia during Operation Slipper and formed part of the Australian contribution to the 2003 invasion of Iraq . ACG also worked on Operation Guardian II , which was the protection of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2002 , and on Operation Falconer , which was providing a larger ground crew and strike force in Iraq . Other tasks have included support for Operation Acolyte ( Melbourne Commonwealth Games 2006 ) and participation in exercises such as Exercise Pitch Black in Australia and Exercise Red Flag in the United States . Aircraft from the Group have also performed domestic security tasks and participated in overseas exercises . 
 It comprises No. 78 , No. 81 and No. 82 Wings . No. 78 Wing RAAF is headquartered at RAAF Williamtown . It commands No. 76 Squadron , based at RAAF Williamtown , No. 79 Squadron , based at RAAF Pearce , No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit , based at RAAF Williamtown , and No. 278 Squadron , which provides technical training specific to flight training . No. 81 Wing RAAF is headquartered at RAAF Williamtown . It commands No. 3 Squadron , based at RAAF Williamtown , No. 75 Squadron , based at RAAF Tindal , and No. 77 Squadron , based at RAAF Williamtown . No. 82 Wing RAAF is headquartered at RAAF Amberley . It commands No. 1 Squadron , based at RAAF Amberley , No. 6 Squadron , based at RAAF Amberley , and the Forward Air Control Development Unit ( FACDU ) , based at RAAF Williamtown . 
 It is accountable for all of the Air Force 's F / A @-@ 18 Hornet , Super Hornet and Hawk squadrons , as well as the PC @-@ 9A Forward Air Control aircraft . The ACG is equipped with McDonnell Douglas / Boeing F / A @-@ 18 Hornet / Super Hornet fighter and attack aircraft , BAE Hawk trainers and Pilatus P / C @-@ 9 ( A ) forward air control training aircraft . 
 = = Establishment and purpose = = 
 The Air Combat Group ( ACG ) was created on 1 January 2002 with the merging of two Force Element Groups ( FEGs ) , Strike Reconnaissance Group ( F @-@ 111 ) and Tactical Fighter Group ( F / A @-@ 18 Hornet , Hawk and PC @-@ 9A ) . The ACG was tasked to deliver the core capabilities of Control of the Air and Precision Air Strike with the hope that it would allow the RAAF to more quickly deploy its combat aircraft . Although the fighter and strike elements will continue to operate as discrete units for some time , ACG will provide the opportunity for the RAAF to test the organisation required to deliver a range of combat capabilities . 
 = = Responsibilities and bases = = 
 Air Combat Group is one of the Force Element Groups ( FEGs ) in the Air Force . It has 145 aircraft , 163 aircrew and 2000 support personnel based across Australia . It is accountable for all of the Air Force 's F / A @-@ 18 Hornet , Super Hornet and Hawk squadrons , as well as the PC @-@ 9A Forward Air Control aircraft . 
 The Wings under the Air Combat Group are located at RAAF Base Amberley , near Brisbane , Queensland , RAAF Base Williamtown , near Newcastle , New South Wales , RAAF Base Pearce , near Perth , Western Australia , and RAAF Base Tindal , near Katherine , Northern Territory . The Headquarters is located at RAAF Williamtown , NSW 2314 . 
 = = Training and operational history = = 
 Air Combat Group maintains a busy training schedule for the air and ground crew on the F / A @-@ 18 Hornet , Super Hornet and Hawk . The Group 's tasks have included support for Operation Acolyte ( Melbourne Commonwealth Games 2006 ) and participation in exercises such as Exercise Pitch Black in Australia and Exercise Red Flag in the United States . 
 = = = Operation Slipper = = = 
 A detachment of four Australian F / A @-@ 18 Hornet fighter aircraft provided air defence for the US military base on the island of Diego Garcia during the campaign against the Taliban , which was called Operation Slipper . The initial detachment was provided by No. 77 Squadron RAAF between December 2001 and 10 February 2002 . This detachment was replaced by a detachment from No. 3 Squadron RAAF which was deployed between 10 February 2002 and 20 May 2002 . No further Australian units have been deployed to Diego Garcia . The United States Air Force commented favourably on the RAAF contingent 's professionalism during this deployment . 
 = = = Operation Guardian II = = = 
 During Operation Guardian II a squadron was deployed to protect the March 2002 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting ( CHOGM ) in south @-@ east Queensland . During this , the Australian Defence Force pilots were given permission to destroy any hostile aircraft . This has not happened at any time during Australian peace time , but was deemed necessary because of the 11 September 2001 attacks six months earlier . 
 = = = Operation Falconer = = = 
 No. 75 Squadron deployed to Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar in February 2003 as part of the Australian contribution to the invasion of Iraq ( Operation Falconer ) . The squadron was equipped only with recently serviced F / A @-@ 18s , and its 14 aircraft were drawn from No. 81 Wing 's three frontline squadrons . The other squadrons also provided pilots to bolster aircrew numbers in No. 75 Squadron to 25 . The squadron saw action during the Iraq War and provided air defence for high @-@ value assets such as Airborne Early Warning and Control Aircraft , close air support for ground troops and attacked other Iraqi targets . No. 75 Squadron flew 350 combat missions during the war and dropped 122 laser @-@ guided bombs . The squadron was prohibited from operating near Baghdad as the Hornets ' electronic warfare suite was judged to not be sufficient for such heavily defended air space . The squadron 's rules of engagement also banned it from conducting close air support in urban areas . No. 75 Squadron conducted its final combat mission on 27 April and all 14 aircraft returned to RAAF Base Tindal on 14 May 2003 . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Headquarters Air Combat Group is located at RAAF Williamtown , with elements based at Amberley ( Queensland ) , Tindal ( Northern Territory ) , Pearce ( Western Australia ) and Williamtown ( New South Wales ) . One hundred forty @-@ five aircraft , 163 aircrew , and around 2000 personnel make up the ACG . 
 = = = Commander = = = 
 The current commander of Air Combat Group is Air Commodore Anthony Grady , who had previously commanded No. 82 Wing , one of the three wings now under the control of Air Combat Group . He took up the position of Commander of Air Combat Group in January 2012 . 
 = = = Air Combat Group components = = = 
 = = = = 78 Wing = = = = 
 No. 78 Wing RAAF is headquartered at RAAF Williamtown . It commands No. 76 Squadron , based at RAAF Williamtown , flying Hawk <unk> aircraft , No. 79 Squadron , based at RAAF Pearce , flying Hawk <unk> aircraft , and No. 278 Squadron , which provides technical training specific to flight training . 78 Wing conducts operational training , both ground and air , on the F / A @-@ 18B Hornet and Hawk at Nos. 76 and 79 Squadrons and No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit . It currently has an increasing role providing simulator training to aircrews and maintenance personnel at Air Force bases across Australia . 
 = = = = 81 Wing = = = = 
 No. 81 Wing RAAF is headquartered at RAAF Williamtown . It commands No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit , based at RAAF Williamtown , flying F / A @-@ 18A and F / A @-@ 18B aircraft , No. 3 Squadron , based at RAAF Williamtown , flying F / A @-@ 18 aircraft , No. 75 Squadron , based at RAAF Base Tindal , flying F / A @-@ 18 aircraft , and No. 77 Squadron , based at RAAF Williamtown , flying F / A @-@ 18 aircraft . 81 Wing is responsible for the provision of combat air power to Australian and coalition forces through Offensive Counter Air ( OCA ) and Defensive Counter Air ( DCA ) operations using three squadrons of F / A @-@ 18 Hornets , Nos. 3 , 75 and 77 Squadrons . 
 = = = = 82 Wing = = = = 
 No. 82 Wing RAAF is headquartered at RAAF Amberley . It commands No. 1 Squadron and No. 6 Squadron , based at RAAF Base Amberley , flying F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornet aircraft , and the Forward Air Control Development Unit ( FACDU ) , based at RAAF Williamtown , flying P / C @-@ 9 aircraft . No. 6 Squadron is an aircraft conversion unit , rather than a combat unit . 82 Wing strikes designated targets and conducts reconnaissance with Nos. 1 and 6 Squadrons . Forward Air Control Development Unit is being used as a training unit . 
 = = Aircraft = = 
 The ACG is equipped with F / A @-@ 18A / B Hornet and F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornet fighter and attack aircraft , BAE Hawk trainers and Pilatus P / C @-@ 9 ( A ) forward air control training aircraft . Each of these aircraft has a different role . 
 = = = Fighter aircraft = = = 
 The F / A @-@ 18 Hornets are modern all @-@ weather strike fighter jets , designed to attack both ground and aerial targets . Australia 's F / A @-@ 18s were built during the 1980s and early 1990s and are currently being upgraded to improve their capabilities and extend their service lives . ACG operates a total of 71 F / A @-@ 18A and F / A @-@ 18B Hornets . The F / A @-@ 18A is a single @-@ seat fighter and the F / A @-@ 18B is a two @-@ seat variant which is mainly used for pilot training . The Australian Government is planning to replace the F / A @-@ 18A and Bs with the F @-@ 35A Lightning II from 2013 onwards . The F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornet is a dedicated strike aircraft in RAAF service and are considered superior to the F @-@ 22 Raptor in their ability to acquire and track moving ground targets , and will continue to be upgraded until the F @-@ 35s are delivered . 
 = = = Training aircraft = = = 
 The BAE Systems Hawk , is a British advanced jet trainer which first flew in 1974 as the Hawker Siddeley Hawk . ACG operations 33 Hawks as trainers , and these aircraft have a limited air @-@ to @-@ air and land strike capability . FACDU is equipped with four Pilatus P / C @-@ 9 ( A ) aircraft , which are a variant of the single @-@ engine , low @-@ wing tandem @-@ seat turboprop training aircraft modified to perform forward air control tasks . 
 = = = Hornet Upgrade = = = 
 The Hornet Upgrade program ( HUG ) commenced in 1999 . The project sought and continues to seek to modernise the ability of the current ACG fleet of F / A @-@ 18A and F / A @-@ 18B aircraft and associated support systems . The upgrade project has been set up to elongate the time the Hornet 's can run until 2018 . The project is being conducted in three phases . This project was established to upgrade the F / A @-@ 18 fleet to combine <unk> that will allow the aircraft to more effectively perform its air defence tasks . The project is being conducted in three main phases , phase one has already concluded and phases two and three are currently in production . 
 = = = = Phase 1 = = = = 
 Phase one is the incorporation of upgraded radios , mission computers , Global Positioning System ( GPS ) navigation systems , upgraded Identification Friend or Foe ( IFF ) , and several structural warranty modifications . Commensurate upgrades were added to the following weapon system support systems , Operational Flight Trainer ( OFT ) , Integrated Avionics Software Support Facility ( <unk> ) , Support Equipment ( SE ) , Computer Based Training System ( <unk> ) , Mission planning system ( MPS ) . 
 = = = = Phase 2 = = = = 
 Phase two was broken into four separate sections , phase 2 @.@ 1 is for a radar upgrade , phase 2 @.@ 2 incorporated a link 16 secure data link , Multi @-@ function Information Distribution System ( <unk> ) , Cockpit full colour displays ( <unk> ) , Counter Measures Dispenser System ( <unk> ) , Joint Helmet Mounted <unk> System ( <unk> ) , Tactical Air Moving Map Capability ( <unk> ) , and the <unk> Operational Flight Program . Phase 2 @.@ 3 added the Electronic Warfare suite upgrade ( Radar Warning Receiver , Radio Frequency Jammer ) and phase 2 @.@ 4 upgraded with the Target Designation System ( <unk> ) . The following support systems will also be either upgraded or replaced , the Operational Flight Trainer ( OFT ) to be replaced by the Hornet Aircrew Training System ( <unk> ) , the Integrated Avionics Software Support Facility ( <unk> ) , the Mission Planning System ( MPS ) , Miscellaneous Support Equipment ( SE ) , Computer Based Training System ( <unk> ) , Simulated Aircraft Maintenance Training System ( <unk> ) to be replaced by the Integrated Maintenance Training System ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = = Phase 3 = = = = 
 Phase three is broken into two separate parts , phase 3 @.@ 1 of the HUG project will see the fleet undergo a structural refurbishment program with a number of aircraft undergoing the replacement of centre barrels and adjacent structural components . In addition , phase 3 @.@ 2 started with an Aging Aircraft Audit ( AAA ) , ongoing R3 Deeper Maintenance ( DM ) and minor projects such as Night Vision Capability ( NVC ) will also be undertaken to ensure that the fleet can continue to perform its air defence tasks through to the Planned Withdrawal Date . 
 = = = = Timeline = = = = 
 The Hardware Acquisition Contract was signed on 25 September 1998 , and the Prime Contract was signed on 21 June 1999 . The Aircraft modification started mid 2000 at RAAF Williamtown , and was completed with the last modified aircraft delivered on 19 June 2002 . 
 The purchase of new AN / APG @-@ 73 radars was announced on 17 August 1998 . The Commonwealth accepted a United States Foreign Military Sales case in October 1999 , and then the prototype modification commenced on 21 August 2001 . The first production modified aircraft was completed in August 2002 and the last aircraft was completed on 27 August 2003 . Phase 2 @.@ 2 , the Multi @-@ purpose Display Group Upgrade ( <unk> ) and the remaining equipment will be installed in the 2006 / 2007 time frame . Phase 2 @.@ 3 , various systems , from BAE Systems , SAAB , and Elta has not been announced . Phase 2 @.@ 4 , commercial contract with Northrop Grumman for the Litening AT targeting pod , will receive the targeting pods during 2007 / 2008 . 
 In Phase 3 @.@ 1 , the prototype activities , were completed in January 2004 . The production installation commenced April 2004 with completion expected in 2009 . In Phase 3 @.@ 2 , the Delta Modification Prototype activities were completed in May 2005 . The Delta Modification Production installation is set to commence January 2006 with completion expected in 2009 ( conducted in conjunction with HUG Phase 3 @.@ 1 installations ) . CBR Prototype activities will commence February 2006 with completion expected January 2008 . CBR Production installation is to begin July 2007 with completion expected in 2011 , but will be dependent on the number of <unk> undertaken . 
 = Hemming 's Cartulary = 
 Hemming 's Cartulary is a manuscript cartulary , or collection of charters and other land records , collected by a monk named Hemming around the time of the Norman Conquest of England . The manuscript comprises two separate cartularies that were made at different times and later bound together ; it is in the British Library as MS Cotton Tiberius A xiii . The first was composed at the end of the 10th or beginning of the 11th century . The second section was compiled by Hemming and was written around the end of the 11th or the beginning of the 12th century . The first section , traditionally titled the Liber Wigorniensis , is a collection of Anglo @-@ Saxon charters and other land records , most of which are organized geographically . The second section , Hemming 's Cartulary proper , combines charters and other land records with a narrative of deprivation of property owned by the church of Worcester . 
 The two works are bound together in one surviving manuscript , the earliest surviving cartulary from medieval England . A major theme is the losses suffered by Worcester at the hands of royal officials and local landowners . Included amongst the <unk> are kings such as Cnut and William the Conqueror , and nobles such as Eadric Streona and Urse d 'Abetot . Also included are accounts of lawsuits waged by the Worcester monks in an effort to regain their lost lands . The two sections of the cartulary were first printed in 1723 . The original manuscript was slightly damaged by fire in 1733 , and required rebinding . A new printed edition is in production as of 2010 . 
 = = Authorship and composition = = 
 Although the monk Hemming has traditionally been credited with all the works in the manuscript , the cartulary contains two works that were collected together , only one of which is by Hemming . The two works were bound together to form the manuscript ( abbreviated MS ) Cotton Tiberius A xiii , now held in the Cotton Library , a collection in the British Library . Together , the two works form the first surviving cartulary from medieval England . The first part is the so @-@ called Liber Wigorniensis , or Book of Worcester , which takes up folios 1 – 118 of the manuscript . The second is Hemming 's work , and takes up folios 119 – 142 , 144 – 152 and 154 – 200 . MS Cotton Nero E i and British Library MS Add <unk> may also contain charters collected as part of Hemming 's work , as they have been identified by some scholars as having been produced during Hemming 's lifetime , although others identify them as a copy of the Liber Wigorniensis . 
 = = = Manuscript condition = = = 
 The original manuscript containing the cartulary was damaged in a fire in 1733 , but the damage was not serious . The edges of the manuscript were burned , which resulted in a few words being lost on the margins . Because of the fire damage , the manuscript was rebound in the 19th century , and each leaf was mounted separately . In addition to the two main sections , there are three smaller parchment pages bound in with the manuscript : folios 110 , 143 , and 153 . The first of them , folio 110 , measures 70 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) high by 90 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) wide and lists eight names , probably witnesses to a lease . The second inserted folio , 143 , measures 130 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) high by 180 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) wide and gives a list of jurors in a late 11th @-@ century hand . The last inserted folio , 153 , measures 58 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 3 in ) high by 180 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) wide and gives the boundaries of a manor in Old English , rather than Latin ; it is written in a 12th @-@ century hand . 
 = = = Liber Wigorniensis = = = 
 The first part of the work is an early 11th @-@ century collection of older charters , arranged geographically , with a section on late 10th @-@ century land leases tacked on the end . The historian H. P. R. Finberg gave this section of the work the title Liber Wigorniensis in 1961 to distinguish it from the later section actually assembled by Hemming . Dates for the compilation of the work include the suggestion by historian Neil Patrick Ker that it dates from between 1002 and 1016 , when Wulfstan ( the earlier Wulfstan – later a saint – who is not the Wulfstan who encouraged Hemming to compile the cartulary ) held both the archbishopric of York and the bishopric of Worcester . Another historian , V. H. Galbraith , suggests that instead of being compiled in Wulfstan 's episcopate , it was created during the episcopate of Ealdwulf , Wulfstan 's predecessor in both sees . A third historian , David Dumville , argues that because no leases later than 996 are mentioned , it must date to a time @-@ frame between 996 and 1016 . There are 155 charters in the Liber , of which 10 are later insertions ; the date of their incorporation ranges from the early to the late 11th century . Ker , who studied the original manuscript , has identified five main scribes involved in the manuscript in the first section . The scribal hands used are small and not very rounded , and resemble the type of writing prevalent in England during the early part of the 11th century . This section consists of 117 leaves in the original manuscript , each page with 26 lines of text . The written area is approximately 190 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) tall by 100 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) wide . A few blank areas in the original manuscript copy have been filled with information in the later 11th and 12th centuries , mainly related to properties owned by the cathedral . 
 = = = Hemming 's cartulary proper = = = 
 Hemming was the author of the second and later part , a collection of lands and rights belonging to the cathedral chapter of Worcester , as well as a narrative of the deeds of Wulfstan , the Bishop of Worcester who died in 1095 , and Archbishop Ealdred of York . In this part of the work is a preface known as the <unk> <unk> , where Hemming names himself as the person responsible for compiling the work , and names Wulfstan as the inspiration for his work . Another section , known as the Prefatio <unk> <unk> , now much later in the manuscript but possibly meant as an introduction to the Codicellus , is a shorter introduction that gives the purpose of the collection . Historians usually take the two prefaces to mean that Wulfstan commissioned the work , but it is unclear whether it was created before or after Wulfstan 's death . It may have been produced during the vacancy after Wulfstan 's death , and before the appointment of the next bishop , Samson . Historian Nicholas Brooks , along with Vivian Galbraith , argues that Hemming 's work was a response to the problems encountered by the diocese during the vacancy , when royal officials administered the lands of the bishopric . According to Brooks , the claim that Wulfstan ordered the composition of the cartulary was inaccurate , and was made to appeal to the authority of the bishop . The historian Julia Barrow believes that the inspiration for the work was the creation of the Domesday Book in 1086 , although she agrees that the work was completed after Wulfstan 's death . Hemming 's work contains over 50 charters , some of which are duplicates of ones in the Liber . 
 The second section of the work is not just a collection of deeds and charters but includes other historical information of importance , especially for Hemming 's monastery . The documents are connected by a narrative explaining why and how the cartulary was created ; the narrative is usually given the title of Codicellus <unk> . This section of the work also includes the Life of the later Wulfstan , one of two contemporary records of Wulfstan 's life . The organization is broadly geographical , with some information grouped by topic . In two sections , which are sometimes entitled " <unk> <unk> " and " Oswald 's <unk> " , the work not only draws on charters but also incorporates regional information from a different type of source recording the holdings of tenants @-@ in @-@ chief . This has been identified as the documentation assembled at the shire @-@ courts for the so @-@ called Domesday survey , commissioned by William the Conqueror in 1085 . More famously , the same records were later used for the compilation of Domesday Book . Some of the documents are in Latin , others are in Old English . Ker has identified the second part of the manuscript as being created by three scribes , describing their writing as " round and fairly large " , in a style belonging to a period of transition between the late 11th and early 12th century . There are 80 leaves in the original manuscript . Most pages in this section of the manuscript have 28 lines of writing , and the written area is approximately 190 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) high by 108 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) wide . A few blank areas in the original manuscript were filled with information ranging from contemporary notes on landholdings of the cathedral to notes on the dissolution of Worcester Priory in the 16th century . 
 = = Themes and contents = = 
 Both the Liber Wigorniensis and Hemming 's work contain a number of forged charters . The historian Julia Barrow has determined that at least 25 of the 155 charters in the Liber are forged , but cautions that this is the minimum estimate . Barrow identifies more than 30 of the charters in Hemming 's work as forgeries , including some that are duplicates from the Liber . Some of the stories that form Hemming 's narrative do not always agree with other sources , and Ker says " it is safer to trust to the main facts than to the details of his [ Hemming 's ] stories " . 
 = = = Contents of the Liber Wigorniensis = = = 
 The main goal of the Liber was to document the landholdings of the diocese and bishop , and to keep a register of the written charters and leases pertaining to the property of the church at Worcester . Because there is no narrative tying the documents together , the Liber should be seen as a working document , compiled for the use of the bishop and monks , and designed not as a literary work but a legal one . The Liber was revised during its working life , which adds further support for the working nature of the composition . 
 The charters constitute valuable evidence for <unk> research and the study of land tenure in late Anglo @-@ Saxon England . According to Donald A. Bullough , they also offer a window on the kind of social bonds which could be created by " neighbourhood " . In the 10th century , the Bishop of Worcester leased out various small estates attached to the Church in the three counties ( Worcestershire , Gloucestershire and Warwickshire ) to several high @-@ ranking men and women , usually for three lifespans . The pattern may be taken to suggest that this way of association served to " create a network , an inter @-@ meshing , of high @-@ status ' neighbours ' ... with its central knot in Worcester and the domus of the bishop " . In the bishop 's residence or at home , the lessees may have come together to participate in convivial drinking , just as the Norman successors to these lands are envisaged as doing in William of Malmesbury 's Life of St Wulfstan . Further , some of the thegns served in the royal army ( fyrd ) under the command of Bishop Oswald or his successors , which presupposes the creation of a personal warband and possibly one with the secondary purpose of protecting the bishop 's properties . 
 = = = Hemming 's work = = = 
 = = = = Purpose = = = = 
 Hemming 's introduction to his work ( Prefatio ) claims that it was produced to teach Wulfstan 's successors : 
 about the things which have been committed to their care , and to show them which lands justly belong ( or ought to belong ) to the church , and which have been unjustly seized by evil men — first , during the Danish invasions ; later , by unjust royal officials and tax collectors ; and most recently , by the violence of Normans in our own time , who by force , guile and <unk> have unjustly deprived this holy church of its lands , villages and possessions , until hardly anything is safe from their depredations . 
 The historian Richard Southern argues that , notwithstanding the stated aim of the work , it was not produced to be used in lawsuits , but rather as a kind of utopian picture of what was in the past . The goal was to depict those things that were beyond human recovery but that were " laid up in heaven " . Because of its narrative structure , it should be seen not only as a documentation of the various landholdings of the diocese , but as a historical work as well . Unlike the Liber , it was not revised as the property changed hands , and this lack of revision has been seen as emphasizing the commemorative nature of the work . The historian John Reuben Davies sees a close parallel between Hemming 's work and the Welsh medieval document The Book of Llandaf . Other similar works were the Norman <unk> , which were compilations of gifts to a monastery , connected by a narrative which was then presented to the dukes to secure confirmation of the gifts . These Norman works date from the early 11th century , and like Hemming 's work , they are of great interest to the historian as sources for the study of medieval history . Also noting that Hemming 's part of the compilation does not appear to have been revised or updated to meet new circumstances , Patrick Geary describes it as " a commemorative , historical volume , not a working administrative tool " and associates the work with counterparts produced in the continental West , such as Folcuin 's chronicle cartulary Gesta <unk> S. <unk> <unk> . 
 More recently Francesca <unk> has arrived at a different conclusion , arguing instead that Hemming 's work , more so than the Liber Wigorniensis , came to serve very real needs , and that these specifically concerned the monastic community at Worcester . Although the Prefatio is silent about monks , the <unk> is explicit that Bishop Wulfstan had commissioned the work to defend the estates assigned for the sustenance of the monks ( ad <unk> <unk> ) . She relates these concerns to the rapid growth of the community during Bishop Wulfstan 's episcopate in the second half of the 11th century . The coming of the Norman newcomer , Samson , who had been involved in the dissolution of Westbury @-@ on @-@ Trym , would have given the enlarged community a particular incentive to safeguard its property and rights . 
 = = = = Contents = = = = 
 One of the themes of Hemming 's work is the depredations suffered by his monastery at the hands of royal officials . One such notorious official from the last decade of King Æthelred 's reign is Eadric Streona ( " <unk> " ) , ealdorman of Mercia , blamed for having appropriated land held by the church in Gloucestershire and Wiltshire and for having incorporated the ancient county of <unk> into Gloucestershire . Hemming may have invented Eadric 's byname of Streona , as it is not attested before appearing in Hemming 's work . 
 Hemming singles out the conquests of England by Cnut and William the Conqueror as being especially damaging . He claims that the work only covers the lost estates that were assigned to support the cathedral chapter , but as he describes the loss of several manors that were listed in Domesday Book as belonging to the bishop , the work probably covers more than the author claims . It also contains a listing of amounts paid to King William to regain items the king had taken from the diocese . Worcester paid over 45 @.@ 5 marks of gold to recover their belongings . Others singled out in the work as significant plunderers of Worcester 's lands included Leofric , Earl of Mercia , and other members of his family . 
 The historian Ted Johnson Smith points out that the Codicellus has strong parallels to the Historia de Sancto <unk> . The Historia was written in Durham in the mid @-@ 10th century , and is a history of the monastery of St. Cuthbert from foundation until about 945 . Like the Codicellus , it is a narrative concerned mainly to defend the patrimony of the monks against depredations . 
 Also contained in Hemming 's work is a description of the lawsuit between the diocese of Worcester and Evesham Abbey , which took place between 1078 and 1085 . Although only Hemming relates the course of the proceedings , the Chronicon Abbatiae de Evesham , or Evesham Chronicle , also gives background information on the dispute . The litigation involved lands that the abbey held in Hampton and <unk> in Worcestershire , but that the diocese maintained were actually part of one of the bishopric 's manors . Ownership became disputed under the abbacy of Æthelwig , when the abbot managed to acquire the allegiance of a number of the new owners of lands previously held from the diocese . After Æthelwig 's death , most of these lands passed to Odo of Bayeux , but Evesham managed to retain Hampton and <unk> , which became the basis of the dispute . The lawsuit was complicated because part of the land had been granted by an earlier bishop , Beorhtheah , to a kinsman , Azur . After the Conquest , Azur 's lands were given to Urse d 'Abetot , the Sheriff of Worcester . Following Æthelwig 's death , Wulfstan was able to secure a settlement with Æthelwig 's successor Walter . The settlement , which was concluded in 1086 , granted the lands to the abbey , but the diocese was the overlord of the lands , for which the abbey owed military service . 
 = = = Contents of the manuscript = = = 
 A brief overview of the contents of the manuscript follows , with the main sectioning and a general idea of the contents of each section . 
 = = Manuscript and publication history = = 
 The only other 11th @-@ century cartulary surviving from England is the Oswald cartulary , also compiled at Worcester . Historian M. T. Clanchy has suggested that the form English cartularies took may have originated at Worcester , although fellow historian Robin Fleming has argued that Christ Church Canterbury 's surviving cartulary is also an 11th @-@ century compilation . Who owned the manuscript after it left Worcester Cathedral Priory , presumably with the Dissolution of the Monasteries in the 1540s , is unknown , but the manuscript was in the possession of Robert Cotton by 1612 , when it is recorded as being loaned by Cotton to Arthur <unk> . There are annotations in the manuscript by John Joscelyn , who was secretary to Matthew Parker ( d . 1575 ) , the Elizabethan Archbishop of Canterbury , but whether Parker owned the manuscript is uncertain . The manuscript thus became part of the Cotton library , which passed into public ownership in 1702 on the death of Cotton 's grandson on the basis of an act of Parliament of 1701 . The manuscript itself is now part of the British Library 's holdings . 
 The manuscript was originally published in 1723 as <unk> <unk> <unk> Wigorniensis , in two volumes edited by Thomas Hearne . This was part of the Chronica Anglia series put out between 1709 and 1735 , which included many chronicles and records in 20 volumes . Hearne printed his edition from a transcription made for the antiquary Richard Graves . This transcript , known as MS Rawlinson <unk> , is not a completely accurate transcription of the Cotton Tiberius manuscript , as some items were omitted , and marginalia were not always transcribed . There were also some additions of decorations . 
 The entire manuscript of Cotton Tiberius A xiii is catalogued as number 366 in Helmut <unk> 's work <unk> of Anglo @-@ Saxon Manuscripts . A new critical edition by David Dumville is forthcoming as of 2010 . 
 = Buena Vista Social Club = 
 The Buena Vista Social Club was a members ' club in Havana , Cuba , that closed in the 1940s , as well as a 1990s band , a 1997 album , a 1999 film , and an unofficial brand name representing the musical spirit of the original Havana club . 
 The original Buena Vista Social Club held dances and musical activities , becoming a popular location for musicians to meet and play during the 1940s . In the 1990s , nearly 50 years after the club was closed , it inspired a recording made by Cuban musician Juan de Marcos González and American guitarist Ry Cooder with traditional Cuban musicians , some of whom were veterans who had performed at the club during the height of its popularity . 
 The recording , named Buena Vista Social Club after the Havana institution , became an international success , and the ensemble was encouraged to perform with a full line @-@ up in Amsterdam in April 1998 ( two nights ) . German director Wim Wenders captured the performance on film and the one that followed on the 1st of July 1998 in Carnegie Hall , New York City for a documentary — also called Buena Vista Social Club — that included interviews with the musicians conducted in Havana . Wenders ' film was released on 4 June 1999 to critical acclaim , receiving an Academy Award nomination for Best Documentary feature and winning numerous accolades including Best Documentary at the European Film Awards . 
 The success of both the album and film sparked a revival of international interest in traditional Cuban music and Latin American music in general . Some of the Cuban performers later released well @-@ received solo albums and recorded collaborations with international stars from different musical genres . The " Buena Vista Social Club " name became an umbrella term to describe these performances and releases , and has been likened to a brand label that encapsulates Cuba 's " musical golden age " between the 1930s and 1950s . The new success was fleeting for the most recognizable artists in the ensemble : Compay Segundo , Rubén González , and Ibrahim Ferrer , who died at the ages of ninety @-@ five , eighty @-@ four , and seventy @-@ eight respectively ; Segundo and González in 2003 , then Ferrer in 2005 . 
 Several surviving members of the Buena Vista Social Club , such as trumpeter Manuel " Guajiro " Mirabal , laúd player Barbarito Torres and trombonist and conductor Jesus " <unk> " Ramos currently tour worldwide , to popular acclaim , with new members such as the singer Carlos <unk> , virtuoso pianist Rolando Luna and occasionally the solo singer Omara Portuondo , as part of a 13 @-@ member band called Orquesta Buena Vista Social Club . 
 = = Social club = = 
 The Buena Vista Social Club was a members @-@ only club located in the populous Marianao neighborhood , in Cuba 's capital Havana . Buena Vista means " good view " in Spanish . According to Juan Cruz , a former master of ceremonies at the Salon Rosado Benny Moré nightclub in Havana , the club was located " on Calle 41 between 46 and 48 " . When musicians Ry Cooder , Compay Segundo and a film crew attempted to identify the location of the club in the 1990s , local people could not agree on where it had stood . 
 The club was run along the lines of a Cabildo , a community <unk> ( fraternity or guild ) dating back to Spanish colonialism . Cabildos in Cuba developed into Sociedades de Color , social clubs whose membership was determined by ethnicity , at a time when slavery and racial discrimination against Afro @-@ Cubans was institutionalized . Sociedades de Negros ( Black Societies ) existed throughout Cuba , and Havana boasted a number of closely linked organizations including the Marianao Social Club , Union Fraternal , Club <unk> — whose members included doctors and engineers — and the Buena Vista Social Club itself . 
 According to American guitarist Ry Cooder , 
 Society in Cuba and in the Caribbean including New Orleans , as far as I know , was organized around these fraternal social clubs . There were clubs of cigar wrappers , clubs for baseball players and they 'd play sports and cards — whatever it is they did in their club — and they had mascots , like dogs . At the Buena Vista Social Club , musicians went there to hang out with each other , like they used to do at musicians ' unions in the U.S. , and they 'd have dances and activities . 
 Prominent musicians who performed at the club during the 1930s and 1940s include bassist Cachao López and bandleader Arsenio Rodríguez . Rodríguez 's pianist Rubén González , who played piano on the 1990s recordings , described the 1940s as " an era of real musical life in Cuba , where there was very little money to earn , but everyone played because they really wanted to " . The era saw the birth of the jazz @-@ influenced mambo , the <unk> , and dance forms such as the <unk> and the cha @-@ cha @-@ cha , as well as the continued development of traditional Afro @-@ Cuban musical styles such as rumba and son , the latter transformed with the use of additional instruments by Arsenio Rodríguez to become son <unk> . Son , described as " the bedrock of Cuban music " , has shaped much of twentieth @-@ century Latin music , and had a strong impact on popular music , not only in Latin America , but also in the United States during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries . 
 = = Closure of musical venues and changing traditions = = 
 Shortly after the Cuban Revolution of 1959 , newly elected Cuban President Manuel Urrutia Lleó , a devout Christian and liberal , began a program of closing gambling outlets , nightclubs , and other establishments associated with Havana 's hedonistic lifestyle . This had an immediate impact on the livelihoods of local entertainers . As the Cuban government rapidly shifted towards the left in an effort to build a " classless and <unk> society " , it struggled to define policy toward forms of cultural expression in the black community ; expressions which had implicitly emphasized cultural differences . Consequently , the cultural and social centers were abolished , including the Afro @-@ Cuban mutual aid Sociedades de Color in 1962 , to make way for racially integrated societies . Private festivities were limited to weekend parties and organizers ' funds were confiscated . The measures meant the closure of the Buena Vista Social Club . Although the Cuban government continued to support traditional music after the revolution , certain favor was given to the politically charged nueva <unk> , and poetic singer @-@ songwriters such as Silvio Rodríguez and Pablo <unk> . The emergence of pop music and salsa , a style derived from Cuban music but developed in the United States , meant that son music became even less common . 
 Cuban music experienced quite radical change in the 1960s , as National Geographic notes : 
 Cuban dance music also witnessed dramatic change beginning in the late 1960s , as groups explored the fusion of Cuban son with American rock , jazz and funk styles . Groups such as Los Van Van and <unk> established modern forms of Cuban music , paving the way for new rhythms and dances to emerge as well as fresh concepts in instrumentation . ... Cuba 's dance music had already inspired a change from the older son @-@ style dances , as younger Cubans broke free of step @-@ oriented dances ... 
 The occurrence of these closures and the change in traditions is the simplest explanation of why many musicians were out of work , and why their style of music had declined before the Buena Vista Social Club made it popular again . 
 = = Album = = 
 In 1996 , American guitarist Ry Cooder had been invited to Havana by British world music producer Nick Gold of World Circuit Records to record a session where two African High @-@ life musicians from Mali were to collaborate with Cuban musicians . On Cooder 's arrival ( via Mexico to avoid the ongoing U.S. trade and travel embargo against Cuba ) , it transpired that the musicians from Mali had not received their visas and were unable to travel to Havana . Cooder and Gold changed their plans and decided to record an album of Cuban son music with local musicians . 
 Already on board the African collaboration project were Cuban musicians including bassist Orlando " Cachaíto " López , guitarist Eliades Ochoa and musical director Juan de Marcos González , who had himself been organizing a similar project for the Afro @-@ Cuban All Stars . A search for additional musicians led the team to singer Manuel " <unk> " Licea , pianist Rubén González and octogenarian singer Compay Segundo , who all agreed to record for the project . 
 Within three days of the project 's birth , Cooder , Gold and de Marcos had organized a large group of performers and arranged for recording sessions to commence at Havana 's <unk> Studios , formerly owned by RCA records , where the equipment and atmosphere had remained unchanged since the 1950s . Communication between the Spanish and English speakers at the studio was conducted via an interpreter , although Cooder reflected that " musicians understand each other through means other than speaking " . 
 The album was recorded in just six days and contained fourteen tracks ; opening with " Chan Chan " written by Compay Segundo , a four chord son that was to become what Cooder described as " the Buena Vista 's calling card " ; and ending with a rendition of " La <unk> " , a traditional Cuban patriotic song ( not to be confused with the Cuban national anthem of the same name ) . The sessions also produced material for the subsequent release , Introducing ... Rubén González , which showcased the work of the Cuban pianist . 
 One of the songs that featured on the album was " Buena Vista Social Club " , a song written by Orestes López , the father of bass player " Cachaíto . " The song spotlighted the piano work of Rubén González and it was recorded after Cooder heard González improvising around the tune 's musical theme before a day 's recording session . After playing the piece , González explained to Cooder the history of the social club and that the song was the club 's " mascot tune " . When searching for a name for the overall project , manager Nick Gold chose the song 's title . According to Cooder , 
 It should be the thing that sets it apart . It was a kind of club by then . Everybody was hanging out and we had rum and coffee around two in the afternoon . It felt like a club , so let 's call it that . That 's what gave it a handle . 
 Upon release on 17 September 1997 , the CD became a huge " word of mouth hit " , far beyond that of most world music releases . It sold more than five million copies and won a Grammy award in 1998 . In 2003 it was listed by the New York @-@ based Rolling Stone magazine as # 260 in The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . 
 = = Musicians = = 
 A total of twenty musicians contributed to the recording including Ry Cooder 's son Joachim Cooder , ( b . 1978 ) who at the time was a 19 @-@ year @-@ old scholar of Latin percussion and provided drums for the band . Ry Cooder himself played slide guitar on several songs and helped produce and mix the album , afterwards describing the sessions as " the greatest musical experience of my life " . Ry Cooder had been a successful American guitarist since the 1960s , recording with Captain Beefheart and the Rolling Stones . Known for his slide guitar work , his interest in roots music led him to record music from diverse genres including Tex @-@ Mex , Hawaiian and <unk> throat singing . He was later prosecuted and fined $ 25 @,@ 000 by U.S. authorities for his work on the Buena Vista Social Club , having broken the Trading with the Enemy Act , a clause that forms part of the ongoing United States embargo . 
 Many of the Cuban musicians who featured on the album were at their musical prime in the 1940s and 1950s . After the success of the 1997 record they became known in Cuba as " Los <unk> " ( the Super @-@ <unk> ) . Juan de Marcos González , a Cuban folk revivalist who was younger than the bulk of performers introduced Cooder to veteran singer Ibrahim Ferrer . Ferrer ( 1927 – 2005 ) had been lead vocalist for bandleader <unk> Alonso , and also sang for Beny Moré , Cuba 's most prominent performer in the 1940s , before his soft singing style fell out of fashion . Having found the semi @-@ retired seventy @-@ year @-@ old Ferrer taking his daily stroll on the streets of Havana and shining shoes for extra money , González signed him up for the project . Cooder later described the discovery as something that happens " perhaps once in your life " , and Ferrer as " the Cuban Nat King Cole " . Ferrer became a prominent member of the group , and the success of the record was attributed in part to the popularity of his vocal performances . The singer went on to record a number of successful solo albums and performed with contemporary acts such as the Gorillaz before his death in 2005 at the age of 78 . 
 Virtuoso pianist Rubén González ( 1919 – 2003 ) also had further success releasing two solo albums after working on the initial project . González was a pianist for bandleader Arsenio Rodríguez in the 1940s , and is attributed with helping establish Cuban piano styles that were to dominate Latin music for the remainder of the century . Despite suffering from arthritis and not even owning a piano at the time of recording with Cooder , ( due to an infestation of termites whilst living in South America ) the American guitarist described him as " the greatest piano soloist I have ever heard " . After the success of the 1997 record , González recorded and toured with bassist Orlando " Cachaíto " López , who was the only musician to play on all of the songs on the Buena Vista Social Club album . " Cachaito " ( 1933 – 2009 ) was the son of multi @-@ instrumentalist Orestes López and the nephew of fellow bassist Israel " Cachao " López , the brothers often attributed with inventing the mambo . Named after his prestigious uncle , " Cachaito " ( little Cachao ) was a leading <unk> musician in the 1950s and 1960s , a musical form that takes its influence from modern jazz , and he became the ever present bassist at Buena Vista Social Club performances and recordings . 
 One of the first to come on board the project was Compay Segundo ( born Máximo Francisco <unk> Muñoz ) ( 1907 – 2003 ) , who at 89 years old was the oldest of the performers . During a discussion about politics , the veteran Segundo said : " Politics ? This new guy [ Fidel Castro ] is good . The 1930s were rough . That 's when we had the really bad times . " 
 Segundo was an accomplished guitarist and tres player who started his career playing with established bands of the 1920s and 1930s . In the 1940s , he gained fame as one half of the Los <unk> duo , and then formed Los Muchachos , a band that he led until his death in 2003 . For the Buena Vista Social Club recording and performances , Segundo played a unique seven @-@ stringed instrument , a hybrid between a guitar and a tres , which he devised himself and called an <unk> . He also sang , mostly doing background vocals , in a number of songs in his baritone voice , including the self @-@ penned opening track , Chan Chan , with Eliades Ochoa as the leading voice . Cowboy hat wearing Eliades Ochoa ( b . 1946 ) , who had collaborated previously with Segundo and was a well established traditional Cuban folk performer , played guitar and sang for the group . Omara Portuondo ( b . 1930 ) , a bolero singer and the only female in the collective , sang " <unk> Años " on the record and duetted with Segundo and Ibrahim Ferrer during live performances . 
 Other performers included singer Pío Leyva ( 1917 – 2006 ) who had been working with Segundo since the early 1950s , and fellow and singer Manuel " <unk> " Licea ( 1927 – 2000 ) , who had performed with Celia Cruz and Benny Moré . Additional improvised percussion was provided by Amadito Valdés and Carlos González . The youngest established member of the group was Barbarito Torres , ( b . 1956 ) a virtuoso player of the laúd , a Cuban offshoot of the lute . Trumpet was provided by Manuel " Guajiro " Mirabal , ( b . 1933 ) who went on to release solo records under the Buena Vista presents ... title . 
 = = Film = = 
 Shortly after returning from Havana to record the Buena Vista Social Club album , Ry Cooder began working with German film director Wim Wenders on the soundtrack to Wenders ' film The End of Violence , the third such collaboration between the two artists . According to Wenders , it was an effort to force Cooder to focus on the project , " He always sort of looked in the distance and smiled , and I knew he was back in Havana . " Although Wenders knew nothing about Cuban music at the time , he became enthused by tapes of the Havana sessions provided by Cooder , and agreed to travel to the island to film the recording of Buena Vista Social Club Presents : Ibrahim Ferrer , the singer 's first solo album , in 1998 . 
 Wenders filmed the recording sessions on the recently enhanced format Digital Video with the help of cinematographer Robert Müller , and then shot interviews with each " Buena Vista " ensemble member in different Havana locations . Wenders was also present to film the group 's first performance with a full line @-@ up in Amsterdam in April 1998 ( two nights ) and a second time in Carnegie Hall , New York City on the 1st of July 1998 . 
 The completed documentary was released on 17 September 1999 , and included scenes in New York of the Cubans , some of whom had never left the island , window shopping and visiting tourist sites . According to Sight & Sound magazine , these scenes of " innocents abroad " were the film 's most moving moments , as the contrasts between societies of Havana and New York become evident on the faces of the performers . Ferrer , from an impoverished background and staunchly anti consumerist , was shown describing the city as " beautiful " and finding the experience overwhelming . Upon completion of filming , Wenders felt that the film " didn 't feel really like it was a documentary anymore . It felt like it was a true character piece " . 
 The film became a box office success , grossing $ 23 @,@ 002 @,@ 182 worldwide . Critics were generally enthusiastic about the story and especially the music , although leading U.S. film critic Roger Ebert and the British Film Institute 's Peter Curran felt that Wenders had lingered too long on Cooder during the performances ; and the editing , which interspersed interviews with music , had disrupted the continuity of the songs . The film was nominated for an Academy Award for best documentary feature in 1999 . It won best documentary at the European Film Awards and received seventeen other major accolades internationally . 
 = = Performances = = 
 The first performances by the full line up of " Buena Vista Social Club " , including Cooder , were those filmed by Wenders in Amsterdam and New York . Other international shows and T.V. appearances soon followed with varying line ups . Ibrahim Ferrer and Rubén González performed together in Los Angeles in 1998 to an audience that included Alanis Morissette , Sean Combs , and Jennifer Lopez , Ferrer dedicating the song Mami Me Gusto to the Hispanic Lopez . 
 Performances in Florida , which has a large Cuban exile and Cuban American community , were rare after the release of the film due to the political climate . In the late 1990s , a concert by Cuban jazz pianist Gonzalo Rubalcaba turned into a near riot when concert goers were attacked and spat at by protesters opposed to the Cuban government . When " Buena Vista " musicians played for a music industry conference at Miami Beach in 1998 , hundreds of protesters chanted outside and the convention center hall was cleared briefly because of a bomb threat . In 1999 , Ferrer and Ruben González were forced to cancel Miami shows citing fears for their safety after fellow @-@ Cubans Los Van Van drew 4 @,@ 000 protesters at a previous show , and Compay Segundo was forced to cut short a 1999 Miami performance due to another bomb threat . When touring the U.S. , the Cubans are only entitled to their per diem ( transportation and lodging ) and are not permitted performance fees due to the U.S. embargo . In 2001 a Buena Vista Social Club ( with Ibrahim Ferrer ) performance was recorded in Austin for PBS and broadcast on Austin City Limits in 2002 . 
 " Buena Vista Social Club " continue to tour throughout the world as Orquesta Buena Vista Social Club , and despite the deaths of six of the original members , the collective performs with many of the remaining ensemble members including Barbarito Torres and " Guajiro " Mirabal . Ry Cooder 's guitar parts are handled by Manuel Galbán , a former member of Cuban vocal group Los <unk> , who played on Ibrahim Ferrer 's first solo record with Cooder and appeared in Wim Wenders ' film . Following a 2007 performance in London , a reviewer at The Independent described the ensemble as " something of an anomaly in music business terms , due to their changing line @-@ up and the fact that they 've never really had one defining front person " , adding , " It 's hard to know what to expect from what is more of a brand than a band . " 
 = = Impact and analysis = = 
 The international success of the Buena Vista Social Club generated a revival of interest in traditional Cuban music and Latin American music as a whole . Musical director Juan de Marcos felt that the recordings serve " as a symbol of the power of Cuban music , and which to a certain degree have contributed to Cuban music regaining the status it always had in Latin American and world music . " 
 Cuba 's burgeoning tourist industry of the late 1990s benefited from this rebirth of interest . According to The Economist , " In the tourist quarters of Old Havana it can seem at times as if every Cuban with a guitar has come out to sing the songs that Buena Vista made famous . It 's as if you were to go to Liverpool and find bands singing Beatles songs on every street corner . " The songs Buena Vista sings are often not their own compositions . Some songs they sing have long been popular in Cuba and people have always performed them in the street . Despite the appeal of the " Buena Vista " ambience to tourists , Cubans themselves were less aware of the " Buena Vista Social Club " than international music listeners . This was due to the foreign nature of the production , and the dominance of modern Timba , <unk> and other musical forms on the island , such as reggaetón by luminaries such as Raul Zeballos , the creator of the genre . Some explain that Buena Vista did not impact the Cuban audience , as they were not creating anything new ; they were just playing the same songs that Cubans know and have been playing for many years . 
 Mari Marques , a Cuban American who leads cultural tours to Cuba , contests that the preponderance of traditional musicians was not solely a consequence of the " Buena Vista Social Club " . Marques believes the notion that some music had been completely neglected in Cuba is " a romantic exaggeration that was propagated by U.S. media coverage " , and the reality is that son trios have existed " everywhere in cities such as Santiago de Cuba in the east of the island . " British world music record label Tumi Music , who had worked with de Marcos and many of the ensemble musicians prior to Cooder , asserted that Cuba has over 50 @,@ 000 musicians , all as good as , and some as old as the " Buena Vista " participants , " but these people hardly ever have the opportunity to share their talents with the outside world . " The label lamented that , " for the West to pay any real attention and consume the product , you needed someone like Ry Cooder to give it a stamp of approval first . " 
 Writer and academic Mike Gonzalez believes the ensemble provoked a backward glance to " timeless , sensual places where dreams and desire merged in a comfortable , evocative music " . Gonzalez asserts that the aura evoked did not represent " the real Cuba " before the revolution of 1959 , nor Cuba in the modern era , but that the Cuban government were happy for the tourist industry to " enjoy the fruits of this confusion " . The American Historical Review suggested that the Buena Vista Social Club 's mise en scène fueled nostalgic , idealistic feelings not only of many Americans and Cubans in the United States who remember the Havana of the 1950s , but also of Cubans in Cuba . The result was a reminiscence about the pre @-@ revolutionary era — dominated by the politics of Gerardo Machado in the 1920s – 30s and then General Fulgencio Batista until 1959 — which " no longer seems so bad " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Buena Vista Social Club albums = = = 
 Buena Vista Social Club ( 16 September 1997 ) World Circuit / Nonesuch Records 
 Buena Vista Social Club at Carnegie Hall ( 14 October 2008 ) World Circuit / Nonesuch Records ( live album ) 
 Lost and Found ( 23 March 2015 ) World Circuit / Nonesuch Records ( collection of previously unreleased tracks ) 
 = = = Other releases = = = 
 = = = = Solo albums = = = = 
 The below discography includes solo albums released since the first Buena Vista Social Club album that feature the musicians in the ensemble , and that are considered to be under the " Buena Vista Social Club " aegis . 
 Rubén González 
 Introducing ... Rubén González ( 17 September 1997 ) . Elektra / Asylum . ( Guest Musicians include Ry Cooder , Manuel Galbán , Orlando " Cachaito " Lopez and Manuel " El Guajiro " Mirabal . ) 
 <unk> ( 17 September 2000 ) . Elektra . ( Guest musicians include Joachim Cooder , Eliades Ochoa , Ibrahim Ferrer and Amadito Valdés . ) 
 Barbarito Torres 
 Havana Cafe ( 6 April 1999 ) . Atlantic Records . ( Guest musicians include Manuel " El Guajiro " Mirabal , Ibrahim Ferrer , Pío Leyva and Omara Portuondo . ) 
 Ibrahim Ferrer 
 Buena Vista Social Club Presents : Ibrahim Ferrer ( 8 June 1999 ) . World Circuit / Nonesuch Records . ( Guest Musicians include Rubén González , Ry Cooder , Manuel Galbán , and Orlando " Cachaito " Lopez . ) 
 Buenos Hermanos ( 18 March 2003 ) . Nonesuch Records . ( Guest musicians include Ry Cooder , Manuel Galbán , and Orlando " Cachaito " Lopez . ) 
 Mi Sueño ( 26 March 2007 ) . World Circuit . ( Guest musicians include Orlando " Cachaíto " López , Manuel Galbán , Rubén González , Manuel " Guajiro " Mirabal , Omara Portuondo , Amadito Valdés . ) 
 Eliades Ochoa 
 Sublime Illusion ( 29 June 1999 ) . Higher Octave . ( Guest musicians include Ry Cooder . ) 
 Omara Portuondo 
 Buena Vista Social Club Presents : Omara Portuondo ( 25 April 2000 ) . World Circuit / Nonesuch Records . ( Guest musicians include Pío Leyva , Rubén González , Orlando " Cachaito " Lopez , Eliades Ochoa , Compay Segundo and Amadito Valdés . ) 
 Flor de Amor ( 25 May 2004 ) . World Circuit / Nonesuch Records . ( Guest musicians include Barbarito Torres , Orlando " Cachaito " Lopez and Manuel Galbán . ) 
 Orlando " Cachaíto " López 
 Cachaito ( 22 May 2001 ) . Elektra / Asylum . ( Guest musicians include Juan de Marcos González , Amadito Valdés and Ibrahim Ferrer . ) 
 Amadito Valdés 
 <unk> Gervasio ( 10 December 2002 ) . <unk> Records . ( Guest musicians include Barbarito Torres . ) 
 Manuel " Guajiro " Mirabal 
 Buena Vista Social Club Presents : Manuel " Guajiro " Mirabal ( 4 January 2005 ) . Nonesuch Records . ( Guest musicians include Ibrahim Ferrer , Pío Leyva , Orlando " Cachaito " Lopez , Omara Portuondo , Juan de Marcos González and Manuel Galbán . ) 
 = = = = Various artists = = = = 
 Rhythms del Mundo : Cuba ( 14 November 2006 ) . Hip @-@ O ( musicians include Ibrahim Ferrer , Orlando " Cachaito " Lopez , Barbarito Torres , Amadito Valdés , Omara Portuondo performing alongside Coldplay , Arctic Monkeys , Dido , Quincy Jones , Kaiser Chiefs , Radiohead , U2 and Jack Johnson . ) 
 = Quark = 
 A quark ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) is an elementary particle and a fundamental constituent of matter . Quarks combine to form composite particles called hadrons , the most stable of which are protons and neutrons , the components of atomic nuclei . Due to a phenomenon known as color confinement , quarks are never directly observed or found in isolation ; they can be found only within hadrons , such as baryons ( of which protons and neutrons are examples ) , and mesons . For this reason , much of what is known about quarks has been drawn from observations of the hadrons themselves . 
 Quarks have various intrinsic properties , including electric charge , mass , color charge and spin . Quarks are the only elementary particles in the Standard Model of particle physics to experience all four fundamental interactions , also known as fundamental forces ( electromagnetism , gravitation , strong interaction , and weak interaction ) , as well as the only known particles whose electric charges are not integer multiples of the elementary charge . 
 There are six types of quarks , known as flavors : up , down , strange , charm , top , and bottom . Up and down quarks have the lowest masses of all quarks . The heavier quarks rapidly change into up and down quarks through a process of particle decay : the transformation from a higher mass state to a lower mass state . Because of this , up and down quarks are generally stable and the most common in the universe , whereas strange , charm , bottom , and top quarks can only be produced in high energy collisions ( such as those involving cosmic rays and in particle accelerators ) . For every quark flavor there is a corresponding type of antiparticle , known as an antiquark , that differs from the quark only in that some of its properties have equal magnitude but opposite sign . 
 The quark model was independently proposed by physicists Murray Gell @-@ Mann and George Zweig in 1964 . Quarks were introduced as parts of an ordering scheme for hadrons , and there was little evidence for their physical existence until deep inelastic scattering experiments at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center in 1968 . Accelerator experiments have provided evidence for all six flavors . The top quark was the last to be discovered at Fermilab in 1995 . 
 = = Classification = = 
 The Standard Model is the theoretical framework describing all the currently known elementary particles . This model contains six flavors of quarks ( q ) , named up ( u ) , down ( d ) , strange ( s ) , charm ( c ) , bottom ( b ) , and top ( t ) . <unk> of quarks are called antiquarks , and are denoted by a bar over the symbol for the corresponding quark , such as u for an up antiquark . As with antimatter in general , antiquarks have the same mass , mean lifetime , and spin as their respective quarks , but the electric charge and other charges have the opposite sign . 
 Quarks are spin @-@ 1 ⁄ 2 particles , implying that they are fermions according to the spin @-@ statistics theorem . They are subject to the Pauli exclusion principle , which states that no two identical fermions can simultaneously occupy the same quantum state . This is in contrast to bosons ( particles with integer spin ) , any number of which can be in the same state . Unlike leptons , quarks possess color charge , which causes them to engage in the strong interaction . The resulting attraction between different quarks causes the formation of composite particles known as hadrons ( see " Strong interaction and color charge " below ) . 
 The quarks which determine the quantum numbers of hadrons are called valence quarks ; apart from these , any hadron may contain an indefinite number of virtual ( or sea ) quarks , antiquarks , and gluons which do not influence its quantum numbers . There are two families of hadrons : baryons , with three valence quarks , and mesons , with a valence quark and an antiquark . The most common baryons are the proton and the neutron , the building blocks of the atomic nucleus . A great number of hadrons are known ( see list of baryons and list of mesons ) , most of them differentiated by their quark content and the properties these constituent quarks confer . The existence of " exotic " hadrons with more valence quarks , such as <unk> ( <unk> ) and <unk> ( <unk> ) , has been conjectured but not proven . However , on 13 July 2015 , the <unk> collaboration at CERN reported results consistent with <unk> states . 
 Elementary fermions are grouped into three generations , each comprising two leptons and two quarks . The first generation includes up and down quarks , the second strange and charm quarks , and the third bottom and top quarks . All searches for a fourth generation of quarks and other elementary fermions have failed , and there is strong indirect evidence that no more than three generations exist . Particles in higher generations generally have greater mass and less stability , causing them to decay into lower @-@ generation particles by means of weak interactions . Only first @-@ generation ( up and down ) quarks occur commonly in nature . Heavier quarks can only be created in high @-@ energy collisions ( such as in those involving cosmic rays ) , and decay quickly ; however , they are thought to have been present during the first fractions of a second after the Big Bang , when the universe was in an extremely hot and dense phase ( the quark epoch ) . Studies of heavier quarks are conducted in artificially created conditions , such as in particle accelerators . 
 Having electric charge , mass , color charge , and flavor , quarks are the only known elementary particles that engage in all four fundamental interactions of contemporary physics : electromagnetism , gravitation , strong interaction , and weak interaction . Gravitation is too weak to be relevant to individual particle interactions except at extremes of energy ( Planck energy ) and distance scales ( Planck distance ) . However , since no successful quantum theory of gravity exists , gravitation is not described by the Standard Model . 
 See the table of properties below for a more complete overview of the six quark flavors ' properties . 
 = = History = = 
 The quark model was independently proposed by physicists Murray Gell @-@ Mann ( pictured ) and George Zweig in 1964 . The proposal came shortly after Gell @-@ Mann 's 1961 formulation of a particle classification system known as the Eightfold Way — or , in more technical terms , SU ( 3 ) flavor symmetry . Physicist Yuval Ne <unk> had independently developed a scheme similar to the Eightfold Way in the same year . 
 At the time of the quark theory 's inception , the " particle zoo " included , amongst other particles , a multitude of hadrons . Gell @-@ Mann and Zweig posited that they were not elementary particles , but were instead composed of combinations of quarks and antiquarks . Their model involved three flavors of quarks , up , down , and strange , to which they ascribed properties such as spin and electric charge . The initial reaction of the physics community to the proposal was mixed . There was particular contention about whether the quark was a physical entity or a mere abstraction used to explain concepts that were not fully understood at the time . 
 In less than a year , extensions to the Gell @-@ Mann – Zweig model were proposed . Sheldon Lee Glashow and James <unk> predicted the existence of a fourth flavor of quark , which they called charm . The addition was proposed because it allowed for a better description of the weak interaction ( the mechanism that allows quarks to decay ) , equalized the number of known quarks with the number of known leptons , and implied a mass formula that correctly reproduced the masses of the known mesons . 
 In 1968 , deep inelastic scattering experiments at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center ( SLAC ) showed that the proton contained much smaller , point @-@ like objects and was therefore not an elementary particle . Physicists were reluctant to firmly identify these objects with quarks at the time , instead calling them " <unk> " — a term coined by Richard Feynman . The objects that were observed at SLAC would later be identified as up and down quarks as the other flavors were discovered . Nevertheless , " <unk> " remains in use as a collective term for the constituents of hadrons ( quarks , antiquarks , and gluons ) . 
 The strange quark 's existence was indirectly validated by SLAC 's scattering experiments : not only was it a necessary component of Gell @-@ Mann and Zweig 's three @-@ quark model , but it provided an explanation for the kaon ( K ) and pion ( π ) hadrons discovered in cosmic rays in 1947 . 
 In a 1970 paper , Glashow , John <unk> and Luciano <unk> presented the so @-@ called <unk> mechanism to explain the experimental non @-@ observation of flavor @-@ changing neutral currents . This theoretical model required the existence of the as @-@ yet undiscovered charm quark . The number of supposed quark flavors grew to the current six in 1973 , when Makoto Kobayashi and Toshihide Maskawa noted that the experimental observation of CP violation could be explained if there were another pair of quarks . 
 Charm quarks were produced almost simultaneously by two teams in November 1974 ( see November Revolution ) — one at SLAC under Burton Richter , and one at Brookhaven National Laboratory under Samuel Ting . The charm quarks were observed bound with charm antiquarks in mesons . The two parties had assigned the discovered meson two different symbols , J and ψ ; thus , it became formally known as the J / ψ meson . The discovery finally convinced the physics community of the quark model 's validity . 
 In the following years a number of suggestions appeared for extending the quark model to six quarks . Of these , the 1975 paper by Haim Harari was the first to coin the terms top and bottom for the additional quarks . 
 In 1977 , the bottom quark was observed by a team at Fermilab led by Leon Lederman . This was a strong indicator of the top quark 's existence : without the top quark , the bottom quark would have been without a partner . However , it was not until 1995 that the top quark was finally observed , also by the CDF and <unk> teams at Fermilab . It had a mass much larger than had been previously expected , almost as large as that of a gold atom . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 For some time , Gell @-@ Mann was undecided on an actual spelling for the term he intended to coin , until he found the word quark in James Joyce 's book Finnegans Wake : 
 Gell @-@ Mann went into further detail regarding the name of the quark in his book The Quark and the Jaguar : 
 In 1963 , when I assigned the name " quark " to the fundamental constituents of the nucleon , I had the sound first , without the spelling , which could have been " kwork " . Then , in one of my occasional <unk> of Finnegans Wake , by James Joyce , I came across the word " quark " in the phrase " Three quarks for Muster Mark " . Since " quark " ( meaning , for one thing , the cry of the gull ) was clearly intended to rhyme with " Mark " , as well as " bark " and other such words , I had to find an excuse to pronounce it as " kwork " . But the book represents the dream of a publican named Humphrey Chimpden Earwicker . Words in the text are typically drawn from several sources at once , like the " portmanteau " words in Through the Looking @-@ Glass . From time to time , phrases occur in the book that are partially determined by calls for drinks at the bar . I argued , therefore , that perhaps one of the multiple sources of the cry " Three quarks for Muster Mark " might be " Three quarts for Mister Mark " , in which case the pronunciation " kwork " would not be totally unjustified . In any case , the number three fitted perfectly the way quarks occur in nature . 
 Zweig preferred the name ace for the particle he had theorized , but Gell @-@ Mann 's terminology came to prominence once the quark model had been commonly accepted . 
 The quark flavors were given their names for several reasons . The up and down quarks are named after the up and down components of isospin , which they carry . Strange quarks were given their name because they were discovered to be components of the strange particles discovered in cosmic rays years before the quark model was proposed ; these particles were deemed " strange " because they had unusually long lifetimes . Glashow , who <unk> charm quark with <unk> , is quoted as saying , " We called our construct the ' charmed quark ' , for we were fascinated and pleased by the symmetry it brought to the subnuclear world . " The names " bottom " and " top " , coined by Harari , were chosen because they are " logical partners for up and down quarks " . In the past , bottom and top quarks were sometimes referred to as " beauty " and " truth " respectively , but these names have somewhat fallen out of use . While " truth " never did catch on , accelerator complexes devoted to massive production of bottom quarks are sometimes called " beauty factories " . 
 = = Properties = = 
 = = = Electric charge = = = 
