 Quarks have fractional electric charge values – either 1 ⁄ 3 or 2 ⁄ 3 times the elementary charge ( e ) , depending on flavor . Up , charm , and top quarks ( collectively referred to as up @-@ type quarks ) have a charge of + 2 ⁄ 3 e , while down , strange , and bottom quarks ( down @-@ type quarks ) have − 1 ⁄ 3 e . <unk> have the opposite charge to their corresponding quarks ; up @-@ type antiquarks have charges of − 2 ⁄ 3 e and down @-@ type antiquarks have charges of + 1 ⁄ 3 e . Since the electric charge of a hadron is the sum of the charges of the constituent quarks , all hadrons have integer charges : the combination of three quarks ( baryons ) , three antiquarks ( antibaryons ) , or a quark and an antiquark ( mesons ) always results in integer charges . For example , the hadron constituents of atomic nuclei , neutrons and protons , have charges of 0 e and + 1 e respectively ; the neutron is composed of two down quarks and one up quark , and the proton of two up quarks and one down quark . 
 = = = Spin = = = 
 Spin is an intrinsic property of elementary particles , and its direction is an important degree of freedom . It is sometimes visualized as the rotation of an object around its own axis ( hence the name " spin " ) , though this notion is somewhat misguided at subatomic scales because elementary particles are believed to be point @-@ like . 
 Spin can be represented by a vector whose length is measured in units of the reduced Planck constant ħ ( pronounced " h bar " ) . For quarks , a measurement of the spin vector component along any axis can only yield the values + ħ / 2 or − ħ / 2 ; for this reason quarks are classified as spin @-@ 1 ⁄ 2 particles . The component of spin along a given axis – by convention the z axis – is often denoted by an up arrow ↑ for the value + 1 ⁄ 2 and down arrow ↓ for the value − 1 ⁄ 2 , placed after the symbol for flavor . For example , an up quark with a spin of + 1 ⁄ 2 along the z axis is denoted by u ↑ . 
 = = = Weak interaction = = = 
 A quark of one flavor can transform into a quark of another flavor only through the weak interaction , one of the four fundamental interactions in particle physics . By absorbing or emitting a W boson , any up @-@ type quark ( up , charm , and top quarks ) can change into any down @-@ type quark ( down , strange , and bottom quarks ) and vice versa . This flavor transformation mechanism causes the radioactive process of beta decay , in which a neutron ( n ) " splits " into a proton ( p ) , an electron ( e − ) and an electron antineutrino ( ν 
 e ) ( see picture ) . This occurs when one of the down quarks in the neutron ( <unk> ) decays into an up quark by emitting a virtual W − boson , transforming the neutron into a proton ( <unk> ) . The W − boson then decays into an electron and an electron antineutrino . 
 Both beta decay and the inverse process of inverse beta decay are routinely used in medical applications such as positron emission tomography ( PET ) and in experiments involving neutrino detection . 
 While the process of flavor transformation is the same for all quarks , each quark has a preference to transform into the quark of its own generation . The relative tendencies of all flavor transformations are described by a mathematical table , called the Cabibbo – Kobayashi – Maskawa matrix ( CKM matrix ) . <unk> unitarity , the approximate magnitudes of the entries of the CKM matrix are : 
 <formula> 
 where <unk> represents the tendency of a quark of flavor i to change into a quark of flavor j ( or vice versa ) . 
 There exists an equivalent weak interaction matrix for leptons ( right side of the W boson on the above beta decay diagram ) , called the Pontecorvo – Maki – Nakagawa – Sakata matrix ( <unk> matrix ) . Together , the CKM and <unk> matrices describe all flavor transformations , but the links between the two are not yet clear . 
 = = = Strong interaction and color charge = = = 
 According to quantum chromodynamics ( QCD ) , quarks possess a property called color charge . There are three types of color charge , arbitrarily labeled blue , green , and red . Each of them is complemented by an anticolor – <unk> , antigreen , and <unk> . Every quark carries a color , while every antiquark carries an anticolor . 
 The system of attraction and repulsion between quarks charged with different combinations of the three colors is called strong interaction , which is mediated by force carrying particles known as gluons ; this is discussed at length below . The theory that describes strong interactions is called quantum chromodynamics ( QCD ) . A quark , which will have a single color value , can form a bound system with an antiquark carrying the corresponding anticolor . The result of two attracting quarks will be color neutrality : a quark with color charge ξ plus an antiquark with color charge − ξ will result in a color charge of 0 ( or " white " color ) and the formation of a meson . This is analogous to the additive color model in basic optics . Similarly , the combination of three quarks , each with different color charges , or three antiquarks , each with anticolor charges , will result in the same " white " color charge and the formation of a baryon or <unk> . 
 In modern particle physics , gauge symmetries – a kind of symmetry group – relate interactions between particles ( see gauge theories ) . Color SU ( 3 ) ( commonly abbreviated to SU ( 3 ) c ) is the gauge symmetry that relates the color charge in quarks and is the defining symmetry for quantum chromodynamics . Just as the laws of physics are independent of which directions in space are designated x , y , and z , and remain unchanged if the coordinate axes are rotated to a new orientation , the physics of quantum chromodynamics is independent of which directions in three @-@ dimensional color space are identified as blue , red , and green . SU ( 3 ) c color transformations correspond to " rotations " in color space ( which , mathematically speaking , is a complex space ) . Every quark flavor f , each with subtypes fB , <unk> , <unk> corresponding to the quark colors , forms a triplet : a three @-@ component quantum field which transforms under the fundamental representation of SU ( 3 ) c . The requirement that SU ( 3 ) c should be local – that is , that its transformations be allowed to vary with space and time – determines the properties of the strong interaction . In particular , it implies the existence of eight gluon types to act as its force carriers . 
 = = = Mass = = = 
 Two terms are used in referring to a quark 's mass : current quark mass refers to the mass of a quark by itself , while constituent quark mass refers to the current quark mass plus the mass of the gluon particle field surrounding the quark . These masses typically have very different values . Most of a hadron 's mass comes from the gluons that bind the constituent quarks together , rather than from the quarks themselves . While gluons are inherently massless , they possess energy – more specifically , quantum chromodynamics binding energy ( <unk> ) – and it is this that contributes so greatly to the overall mass of the hadron ( see mass in special relativity ) . For example , a proton has a mass of approximately 938 MeV / c2 , of which the rest mass of its three valence quarks only contributes about 9 MeV / c2 ; much of the remainder can be attributed to the field energy of the gluons . See Chiral symmetry breaking . 
 The Standard Model posits that elementary particles derive their masses from the Higgs mechanism , which is associated to the Higgs boson . It is hoped that further research into the reasons for the top quark 's large mass of ~ 173 GeV / c2 , almost the mass of a gold atom , might reveal more about the origin of the mass of quarks and other elementary particles . 
 = = = Table of properties = = = 
 The following table summarizes the key properties of the six quarks . Flavor quantum numbers ( isospin ( I3 ) , charm ( C ) , strangeness ( S , not to be confused with spin ) , topness ( T ) , and <unk> ( B ′ ) ) are assigned to certain quark flavors , and denote qualities of quark @-@ based systems and hadrons . The baryon number ( B ) is + 1 ⁄ 3 for all quarks , as baryons are made of three quarks . For antiquarks , the electric charge ( Q ) and all flavor quantum numbers ( B , I3 , C , S , T , and B ′ ) are of opposite sign . Mass and total angular momentum ( J ; equal to spin for point particles ) do not change sign for the antiquarks . 
 J 
 = total angular momentum , B = 
 baryon number , Q 
 = electric charge , I3 = 
 isospin , C 
 = charm , S = 
 strangeness , T 
 = topness , B ′ = 
 <unk> . 
 * Notation such as <unk> ± 510 ± 710 denotes two types of measurement uncertainty . In the case of the top quark , the first uncertainty is statistical in nature , and the second is systematic . 
 = = Interacting quarks = = 
 As described by quantum chromodynamics , the strong interaction between quarks is mediated by gluons , massless vector gauge bosons . Each gluon carries one color charge and one anticolor charge . In the standard framework of particle interactions ( part of a more general formulation known as perturbation theory ) , gluons are constantly exchanged between quarks through a virtual emission and absorption process . When a gluon is transferred between quarks , a color change occurs in both ; for example , if a red quark emits a red – antigreen gluon , it becomes green , and if a green quark absorbs a red – antigreen gluon , it becomes red . Therefore , while each quark 's color constantly changes , their strong interaction is preserved . 
 Since gluons carry color charge , they themselves are able to emit and absorb other gluons . This causes asymptotic freedom : as quarks come closer to each other , the <unk> binding force between them weakens . Conversely , as the distance between quarks increases , the binding force strengthens . The color field becomes stressed , much as an elastic band is stressed when stretched , and more gluons of appropriate color are spontaneously created to strengthen the field . Above a certain energy threshold , pairs of quarks and antiquarks are created . These pairs bind with the quarks being separated , causing new hadrons to form . This phenomenon is known as color confinement : quarks never appear in isolation . This process of <unk> occurs before quarks , formed in a high energy collision , are able to interact in any other way . The only exception is the top quark , which may decay before it <unk> . 
 = = = Sea quarks = = = 
 Hadrons contain , along with the valence quarks ( q 
 v ) that contribute to their quantum numbers , virtual quark – antiquark ( <unk> ) pairs known as sea quarks ( q 
 s ) . Sea quarks form when a gluon of the hadron 's color field splits ; this process also works in reverse in that the annihilation of two sea quarks produces a gluon . The result is a constant flux of gluon splits and creations colloquially known as " the sea " . Sea quarks are much less stable than their valence counterparts , and they typically annihilate each other within the interior of the hadron . Despite this , sea quarks can <unk> into baryonic or <unk> particles under certain circumstances . 
 = = = Other phases of quark matter = = = 
 Under sufficiently extreme conditions , quarks may become <unk> and exist as free particles . In the course of asymptotic freedom , the strong interaction becomes weaker at higher temperatures . Eventually , color confinement would be lost and an extremely hot plasma of freely moving quarks and gluons would be formed . This theoretical phase of matter is called quark – gluon plasma . The exact conditions needed to give rise to this state are unknown and have been the subject of a great deal of speculation and experimentation . A recent estimate puts the needed temperature at ( 1 @.@ 90 ± 0 @.@ 02 ) × 1012 kelvin . While a state of entirely free quarks and gluons has never been achieved ( despite numerous attempts by CERN in the 1980s and 1990s ) , recent experiments at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider have yielded evidence for liquid @-@ like quark matter exhibiting " nearly perfect " fluid motion . 
 The quark – gluon plasma would be characterized by a great increase in the number of heavier quark pairs in relation to the number of up and down quark pairs . It is believed that in the period prior to 10 − 6 seconds after the Big Bang ( the quark epoch ) , the universe was filled with quark – gluon plasma , as the temperature was too high for hadrons to be stable . 
 Given sufficiently high baryon densities and relatively low temperatures – possibly comparable to those found in neutron stars – quark matter is expected to degenerate into a Fermi liquid of weakly interacting quarks . This liquid would be characterized by a condensation of colored quark Cooper pairs , thereby breaking the local SU ( 3 ) c symmetry . Because quark Cooper pairs harbor color charge , such a phase of quark matter would be color superconductive ; that is , color charge would be able to pass through it with no resistance . 
 = Knight Lore = 
 Knight Lore is a 1984 action @-@ adventure game known for popularising isometric graphics in video games . The game was developed and published by Ultimate Play the Game and written by company founders Chris and Tim Stamper . In Knight Lore , the player @-@ character Sabreman has forty days to collect objects throughout a castle and brew a cure to his werewolf curse . Each castle room is depicted in monochrome on its own screen and consists of blocks to climb , obstacles to avoid , and puzzles to solve . 
 Ultimate released Knight Lore third in the Sabreman series despite having completed it first . The Stamper brothers withheld its release for a year to position the company advantageously in anticipation of the game 's effect on the market . Knight Lore 's novel image masking technique , Filmation , let images appear to pass atop and behind each other without their contents colliding . This created the illusion of depth priority , which the computer did not natively support . By delaying Knight Lore 's release , Ultimate protected sales of their upcoming Sabre Wulf and created another Filmation game before other developers could copy the style . Ultimate released the original Sabreman trilogy in quick succession in 1984 for the ZX Spectrum . Knight Lore came last , in November . Ports followed for the BBC Micro , Amstrad CPC , MSX , and Famicom Disk System . The game was later included in compilations including Rare 's 2015 Xbox One retrospective compilation , Rare Replay . 
 Knight Lore is regarded as a seminal work in British gaming history and has been included in multiple lists of top Spectrum games . Critics considered its technical solutions and isometric 3D style a harbinger of future game design . They praised the game 's controls and atmosphere of mystery , but noted its difficult gameplay and criticised its sound and occasional graphical slowdown . Knight Lore was the best @-@ selling game of January 1985 and was named 1984 game of the year by the Golden Joystick Awards and Popular Computing Weekly readers . Though it was not the first isometric 3D video game , Knight Lore popularised the format . When the isometric , flip @-@ screen style fell out of fashion , Knight Lore 's influence persisted in computer role @-@ playing games . Retrospective reviewers remember the game as the first to offer an exploratory " world " rather than a flat surface , but consider its controls outdated and frustrating in the thirty years since its release . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player , as Sabreman , has been bitten by the Sabre Wulf and now transforms into a werewolf at nightfall . He has forty days to collect items throughout a strange castle and brew a cure for his curse . An onscreen timer shows the progression of day into night , when Sabreman changes to a werewolf , returning to human form at sunrise . Some of the castle 's monsters only attack Sabreman when he is a werewolf . The game ends if the player does not finish the cure in forty days . The game 's only directions are given through a poem included with the game 's cassette tape . 
 The castle consists of a series of 128 rooms , each displayed on a single , non @-@ scrolling screen . Sabreman must navigate the 3D maze of stone blocks in each room , usually to retrieve a collectible object , whilst avoiding spikes and enemies , which kill him on contact . The player begins with four lives , and loses one for each death ; running out of lives ends the game . Stone blocks serve as platforms for the player to jump between ; some fall under the player 's weight , some move of their own accord , and some can be pushed by ghosts . Sabreman jumps higher when in werewolf form , which helps in specific puzzles . The player often needs to move blocks to reach distant objects , which are then used as platforms to reach areas in other puzzles . To complete the game , the player must return 14 sequential objects from throughout the castle to the wizard 's cauldron room . At the end of the game , the player receives a final score based on the remaining time and amount of the quest completed . 
 = = Development = = 
 Ultimate Play the Game , represented by its co @-@ founding brothers , Tim and Chris Stamper , was uncommonly taciturn in matters of press and marketing , though they provided some details on Knight Lore 's development to Crash magazine . While Knight Lore was released as the third game in the Sabreman series , the Stamper brothers had finished it first . They withheld the game for about a year for market reasons : they thought that Knight Lore 's advancements — copyrighted as the Filmation engine — would hurt sales of their upcoming Sabre Wulf , and used the extra time to prepare another Filmation game ( Alien 8 ) to preempt the sales that would be lost when other publishers would try to copy the technique . " We just had to sit on it because everyone else was so far behind , " Tim Stamper recalled . Sabre Wulf was released to commercial and critical success in 1984 . Alien 8 and the next two Sabreman titles — Underwurlde and Knight Lore — followed in close succession before the end of the year . 
 Filmation and Knight Lore 's graphical novelty lay in how images could render without overlapping . Filmation introduced " masked sprites " whereas earlier games used " planar sprites " , which overlapped without regard for depth order . Chris Stamper 's solution was to use image masking . A mask is a version of an image that defines a background from the subject matter in different colours . When combining the mask and the on @-@ screen composite image , the mask 's " background " data was ignored and a hole in the shape of the desired image sprite was added to the background . This was filled in with the sprite 's details . Thus , rooms in Knight Lore were drawn one sprite at a time through this masking method . In more recent times , contemporary images render with layer priority set at the individual pixel level . Knight Lore is depicted in a single colour that changes between rooms so as to avoid attribute clash , a computing limitation wherein an object 's colour interfered with those of others in close proximity . 
 Ultimate released Knight Lore for the ZX Spectrum in November 1984 . In a press release , they announced the game as the beginning of a new class of adventure games and " the very pinnacle of software development on the 48K Spectrum " . As standard for the cryptic company , Ultimate did not circulate screenshots of the game in its press materials or cover art . Knight Lore was subsequently released for the BBC Micro , Amstrad CPC , and MSX later in 1985 . The Amstrad version upgraded the monochromatic colouring to a two @-@ colour setup . Jaleco released versions of Knight Lore for MSX and , later , the Famicom Disk System . The latter 1986 release barely resembled its namesake . Ultimate asked Shahid Ahmad , who developed the Knight Lore @-@ inspired Chimera ( 1985 ) , to develop a Knight Lore port for the Commodore 64 , but this did not come to fruition . Knight Lore later appeared in the Spectrum version of the 1986 compilation They Sold a Million II and the 2015 Xbox One compilation of 30 Ultimate and Rare titles Rare Replay . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Computer game magazines lauded Knight Lore , writing that its graphics were the first of its kind and marked a sea change from its contemporaries . Computer & Video Games ( CVG ) wrote that they had never seen graphics of its calibre and that it lived up to Ultimate 's hype . Peter <unk> of Home Computing Weekly was left speechless and predicted that Knight Lore would change the market . Crash said it was unlikely to be surpassed as the Spectrum 's best game . Crash selected Knight Lore as a " Crash Smash " recommendation in its January 1985 issue . Knight Lore was the best selling game in the United Kingdom that month . Popular Computing Weekly readers named Knight Lore their 1984 arcade game and overall game of the year . Knight Lore was also named CVG 's game of the year at their 1985 Golden Joystick Awards event , and Ultimate was named both developer and programmer of the year . 
 In 1985 , Crash compared Knight Lore stylistically to the 1984 Avalon , but suggested that the former had bolder visuals . They noted how Knight Lore 's masking technique addressed issues of flicker and attribute clash , and how the game 's novel eight @-@ way direction scheme suited the 3D space . The magazine preferred to play as a werewolf and noted the cruel difficulty of some rooms . They appreciated the imaginative mystery of the game as they attempted to answer why Sabreman turns into a werewolf and what the collectible objects throughout the castle do . Crash preferred Knight Lore to Underwurlde , its predecessor . One reviewer wrote that the former was Ultimate 's best game . Sinclair User 's Chris Bourne liked how Sabreman disappeared when passing behind blocks . They described Knight Lore 's atmosphere as a " crepuscular world of claustrophobic menace " that inspired many curious questions on the part of the adventurer . CVG found the werewolf transformation sequence annoying and Your Spectrum found the game particularly difficult . Reviewers found the game 's sound its weakest component . 
 In reviews of the Amstrad release , Amtix noted the colour additions over the monochromatic original and wrote that Knight Lore was among the Amstrad 's best adventures . Their one complaint was the graphical slowdown when too many elements were moving onscreen . Amstrad Action shared this complaint but nevertheless named Knight Lore among the Amstrad 's best three games — an improvement on the Spectrum release and on par with the quality of Commodore 64 titles . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Knight Lore is widely regarded as a seminal work in British gaming history . According to Kieron Gillen of Rock , Paper , Shotgun , Knight Lore is second only to Elite ( 1984 ) as an icon of the 1980s British computer game industry . British magazine Retro Gamer described players ' first impressions of Knight Lore as " unforgettable " , on par with the experience of playing Space Harrier ( 1985 ) , Wolfenstein 3D ( 1992 ) , or Super Mario 64 ( 1996 ) for the first time . Retro Gamer recalled that Knight Lore 's striking , isometric 3D visuals were both a bold advance in game graphics and a foretelling of their future . British magazine Edge described the game 's graphics engine as " the single greatest advance in the history of video games " . Knight Lore was not the first to use isometric graphics — earlier examples include <unk> ( 1982 ) , Q * bert ( 1982 ) , and Ant Attack ( 1983 ) — but it popularized the style and put Ultimate and Filmation in its epicentre . 
 Several video game clones were inspired by Knight Lore . When Edge Games struggled to approximate the isometric style internally , the visiting developer Bo <unk> devised his own solution . His result , Fairlight ( 1985 ) , is regarded as another classic of the platform . Edge 's version of Filmation received its own branding as " <unk> " . Shahid Ahmad said Firebird 's Chimera ( 1985 ) was even closer to Knight Lore . Ahmad 's " shock " and " admiration " from playing Knight Lore reportedly changed his life and convinced him to continue making games . He released Chimera on the Amstrad CPC , Atari 8 @-@ bit , Commodore 64 , and ZX Spectrum , customising each port for the processing limitations of its hardware . By 1986 , many British video game publishers had produced Knight Lore @-@ style isometric games ; examples include <unk> 's World , Movie , <unk> , Get Dexter , Glider Rider , and Molecule Man . Many of these titles suffered the same slowdown issues as Knight Lore due to too much on @-@ screen activity . 
 Ultimate itself released four more Filmation games . Alien 8 ( 1985 ) was rushed for release before developers had an opportunity to react to Knight Lore , though Retro Gamer said that its rush was not noticeable , as Alien 8 had a larger game world than Knight Lore , with even more puzzles . Alien 8 and Knight Lore are similar in gameplay , but the former is set in outer space . With the updated Filmation II engine , Nightshade ( 1985 ) added colour and scrolling graphics ( in place of flip @-@ screen room changes ) ; however , Retro Gamer regarded its gameplay as comparatively dull . Gunfright ( 1986 ) , reported as the Stampers ' last game , also used Filmation II and was more robust than its predecessor . Pentagram ( 1986 ) returned to flip @-@ screen rooms and its action @-@ based gameplay included shooting enemies . It sold poorly and was the last Sabreman game . Meanwhile , the Stamper brothers sought to enter the burgeoning console industry . They sold Ultimate to U.S. Gold in the mid @-@ 1980s and established Rare to develop Nintendo console games . While Ultimate 's last two isometric games were of lesser quality , consumer interest in the genre endured . 
 The isometric , flip @-@ screen trend continued in Britain for several years . Apart from Fairlight , <unk> 's World and Get Dexter , other isometric flip @-@ screen games included Jon Ritman 's Knight Lore @-@ inspired Batman ( 1986 ) , Head over Heels ( 1987 ) , The Last Ninja ( 1987 ) , La <unk> del <unk> ( 1987 ) , Cadaver ( 1990 ) , and console games Solstice ( 1990 ) and Landstalker ( 1992 ) . As players tired of the genre 's similar reiterations , Ritman 's games , in particular , brought new ideas . Sandy White , who developed the pre @-@ Knight Lore isometric game Ant Attack , was impressed at Ultimate 's in @-@ game " balance " and gutsy design decisions . The developer of The Great Escape , another isometric game , considered Knight Lore to be more " a rival title than an inspiration " , but it still spurred him to spend nine months making Where Time Stood Still . Retro Gamer wrote that Knight Lore 's influence persisted 30 years later through titles such as Populous ( 1989 ) , Syndicate ( 1993 ) , UFO : Enemy Unknown ( 1994 ) , and Civilization II ( 1996 ) . The style also spread to computer role @-@ playing games like Baldur 's Gate , Planescape : Torment , Diablo , and Fallout . Though GamesRadar 's Matt <unk> reported in 2009 that isometric perspective was no longer as prominent a topic in game design , in 2014 , Chris Scullion of Vice traced Knight Lore 's isometric influence to The Sims 4 ( 2014 ) and Diablo III ( 2012 ) . 
 Knight Lore was included in multiple lists of top Spectrum games . It inspired two fangames : a 1999 sequel and a 2010 3D remake , which was in development for four years . 
 Though isometric games had existed previously , in a retrospective review , Gillen ( Rock , Paper , Shotgun ) recalled that Knight Lore was the first game to offer a " world " with physical depth for exploration as opposed to the simple mechanics of arcade games . Jeremy Signor of USgamer agreed that Knight Lore felt more like a world than a painting and added that the game 's innovative use of successive , single @-@ screen rooms ( " flip @-@ screen " ) pre @-@ dated The Legend of Zelda by years . Gillen said the game 's punishing style ( unforgiving gameplay , high difficulty , awkward controls ) had become obsolete in the 30 years since its release and criticised Knight Lore as " enormously innovative , incredibly atmospheric , and totally unplayable " , suggesting that the similar Head over Heels ( 1987 ) had aged much better . Peter Parrish ( Eurogamer ) , too , found the game frustrating , though well @-@ made . Dan Whitehead of the same publication appreciated that the 2015 Rare Replay compilation version of Knight Lore emulated the original 's choppy animations as the ZX Spectrum 's processor once struggled to render the onscreen objects . 
 = Don 't Panic ( song ) = 
 " Don 't Panic " is a song written and recorded by British alternative rock band Coldplay . Originally titled " Panic " , the earliest known version of the song existed in 1998 , performed live during the band 's first gig in the same year . It had a different melody , and was included in the band 's second EP , The Blue Room . The track was reproduced by Coldplay and British producer Ken Nelson for the band 's debut studio album , Parachutes . 
 Following their successful releases in 2000 , Coldplay and their record label Parlophone thought there was enough exposure of the album in the United Kingdom . Thus , the decision of releasing a fourth single would be for regions that had not been overdosed by the hit singles " Yellow " and " Trouble " . They settled on " Don 't Panic " , which at the time was an audience favorite . The single was released in some European regions , and the United Kingdom only received a promo edition . The critical reception of the song was generally positive . 
 = = Origins and production = = 
 " Don 't Panic " came into existence while Coldplay was still in its infancy . In the time , the band had written 10 songs including an early version of " Don 't Panic " , and used it in recruiting the band 's drummer . It was originally called " Panic " , and was one of six songs played at Coldplay 's first gig in 1998 at Camden 's Laurel Tree . This version has a different melody , and the lyrics are an account of a " slightly disastrous evening Chris had spent entertaining a young lady called Alice Hill " . Eventually , the title became " Don 't Panic . " 
 The original version of " Don 't Panic " was recorded in 1999 , different from the version featured in Parachutes . First , lead singer Chris Martin plays the piano during the bridge . As well , there is a feedback @-@ distorted introduction . This version was included in The Blue Room EP , released in October 1999 . 
 For Coldplay 's debut studio album Parachutes , British record producer Ken Nelson re @-@ produced " Don 't Panic " . The track was recorded live , like many other tracks featured in the album . Guitarist Jonny Buckland recorded twice his overdubbed guitars , and used parts of the two during the mixing . The band subtly used the acoustic guitar , drums and bass , and also a pump organ . The song was recorded in Rockfield Studios , Wales and Parr Street Studio , Liverpool . 
 " Don 't Panic " is the opening track to Parachutes . A guitar @-@ based song , it begins with a strummed electric guitar , followed with more guitar lines , then the vocals . A review claims that Coldplay 's indie rock inclination is obvious in the song . The verse melody is similar to ' Things ' by Split Enz ( 1979 ) . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Originally , the band planned to release " Don 't Panic " as Parachutes ' fourth single . However , it was abandoned after they deemed three singles were enough for an album . Following the successful single releases of the album in 2000 , the band thought that Parachutes had gained enough exposure in significant regions in the United Kingdom . When they decided to release a fourth single , it would be for countries yet not " overdosed " by the hit singles " Yellow " and " Trouble " . Coldplay and their record label , Parlophone , settled on " Don 't Panic " , which at the time was an audience favorite . The single was eventually released on 19 March 2001 in some European regions . The single is accompanied by the live tracks " You Only Live Twice " , a theme song for the James Bond film of the same name , and " Bigger Stronger " , a song taken from the band 's first EP release ; these live tracks were recorded during their performance at the Rockefeller Music Hall in Norway . " Don 't Panic " appeared on the UK compilation album Now That 's What I Call Music ! 48 . 
 Like their others songs , Coldplay has refused several offers to use " Don 't Panic " for promotional tools . In 2004 , the band rejected a multi @-@ million Euro offer from Diet Coke and Gap to use " Don 't Panic " and " Trouble " , another song featured in the album . The band asked then @-@ manager Phil Harvey to not refer them to such offers because " a discussion might lead to compromise " . 
 Despite this , the song has been used in many promotional tools and featured in several films and television series . In 2002 , the song was featured in the comedy @-@ drama film <unk> Goes Down , and later appeared on the film 's soundtrack album , released on 25 February 2003 by Spun Records . Also in 2003 , the song was also featured on Coldplay 's live album Live 2003 . In 2004 , it was on the romantic comedy film Garden State ; director Zach Braff handpicked songs , including " Don 't Panic " , for the film 's Grammy Award @-@ winning compilation album , Garden State : Music From The Motion Picture . The song was also featured on the debut episode of the FX television series Rescue Me as well as the pilot episode of the short @-@ lived show Odyssey 5 . Additionally , the song was featured in episode nine of the first series on the British TV series Sugar Rush in 2005 . It was also referenced in the 2016 movie The 5th Wave as a lullaby to the main character 's little brother . 
 During the band 's 2003 A Rush of Blood to the Head Tour , " Don 't Panic " contained an entirely different introduction . In addition , Martin played the electric guitar and Buckland in harmonica solo during the bridge . He regularly threw the harmonica into the crowd after the solo . In 2001 , a dance cover version of " Don 't Panic " was released by Logo featuring Dawn Joseph . 
 = = = Critical reviews = = = 
 Upon release , critics gave the song generally positive reviews . MacKenzie Wilson , in his review from Allmusic , notes , " Coldplay 's indie rock inclinations are also obvious , especially on songs such as ' Don 't Panic ' and ' Shiver ' . " In the Pitchfork Media review , Spencer Owen writes , " This subdued , dreamy opener contains Martin 's falsetto chorus of ' We live in a beautiful world , ' which seems to sum up the overall sentiment of the record . " Robert Christgau alleged that , along with " Yellow " , the song was one of only two good ones on all of Parachutes . Critic Adrian Denning , in his review of the album , compliments , " Both the vocals and guitar are utterly beautiful . It 's a song to take solace from , draw comfort from , be quietly awed by . " David DeVoe of <unk> wrote : " It is a wonderful song that echoes the promise of what is to come on the rest of the record . ' Don ’ t Panic ' is filled with excellent guitar tones and a nice grooving back beat , and I love the way the song ends . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Don 't Panic " was directed by Tim Hope . The video starts off with an animated diagram of the water cycle , then portrays the band as two @-@ dimensional paper cutouts doing household chores , when suddenly disaster strikes the earth in the forms of floods , volcanoes and electric shocks . Like Coldplay 's earlier music videos , " Don 't Panic " also features the yellow globe on the cover of Parachutes . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 On 19 July 2011 , the song was played as a wake @-@ up call to STS @-@ 135 Space Shuttle Atlantis Pilot Doug Hurley as a tribute from his wife and family , marking the last ever wake @-@ up call for a crew visiting the International Space Station from the Space Shuttle fleet . 
 The song is nostalgically sung a cappella in the 2016 film The 5th Wave , while the characters are reflecting on the destruction of planet Earth and remembering how beautiful the world used to be . 
 In February 2016 , a cover of the song by <unk> was used in the trailer for the 2016 film X @-@ Men : Apocalypse , as well as the film 's TV spot for the Super Bowl 50 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Cancer pagurus = 
 Cancer pagurus , commonly known as the edible crab or brown crab , is a species of crab found in the North Sea , North Atlantic Ocean and perhaps in the Mediterranean Sea . It is a robust crab of a reddish @-@ brown colour , having an oval carapace with a characteristic " pie crust " edge and black tips to the claws . A mature adult may have a carapace width of up to 25 cm ( 10 in ) and weigh up to 3 kg ( 6 @.@ 6 lb ) . C. pagurus is a nocturnal predator , targeting a range of molluscs and crustaceans . It is the subject of the largest crab fishery in Western Europe , centred on the coasts of the British Isles , with more than 60 @,@ 000 tonnes caught annually . 
 = = Description = = 
 The carapace of C. pagurus adults is a reddish @-@ brown colour , while in young specimens it is purple @-@ brown . It occasionally bears white patches , and is shaped along the front edge into nine rounded lobes , resembling a pie crust . Males typically have a carapace 60 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) long , and females 98 mm ( 4 in ) long , although they may reach up to 150 mm ( 6 in ) long in exceptional cases . <unk> width is typically 150 mm ( 6 in ) , or exceptionally up to 250 mm ( 10 in ) . A fold of the carapace extends ventrally to constitute a branchial chamber where the gills lie . 
 The first pereiopod is modified into a strong <unk> ( claw @-@ bearing leg ) : the claw 's fingers , the dactylus and propodus , are black at the tips . The other pereiopods are covered with rows of short stiff setae ; the dactylus of each is black towards the tip , and ends in a sharp point . 
 From the front , the antennae and antennules are visible . Beside these there are the orbits in which the eyes are situated . The mouthparts comprise three pairs of maxillipeds , behind which there are a pair of maxillae , a pair of maxillules , and finally the mandibles . 
 In common with most crabs , the abdomen is folded under the thorax and shows clear sexual dimorphism : in males it is comparatively narrow , whereas in the female it is wider . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 Reproduction occurs in winter ; the male stands over the female and forms a cage with his legs protecting her while she moults . Internal fertilisation takes place before the hardening of the new carapace , with the aid of two abdominal appendages ( gonopods ) . After mating , the female retreats to a pit on the sea floor to lay her eggs . Between 250 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 fertilised eggs are held under the female 's abdomen for up to eight months until they hatch . 
 The first developmental stage after hatching is a planktonic larva ( 1 mm ) called the zoea that develops into a <unk> ( megalopa ) , and finally a juvenile . The first juvenile stage is characterised by a well @-@ developed abdomen , which will , in time , become reduced in size and folded under the sternum . Juveniles settle to the sea floor in the intertidal zone , where they stay until they reach a carapace width of 60 – 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 2 @.@ 8 in ) and then migrate to deeper water . The growth rate in males slows from an increase in carapace width of 10 mm per year before it is eight years old , to 2 mm per year thereafter . Females grow at about half the rate of males , probably due to the energetic demands of egg laying . Sexual maturity is reached at a carapace width of 12 @.@ 7 cm ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) in females , and 11 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) in males . Longevity is typically 25 – 30 years , although exceptional individuals may live for up to 100 years . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Cancer pagurus is abundant throughout the northeast Atlantic as far as Norway in the north and northern Africa in the south , on mixed coarse grounds , mud and sand from the shallow sublittoral to depths of about 100 metres ( 330 ft ) . It is frequently found inhabiting cracks and holes in rocks but occasionally also in open areas . Smaller specimens may be found under rocks in the littoral zone . Unconfirmed reports suggest that C. pagurus may also occur in the Mediterranean Sea and Black Sea . 
 Adult C. pagurus are nocturnal , hiding buried in the substrate during the day , but foraging at night up to 50 metres ( 160 ft ) from their hideouts . Their diet includes a variety of crustaceans ( including the crabs Carcinus maenas and <unk> <unk> , the porcelain crabs <unk> <unk> and Pisidia <unk> , and the squat lobster Galathea <unk> ) and molluscs ( including the gastropods <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> , and the bivalves <unk> , Mytilus edulis , <unk> edule , Ostrea edulis and <unk> <unk> ) . It may stalk or ambush motile prey , and may dig large pits to reach buried molluscs . The main predator of Cancer pagurus is the octopus , which will even attack them inside the crab pots that fishermen use to trap them . 
 Compared to other commercially important crab species , relatively little is known about diseases of Cancer pagurus . Its parasites include viruses , such as the white spot syndrome virus , various bacteria that cause dark lesions on the exoskeleton , and Hematodinium @-@ like dinoflagellates that cause " pink crab disease " . Other microscopic pathogens include fungi , microsporidians , <unk> and ciliates . Cancer pagurus is also targeted by metazoan parasites , including trematodes and parasitic barnacles . A number of sessile animals occasionally settle as epibionts on the exoskeleton of C. pagurus , including barnacles , sea anemones , <unk> polychaetes such as <unk> <unk> , bryozoans and saddle oysters . 
 = = Fishery = = 
 Cancer pagurus is heavily exploited commercially throughout its range , being the most commercially important crab species in Western Europe . The crabs are caught using crab pots ( similar to lobster pots ) which are placed offshore and baited . The catch of C. pagurus has increased steadily , rising from 26 @,@ 000 tonnes in 1978 to 60 @,@ 000 t in 2007 , of which more than 70 % was caught around the British Isles . The fishery is widely dispersed around the British and Irish coasts , and C. pagurus is thought to be overfished across much of this area . Most of the edible crabs caught by the British fleet are exported live for sale in France and Spain . 
 A number of legal restrictions apply to the catching of Cancer pagurus . It is illegal to catch " berried " crabs ( females carrying eggs ) , but since <unk> females remain in pits dug in the sediment and do not feed , fishing pressure does not affect the supply of larvae . Minimum landing sizes ( MLS ) for C. pagurus are set by both the European Union technical regulations and by the UK government . Different minimum sizes are employed in different geographical areas , to reflect differences in the crab 's growth rate across its range . In particular , the " Cromer crab " fishery along the coasts of Suffolk , Norfolk and Lincolnshire is subject to a MLS of 115 mm ( 4 @.@ 5 in ) , rather than the 140 mm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) MLS in most of the species ' range . An intermediate value of 130 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) is used in the rest of the North Sea between the 56th parallel north and the Essex – Kent border , and in the Irish Sea south of 55 ° N. Around Devon , Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly , there is a separate MLS for males ( 160 mm or 6 @.@ 3 in ) and females ( 140 mm or 5 @.@ 5 in ) . The Norwegian catch is 8 @,@ 500 tons annually , compared to 20 @,@ 000 tons in the United Kingdom , 13 @,@ 000 tons in Ireland , 8 @,@ 500 tons in France , and a total 45 @,@ 000 tons globally . 
 = = Cookery = = 
 Around one third of the weight of an adult edible crab is meat , of which one third is white meat from the claws ( see <unk> of crabs ) , and two thirds is brown meat from the body . As food , male edible crabs are referred to as cocks and females as hens . Cocks have more sweet white meat ; hens have more rich brown meat . Dishes include dressed crab ( crab meat arranged in the cleaned shell , sometimes with decoration of other foodstuffs ) , soups such as bisque or bouillabaisse , pâtés , <unk> and hot soufflés . 
 = = Taxonomy and systematics = = 
 According to the rules of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature , Cancer pagurus was first described by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 , in the tenth edition of his Systema Naturae , which marks the starting point of zoological nomenclature . It was chosen to be the type species of the genus Cancer by Pierre André Latreille in 1810 . The specific epithet pagurus is a Latin word , deriving from the Ancient Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , which , alongside " <unk> " ( <unk> ) , was used to refer to edible marine crabs ; neither classical term can be confidently assigned to a particular species . 
 Although the genus Cancer formerly included most crabs , it has since been restricted to eight species . Within that set of closely related species , the closest relative of C. pagurus is the Jonah crab , Cancer borealis , from the east coast of North America . 
 = Wild Arms = 
 Wild Arms ( <unk> ) is a Western @-@ themed role @-@ playing video game developed by Japanese company <unk> Originally released in Japan in 1996 for the PlayStation , it was later translated and released in North America in 1997 and Europe in 1998 by Sony Computer Entertainment . It is noteworthy for not only being one of the first role @-@ playing video games on the PlayStation , but also one of the few to feature a Western American setting and motif . The game features 2D computer graphics for normal gameplay , while battle sequences are rendered in 3D . 
 Taking place in the fantasy world of Filgaia , Wild Arms follows the adventures of a band of miscreants and adventurers called Dream Chasers who scour the world in search of excitement and fortune . The player assumes control of a young boy named Rudy who has the ability to operate powerful weapons called Ancient Relic Machines ( ARMs ) , forbidden remnants of a lost age that resemble firearms . Along with his companions Jack and Cecilia , the group must use their respective skills to navigate through the vast wastelands and dungeons of Filgaia and prevent an otherworldly threat from reviving their lost leader and destroying the world . 
 In November 2003 , an enhanced remake of Wild Arms titled Wild Arms Alter Code : F was released for the PlayStation 2 in Japan , with a North American version produced in 2005 . In addition to enhanced graphics , Alter Code : F also features an expanded script , remastered soundtrack , new characters , and additional gameplay scenarios . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Wild Arms is a role @-@ playing video game that involves the player controlling up to three characters , Rudy , Jack , and Cecilia , as they progress through a number of environments , battle enemies , and solve puzzles . The game is presented in a top @-@ down two @-@ dimensional fashion where the player has an overhead view of all the action taking place on a particular screen . To advance , the player must overcome a number of story @-@ based scenarios and sequences that involve navigating through dungeons while fighting enemies that appear randomly . Characters progress and grow by gaining experience points after a battle , discovering crest graphs , finding ARMs , and mastering sword techniques prompted by various events in the game . This allows them to battle increasingly more difficult demonic entities . 
 Progressively more powerful armor and weapons can be purchased for each character from specialized shops in towns throughout the world , and new skills can be learned to help the player complete tougher challenges . Special devices called " Tools " unique to each character allow the player to traverse otherwise impassable situations while not in battle . These items are obtained at certain points in the game , and allow hidden areas or pathways to be discovered , as well as destroy objects and solve puzzles . Rudy 's bomb tool , for example , can demolish large rocks and other impediments , while Jack 's grappling hook allows the party to cross large gaps and chasms while avoiding traps . 
 = = = Battle system = = = 
 Unlike normal gameplay , where all character and background graphics are two @-@ dimensional ( 2D ) , combat is rendered entirely in 3D . Wild Arms uses a turn @-@ based battle system in which the player inputs commands at the start of each round designating which actions take place . The order in which each character and enemy performs these actions is based on their " response " ( RES ) statistic , which denotes how quickly a particular character can act . The higher a character 's response , the more likely they are to act before an enemy . The player has the option every round to either use a restorative item from their inventory , use a special skill , run from combat , or attack . Enemy units are defeated when their hit points , a numerical representation of their vitality , reaches zero . Hit points can be reduced by attacking an enemy , either with standard attacks or spells . 
 Each of the three playable characters has a unique set of abilities that can be used to defeat enemies or aid party members . Rudy utilizes " ARMs " , powerful yet limited attacks involving gun @-@ like weapons that rely on a set number of bullets , Jack 's " Fast Draw " sword techniques can damage opponents in a variety of ways , and Cecilia 's magic can either benefit the party by restoring hit points , raising statistics or damage enemies with harmful spells . Additionally , a character can equip special items called " runes " allowing them to summon powerful Guardians to aid them in battle . New skills are acquired as the main story progresses , completing side quests , or purchasing them from an in @-@ game shop ( magic ) . 
 During combat , each character has a " Force Bar " divided into 4 equal @-@ sized sections called levels . As the bar 's level increases , the player is given access to one of four " Force Techniques " , made available through different areas of gameplay . These techniques allow a character to perform a special action each time they attack or use a skill , adding to their overall effectiveness . Cecilia 's " Mystic " ability , for example , allows an item to be used to cast a spell whether it be an attack , restorative or assist spell , and Jack 's " Accelerator " gives him the option of acting first in the next combat round , regardless of his or the enemy 's speed . The more effective the skill , the more Force Bar levels the move requires . 
 Like normal equipment , Runes can alter a character 's statistics to make them more proficient in certain areas of combat , such as raising their strength statistic , increasing the damage they cause with normal attacks . Equipping these items has the added benefit of allowing a character to call upon powerful magic creatures to attack all enemies at once or aid allies with beneficial magic . Runes can be obtained either in hidden areas within dungeons , or simply whenever the story wills it . Most Guardian attacks , like Cecilia 's magic , have a certain elemental designation that is more effective against certain enemies . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Wild Arms takes place in the world of Filgaia ( " <unk> " in the original Japanese version ) , a fantasy world modeled closely after the American Old West and Medieval Europe . The Wild West motif is present throughout the entirety of the game , and though several different landforms and climates exist across the entirety of the world , vast deserts , wide gorges , canyons , and sparse grasslands make up the majority of the landscape . A number of towns and villages exist , some containing old @-@ world European architecture and castles , while others resemble early American frontier towns and trade posts . Technology at the time of the game is set around the early Industrial Revolution , with advancements such as motors first coming into use . A recurring theme throughout the game is destructive technology such as guns and firearms being seen as dangerous and therefore forbidden technology that is feared by the general populace . Since most of the world 's most advanced technology existed centuries before the start of the game , archaeologists and engineers are essentially one and the same ; rediscovering old technology as they find new applications for it . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 In addition to several supporting characters and villains , Wild Arms features three playable characters . 
 Rudy <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> Rodi <unk> " <unk> <unk> " in the Japanese version and " Rudy <unk> " in subsequent English translations ) is a 15 @-@ year @-@ old boy from a remote village who was orphaned several years before the beginning of the game when his grandfather died . Under the care of the town 's mayor , Rudy worked as a farmhand for his neighbor until the day a local boy , searching for medicinal herbs to heal his ailing father , became lost in a cave just outside town . Rushing to save him , Rudy eventually finds and rescues the child , yet inadvertently frees a zombie sealed within the cavern . He is able to defeat the zombie and save the village , but alerts the villagers to his forbidden ARM weapon in the process , causing him to be cast out of the village and forcing him to live on his own , returning to the life of an adventurer and Drifter . After severing his own arm ( by sword in Wild Arms , and by gun in Wild Arms Alter Code : F ) , Rudy is discovered to be a <unk> artificial being designed to be a weapon that shares the basic physiology of the Metal Demons , which were terminated since they were labeled as being extremely violent and dangerous . But Rudy was adopted by a man called <unk> , who assumed the role of his grandfather and cared for him , giving Rudy a heart and the capacity to care and love , steering him away from being a weapon of mass destruction like his brethren . Rudy 's character exemplifies the role @-@ playing game archetype of the silent protagonist and is meant to act as the player 's extension into the game , though he does have one line in the game . 
 Jack Van <unk> ( <unk> ・ ヴァン ・ <unk> <unk> Van <unk> " Zakk <unk> Brace " in the Japanese version ) is a treasure hunter and swordsman @-@ for @-@ hire who is searching the world for the " ultimate power " that will allow him to confront his troubled past . Upon the discovery of an ancient holographic device within the Memory Temple , Jack learns of the long lost race of the Elw who had developed several forms of advanced technology . He sets off to the town of Adlehyde to find more information that will point him in the direction of his goal . Jack is accompanied by his partner ' <unk> ' , a " wind mouse " who is able to speak and understand the language of humans , and often acts as Jack 's moral compass . It is discovered that in his youth he was a <unk> Knight of Arctica , the " Gauntlet @-@ Knight " named Garret Stampede . 
 Cecilia Lynn Adlehyde ( <unk> ・ レイン ・ <unk> <unk> Rein <unk> " Cecilia <unk> Adlehyde " in the Japanese version ) is a young mage who has spent most of her life studying at the <unk> Abbey magic school . Her 17th birthday at the beginning of the game marks her official ascension into the Adlehyde royal family and departure from the school . Before she is able to leave , however , she is contacted by a mysterious voice who beckons her to a hidden library deep within the abbey . It is there that she confronts and defeats a demon using her fledgling magic skills , and frees a powerful entity known as a " Guardian " from a sealed book . The Guardian informs Cecilia that her royal blood allows her to be a medium between the real world and the spirit dimension occupied by the avatars of all the world 's elemental forces , and that she will be instrumental in securing the future and reconstruction of the barren planet . Throughout her life she has disliked being just a figurehead known as " Cecilia the princess " and not as " Cecilia the girl " . One of her reasons for joining Rudy and Jack was so she would not be lonely . It is hinted that she may be in love with Rudy . In Alter Code F , it is also shown that Jane harbors a crush on Rudy as well . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 A thousand years before the events of Wild Arms , a war raged between the inhabitants of Filgaia and the Metal Demons seeking to turn the planet into their new home . After a fierce struggle , the humans managed to capture the demon 's leader , " Mother " , and sealed her deep within a castle in the tundra of Arctica . Unable to completely destroy her constantly regenerating body , the people of Arctica removed her heart and tore it into three pieces , imprisoned her within a cocoon , and sealed the pieces of her heart inside three stone statues which they spread across the world . With their leader gone , a majority of the demons disappeared , with only a few remaining in seclusion over the next few centuries , eventually launching an attack on the castle to reclaim the incapacitated body of Mother . 
 Succeeding in their mission , a small band of demon warriors known as the Quarter Knights kept watch over the body of Mother in their fortress protected behind a powerful force field , and began gathering information as to the whereabouts of the guardian statues with the hope of one day reviving her and claiming Filgaia as their own . As time passed , talk of the ancient invasion began to dwindle , though stories of demonic weaponry such as " ARMs " and robotic soldiers still persisted in the minds of many . When a mysterious child named Rudy drifted into the small town of Surf , he came with an ARM at his side . Though he is able to hide it for a time his ARM makes him into a pariah after he is involved with a disastrous earthquake . 
 Making his way to the city of Adlehyde , Rudy meets Cecilia , a magician @-@ in @-@ training and successor to the Adlehyde royal family , and Jack , a headstrong treasure hunter . The trio teams up for the first time to help a local engineer named Emma , who is researching ancient technology in a nearby tomb and believes a remnant of the Demon Wars may be inside , but came across the monsters inside the tomb . Upon discovering the object , a deactivated robotic creature called a " golem " , the three adventurers escort Emma and their discovery back to Adlehyde to exhibit it at the town 's Ruin Festival . During the event , where several other golem creatures are on display , a small army of demons led by Belselk of the Quarter Knights precede to burn the town , steal the golems , and mortally wound Cecilia 's father , the king . In order to spare the remaining people of Adlehyde , Cecilia gives Belselk her family heirloom , a pendant called the Tear Drop that has magical properties which the demons believe can be used as a catalyst for reviving their leader . When the invaders recall from the town , Rudy and his friends make a pact to stop the Knights from taking control of Filgaia , and to restore balance to the weakening elemental forces of the world that have been in decline since the demons ' initial invasion . 
 Traveling across Filgaia , the heroes make their way to the long @-@ abandoned Guardian Temple to gain the alliance of the mystical guardians who maintain the forces of nature across the planet . There they are tested individually . After each of them fails their personal tests of character , the Guardians reluctantly agree to aid them . The Guardians tell Rudy and his companions that the demons have already begun to revive their leader , and have only to lift the seal on her cocoon @-@ like prison by destroying the three scattered statues that lie across Filgaia . Utilizing ancient Elw technology in the form of teleportation devices , the group travels the world to stop the Quarter Knights from destroying the statues , but they fail in each attempt . The consequent resurrection of Mother occurs , yet the demons are informed by their leader that it is her intention to eradicate Filgaia rather than subjugate it and tells her followers that their own deaths will follow soon after . 
 Realizing that the only way to defeat the demons is to confront them in their stronghold , the Photosphere , Rudy , Jack , and Cecilia gather the necessary materials to enter the tomb of the last remaining golem , the Earth Golem , Asgard . Convincing him to aid them in their struggle , Asgard neutralizes the protective seal around the Photosphere , granting Rudy , Jack , and Cecilia access . With the aid of a blue @-@ hooded figure , the heroes are able to re @-@ acquire Cecilia 's Tear Drop , previously acting as the power source to the entire fortress , and confront a weakened Mother directly , destroying her body just as the Photosphere sinks into the ocean . Thinking the worst to be over , the trio depart for Adlehyde when they are confronted by the Quarter Knights , who inform them of their plan to take over Filgaia in their maniacal leader 's absence , and the blue @-@ hooded character who assisted them was <unk> , the leader of the Quarter Knights who betrayed Mother . 
 The demons attempt to destroy the Ray Line underneath Filgaia . It was the last resort of the Guardians to connect their remaining strength together and maintain the planet . These plans are temporarily thwarted at the last moment , with Zeikfried being thrown through a dimensional rift in space when the three confront him . Finding himself transported to the underwater wreckage of the Photosphere , <unk> is met by a deformed visage of Mother , who devours him . However , the remaining Demons find another way to disrupt the Ray line by creating their own tear drop designed to destroy rather than create life and using the Elw teleportation system distribute it all over Filgaia , throwing the forces of nature into chaos . It is also revealed that one of the Quarter Knights was not originally a demon , but Jack 's lost love Elmina , which fueled his lust for vengeance . 
 Later , the demons learn of a giant structure on one of the moons orbiting the planet , Malduke , that was designed to be a space station for residential and military purposes , possessing a powerful weapon that could destroy Filgaia . Inside the demons ' newly @-@ arisen tower Ka <unk> that connects with Malduke , Rudy , Jack , and Cecilia confront what remains of their adversaries before reaching the teleportation device to take them to Malduke . Within Malduke 's deepest sanctum , they confront Zeikfried , who transforms into a revived Mother . This new being , <unk> , confronts the heroes with the intent of using Malduke 's primary weapon to destroy Filgaia , but is defeated . 
 However , even after defeating the last of the Demons , it seems too late to stop Malduke 's weapon from destroying Filgaia , but the Guardians are able to pool their strength and revive the world . Rudy , Jack , and Cecilia board the teleportation device to be transported back to Filgaia , only to be stopped in mid @-@ voyage by what is left of Zeikfried 's body and his spear . The weakened Zeikfried launches a last desperate assault on the heroes , and , though defeated in the end , the energy released in the battle destabilizes the portal . Narrowly escaping through the portal to Filgaia , the trio arrives at Ka <unk> just as it collapses , with Asgard arriving to shield them from the falling debris , but the sheer strain causes great damage to the Earth Golem and so , is later allowed to sleep once more beneath the earth with Cecilia 's help . With the demons defeated and nature beginning to recover , Jack and Rudy set off on a new journey while Cecilia remains in Adlehyde to fulfill her duties as ruler . In a letter she writes to Jack and Rudy , she tells them that she will send them the item they forgot to help them on their future adventures and shows up shortly after to join them on a new quest . 
 = = Development = = 
 Wild Arms was developed by Japanese software company Media.Vision and initially released in Japan in late 1996 . New to the role @-@ playing video game market , Media.Vision had previously released the " run and gun " -styled shooter game Rapid Reload for the PlayStation a year before Wild Arms . Under the direction of producer Takashi Fukushima and game designer Akifumi Kaneko , Wild Arms was developed to be a traditional role @-@ playing video game that would incorporate an American Old West theme with anime @-@ type story elements and action sequences . Character designer Yoshihiko Ito was responsible for all major character designs . 
 Wild Arms features an opening sequence by Japanese animation studio Madhouse , with accompanying music by game composer Michiko <unk> titled " Into the Wilderness " . The song was arranged by Kazuhiko Toyama and features melancholy whistling by Naoki Takao . 
 Wild Arms ' soundtrack was composed entirely by Michiko <unk> and is heavily inspired by Spaghetti westerns , featuring instrumentation from mandolins , acoustic and electric guitars , finger cymbals , trumpets , and whistling to produce an Old West sound to fit the game 's setting and stylistic approach . A classical theme is also present in many tracks with the melody being provided by string instruments and deep drums to heighten the mood or increase tension . The game 's overworld theme " Lone Bird in the Shire " , contains the melody from Ennio Morricone 's " The Ecstasy of Gold " originally from The Good , the Bad , and the Ugly . The opening theme " Into the Wilderness " is of Riz Ortolani 's " Day of Anger " from Day of Anger . The melody that plays while Mother is reawakened sounds very similar to the melody of the song " Farewell to Cheyenne " from the popular western , Once Upon a Time in the West . 
 = = Release = = 
 First appearing as a video demo on the promotional PlayStation <unk> vol . 1 in January 1997 , the full English version of Wild Arms was made available three months later in March 1997 by Sony Computer Entertainment America . Being released just before the Entertainment Software Rating Board ( ESRB ) updated their video game ratings system , the game thus received two separate North American ratings : first , " Kids to Adults " ( K @-@ A ) , and later " Everyone " ( E ) for copies released after January 1 , 1998 , though both versions contained the same software and catalog number . Wild Arms was later translated to both French and German for its release in the PAL region in late 1998 , published by Sony Computer Entertainment 's European division . The English versions of the original Wild Arms were plagued with horrible translation mistakes ( such as Gepetto becoming <unk> , Siegfried becoming Zeikfried , Nergal to <unk> , Berserk to Belselk , Belial to <unk> , <unk> becoming Van <unk> , <unk> Zwei to <unk> <unk> , and <unk> becoming <unk> Moa ) . These translations were to be corrected in the remake Wild Arms Alter Code : F. 
 The Wild Arms Original Game Soundtrack was initially released in Japan on January 22 , 1997 , and was re @-@ printed two years later . This version contained only a one @-@ disc sample of the game 's music , and after the release of the enhanced remake Wild Arms Alter Code : F and its arranged soundtrack , a complete version of the original Wild Arms soundtrack containing all of the game 's music titled Wild Arms Complete Tracks was released on April 6 , 2006 . 
 On July 26 , 2007 , Wild Arms was made available on the PlayStation Network in Japan , through which it can be played on the PlayStation Portable and , as of Operating System update 1 @.@ 70 , on the PlayStation 3 . On December 6 , 2007 this version was released on the North American PlayStation Network . On January 4 , 2012 , Wild Arms was released on the European PlayStation Store . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Wild Arms garnered a positive response . Game Informer magazine stated it was " by far one of the best action RPGs of the year " , praising the game 's use of 3D battle graphics in addition to the colorful 2D graphics of normal gameplay . Their three reviewers scored it 9 , 9 @.@ 25 and 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , giving it an overall " Bottom Line " score of 8 @.@ 75 out of 10 . GameFan 's three reviewers scored it 95 % , 92 % , and 90 % , and also gave it their " Game of the Month " award . They said it " is a spectacular RPG " and , " if not for <unk> , Wild Arms would definitely be RPG of the year so far . " 
 Electronic Gaming Monthly 's four reviewers scored it 9 , 8 @.@ 5 , 9 and 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , adding up to 35 out of 40 and averaging 8 @.@ 75 out of 10 , earning it an " Editor 's Choice Silver Award " , a distinction given to games with a score averaging above 8 out of 10 . They said it is " easily the best PlayStation RPG to date " up until Final Fantasy VII releases and gave it their " Game of the Month " award . An online GamePro review in 2000 remarked that while the game 's graphics had not aged well , it was still a thoroughly enjoyable game , earning it a perfect " fun factor " score and an Editor 's Choice award . Electronic Gaming Monthly gave Wild Arms the Runner @-@ Up award for Role @-@ Playing Game of the Year behind Final Fantasy VII , while GamePro gave Wild Arms the 3rd Place award for Best Role @-@ Playing Game behind Final Fantasy VII and Alundra . 
 The game received positive reviews on both GameSpot and IGN websites . The website RPGFan also gave it a positive review , stating that it is " very well designed and is a lot of fun to play " and concluding that it " has a great English translation , interesting ideas and makes you use you brain to solve puzzles . " The game maintains an 83 @.@ 3 % average rating on GameRankings , pooling reviews from 14 separate online sources . 
 Criticism of Wild Arms comes from its myriad puzzles and minigames that resemble those found in an action games , described as being " extremely action oriented , which may be frustrating to RPG fans who don 't have the quickest of reflexes " . The game was also compared to the RPG Final Fantasy VII , released five months later , which in turn led to Wild Arms being designated as a game that would " suppress your appetite for Final Fantasy VII " . GameSpot additionally declared that Wild Arm 's graphics , though impressive , were not the industry standard at the time , remarking : " Although it 's no Final Fantasy VII , Wild Arms looks great . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Wild Arms series has grown to several games since the original title 's release , with a fourth sequel released in Japan in December 2006 , mobile phone adaptations , a manga , and a Wild Arms anime distributed by ADV Films . In episode three of the anime series Great Teacher Onizuka , Wild Arms ( referred in the English voice track as Wild Arms 3 ) is referenced as a game that the main character Eikichi Onizuka desperately wants to finish ; its Japanese box art is also shown on screen . 
 = = = Remake = = = 
 Wild Arms Alter Code : F ( <unk> <unk> ・ F ) is an enhanced remake of Wild Arms for the PlayStation 2 , developed by Media.Vision and published by Sony in Japan and <unk> in North America . The game features entirely new 3D environments , five new playable characters and many other improvements . The game 's North American release was postponed several times until it was finally released on November 15 , 2005 . The North American version comes with a bonus DVD featuring the first episode of the Wild Arms anime series , Wild Arms : Twilight Venom . It was never released in Europe . 
 The game features more characters than just the original trio . Other characters such as Jane Maxwell , <unk> Harts ( called Magdalene Harts in the remake ) , Emma Hetfield , Mariel , and Zed will be able to join and the player may switch them into the battlefield . All of the dungeons have completely different puzzles and layouts . 
 The game has been graphically overhauled and now has 3D graphics both in and out of battles . The soundtrack has been heavily remixed or replaced entirely with new music . Numerous FMVs have been added at key points in the game and for the guardian summonings . The encounter cancel system from Wild Arms 2 and 3 , which allows a player to skip a random battle , is present . 
 = Ethylene glycol poisoning = 
 Ethylene glycol poisoning is caused by the ingestion of ethylene glycol , the primary ingredient in automotive antifreeze . Ethylene glycol is a toxic , colorless , odorless , almost nonvolatile liquid with a sweet taste that is sometimes accidentally consumed by children and animals due to its sweetness . Following ingestion the symptoms of poisoning progress from signs similar to intoxication and vomiting ; to hyperventilation , metabolic acidosis , and cardiovascular dysfunction ; and finally acute kidney failure . The major cause of toxicity is not the ethylene glycol itself but its metabolites , mainly glycolic acid and oxalic acid . 
 Treatment for antifreeze poisoning needs to be started as soon after ingestion as possible to be effective ; the earlier treatment is started , the greater the chance of survival . Once kidney failure develops in dogs and cats , the prognosis is poor . Poisoning is relatively common , and due to its taste , children , domestic animals and wildlife sometimes consume the substance . <unk> benzoate , a <unk> , is sometimes added to antifreeze products to discourage accidental or deliberate ingestion . 
 Medical diagnosis of poisoning is most reliably done by measuring ethylene glycol in the blood . However , many hospitals do not have the facilities to perform this test and need to rely on abnormalities in the body ’ s biochemistry to diagnose poisoning , such as calcium oxalate crystals present in the urine . Treatment consists of initially stabilizing the patient , followed by the use of antidotes . The antidotes used are either ethanol or fomepizole ( <unk> ) . The antidotes work by blocking the enzyme responsible for metabolizing ethylene glycol and therefore halt the progression of poisoning . Hemodialysis is also used to help remove ethylene glycol and its metabolites from the blood . As long as medical treatment is undertaken , the prognosis is generally good with most patients making a full recovery . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Signs of ethylene glycol poisoning depend upon the time after ingestion . Symptoms usually follow a three @-@ step progression , although poisoned individuals will not always develop each stage . 
 Stage 1 ( 30 minutes to 12 hours ) consists of neurological and gastrointestinal symptoms and looks similar to alcohol poisoning . Poisoned individuals may appear to be intoxicated , dizzy , lacking coordination of muscle movements , drooling , depressed , and have slurred speech , <unk> , abnormal eye movements , headaches , and confusion . Irritation to the stomach may cause nausea and vomiting . Also seen are excessive thirst and urination . Over time , the body metabolizes ethylene glycol into other toxins . 
 Stage 2 ( 12 to 36 hours ) where signs of " alcohol " poisoning appear to resolve , underlying severe internal damage is still occurring . An elevated heart rate , hyperventilation or increased breathing effort , and dehydration may start to develop , along with high blood pressure and metabolic acidosis . These symptoms are a result of accumulation of organic acids formed by the metabolism of ethylene glycol . Additionally low calcium concentrations in the blood , overactive muscle reflexes , muscle spasms , QT interval prolongation , and congestive heart failure may occur . If untreated , death most commonly occurs during this period . 
 Stage 3 ( 24 to 72 hours ) kidney failure is the result of ethylene glycol poisoning . In cats , this stage occurs 12 – 24 hours after getting into antifreeze ; in dogs , at 36 – 72 hours after getting into antifreeze . During this stage , severe kidney failure is developing secondary to calcium oxalate crystals forming in the kidneys . Severe lethargy , coma , depression , vomiting , seizures , drooling , and <unk> may be seen . Other symptoms include acute tubular necrosis , red blood cells in the urine , excess proteins in the urine , lower back pain , decreased or absent production of urine , elevated blood concentration of potassium , and acute kidney failure . If kidney failure occurs it is typically reversible , although weeks or months of supportive care including hemodialysis may be required before kidney function returns . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 The three main systems affected by ethylene glycol poisoning are the central nervous system , metabolic processes , and the kidneys . The central nervous system is affected early in the course of poisoning as the result of a direct action of ethylene glycol . Similar to ethanol , it causes intoxication , followed by drowsiness or coma . Seizures may occur due to a direct effect . The toxic mechanism of ethylene glycol poisoning is mainly due to the metabolites of ethylene glycol . Initially it is metabolized by alcohol dehydrogenase to <unk> , which is then oxidized to glycolic acid . The increase in metabolites may cause encephalopathy or cerebral edema . The metabolic effects occur 12 to 36 hours post ingestion , causing primarily metabolic acidosis which is due mainly to accumulated glycolic acid . Additionally , as a side effect of the first two steps of metabolism , an increase in the blood concentration of lactic acid occurs contributing to lactic acidosis . The formation of acid metabolites also causes inhibition of other metabolic pathways , such as oxidative phosphorylation . 
 The renal toxicity of ethylene glycol occurs 24 to 72 hours post ingestion and is caused by a direct cytotoxic effect of glycolic acid . The glycolic acid is then metabolized to <unk> acid and finally to oxalic acid . <unk> acid binds with calcium to form calcium oxalate crystals which may deposit and cause damage to many areas of the body including the brain , heart , kidneys , and lungs . The most significant effect is accumulation of calcium oxalate crystals in the kidneys which causes kidney damage leading to <unk> or <unk> acute kidney failure . The rate @-@ limiting step in this cascade is the conversion of glycolic to <unk> acid . Accumulation of glycolic acid in the body is mainly responsible for toxicity . 
 = = = Toxicity = = = 
 Ethylene glycol has been shown to be toxic to humans and is also toxic to domestic pets such as cats and dogs . A toxic dose requiring medical treatment varies but is considered more than 0 @.@ 1 mL per kg body weight ( mL / kg ) of pure substance . That is roughly 16 mL of 50 % ethylene glycol for an 80 kg adult and 4 mL for a 20 kg child . Poison control centers often use more than a lick or taste in a child or more than a mouthful in an adult as a dose requiring hospital assessment . 
 The orally lethal dose in humans has been reported as approximately 1 @.@ 4 mL / kg of pure ethylene glycol . That is approximately 224 mL ( 7 @.@ 6 oz . ) of 50 % ethylene glycol for an 80 kg adult and 56 mL ( 2 oz . ) for a 20 kg child . Although survival with medical treatment has occurred with doses much higher than this , death has occurred with 30 mL of the concentrate in an adult . In the EU classification of dangerous substances it is ' harmful ' ( <unk> ) while more toxic substances are classified as ' toxic ' ( T ) or ' very toxic ' ( T + ) . The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency generally puts substances which are lethal at more than 30 g to adults in Toxicity Class III . 
 Ethylene glycol has a low vapor pressure ; it does not evaporate readily at normal temperatures and therefore high concentrations in air or intoxication are unlikely to occur following inhalational exposures . There may be a slight risk of poisoning where mists or fogs are generated , although this rarely leads to poisoning as ethylene glycol causes irritation and coughing when breathed in , alerting victims to its presence . Ethylene glycol is not well absorbed through skin meaning poisoning following dermal exposure is also uncommon . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Antifreeze products for automotive use containing propylene glycol in place of ethylene glycol are available , and are generally considered safer to use , as it possesses an unpleasant taste in contrast to the perceived " sweet " taste of toxic ethylene glycol @-@ based coolants , and only produces lactic acid in an animal 's body , as their muscles do when exercised . 
 When using antifreeze products containing ethylene glycol , recommended safety measures include : 
 Cleaning up any spill immediately and thoroughly . Spills may be cleaned by sprinkling cat litter , sand or other absorbent material directly on the spill . Once fully absorbed , while wearing protective gloves , the material may be scooped into a plastic bag , sealed and disposed . The spill area may be scrubbed with a stiff brush and warm , soapy water . The soapy water is not recommended to be drained in a storm drain . 
 Checking vehicles regularly for leaks . 
 <unk> antifreeze in clearly marked original sealed containers , in areas that are inaccessible to pets or small children . 
 Keeping pets and small children away from the area when draining the car radiator . 
 Disposing of used antifreeze only by taking to a service station . 
 If antifreeze is placed in toilets , ensuring the lid is down and the door closed . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 As many of the clinical signs and symptoms of ethylene glycol poisoning are nonspecific and occur in many poisonings the diagnosis is often difficult . It is most reliably diagnosed by the measurement of the blood ethylene glycol concentration . Ethylene glycol in biological fluids can be determined by gas chromatography . Many hospital laboratories do not have the ability to perform this blood test and in the absence of this test the diagnosis must be made based on the clinical presentation of the patient . In this situation a helpful test to diagnose poisoning is the measurement of the osmolal gap . The patients ' serum osmolality is measured by freezing point depression and then compared with the predicted osmolality based on the patients ' measured sodium , glucose , blood urea nitrogen , and any ethanol that may have been ingested . The presence of a large osmolal gap supports a diagnosis of ethylene glycol poisoning . However , a normal <unk> gap does not rule out ethylene glycol exposure because of wide individual variability . 
 The increased osmolal gap is caused by the ethylene glycol itself . As the metabolism of ethylene glycol progresses there will be less ethylene glycol and this will decrease the blood ethylene glycol concentration and the osmolal gap making this test less useful . Additionally , the presence of other alcohols such as ethanol , <unk> , or methanol or conditions such as alcoholic or diabetic ketoacidosis , lactic acidosis , or kidney failure may also produce an elevated osmolal gap leading to a false diagnosis . 
 Other laboratory abnormalities may suggest poisoning , especially the presence of a metabolic acidosis , particularly if it is characterized by a large anion gap . Large anion gap acidosis is usually present during the initial stage of poisoning . However , acidosis has a large number of differential diagnosis , including poisoning from methanol , salicylates , iron , isoniazid , paracetamol , theophylline , or from conditions such as uremia or diabetic and alcoholic ketoacidosis . The diagnosis of ethylene glycol poisoning should be considered in any patient with a severe acidosis . Urine microscopy can reveal needle or envelope @-@ shaped calcium oxalate crystals in the urine which can suggest poisoning ; although these crystals may not be present until the late stages of poisoning . Finally , many commercial radiator antifreeze products have fluorescein added to enable radiator leaks to be detected using a Wood 's lamp . Following ingestion of antifreeze products containing ethylene glycol and fluorescein , a Wood 's lamp may reveal fluorescence of a patient ’ s mouth area , clothing , <unk> , or urine which can help to diagnose poisoning . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 = = = Stabilization and decontamination = = = 
 The most important initial treatment for ethylene glycol poisoning is stabilizing the patient . As ethylene glycol is rapidly absorbed , gastric decontamination is unlikely to be of benefit unless it is performed within 60 minutes of ingestion . Traditionally , gastric lavage or nasogastric aspiration of gastric contents are the most common methods employed in ethylene glycol poisoning . The usefulness of gastric lavage has , however , been questioned , and it is now no longer used routinely in poisoning situations . Ipecac @-@ induced vomiting is not recommended . As activated charcoal does not adsorb glycols , it is not recommended as it will not be effective at preventing absorption . It is only used in the presence of a toxic dose of another poison or drug . Patients with significant poisoning often present in a critical condition . In this situation stabilization of the patient including airway management with intubation should be performed in preference to gastrointestinal decontamination . Patients presenting with metabolic acidosis or seizures require treatment with sodium bicarbonate and <unk> such as a benzodiazepine respectively . Sodium bicarbonate should be used cautiously as it can worsen hypocalcemia by increasing the plasma protein binding of calcium . If hypocalcemia occurs it can be treated with calcium replacement although calcium supplementation can increase the precipitation of calcium oxalate crystals leading to tissue damage . Intubation and respiratory support may be required in severely intoxicated patients ; patients with hypotension require treatment with intravenous fluids and possibly vasopressors . 
 = = = Antidotes = = = 
 Following decontamination and the institution of supportive measures , the next priority is inhibition of further ethylene glycol metabolism using antidotes . The antidotes for ethylene glycol poisoning are ethanol and fomepizole . This <unk> treatment forms the mainstay of management of ethylene glycol poisoning . The toxicity of ethylene glycol comes from its metabolism to glycolic acid and oxalic acid . The goal of pharmacotherapy is to prevent the formation of these metabolites . Ethanol acts by competing with ethylene glycol for alcohol dehydrogenase , the first enzyme in the degradation pathway . Because ethanol has a much higher affinity for alcohol dehydrogenase , about a 100 @-@ times greater affinity , it successfully blocks the breakdown of ethylene glycol into <unk> , which prevents the further degradation . Without oxalic acid formation , the nephrotoxic effects can be avoided , but the ethylene glycol is still present in the body . It is eventually excreted in the urine , but supportive therapy for the CNS depression and metabolic acidosis will be required until the ethylene glycol concentrations fall below toxic limits . Pharmaceutical grade ethanol is usually given intravenously as a 5 or 10 % solution in 5 % dextrose , but it is also sometimes given orally in the form of a strong spirit such as whisky , vodka , or gin . 
 <unk> is a potent inhibitor of alcohol dehydrogenase ; similar to ethanol , it acts to block the formation of the toxic metabolites . <unk> has been shown to be highly effective as an antidote for ethylene glycol poisoning . It is the only antidote approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning . Both antidotes have advantages and disadvantages . Ethanol is readily available in most hospitals , is inexpensive , and can be administered orally as well as intravenously . Its adverse effects include intoxication , hypoglycemia in children , and possible liver toxicity . Patients receiving ethanol therapy also require frequent blood ethanol concentration measurements and dosage adjustments to maintain a therapeutic ethanol concentration . Patients therefore must be monitored in an intensive care unit . Alternatively , the adverse side effects of fomepizole are minimal and the approved dosing regimen maintains therapeutic concentrations without the need to monitor blood concentrations of the drug . The disadvantage of fomepizole is that it is expensive . Costing US $ 1 @,@ 000 per gram , an average course used in an adult poisoning would cost approximately $ 3 @,@ 500 to $ 4 @,@ 000 . Despite the cost , fomepizole is gradually replacing ethanol as the antidote of choice in ethylene glycol poisoning . Adjunct agents including thiamine and pyridoxine are often given , because they may help prevent the formation of oxalic acid . The use of these agents is based on theoretical observations and there is limited evidence to support their use in treatment ; they may be of particular benefit in people who could be deficient in these vitamins such as malnourished or alcoholic patients . 
 = = = Hemodialysis = = = 
 In addition to antidotes , an important treatment for poisoning is the use of hemodialysis . Hemodialysis is used to enhance the removal of <unk> ethylene glycol , as well as its metabolites from the body . It has been shown to be highly effective in the removal of ethylene glycol and its metabolites from the blood . Hemodialysis also has the added benefit of correcting other metabolic <unk> or supporting deteriorating kidney function . Hemodialysis is usually indicated in patients with severe metabolic acidosis ( blood pH less than 7 @.@ 3 ) , kidney failure , severe electrolyte imbalance , or if the patients condition is deteriorating despite treatment . Often both <unk> treatment and hemodialysis are used together in the treatment of poisoning . Because hemodialysis will also remove the antidotes from the blood , doses of antidotes need to be increased to compensate . If hemodialysis is not available , then peritoneal dialysis also removes ethylene glycol , although less efficiently . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Treatment for antifreeze poisoning needs to be started as soon after ingestion as possible to be effective ; the earlier treatment is started , the greater the chance of survival . Cats must be treated within 3 hours of ingesting of antifreeze to be effective , while dogs must be treated within 8 – 12 hours of ingestion . Once kidney failure develops , the prognosis is poor . 
 Generally , if the patient is treated and survives then a full recovery is expected . Patients who present early to medical facilities and have prompt medical treatment typically will have a favorable outcome . Alternatively , patients presenting late with signs and symptoms of coma , hyperkalemia , seizures , or severe acidosis have a poor prognosis . Patients who develop severe central nervous system manifestations or stroke who survive may have long term neurologic dysfunction ; in some cases they may recover , although convalescence may be prolonged . The most significant long @-@ term complication is related to the kidneys . Cases of permanent kidney damage , often requiring chronic dialysis or kidney transplantation , have been reported after severe poisoning . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Ethylene glycol poisoning is a relatively common occurrence worldwide . Human poisoning often occurs in isolated cases , but may also occur in epidemics . Many cases of poisoning are the result of using ethylene glycol as a cheap substitute for alcohol or intentional ingestions in suicide attempts . Less commonly it has been used as a means of homicide . Children or animals may be exposed by accidental ingestion ; children and animals often consume large amounts due to ethylene glycol having a sweet taste . In the United States there were <unk> cases reported to poison centers in 2002 . Additionally , ethylene glycol was the most common chemical responsible for deaths reported by US poison centers in 2003 . In Australia there were 17 cases reported to the Victorian poison center and 30 cases reported to the New South Wales poison center in 2007 . However , these numbers may underestimate actual numbers because not all cases attributable to ethylene glycol are reported to poison control centers . Most deaths from ethylene glycol are intentional suicides ; deaths in children due to unintentional ingestion are extremely rare . 
 In an effort to prevent poisoning , often a bittering agent called <unk> benzoate , known by the trade name <unk> , is added to ethylene glycol preparations as an <unk> to prevent accidental or intentional ingestion . The bittering agent is thought to stop ingestion as part of the human defense against ingestion of harmful substances is rejection of bitter tasting substances . In the United States , eight states ( Oregon , California , New Mexico , Virginia , Arizona , Maine , Tennessee , Washington ) have made the addition of bittering agents to antifreeze compulsory . Three follow up studies targeting limited populations or suicidal persons to assess the efficacy of bittering agents in preventing toxicity or death have , however , shown limited benefit of bittering ethylene glycol preparations in these two populations . Specifically , Mullins finds that bittering of antifreeze does not reduce reported cases of poisoning of preschoolers in the US state of Oregon . Similarly , White found that adding bittering agents did not decrease the frequency or severity of antifreeze poisonings in children under the age of 5 . Additionally , another study by White found that suicidal persons are not deterred by the <unk> taste of antifreeze in their attempts to kill themselves . These studies did not focus on poisoning of domestic pets or livestock , for example , or inadvertent exposure to <unk> antifreeze among a large population ( of non @-@ preschool age children ) . 
 Poisoning of a raccoon was diagnosed in 2002 in Prince Edward Island , Canada . An online veterinary manual provides information on lethal doses of ethylene glycol for chicken , cattle , as well as cats and dogs , adding that younger animals may be more susceptible . 
 = = Environmental effects = = 
 Ethylene glycol involved in aircraft de @-@ icing and anti @-@ icing operations is released onto land and eventually to waterways . A report prepared for the World Health Organization in 2000 stated that laboratory tests exposing aquatic organisms to stream water receiving runoff from airports have shown toxic effects and death ( p . 12 ) . Field studies in the vicinity of an airport have reported toxic signs consistent with ethylene glycol poisoning , fish kills , and reduced biodiversity , although those effects could not definitively be ascribed to ethylene glycol ( p . 12 ) . The process of <unk> of glycols also increases the risk to organisms , as oxygen levels become depleted in surface waters ( p . 13 ) . Another study found the toxicity to aquatic and other organisms was relatively low , but the oxygen depletion effect of biodegradation was more serious ( p . 245 ) . Further , " Anaerobic biodegradation may also release relatively toxic byproducts such as acetaldehyde , ethanol , acetate , and methane ( p . 245 ) . " 
 In Canada , Environment Canada reports that " in recent years , management practices at Canada ’ s major airports have improved with the installation of new ethylene glycol application and mitigation facilities or improvements to existing ones . " Since 1994 , federal airports must comply with the <unk> Guidelines of the Canadian Environmental Protection Act , monitoring and reporting on concentrations of glycols in surface water . Detailed mitigation plans include storage and handling issues ( p . 27 ) , spill response procedures , and measures taken to reduce volumes of fluid ( p . 28 ) . Considering factors such as the " seasonal nature of releases , ambient temperatures , metabolic rates and duration of exposure " , Environment Canada stated in 2014 that " it is proposed that ethylene glycol is not entering the environment in a quantity or concentration or under conditions that have or may have an immediate or long @-@ term harmful effect on the environment or its biological diversity " . 
 In the U.S. , airports are required to obtain stormwater discharge permits and ensure that wastes from deicing operations are properly collected and treated . Large new airports may be required to collect 60 percent of aircraft deicing fluid after deicing . Airports that discharge the collected aircraft deicing fluid directly to waters of the U.S. must also meet numeric discharge requirements for chemical oxygen demand . A report in 2000 stated that ethylene glycol was becoming less popular for aircraft deicing in the U.S. , due to its reporting requirements and adverse environmental impacts ( p . 213 ) , and noted a shift to the use of propylene glycol ( p . I @-@ 3 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Ethylene glycol was once thought innocuous ; in 1931 it was suggested as being suitable for use as a vehicle or solvent for injectable pharmaceutical preparations . Numerous cases of poisoning have been reported since then , and it has been shown to be toxic to humans . 
 = Mycena polygramma = 
 Mycena polygramma , commonly known as the grooved bonnet , is a species of mushroom in the Mycenaceae family . The inedible fruit bodies are small , pale gray @-@ brown mushrooms with broadly conical caps , pinkish gills . They are found in small troops on stumps and branches of deciduous and occasionally coniferous trees . The mushroom is found in Asia , Europe , and North America , where it is typically found on twigs or buried wood , carrying out its role in the forest ecosystem by decomposing organic matter , recycling nutrients , and forming humus in the soil . M. polygramma contains two uncommon hydroxy fatty acids and is also a bioluminescent fungus whose intensity of light emission follows a diurnal pattern . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 First called Agaricus <unk> by French mycologist Jean Bulliard in 1789 , the species was later sanctioned under that name by Elias Magnus Fries in his Systema Mycologicum . It was soon after transferred into the genus Mycena in 1821 by Samuel Frederick Gray , who raised many of Fries ' sub @-@ generic divisions to the genus level . Agaricus <unk> , described by Friedrich Franz Wilhelm Junghuhn in 1830 , is the only known taxonomic synonym . The specific epithet is derived from the Greek <unk> meaning " many " and <unk> , or " foot " . It is commonly known as the " grooved bonnet " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of the M. polygramma fruit body is 2 to 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 to 1 @.@ 6 in ) in diameter , and initially egg- to cone @-@ shaped , but expands to become conic to bell @-@ shaped or nearly convex with an abrupt small umbo , or at times plane with a conic umbo . On young fruit bodies , the cap margin is slightly curved inward , and frequently has scalloped edges ; in maturity the margin flares out , or is recurved and wavy . The surface of the cap is initially covered with short , fine whitish or grayish hairs that often persist until near maturity . With age , the cap surface becomes smooth , the color dark brownish @-@ gray to black beneath the bloom , fading slowly to a pale gray , and nearly pinkish @-@ buff at times . The cap margin is opaque and frequently has narrow , deep furrows or grooves , with the surface often more or less uneven and appearing as if streaked with glistening lines . The flesh is very hard and cartilaginous , watery grayish to white , rather thin , and with no distinctive odor and a mild taste . 
 The gills are narrowly adnate ( attached squarely to the stem ) or have a short decurrent tooth , and are packed close together , with 30 – 38 gills reaching the stem . They are broad anteriorly ( 4 – 7 mm ) , white or whitish , in age flushed with pink , often with sordid @-@ brownish stains , and with edges pallid and even . The stem is 6 to 15 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 to 5 @.@ 9 in ) long , 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 2 in ) thick , very brittle and cartilaginous , equal , and tubular . It sometimes has a well @-@ developed pseudorrhiza that resembles white cotton , and the base is covered with stiff white hairs , and often it stains reddish brown . The surface has fine straight or sometimes twisted longitudinal striations . The surface is ashy @-@ gray or paler grayish @-@ brown beneath the silvery covering , at times nearly smooth , with the apex pallid and faintly powdered . 
 Mycena polygramma is a bioluminescent mushroom , although the extent of luminescence can vary considerably . The mushroom is inedible , and has a mild to slightly acrid taste and a " pleasant " odor . 
 = = = Microscopic features = = = 
 Collected in deposit , such as in a spore print , the spores appear white . Viewed with a light microscope , the spores are broadly ellipsoid in shape , smooth , amyloid , with dimensions of 7 @.@ 5 – 10 by 5 – 6 µm . Occasionally the spores contain oil droplets . The basidia ( pore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored , 26 – 30 by 7 – 8 µm . The cheilocystidia are scattered to abundant , <unk> or with the <unk> somewhat enlarged and the apex forked or branched , and give rise to two or several contorted finger @-@ like projections . Pleurocystidia are not differentiated . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Tall and slender forms of Mycena polygramma somewhat resemble M. <unk> or M. <unk> . The former species is distinguished by its color , and the latter by its relationship to M. alcalina and its habitat on sphagnum . 
 = = Ecology , habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies of M. polygramma grow in groups or sub @-@ clusters under hardwoods , particularly deciduous trees such as oak , maple , and basswood . In North America , it has been collected from North Carolina , Massachusetts , New York , and Michigan , where it fruits from June to October . The fruit bodies are susceptible to attack by the parasitic fungi Spinellus fusiger and S. macrocarpus . 
 Typically found on twigs or buried wood , the fungus is known to be a vigorous decomposer of lignin and cellulose in leaf litter . Mycena polygramma is a saprobic fungus , and is one of many fungi that contribute to plant litter decomposition in forest ecosystems through nutrient recycling and humus formation in soil . It is a <unk> decomposer of larch litter , and can break down both lignin and carbohydrates , although it has a preference for carbohydrates . In an experiment testing the ability of several litter @-@ decomposing fungi to remove lignin from leaves of the perennial grass Miscanthus sinensis , under pure culture conditions , M. polygramma showed limited ability to cause the mass loss of lignin . 
 Rare in North America , the fungus is common in Europe , including Great Britain . They have been collected on the Falkland Islands , and Japan . 
 = = Chemistry and bioluminescence = = 
 Mycena polygramma contains the unusual hydroxy fatty acids 7 @-@ hydroxy @-@ 8 @,@ 14 @-@ dimethyl @-@ 9 @-@ <unk> acid ( 0 @.@ 05 % of the total fatty acids ) and 7 @-@ hydroxy @-@ 8 @,@ 16 @-@ dimethyl @-@ 9 @-@ <unk> acid ( 0 @.@ 01 % ) . 
 The fungus is one of several dozen Mycena species that are bioluminescent . Unlike most luminescent organisms , M. polygramma has a diurnal rhythm of luminescence intensity , and has rises and falls of light intensity as high as 35 percent . However , this light emission is not typically noticed , as it can not be detected visually by the dark @-@ adapted eye ; sensitive photomultipliers or long exposure times are required to measure the phenomenon . The wavelength of spectral emissions from the fungus grown in pure culture is in the range 470 – 640 <unk> . 
 = = = Cited books = = = 
 Smith AH . ( 1947 ) . North American species of Mycena . Ann Arbor , Michigan : University of Michigan Press . 
 = Geology of the Lassen volcanic area = 
 The geology of the Lassen volcanic area presents a record of sedimentation and volcanic activity in the area in and around Lassen Volcanic National Park in Northern California , U.S. The park is located in the southernmost part of the Cascade Mountain Range in the Pacific Northwest region of the United States . Pacific Oceanic tectonic plates have plunged below the North American Plate in this part of North America for hundreds of millions of years . Heat from these subducting plates has fed scores of volcanoes in California , Oregon , Washington and British Columbia over at least the past 30 million years ( see Geology of the Pacific Northwest ) and is also responsible for activities in the Lassen volcanic area . 
 Between 3 and 4 million years ago , volcanic @-@ derived mud flows called lahars streamed down several major mountains that included nearby but now extinct Mount Yana and Mount Maidu to become the Tuscan Formation . Basaltic and later andesitic to dacitic flows of lava covered increasingly larger areas of this formation to eventually form the lava plateau that the park sits on . About 600 @,@ 000 years ago , Mount Tehama started to rise as a stratovolcano in the southwestern corner of the park , eventually reaching an estimated 11 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 @,@ 400 m ) in height . Following a series of eruptions approximately 350 @,@ 000 years ago , its cone collapsed into itself to form a 2 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) wide caldera . 
 Roughly 27 @,@ 000 years ago , a dacite lava dome quickly pushed its way through Tehama 's destroyed north @-@ eastern flank , becoming the approximately 1 @,@ 000 ft ( 300 m ) shorter Lassen Peak . Lassen 's shape was significantly altered by glacial erosion from 25 @,@ 000 to 18 @,@ 000 years ago during the Wisconsin glaciation . Since then , smaller dacite domes such as the 1 @,@ 100 @-@ year @-@ old Chaos Crags have formed around Lassen . Phreatic ( steam explosion ) eruptions , dacite and andesite lava flows along with cinder cone formation have persisted into modern times . Most notable of these is the mid to late 17th century eruption and formation ( Tree Ring dates ) of Cinder Cone and the early 20th century eruption of Lassen Peak . The only activity since then has been the constant bubbling of mud pots and steaming of fumaroles from the various geothermal areas in Lassen Volcanic National Park . However , a potential exists for renewed vigorous volcanic activity that could threaten life and property in the area . 
 = = Regional geologic setting = = 
 = = = Current setting = = = 
 The Lassen volcanic area lies at the southern extremity of the Cascade Range , which extends northward some 500 mi ( 800 km ) from Lassen Peak within the park through Oregon and Washington and into British Columbia . Lassen Peak and the 16 other major Cascade Volcanoes form a segment of a ring of volcanoes that circle the Pacific Ocean known collectively as the ' Pacific Ring of Fire . ' The Cascade Volcanoes are fed by heat generated as the Gorda and Juan de Fuca tectonic plates are being subducted below the much larger but lighter North American Plate . Lying some 300 mi ( 480 km ) offshore , the spreading center of the Gorda Plate pushes out about 1 in ( 2 @.@ 54 cm ) of new crust toward the coast of <unk> California and southern Oregon every year . 
 The composition of the molten rock ( magma ) that feeds volcanism in the Lassen volcanic area ranges widely in its content of silica or SiO 
 2 ; the higher the silica content , the greater the ability of the magma to trap and hold on to gas and water vapor . When high @-@ silica ( dacitic ) magma rises to the Earth 's surface , the trapped gases and vapors can erupt explosively to produce ash clouds and pyroclastic flows that consist of superheated gas , ash and volcanic fragments . Dacite magma that is extruded <unk> as lava forms lava domes because it is too viscous ( sticky ) to flow far away from its source . Low @-@ silica ( basaltic ) magma is more fluid and usually erupts as lava in less explosive eruptions than dacite because gas and water vapor escape easily from it . Eruptions of basalt magma typically produce elongate lava flows , as well as build cinder cones ( piles of small frothy lava fragments or ' cinders ' ) around volcanic vents . 
 Basaltic volcanism in the Lassen volcanic area occurs mainly along chains of vents aligned in a north or northwest direction , parallel to regional faults . Examples include Poison Buttes , Subglacial Buttes , Tumble Buttes , the Prospect Peak @-@ Red Cinder area , the east side of the Hat Creek Valley and Potato Buttes @-@ Sugarloaf area , and the Red Lake Mountain area . Prolonged basaltic volcanism at a single site can produce a sizeable edifice , like the broad , relatively flat shield volcanoes of Prospect Peak and Sifford Mountain . 
 Northwest of the park lies the Klamath Mountains ( a collective term for the Siskiyou , Trinity , Salmon and Marble mountain ranges ) . To the west lies the Sacramento Valley . Just south of the park begins the Sierra Nevada , and to the east lie the Modoc Plateau and then the Great Basin . 
 = = = Geologic history of the region = = = 
 All rock now exposed in the area of the park is volcanic , but this has not always been the case . For hundreds of millions of years , the Lassen region underwent repeated uplifting to form mountains , only to have them worn down and submerged under encroaching seas . During the periods of submersion , sand , mud and limestone were deposited . Occasionally volcanic activity was associated with the mountain building . 
 About 70 million years ago , the area where the Cascade Range is now situated was under the most recent encroachment by the Pacific Ocean . The rocks that make up the modern Sierra Nevada and the Klamath Mountains were already in existence but deeply buried . Some 70 million years before ( 140 million years before present ) , the rocks that now make up the Klamaths broke away from the rocks that now make up the Sierras and moved 60 mi ( 97 km ) west , leaving the flooded ' Lassen Strait . ' This broad depression was a seaway that connected the marine basin in California with that in east central Oregon . 
 The entire western portion of North America was being deformed from the Laramide orogeny starting around 70 million years ago . Gradually during millions of years , crustal rocks were folded and fractured and the seas driven away . This same bending and breaking of rocks relieved pressure on the hot material beneath the Earth 's crust and permitted magma to rise toward the surface . Volcanoes burst into activity starting 30 million years ago from Washington southward along the Cascades and in the area now occupied by the Sierra Nevada . This activity continued until approximately 11 or 12 million years ago . Lava and ash reached a thickness of up to 10 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) in some areas , forming what is now known as the western Cascades . These have been eroded until they are now rolling hills . 
 Meanwhile , toward the end of this activity , eruptions of a different kind took place on an unprecedented scale in eastern Oregon and Washington . From innumerable cracks , floods of highly fluid basaltic lava spread to cover an area of over 200 @,@ 000 sq mi ( 520 @,@ 000 km2 ) . Now known as the Columbia Plateau , this great lava bed of flood basalt covers much of Oregon , Washington and even parts of Idaho . Northern California 's Modoc Plateau is a thinner basaltic flow which some geologists associate with the Columbia Plateau , but there are technical objections to this . The High Cascades took shape as a distinct mountain belt as a result of this upheaval and the bending of the thick blanket of volcanic rocks . During the next 10 million years , a series of new basaltic volcanic cones similar to the shield volcanoes now found in Hawaii were built . 
 = = Formation of basement rocks = = 
 Between two and three million years ago , during the Pliocene , the Sierra Nevada was uplifted and tilted westward . A series of volcanic mudflows ( lahars ) from three major source areas contributed debris that covered almost 2 @,@ 000 sq mi ( 5 @,@ 200 km2 ) to form the oldest distinctive geologic formation in the High Cascades . The resulting Tuscan Formation is not exposed anywhere in the national park but it is just below the surface in many places within it . The oldest pyroclastic material in the formation is 3 or 4 million years old . The youngest part of the formation consists of interbedded conglomerates and volcanic breccias that are 2 million years old . 
 One major source of the formation was Mount Yana ; centered a few miles ( 5 km ) southwest of Butt Mountain and south of the park . Mount Yana had probably reached its full size of 10 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) in elevation and 15 mi ( 24 km ) in diameter before Mount Maidu , the second source , had acquired half its growth . Mount Maidu , which eventually surpassed Mount Yana in size , was centered over what is now the town of Mineral , California but has been extinct for hundreds of thousands of years ( the grassy plain around the town is Maidu 's caldera ) . A third source situated north of Latour Butte made a lesser contribution to the formation . Minor sources included an area near Hatchet Mountain Pass ( northwest of Burney Mountain ) , dikes south and southwest of Inskip Hill and possibly Campbell Mound ( north of Chico , California ) . 
 Meanwhile , within the park boundary other volcanic events were taking place . Basaltic lavas poured forth in the vicinity of Willow Lake in the southwestern portion of the park . These were followed by a very thick sequence of very fluid andesitic lavas which erupted near Juniper Lake and flowed westward about four miles ( 6 km ) . At about the same time , other andesitic lavas poured from several vents on the central plateau to cover an area of at least 30 sq mi ( 78 km2 ) . Included among these flows were the Twin Lake lavas of black porphyritic andesite , which are notable in that they contain xenocrysts of quartz . The Flatiron andesites spread over the southwestern part of the park area around this time . Apparently , the vents of these lavas renewed activity at a much later date to form three cinder cones : Hat Mountain , Crater Butte and Fairfield Peak . 
 Somewhat later , andesitic lavas poured out from what is now Reading Peak and mainly flowed to the south and east , reaching the head of Warner Valley . By this time , the park 's eastern portion had been transformed into a relatively flat plain . The activity was followed by an eruption of the Eastern basalts from volcanoes east of the park . These thick flows have subsequently eroded to produce rugged hills that limit the park on the east . Taken together , these various flows built the lava plateau that the Lassen volcanic area is located on . 
 = = Volcanoes rise and fall in the park area = = 
 = = = Mount Tehama and pre @-@ Lassen volcanics = = = 
 From 600 @,@ 000 to 400 @,@ 000 years ago , eruptions built a large conical stratovolcano called Mount Tehama ( also called Brokeoff Volcano ) in what is now the southwest corner of the park . It was made of roughly alternating layers of andesitic lavas and tephra ( volcanic ash , breccia , and pumice ) with increasing amounts of tephra with elevation . 
 Tehama eventually reached an elevation of about 11 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 @,@ 400 m ) , was 11 to 15 miles ( 18 to 24 km ) wide at its base , and contained 80 km3 ( 19 cu mi ) of material . Its principal vent lay in the neighborhood of what is now Sulphur Works , but a second vent from which no lavas issued lay on the eastern flank of Little Hot Springs Valley . Contrary to popular belief , Bumpass Hell is not one of Tehama 's main vents since it is located outside of the caldera . 
 It is possible that Tehama collapsed along a series of fault lines which criss @-@ crossed it . The trigger for this possible collapse may have been the release of the extensive amounts of lava that formed the dacite domes on its flank . More likely , the volcano weathered away ; hot volcanic gases and steam turned hard rock into soft clay that were easily eroded by glacial action . Either way , the largest remnants of Tehama include Brokeoff Mountain , Mount Conard , Mount Diller , and Pilot Pinnacle . <unk> erupted again in the area starting approximately 300 @,@ 000 years ago and dacite erupted in the area between 250 @,@ 000 and 200 @,@ 000 years ago and 100 @,@ 000 years ago through the present . 
 Four shield volcanoes ( Raker and Prospect Peaks , Sifford Mountain and Mount Harkness ) grew to elevations of between 7 @,@ 000 to 8 @,@ 400 ft ( 2 @,@ 100 to 2 @,@ 600 m ) at the corners of the central plateau . Raker Peak erupted andesite lavas while basalt flowed from the others . Each of these volcanoes developed a cinder cone on its summit during their last stages of eruption . Later , a mass of rhyolite was forced through the north flank of Sifford Mountain and a plug of dacite was pushed up through the west flank of Raker Peak . 
 In the past 50 @,@ 000 years , at least seven major episodes of dacitic volcanism produced lava domes and pyroclastic deposits in the Lassen volcanic area , and another five episodes produced basaltic and andesitic ( silica content between basalt and dacite ) lava flows . Eruptions have occurred at sites including Lassen Peak , Chaos Crags , and Sunflower Flat ( explosive dacite eruptions followed by dome growth ) and Tumble Buttes , Hat Mountain , and Prospect Peak ( basalt eruptions ) . In addition , about 30 smaller volcanoes erupted basaltic lavas in the larger region surrounding the Lassen volcanic center . 
 = = = Development of Lassen Peak = = = 
 Radiometric dating indicates that around 31 @,@ 000 years ago a new vent opened up on the northeastern slope of Tehama , probably close to where Lassen Peak now stands . Streams of fluid dacite flowed chiefly toward the north , reaching a thickness of 1 @,@ 500 ft ( 460 m ) and covering perhaps 20 square miles ( 52 km2 ) . Known as the Loomis Sequence , these pre @-@ Lassen dacites are the black , glassy , columnar lavas that now encircle Lassen Peak . 
 Sometime between 25 @,@ 000 and 31 @,@ 000 years ago , Lassen Peak , a <unk> lava dome volcano , was pushed up through the pre @-@ Lassen dacites . Lassen grew past the normal maximum size of plug dome volcanoes , 1 @,@ 000 ft ( 300 m ) , and reached a height of 1 @,@ 800 feet ( 550 m ) above the surrounding plateau in as little as a few years . The surface of the growing pile of about a 1 cu mi ( 4 @.@ 2 km3 ) of lava crumbled continually , forming enormous banks of talus . When Lassen Peak formed it looked much like the nearby Chaos Crags domes do today , with steep sides covered by angular rock talus . Lassen Peak 's shape was significantly altered by glacial erosion from 25 @,@ 000 to 18 @,@ 000 years ago during the Wisconsin glaciation . At least one of Lassen 's glaciers extended as far as 7 mi ( 11 km ) from the volcano itself . 
 Later , but not precisely dated , eruptions from the Lassen volcanic area have formed over 30 smaller steep @-@ sided , mound @-@ shaped accumulations of volcanic rock , called lava domes . Crescent Crater , which at first glance appears as a parasite on Lassen 's northeast flank , has been more heavily glaciated and thus is older . Other dacite domes which rose on Tehama 's flanks are Bumpass Mountain , Helen Ridge , Eagle Peak , Vulcan 's Castle and Reading Peak . An upper limit of 10 @,@ 000 years has been set for the domes next to Lost Creek ( north domes ) . All of these domes must have risen with great rapidity . 
 = = = Glacial action = = = 
 Glaciation has played an important but incompletely understood role in the park . Glaciers existed throughout the park area during most of the Pleistocene with smaller ones persisting at higher elevations until comparatively recent times . Lassen Peak is situated at a center from which many of these glaciers originated . Glacial ice that filled Mill Creek ( whose canyon is mostly post @-@ glacial ) , Blue Lake Canyon , Kings Creek Meadows , Flatiron Ridge , Warner Valley and the valley of Manzanita , Hat and Lost Creeks originated from there . Indeed , Lassen Peak appears to be sitting in the depression carved by the Lost Creek Glacier . 
 Reading Peak formed a second center from which ice moved north into Hat Creek and Summit Creek . Ice moving southward united with some of the above glaciers and emptied into Warner Valley . On the central plateau , the ridge connecting Hat Mountain with Crater Butte served as a divide between ice flowing northward to Badger Flat and Hat Creek and that moving southward to Corral Meadows , Kings Creek and Warner Valley . Ice from Mt . Harkness and Sifford Mountain also wound up in Warner Valley . 
 The crest of Saddle Mountain served as a divide with ice north of it moving into the depression containing Snag and Butte Lakes , while those to the south entered Warner Valley . The ice varied from a thickness of 1 @,@ 600 ft ( 490 m ) in Warner Valley to much thinner sheets in the higher mountains . 
 = = = Post glacial to 19th century activity = = = 
 Subsequent to the rise of Lassen Peak , several dacitic pumice cones developed in a rift extending northwest from the base of Lassen Peak . Then about 1 @,@ 100 years ago several dacitic domes , the Chaos Crags , protruded through these cones and obliterated all but half of the southernmost cone . At least 300 years ago a series of large avalanches , possibly triggered by steam explosions , occurred on the north side of the Crags . These avalanches created their own ' air cushions ' that helped accelerate them to speeds exceeding 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) and push them partway up Table Mountain . The resulting wilderness of debris , the Chaos <unk> , covers an area of 2 @.@ 5 sq mi ( 6 @.@ 5 km2 ) . Manzanita Lake was formed as a result of Manzanita Creek being dammed by the debris . Steam rose from the domes of Chaos Crags until 1857 . 
 Around the mid @-@ 18th century a series of eruptions produced Cinder Cone in the northeast corner of the park , mantling an area of 30 sq mi ( 78 km2 ) with ejecta in the process . Ash falling on the streams of lava pouring from the cone 's east flank formed the Painted Dunes . A flow of quartz @-@ studded basalt lava ( the Fantastic Lava Beds ) poured from the Cinder Cone and dammed the streams that fed nearby Butte Lake to the north , forming Snag Lake to the south . In the late 18th century Cinder Cone had its most recent eruption and lava flow . 
 = = = Early 20th century activity = = = 
 Explosions recurred at irregular intervals on Lassen Peak for most of 1914 . Later , on May 19 , 1915 , a mass of lava rose in the summit crater and spilled 1 @,@ 000 ft ( 300 m ) down the western side of the volcano . Extensive lahars ( mudflows ) were created on the northeastern side as snowbanks were melted . The resulting debris swept down the slope . Divided by Raker Peak , part of this mudflow raced down Lost Creek ; the remaining flow passed over the 100 ft ( 30 m ) rise east of the park road and rushed down Hat Creek . A wide barren swath was torn through the forest . 
 A great explosion blasted out a new crater three days later on May 22 , 1915 . A volcanic cloud rose 40 @,@ 000 ft ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) , but a portion of the explosive force was deflected downward . The resulting pyroclastic flow of super @-@ heated gas , rocks and ash roared down the same path taken by the mudflow , resulting in further damage along the headwaters of Hat and Lost Creeks . Ash from the eruption blew eastward with some fine ash falling at least as far as 200 mi ( 320 km ) from the volcano . 
 The last major eruptions of Lassen Peak occurred in April through June 1917 , when a new crater was created at the summit of the mountain . Less explosive activity continued through 1921 . Some authorities , such as the Smithsonian , consider the eruption of Mount Lassen to have ended on June 29 , 1917 . 
 Since then , the volcano has been dormant , although some steam still rises from small vents in its summit and on its flanks . Pumice ejected during the 1915 eruption of Lassen Peak is conspicuously banded with light streaks of dacite and dark andesite , which appears to represent two distinct magmas imperfectly mixed during the eruption . The 1915 eruption of Lassen Peak was the second most recent volcanic outburst in the contiguous 48 U.S. states ( after the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens in Washington ) . 
 = = Volcanic hazards = = 
 = = = Direct eruption hazards = = = 
 The most common volcanic activity over the last 50 @,@ 000 years in the Lassen volcanic area consists of small to moderate @-@ sized eruptions that produce basaltic lava flows and localized ash falls . These eruptions typically last a few months to a year , but may continue for several years . They can cover more than 1 sq mi ( 2 @.@ 6 km2 ) with lava flows , build cinder cones as high as 1 @,@ 000 ft ( 300 m ) , and blanket many square miles or square kilometers with ash a few inches ( several cm ) to about three feet ( one meter ) deep . Because these eruptions are relatively nonviolent , they rarely cause human fatalities . 
 Dacite eruptions in the Lassen area typically begin with steam explosions caused by the interaction of rising magma with ground water . When dacite magma charged with volcanic gases reaches the surface , it erupts explosively , usually as a vertical column of gas and ash that can rise several miles into the atmosphere . Heavy fallback of hot ash and rock fragments from eruption columns may generate highly mobile pyroclastic flows that can rush several miles down a volcano 's slopes and adjacent valleys . Fallout from the eruption column can blanket areas within a few miles ( ~ 8 km ) of the vent with a thick layer of pumice , and high @-@ altitude winds may carry finer ash tens to hundreds of miles from the volcano , posing a hazard to flying aircraft , particularly those with jet engines . 
 The areas of highest hazard are those that could be affected by pyroclastic flows and lahars ( see map ) . These areas , including Hat Creek Valley , are those in the immediate vicinity and downhill from likely eruption sites . Fallout of ash will affect areas downwind at the time of an eruption . Within the hazard zones , relative hazard is gradational , decreasing away from the location of potential vents . 
 After an initial explosive eruption , extrusion of gas @-@ depleted dacite magma commonly forms lava domes . Growing lava domes are inherently unstable , and collapse of their steep sides often generates pyroclastic flows of lava blocks and ash that can travel several miles . Such a sequence of events is recorded by the deposits related to the emplacement of Chaos Crags domes between 1 @,@ 100 and 1 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 Interaction of hot pyroclastic flows with snow and ice can generate highly mobile flows of mud and debris ( called lahars ) that may rush down valleys leading away from a volcano . Because of this , active volcanoes that have a significant snow and ice cover can be particularly dangerous . The lahars that threatened residents of the Lassen area in May 1915 were generated by relatively small eruptions of Lassen Peak . Nonetheless , they traveled down creek beds as far as 12 mi ( 19 km ) and released floods that affected valleys for 30 mi ( 48 km ) downstream . 
 = = = Non @-@ eruption hazards = = = 
 Additional volcano hazards at Lassen are rockfalls and landslides not directly related to eruptions . Recently erupted volcanic domes are unstable and can collapse , generating small to large rockfalls . Approximately 350 years ago , collapse of one of the Chaos Crags domes generated huge rockfalls , creating an area now called the Chaos <unk> . The first and largest of these traveled 4 mi ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) downslope and was able to climb 400 feet ( 120 m ) up the side of Table Mountain . The trigger for the rockfall is unknown , but it was most likely a large earthquake . Normal weathering also weakens fractured volcanic rock and contributes to small rockfalls . In the summer of 1994 , a rockfall of 13 @,@ 000 cu yd ( 9 @.@ 9 × 10 − 6 km3 ) occurred on the northeastern flank of Lassen Peak . During periods of extreme rainfall or snow melt , mudflows are sometimes generated by mobilization of loose volcanic debris and soil on the slopes of volcanoes . 
 The only current visible activity in the Lassen volcanic area is from the various geothermal areas in Lassen Volcanic National Park ; boiling hot springs , bubbling mud pots and fuming fumaroles . Most of these features lie in or are closely adjacent to Mount Tehama 's caldera . In each thermal area , the highest temperature of water generally is close to the boiling temperature at the altitude of the particular spring or fumarole 198 ° F ( 92 ° C ) at Bumpass Hell and 191 ° F ( 88 ° C ) on the northwest flanks of Lassen Peak . 
 The hottest and most vigorous hydrothermal features in the Lassen volcanic area are at Bumpass Hell , which marks the principal area of <unk> and steam discharge from the Lassen hydrothermal system . A prominent steam plume marks the site of Big Boiler , the largest fumarole ( steam and volcanic @-@ gas vent ) in the park . The temperature of the high @-@ velocity steam jetting from it has been measured as high as 322 ° F ( 161 ° C ) . A thin crust of material often covers these boiling hot features , making them a serious burn hazard to anyone walking off trail . The steam @-@ heated waters of the features are typically acidic and , even if cool enough , are not safe for bathing . 
 = No Better = 
 " No Better " is a song by New Zealand singer Lorde , taken from the extended version of her debut studio album Pure Heroine ( 2013 ) . The track was released on 13 December 2013 by Universal Music Group as a promotional tool for the album . " No Better " is an electropop and trip hop ballad with elements of hip hop , in which Lorde discusses an infatuation . Music critics opined that the single has similar musical style to songs from Pure Heroine . 
 = = Background = = 
 " No Better " was written by Lorde ( credited under her birth @-@ name Ella Yelich @-@ O 'Connor ) and Joel Little . On 13 December 2013 , the track was released as a digital download single on the iTunes Store . The single was made available for free until 19 December as a part of the iTunes Store 's " 12 Days of Gifts " Christmas promotion . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " No Better " is an electropop and trip hop ballad with hip hop elements . The song has a similar sonority to that of other songs from Pure Heroine , featuring Lorde 's " feathery " vocals and minimal production . It incorporates " woozy " basslines , and " pulsing " synthesisers in its instrumentation , making the song 's melody " dreamy " , according to Whitney Phaneuf of HitFix . Lyrically , the song features Lorde " [ celebrating ] an infatuation that deepens as the seasons change " . At the first verse , she sings " We roll in every summer when there 's strength in our numbers / And your breath 's hot and gross but I kiss you like a lover " . During the chorus the bass beat becomes more intense as Lorde sings " Go all the way / Have your fun , have it all " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Marc Hogan from Spin wrote that the song " flits between fairly vivid first @-@ person details " , while Whitney Phaneuf from HitFix labelled " No Better " a " sexy " track . Eric Danton of Rolling Stone opined that the lyrics of the song are " girlish and knowing " . Writing for Slate , L. V. Anderson shared that " No Better " is reminiscent of some of the best tracks on Pure Heroine , but also " lighter , simpler [ ... ] and more <unk> than most of her debut album " , in spite of its dark theme . " No Better " entered the New Zealand Artists Singles Chart at number seven on 23 December 2013 . It dropped to number nineteen the following week , before falling out of the chart . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " No Better " – 2 : 50 
 " Royals " ( music video ) – 4 : 03 
 = = Release history = = 
 = PETA satirical browser games = 
 People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) , an animal rights organization based in the United States ; has released a number of browser games on its website that have parodied existing video games . Various PETA parodies have taken on games such as Super Mario Bros. , Cooking Mama , and Pokémon Black and White . PETA creates these games to spread attention about real @-@ life animal rights and animal welfare concerns and advocate vegetarian and vegan diets . 
 = = History = = 
 Some of PETA 's earliest forays into gaming include Flash @-@ based games such as Make Fred <unk> ( 2001 ) and Save the Chicks ( 2003 ) , which were included as part of PETA 's anti @-@ dairy and Kentucky Fried Cruelty campaigns . These games received some coverage in academic and news sources , and PETA 's head of online marketing , Joel Bartlett , identified their 2004 Revenge of the PETA Tomatoes and the Frogger parody , Lobster Liberation , as some of the organization 's earliest released games . However it was not until 2007 that PETA began to attract wider attention within the gaming community with its release of Super Chick Sisters , a parody of Super Mario Bros. Controlling two female chicks named Nugget and <unk> , the player sets out to rescue vegetarian actress Pamela Anderson , who has publicly revealed animal cruelty endemic to KFC 's food production , from KFC 's mascot Colonel Sanders . In 2009 , the game was met with a sequel , New Super Chick Sisters , an homage to New Super Mario Bros. In this game , McDonald 's mascot Ronald McDonald kidnaps Anderson with the intent of using her as a Happy Meal ingredient , and the Chick Sisters must rescue her again . 
 In 2008 , PETA released an adaptation of the cooking simulator Cooking Mama called Cooking Mama : Mama Kills Animals . In it , PETA encouraged users to write to Cooking Mama developer Majesco Entertainment to create a version of the game with only vegetarian recipes . Mama Kills Animals consists of minigames related to the preparation of animal carcasses . 
 Edmund McMillen from Team Meat , the developer of the indie game Super Meat Boy , created various accounts on PETA 's official forums to try to get his game parodied by PETA . PETA developed Super Tofu Boy and released it in December 2010 . It stars Tofu Boy , an anthropomorphic cube of tofu whose goal is to rescue Bandage Girl , the girlfriend of the original game 's protagonist Meat Boy , from Meat Boy . It plays as a standard platformer and is peppered with inter @-@ level pro @-@ vegetarian messages and facts about meat consumption and the livestock industry . 
 After releasing Mario Kills Tanooki , a parody of Super Mario Bros. 3 , PETA released a statement that the game was " meant to be tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek , a fun way to call attention to a serious issue , that raccoon dogs are skinned alive for their fur . " The organization also stated that " by wearing Tanooki , Mario is sending the message that it 's OK to wear fur . " It is an action game in which the player controls a skinned but living raccoon dog that chases Mario to retrieve its fur . 
 PETA took on the Pokémon series with Pokémon Black and Blue , a parody of Pokémon Black and White that focuses on animal fighting and experimentation . In role @-@ playing @-@ style battles , the player controls a Pikachu who escapes its Trainers , Cheren . Pikachu first fights Cheren and then moves on to other Trainers in order to rescue their Pokémon from ownership . Pikachu recruits these Pokémon to its cause , as well as the sympathetic Nurse Joy . A sequel , Pokémon Red , White , and Blue , followed in 2013 . The game suggests that Nintendo 's continual releases of Pokémon games reduce humans ' empathy for animals . Also a role @-@ playing game , it stars Pikachu and <unk> , who battle McDonald 's characters like the Hamburglar in a crusade against the rare but ongoing practice of meat production in the Unova region . 
 Also in 2013 , PETA released Cage Fight : Knock Out Animal Abuse , a beat ' em up game in the style of River City Ransom . The player controls vegetarian mixed martial arts fighters Jake Shields , Aaron Simpson , and Georgi <unk> and attacks animal testing practitioners to rescue confined animals . 
 = = Reception and impact = = 
 PETA 's games have received mainly negative opinions from video game journalists . Forbes writer Erik Kain summarized the series in general as " a long parade of silly protests . " He also considered PETA 's failure to satirize well @-@ known hunting games like Duck Hunt and Big Game Hunter as well as the general message that video games encourage real @-@ life violence , to be illogical . 
 Response to Mario Kills Tanooki has been negative , generally holding that it was under @-@ researched . While PETA 's protest focused on Mario wearing a raccoon dog 's skin rather than harming them himself , Gaming Union stated that " from any gamers ' perspective , it 's clear to see that PETA have missed their mark on this one ; Mario squishes hundreds of enemies in each of his games , but is never seen harming a tanuki . " Kain called the game " ludicrous " given that gamers had long adored the Tanooki suit and would not be encouraged to kill real @-@ life raccoon dogs . 
 Jessica <unk> from Joystiq found the messages of Pokémon Black and Blue to be contradictory : " while it 's terrible to punch , kick , cut or hit fictional animals with bats , it 's perfectly acceptable to electrocute humans " . Jason Schreier from Kotaku called it " ridiculous " . Kotaku 's Mike Fahey wrote a mostly negative piece about Pokémon Red , White , and Blue ; he stated that despite its occasional humor , " mostly it just wanders about , beating its message into your brain with heavy hands . " 
 Not all critical response has been unfavorable . Fahey opined that New Super Chick Sisters " manages to be a rather capable little platformer despite its heavy @-@ handed message . " <unk> <unk> of G4TV called Super Tofu Boy " actually a pretty good time waster " and , as she is a vegetarian , claimed to be " on Team Tofu . " Overall , Mike Splechta from GameZone stated that " some are a little less flattering than others , but they do tend to get their point across . " He also called Cage Fight " kickass " , praising its gameplay and chiptune soundtrack , and encouraged readers to play it . 
 In some cases , the creators of the original games have responded to PETA 's parodies . In response to Super Tofu Boy , Super Meat Boy developer Team Meat added Tofu Boy as a playable character in a Super Meat Boy update . Majesco responded to Cooking Mama : Mama Kills Animals that the Mama character , while not a vegetarian herself , supports treating animals humanely and " would never put rat in [ her ] Ratatouille . " Nintendo also released a statement in regards to Pokémon Black & Blue stating , " Nintendo and the Pokémon company take the inappropriate use of our products and intellectual property seriously . " 
 = = Notable titles = = 
 PETA 's games — and the games they parody — that have received press coverage include : 
 Super Chick Sisters ( 2007 ) – Super Mario Bros. 
 Cooking Mama : Mama Kills Animals ( 2008 ) – Cooking Mama 
 New Super Chick Sisters ( 2009 ) – New Super Mario Bros. 
 Super Tofu Boy ( 2010 ) – Super Meat Boy 
 Mario Kills Tanooki ( 2011 ) – Super Mario Bros. 3 
 Pokémon Black and Blue ( 2012 ) – Pokémon Black and White 
 Cage Fight : Knock Out Animal Abuse ( 2013 ) – River City Ransom 
 Pokémon Red , White , and Blue : Loosely Connected to McDonald 's ( 2013 ) – Pokémon Black and White 
 = We Ride = 
 " We Ride " is a song by Barbadian singer Rihanna from her second studio album A Girl like Me ( 2006 ) . It was written by Makeba Riddick , Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor Erik Hermansen , with production helmed by StarGate . The song was released on August 21 , 2006 , as the album 's third single . " We Ride " is a hip hop and soul song . Critical reception of the song was generally positive , as the majority of reviewers praised its relaxing and carefree qualities . 
 " We Ride " peaked inside the top forty on multiple charts , including Australia , the Flanders and Wallonia regions of Belgium and the United Kingdom . The song peaked inside top ten in Finland and New Zealand . Despite failing to chart on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , the song peaked at number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart and number 34 on the Pop Songs chart . The song 's accompanying video was directed by Anthony Mandler , and shot in Miami and the Florida Keys . The video features Rihanna in various scenes , including a beach , nightclub and socialising with friends . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " We Ride " was written by Makeba Riddick , Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor Erik Hermansen , with production helmed by Eriksen and Hermansen under their stage name StarGate . Rihanna explained the reasoning behind " We Ride " being chosen as the third single from the album in an interview with Corey Moss of MTV . The singer stated that instead of asking her record label and management which song should be released after " Unfaithful " , Rihanna looked on iTunes to see which was her most downloaded song after the album 's lead single " SOS " and " Unfaithful " and stated that " We Ride " was the third most popular , saying " Out of all my songs available for sale on iTunes , [ We Ride was ] the third most downloaded , behind ' SOS ' and ' Unfaithful , ' ... It 's having good feedback , so I 'm gonna give fans what they want . " " We Ride " was released as the third single from the album to US mainstream and rhythmic radio stations on August 21 , 2006 , and was released in certain European territories as a CD single throughout October and November 2006 . In Australia , the song was released as an Extended play ( EP ) on October 30 , 2006 , which featured remixes of " We Ride " and the previous single from the album , " Unfaithful " . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 As a mid @-@ tempo ballad , " We Ride " is a hip hop and soul music song . According to the digital sheet music published by Musicnotes.com , " We Ride " is written in the key of E ♭ major and is set in common time with a moderate dance groove with 80 beats per minute ( BPM ) . Rihanna 's vocal range in the song spans from the lower note of G ♯ 3 to the higher note of C5 . The song includes piano keys and guitar strings as part of its instrumental composition , and were provided by Stargate . <unk> Bass of Contactmusic.com commented that " We Ride " incorporates a " teen music sound " into its composition , which features a melodic tap to keep the listener engaged . In an interview with Corey Moss of MTV , Rihanna explained the meaning behind the song 's lyrics , saying : 
 <unk> Ride ' is about this guy saying over and over again , ' When we ride , we ride , we 're gonna be together until the day that we die ' — promising all these things ... then it turns out he broke all of his promises , which is sad — but it 's summer and I don 't care if you wanna do that and be ugly and unfaithful , then I can just do my thing , chill with my girls and have fun . That 's what summers are all about ... every summer you remember a certain relationship and there 's always a song to connect to that . So ' We Ride ' is just one of those songs . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " We Ride " garnered a generally positive response from music critics . David Jeffries of Allmusic praised " We Ride " , writing that the song is " an easy @-@ flowing weekend cruiser " . Spence D. of IGN similarly noted that " We Ride " is a song to which someone can listen to whilst driving , writing that it is a " ubiquitous cruising track that reworks the cliché catch phrase of the new millennium : ' we ride till the day that we die . ' " Bill Lamb of About.com noted that " We Ride " would appeal most to urban audiences due to its hip @-@ hop composition . However , Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine was critical of " We Ride " , writing that although the song is a " hip hop @-@ influenced club banger " , it appeared to be too mature for the singer and her " minor vocal talents " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In Australia , the song debuted and peaked at number 24 on November 19 , 2006 . The following week , the song remained at number 24 and spent a total of 10 weeks on the singles chart , with its last chart appearance at number 43 on January 21 , 2007 . In New Zealand , " We Ride " debuted at number 16 on December 11 , 2006 , and rose to number eight the following week . In its third week charting , the song fell to number 10 , but peaked at number seven in its fourth week . After having spent 12 weeks on the chart , " We Ride " dropped out of the top @-@ 40 singles chart , however , the song re @-@ entered the chart at number 37 on February 26 , 2007 , for one week . 
 In Europe , " We Ride " charted moderately in several territories . In The Netherlands , the song debuted at number 89 on November 25 , 2006 , and peaked at number 60 the following week . Over the following six weeks , the song fluctuated on the lower region on the top @-@ 100 singles chart , and spent a total of eight weeks on the chart . In the Flanders region of Belgium , the song debuted at number 46 on December 16 , 2006 , where it remained for a further week . In its third week charting , " We Ride " peaked at number 40 . The song re @-@ entered the singles chart at number 43 on January 20 , 2007 , where it remained for a further week before dropping out of the singles chart . In the Wallonia region of Belgium , the song debuted at number 34 on December 9 , 2006 , and rose by one chart position to number 33 the following week , where it remained in its third week . " We Ride " peaked at number 26 in its fourth week on the singles chart . In Switzerland , " We Ride " debuted and peaked at number 42 on December 17 , 2006 . After having spent seven weeks on the chart , " We Ride " dropped out of the top @-@ 100 singles chart , however , the song re @-@ entered the chart at number 95 on February 11 , 2007 , for one week . In Finland , the song debuted peaked at number four in the final week of December 2006 ; " We Ride " spent one week on the singles chart . In Italy , the song debuted and peaked on that countries singles chart at number 16 on October 9 , 2008 , more than two years after the song 's release as a single ; " We Ride " spent one week on the singles chart . The song peaked at number 96 on the European Hot 100 Singles chart . 
 In the United Kingdom , " We Ride " debuted at number 17 on November 4 , 2006 , and fell to number 34 the following week , spending a total of two weeks inside the official UK top @-@ 40 . In the United States , the song failed to make a chart appearance on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , but managed to chart on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart and Pop Songs chart . The song peaked at number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart on February 3 , 2007 , and spent a total of 18 weeks on the chart . On the Pop Songs chart , " We Ride " debuted and peaked at number 34 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and release = = = 
 The music video for " We Ride " was filmed in Miami and the Florida Keys in August 2006 . It was directed by Anthony Mandler , the director of the previous single 's video , " Unfaithful " . In an interview with Corey Moss of MTV , Rihanna explained the concept behind the inspiration for the video , saying , " We just wanted to reconnect with my peers , let them know I 'm still a teen , I still have friends – but to make something provocative . The ' [ SOS ] ' and ' Unfaithful ' [ concepts ] were so out there , so we pulled it back a little bit . I 'm chilling with my girls some . " The singer continued to talk about the choreographic content , saying , " I 'm dancing [ in the video ] , like technical dance , which was a challenge ... It usually takes years to learn , but we got it done in a few days . And it was beautifully shot . " The video was released to download via iTunes on September 18 , 2006 in Ireland and September 20 , 2006 in the United States . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins with Rihanna walking towards a white Jeep Wrangler , but stops due to her mobile phone ringing . As Rihanna answers , she converses with a male friend , presumably her boyfriend . As she tells him that she needs to do some things before meeting with him , Rihanna hangs up and the screen cuts to a black screen . As a visual of Rihanna driving along a bridge in the Florida Keys , the song begins to play . During the first verse , different scenes are intercut of Rihanna , including a close @-@ up shot of the singer driving behind the wheel is shown , walking along the beach and dancing in a black dress against a white backdrop , as she sings about how her boyfriend has been seeing another girl without Rihanna knowing . For the first chorus , in addition to the other three scenes , one shot is shown of Rihanna dancing with a man in a nightclub . During the second verse , Rihanna is shown lying down on the beach and playing in the water , as well as dancing with a male dancer against a white backdrop , this time wearing a lace dress . 
 For the second chorus , a new scene of Rihanna is introduced , with Rihanna meeting with her friends , having arrived at her destination , where they eat in restaurant and walk down the street . During the bridge , as Rihanna sings about the difficulties of getting over a failed relationship , scenes of Rihanna partying and talking to her ex @-@ boyfriend on her phone are depicted , which results in her agreeing to meet him as she sings " Just blame yourself ' cause you blew it / I won 't forget how you do it , my sweet baby / This is where the game ends now / But somehow wanna believe you and me / We can figure it out " , as she decides that their relationship is worth salvaging . During the final chorus , the singer is shown intimately dancing and partying with her boyfriend , whilst other scenes from the video are intercut . The video ends with a close @-@ up shot of Rihanna against a white backdrop ; when the song 's audio finishes , the singer turns her head to the side and looks into the distance , as the camera pans away . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Battery Studios , New York City , New York ; The Loft Recording Studios , Bronxville , New York ; Blue Wave Studio , Saint Philip , Barbados ; and Hinge Studios , Chicago , Illinois . 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Makeba Riddick , Mikkel Eriksen , Tor Erik Hermansen 
 Production – StarGate 
 Vocal engineering and recording – Mikkel Eriksen , Al Hemberger , James <unk> 
 Mixing – Phil Tan 
 Vocal production – Evan Rogers , Carl Sturken 
 Instruments – Mikkel Eriksen , Tor Erik Hermansen 
 Lead and background vocals – Rihanna 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of A Girl Like Me , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 Since May 2013 , RIAA certifications for digital singles include on @-@ demand audio and / or video song streams in addition to downloads . 
 = = Radio adds and release history = = 
 = Kenwood , St. George 's Hill = 
 Kenwood is a house on the St. George 's Hill estate , Weybridge , Surrey , England . Originally called the Brown House , it was designed by architect T.A. Allen , and built in 1913 by local builders , Love & Sons . The estate was constructed around the Weybridge Golf Club , which was designed in 1912 by Harry Colt . 
 John Lennon , of The Beatles , bought Kenwood for £ 20 @,@ 000 on 15 July 1964 , on the advice of The Beatles ' accountants , Dr Walter Strach and James Isherwood . Lennon was resident from the summer of 1964 , until the late spring of 1968 . Film of the exterior of the house and the gate was included in an ITN programme called Reporting 66 , in 1966 . Parts of a home movie showing Lennon at Kenwood ( 1967 ) were featured in the film Imagine : John Lennon . 
 Kenwood is close to Sunny Heights , the former home of Ringo Starr , and a short drive from Kinfauns , George Harrison 's former home in Esher . In October 2006 , Kenwood went back on the market , with a price of £ 5 @.@ 95 million , and was sold in January 2007 for £ 5 @.@ 8 million . In June 2013 , Kenwood went onto the market once again for £ 13 @,@ 750 @,@ 000 . 
 = = History = = 
 Kenwood was built in 1913 , and was originally called The Brown House . On Wood Lane , off Cavendish Road , and built in a mock @-@ Tudor style , the footprint and gardens cover 1 @.@ 5 acres ( 0 @.@ 61 ha ) , of which the house must occupy no more than one fifth and the plot may not be subdivided into more than one home under the rules of the building scheme . It was designed in 1913 by architect Theophilus Arthur Allen , who had been commissioned by local man Norman H. Johnson . Allen employed a local firm called Love & Sons in the construction of Kenwood . The hill was divided into lots around the Weybridge Golf Club , which was designed by Harry Colt in 1912 . Many of the original houses on the estate were built by master builder Walter George Tarrant whose firm constructed the original external garage <unk> ( demolished <unk> ) . 
 = = Renovation = = 
 Lennon bought the house on 15 July 1964 , on the advice of The Beatles ' accountants , Dr Walter Strach and James Isherwood . Cliff Richard and Tom Jones had earlier bought homes on the St George 's Hill estate . Though reportedly not liking Kenwood ( describing it as a " stop @-@ over " on the way to something better ) , Lennon spent £ 40 @,@ 000 ( were it cash for ordinary expenditure equivalent to £ 731 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . on renovations , reducing its 22 rooms to 17 , landscaping the grounds and building an outdoor swimming pool . Much of the initial decoration was left to interior designer Kenneth Partridge , whom Lennon employed after being impressed by his design work at a lavish party held by Beatles ' manager Brian Epstein to celebrate the Beatles ' departure for their first tour of the USA . However , when Partridge had completed his work , Lennon and then @-@ wife Cynthia immediately made a number of further alterations which better reflected their taste . Cynthia 's mother was given an allowance to fill the shelves of the house with antiques and antiquarian books , and a heavy sliding wooden door was installed at the gate entrance to keep out fans . 
 Kenwood has three floors : on the ground floor during the Lennon period the front door opened onto an entrance hall , where Lennon placed a suit of armour and a gorilla suit . Across the hall was a large living room , which had black carpets , two 18 @-@ foot sofas and a marble fireplace . To the left of the hall was a toilet , and through the living room was a dining room , where purple , velvet wallpaper was put up . Adjacent to the dining room , at the back of the house , was a small sunroom . This was decorated with various pictures , caricatures and stickers , such as the one from the Safe as Milk debut album ( 1967 ) by Captain Beefheart & His Magic Band , and one advertising the Monterey Pop Festival . Photos published by The Beatles Book Monthly show the shelves of the sunroom filled with articles such as a large , ornate cross , a Mickey Mouse doll and a mortar and pestle , reportedly used by Lennon to mix various combinations of cocaine , amphetamine , barbiturates and LSD . There was also a yellow sofa or chaise @-@ longue upon which Lennon would spend much of his time . It was a present from his aunt , Elizabeth Smith ( née Stanley ) also known as Mimi . Behind the sunroom was the split @-@ level kitchen where state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art appliances were installed , so complex that a tutor had to come and give the Lennons lessons in their use . 
 Completing the ground floor was a smaller lounge , and a large garage . The main staircase to the upper floors was situated in the entrance hall . The house had six bedrooms , with five on the first floor . The giant master bedroom featured a huge double bed , white carpets and an en @-@ suite bathroom complete with sunken bathtub , shower , Jacuzzi and ' his and hers ' wash basins . Lennon wanted the guest bedrooms to contain works of art by students of the Liverpool Art College . In particular , two drawings by former Beatles ' bassist Stuart Sutcliffe were hung , for what Lennon described as " sentimental reasons " . The first floor also had a study . On the top floor was the attic , which Lennon claimed as his own , painting the ceiling one bright colour , then changing to another when the paint ran out , and installing most of his musical equipment there . Outside the house , to the right as you looked down from the sunroom , lay the swimming pool . In 1967 , Lennon suggested a mirrored bottom for the pool ; being advised that this would be not only impractical and expensive , but potentially dangerous to swimmers , he settled for a large eye mosaic set in the side . The mosaic was based on the Eye of Knowledge , which was part of the teachings of the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi . 
 = = = Staff = = = 
 The Lennons initially had problems recruiting reliable staff , but eventually employed a cook / housekeeper ( Dorothy <unk> , or Dot ) a chauffeur ( Les Anthony ) and a groundskeeper . Lennon was surprised and impressed to discover that the groundskeeper had " dropped out " of university to pursue his love of horticulture . Others employed at Kenwood included Lennon 's schoolfriend , Pete Shotton , who worked as Lennon 's personal assistant in the early part of 1968 , and Pauline Jones , who was the girlfriend ( later wife ) of Lennon 's father , Alfred Lennon . Jones worked as an au pair and secretary , answering the large volume of fan mail received at Kenwood , during late 1967 . 
 = = = Songwriting = = = 
 Lennon did much of his songwriting in the attic , where he had several Studer tape recorders . Little was done with them until fellow Beatle Paul McCartney came over and helped re @-@ install them in sequence , so overdubs could be made . Lennon could thus record his own doubletracked song demos . ( These demos , and some other , more avant garde sound recordings also made in the attic , have appeared on various bootlegs ) . The attic also contained a mellotron , an electric organ , a piano , a Vox AC30 amplifier and several guitars ( including his first Rickenbacker 325 , a Hofner Senator , and his Rickenbacker 1996 ) , all of which were used when songwriting . Lennon also wrote on an upright piano in the sunroom . 
 = = = Recreation = = = 
 Aside from the mini @-@ studio , the attic contained two other rooms : a small guest bedroom and a games room used for recreation . Lennon filled it with three full sets of the model car racing game , Scalextric . When not in the attic , Lennon could usually be found in the sunroom watching television or reading newspapers . He would also walk in the garden with his black cat on his shoulder ( he had ten cats in total ) . His drug intake , particularly LSD and hashish , but also amphetamine , was high for much of the time he lived at Kenwood . Drugs were taken there in the company of people such as Marianne Faithfull 's ex @-@ husband John Dunbar and art dealer Robert Fraser . At one stage , under the influence of transcendental meditation , Lennon renounced both meat @-@ eating and drugs , and buried a huge quantity of LSD in the garden , which had been obtained by representatives of The Beatles at the Monterey Pop Festival from Augustus Stanley Owsley III . He later tried to find the LSD , but could not remember where he had buried it . Although no lavish planned parties were ever held , which remained a source of disappointment to Cynthia , various guests ( including <unk> Michael Nesmith and his wife Phyllis , Bob Dylan and Peter Cook ) stayed or dined at the house , together with old friends like Ivan Vaughan and Shotton from Liverpool , or strangers Lennon had met at a party or nightclub , such as the Ad Lib . Cynthia and Lennon were beginning to lead separate lives by 1967 , and it was not uncommon for Cynthia to wake up in the morning to find the house filled with people in various states of intoxication whom Lennon had met in clubs the night before . Large parts of the house were unused by the Lennons , and visitors remarked that there was frequently a strange atmosphere . 
 = = = Lennon , Cynthia , and Ono = = = 
 In 1968 , Cynthia went on vacation to Greece , leaving Lennon at Kenwood with Shotton . After several days of taking LSD and smoking marijuana , Lennon convened a meeting at the Beatles ' business HQ to inform the others that he felt he was the reincarnation of Jesus Christ . Later that day he phoned Ono , whose own husband Tony ( Anthony Cox ) was in Paris on business , and invited her to Kenwood . Shotton left the two alone , whereupon Lennon invited Ono ( who had also taken LSD ) up to the attic to hear his largely experimental non @-@ Beatles ' recordings . For the rest of the night , the two collaborated on what became the Two Virgins album , and then " made love at dawn " , according to Lennon . Cynthia returned early from her vacation , and discovered Lennon and Ono sitting cross @-@ legged on the floor and staring intently into each other 's eyes ( Ono was wearing one of Cynthia 's bathrobes ) . In a state of shock , Cynthia then left to stay with friends for a few days , although Lennon and Cynthia were reconciled for a time upon her return to Kenwood . It was during Cynthia 's next holiday in Italy that Lennon and Ono finally entered into a permanent relationship , and Lennon asked for a divorce . Cynthia , together with Julian and her mother , moved back into Kenwood for the summer , where Paul McCartney visited her to offer his support . On the journey to Kenwood he composed the song " Hey Jude " , which eventually became The Beatles ' biggest selling single . Lennon and Ono , meanwhile , were without a permanent address for a time . They stayed with McCartney at his house in Cavendish Avenue ( where it is alleged that a further breach occurred in the Lennon – McCartney relationship when Lennon discovered a derogatory note written by McCartney ) and with Peter Brown and then Neil Aspinall , before moving into an apartment leased by Starr at 34 Montagu Square , Marylebone in London . They were evicted from this flat by the owner following a raid by the drug squad on 18 October 1968 , and subsequent November trial , and so moved back into Kenwood for a short time , which had been vacated by Cynthia . In the new year Ono and Lennon moved into the Dorchester Hotel in London , leaving Kenwood for the last time . 
 = = = Film / Interview / Photos = = = 
 Film of the exterior of the house and the gate was included in Reporting 66 ; a programme produced by ITN , in 1966 . Parts of a home movie showing Lennon at Kenwood , in 1967 , were featured in the film Imagine : John Lennon . This had Lennon in the company of Starr , his son Julian Lennon and the gardener at Kenwood . It also shows Lennon standing in the sunroom . Lennon and Yoko Ono were filmed singing the " Everybody had a hard year " section of the Beatles ' song , " I 've Got a Feeling " , at the side of the house , and made two art films in the grounds in 1968 : Number 5 a.k.a. Smile , and Two Virgins . Lennon was interviewed several times on audio tape at Kenwood , by people like Ray Coleman , and Kenny Everett . Several photo sessions also took place at Kenwood , the most famous of which provided the cover photo for the Beatles ' 1965 album Rubber Soul . 
 = = Kenwood after the Lennons = = 
 As Lennon and Cynthia were getting divorced , it became clear that Lennon did not wish to keep Kenwood , and Cynthia could not afford to maintain it on her own , so it was sold in December 1968 , for a reputed £ 40 @,@ 000 , to Bill Martin , writer of songs such as " Puppet on a String " and " Congratulations " . Kenwood has subsequently changed hands several times , and been subject to some major renovation work , such that the interior now little resembles the house that Lennon lived in . The exterior and grounds are still recognisable , although the sunroom has been completely rebuilt . After being displayed at the Liverpool International Garden Festival in 1984 , the psychedelic eye mosaic was unclaimed , and left in a field . It was rediscovered and restored by Tom Lorimer , a laboratory technician at the Liverpool John Moores University . The mosaic was then displayed at the Museum of Liverpool Life . Items from Lennon 's Kenwood period have also appeared for auction , including towels and cutlery , a caviar jar , and the table that sat in the sunroom . Lennon kept the Kenwood house sign after he left , but gave it to Andy Eccles , who was a gardener at Tittenhurst Park , in 1972 . It was sold for US $ 20 @,@ 400 , in 2003 . In October 2006 , Kenwood went back on the market , with a price of £ 5 @.@ 95 million , and was sold in January 2007 for £ 5 @.@ 8 million . It has been claimed that every owner after the Lennons has sold it due to divorce . In January 2013 , Kenwood was again back on the market with a price of £ 15m . 
 = Who Is It ( Michael Jackson song ) = 
 " Who Is It " is a song by American recording artist Michael Jackson . It was released by Epic Records on August 31 , 1992 , as the fifth single from Jackson 's eighth studio album , Dangerous ( 1991 ) . The song was written and composed by Jackson , and produced by Jackson and Bill Bottrell . The song 's lyrics pertain to despair over being left by someone you love ; some critics noted a comparison to the lyrics of the song to Jackson 's single , " Billie Jean " , from the album Thriller . As part of the promotion for the song , two music videos were released in 1992 . The song was not performed by Jackson on any of his world concert tours . He did , however , perform a small segment of the song in his interview with Oprah Winfrey in early 1993 . An instrumental portion of the song was supposed to be used during the This Is It comeback concerts in London , which were canceled due to Jackson 's death . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Who Is It " was recorded by Michael Jackson in 1990 for his eighth studio album , Dangerous , which was released the following year . Jackson wrote and composed the track , and produced it with Bill Bottrell . It was released as the fifth single from Dangerous on August 31 , 1992 , by Jackson 's record label , Epic Records . The lyrics of the song tell of a man who is left in despair when his lover suddenly leaves him . He learns that she was unfaithful to him and wants to know with whom the person was that she cheated . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Several music critics compared " Who Is It " to Jackson 's 1983 single " Billie Jean " . Jon Pareles , a writer for The New York Times , described " Who Is It " as an " imitation " of " Billie Jean " . Chris Willman of the Los Angeles Times claimed that the track " recaptures some of the slinky , insinuating feel of ' Billie Jean . ' " Jonathan Bernstein , a writer for Spin , wrote that " Who Is It " was " close skin to " Billie Jean " . Alan Light of Rolling Stone noted that unlike his previous efforts , it is about betrayal . 
 " Who Is It " was commercially successful worldwide , generally peaking within the top 30 positions on national music charts . The song peaked at number 14 on the United States ' Billboard Hot 100 chart , while peaking at number six on Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , as well as topping the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play . Internationally , " Who Is It " reached the top 20 in several countries . The song debuted on the United Kingdom music chart at number 12 on July 25 , 1992 , and the following week reached its peak position , number 10 . It remained within the top 100 positions for seven consecutive weeks from July to September 1992 . In France , the track peaked at number eight on August 29 . " Who Is It " reached its lowest peak position at number 34 in Australia . 
 In Austria , the track debuted at its peak position , number five ; the song remained within the top 30 chart positions from August to October . " Who Is It " debuted in Switzerland on August 2 , at number 40 , and peaked at number 14 two weeks later . The song debuted at number 94 in the Netherlands , and the following week moved up 60 positions , eventually peaking at number 13 . In Sweden , the track entered the country 's music chart at its peak position , number 24 and , after four weeks , fell out of the top 50 . In Norway , the track debuted at its peak position , number 10 on the 30th week of 1992 ; the song charted at its peak position for two weeks before falling off the chart . The song also peaked at number 16 in New Zealand . After Jackson 's death in June 2009 , his music experienced a surge in popularity . " Who Is It " re @-@ entered the Switzerland music charts for the first time in over 17 years , hitting number 49 on July 12 , 2009 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Directed by David Fincher , the music video for " Who Is It " was released in 1993 . 
 It begins with Jackson in what seems to be a hotel , singing about his girlfriend . He is distressed because he found a silver card in with the name " Alex " on it . To him , it implies that " Alex " is another man who his girlfriend is with ; thus , she is cheating on Jackson . However , as the story in the video unfolds , this is not true , because the girl takes on different identities ( I.e. Eve , Diana , etc . ) for her job as a high class call girl . " Alex " ( which is also a girl 's name ) , just happens to be one of them . The video alternates scenes from where Jackson is singing about his pain , to where the girl is being changed into her different identities and taking care of her jobs ( mostly meeting with other men and even some women and sleeping with them ) . Towards the end of the video , Jackson has packed up his bags to leave town , because of his distress . A helicopter comes to pick him up from his house . The girl comes to Jackson 's house and she asks his assistant ( who knows the situation and aided Jackson in his departure ) to let her in . The assistant shakes his head , implying that he left . When she asks why , he drops a flutter of silver nameplates ( including the one that said " Alex " ) from a slot in the door . After that scene , Jackson is seen sleeping and smoke floats out the side of the screen . The girl regrets and takes off her makeup to quit what she was doing . 
 This version did not initially air in the USA but was included on the video albums : Dangerous : The Short Films and Michael Jackson 's Vision . 
 Another version of the video features footage from past music videos and live performances . This is the version that first aired in the USA . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = Naulakha Pavilion = 
 The Naulakha Pavilion is a prominent white marble personal chamber with a curvilinear roof , located beside the Sheesh Mahal courtyard , in the northern section of the Lahore Fort in Lahore , Punjab , Pakistan . The structure was originally inlaid with precious and semi @-@ precious stones and overlooked the Ravi River . Today , it is one of the 21 monuments situated within the Lahore Fort , with its western façade providing a panoramic view of the ancient city of Lahore . In 1981 , as part of the larger Lahore Fort Complex , it became inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 When the pavilion was built in 1633 by the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan as a small summer house , it cost around 900 @,@ 000 rupees , an exorbitant amount at the time . It is called Naulakha because in Urdu language , the word means ' worth 9 lakhs rupees ' . This also brought the word Naulakha into common use to signify something precious . 
 = = History = = 
 The Lahore Fort was built in 1566 under the rule of Mughal emperor Akbar the Great on the location of an earlier mud @-@ fort . The solid brick masonry complex was later extended and modified by subsequent emperors . Mughal emperor Shah Jahan was a romantic man who <unk> Taj mahal in <unk> and after that this master piece in Lahore was built in 1633 by the s a small summer house , it cost around 900 @,@ 000 rupees , an exorbitant amount at the time . Naulakha Pavilion is among the buildings that were erected or reconstructed between 1628 and 1634 under Shah Jahan 's rule . Due to his personal interest in the design and construction , Shah Jahan 's architectural traditions manifest distinctive symmetry and hierarchical accents . Naulakha Pavilion is part of the Shah Burj block in the northwest section of the fort that was actually built by his predecessor Jahangir . 
 In 1927 , the building was listed by the Department of Archaeology of British India . In 1975 , it was listed as a protected monument under the Antiquities Act by Pakistan 's Department of Archaeology , whereas in 1981 , as part of the larger Lahore Fort Complex , it became inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site . 
 More recently , the building and its materials have started showing signs of damage and discolouration due to the air pollution . The pollutants such as sulphur dioxide and other emissions , have already affected the white marble of the nearby Sheesh Mahal in the Lahore Fort Complex . 
 = = Design = = 
 The pavilion is rectangular in shape , situated in the west of Sheesh Mahal , and is prominent because of its centrally arched and extraordinarily curved roof . This unique feature is symbolic of <unk> architecture . It reflects a mixture of contemporary traditions ( at the time of its construction ) of sloping @-@ roof from Bengal , and <unk> from Europe . This demonstrates the imperial as well as religious image of the subject . The original roof was probably gilded . The inner walls are minutely inlaid with precious and semi @-@ precious stones and silver with delicate <unk> kari ornamentation are considered among the finest in the <unk> tile mosaics have been used to decorate the spandrels of the arched openings with floral designs and images of angels , genies , and <unk> symbols . The marble screens of the pavilion are crowned with merlons to prevent inmates being seen from the grounds in between the Fort and the river . The overall quadrangle comprises private quarters for royal family and closely resembles Agra fort . 
 = = Inspirations = = 
 As a unique and impressive monument of Mughal architecture , the building became a source of inspiration to Rudyard Kipling during his early days in Lahore . One of his novels is titled The <unk> ( sic ) , written in collaboration with Wolcott Balestier , the brother of his then @-@ fiancée Caroline . The novel is about a precious necklace , which is called the <unk> . When Kipling settled in his house in <unk> , Vermont , he named it Naulakha , after the pavilion . To him , Naulakha symbolised the virtues , peacefulness , and solitude of the rural Vermont . 
 The Naulakha Pavilion motif was used on the reverse of the Pakistani one rupee banknote , issued by the Government of Pakistan in 1964 . The motif was subsequently replaced with the Tomb of Muhammad Iqbal in 1980s , until the one rupee <unk> was taken out of circulation in 2005 . The Pakistan Embassy building in Washington D.C. is partly modelled on the Naulakha Pavilion . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Age of Empires = 
 Age of Empires is a series of personal computer games developed by Ensemble Studios ( defunct in 2009 ) and published by Microsoft Studios . The first title of the series was Age of Empires , released in 1997 . Since then , seven titles and three spin @-@ offs have been released . The titles are historical real @-@ time strategy games , and their gameplay revolves around two main game modes : Single player and campaign . They competed with another popular strategy series , Civilization , and are set amidst historical events . 
 Age of Empires focused on events in Europe , Africa and Asia , spanning from the Stone Age to the Iron Age ; the expansion game explored the formation and expansion of the Roman Empire . The sequel , Age of Empires II : The Age of Kings , was set in the Middle Ages , while its expansion focused partially on the Spanish conquest of Mexico . The subsequent three games of Age of Empires III explored the early modern period , when Europe was colonizing the Americas and several Asian nations were on the decline . The newest installment , Age of Empires Online , takes a different approach as a free @-@ to @-@ play online game utilizing Games for Windows Live . A spin @-@ off game , Age of Mythology , was set in the same period as the original Age of Empires , but focused on mythological elements of Greek , Egyptian , and Norse mythology . 
 The Age of Empires series has been a commercial success , selling over 20 million copies . The popularity and quality of the games has earned Ensemble Studios a strong reputation in real @-@ time strategy gaming . Ensemble collaborated with Big Huge Games on Age of Empires III : The Asian Dynasties . Critics have credited part of the success of the series to its historical theme and fair play ; the artificial intelligence ( AI ) players fight with less " cheating " than in many of the series ' competitors . 
 = = Games = = 
 The games in the series focus on historical events throughout time . Age of Empires covers the events between the Stone Age and the Classical period , in Europe and Asia . Its expansion , The Rise of Rome , follows the formation and rise of the Roman Empire . The Age of Kings and its Nintendo DS spin @-@ off follow Europe and Asia through the Middle Ages . The Age of Kings ' expansion pack , The Conquerors , is set during the same period , but also includes scenarios about the Spanish conquest of Mexico , El Cid , and Attila the Hun . Age of Empires III and its first expansion , The WarChiefs , take place during the European colonization of the Americas . Its second expansion , The Asian Dynasties , follows the rise of Asia in the same period . Age of Empires Online focuses on the Greek and Egyptian civilizations . The series ' spin @-@ off , Age of Mythology , and its expansion pack , The Titans , are set during the Bronze Age , but focus on mythology as their themes , rather than history . 
 = = = Main series = = = 
 = = = = Age of Empires = = = = 
 Age of Empires , released on October 26 , 1997 , was the first game in the series , as well as the first major release from Ensemble Studios . It was one of the first history @-@ based real @-@ time strategy games made , utilizing the Genie game engine . GameSpot described it as a mix of Civilization and Warcraft . The game gives players a choice of 12 civilizations to develop from the Stone Age to the Iron Age . The expansion pack , The Rise of Rome , published by Microsoft on October 31 , 1998 , introduced new features and four new civilizations , including the Romans . Although the two games had contained many software bugs , patches resolved many of the problems . 
 Age of Empires was generally well received , despite some highly negative reviews . GameSpot criticized a confused design , while Computer and Video Games praised the game as strong in single and multiplayer . The Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences named Age of Empires the 1998 " Computer Strategy Game of the Year . " For several years , the game remained high on the sales charts , with over three million units sold by 2000 . The Rise of Rome was not as popular : it had only sold one million units in 2000 , and attained 80 % as an aggregate score from Game Rankings . 
 = = = = Age of Empires II : The Age of Kings = = = = 
 Age of Empires II : The Age of Kings , released on September 30 , 1999 , used the Genie game engine , and had gameplay similar to its predecessor . Age of Kings is set in the Middle Ages , from the Dark Ages to the Imperial Age . It allows players to choose one of 13 civilizations , from Europe , Asia , and the Middle East . 
 On August 24 , 2000 , Microsoft published the expansion , The Conquerors . It added new units and five new civilizations , including two Mesoamerican civilizations ; the Maya and the Aztec . The Age of Kings was a bigger critical success than the first two games , with Game Rankings and Metacritic scores of 92 % . Microsoft shipped out more than two million copies to retailers , and the game received numerous awards and accolades . Critics agreed that The Conquerors expanded well on The Age of Kings , though issues of unbalanced gameplay were raised . The Age of Kings and The Conquerors won the 2000 and 2001 " Computer Strategy Game of the Year " awards from the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences , respectively . 
 In April 2013 , Age of Empires II : HD Edition was released on the Steam digital distribution platform for Windows operating systems . The HD Edition includes both the original game and the expansion The Conquerors , as well as updated graphics for high @-@ resolution displays . 
 In November 2013 , a second expansion entitled The Forgotten was released by Microsoft exclusively for the HD Edition . A third expansion named The African Kingdoms was released by Microsoft in November 2015 , also exclusively for the HD Edition . 
 = = = = Age of Empires III = = = = 
 Age of Empires III , released on October 18 , 2005 , was built on an improved version of the Age of Mythology game engine with the most significant changes being the updated graphics engine and the inclusion of the Havok physics middleware engine . The game is set in the period between 1421 and 1850 , and players can choose one of eight European nations . The game introduced a large number of features , such as home cities . Described by Ensemble Studios as " an important support system to your efforts in the New World , " home cities helped provide the player with resources , equipment , troops , and upgrades . They could be used across multiple games , and upgraded after each battle ; it was compared to a role @-@ playing game character by Ensemble Studios . The first expansion to Age of Empires III , The WarChiefs , was released October 17 , 2006 . Most gameplay changes in the expansion pack were small , but it introduced three new civilizations , with a focus on Native Americans . Most notable was the introduction of the <unk> unit . The second expansion , The Asian Dynasties , went on sale October 23 , 2007 . It was a jointly developed product ; Big Huge Games helped Ensemble Studios develop the game , with Brian Reynolds joining Bruce Shelley as lead designer . The game expanded the Age of Empires III universe into Asia , and introduced three new civilizations . Reception towards Age of Empires III was mixed ; Game Revolution described it as " about as much fun " as a history textbook , while GameZone argued it was " one of the best looking games , much less an RTS game , that is out on the market currently " . It sold more than two million copies , and won the GameSpy " real @-@ time strategy game of the year " award . The WarChiefs failed to equal the success of its predecessor , with a lower score on both Game Rankings and Metacritic , and The Asian Dynasties ' score was lower still with 80 % . 
 Several collectors ' editions of Age of Empires III included a hardcover artbook . The last page of the artbook has a pictorial depiction of the series ; the Roman numerals below each panel range from I to V , indicating the series would include an Age of Empires IV and Age of Empires V. Ensemble Studios employee Sandy Petersen said that the image " was total speculation on [ their ] part . " 
 In 2008 , Microsoft announced they were closing down Ensemble Studios following the completion of Halo Wars . Some of its employees would form a new team as part of Microsoft Studios . Kevin <unk> , director of Games for Windows , denied it was the end of the Age of Empires series , telling The San Francisco Chronicle " we 're very excited about the future potential for Age of Empires " . Edge confirmed , in an interview with Microsoft 's corporate vice president of interactive entertainment , Shane Kim , that Microsoft continued to own Age of Empires and that they had plans to continue the series . However , Bruce Shelley wrote in his blog that he would not be part of any new studios formed . 
 = = = Spin @-@ off games = = = 
 Age of Mythology shared many elements of gameplay with the main series , and was considered a part of the series , despite its different focus . The campaign in Age of Mythology tells the story of an Atlantean , <unk> , and his quest to find why his people are out of favor with Poseidon . Microsoft published the game on October 30 , 2002 , and its expansion , The Titans , on October 21 , 2003 . The Titans featured the Atlanteans as a new civilization . Its campaign is shorter than previous expansions , and centers on Kastor , son of <unk> , who falls for the lies of the titans and frees them from Tartarus . Age of Mythology sold more than one million units in four months . It scored 89 % on Game Rankings and Metacritic . The Titans failed to equal the sales success of Age of Mythology , although critics rated it highly . 
 Backbone Entertainment developed Age of Empires : The Age of Kings as a turn @-@ based game for the Nintendo DS . Majesco published the game on February 14 , 2006 . It is similar to other turn @-@ based games , such as Advance Wars , but with a gameplay based on its PC counterpart . Age of Empires : The Age of Kings scored 80 % on Game Rankings and Metacritic . Konami brought a game of the same title to the PlayStation 2 around five years earlier than the DS version , but the game had little promotion , and sold poorly . 
 On August 16 , 2010 , Microsoft announced Age of Empires Online , which was a free @-@ to @-@ play Games for Windows Live online game , it developed in collaboration with Robot Entertainment . It featured Free @-@ to @-@ play experiences via Games for Windows LIVE as well as : A persistent online capital city that lives and grows even when you 're offline , Cooperative multiplayer quests , trading and a level @-@ based system that lets you progress at your own pace . 
 On April 13 , 2014 , Age of Empires : World Domination was announced . It was developed by <unk> Games for the iOS , Android and Windows Phone . 
 On August 25 , 2014 , Age of Empires : Castle Siege was announced . It is a touch @-@ based game developed by Smoking Gun Interactive . It was released on September 17 , 2014 for the Windows PC and Windows Phone 8 . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Historical elements = = = 
 The development phases of the Age of Empires games were similar in several ways . Due to the games being based on historical events , the team often had to do large amounts of research . However , the research was not in depth , which , according to Age of Empires designer Bruce Shelley , is " a good idea for most entertainment products . " Shelley also said that Ensemble Studios took most of the reference material from children 's sections at libraries . He pointed out the goal was for the players of the game to have fun , " not [ its ] designers or researchers . " At the Games Convention Developers Conference in 2007 , Shelley continued with this thought and explained that the success of the series laid in " making a game which appealed to both the casual and hardcore gamer . " Shelley also remarked the Age of Empires games were not about history in itself , but rather " about the human experience ; " they focused not simply on what humans had done but on what they could do in the future such as " going into space . " Ensemble Studios developed Age of Mythology in a different way than the previous two games . The team had worried they " couldn 't get away " with a third historical @-@ based game , and chose mythology as the setting after they had discussed several options . 
 = = = Artificial intelligence = = = 
 The artificial intelligence ( AI ) used in the Age of Empires series has been developed and improved regularly by designers . AI specialist Dave Pottinger noted the development team gave the AI in the original game a very high priority , and spent over a year working on it . He said that the AI in the game relies on tactics and strategies to win , instead of " cheating " by giving bonus resources to itself , or tweaking its units to be stronger than normal . Pottinger later noted that the Age of Empires series team took great pride in their AI playing a " fair game " . 
 Age of Empires allows players to choose to play either along specialized , story @-@ backed conditions or as individual battles against the AI ( and other players ) . Choosing to battle against the AI – rather than following the storyline – allows the AI to adapt to players ' strategies and even remember which games it won and lost . The AI eventually overcomes players ' strategies and easily destroys their villages after several games . For instance , in Age of Empires III , this is referred to as playing a " Skirmish . " However Age of Empires III allows players to refine their strategies further against the AI by " Building a Deck , " which allows players to replace " Home City " shipments with improved alternatives . 
 In Age of Empires II : The Conquerors the AI was given a high priority , the result being the " smart villager " feature , which was highly popular in subsequent games of the series . After building a structure that stores or produces resources , smart villagers would proceed to collect resources related to the structure , such as crops from farms or ore from exposed deposits . 
 Age of Mythology : The Titans lets players use an AI debugger when creating custom scenarios ; players can change the settings of computer players and make them act according to certain patterns . More basic changes to the AI had previously been available in the series ' first two games . 
 = = = Graphics and visuals = = = 
 The graphics and visuals of Age of Empires improved with each successive release . From the original release to the second , Age of Empires II : The Age of Kings , noteworthy improvements gained praise from several critics . With the release of Age of Mythology the praise continued , and the fourth release , Age of Empires III , garnered even more . 
 GameSpot praised the improved graphics in the second release , Age of Empires II : The Age of Kings . Eurogamer welcomed its introduction of female villagers as compared with the original male only version . Allgame praised the advanced grouping and path @-@ finding systems in the second release . Despite the improved graphics , Allgame complained that units in Age of Empires II : The Age of Kings were at times difficult to distinguish from one another , a point numerous reviewers agreed on . Nevertheless , Game Revolution wrote that the second release was " the best looking of the 2D RTS games out there right now . " 
 The graphics continued to improve in Age of Mythology and was praised by a majority of reviewers . IGN ranked the graphics in this third release , " a joy to watch ... awesome . " GameSpot assented , also rating the graphics a 9 out of 10 . Game Revolution agreed , and PC Gamer stated that the graphics in the third release " are packed with detail . " 
 The trend in improved graphics continued well into the next release , Age of Empires III , much to the delight of reviewers . IGN stated , " After seeing the screenshots , our jaws hit the floor at the amount of detail . " 1UP.com described Age of Empires III as " one of the most beautiful games you will put on your computer for the foreseeable future . " GameSpy agreed , stating , " Age III 's graphics are unmatched in the strategy genre . " Age of Empires III builds on and introduces new features to the prior release , Age of Mythology , such as the inclusion of the award @-@ winning Havok physics simulation middleware game engine for the Windows version and PhysX for the Mac OS X. The innovative result is that pre @-@ created animations are avoided ; instead events are calculated according to the physics engine . Consequently , views of events like building destruction and tree felling are not pre @-@ recorded . GameSpot also admired the graphics in the fourth release but complained about " the awkward unit behavior . " Other graphical features of the game include bloom lighting and support for pixel shader 3 @.@ 0 . 
 GameSpy awarded Age of Empires III the " Best Graphics " award at GameSpy 's " Game of the Year 2005 . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Stephen Rippy has been the series ' music director since the first game . He has had occasional help from his brother , David Rippy , as well as Kevin McMullan . He created the original music in Age of Empires with sounds of instruments from the periods in the game . These sounds came from actual instruments , and their digital samples . The tunes were the result of extensive research on the cultures , styles , and instruments used . Rippy said that sound development on The Age of Kings was easy , since there was knowledge of the instruments used in the Middle Ages . Therefore , they were able to reproduce the tunes for the soundtrack of the game . In Age of Mythology , an orchestral instrumentation was used , instead . According to McMullan , the team also collected large numbers of audio recordings from zoos , and created " a massive sound library of [ their ] own material . " The music of Age of Empires III was similar to The Age of Kings , in which the team used more historical instruments ; Rippy noted the team used instruments such as " bagpipes and field drums " to give it a realistic feel . Finally , some infrequent mood pieces were the product of a collaboration between Rippy and Sean Paul . 
 = = = Collaboration = = = 
 Ensemble Studios worked together with Big Huge Games to develop The Asian Dynasties , Age of Empires III 's second expansion . This was the first joint venture for both teams . The reason for them doing so was compatible schedules : Ensemble Studios was busy with other projects — particularly Halo Wars — while Big Huge Games ' real @-@ time strategy team had few projects at that time . Big Huge Games did most of the work , but Ensemble Studios designers Greg Street and Sandy Petersen joined in the brainstorming , and had control over the final product . Both studios had roles in testing the game before its release . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The Age of Empires series has been a commercial success . As of 2008 , five of its games have each sold more than one million copies . According to Gamasutra , Age of Empires had sold more than three million copies , and The Rise of Rome sold one million copies as of 2000 . Around the same time , Microsoft announced that they shipped over two million copies of The Age of Kings . In 2003 , Microsoft announced the sales of one million copies for Age of Mythology . By 2004 — prior to the release of Age of Empires III — the Age of Empires franchise had sold over 15 million copies . On May 18 , 2007 , Ensemble Studios announced that two million copies of Age of Empires III had been sold . Games in the series have consistently scored highly on video game review aggregator websites Game Rankings and Metacritic , which collect data from numerous review websites . As noted in the table to the right , the highest rating game is Age of Empires II : The Age of Kings , receiving a 92 % score from both sites . 
 Critics have credited Age of Empires for influencing real @-@ time strategy ( RTS ) games such as Rise of Nations , Empire Earth , and Cossacks . Star Wars : Galactic Battlegrounds was also influenced by the series : it utilized the Genie game engine , as Age of Empires and Age of Empires II : The Age of Kings had , and was considered by critics to be a very close replica to the games ; IGN began their review with the statement " I love Age of Star Wars , I mean Star Empires . Whatever it 's called , I dig it . " and GameSpot wrote that " fundamentals of the Age of Empires II engine are so intact in Star Wars : Galactic Battlegrounds that veterans of that game can jump right in . " In October 2005 , Shelley commented on the impact of the series . In a GameSpy interview , he explained that parents would " tell Ensemble Studios that their kid is reading books about ancient Greece because they enjoy playing with the triremes so much , or that they want to check out books about medieval history because [ the ] game taught them what a trebuchet was . " 
 Shelley has said that the key to the success of the games was its innovation , rather than imitation of its peers . He also claimed the unique elements in the games " helped establish the reputation of Ensemble Studios as masters of the real @-@ time strategy genre . " Mark Bozon of IGN wrote in his review of The Age of Kings , " The Age of Empires series has been one of the most innovative real @-@ time strategy games for PC in the last decade or so . " <unk> called Ensemble Studios " the developer that started it all " when they talked about how much Age of Empires III had done to advance the real @-@ time strategy genre . Shelley has acknowledged the success and innovation of Age of Empires helped to ensure Ensemble survive its early periods since startup . In 2005 , Shelley complained of critics holding an " innovation bias " against the series ; citing the 60 % score from Computer Gaming World , he said that despite Age of Empires III being " perhaps the best selling PC game in the world , " reviewers expected " something really new , " and rated it harshly . 
 Bungie Studios chose Ensemble Studios to develop Halo Wars , an RTS game based on their Halo series . They said that one of the reasons they chose to work with Ensemble was because of the " <unk> " Age of Empires series . They also noted that Ensemble was the perfect choice " to realize the original vision of Halo , " which started life as an RTS . 
 = Reaganing = 
 " Reaganing " is the fifth episode of the fifth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 85th overall episode of the series . It was written by co @-@ executive producer Matt Hubbard and directed by Todd Holland . It originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on October 21 , 2010 . Guest stars in this episode include Kelsey Grammer , Seth Kirschner , and Jen Ponton . 
 In the episode , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) is succeeding at all of his tasks , and as a result of having a good day , as he is on a roll , he decides to help Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) figure out her relationship status with Carol ( Matt Damon ) . Meanwhile , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) and Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) enlist the help of actor Kelsey Grammer to help them pull off a scam , and Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) tries to film a commercial for the Boys & Girls Clubs of America . 
 " Reaganing " was generally , though not universally , well received among television critics . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was watched by 5 @.@ 182 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 2 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . For his work in this episode , Matt Hubbard received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination in the category for Outstanding Writing in a Comedy Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) agrees to give sketch show TGS with Tracy Jordan head writer Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) a ride to Newark Liberty International Airport to meet her boyfriend Carol ( Matt Damon ) . On the way , she tells him that she is having intimacy issues with Carol and wants to end the relationship . Jack , who is having a successful run of problem @-@ solving , encourages Liz to confide in him so that he can help solve her problem . She tells him of a traumatic incident from her childhood when , preparing to use the bathroom whilst wearing roller skates , she pulled down her underpants and fell , pulling a Tom Jones poster on top of her . Her mother ( Anita Gillette ) discovered Liz under the poster and suspected her of masturbating , so she took all her posters away . With their limousine stuck in traffic , Jack exits the vehicle to try to digest Liz 's story . 
 At the same time , TGS star Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) tries to film a commercial for the Boys & Girls Clubs of America but has a difficult time remembering his line resulting in production holding traffic up as the commercial shoot is blocking off a street . Jack comes upon the scene and realizes the problem . To speed things up , he gives Tracy jelly beans to eat and while he is chewing , Jack imitates Tracy 's voice and says the line Tracy was scheduled to say . 
 Back in the car , Jack begins to lose confidence in his problem @-@ solving abilities because Liz still wants to break up with Carol . As they talk through Liz 's past problems with sex , they realize that they are all connected to the incident with the Tom Jones poster and that each time she has had a problem , it is because she has been reminded of the singer . Liz is relieved that she has found the root of her problem and Jack convinces her to stay with Carol . When they finally reach Newark Airport , Liz realizes that she is supposed to meet him at John F. Kennedy International Airport instead . 
 Meanwhile , TGS star Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) receives a card from Carvel that entitles her to free ice cream cakes for life . She gets a free cake with the card but it has a mistake in the decoration so NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) returns it to the restaurant . When he gets a refund for the free cake , Jenna decides to scam the restaurant . With Kenneth 's help , she orders several more cakes and gets refunds for them . Eventually Jenna is banned from Carvel . The two then enlist actor Kelsey Grammer to assist them in a bigger scam . Jenna and Kenneth submit a sketch to TGS producer Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) in Liz 's name that requires dozens of cakes . Grammer orders the cakes and later gets refunds for all of them . The gang has now collected money from both TGS and Carvel for 21 free cakes , a windfall of nearly 800 dollars . Kenneth runs into one of the Carvel employees ( Jen Ponton ) and learns that she was fired because of the scam . Realizing the negative effect of their actions , Kenneth decides not to take part in the scams anymore . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Reaganing " was written by co @-@ executive producer Matt Hubbard , his first episode for the fifth season , and his eleventh writing credit after " The Rural Juror " , " Hard Ball " , " The Collection " , " MILF Island " , " Reunion " , " Larry King " , " Cutbacks " , " Audition Day " , " Anna Howard Shaw Day " , and " Emanuelle Goes to Dinosaur Land " . The episode was directed by Todd Holland , making it his second for the series after directing the February 5 , 2009 , episode " Generalissimo " from the show 's third season . This episode of 30 Rock originally aired in the United States on October 21 , 2010 , on NBC as the fifth episode of the show 's fifth season and the 85th overall episode of the series . " Reaganing " was filmed on September 14 , and September 20 , 2010 . 
 Co @-@ showrunner and executive producer Robert Carlock said that the upcoming season would address Liz Lemon 's sexual problems , explaining that " [ we ] finally get to the bottom of where [ her ] <unk> [ sic ] dysfunction comes from . " In this episode , it is revealed that Liz 's problem stems from an incident from her childhood involving a poster of singer Tom Jones . Actor Kelsey Grammer played himself in " Reaganing " in which he helps Jenna Maroney and Kenneth Parcell scam Carvel , an ice cream franchise . Following the broadcast , Carvel thanked the show for referencing them in the episode despite making them " the butt of the joke . " In addition , Carvel enjoyed the subplot scheme , noting it " was pretty funny stuff ! " 
 This was actor Seth Kirschner 's third appearance as the character Shawn , a film and television director . In the episode , Shawn is the director of the Boys & Girls Clubs of America commercial and gets frustrated with Tracy Jordan when Tracy cannot remember his line during the shoot . Kirschner previously appeared in two season four episodes " Into the Crevasse " and " Emanuelle Goes to Dinosaur Land " . Jen Ponton , who plays a Carvel employee who gets fired , said that the cast and crew of 30 Rock were " wonderful to work with . Everyone was absolutely top @-@ notch . The whole crew was very professional . They treated me very well " . Ponton auditioned for her role in September and got the job within a few days . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the beginning of the episode , Jack tells Liz that he has entered " a magic zone of error @-@ free living " which he calls " Reaganing " — named after former United States President Ronald Reagan — and that the only people to accomplish this have been businessman Lee Iacocca , former General Electric Chairman and CEO Jack Welch , and former President of Iraq Saddam Hussein . Tracy tells Kenneth that he turned down the opportunity to host the MTV International Awards to film a commercial for the Boys & Girls Clubs of America instead . As a result of her participation in the Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade , Jenna is given a card from Carvel that entitles her to free ice cream cakes for life in which she and Kenneth decide to abuse the card which results in Jenna being banned from Carvel from life . This subplot was a reference to Dina Lohan , the mother of actress Lindsay Lohan , who abused her daughter 's Carvel card and as a result she was banned from ever using the card . 
 Liz says that after her mother found her under a Tom Jones poster with her underpants around her ankles her mother removed all her posters from her room which included Grizzly Adams , Larry Wilcox as his television character Officer Jon Baker from CHiPs , Harrison Ford as Han Solo from Star Wars , Philadelphia Phillies players Tug McGraw and Mike Schmidt , Kermit the Frog , and Gunther Gebel @-@ Williams . 
 After learning Jenna 's scheme to con Carvel , Kenneth says that it is wrong and illegal , and says that if Cookie Puss knew about this " he 'd tear us apart with his fangs . " This is a reference to Cookie Puss , an ice cream cake character created by Carvel in the 1970s . A television commentator opined that the Carvel storyline here referenced the 1973 caper film The Sting that starred Paul Newman and Robert Redford , as two professional <unk> , who decide to con a mob boss , played by Robert Shaw . In addition , after ordering the cakes with mistakes on them at a Carvel location , Grammer touches his nose as a sign to Jenna and Kenneth , who are outside , that he has ordered them , a similar gesture that Newman did in the film . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , " Reaganing " was watched by 5 @.@ 182 million households in its original American broadcast . It earned a 2 @.@ 2 rating / 7 share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 7 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode constituted a 30 percent drop in viewership from the previous week 's episode , " Live Show " , which was watched by 6 @.@ 701 million American viewers . Matt Hubbard received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Writing in a Comedy Series at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for HitFix reported that despite " Reaganing " not being a perfect episode it was still " a very good one in what 's so far ... been a very strong rebound season for 30 Rock . " Juli Weiner of Vanity Fair wrote , " the episode was quick , sharp , and consistent " . Meredith Blake of the Los Angeles Times enjoyed Tracy 's plot here , noting that his attempts to deliver a single line was highly entertaining . The Cornell Daily Sun 's Scott Eidler said that Jenna and Kenneth 's subplot " wasn 't laugh @-@ out @-@ loud funny " , nonetheless " it was a nice realistic turn for characterization ! " Johnny Firecloud of CraveOnline deemed " Reaganing " an excellent episode from the series . Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club was positive about Jenna and Kenneth 's story , noting it went from amusing to hilarious . He was not " overly blown away " with Liz 's plot , but said it redeemed itself at the end " by providing another nice moment of connection " between the Jack and Liz characters . Rabin gave " Reaganing " a B + grade , praising the ( non @-@ existent ) scene where Jack put pills into Tracy 's jelly beans . Samantha Urban of The Dallas Morning News said that the best part of the episode was Jack McBrayer 's Kenneth " actually [ having ] some funny lines for the first time in awhile [ sic ] . " The Fordham Ram 's Celeste <unk> said that the episode was " perhaps more awkward than normal ... but it was nonetheless hilarious , and was tempered by its ability to throw cultural references into everything until you almost forget what is actually being discussed . " Entertainment Weekly contributor Annie Barrett liked Kelsey Grammer 's appearance , but mostly enjoyed the fact that 30 Rock devoted an episode to Tina Fey 's character as " the sexual equivalent of a million <unk> " and was pleased with the numerous Liz flashbacks from past episodes that were featured here . 
 Not all reviews were positive . Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad reported that this episode was an odd one produced by the show . " I don 't know if it was the off @-@ balance tone the episode had because two of the three plots took place outside , but it just wasn 't as good as most episodes . " Brad Sanders of the Indiana Daily Student called Jenna and Kenneth 's plot a travesty , commenting that the two along with Grammer scamming Carvel was " diabolical , and definitely not funny enough to justify the <unk> " . In regards to the episode , itself , Sanders wrote that it was " mostly awful " . 
 = The Augments = 
 " The Augments " is the sixth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise , the eighty @-@ second episode overall . It is the last of a three @-@ story episode arc , preceded by " Borderland " , and " Cold Station 12 " . " The Augments " was directed by LeVar Burton , from a script by Michael Sussman . The series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . In this episode , " Augments " , genetically enhanced humans , and Doctor Arik Soong , their surrogate father , escape Cold Station 12 after stealing frozen Augment embryos from storage . Soong plans to hide out with the Augments and raise the embryos , but Malik , their leader , is tired of hiding and attempts to instigate a war between Starfleet and the Klingons . 
 The production of the episode reunites fellow Star Trek : The Next Generation alumni Burton as the director and Brent Spiner as Arik Soong . On The Next Generation , Burton previously played Geordi La Forge , while Spiner played Data . Most of the guest cast from the previous two Enterprise episodes in the story arc returned for " The Augments " ; Mark Rolston makes an appearance as Klingon Captain Magh . The sets were also reused , but a new one was built for the Klingon escape pod used by Soong . UPN first aired " The Augments " on November 12 , 2004 , where it was watched by 2 @.@ 1 percent of the U.S. population . It received mixed reviews by critics , who spoke negatively of Malik 's character , but praised the performance of Spiner as Soong and the relationship between T 'Pol and Tucker . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the end of " Cold Station 12 " , Doctor Arik Soong and the Augments he secretly raised depart the space station , taking with them 1 @,@ 800 frozen Augment embryos preserved from the time of the Eugenics Wars . Before leaving , Malik steals several pathogen samples from the station and sets the containment fields to fail . In " The Augments " , Captain Archer restores stasis around the central compound , and is beamed from space to safety , with the Enterprise in pursuit of Soong , Malik , and the Augments on their stolen Bird of Prey . Soong and the Augments arrive in Klingon space where he shares his plan : Soong intends to hide out in a region where Starfleet would have trouble tracking them down . Malik objects to Soong 's plan , noting that Khan Noonien Singh also ran away on the SS Botany Bay . 
 In pursuit of the Augments , Enterprise arrives in Klingon space having faked a Klingon warp signature . Soong releases a hostage on a <unk> shuttle into a gas giant , forcing the Enterprise to abandon their pursuit and mount a rescue operation . Escaping , Malik proposes a new plan : trigger a war between Starfleet and the Klingons as a distraction by firing a pathogen @-@ filled torpedo at a Klingon colony . He reasons that Starfleet will be too busy fighting the Klingons to hunt down the Augments . Soong will have nothing to do with Malik 's genocidal proposal . On the Enterprise , Commander T 'Pol asks Commander Tucker about the distance between them after her recent arranged marriage ( " Home " ) , and he tells her he has come to terms with their new relationship . 
 Back on the Bird of Prey , Soong works on a way to remove aggressive behavior from the unborn Augment embryos . Malik , concerned by Soong 's plan to hide from Starfleet and his tampering with the embryos , leads a mutiny which confines Soong to his quarters . With the help of Persis , Soong leaves the ship in an escape pod . Enterprise , once again in pursuit , detects the pod and brings Soong on board . Heading towards the Klingon colony in high warp in an attempt to stop Malik 's plan , the Klingons detect their ship . Enterprise is forced to disable a Klingon cruiser when it tries to board . Malik kills Persis for her betrayal , and continues with his plan to attack the Klingons . Scans of the Qu <unk> colony reveal three main population centers ; the torpedo is armed with pathogens and prepared for deployment . 
 The Enterprise arrives late , just after Malik fires the torpedo , but Enterprise destroys it , saving the Klingon colony . Soong helps disable the Klingon ship , hoping to save some of the Augments . However , Malik scuttles the Klingon ship , killing the remaining Augments and the embryos , and transports himself onto Enterprise in an attempt to kill Soong in revenge , but Archer manages to kill Malik first . The Klingons call off their retaliation against Earth , and Soong returns to the Starfleet Detention Center . In custody , he begins to doubt the feasibility of genetically engineering humans and wonders if perfecting artificial life has better prospects for the future . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Augments " is the final episode in a three @-@ part story which began with " Borderland " and continued in " Cold Station 12 " . The return of genetically enhanced humans , as previously seen in the Star Trek : The Original Series episode " Space Seed " and Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan , closely ties Enterprise to The Original Series . 
 The episode reunites Brent Spiner and LeVar Burton , two former Star Trek : The Next Generation alumni . Spiner previously played the role of the android Data on the show while Burton played chief engineer Geordi La Forge . Spiner appeared in all previous installments of the three @-@ story arc , while Burton only directed " The Augments " . Burton previously directed three episodes of Enterprise in the third season . To celebrate their collaboration as well as acknowledge the crew members who had remained with the franchise since their former series , Burton bought lunch on the final day of shooting for everyone on the set . The episode was written by Mike Sussman , his second of the season after " Home " . 
 Shooting began on September 2 and lasted for seven days , with the production taking time off for Labor Day . The majority of the sets on the episode were created for " Borderland " or " Cold Station 12 " . The scene depicting a Klingon escape pod required the construction of a new set . Spiner , as well as several other guest stars , resumed their roles from earlier in the story arc , including Alec Newman as Malik , Richard Riehle as Doctor Jeremy Lucas , Abby <unk> as Persis and Adam Grimes as Lokesh . Joining them was Mark Rolston as the Klingon Captain Magh ; Rolston previously appeared in The Next Generation as Walter Pierce in the episode " Eye of the Beholder " , and also played Kuroda in the Enterprise episode " Canamar " . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 UPN first broadcast " The Augments " on November 12 , 2004 . According to overnight Nielsen ratings , 2 @.@ 1 percent of the population of the United States and four percent of those watching television at the time viewed the episode . " The Augments " received the same ratings as the previous episode , " Cold Station 12 " . However , it moved up to fourth place in the 8 p.m. timeslot , narrowly beating What I Like About You and Grounded for Life on The WB . 
 In a review for TrekNation , Michelle Erica Green said that Malik had become a " cardboard villain " by the time of " The Augments " , but she did not place the blame on Alec Newman for the failing . She also criticised the use of Persis ' death by Malik , saying that he defined her " even in death as a commodity for his use " . Green praised the relationship between T 'Pol and Tucker and the characterisation of Soong , noting that Spiner 's performance was the best of the three @-@ episode arc . 
 Writing for Jammer 's Reviews , Jamahl Epsicokhan gave the episode a rating of two out of four . Like Green , he also criticised Malik , noting that the " crux of the story is reduced to an unremarkable three @-@ character power struggle that is supposed to be a microcosm for the trouble that comes with genetically engineered super @-@ humans , but comes across instead as overly bland and tidy drama . " Spiner " delivers a good performance under the circumstances " , notes Epsicokhan , as his character has to believe that Malik will not overthrow his leadership of the Augments . Summing up the episode , Epsicokhan writes : 
 Perhaps this story was simply content to show absolute power corrupting absolutely . Unfortunately , aside from Persis , none of the Augments stop to think about what they 're doing or why , and the story of Malik is content to blandly repeat the story of Khan , but without the crucial personal motivator of revenge . I think the writers owed the material more than this . 
 Den of Geek writer James Hunt ranked the mini @-@ arc featuring the episodes " Borderland " , " Cold Station 12 " and " The Augments " , the sixth best story of Enterprise . In a review for Big Shiny Robot , Andy Wilson said that the story arc represented the " personal journey " of Arik Soong from genetic engineering to cybernetics . 
 The first home media release of " The Augments " was originally released in the United States on November 1 , 2005 , as part of the season four DVD box set of Enterprise . The Blu ray edition was released on April 1 , 2014 . 
 = Bart the Mother = 
 " Bart the Mother " is the third episode of The Simpsons ' tenth season . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on September 27 , 1998 . In the episode , Bart accidentally kills a mother bird with a BB gun , and decides to hatch and take care of the two eggs he found in the bird 's nest . 
 " Bart the Mother " was written by David X. Cohen and directed by Steven Dean Moore ; it was the last full @-@ length episode Cohen wrote for The Simpsons before leaving to work on Futurama . The original idea for the episode was intended to be a B story , but because it was too difficult to work into other episodes , it eventually became a primary plot . The episode features the final appearance of character Troy McClure and was dedicated to the character 's voice actor , Phil Hartman , who was murdered by his wife on May 28 , 1998 , four months before the episode aired . 
 In its original American broadcast , " Bart the Mother " finished 58th in ratings for the week of September 21 – 27 , 1998 , with a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 4 , translating to 7 @,@ 355 @,@ 600 households . The episode received generally positive reviews from critics , who praised Bart 's moral dilemma and soul searching moments . Nancy Cartwright , the voice actress of Bart , described the episode as one of her favorites . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Marge takes the family to the Family Fun Center , she notices Nelson acting like a bully , especially when he knocks Milhouse off the track and wins a BB gun from stolen prize tickets . Bart and Nelson attempt to be friends , but Marge forbids Bart to hang out with Nelson . Bart goes to Nelson ’ s house anyway and starts using Nelson 's new BB gun . When Nelson pressures Bart to shoot a bird in a nest , Bart accidentally kills the bird . Marge is furious that Bart killed an animal , but instead of punishing him , she refuses to have anything to do with his destructive ways . 
 After Marge leaves Bart with Nelson , Bart discovers two eggs in a bird 's nest . Since he does not want the babies to die like their mother , he decides to hatch the eggs , and secretly keeps the eggs warm in his treehouse . After Bart spends more time in his treehouse , Marge starts to suspect he is up to something . After Marge finds out what Bart has been doing , she tells him she is proud of him . With Marge 's help , the eggs eventually hatch , but the Simpson family is shocked when instead of birds , a pair of lizards emerge from the eggs , who Bart names <unk> Boy and Bart Jr . 
 Bart and Marge take the lizards to the Springfield Birdwatching Society . Principal Skinner , a member of the society , explains that they are Bolivian tree lizards , a type of lizard that steals a bird ’ s eggs and leaves their own eggs to be watched after by the mother bird , which is then eaten by the offspring once they hatch . Skinner says the lizards must be killed by law , because they have killed many bird species . Bart escapes and runs away with the lizards , but before he can get away , Skinner catches up to him and they both struggle on top of the building . Suddenly , the lizards glide to the ground , where they start to eradicate pigeons in Springfield . 
 Since the town considered the pigeons to be a nuisance , they are delighted that the lizards have eaten all the pigeons . So , Bart is thanked and honored by Mayor Quimby with a <unk> scented candle . Lisa worries the town will now become infested by lizards rather than the pigeons , but Skinner assures her they will send in " wave after wave of " Chinese needle snakes , then snake @-@ eating gorillas , and then " when wintertime rolls around , the gorillas simply freeze to death . " 
 = = Production = = 
 " Bart the Mother " was the last full @-@ length episode David X. Cohen wrote for The Simpsons . Shortly after the episode aired , Cohen teamed up with The Simpsons ' creator Matt Groening to develop Futurama , where he served as executive producer and head writer for the series ' entire run . Cohen 's idea for the episode started out as a B story for Homer . In the original concept , pigeons nest outside Homer 's window at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant . Mr. Burns <unk> the pigeons and Homer climbs out onto the ledge of the window , in the middle of a blizzard , to nest the eggs . Cohen said the idea " [ did not ] fit in anywhere " , so he decided to pitch it as an A story instead , with Bart nesting the eggs instead of Homer . The Simpsons writer George Meyer thought the idea of Bart shooting the bird and simply nesting the eggs was too straightforward , and he did not think it had " enough of a twist " to be a good episode . Cohen and Meyer eventually decided the eggs should be lizard eggs . Cohen thought the twist was what ultimately made the episode both " touching " and " interesting " . 
 Producer Ron Hauge came up with the idea of someone shooting a bird and feeling guilty about it . Hauge told the staff a few weeks before Cohen started writing the episode that when he was 13 or 14 years old , he accidentally killed a bird after he got a Wrist Rocket slingshot , and took a shot at a bird that he thought was " far , far away " . Hauge said his friends were excited about it , but he was " dying inside " . For the scene in which the bird is killed , Cohen received further inspiration from an episode of The Andy Griffith Show entitled " Opie the Birdman " . The writers were trying to figure out a way to have Bart kill the bird without actually wanting to kill it , and decided to give the gun a crooked sight that Bart would be unaware of , so when Bart intentionally takes a shot at the right of the bird to avoid it , the bullet still hits the bird . After Bart kills the mother bird , he imagines himself before a bird court with a vulture , an eagle , and a toucan as judges . This sequence was added to " liven up the visuals " , because the writers thought the episode tended too heavily towards extreme realism and because most of the scenes in the episode were taking place in and around the Simpsons ' house . Then @-@ show runner Mike Scully had done the same thing with an episode he wrote for season seven called " Marge Be Not Proud " . In that episode , Bart gets caught shoplifting , and writer Bill Oakley suggested the addition of a fantasy sequence to get away from the realism in the episode . 
 The Family Fun Center the Simpsons visit is based on a real family fun center in Falmouth , Massachusetts that Cohen went to as a child to play video games . The Bolivian Tree Lizard is a fake species , but Cohen based it on real animals , including the dinosaur species Oviraptor , which was originally thought to eat eggs . The species is also based on the cowbird and the cuckoo , which lay their eggs in other birds ' nests , and Draco , a genus of gliding lizards . Cohen also received inspiration from the Cane Toad that started " taking over " Australia in 1935 . 
 " Bart the Mother " marked the last guest appearance of Phil Hartman on The Simpsons as Troy McClure . On May 28 , 1998 , four months before the episode aired , he was shot and killed by his wife Brynn . " Bart the Mother " was dedicated in his memory in response to this . Rather than replace Hartman with a new voice actor , the production staff retired McClure from the show , along with Hartman 's other recurring character , Lionel Hutz . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Bart the Mother " finished 58th in the ratings for the week of September 21 – 27 , 1998 , with a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 4 , translating to 7 @,@ 355 @,@ 600 households . Nancy Cartwright , the voice of Bart Simpson , called it one of her favorite The Simpsons episodes , along with " Bart Sells His Soul " and " Lisa 's Substitute " . The Toronto Sun 's Bruce Kirkland wrote that " Bart the Mother " was one of the " classic episodes " of the series ' tenth season . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood wrote , " We particularly like the moral dilemma at the end , as underlined by Lisa , regarding the eventual culling of the lizards that will need to take place . A good romp , this one , with some nice laughs at Homer 's expense . " Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide said , " The show generates decent heart as it shows Bart ’ s attempts to make up for his misbehavior . The show becomes reasonably enjoyable if not especially memorable . " Jesse Hassenger of PopMatters named the tenth season of The Simpsons the series ' " first significant dip in quality , a step away from its golden era [ ... ] with broader gags and more outlandish plots " . However , Hassenger enjoyed " Bart the Mother " , and wrote , " [ The episode ] explores the show ’ s sweet and dark sides simultaneously as Bart , remorseful after killing a bird , tries to care for orphaned eggs that turn out to hold ravenous lizards . " DVD Town 's James Plath described " Bart the Mother " as an episode that viewers would either love or hate , because of Bart 's rare moments of soul searching , and he found the episode to be a memorable one . 
 = SMS Schleswig @-@ Holstein = 
 SMS Schleswig @-@ Holstein ( pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ̯ n ] ) was the last of the five Deutschland @-@ class battleships built by the German Kaiserliche Marine . The ship , named for the province of Schleswig @-@ Holstein , was laid down in the Germaniawerft dockyard in Kiel in August 1905 and commissioned into the fleet nearly three years later . The ships of her class were already outdated by the time they entered service , being inferior in size , armor , firepower and speed to the new generation of dreadnought battleships . 
 Schleswig @-@ Holstein fought in both World Wars . During World War I , she saw front @-@ line service in the II Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet , culminating in the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . Schleswig @-@ Holstein saw action during the engagement , and was hit by one large @-@ caliber shell . After the battle , Schleswig @-@ Holstein was relegated to guard duty in the mouth of the Elbe River before being decommissioned in late 1917 . As one of the few battleships permitted for Germany by the terms of the Treaty of Versailles , Schleswig @-@ Holstein was again pressed into fleet service in the 1920s . In 1935 , the old battleship was converted into a training ship for naval cadets . 
 Schleswig @-@ Holstein fired the first shots of World War II when she bombarded the Polish base at Danzig 's Westerplatte in the early morning hours of 1 September 1939 . The ship was used as a training vessel for the majority of the war , and was sunk by British bombers in Gotenhafen in December 1944 . Schleswig @-@ Holstein was subsequently salvaged and then beached for use by the Soviet Navy as a target . As of 1990 , the ship 's bell was on display in the Bundeswehr Military History Museum in Dresden . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Schleswig @-@ Holstein was laid down on 18 August 1905 at the Germaniawerft dockyard in Kiel . She was launched on 17 December 1906 , the last pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the German navy . The British battleship HMS Dreadnought — armed with ten 12 @-@ inch ( 30 @.@ 5 cm ) guns — had already been commissioned earlier that month , with a revolutionary design that rendered every battleship of the German navy obsolescent , including Schleswig @-@ Holstein . At Schleswig @-@ Holstein 's launching ceremony , she was christened by Augusta Victoria of Schleswig @-@ Holstein , the German Empress ; Wilhelm II was also in attendance . Ernst Gunther , the Duke of Schleswig @-@ Holstein , gave the commissioning speech . 
 Schleswig @-@ Holstein had a length of 127 @.@ 60 m ( 418 ft 8 in ) , a beam of 22 @.@ 20 m ( 72 ft 10 in ) , and a draft of 8 @.@ 21 m ( 26 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 13 @,@ 200 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 000 long tons ) normally and up to 14 @,@ 218 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 993 long tons ) at combat loading . She was equipped with three triple expansion engines and twelve coal @-@ fired water @-@ tube boilers that produced a rated 16 @,@ 767 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 503 kW ) and a top speed of 19 @.@ 1 knots ( 35 @.@ 4 km / h ; 22 @.@ 0 mph ) . In addition to being the fastest ship of her class , Schleswig @-@ Holstein was the second @-@ most fuel efficient . At a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) , she could steam for 5 @,@ 720 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 590 km ; 6 @,@ 580 mi ) . She had a standard crew of 35 officers and 708 enlisted men . 
 The ship 's primary armament consisted of four 28 cm SK L / 40 guns in two twin turrets ; one turret was placed forward and the other aft . She was also equipped with fourteen 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) SK L / 40 guns mounted in casemates and twenty 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 35 guns in pivot mounts . The ship was also armed with six 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , all below the waterline . One was in the bow , one in the stern , and four on the broadside . Her armored belt was 240 mm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships , and she had a 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick armored deck . The main battery turrets had 280 mm ( 11 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Upon completion , Schleswig @-@ Holstein was commissioned for sea trials on 6 July 1908 . Her crew largely came from her sister ship Schlesien . On 21 September the ship was assigned to the II Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet , alongside her sister ships . In November , fleet and unit exercises were conducted in the Baltic Sea . The training regimen in which Schleswig @-@ Holstein participated followed a similar pattern over the next five years . Fleet maneuvers were conducted in the spring , followed by a summer cruise to Norway , and additional fleet training in the fall . This included another cruise into the Atlantic , from 7 July to 1 August 1909 . Starting in September 1910 , Friedrich Boedicker took command of the ship , a position he held for the next three years . On 3 October 1911 , the ship was transferred back to the II Squadron . Due to the Agadir Crisis in July , the summer cruise only went into the Baltic . In 1913 , she won the Kaiser 's Schiesspreis ( Gunnery Award ) . On 14 July 1914 , the annual summer cruise to Norway began , but the threat of war in Europe cut the excursion short ; within two weeks Schleswig @-@ Holstein and the rest of the II Squadron had returned to Wilhelmshaven . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 At the outbreak of war in July 1914 , Schleswig @-@ Holstein was assigned to guard duty in the mouth of the Elbe River while the rest of the fleet mobilized . In late October , she and her sisters were sent to Kiel to have improvements made to their underwater protection system to make them more resistant to torpedoes and mines , after which the II Battle Squadron rejoined the fleet . The squadron covered Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group while they bombarded Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 . During the operation , the German battle fleet of some 12 dreadnoughts and 8 pre @-@ dreadnoughts came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . However , skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens convinced the German commander , Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , that he was confronted with the entire Grand Fleet , and so he broke off the engagement and turned the fleet for home . In April 1916 , the ship had two of her 8 @.@ 8 cm guns removed and replaced with 8 @.@ 8 cm Flak guns . 
 Schleswig @-@ Holstein then participated in a fleet advance to the Dogger Bank on 21 – 22 April 1915 . On 11 – 12 September , the II Reconnaissance Group conducted a minelaying operation off the Swarte Bank with the II Squadron in support . This was followed by another sweep by the fleet on 23 – 24 October that ended without result . The II and III Battle Squadron dreadnoughts conducted an advance into the North Sea on 5 – 7 March 1916 ; Schleswig @-@ Holstein and the rest of the II Squadron remained in the German Bight , ready to sail in support . They then rejoined the fleet during the operation to bombard Yarmouth and Lowestoft on 24 – 25 April . During this operation , the battlecruiser Seydlitz was damaged by a British mine and had to return to port prematurely . Visibility was poor , so the operation was quickly called off before the British fleet could intervene . 
 = = = = Battle of Jutland = = = = 
 The commander of the High Seas Fleet , Admiral Reinhard Scheer , immediately planned another advance into the North Sea , but the damage to Seydlitz delayed the operation until the end of May . As the last ship assigned to the IV Division of the II Battle Squadron , the rearmost German formation , Schleswig @-@ Holstein was the last battleship in the line . The II Battle Squadron was commanded by Rear Admiral Franz Mauve . During the " Run to the North " , Scheer ordered the fleet to pursue the retreating battleships of the British 5th Battle Squadron at top speed . Schleswig @-@ Holstein and her sisters were significantly slower than the dreadnoughts and quickly fell behind . During this period , Admiral Scheer directed Hannover to place herself behind Schleswig @-@ Holstein so he would have a flagship on either end of the formation . By 19 : 30 , the Grand Fleet had arrived on the scene and confronted Admiral Scheer with significant numerical superiority . The German fleet was severely hampered by the presence of the slower Deutschland @-@ class ships ; if Scheer had ordered an immediate turn towards Germany , he would have had to sacrifice the slower ships to make his escape . 
 Admiral Scheer decided to reverse the course of the fleet with the Gefechtskehrtwendung , a maneuver that required every unit in the German line to turn 180 ° simultaneously . Having fallen behind , the ships of the II Battle Squadron could not conform to the new course following the turn , and fell to the disengaged side of the German line . Admiral Mauve considered moving his ships to the rear of the line , astern of the III Battle Squadron dreadnoughts , but decided against it when he realized the movement would interfere with the maneuvering of Hipper 's battlecruisers . Instead , he attempted to place his ships at the head of the line . But by the time the II Squadron reached its position at the head of the line , Scheer had ordered another Gefechtskehrtwendung , which placed them at the rear of the German fleet . By 21 : 00 , Scheer had turned the fleet around a third time , but the slow speed of Schleswig @-@ Holstein and her squadron mates caused them to fall out of position , to the disengaged side of the fleet . 
 Later on the first day of the battle , Hipper 's badly damaged battlecruisers were being engaged by their British rivals . Schleswig @-@ Holstein and the other so @-@ called " five @-@ minute ships " came to their aid by steaming in between the opposing battlecruiser squadrons . These ships were very briefly engaged , owing in large part to the poor visibility . The visibility was so bad , the gunners aboard Schleswig @-@ Holstein could not make out a target , and she did not fire her main guns . At 21 : 35 a heavy caliber shell struck the ship on the port @-@ side , punching a hole approximately 40 cm ( 16 in ) wide before exploding against the inner casemate armor . It tore apart 4 @.@ 50 m ( 14 @.@ 8 ft ) of the superstructure deck and disabled one of the port side casemate guns . Three men were killed and nine were wounded . Admiral Mauve halted the fight against the much more powerful battlecruisers and ordered an 8 @-@ point turn to starboard . 
 Late on the 31st , the fleet re @-@ formed for the night voyage back to Germany , with Schleswig @-@ Holstein towards the rear of the line , ahead of Hessen , Hannover , and the battlecruisers Von der Tann and Derfflinger . Around 03 : 00 , British destroyers conducted a series of attacks against the fleet , some of which were directed towards Schleswig @-@ Holstein . Shortly thereafter , Pommern was struck by at least one torpedo from the destroyer Onslaught ; the hit detonated an ammunition magazine , destroying the ship in a tremendous explosion . During the attack , Schleswig @-@ Holstein was forced to turn away to avoid the destroyers ' torpedoes . Shortly after 05 : 00 , Hannover and several other ships fired repeatedly at what they falsely believed to be British submarines . 
 Despite the ferocity of the night fighting , the High Seas Fleet punched through the British destroyer forces and reached Horns Reef by 4 : 00 on 1 June . The German fleet reached Wilhelmshaven a few hours later , where the undamaged dreadnoughts of the Nassau and Helgoland classes took up defensive positions . Over the course of the battle , Schleswig @-@ Holstein had fired only twenty 17 cm rounds . 
 = = = = Later actions = = = = 
 Schleswig @-@ Holstein was put into dock for repairs 10 – 25 June 1916 . The Navy then decided to withdraw the four remaining Deutschland @-@ class ships , owing to their obsolescence and vulnerability to underwater attacks , as demonstrated by the loss of Pommern . Thereafter , the ship was used as a target for U @-@ boats , except during 12 – 23 February 1917 when she was used as a guard ship . In April Schleswig @-@ Holstein was sent to Altenbruch at the mouth of the Elbe ; here she was decommissioned on 2 May . Schleswig @-@ Holstein was then disarmed and assigned to the 5th U @-@ boat Flotilla to be used as a barracks ship in Bremerhaven . In 1918 the ship was moved to Kiel , where she remained for the rest of the war . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war years = = = 
 Following the German defeat in World War I , the German navy was reorganized as the Reichsmarine according to the Treaty of Versailles . The new navy was permitted to retain eight pre @-@ dreadnought battleships under Article 181 — two of which would be in reserve — for coastal defense . Schleswig @-@ Holstein was among the ships that were retained , along with her sisters Hannover and Schlesien and several of the Braunschweig @-@ class battleships . Schleswig @-@ Holstein was recommissioned as the new fleet flagship on 31 January 1926 following an extensive refit , with new fire controls and an enlarged aft superstructure for the admiral 's staff . The secondary 17 cm guns were replaced with 15 @-@ centimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) pieces and four 50 cm torpedo tubes were fitted in main deck casemates fore and aft , replacing the submerged tubes . 
 Schleswig @-@ Holstein and her sister Hannover went on a training cruise into the Atlantic that lasted from 14 May to 17 June 1926 ; while on the cruise , she visited Palma de Mallorca in the Mediterranean from 22 to 30 May . She stopped in Barcelona with Elsass from 1 to 7 June , and then proceeded to Vigo from 12 to 14 June , where she joined Hessen , Elsass , and Hannover . There , the chief of the fleet , Vice Admiral Konrad Mommsen , met with King Alfonso XIII . Schleswig @-@ Holstein went on another training cruise between 30 March and 14 June 1927 into the Atlantic . She visited a series of Iberian ports , including Lisbon , Portugal , where Mommsen was greeted by Óscar Carmona , the president of Portugal . In December 1927 Schleswig @-@ Holstein went back into dock , re @-@ emerging in January 1928 with her <unk> trunked back into the second and both remaining funnels heightened , as had previously been done with her sister Schlesien . 
 With the delivery of the new Deutschland @-@ class Panzerschiffe ( armored ships ) beginning in 1933 , the older battleships were gradually withdrawn from front @-@ line service . In May 1935 , the Reichsmarine was reorganized as the Kriegsmarine by the reforms instituted by Adolf Hitler that created the Wehrmacht . Schleswig @-@ Holstein ceased to be fleet flagship on 22 September 1935 , and was refitted as a cadet training ship during January – March and May – July 1936 . The changes included removing her remaining upper deck 15 cm guns and her torpedo tubes , and her two aft boiler rooms were converted to oil @-@ firing models , although the forward boilers remained coal @-@ fired . The ship 's standard complement was also reduced from 35 officers and 708 enlisted men to 31 officers and 565 sailors . The crew was supplemented by 175 cadets , who were taken on long cruises in Schlesien and Schleswig @-@ Holstein , the latter sailing in October 1936 on a six @-@ month voyage to South America and the Caribbean . The following year , her cruise took her around Africa , and the 1938 – 39 cruise went back to South American and Caribbean waters . Gustav Kieseritzky served as the ship 's commander from June 1938 until April 1939 . 
 In the mid @-@ 1930s , Hitler began pursuing an increasingly aggressive foreign policy ; in 1936 he re @-@ militarized the Rhineland , and in 1938 completed the Anschluss of Austria and the annexation of Czechoslovakia . He then demanded German control over the city of Danzig , which had become a free city after World War I. 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Early on 1 September 1939 , Germany launched an invasion of Poland . Schleswig @-@ Holstein had been positioned in the port of Danzig , moored close to the Polish ammunition depot at Westerplatte under the guise of a ceremonial visit in August . At 04 : 47 on 1 September , Schleswig @-@ Holstein opened fire with her main battery at the Polish positions on the Westerplatte , and in doing so fired the first shots of World War II . These shots were the signal for ground troops to begin their assault on the installation ; though the first German ground attack in the Battle of Westerplatte was repelled shortly thereafter . A second assault began later that morning , again supported by Schleswig @-@ Holstein , though it too had failed to break into the installation by around noon . 
 Schleswig @-@ Holstein was joined on 4 September by the torpedo boats <unk> and Von der <unk> . A force of German infantry and army engineers went ashore to take the fortress , with heavy fire support from Schleswig @-@ Holstein . The Poles managed to hold off the Germans until they were forced to surrender on 7 September at 10 : 30 . Following the Polish surrender , Schleswig @-@ Holstein began shelling Polish positions at Hel and <unk> ; these operations lasted until 13 September . Between 25 and 27 September , the old battleship returned to Hel with her sister Schlesien ; both vessels conducted further bombardments of Polish positions there . 
 The German military then turned its attention westward , and in April 1940 invaded Denmark . Schleswig @-@ Holstein was assigned to the naval component of the invasion force . During the invasion , the ship was briefly grounded off the Danish coast . Following the operation , she was transferred back to training duties , as the flagship of the Chief of Training Units . At the end of 1943 , the reactivation of Schleswig @-@ Holstein was once again contemplated . In her favor was the fact that she retained some coal @-@ fired boilers , given the ever @-@ worsening oil @-@ supply situation . Thus , on 1 February 1944 she was once again recommissioned , at first taking up her old role as a cadet training ship , then later in the year docking at Gotenhafen ( Gdynia ) for a refit . She was to be converted into a convoy escort ship with a greatly enhanced anti @-@ aircraft armament , but after being hit three times by Royal Air Force bombers on 18 December 1944 , she eventually foundered in shallow water . As the ship was permanently disabled , her crew was sent ashore to assist in the defense of Marienburg . 
 Following the Soviet capture of that city , the remaining crew detonated scuttling charges in the wreck on 21 March to further destroy the ship . After the war , the ship was raised during 1945 – 46 by the Soviet Navy and transferred to Tallinn . Although reference books long stated that she was scrapped there or in Marienburg , in actuality she was towed out in 1948 and beached for long @-@ term use as a target in shallow water off the island of <unk> in the Gulf of Finland . Last used for target practice around 1966 , the remains are now submerged . Her bell was held in the collection of the Military History Museum of the Bundeswehr in Dresden as of 1990 . 
 = Copán = 
 Copán is an archaeological site of the Maya civilization located in the Copán Department of western Honduras , not far from the border with Guatemala . It was the capital city of a major Classic period kingdom from the 5th to 9th centuries AD . The city was located in the extreme southeast of the Mesoamerican cultural region , on the frontier with the <unk> @-@ Colombian cultural region , and was almost surrounded by non @-@ Maya peoples . In this fertile valley now lies a city of about 3000 , a small airport , and a winding road . 
 Copán was occupied for more than two thousand years , from the Early Preclassic period to the Postclassic . The city developed a distinctive sculptural style within the tradition of the lowland Maya , perhaps to emphasize the Maya ethnicity of the city 's rulers . 
 The city has a historical record that spans the greater part of the Classic period and has been reconstructed in detail by archaeologists and epigraphers . Copán was a powerful city ruling a vast kingdom within the southern Maya area . The city suffered a major political disaster in AD 738 when Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil , one of the greatest kings in Copán 's dynastic history , was captured and executed by his former vassal , the king of Quiriguá . This unexpected defeat resulted in a 17 @-@ year hiatus at the city , during which time Copán may have been subject to Quiriguá in a reversal of fortunes . 
 A significant portion of the eastern side of the acropolis has been eroded away by the Copán River , although the river has since been diverted in order to protect the site from further damage . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 It is likely the ancient name of Copán was <unk> pronounced [ <unk> ] , " Three <unk> " ( the meaning of <unk> remains obscure ) . 
 = = Location = = 
 Copán is located in western Honduras close to the border with Guatemala . Copán lies within the municipality of Copán Ruinas in the department of Copán . It is situated in a fertile valley among foothills at 700 meters ( 2 @,@ 300 ft ) above mean sea level . The ruins of the site core of the city are located 1 @.@ 6 kilometers ( 1 mi ) from the modern village of Copán Ruinas , which is built on the site of a major complex dating to the Classic period . 
 In the Preclassic period the floor of the Copán Valley was undulating , swampy and prone to seasonal flooding . In the Early Classic , the inhabitants flattened the valley floor and undertook construction projects to protect the architecture of the city from the effects of flooding . 
 Copán had a major influence on regional centres across western and central Honduras , stimulating the introduction of Mesoamerican characteristics to local elites . 
 = = Population = = 
 At the peak of its power in the Late Classic , the kingdom of Copán had a population of at least 20 @,@ 000 and covered an area of over 250 square kilometers ( 100 sq mi ) . The greater Copán area consisting of the populated areas of the valley covered about a quarter of the size of the city of Tikal . It is estimated that the peak population in central Copán was between 6000 to 9000 in an area of 0 @.@ 6 square kilometers ( 0 @.@ 23 sq mi ) , with a further 9000 to 12 @,@ 000 inhabitants occupying the periphery — an area of 23 @.@ 4 square kilometers ( 9 @.@ 0 sq mi ) . Additionally , there was an estimated rural population of 3000 to 4000 in a 476 square kilometers ( 184 sq mi ) area of the Copán Valley , giving an estimated total population of 18 @,@ 000 to 25 @,@ 000 people in the valley during the Late Classic period . 
 = = History = = 
 Little is known of the rulers of Copán before the founding of a new dynasty with its origins at Tikal in the early 5th century AD , although the city 's origins can be traced back to the Preclassic period . After this , Copán became one of the more powerful Maya city states and was a regional power in the southern Maya region , although it suffered a catastrophic defeat at the hands of its former vassal state <unk> in 738 , when the long @-@ ruling king Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil was captured and beheaded by <unk> 's ruler K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat ( <unk> Sky ) . Although this was a major setback , Copán 's rulers began to build monumental structures again within a few decades . 
 The area of Copán continued to be occupied after the last major ceremonial structures and royal monuments were erected , but the population declined in the 8th and 9th centuries from perhaps over 20 @,@ 000 in the city to less than 5 @,@ 000 . This decrease in population took over four centuries to actually show signs of collapse , showing the stability of this site even after the fall of the ruling dynasties and royal families . The ceremonial center was long abandoned and the surrounding valley home to only a few farming hamlets at the time of the arrival of the Spanish in the 16th century . 
 = = = Rulers = = = 
 References to the predynastic rulers of Copán are found in later texts , but none of these texts predate the refounding of Copán in AD 426 . 
 = = = Predynastic history = = = 
 The fertile Copán River valley was long a site of agriculture before the first known stone architecture was built in the region about the 9th century BC . The city was important before its refounding by a foreign elite ; mentions of the predynastic history of Copán are found in later texts , but none of these predates the refounding of the city in AD 426 . There is an inscription that refers to the year 321 BC , but no text explains the significance of this date . An event at Copán is linked to another event that happened 208 days before in AD 159 at an unknown location that is also mentioned on a stela from Tikal , suggesting that it is a location somewhere in the Petén Basin , possibly the great Preclassic Maya city of El Mirador . This AD 159 date is mentioned in several texts and is linked to a figure known as " <unk> Ajaw " . This same person is mentioned on the carved skull of a peccary recovered from Tomb 1 , where he is said to perform an action with a stela in AD 376 . 
 = = = K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' and K 'inich Popol Hol = = = 
 The city was refounded by K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' , establishing it as the capital of a new Maya kingdom . This coup was apparently organized and launched from Tikal . Texts record the arrival of a warrior named K 'uk ' Mo ' Ajaw who was installed upon the throne of the city in AD 426 and given a new royal name , K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' and the <unk> 'in <unk> " Lord of the West " title used a generation earlier by Siyaj K 'ak ' , a general from the great metropolis of Teotihuacan who had decisively intervened in the politics of the central Petén . K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' was probably from Tikal and was likely to have been sponsored by Siyaj Chan K <unk> II , the 16th ruler in the dynastic succession of Tikal . K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' may have legitimized his claim to rulership by marrying into the old Copán royal family , evidenced from the remains of his presumed widow . Bone analysis of her remains indicates that she was local to Copán . After the establishment of the new kingdom of Copán , the city remained closely allied with Tikal . The hieroglyphic text on Copán Altar Q describes the lord being elevated to kingship with the receipt of his royal scepter . The ceremonies involved in the founding of the Copán dynasty also included the installation of a subordinate king at Quiriguá . 
 A text from Tikal mentions K 'uk ' Mo ' and has been dated to AD 406 , 20 years before K 'uk ' Mo ' Ajaw founded the new dynasty at Copán . Both names are likely to refer to the same individual originally from Tikal . Although none of the hieroglyphic texts that mention the founding of the new Copán dynasty describe how K 'uk ' Mo ' arrived at the city , indirect evidence suggests that he conquered the city by military means . On Altar Q he is depicted as a Teotihuacano warrior with goggle eyes and a war serpent shield . When he arrived at Copán he initiated the construction of various structures , including one temple in the talud @-@ tablero style typical of Teotihuacan and another with inset corners and apron moldings that are characteristic of Tikal . These strong links with both the Maya and Central Mexican cultures suggest that he was at least a <unk> Maya or possibly even from Teotihuacan . The dynasty founded by king K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' ruled the city for four centuries and included sixteen kings plus a probable pretender who would have been seventeenth in line . Several monuments have survived that were dedicated by K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' and by his heir . 
 K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' died between AD 435 and AD 437 . In 1995 a tomb underneath the talud @-@ tablero Hunal temple was discovered by a team of archaeologists led by Robert Sharer and David <unk> . The tomb contained the skeleton of an elderly man with rich offerings and evidence of battle wounds . The remains have been identified as those of K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' due to their location underneath a sequence of seven buildings erected in his honor . Bone analysis has identified the remains as being those of someone foreign to Copán . 
 K 'inich Popol Hol inherited the throne of Copán from K 'inich ax K 'uk ' Mo ' , who was his father . He undertook major construction projects with the redesign of the core of Copán . Popol Hol is not the original name of this king but rather a nickname based on the appearance of his Teotihuacan @-@ linked name glyph . K 'inich Popol Hol oversaw the construction of the first version of the Mesoamerican ballcourt at the city , which was decorated with images of the scarlet macaw , a bird that features prominently in Maya mythology . His greatest construction activity was in the area of his father 's palace , now underlying Structure 10L @-@ 16 , which he demolished after entombing his father there . He then built three successive buildings on top of the tomb in rapid succession . 
 = = = Other early dynastic rulers = = = 
 Very little is known about Rulers 3 to 6 in the dynastic succession , although it is known from a fragment of a broken monument reused as construction fill in a later building that one of them was a son of Popol Hol . Ruler 3 is depicted on the 8th @-@ century Altar Q , but his name glyph has broken away . Ku Ix was the 4th ruler in the succession . He rebuilt temple 10L @-@ 26 in the Acropolis , erecting a stela there and a hieroglyphic step at its base . Although this king is also mentioned on a few other fragments of sculpture , no dates accompany his name . The next two kings in the dynastic sequence are only known from their sculptures on Altar Q. 
 B 'alam Nehn ( often referred to as <unk> Jaguar ) was the first king to actually record his position in the dynastic succession , declaring that he was seventh in line from K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' . Stela 15 records that he was already ruling Copán by AD 504 . B 'alam Nehn is the only king of Copán to be mentioned in a hieroglyphic text from outside of the southeastern Maya region . His name appears in a text on Stela 16 from Caracol , a site in Belize . The stela dates to AD 534 , but the text is not well understood . B 'alam Nehn undertook major construction projects in the Acropolis , building over an early palace with a number of important structures . 
 Wil Ohl K 'inich , the eighth ruler , is another king known only by his appearance on Altar Q. He was succeeded by Ruler 9 in AD 551 , his accession being described on the Hieroglyphic Stairway . He is also depicted on Altar Q even though he ruled for less than two years . 
 The 10th ruler is nicknamed Moon Jaguar by Mayanists . He was a son of B 'alam Nehn , the 7th ruler . He was enthroned in May 553 . His surviving monuments were found in the modern village of Copán Ruinas , which was a major complex during the Classic period . The most famous construction dating to his reign is the elaborate Rosalila phase of Temple 16 , discovered entombed intact under later phases of the temple during archaeological tunneling work . 
 = = = K 'ak ' Chan Yopaat and Smoke Imix = = = 
 K 'ak ' Chan Yopaat was the eleventh dynastic ruler at Copán . He was crowned as king in AD 578 , 24 days after the death of Moon Jaguar . At the time of his rule , Copán was undergoing an unprecedented rise in population , with residential land use spreading to all available land in the entire Copán Valley . The two surviving stelae of K 'ak ' Chan Yopaat contain long , hard @-@ to @-@ decipher hieroglyphic texts and are the oldest monuments at the site to survive without being either broken or buried . He reigned for 49 years until his death on 5 February 628 . His name is recorded on four stelae erected by his successors , one of which describes a rite performed with relics from his tomb in AD 730 , almost a hundred years after his death . 
 Smoke Imix was crowned 16 days after the death of K 'ak ' Chan Yopaat . He is thought to have been the longest reigning king of Copán , ruling from 628 to 695 . He is believed to have been born in AD 612 and to have become king at the age of 15 . Archaeologists have recovered little evidence of activity for the first 26 years of his reign , but in AD 652 there was a sudden explosion of monument production , with two stelae being erected in the Great Plaza and a further four in important locations across the Copán Valley . These monuments all celebrated a k 'atun @-@ ending . He also erected a stela at the Santa Rita site 12 kilometers ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) away and is mentioned on Altar L at Quiriguá in relation to the same event in 652 . It is thought that he was trying to stamp his authority throughout the whole valley after the end of some earlier restriction to his freedom to rule as he wished . 
 After this sudden spate of activity , Smoke Imix continued to rule until almost the end of the 7th century ; he dedicated another nine known monuments and made important changes to the architecture of Copán , including the construction of Structure 2 , which closes the northern side of the Great Plaza , and a new version of Temple 26 , nicknamed Chorcha . Smoke Imix ruled Copán for 67 years and died on 15 June 695 at the age of 79 , an age that was so distinguished that it is used to identify him in place of his name on Altar Q. His tomb had already been prepared in the Chorcha phase of Temple 26 and he was buried just two days after his death . 
 = = = Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil = = = 
 Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil was crowned as the 13th king in the Copán dynasty in July 695 . He oversaw both the apogee of Copán 's achievements and also one of the city 's most catastrophic political disasters . During his reign , the sculptural style of the city evolved into the full in @-@ the @-@ round sculpture characteristic of Copán . In AD 718 , Copán attacked and defeated the unidentified site of Xkuy , recording its burning on an unusual stone cylinder . In AD 724 Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil installed K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat as a vassal on the throne of Quiriguá . Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil was confident enough in his power to rank his city among the four most powerful states in the Maya region , together with Tikal , Calakmul and Palenque , as recorded on Stela A. In contrast to his predecessor , Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil concentrated his monuments in the site core of the Copán ; his first was Stela J , dated to AD 702 and erected at the eastern entrance to the city . 
 He continued to erect a further seven high @-@ quality stelae until AD 736 , monuments that are considered masterpieces of Classic Maya sculpture with such mastery of detail that they represent the highest pinnacle of Maya artistic achievement . The stelae depict king Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil ritually posed and bearing the attributes of a variety of deities , including B 'olon K 'awiil , K <unk> Nik Ajaw and Mo ' Witz Ajaw . The king also carried out major construction works , including a new version of Temple 26 that now bore the first version of the Hieroglyphic Stairway , plus two temples that have now been lost to the erosion of the Copán River . He also encased the Rosalila phase of Temple 16 within a new phase of construction . He remodelled the ballcourt , then demolished it and built a new one in its place . 
 Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil had only recently dedicated the new ballcourt in AD 738 when a completely unexpected disaster befell the city . Twelve years earlier he had installed K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat on the throne of Quiriguá as his vassal . By 734 the king of Quiriguá had shown he was no longer an obedient subordinate when he began to refer to himself as k 'ul ajaw , " holy lord " , rather than simply as a subordinate lord ajaw . K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat appears to have taken advantage of wider political rivalries and allied himself with Calakmul , the sworn enemy of Tikal . Copán was firmly allied with Tikal and Calakmul used its alliance with Quiriguá to undermine Tikal 's key ally in the south . 
 Although the exact details are unknown , in April 738 K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat captured Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil and burned two of Copán 's patron deities . Six days later Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil was decapitated in Quiriguá . This coup does not seem to have physically affected either Copán or Quiriguá ; there is no evidence that either city was attacked at this time and the victor seems not to have received any detectable tribute . All of this seems to imply that K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat managed to somehow ambush Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil , rather than to have defeated him in outright battle . It has been suggested that Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil was attempting to attack another site to secure captives for sacrifice in order to dedicate the new ballcourt when he was ambushed by K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat and his Quiriguá warriors . 
 In the Late Classic , alliance with Calakmul was frequently associated with the promise of military support . The fact that Copán , a much more powerful city than Quiriguá , failed to retaliate against its former vassal implies that it feared the military intervention of Calakmul . Calakmul was far enough away from Quiriguá that K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat was not afraid of falling directly under its power as a full vassal state , even though it is likely that Calakmul sent warriors to help in the defeat of Copán . The alliance instead seems to have been one of mutual advantage : Calakmul managed to weaken a powerful ally of Tikal while Quiriguá gained its independence . The disaster for Copán had long @-@ lasting consequences ; major construction ceased and no new monuments were raised for the next 17 years . 
 = = = Later rulers = = = 
 K 'ak ' Joplaj Chan K 'awiil was installed as the 14th dynastic ruler of Copán on 7 June 738 , 39 days after the execution of Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil . Little is known of his reign due to the lack of monuments raised after Quiriguá 's surprise victory . Copán 's defeat had wider implications due to the fracturing of the city 's domain and the loss of the key Motagua River trade route to Quiriguá . The fall in Copán 's income and corresponding increase at Quiriguá is evident from the massive commissioning of new monuments and architecture at the latter city , and Copán may even have been subject to its former vassal . K 'ak ' Joplaj Chan K 'awiil died in January 749 . 
 The next ruler was K 'ak ' Yipyaj Chan K 'awiil , a son of K 'ak ' Joplaj Chan K 'awiil . The early period of his rulership fell within Copán 's hiatus , but later on he began a programme of renewal in an effort to recover from the city 's earlier disaster . He built a new version of Temple 26 , with the Hieroglyphic Stairway being reinstalled on the new stairway and doubled in length . Five life @-@ size statues of seated rulers were installed seated upon the stairway . K 'ak ' Yipyaj Chan K 'awiil died in the early 760s and is likely to have been interred in Temple 11 , although the tomb has not yet been excavated . 
 Yax Pasaj Chan Yopaat was the next ruler , 16th in the dynasty founded by K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' , although he appears not to have been a direct descendent of his predecessor . He took the throne in June 763 and may have been only 9 years old . He produced no monumental stelae and instead dedicated hieroglyphic texts incorporated into the city 's architecture and smaller altars . Texts make an obscure reference to his father but his mother was a noblewoman from distant Palenque in Mexico . He built the platform of Temple 11 over the tomb of the previous king in AD 769 and added a two @-@ storey superstructure that was finished in AD 773 . Around AD 776 , he completed the final version of Temple 16 over the tomb of the founder . At the base of the temple , he placed the famous Altar Q , which shows each of the 16 rulers of the city from K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' through to Yax Pasaj Chan Yopaat , with a hieroglyphic text on top describing the founding of the dynasty . By the latter 8th century , the nobility had become more powerful , raising palaces with hieroglyphic benches that were as richly constructed as those of the king . At the same time , local satellites were displaying their own local power , as demonstrated by the ruler of Los Higos erecting his own stela in AD 781 . Towards the end of Yax Pasaj Chan Yopaat 's reign , the city of Copán was struggling with overpopulation and a lack of local resources , with a distinct fall in living standards among the populace . Yax Pasaj Chan Yopaat was able to celebrate his second K 'atun in AD 802 with his own monument , but the king 's participation in the K 'atun ending ceremony of AD 810 was marked at Quiriguá , not at Copán . By this time the city 's population was over 20 @,@ 000 and it had long needed to import basic necessities from outside . 
 The troubled times enveloping Copán at this time are evident from the funerary tomb of Yax Pasaj Chan Yopaat , which bears sculptures of the king performing war dances with spear and shield in hand . The sculpted column from the temple shrine has a hieroglyphic text reading " toppling of the Foundation House " that may refer to the fall of the Copán dynasty . Shortage and disease afflicted the massively overpopulated valley of Copán when its last known king , <unk> Took ' , came to the throne on 6 February 822 . He commissioned Altar L in the style of Altar Q but the monument was never finished — one face shows the enthronement of the king and a second face was started but two others were completely blank . The long line of kings at the once great city had come to an end . Before the end , even the nobility had been struck by disease , perhaps because epidemics among the malnourished masses spread to the elite . With the end of political authority at the city the population collapsed to a fraction of what it had been at its height . This collapse of the city @-@ state , which people believe occurred sometime between 800 and 830 AD , was sudden . However , the population continued to persist and even flourish between the years 750 and 900 AD , and then gradually declined soon thereafter . In the Postclassic period the valley was occupied by villagers who stole the stone from the monumental architecture of the city in order to build their simple house platforms . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 The first post @-@ Spanish conquest mention of Copán was in an early colonial period letter dated 8 March 1576 . The letter was written by Diego García de Palacio , a member of the Royal Audience of Guatemala , to king Philip II of Spain . French explorer Jean @-@ Frédéric Waldeck visited the site in the early 19th century and spent a month there drawing the ruins . Colonel Juan Galindo led an expedition to the ruins in 1834 on behalf of the government of Guatemala and wrote articles about the site for English , French and North American publications . John Lloyd Stephens and Frederick Catherwood visited Copán and included a description , map and detailed drawings in Stephens ' Incidents of Travel in Central America , Chiapas and Yucatán , published in 1841 . The site was later visited by British archaeologist Alfred Maudslay . Several expeditions sponsored by the Peabody Museum of Harvard University worked at Copán during the late 19th and early 20th centuries , including the 1892 – 1893 excavation of the Hieroglyphic Stairway by John G. Owens and George Byron Gordon . The Carnegie Institution also sponsored work at the site in conjunction with the government of Honduras . 
 The Copán buildings suffered significantly from forces of nature in the centuries between the site 's abandonment and the rediscovery of the ruins . After the abandonment of the city the Copán River gradually changed course , with a meander destroying the eastern portion of the acropolis ( revealing in the process its archaeological stratigraphy in a large vertical cut ) and apparently washing away various subsidiary architectural groups , including at least one courtyard and 10 buildings from Group 10L – 2 . The cut is an important archaeological feature at the site , with the natural erosion having created an enormous cross @-@ section of the acropolis . This erosion cut away a large portion of the eastern part of the acropolis and revealed a vertical cross @-@ section that measures 37 meters ( 121 ft ) high at its tallest point and 300 meters ( 980 ft ) long . Several buildings recorded in the 19th century were destroyed , plus an unknown amount of the acropolis that was eroded before it could be recorded . In order to avoid further destruction of the acropolis , the Carnegie Institution redirected the river to save the archaeological site , diverting it southwards in the 1930s ; the dry former riverbed was finally filled in at the same time as consolidation of the cut in 1990s . Structures 10L – 19 , 20 , 20A and 21 were all destroyed by the Copán River as it eroded the site away , but had been recorded by investigators in the 19th century . 
 Copán was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1980 , and UNESCO approved funding of US $ 95 @,@ 825 between 1982 and 1999 for various works at the site . Looting remains a serious threat to Copán . A tomb was looted in 1998 as it was being excavated by archaeologists . 
 = = Site description = = 
 The Copán site is known for a series of portrait stelae , most of which were placed along processional ways in the central plaza of the city and the adjoining acropolis , a large complex of overlapping step @-@ pyramids , plazas , and palaces . The site has a large court for playing the Mesoamerican ballgame . In two parallel buildings framing a carefully dimensioned rectangle lies the court . 
 The site is divided into various groups , with the Main Group and the Cemetery Group in the site core linked by a sacbe to the Sepulturas Group to the northeast . Central Copán had a density of 1449 structures per square kilometer ( 3 @,@ 750 / sq mi ) , while in greater Copán as a whole this density fell to 143 per square kilometre ( 370 / sq mi ) over a surveyed area of 24 @.@ 6 square kilometers ( 9 @.@ 5 sq mi ) . 
 = = = Main Group = = = 
 The Main Group represents the core of the ancient city and covers an area of 600 by 300 meters ( 1 @,@ 970 ft × 980 ft ) . The main features are the Acropolis , which is a raised royal complex on the south side , and a group of smaller structures and linked plazas to the north , including the Hieroglyphic Stairway and the ballcourt . The Monument Plaza contains the greatest concentration of sculpted monuments at the site . 
 The Acropolis was the royal complex at the heart of Copán . It consists of two plazas that have been named the West Court and the East Court . They are both enclosed by elevated structures . Archaeologists have excavated extensive tunnels under the Acropolis , revealing how the royal complex at the heart of Copán developed over the centuries and uncovering several hieroglyphic texts that date back to the Early Classic and verify details of the early dynastic rulers of the city who were recorded on Altar Q hundreds of years later . The deepest of these tunnels have revealed that the first monumental structures underlying the Acropolis date archaeologically to the early 5th century AD , when K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' established the royal dynasty . These early buildings were built of stone and adobe and were themselves built upon earlier earth and cobble structures dating to the predynastic period . The two styles of building overlap somewhat , with some of the earthen structures being expanded during the first hundred years or so of the dynastic history of the city . The early dynastic masonry buildings of the Acropolis included several with the Early Classic apron @-@ molding style of Tikal and one built in the talud @-@ tablero style associated with Teotihuacan , although at the time the talud @-@ tablero form was in use at both Tikal and Kaminaljuyu as well as in Central Mexico . 
 Structure 10L @-@ 4 is a platform with four stairways situated by the Monument Plaza . 
 Structure 10L @-@ 11 is on the west side of the Acropolis . It encloses the south side of the Court of the Hieroglyphic Stairway and is accessed from it by a wide monumental stairway . This structure appears to have been the royal palace of Yax Pasaj Chan Yopaat , the 16th ruler in the dynastic succession and the last known king of Copán . Structure 10L @-@ 11 was built on top of several earlier structures , one of which probably contains the tomb of his predecessor K 'ak ' Yipyaj Chan K 'awiil . A small tunnel descends into the interior of the structure , possibly to the tomb , but it has not yet been excavated by archaeologists . Yax Pasaj Chan Yopaat built a new temple platform over his predecessor 's tomb in AD 769 . On top of this he placed a two @-@ storey superstructure with a sculpted roof depicting the mythological cosmos . At each of its northern corners was a large sculpted Pawatun ( a group of deities that supported the heavens ) . This superstructure had four doorways with panels of hieroglyphs sculpted directly onto the walls of the building . A bench inside the structure , removed by Maudslay in the nineteenth century and now in the British Museum 's collection , once depicted the king 's accession to the throne , overseen by deities and ancestors . 
 Structure 10L @-@ 16 ( Temple 16 ) is a temple pyramid that is the highest part of the Acropolis . It is located between the East and West Courts at the heart of the ancient city . The temple faces the West Court within the Acropolis and is dedicated to K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' , the dynastic founder . The temple was placed on top of the original palace and tomb of the king . It is the final version of a number of temples built on top of each other , as was common practice in Mesoamerica . The earliest version of this temple is nicknamed Hunal ; it was built in the talud @-@ tablero style of architecture that was typical of Teotihuacan , with traces of brightly colored murals on the surviving traces of the interior walls . The king was buried in a vaulted crypt that was cut into the floor of the Hunal phase of the building , accompanied by rich offerings of jade . K 'inich Popol Hol , son of the founder , demolished the palace of his father and built a platform on top of his tomb , named <unk> by archaeologists . It was built in a distinctively Petén Maya style and bore large masks of K 'inich <unk> <unk> ' , the sun god , which were painted red . This platform was encased within another much larger platform within a decade of its construction . This larger platform has been named Margarita and had stucco panels flanking its access stairway that bore entwined images of <unk> and macaws , which both form a part of K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo 's name . The Margarita phase contained a tomb with the richly accompanied burial of an elderly woman nicknamed the " Lady in Red " . It is likely that she was the widow of K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' and the mother of K 'inich Popol Hol . The upper chamber of the Margarita phase temple was converted to receive offerings and the unusual <unk> stone , a dedicatory monument used in one of the earlier phases , was reused in this later phase . 
 One of the best preserved phases of Temple 16 is the Rosalila , built over the remains of five previous versions of the temple . Archaeologist Ricardo <unk> discovered the almost intact shrine while tunneling underneath the final version of the temple . Rosalila is notable for its excellent state of preservation , including the entire building from the base platform up to the roof comb , including its highly elaborate painted stucco decoration . Rosalila features K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' placed at the centre of a mythological tableau , combining the founder of the dynasty with the sky deity Itzamna in avian form . The mythological imagery also includes anthropomorphic mountains , skeletons and crocodiles . Vents in the exterior were designed so smoke from incense being burned inside the shrine would interact with the stucco sculpture of the exterior . The temple had a hieroglyphic stone step with a dedicatory inscription . The stone step is less well preserved than the rest of the building , but a date in AD 571 has been deciphered . Due to the deforestation of the Copán valley , the Rosalila building was the last structure at the site to use such elaborate stucco decoration — vast quantities of firewood could no longer be spared to reduce limestone to plaster . A life @-@ size copy of the Rosalila building has been built at the Copán site museum . 
 Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil encased the Rosalila phase under a new version of the building in the early 8th century AD . An offering was made as part of the rites to terminate the old phase and included a collection of eccentric flints worked into the profiles of humans and gods , which were wrapped in blue @-@ dyed textiles . 
 Structure 10L @-@ 18 is on the southeastern side of the Acropolis and has been damaged by the erosion caused by the Copán River , having lost its eastern side . Stairs on the south side of the structure lead down to a vaulted tomb that was looted in ancient times and was probably that of Yax Pasaj Chan Yopaat . It was apparently plundered soon after the collapse of the Copán kingdom . Unusually for Copán , the summit shrine had four sculpted panels depicting the king performing war dances with spear and shield , emphasizing the rising tensions as the dynasty came to its end . 
 Temples 10L @-@ 20 and 10L @-@ 21 were probably both built by Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil . They were lost to the Copán River in the early 20th century . 
 Structure 10L @-@ 22 is a large building on the north side of the East Court , in the Acropolis , and faces onto it . It dates to the reign of Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil and is the best preserved of the buildings from his rule . The superstructure of the building has an interior doorway with an elaborate sculpted frame and decorated with masks of the mountain god Witz . The outer doorway is framed by the giant mask of a deity , and has stylistic similarities with the Chenes regional style of distant Yucatán . The temple was built to celebrate the completion of the king 's first K 'atun in power , in AD 715 , and has a hieroglyphic step with a first @-@ person phrase " I completed my K 'atun " . The building symbolically represents the mountain where maize was created . 
 Structure 10L @-@ 25 is in the East Court of the Acropolis . It covers a rich royal tomb nicknamed Sub @-@ Jaguar by archaeologists . It is presumed to be the tomb of either Ruler 7 ( B 'alam Nehn ) , Ruler 8 or Ruler 9 , who all ruled in the first half of the 6th century AD . 
 Structure 10L @-@ 26 is a temple that projects northwards from the Acropolis and is immediately to the north of Structure 10L @-@ 22 . The structure was built by Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil and K 'ak ' Yipyaj Chan K 'awiil , the 13th and 15th rulers in the dynastic succession . The 10 @-@ meter ( 33 ft ) wide Hieroglyphic Stairway ascends the building on the west side from the courtyard below . The earliest version of the temple , nicknamed Yax , was built during the reign of K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' , the dynastic founder , and has architectural features ( such as inset corners ) that are characteristic of Tikal and the central Petén region . The next phase of the building was built by Yax K 'uk ' Mo 's son K 'inich Popol Hol and is nicknamed Motmot . This phase of the structure was more elaborate and was decorated with stucco . Set under the building was the Motmot capstone , covering a tomb with the unusual Teotihuacan @-@ style burial of a woman , accompanied by a wide variety of offerings that included animal bones , mercury , jade and quartz , along with three severed human heads , all of which were male . Ku Ix built a new phase of the building over Motmot , nicknamed Papagayo . 
 Smoke Imix demolished the Papagayo phase and ritually interred the broken remains of its sculpted monuments , accompanied by stone macaw heads from an early version of the ballcourt . He then built a pyramid over the earlier phases , nicknamed <unk> by archaeologists . It in turn was developed into the Chorcha pyramid with the addition of a long superstructure with seven doorways at the front and back . Before a new building was built over the top , the upper sanctuary was demolished and a tomb was inserted into the floor and covered with 11 large stone slabs . The tomb contained the remains of an adult male and a sacrificed child . The adult 's badly decayed skeleton was wrapped in a mat and accompanied by offerings of fine jade , including ear ornaments and a necklace of sculpted figurines . The burial was accompanied by offerings of 44 ceramic vessels , jaguar pelts , <unk> shells , 10 <unk> and one or more hieroglyphic books , now decayed . There were also 12 ceramic incense burners with lids modeled into human figurines , thought to represent Smoke Imix and his 11 dynastic predecessors . The Chorcha building was dedicated to the long @-@ lived 7th @-@ century king Smoke Imix and it is therefore likely that the remains interred in the building are his . Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil had sealed the Chorcha phase under a new version of the temple , nicknamed Esmeralda , by AD 710 . The new phase bore the first version of the Hieroglyphic Stairway , which contains a lengthy dynastic history . K 'ak ' Yipyaj Chan K 'awiil built over the Esmeralda phase in the mid @-@ 8th century . He removed the Hieroglyphic Stairway from the earlier building and reinstalled it into his own version , while doubling the length of its text and adding five life @-@ size statues of rulers dressed in the garb of Teotihuacano warriors , each seated on a step of the stairway . At the base of the stairway , he also raised Stela M , with his own image . The summit shrine of the temple bore a hieroglyphic text composed of full @-@ figure hieroglyphs , each placed beside a similar glyph in faux @-@ Mexican style , giving the appearance of a bilingual text . 
 The Hieroglyphic Stairway climbs the west side of Structure 10L @-@ 26 . It is 10 meters ( 33 ft ) wide and has a total of 62 steps . Stela M and its associated altar are at its base and a large sculpted figure is located in the centre of every 12th step . These figures are believed to represent the most important rulers in the dynastic history of the site . The stairway takes its name from the 2200 glyphs that together form the longest known Maya hieroglyphic text . The text is still being reconstructed , having been scrambled by the collapse of the glyphic blocks when the façade of the temple collapsed . The staircase measures 21 meters ( 69 ft ) long and was first built by Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil in AD 710 , being reinstalled and expanded in the following phase of the temple by K 'ak ' Yipyaj Chan K 'awiil in AD 755 . 
 The Ballcourt is immediately north of the Court of the Hieroglyphic Stairway and is to the south of the Monument Plaza . It was remodeled by Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil , who then demolished it and built a third version , which was one of the largest from the Classic period . It was dedicated to the great macaw deity and the buildings flanking the playing area carried 16 mosaic sculptures of the birds . The completion date of the ballcourt is inscribed with a hieroglyphic text upon the sloping playing area and is given as 6 January 738 . 
 The Monument Plaza or Great Plaza is on the north side of the Main Group . 
 = = = Sepulturas Group = = = 
 The Sepulturas Group is linked by a sacbe or causeway that runs southwest to the Monument Plaza in the Main Group . The Sepulturas Group consists of a number of restored structures , mostly elite residences that feature stone benches , some of which have carved decorations , and a number of tombs . 
 The group has a very long occupational history , with one house having been dated as far back as the Early Preclassic . By the Middle Preclassic , large platforms were being built from cobbles and several rich burials were made . By AD 800 , the complex consisted of about 50 buildings arranged around 7 major courtyards . At this time , the most important building was the House of the <unk> , the palace of a powerful nobleman from the time of Yax Pasaj Chan Yopaat . The building has a high @-@ quality sculpted exterior and a carved hieroglyphic bench inside . A portion of the group was a subdistrict occupied by non @-@ Maya inhabitants from Central Honduras who were involved in the trade network that brought in goods from that region . 
 = = = Other groups = = = 
 The North Group is a Late Classic compound . Archaeologists have excavated fallen façades that bear hieroglyphic inscriptions and sculpted decoration . 
 The Cemetery Group is immediately south of the Main Group and includes a number of small structures and plazas . 
 = = = Monuments = = = 
 Altar Q is the most famous monument at Copán . It was dedicated by king Yax Pasaj Chan Yopaat in AD 776 and has each of the first 16 kings of the Copán dynasty carved around its side . Each figure is depicted seated on his name glyph . A hieroglyphic text is inscribed on the upper surface , relating the founding of the dynasty in AD 426 – 427 . On one side , it shows the dynastic founder K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' transferring power to Yax Pasaj . Interestingly , Tatiana Proskouriakoff first discovered the inscription on the West Side of Altar Q that tells us the date of the inauguration of Yax Pasaj . This portrayal of political succession tells us much about Early Classic Maya culture . 
 The Motmot Capstone is an inscribed stone that was placed over a tomb under Structure 10L @-@ 26 . Its face was finely sculpted with portraits of the first two kings of the Copán dynasty , K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' and K 'inich Popol Hol , facing towards each other with a double column of hieroglyphs between them , all contained within a quatrefoil frame . The frame and the hieroglyphic names of mythological locations underneath the feet of the two kings place them in a supernatural realm . The capstone bears two calendrical dates , in AD 435 and AD 441 . The second of these is probably the date that the capstone was dedicated . 
 The <unk> Stone is a dedicatory monument from one of the earlier phases of the 10L @-@ 16 temple constructed to honor K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' . It bears the date of AD 437 and the names both K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' and K 'inich Popol Hol , together with a possible mention of the Teotihuacan general Siyaj K 'ak ' . The monument has not been completely deciphered and its style and phrasing are unusual . Originally it was used as a sculpted bench or step and the date on the monument is associated with the dedication of a funerary temple or a tomb , probably the tomb of K 'inich ' Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' , which was discovered underneath the same structure . 
 Stela 2 was erected in the Great Plaza by Smoke Imix in AD 652 . 
 Stela 3 is another stela erected by Smoke Imix in the Great Plaza in AD 652 . 
 Stela 4 was erected by Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil in the early 8th century AD . 
 Stela 7 dates to the reign of K 'ak ' Chan Yopaat , and was erected to celebrate the K 'atun @-@ ending ceremony of AD 613 . It was found in the western complex now underneath the modern village of Copán Ruinas . It bears a long hieroglyphic text that has been only partially deciphered . 
 Stela 9 was found in the modern village of Copán Ruinas , where it had been erected on the site of a major Classic period complex 1 @.@ 6 kilometers ( 1 mi ) outside of the site core . It was dedicated by Moon Jaguar and dates to AD 564 . 
