 Stela 10 was erected outside of the site core by Smoke Imix in AD 652 . 
 Stela 11 was originally an interior column from Temple 18 , the funerary shrine of Yax Pasaj Chan Yopaat . When it was found , it was broken in two parts at the base of the temple . It portrays the king as the elderly Maya maize god and has imagery that seems to deliberately parallel the tomb lid of the Palenque king K 'inich Janaab ' Pakal , probably because of Yax Pasaj Chan Yopaat 's close family ties to that city . The text of the column formed part of a longer text carved onto the interior walls of the temple and may describe the downfall of the Copán dynasty . 
 Stela 12 was erected outside of the site core by Smoke Imix in AD 652 . 
 Stela 13 was erected outside the site core by Smoke Imix in AD 652 . 
 Stela 15 is dated to AD 524 , during the reign of B 'alam Nehn . Its sculpture consists entirely of hieroglyphic text , which mentions that king B 'alam Nehn was ruling the city by AD 504 . 
 Stela 17 dates to AD 554 , during the reign of Moon Jaguar . It originally stood in the nearby village of Copán Ruinas , which was a major complex in the Classic period . 
 Stela 18 is a fragment of a monument bearing the name of K 'inich Popol Hol . It was erected in the inner chamber of the 10L @-@ 26 temple . 
 Stela 19 is a monument erected outside of the site core by Smoke Imix in AD 652 . 
 Stela 63 was dedicated by K 'inich Popol Hol . Its sculpture consists purely of finely carved hieroglyphic texts and it is possible that it was originally commissioned by K 'inich Yax K 'uk ' Mo ' with additional texts added to the sides of the monument by his son . The text contains the same date in AD 435 that appears on the Motmot Capstone . Stela 63 was deliberately broken , together with its hieroglyphic step , during the ritual demolishing of the Papagayo phase of Temple 26 . The remains of the monuments were then interred in the building before the next phase was built . 
 Stela A was erected in 731 by Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil . It places his rulership among the four most powerful kingdoms in the Maya region , alongside Palenque , Tikal and Calakmul . 
 Stela B was erected by Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil in the early 8th century AD . 
 Stela C was erected by Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil in the early 8th century AD . 
 Stela D was erected by Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil in the early 8th century AD . 
 Stela F was erected by Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil in the early 8th century AD . 
 Stela H was erected by Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil in the early 8th century AD . 
 Stela J was erected by Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil in AD 702 and was his first monument . It stood at the eastern entrance to the city and is unusual in being topped by a sculpted stone roof , converting the monument into a symbolic house . It bears a hieroglyphic text that is woven into a criss @-@ cross mat design to form a convoluted puzzle that must be read in precisely the right order to be understood . 
 Stela M bears a portrait of K 'ak ' Yipyaj Chan K 'awiil . It was raised at the foot of the Hieroglyphic Stairway of Temple 26 in AD 756 . 
 Stela N was dedicated by K 'ak ' Yipyaj Chan K 'awiil in AD 761 and placed at the foot of the steps to Temple 11 , which is believed to contain his burial . 
 Stela P was originally erected in an unknown location and was later moved to the West Court of the Acropolis . It bears a long hieroglyphic text that has not yet been fully deciphered . It dates from the reign of king K 'ak ' Chan Yopaat and was dedicated in AD 623 . 
 = Progress Party ( Norway ) = 
 The Progress Party ( Bokmål : <unk> , Nynorsk : <unk> , <unk> ) is a political party in Norway which identifies as classical liberal ( libertarian ) and conservative @-@ liberal . Academics broadly categorise the party as neoliberal ( moderate or non @-@ radical ) populist , while the party itself , Norway 's Prime Minister Erna Solberg , centrist parties , and some scholars reject any comparison with foreign right @-@ wing populist parties . In coalition with the Conservative Party , the party won the 2013 parliamentary election and entered into its first ever government . 
 Founded by Anders Lange in 1973 as an anti @-@ tax protest movement , the party values individual freedom strongly , supports market liberalism , and advocates downsizing bureaucracy and the public sector , while also proposing increased spending of Norway 's public Oil Fund to invest in infrastructure , rejecting the notion of the " budgetary rule " . The party also seek a more restrictive immigration policy and tougher integration and law and order measures . In foreign policy it is strongly <unk> , and pro @-@ globalization . Long @-@ time chairman Carl I. Hagen was from 1978 to 2006 the undisputed leader of the party , and in many ways personally controlled the ideology and direction of the party ; most notably demonstrated by effectively expelling the most radical libertarian faction in 1994 , and anti @-@ immigration populists in 2001 . The current leader of the party is Siv Jensen , who since 2013 is also Norway 's Minister of Finance . 
 The party became the second largest party in Norway for the first time in the 1997 parliamentary election , a position it also held following the elections in 2005 and 2009 ; in 2013 it dropped to third largest . The other parties in parliament historically refused any formal governmental cooperation with the Progress Party , but after a long period of work to unite the political right in Norway , helped by Siv Jensen devising a more moderate liberal leadership , the party entered into a coalition with the Conservative Party , which from 2013 makes up the current Norwegian government ( with parliamentary support from two smaller centrist parties ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Anders Lange 's Party = = = 
 The Progress Party was founded at a meeting at the movie theater Saga Kino in Oslo on 8 April 1973 , attended by around 1 @,@ 345 persons . The address was held by Anders Lange , after whom the party was named Anders Lange 's Party for a Strong Reduction in Taxes , Duties and Public Intervention , commonly known as Anders Lange 's Party , and abbreviated ALP . Lange had some political experience from the interwar era Fatherland League , and was part of the Norwegian resistance movement during the Second World War . Since the end of the war , he had worked as an independent right @-@ wing political editor and public speaker . Lange held his first public speech as chairman of ALP at <unk> in Oslo on 16 May the same year . ALP was to a large extent inspired by the Danish Progress Party , which was founded by Mogens <unk> . <unk> also spoke at the event , which gathered around 4 @,@ 000 attendees . 
 Originally , Anders Lange wanted the party to be an anti @-@ tax protest movement rather than a common political party . The party had a brief political platform on a single sheet of paper that on one side listed ten things the party was " tired of " , and on the other side ten things that they were in favour of . The protest was directed against what Lange claimed to be an unacceptable high level of taxes , subsidies , and foreign aid . In the 1973 parliamentary election , the party won 5 percent of the vote and gained four seats in the Norwegian parliament . The main reasons for the success has later been seen by scholars as a mixture of tax protests , the charisma of Anders Lange , the role of television , the aftermath of the 1972 EC membership referendum and the political development in Denmark . The first party conference was held in Hjelmeland in 1974 , where the party established its first political conventions . 
 = = = Progress Party and Carl I. Hagen = = = 
 In early 1974 , Kristofer Almås , Deputy Member of Parliament Carl I. Hagen , along with some others , broke away and formed the short @-@ lived Reform Party . The background for this was a criticism of <unk> " undemocratic organisation " and lack of a real party program . However , in the same year , Anders Lange died ; consequently Hagen stepped in as a regular Member of Parliament in Lange 's place . As a result , the Reform Party merged back into ALP already the following year . The party adopted its current name , the Progress Party , on 29 January 1977 , inspired by the great success of the Danish Progress Party . The Progress Party performed poorly in the 1977 parliamentary election , and was left without parliamentary representation . In the 1978 party convention , Carl I. Hagen was elected as party chairman . Hagen soon started to expand the political program of the party , and built a conventional party organisation , a step which Lange and some of his followers had opposed . The party 's youth organisation , the Progress Party 's Youth , was also established in 1978 . Hagen succeeded in sharpening the image of the party as an anti @-@ tax movement . His criticism of the wisdom of hoarding billions of dollars in the " Oil Fund " hit a nerve owing to perceived declines in infrastructure , schools , and social services and long queues at hospitals . 
 = = = 1980s : Establishing the party = = = 
 While the Progress Party dropped out of parliament altogether in 1977 , it returned in the following 1981 parliamentary election with four representatives . In this election , the political right in general had a great upturn , which garnered the Progress Party increased support . The ideology of the party was sharpened in the 1980s , and the party officially declared that it was a libertarian party at its national convention in Sandefjord in 1983 . Until then , the party had not had a clearly defined ideology . In the campaign for the 1985 parliamentary election the party attacked many aspects of the Norwegian welfare state , and campaigned for privatization of medical care , education and government @-@ owned enterprises , as well as steep cuts in income tax . In the election , the party lost two of its four members of parliament , but was left with some power as they became the kingmaker . In May 1986 , the party used this position to effectively throw the governing Conservative @-@ led government after it had proposed to increase gas taxes . A minority Labour government was established as a result . 
 The first real breakthrough for the party in Norwegian politics came in the 1987 local elections , when the party nearly doubled its support from 6 @.@ 3 % to 12 @.@ 3 % ( county results ) . This was largely as immigration was for the first time seriously taken up as an issue by the party ( although Hagen had already in the late 1970s called for a strongly restrictive immigration policy ) , successfully putting the issue on the national agenda . Its campaign had mainly been focused on the issue of asylum seekers , but was additionally helped by the infamous " Mustafa @-@ letter " , a letter read out by Hagen during the electoral campaign that portrayed the future Islamisation of Norway . In April 1988 the party was for the first time the second largest party in Norway in an opinion poll with 23 @.@ 5 % . In September 1988 , the party further proposed in parliament for a referendum on the immigration policy , which was regarded by political scientists as the start of the party 's 1989 election campaign . In 1989 , the party made its breakthrough in national politics . In the 1989 parliamentary election , the party obtained 13 % , up from 3 @.@ 7 % in 1985 , and became the third largest party in Norway . It started to gain power in some local administrations . The first mayors from the party were Håkon <unk> in Sola ( 1988 – 1989 ) , Bjørn Bråthen in <unk> ( 1990 – 1991 ) and Peter N. Myhre in Oslo ( 1990 – 1991 ) . 
 = = = 1990s : Libertarian schism , consolidation = = = 
 The 1993 parliamentary election halved the party 's support to 6 @.@ 3 % and ten members of parliament . This drop in support can be seen as the result of an internal conflict within the party that came to a head in 1992 , between the more radical libertarian minority and the majority led by Carl I. Hagen . The libertarians had removed the party 's focus on immigration , declaring it a " non @-@ issue " in the early 1990s , which was heavily punished by voters in 1993 , as well as 1991 . Social conservative policy platforms had also been liberalised and caused controversy , such as accepting homosexual partnership . The party 's unclear stance on Norwegian membership of the European Union also contributed greatly to the setback , by moving the focus away from the party 's stronger issues ( see also Norwegian European Union membership referendum , 1994 ) . 
 While many of the libertarians , including Pål Atle Skjervengen and Tor Mikkel Wara , had left the party before the 1993 election or had been rejected by voters , the conflict finally culminated in 1994 . Following the party conference at Bolkesjø <unk> in Telemark in April of that year , four MPs of the " libertarian wing " in the party broke off as independents . This was because Hagen had given them an ultimatum to adhere to the political line of the party majority and parliamentary group , or else to leave . This incident was later nicknamed " Dolkesjø " , a pun on the name of the hotel , with " <unk> " meaning to " lit. stab ( in the back ) / betray " . 
 These events have been seen by political scientists as a turning point for the party . Subsequently the libertarians founded a libertarian organisation called the Free Democrats which tried to establish a political party , but without success . Parts of the younger management of the party and the more libertarian youth organisation of the party also broke away , and even tried to disestablish the entire youth organisation . The youth organisation was however soon running again , this time with more " loyal " members , although it remained more libertarian than its mother organisation . After this , the Progress Party had a more right @-@ wing populist profile , which resulted in it gaining electoral support . 
 In the 1995 local elections the Progress Party regained the level of support seen at the 1987 elections . This was said largely to have been as a result of a focus on Progress Party core issues in the electoral campaign , especially immigration , as well as the party dominating the media picture as a result of the controversy around the 1995 Norwegian Association meeting at <unk> kino . The latter particularly gained the party many sympathy votes , as a result of the harsh media storm targeted against Hagen . In the 1997 parliamentary election , the party obtained 15 @.@ 3 % of the vote , and for the first time became the second largest political party in Norway . The 1999 local elections resulted in the party 's first mayor as a direct result of an election , Terje <unk> in Os . 20 municipalities also elected a deputy mayor from the Progress Party . 
 = = = 2000 / 01 : Turmoil , expulsion of populists = = = 
 While the Progress Party had witnessed close to 35 % support in opinion polls in late 2000 , its support fell back to 1997 levels in the upcoming election in 2001 . This was largely a result of turmoil surrounding the party . The party 's deputy leader Terje <unk> became involved in a sex scandal , and internal political conflicts came to the surface ; Hagen had already in 1999 tried to quiet the most controversial immigration opponents in the parliamentary party , who had gained influence since the 1994 national convention . In late 2000 and early 2001 , opposition to this locally in Oslo , Hordaland and Vest @-@ Agder sometimes resulted in expulsions of local representatives . Eventually Hagen also , in various ways , got rid of the so @-@ called " gang of seven " ( <unk> ) , which consisted of seven members of parliament . In January 2001 , Hagen claimed that he had seen a pattern where these had cooperated on several issues , and postulated that they were behind a conspiracy to eventually get Øystein Hedstrøm elected as party chairman . The seven were eventually suspended , excluded from or voluntarily left the party , starting in early 2001 . They most notably included Vidar Kleppe ( the alleged " leader " ) , Dag Danielsen , Fridtjof Frank Gundersen , as well as Jan Simonsen . Only Hedstrøm remained in the party , but was subsequently kept away from publicly discussing immigration issues . 
 This again caused turmoil within the party ; supporters of the excluded members criticized their treatment , some resigned from the party , and some of the party 's local chapters were closed . Some of the outcasts ran for office in the 2001 election in several new county lists , and later some formed a new party called the Democrats , with Kleppe as chairman and Simonsen as deputy chairman . Though the " gang of seven " took controversial positions on immigration , the actions taken against them were also based on internal issues ; it remains unclear to what degree the settlement was based primarily on political disagreements or tactical considerations . Hagen 's main goal with the " purge " was an attempt to make it possible for non @-@ socialist parties to cooperate in an eventual government together with the Progress Party . In 2007 , he revealed that he had received " clear signals " from politicians in among other the Christian Democratic Party , that government negotiations were out of the question so long as certain specific Progress Party politicians , including Kleppe and Simonsen ( but not Hedstrøm ) , remained in the party . The more moderate libertarian minority in Oslo , including Henning <unk> , <unk> Kristiansen and Siv Jensen , now improved their hold in the party . 
 = = = 2001 – 05 : Bondevik II years = = = 
 In the 2001 parliamentary election the party lost the gains it had made according to opinion polling but maintained its position from the 1997 election , it got 14 @.@ 6 % and 26 members in the parliament . The election result allowed them to unseat the Labour Party government of Jens Stoltenberg and replace it with a three @-@ party coalition led by Christian Democrat Kjell Magne Bondevik . However , the coalition continued to decline to govern together with the Progress Party as they considered the political differences too large . The Progress Party eventually decided to tolerate the coalition , as it promised to invest more in defence , open more private hospitals and open for more competition in the public sector . In 2002 the Progress Party again advanced in the opinion polls and for a while became the largest party . 
 The local elections of 2003 were a success for the party . In 36 municipalities , the party gained more votes than any other ; it succeeded in electing the mayor in only 13 of these , but also secured 40 deputy mayor positions . The Progress Party had participated in local elections since 1975 , but until 2003 had only secured a mayoral position four times , all on separate occasions . The Progress Party vote in Os — the only municipality that elected a Progress Party mayor in 1999 — increased from 36 @.@ 6 % in 1999 to 45 @.@ 7 % in 2003 . The party also became the single largest in the counties of Vestfold and Rogaland . 
 In the 2005 parliamentary elections , the party again became the second largest party in the Norwegian parliament , with 22 @.@ 1 % of the votes and 38 seats , a major increase from 2001 . Although the centre @-@ right government of Bondevik which the Progress Party had tolerated since 2001 was beaten by the leftist Red @-@ Green Coalition , Hagen had before the election said that his party would no longer accept Bondevik as Prime Minister , following his consistent refusal to formally include the Progress Party in government . For the first time the party was also successful in getting Members of Parliament elected from all counties of Norway , and even became the largest party in three : Vest @-@ Agder , Rogaland and Møre og Romsdal . After the parliamentary elections in 2005 , the party also became the largest party in many opinion polls . The Progress Party led November 2006 opinion polls with a support of 32 @.@ 9 % of respondents , and it continued to poll above 25 percent during the following years . 
 = = = 2006 – present : Siv Jensen = = = 
 In 2006 , after 27 years as leader of the party , Hagen stepped down to become Vice President of the Norwegian parliament Stortinget . Siv Jensen was chosen as his successor , with the hope that she could increase the party 's appeal to voters , build bridges to liberal conservative parties , and head or participate in a future government of Norway . Following the local elections of 2007 , Progress Party candidates became mayor in 17 municipalities , seven of these continuing on from 2003 . Deputy mayors for the party however decreased to 33 . The party in general strongly increased its support in municipalities where the mayor had been elected from the Progress Party in 2003 . The best result came in Nordreisa , where the party held the mayor from the last election , with an increase from 24 @.@ 6 % to 49 @.@ 3 % . 
 In the months before the 2009 parliamentary elections , the party had , as in the 2001 election , rated very highly in opinion poll results which however declined towards the actual election . Earlier in the year , the Progress Party had achieved above 30 % in some polls which made it the largest party by several percentage points . With such high gains , the election result was in this case relatively disappointing . Before the election the gains continued to decrease , with most of these losses going to the Conservative Party which had a surprisingly successful campaign . The decline in support over a longer period of time can also be seen as the Labour Party was since 2008 accused of " stealing " policies from the Progress Party . The Progress Party did , regardless , achieve a slight gain from the 2005 election with 22 @.@ 9 % , the best election result in the party 's history . It also for the first time got represented in the Sami Parliament of Norway in 2009 , with three representatives . This made it the fourth largest party in the Sami parliament , and second largest of the nationwide parties . In the informal school elections in Norway , the party became the largest party in Norway with 24 % of the votes . 
 Since early 2010 , opinion polls regularly showed a majority support for the Progress Party and Conservative Party together . The Progress Party however saw a strong setback for the 2011 local elections . The party lost 6 % in vote share , while the Conservative Party gained 9 % . According to political scientists , most of the setback could be explained by a low turnout of Progress Party supporters . 
 In coalition with the Conservative Party , the party won the 2013 parliamentary election and helped form its first ever government , the Solberg 's Cabinet , although the Progress Party itself lost seats and is now the third largest party instead of the second largest . 
 = = Isolation = = 
 Ever since its foundation , other parties have consistently refused the Progress Party 's efforts to join any governing coalition at the state level . The reasons have mainly included concerns about the party 's alleged irresponsibility and its position on immigration issues . Following the increased support and importance of the Progress Party in the 2005 elections , the Conservative Party stated they wanted to be " a bridge between the Progress Party and the centre . " This is because the centrist Liberal Party and Christian Democratic Party reject the possibility of participating in a government coalition together with the Progress Party . In addition , the Progress Party does not want to support a government coalition that it itself is not a part of . In 2010 , the Conservative Party went even further when its leader Erna Solberg stated that the Progress Party was now such a big party that it " must " be part of any centre @-@ right governmental negotiations after the 2013 elections . At the municipal level , the Progress Party however cooperates with most parties , including the Labour Party . In 2007 it also attracted some unusual attention when the local Porsgrunn Progress Party was involved in some limited cooperation with the Socialist Left Party and the Red Party . 
 = = Ideology = = 
 The Progress Party currently regards itself to be a " liberal people 's party " , and its ideology to be classical liberalism or conservative liberalism . The party identifies itself in the preamble of its platform as a liberal ( <unk> ; " liberal , libertarian " ) party , built on Norwegian and Western traditions and cultural heritage , with a basis in a Christian understanding of life and humanist values . Its main declared goal is a strong reduction in taxes and government intervention . The party is today considered to be conservative liberal , but has sometimes been described as populist . While more fundamental libertarianism was earlier a component of its ideology , this has in practice gradually more or less vanished from the party . As of the late 2000s , the party has also been influenced by Thatcherism , particularly with Siv Jensen becoming party leader . 
 The core issues for the party revolve around immigration , crime , foreign aid , the elderly and social security in regards to health and care for the elderly . The party is regarded as having policies on the right in most of these cases , both fiscally and socially , though in some cases , like care for the elderly , the policy is regarded as being on the left . It has been claimed that the party changed in its first three decades , in turn from an " outsider movement " in the 1970s , to libertarianism in the 1980s , to right @-@ wing populism in the 1990s . From the 2000s , the party has to some extent sought to moderate its profile in order to seek government cooperation with centre @-@ right parties . This has been especially true since the expulsion of certain members around 2001 , and further under the lead of Siv Jensen from 2006 , when the party has tried to move and position itself more towards conservatism and also seek cooperation with such parties abroad . 
 = = = Economy = = = 
 The party is strongly individualistic , wanting to reduce the power of the state and the public sector . It believes that the public sector should only be there to secure a minimum standard of living , and that individuals , businesses and organisations should take care of various tasks instead of the public sector , in most cases . The party also generally advocates the lowering of taxes , various duties , as well increased market economy . 
 The party also notably want to invest more of Norway 's oil wealth in infrastructure ( particularly roads , broadband capacity , hospitals , schools and nursing homes ) and the welfare state . This position , that has used a sense of a welfare crisis to support demands to spend more of the oil fund now rather than later , is part of its electoral success . 
 The party wants to strongly reduce taxation in Norway , and says that the money Norwegians earn , is theirs to be kept . They want to remove inheritance tax and property tax . 
 = = = Society = = = 
 In schools , the party wants to improve the working environment for teachers and students by focusing more on order , discipline and class management . The party wants more individual adaptation , to implement grades in basic subjects from fifth grade , open more private schools and decrease the amount of theory in vocational educations . 
 The party regards the family to be a natural , necessary and basic element in a free society . It regards the family to be a carrier of traditions and culture , and to have a role in raising and caring for children . The party also wants all children to have a right of visitation and care from both parents , and to secure <unk> right to know who their biological parents are . The party opposed the legalization of same @-@ sex marriage in 2008 , questioning how children would " cope " with the law . 
 During the national convention in May 2013 , the party voted in favor of both same @-@ sex marriage and same @-@ sex adoption . The party has for several years been a proponent for legalizing blood donation for homosexuals . 
 The party believes that artists should be less dependent on public support , and instead be more dependent on making a living on what they create . The party believes that regular people should rather decide what good culture is , and demands that artists on public support should offer something the audience wants . It also wants to abolish the annual fee for the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation and privatise the company . Otherwise , the party wants to protect and secure Norwegian cultural heritage . 
 Since the party distances itself from discrimination and special treatment based on gender , religion and ethnic origin , the party wants to dissolve the Sami Parliament of Norway , which is based on ethnic classifications . The party wants to uphold Sami culture , but wants to work against any special treatment based on ethnic origin regarding the right of use of water and land . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The Progress Party has historically sometimes been portrayed externally as a populist or right @-@ wing populist party ( or other similar terms ) , both by opposing politicians , as well as some scholars . Depending on definitions of populism , other scholars have however found that populism is at best a minor element of the party , or that its policies historically have been more consistent than for instance those of the Labour Party , which has moved more towards the Progress Party and neoliberalism since the 1980s . Political scientist Anders <unk> Jensen has argued that the Progress Party is the only populist party in Norway , with all the other parties in contrast having strong elitist foundations . He has suggested that populism could actually be a sign of health as the structures of the traditional parties make them poorly able to “ listen to the people ” in the same manner that the Progress Party may . 
 = = = Law and order = = = 
 The party supports an increase in police forces , and more visible police on the streets . It wants to implement tougher punishments , especially for crime regarding violence and morality offences . The party also wants to establish an ombudsman for victims and relatives , as it believes today 's supportive concern focus too much on the criminals rather than the victims . It wants the police to be able to use more non @-@ lethal weapons , such as electroshock weapons . It also does not accept any use of religious or political symbols with the police uniform , and wants to expel foreign citizens who are convicted of crime with a frame of more than three months imprisonment . 
 = = = Immigration = = = 
 From the second half of the 1980s the economic and welfare aspects of immigration policy were mainly a focus of Progress Party criticism , including the strains placed by immigration on the welfare state . During the 1990s the party shifted to focus more on cultural and ethnic issues and conflicts , a development which can also be seen in the general public debate , including among its political opponents . In 1993 , it was the first party in Norway to use the notion of " integration politics " in its party programme . While the party has made numerous proposals on immigration in parliament , it has rarely received majority support for them . Its proposals has largely been rejected by the remaining political parties , as well as the mass media . Although the party 's immigration policies have been compared to those of the Danish People 's Party and the Sweden Democrats , leading party members have rather seen its immigration policies to resemble those of the Dutch People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy and the Danish Venstre , when those parties were in government . 
 Generally , the party wants a stricter immigration policy , so that only those who are in need of protection according to the UN Refugee Convention are allowed to stay in Norway . In a speech in the 2007 election campaign , Siv Jensen claimed that the immigration policy was a failure because it let criminals stay in Norway , while throwing out people who worked hard and followed the law . The party claims the immigration and integration policy to be naïve . In 2009 , the party proposed an official goal of reducing accepted asylum seekers by about 90 % , from 1 @,@ 000 to 100 a month , the standards then said to be used in Denmark and Finland , although less than 100 a year was proposed in 2008 . In 2008 , the party wanted to " avoid illiterates and other poorly resourced groups who we see are not able to adapt in Norway " ; which included countries as Somalia , Afghanistan and Pakistan . The party opposes that asylum seekers are allowed stay in Norway on humanitarian grounds or due to health issues , and seeks to substantially limit the number of family <unk> . The party has also called for a referendum on the general immigration policy . 
 A poll conducted by <unk> in August 2009 showed that 10 % ( 14 % if the respondents answering " Don 't know " are removed ) of immigrants in Norway would vote for the Progress Party , only beaten by the Labour Party ( 38 % and 56 % respectively ) , when asked . More specifically , this constituted 9 % of both African and Eastern European immigrants , 22 % of Western European immigrants and 3 % of Asian immigrants . Thus , it was above all immigrants from Western countries that contributed to the Progress Party , whereas those from Asia were very unlikely to support it ; however , many immigrants from Africa also voted for the Progress Party . Individuals of immigrant background are increasingly active in the party , most notably Iranian @-@ Norwegian Mazyar <unk> and the current leader of the youth party , Indian @-@ Norwegian Himanshu Gulati . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 The Progress Party is in principle open to a referendum on Norwegian membership of the European Union , although only if a majority of the public opinion is seen to favour it beforehand . Currently , the party considers an eventual membership of Norway in the European Union to be a " non @-@ issue " , believing there to be no reason for a debate of a new referendum at present . The party regards NATO to be a positive basic element of Norway 's defense , security and foreign policy . It also wants to strengthen transatlantic relations in general , and Norway 's relationship with the United States more specifically . The party considers its international policy to " follow in the footsteps of Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher . " 
 Of all the major political parties in Norway , the Progress Party has shown the strongest support for Israel . Recently , it has supported the right of Israel to defend itself against rocket attacks from Hamas , and was the only party in Norway which supported Israel through the Gaza War ( 2008 – 09 ) . The party also wants to relocate the Norwegian embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem . 
 The party sees the most viable form of foreign aid policy , to be for developing countries to gradually manage themselves without Western aid . It believes that free trade is the key for developing countries to gain economic growth , and that " the relationship between aid and development is at best unclear . " The party is strongly critical of " forced contribution to government development aid through taxation " , which it wants to limit , also as it believe this weakens the individual 's personal sense of responsibility and generosity ( voluntary aid ) . The party instead supports an increase in support for global health and vaccination initiatives against global epidemics such as HIV , AIDS and tuberculosis , and to increase the support after emergencies and disasters . 
 = = International relations = = 
 The Progress Party does not belong to any international political groups , and does not have any official sister parties . Historically the party has not compared itself to other European parties , and has sought to rather establish its own identity . In 2008 however , the party for the first time set out to build its international reputation by hiring two international secretaries to travel internationally and establishing contact with politicians and parties abroad . This was cited especially to " not risk being declared as extremists by opponents the day we form a government " . An international secretary for the party in the same year said that the party had been connected with a " misunderstood right @-@ wing radical label " , partly because people with nationalistic and " hopeless attitudes " had previously been involved in the party . Such persons were said no longer to be involved . 
 = = = Denmark = = = 
 The Progress Party was originally inspired by its Danish counterpart , the Progress Party , which ultimately declined , lost parliamentary representation , and fell into the fringes of Danish politics . In recent years , the Norwegian party has rather considered Denmark 's Venstre to be its sister party . Formally , Venstre is aligned with the Norwegian Liberal Party , and as late as 2006 the international secretary of Venstre said that " we have nothing in common with the Norwegian Progress Party " . In 2009 however , the prominent Venstre MP Inger <unk> gave her support for the Progress Party , saying there were " great similarities " between the parties , and that Venstre stood " shoulder to shoulder " with the Progress Party , although this position was not supported by Venstre 's party chairman Lars Løkke Rasmussen . 
 The party has also been compared to the more national conservative Danish People 's Party ( DF ) , with journalist Lars <unk> suggesting that the great support for the party resulted from a combination of the immigration policies of the DF and the liberalism of Venstre . Political scientist Cas Mudde has also regarded the Progress Party to be somewhere in between these two parties . Kristian Norheim , the international secretary for the Progress Party , in 2008 however distanced himself from DF , citing a right @-@ turn in its immigration policy , and left @-@ turn in its financial policies to be problematic . In 2007 , Norheim also claimed that the Progress Party were " globalisation friendly " , in contrast to DF , and that DF ideologically and politically was in Norway rather comparable to the Democrats . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 The Progress Party has by some been compared to parties such as the Dutch Pim Fortuyn List , French Front National and the Freedom Party of Austria . It has been approached for cooperation by some of these parties , including the Belgian Vlaams Belang , French Front National and the Freedom Party of Austria , only to be rejected by the Progress Party . In 2008 , the Progress Party international secretary Kristian Norheim specifically distanced the Progress Party from such parties . He regarded many of these parties to be " national social democratic " , and stressed their lack of liberalism as inconsistent with the Progress Party 's platform . The Progress Party has also been compared to the Alternative for Germany by Jan Simonsen , who he also cited as a blending of conservatives and economic liberals . 
 The Progress Party mentions among parties it consider itself closest to internationally the Danish Venstre ( Liberal Party ) , the Estonian Reform Party , the Dutch People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy , the British Conservative Party and the Czech Civic Democratic Party . In 2009 the British Conservative Party invited party leader Siv Jensen to hold a lecture in the House of Commons , which was seen as a further recognition of the party internationally , with the approach by the Danish Venstre the previous month . 
 In the United States , the Progress Party generally supports the Republican Party , and was in 2010 called " friends " by the Republican Party chairman as he said he looked forward to the continued growth of the party and free market conservative principles . For the 2008 US election , a survey found that the vast majority of Progress Party MPs and county leaders supported Republican Party candidates for president , although a few individuals supported Democratic Party candidates . The party also has some connections with the American Tea Party movement . 
 = = Party leadership = = 
 = = = Party leaders = = = 
 Anders Lange ( 1973 – 1974 ) 
 Eivind <unk> ( 1974 – 1975 ) ( interim ) 
 Arve <unk> ( 1975 – 1978 ) 
 Carl I. Hagen ( 1978 – 2006 ) 
 Siv Jensen ( 2006 – ) 
 = = = Parliamentary leaders = = = 
 Anders Lange ( 1973 – 1974 ) 
 Erik Gjems @-@ Onstad ( 1974 – 1976 ) 
 Harald Bjarne <unk> ( 1976 – 1977 ) 
 Carl I. Hagen ( 1981 – 2005 ) 
 Siv Jensen ( 2005 – 2013 ) 
 Harald T. <unk> ( 2013 – ) 
 = = = Deputy party leaders = = = 
 = = Election results = = 
 = = = Parliamentary elections = = = 
 = = = Local elections = = = 
 = Fantastic Novels = 
 Fantastic Novels was an American science fiction and fantasy pulp magazine published by the Munsey Company of New York from 1940 to 1941 , and again by Popular Publications , also of New York , from 1948 to 1951 . It was a companion to Famous Fantastic Mysteries . Like that magazine , it mostly reprinted science fiction and fantasy classics from earlier decades , such as novels by A. Merritt , George Allan England , and Victor Rousseau , though it occasionally published reprints of more recent work , such as Earth 's Last Citadel , by Henry Kuttner and C. L. Moore . 
 The magazine lasted for 5 issues in its first incarnation , and for another 20 in the revived version from Popular Publications . Mary Gnaedinger edited both series ; her interest in reprinting Merritt 's work helped make him one of the better @-@ known fantasy writers of the era . A Canadian edition from 1948 to 1951 reprinted 17 issues of the second series ; two others were reprinted in Great Britain in 1950 and 1951 . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 In the early 20th century , science fiction ( sf ) stories were frequently published in popular magazines , with the Munsey Company , a major pulp magazine publisher , printing a great deal of science fiction . In 1926 Amazing Stories became the first specialist pulp magazine publisher of science fiction . Munsey continued to print sf in Argosy during the 1930s , and in 1939 took advantage of the new genre 's growing popularity by launching Famous Fantastic Mysteries , a vehicle to reprint the most popular fantasy and sf stories from the Munsey magazines . 
 The new title immediately became successful , and demand for reprints of old favorites was such that Munsey decided to launch an additional magazine , Fantastic Novels , in July 1940 , edited , like Famous Fantastic Mysteries , by Mary Gnaedinger . The two magazines were placed on bimonthly schedules , arranged to alternate with each other , though the schedule slipped slightly with the fifth issue of Fantastic Novels , dated April 1941 but following the January 1941 issue . Fantastic Novels was suspended after that issue and merged with Famous Fantastic Mysteries . The stated reason was that Famous Fantastic Mysteries " is apparently the favorite title " , but it seems likely that production difficulties caused by World War II played a part . The June 1941 and August 1941 issues of Famous Fantastic Mysteries both carried the slogan " Combined with Fantastic Novels Magazine " on the cover . 
 Fantastic Novels reappeared in 1948 through Popular Publications , which had acquired Famous Fantastic Mysteries from Munsey at the end of 1942 . Gnaedinger remained editor of Famous Fantastic Mysteries when Popular took over , and was editor of the second incarnation of Fantastic Novels . The March 1948 issue , the first of the new series , was catalogued volume 1 , number 6 , as if there had been no break in publication . This version lasted for a further 20 issues , ending without notice with the June 1951 issue . It was apparently a sudden decision ; the final issue had announced plans to reprint Otis Adelbert Kline 's Maza of the Moon . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Fantastic Novels came into existence because of the demand from readers of Famous Fantastic Mysteries for book @-@ length reprints . Gnaedinger observed that " Everyone seems to have realized that although [ the ] set @-@ up of five to seven stories with two serials running , was highly satisfactory , that the long list of novels would have to be speeded up somehow " . When the new magazine was launched , Famous Fantastic Mysteries was partway through serialization of Austin Hall and Homer Eon Flint 's The Blind Spot , with the third episode appearing in the May / June 1940 issue . Rather than complete the serialization , Gnaedinger printed the novel in its entirety in the first issue of Fantastic Novels , ensuring that readers of Famous Fantastic Mysteries would also acquire the new magazine . Over the next four issues she printed Ray Cummings ' People of the Golden Atom , Ralph Milne Farley 's The Radio Beasts , and two novels by A. Merritt : The Snake Mother and The Dwellers in the Mirage . Gnaedinger 's interest in reprinting Merritt 's work helped make him one of the better @-@ known fantasy writers of the era . 
 In the second series , from 1948 to 1951 , Gnaedinger continued to reprint work by Merritt , along with other reader favorites from the Munsey years . Works by George Allan England , Victor Rousseau , Ray Cummings , and Francis Stevens ( the pen name of Gertrude Barrows Bennett ) appeared , as well as ( occasionally ) reprints of more recent work , such as Earth 's Last Citadel , by Henry Kuttner and C. L. Moore , which had been serialized in Argosy in 1943 . In the early 1950s , when first Fantastic Novels and two years later Famous Fantastic Mysteries ceased publication , it is likely that the audience for science fiction was growing too sophisticated for these early works . 
 Each issue , except the last one , featured a lead novel with additional short fiction . The cover artwork was mostly by Virgil Finlay , Lawrence Stevens , Peter Stevens , and Norman Saunders , with one early cover contributed by Frank R. Paul . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Mary Gnaedinger edited Fantastic Novels for both the Munsey and Popular Publication series . Five issues appeared between July 1940 and April 1941 , and an additional twenty from March 1948 to June 1951 . The schedule was bimonthly , with only two irregularities : the issues that would have been dated March 1941 and March 1951 were each delayed by a month . The volume numbering was regular throughout , with four volumes of six numbers , and a final fifth volume of one number . The magazine was printed in pulp format throughout both series , and was priced at 20 cents for the first two issues ; then 10 cents for the remainder of the first series and 25 cents for issues in the second series . Fantastic Novels was 144 pages for the first two issues , 128 pages for two issues , and 112 pages for the last issue of the first series ; it was 132 pages from the start of the second series until the November 1950 issue , and then 128 pages for January 1951 , and 112 pages for the last two issues . 
 A Canadian reprint edition ran from September 1948 to June 1951 ; these were published by the Toronto @-@ based New Publications . They were half an inch taller than the U.S. editions and used different back @-@ cover advertisements , but were otherwise identical to the U.S. issues of the same date . Two issues were released in Britain : a single issue was released in March 1950 ; it was a copy of the November 1949 U.S. issue but was neither numbered nor dated . The other British issue was a copy of the May 1949 issue , cut to only 64 pages ; it was released in June 1951 and was undated but numbered 1 . Both these issues were published by Pemberton 's and distributed by Thorpe & Porter . 
 = Snow Falls = 
 " Snow Falls " is the third episode of the American fairy tale / drama television series Once Upon a Time . The series takes place in the fictional seaside town of Storybrooke , Maine , in which the residents are actually characters from various fairy tales that were transported to the " real world " town by a powerful curse . This episode centers on the first meeting of Snow White ( Ginnifer Goodwin ) and Prince Charming ( Joshua Dallas ) , when the former steals his mother 's ring ; Charming hunts her down , but they later part amicably . Meanwhile , Snow 's Storybrooke counterpart , Mary Margaret ( Goodwin ) , develops a personal bond with a comatose John Doe ( Dallas ) while reading him fairy tales . During the night , he awakens and escapes the hospital ; Mary Margaret locates the amnesiac man , but is dismayed to learn that he is married . 
 The episode was written by co @-@ executive producer Liz Tigelaar , while being directed by Dean White . It featured the first appearance of David Anders as Dr. Whale and Anastasia Griffith in the dual role of Kathryn Nolan and Princess Abigail . " Snow Falls " serves as a prequel to the pilot episode . Goodwin injured herself during filming and received facial stitches in a local emergency room , though she and Dallas still called the episode their favorite up to that point . 
 It first aired in the United States on ABC on November 6 , 2011 . An estimated 11 @.@ 4 million viewers tuned into the episode , and it placed second in its timeslot , though it garnered five percent fewer viewers than the previous episode . " Snow Falls " received generally positive reviews from television critics , with several calling it an indication that the series was improving over time . The chemistry between Goodwin and Dallas was particularly highlighted for praise . A novelization of the episode was released in 2013 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Opening Sequence = = = 
 A troll is shown in the forest . 
 = = = In the Characters ' Past = = = 
 In the Enchanted Forest , a guarded carriage carrying Prince Charming ( Joshua Dallas ) and his fiancee , Abigail ( Anastasia Griffith ) , is halted by a roadblock . Charming notices a fallen tree is blocking the road , and that it was cut on purpose . The carriage is ambushed by a hooded vagabond , who takes Charming 's bag of valuables , including a wedding ring . Charming pursues and knocks the mysterious thief off their horse . He discovers it is a woman , Snow White ( Ginnifer Goodwin ) . Before he can get an answer as to why she stole his bag , Snow hits him with a rock , surprising and cutting him to make her escape . Charming vows that he will find her . 
 Later , Charming tracks Snow and nets her in a trap . Snow reluctantly agrees to show Charming where she sold his jewels . Along the way , Charming discovers a wanted poster of Snow in her bag . Snow claims the Evil Queen ( Lana Parrilla ) blames her for ruining her life . Charming asks if this is true and she admits it is . 
 As they reach a river , Snow once again tricks Charming and escapes again , only to be captured moments later by the Queen 's henchmen . Their orders are to cut out Snow 's heart and bring it to the Queen . Charming attacks the henchmen with his sword , killing two . One henchman gets away with Snow , and Charming quickly dispatches him with an arrow . Now that he has saved Snow , she decides to trust him , and agrees to lead him to the place where she sold the items . 
 They reach the dilapidated bridge where Snow sold Charming 's goods to a group of trolls . When she asks the trolls if she can buy back the ring , the trolls become suspicious and discover the wanted poster of Snow , leading to a fight . Snow comes to Charming 's rescue by using fairy dust to turn the trolls into bugs . Charming is surprised that Snow saved him , but she wants to repay him for saving her life . As she hands him back the items , including the wedding ring , Snow looks at the ring , then places it on her finger before handing it back to him as they go their separate ways . 
 = = = In Storybrooke = = = 
 In the present day , during a night out with Dr. Whale ( David Anders ) , Mary Margaret ( Goodwin ) tries to make a little conversation with him ; however , he is busy ogling Ruby ( Meghan Ory ) , prompting Mary Margaret to leave the cafe by herself . As she walks back to her apartment , she notices Emma Swan ( Jennifer Morrison ) in her car reading a newspaper and searching for a place to stay . Mary Margaret offers Emma a spare room at her apartment . The following day , Mary Margaret notices Henry ( Jared S. Gilmore ) looking at the comatose John Doe ( Dallas ) while they are setting up decorations at the hospital . Henry believes that John Doe is Prince Charming and Mary Margaret is Snow White . Henry asks her to read to Charming from the storybook , convinced that it will wake him up . Emma persuades Mary Margaret to go along with Henry 's wishes so that they can prove the stories aren 't real . At the hospital , Mary Margaret reads the stories to the patient , until his hand grabs hers , shocking Mary Margaret . She tells Dr. Whale that Charming might be waking up , but the doctor does not believe her . After she leaves , Dr. Whale calls Regina ( Parrilla ) , as he had been instructed to do should there be a change in John Doe 's state , revealing that he had been lying to Mary Margaret . 
 The next day , Emma , Henry and Mary Margaret stop by the hospital to see him , only to discover that the patient has left on his own and might be bleeding . Regina and Sheriff Graham ( Jamie Dornan ) have also shown up , since Regina is the emergency contact for John Doe . She claims that she had found him on the side of the road unconscious without any memory of what or who he was . As Regina takes Henry home , Emma , Mary Margaret , and the sheriff decide to investigate what happened and visit the security room . They encounter the janitor Leroy ( Lee Arenberg ) , and the security guard Walter , who was sleeping on the job ( since he is actually Sleepy ) . Emma and the others discover that John Doe went out into the woods . 
 As Emma , Mary Margaret , and Graham search the wooded area for John Doe , they are joined by Henry . Henry believes that the patient is looking for Mary Margaret . They soon discover the patient lying near the bridge seen in the fairytale flashback , and Mary Margaret revives him . As they take him back to the hospital , Regina shows up with a woman named Kathryn ( Griffith ) , and states that she is his wife and that the patient 's name is David Nolan . This devastates Mary Margaret , as she had begun to develop feelings for the patient . Emma becomes suspicious of Regina 's ability to find Nolan 's wife and questions why Kathryn never bothered to search for him before . Although Regina claims that past hospital surveillance tapes had David mentioning Kathryn 's name in his sleep , Emma still believes that Regina is lying . Later that evening , Emma arrives at Mary Margaret 's place and agrees to take up the offer of staying with the teacher . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Snow Falls " was written by co @-@ executive producer Liz Tigelaar , while being directed by The Shield veteran Dean White . The episode features the first appearance of Anastasia Griffith as Abigail / Kathryn Nolan , a recurring role . Her casting was announced in early August 2011 , with her character being variously described as " spoiled " and " regal " . Actor David Anders also made his first appearance in this episode as Dr. Whale . 
 The episode serves as a prequel to the events of the pilot . In October 2011 , Ginnifer Goodwin told reporters that she was excited to portray the beginning of Snow and Charming 's relationship " because it is based more on animosity and manipulation and selfishness . " She added that " they have a very far way to go from their moment of meeting to falling in love , " making the episode " greatly challenging and fun . " 
 In the scene in which Snow White is captured by The Queen 's henchmen , Goodwin tweeted that the horse ran right into her , sending her flying and injuring her hand and face . Goodwin explained that " we go on quite an adventure and I came away with an actual , physical scar from it . " The incident required that the actress ' face receive stitches in a hospital emergency room . Goodwin and Joshua Dallas said that it was their favorite episode up to that point , with Dallas saying it was " lot of fun to shoot and it ’ s just great . " In another tweet , Goodwin commented that Jennifer Morrison taught her to perform CPR during a scene with Dallas , as Morrison learned the procedure while she was a regular on House M.D. 
 The episode was included in Reawakened : A Once Upon a Time Tale – a novelization of the first season – which was written by Odette Beane and published by Hyperion Books in May 2013 . The novel is intended to give " fans of the show a whole new look at their favorite characters and stories , " and is alternately set from the perspective of Emma Swan and Snow White , who narrate events in Storybrooke and the Enchanted Forest , respectively . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Snow Falls " first aired in the United States on November 6 , 2011 , earning strong ratings . It was watched by an estimated 11 @.@ 4 million viewers , five percent less than the previous episode . It earned a ratings share of 3 @.@ 7 among adults aged 18 to 49 and a 6 @.@ 6 score among overall viewers . The episode ranked second in its timeslot behind Football Night In America on NBC but ahead of The Simpsons on the Fox network and The Amazing Race on CBS . In Canada , the episode was watched by an estimated 1 @.@ 732 million viewers , a rise from the previous episode 's 1 @.@ 44 million . The show ranked 16th overall for the week . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode was met with generally positive reviews . 
 Writing for Zap2it , Andrea Reiher stated that this episode was the best since the pilot , explaining that " if they continue to be this good , this show should be in for a long run . " Reiher cited Goodwin 's " wonderful , captivating " performance and the parallels between the Storybrooke and Enchanted Forest stories as particular highlights . In a review from TV Fanatic , writer Christine Orlando stated that the episode " had me on the edge of my seat and enjoying the ride , " giving particular praise to Snow and Charming 's chemistry @-@ filled early relationship . Orlando concluded , " Snow White , the character I had the least interest in two weeks ago , held her own and then some . Heck , I was so enthralled by her story that , for the first time ever , I can 't wait to learn more . " Sound on Sight 's Ricky D thought it wise that the episode focused on Snow and Charming , " without feeling the need to include multiple stories . " He felt that Goodwin had " excellent " chemistry with Dallas and that her performance saved the " silliness of the modern day plot , " especially in her developing relationship with Emma . 
 IGN 's Amy Ratcliffe gave " Snow Falls " a score of 8 out of 10 and felt that while " everyone delivered solid performances ... Goodwin stole the show " for playing a character who was " not an innocent , doe @-@ eyed girl . " Like Orlando , Ratcliffe also felt that " Goodwin and Dallas hit a perfect rhythm every time they share the screen , " but expressed concern about how the series would continue cutting between both worlds . Shaunna Murphy of Entertainment Weekly cited " Snow Falls " as evidence that the show was continuing down the " fortunate path of getting better each week . " Murphy was interested in Sheriff Graham , speculating that he might be the Huntsman from Snow White , which would be a " good , complicated role for him . " The A.V. Club reviewer Oliver Sava was less positive , giving the episode a grade of C- . He was pleased the plot moved forward , but felt the execution did not work ; he cited the " major problems " of " the lack of any sort of subtlety , nonsensical story developments , and Henry . " Sava derided the " corny dialogue " and use of flashbacks , but wrote that the " best thing " about the episode was the introduction of Dr. Whale and Kathryn Nolan , and also praised the acting . 
 = Larry O 'Brien Championship Trophy = 
 The Larry O 'Brien NBA Championship Trophy is the championship trophy awarded annually by the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) to the winner of the NBA Finals . The name of the trophy was the Walter A. Brown Trophy until 1984 . 
 The current design , depicting a basketball over a hoop and basket , was first awarded in 1977 still under its original name , which was changed in honor of former NBA commissioner Larry O 'Brien who served from 1975 to 1984 . Before joining the NBA , O 'Brien was the United States Postmaster General under President Lyndon B. Johnson from 1965 to 1968 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The trophy , made of 14 @.@ 5 pounds of sterling silver and <unk> with a 24 karat gold overlay , stands two feet tall . The basketball itself is nine inches in diameter , about the same size as a regulation NBA ball . Valued at $ 13 @,@ 500 , the trophy is manufactured by the Tiffany & Co . Silver Shop every year . The winning team maintains permanent possession of the trophy . The year and winning team names are engraved on the trophies , and are often prominently displayed in the winning team 's arena . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Although the Larry O 'Brien Trophy has been compared with the National Hockey League 's ( NHL ) Stanley Cup , it has never been as prominent as the NHL trophy . To reduce this discrepancy , the NBA has been actively promoting the O 'Brien Trophy in recent years to generate more recognition and an iconic status for the trophy . After the Detroit Pistons won the NBA Finals in 2004 , the trophy was toured around the state of Michigan , marking the first time the trophy toured around the state of the winning team . In 2005 , the NBA Legends Tour was launched in New York City . As part of the tour , the O ’ Brien Trophy was showcased in various cities — including those that were hosting the playoffs — for fans ' autograph and photo sessions . It was escorted by many former players , including Julius Erving , Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar and Bill Russell . In May 2007 , the NBA unveiled the NBA Headquarters on Second Life , an Internet @-@ based virtual reality environment . With this launch , fans could take pictures with the championship trophy in the virtual Toyota Larry O 'Brien Trophy Room . In August , the trophy traveled to Hong Kong for the first time as part of the NBA Madness Asia Tour . 
 = John Carpenter ( game show contestant ) = 
 John Carpenter ( born c . 1968 ) is an American game show contestant and IRS agent . He is best @-@ known for becoming the first top prize winner on the United States version of Who Wants to Be a Millionaire . He held the record for the largest single win in United States game show history , until it was broken by Rahim Oberholtzer who won $ 1 @.@ 12 million on another U.S. quiz show , Twenty One . Carpenter was also the first top prize winner among all international versions of the Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? series . 
 On the November 19 , 1999 , episode , Carpenter proceeded to advance to the million @-@ dollar question without using any lifelines . He then used his Phone @-@ A @-@ Friend to call his father not for help , but rather to tell him he was going to win the game . Carpenter answered the question correctly and became the show 's first millionaire . His win gave him national recognition and led to multiple talk show appearances , as well as reappearances on Millionaire itself . 
 = = Career and family = = 
 Carpenter is from Northampton , Massachusetts . His father , Tom , worked as a computer program analyst for the Department of Veterans Affairs , while his mother , Gail , served as an administrative assistant for the Massachusetts Audubon Society . In 1986 , he enrolled at Rutgers University and graduated in 1990 with a degree in economics . In January 1991 , he joined the Internal Revenue Service after completing government exams and tests . In November 1996 , Carpenter met his future wife , Deborah , who was studying for a Master 's degree at Southern Connecticut State University and worked as a manager of a Fleet Bank branch in New Haven . They married in August 1998 . At the time of his appearance on Millionaire , he was 31 years old . When he revealed his profession as an IRS officer on Millionaire , Carpenter was playfully booed by the audience . 
 = = Who Wants to Be a Millionaire = = 
 Carpenter was originally uninterested in Millionaire but eventually tuned in one night after dinner while having friends over at his house . When he found the show 's higher @-@ tier questions to not be , in his words , " any more difficult " than the lower @-@ tier ones , he decided to call in to the show 's hotline for a chance to become a contestant . Carpenter answered all of the hotline questions correctly and was on the show within two days . 
 Host Regis Philbin described Carpenter as having " cruised right through those first fourteen questions , " he had proceeded to reach the final question without using any of his lifelines . The $ 1 million question was , " Which of these U.S. Presidents appeared on the television series ' Laugh @-@ In ' ? " , with the choices being A ) Lyndon Johnson , B ) Richard Nixon , C ) Jimmy Carter , and D ) Gerald Ford . Carpenter used his Phone @-@ A @-@ Friend lifeline to call his father not for help , but rather to inform him that he knew the answer . Carpenter later explained , " I thought I 'd look so cocky if I didn 't use any lifelines , so I faked it . " 
 With his win , Carpenter became the first contestant in the worldwide Millionaire franchise to win the show 's top prize . He said that the only question that had flustered him was one which asked for the location of the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral . Carpenter eventually remembered that the film Tombstone included the gunfight , and he replied correctly with the answer ' Tombstone , Arizona ' . While taking a vacation after his win , Carpenter considered quitting his job with the IRS , but eventually decided against it . He explained to Kiplinger 's Personal Finance that " after the taxes , it 's not change @-@ your @-@ life kind of money if you want to eat every day . " Carpenter also described the fame as having a bigger impact on his life than the money , later stating : " The money doesn 't change your life . What happens afterwards might . " 
 = = Later work = = 
 Shortly after winning on Millionaire , Carpenter played himself in a Saturday Night Live skit . Donald Trump , played by Darrell Hammond , announced that Carpenter would be his running @-@ mate in the presidential election . Afterward , Carpenter pretended to call his father , then shouted , " Live from New York , it 's Saturday Night ! " Carpenter also appeared on Good Morning America , Oprah Winfrey Show , Live with Regis and Kathie Lee , and Late Show with David Letterman . 
 Carpenter appeared as himself in the second half of the fourth season of Oz . He plays a contestant in a fictional TV game show called Up Your Ante that the prisoners in Em City are watching . The show within the show is hosted by Gordon Elliott , with Eartha Kitt and Didi Conn appearing as celebrity participants . 
 With Rod L. Evans , Carpenter co @-@ authored a trivia book entitled Matching Wits With the Million @-@ Dollar Mind : The World 's Hardest Trivia <unk> From America 's First Quiz Show Millionaire . The book was published by Berkley Books in 2002 . 
 = = = Other game show appearances = = = 
 In 2000 , Carpenter appeared in the Who Wants to Be a Millionaire Champions Edition , in which previous contestants who won $ 250 @,@ 000 – $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 played again , with half of their additional winnings from the Champions Edition going to a charity of their choice . Carpenter won $ 250 @,@ 000 , bringing his total Millionaire winnings $ 1 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 . In 2004 , Carpenter participated in Super Millionaire , as one of the " Three Wise Men " on the episode during which Robert " Bob @-@ O " Essig won $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 He later participated as part of the Mob on NBC 's 1 vs. 100 on October 27 , 2006 @.@ and as a contestant on the Game Show Network game show Grand Slam . Carpenter appeared on the August 16 , 2009 episode of Millionaire in prime time for its tenth anniversary . In the audience with him was his dad , his wife , and his son . Additionally , he was also the first expert in the " Ask the Expert " lifeline for the eighth season of the syndicated series . 
 = Portrait of a Lady ( van der Weyden ) = 
 Portrait of a Lady ( or Portrait of a Woman ) is a small oil @-@ on @-@ oak panel painting executed around 1460 by the Netherlandish painter Rogier van der Weyden . The composition is built from the geometric shapes that form the lines of the woman 's veil , neckline , face , and arms , and by the fall of the light that illuminates her face and headdress . The vivid contrasts of darkness and light enhance the almost unnatural beauty and Gothic elegance of the model . 
 Van der Weyden was preoccupied by commissioned portraiture towards the end of his life and was highly regarded by later generations of painters for his penetrating evocations of character . In this work , the woman 's humility and reserved demeanour are conveyed through her fragile physique , lowered eyes and tightly grasped fingers . She is slender and depicted according to the Gothic ideal of elongated features , indicated by her narrow shoulders , tightly pinned hair , high forehead and the elaborate frame set by the headdress . It is the only known portrait of a woman accepted as an autograph work by van der Weyden , yet the sitter 's name is not recorded and he did not title the work . 
 Although van der Weyden did not adhere to the conventions of idealisation , he generally sought to flatter his sitters . He depicted his models in highly fashionable clothing , often with rounded — almost sculpted — facial features , some of which deviated from natural representation . He adapted his own aesthetic , and his portraits of women often bear a striking resemblance to each other . 
 The painting has been in the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. since donated in 1937 , and is no . 34 in the de Vos catalogue raisonné of the artist . It has been described as " famous among all portraits of women of all schools " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The woman , who is probably in her late teens or early twenties , is shown half @-@ length and in three @-@ quarters profile , set against a two @-@ dimensional interior background of deep blue @-@ green . The background is flat and lacks the attention to detail common in van der Weyden 's devotional works . Like his contemporary Jan van Eyck ( c . 1395 – 1441 ) , when working in portraiture , he used dark planes to focus attention on the sitter . It was not until Hans Memling ( c . 1435 – 1494 ) , a pupil of van der Weyden , that a Netherlandish artist set a portrait against an exterior or landscape . In this work the flat setting allows the viewer to settle on the woman 's face and quiet self @-@ possession . Van der Weyden reduces his focus to four basic features : the woman 's headdress , dress , face and hands . The background has darkened with age ; it is likely that the angles created by the sitter 's hennin and dress were once much sharper . 
 The woman wears an elegant low @-@ cut black dress with dark bands of fur at the neck and wrist . Her clothes are of the then @-@ fashionable Burgundian style , which emphasises the tall and thin aesthetic of the Gothic ideal . Her dress is buckled by a bright red sash pulled in below her breasts . The buff @-@ coloured hennin headdress is draped with a large transparent veil , which spills over her shoulders , reaching her upper arms . Van der Weyden 's attention to the structure of the clothing — the careful detailing of the pins pushed into the veil to fix its position — is typical for the artist . 
 The woman 's veil forms a diamond shape , balanced by the inverse flow of a light vest worn beneath her dress . She is shown at a slight angle , but her pose is centred by the interlocked broad lines of arms , décolletage and veil . The woman 's head is delicately lit , leaving no strong tonal contrasts on her skin . She has a long , thin face , plucked eyebrows and eyelids , and a plucked hairline to create a fashionably high forehead . Her hair is tightly pinned back on the rim of the bonnet and rests above her ear . Her high headdress and severe hairline accentuate her elongated face , giving it a sculpted appearance . 
 The woman 's left ear is set , according to art historian Norbert Schneider , unnaturally high and far back , parallel to her eyes rather than to her nose ; this position is probably an artistic device used to continue the flow of the diagonal line of the veil 's inner @-@ right wing . In the 15th century , veils were normally worn for modesty , to hide the sensuality of the flesh . In this work the veil has the opposite effect ; the woman 's face is framed by the headdress to draw attention to her beauty . 
 The woman 's hands are crossed tightly as if in prayer , and positioned so low in the painting as to appear to be resting on the frame . They are rendered as tightly compressed into a small area of the picture ; it is likely van der Weyden did not want them to result in an area of high tone that might distract from the description of her head . Her slender fingers are minutely detailed ; van der Weyden often indicated the social position of his models through his rendering of their face and hands . The sleeve of her dress extends beyond her wrists . Her fingers are folded in layers ; their intricate portrayal is the most detailed element in the painting , and echoes the pyramidal form of the upper portion of the painting . 
 Her eyes gaze downward in humility , in contrast to her relatively extravagant clothes . The piety of her expression is achieved through motifs common to van der Weyden 's work . Her eyes and nose are elongated and her lower lip made fuller by the use of tone and pronounced finish . Some vertical lines around these features are emphasised , while her pupils are enlarged and her eyebrows slightly raised . In addition the contours of her face are highlighted in a manner that is slightly unnatural and abstract , and outside the usual spatial constraints of 15th @-@ century human representation . This methodology was described by art historian Erwin Panofsky : " Rogier concentrated on certain salient features — salient both from a <unk> and psychological point of view — which he expressed primarily by lines . " Her high forehead and full mouth have been seen as suggestive of a nature at once intellectual , ascetic , and passionate , symbolic of " an unresolved conflict in her personality " . Panofsky refers to a " smouldering excitability " . 
 The sitter is unknown , although some art historians have speculated on her identity . On the grounds of similarity of facial features , writer Wilhelm Stein suggested in the early 20th century that she might be Marie de <unk> , the illegitimate daughter of Philip the Good of Burgundy . However , this is a contentious assertion and not widely held . Because her hands are shown as resting on the painting 's lower frame , art historians generally accept that this was an independent portrait , rather than a devotional work . It is possible that it was intended as a pendant to a picture of the woman 's husband , however no other portrait has been suggested as a likely companion . 
 = = Break from idealisation = = 
 Van der Weyden worked in the same tradition of portraiture as contemporaries Jan van Eyck and Robert Campin . In the early to middle 15th century , these three artists were among the first generation of " Northern Renaissance " painters , and the first northern Europeans to portray members of the middle and upper classes naturalistically rather than in a medieval Christian idealised form . In earlier Netherlandish art the profile view was the dominant mode of representation for the nobles or clergy worthy of portraiture . In works such as Portrait of a Man in a Turban ( 1433 ) , Jan van Eyck broke this tradition and used the three @-@ quarter profile of the face which became the standard in Netherlandish art . Here , van der Weyden utilises the same profile , which better allows him to describe the shape of the head and facial features of the sitter . She is shown in half @-@ length , which enables the artist to show her hands crossed at her waist . 
 Despite this new freedom , van der Weyden 's portraits of women are strikingly similar in concept and structure , both to each other and to female portraits by Campin . Most are three @-@ quarter face and half @-@ length . They typically set their models in front of a dark background that is uniform and nondescript . While the portraits are noted for their expressive pathos , the facial features of the women strongly resemble one another . This indicates that although van der Weyden did not adhere to the tradition of idealised representation , he sought to please his sitters in a manner that reflected contemporary ideals of beauty . Most of van der Weyden 's portraits were painted as commissions from the nobility ; he painted only five ( including Portrait of a Lady ) that were not donor portraits . It is known that in his Portrait of Philip de Croÿ ( c . 1460 ) , van der Weyden complimented the young Flemish nobleman by concealing his large nose and undershot jaw . When describing this tendency in relation to the Washington portrait , art historian Norbert Schneider wrote , " While van Eyck shows nature ' in the raw ' , as it were , Rogier improves on physical reality , civilising and refining Nature and the human form with the help of a brush . " The high quality of the painting is highlighted when compared to the National Gallery 's very similar workshop painting . The London subject has softer , more rounded features and is younger and less individually characterised than the c . 1460 model . The technique also is less subtle and fine in the London work . However , both share a similar expressions and dress . 
 Van der Weyden was more concerned with the aesthetic and emotional response created by the pictures overall than in the specific portraits . Art historian and curator Lorne Campbell suggests that the popularity of the portrait is due more to the " elegant simplicity of the pattern which [ the sitter ] creates " than to the grace of her depiction . While van der Weyden did not stay within the traditional realms of idealisation , he created his own aesthetic , which he extended across his portraits and religious pictures . This aesthetic includes the mood of sorrowful devotion which forms the dominant tone in all his portraits . His figures may be more natural than those of earlier generations of artists ; however , his individualistic approach to the depiction of his sitters ' piety often leads to the abandonment of the rules of scale . 
 John Walker , former director of the National Gallery of Art , referred to the subject as " outré " , but believed that despite the awkwardness of her individual features , the model was nonetheless " strangely beautiful " . By the time of the work 's completion van der Weyden had eclipsed even van Eyck in popularity , and this painting is typical of the austere spirituality , over the latter 's sensuality , for which van der Weyden is renowned . 
 = = Condition and provenance = = 
 Although van der Weyden did not title the work , and the sitter 's name is not recorded in any of the early inventories , the style of her dress has been used to place the picture very late in van der Weyden 's career . The c . 1460 dating is based on the high @-@ fashion dress and the work 's apparent chronological position in the evolution of van der Weyden 's style . However , it is possible that it was executed even later ( van der Weyden died in 1464 ) . 
 Portrait of a Lady was painted on a single oak board with a vertical grain and has an unpainted margin on each side . The panel was prepared with gesso , upon which the figure was then painted in monochrome . <unk> of oil pigment were then added , which allowed for subtle and transparent tonal gradations . Infra @-@ red reflectography reveals that van der Weyden did not sketch the work on the board before he began to paint , and there is no evidence of underdrawing . It shows that the lady was portrayed as more slender before changes were made as the work progressed ; thickly applied background paint underlies some of the belt , demonstrating that the original silhouette was widened . These changes are also visible in x @-@ ray images . It is in relatively good condition , having been cleaned a number of times , most recently in 1980 . There is some loss of paint on the veil , headdress and sleeve , and abrasion on the ear . 
 The provenance of the painting is unclear , and there is doubt as to which painting is referred to in some early inventories . An Anhalt prince , likely Leopold Friedrich Franz ( d . 1817 ) of <unk> , near Dessau , Germany , held it in the early 19th century , after which it is likely to have passed to Leopold Friedrich ( d . 1871 ) . The painting was loaned for exhibition in 1902 , when it was shown at the Hôtel de Gouvernement Provincial , Bruges at the Exposition des primitifs flamands et d 'art ancien . It was held by a Duke of Anhalt until 1926 when he sold it to the art dealers Duveen Brothers . They in turn sold it that year to Andrew W. Mellon . It was loaned the following year to the Royal Academy of Arts , London , for an exhibition covering six centuries of Flemish and Belgian art . Mellon willed the work to his Educational and Charitable Trust in 1932 , which in 1937 donated it to the National Gallery of Art where it is on permanent display . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Hurt : The EP = 
 Hurt : The EP is the first EP by British singer @-@ songwriter Leona Lewis . It was released on 9 December 2011 by Syco Music and RCA Records . The EP served as something to bridge the gap for her fans whilst she finished recording her third studio album Glassheart ( 2012 ) . The album was supposed to be released in November 2011 , but was delayed to March 2012 , and again to November 2012 . Lewis 's reason for delaying the album was because after she met producer Fraser T Smith , the singer wanted to collaborate on new material for possible inclusion on Glassheart . As a result , Smith also produced Hurt : The EP . The EP consists of three cover versions : " Hurt " by Nine Inch Nails ; " Iris " by the Goo Goo Dolls and " Colorblind " by Counting Crows . Musically , the songs are influenced by rock music , whilst the lyrics revolve around feeling pain . 
 Hurt : The EP garnered a mixed response from music critics . Lewis 's interpretations were both praised and criticised ; some critics described her vocal performance as " spine @-@ chilling " and a " compelling beauty " , whilst others cited that it was too formulaic . The EP peaked at number seven in Scotland , number eight in the United Kingdom and number 15 in Ireland on those countries ' albums charts . To promote Hurt : The EP , Lewis performed " Hurt " on the eighth series finale of The X Factor and the Royal Variety Performance in the United Kingdom , and performed " Run " on the first season finale of US The X Factor . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Shortly after her The Labyrinth arena tour ended in July 2010 , Lewis began to work on her third studio album . It was reported that Simon Cowell had set a deadline for Lewis to complete the album for a summer 2011 release . After originally having been given a release date of 28 November 2011 , Glassheart was pushed back to March 2012 . Lewis 's reason for delaying the release of the album was that after she met producer Fraser T Smith , she wanted to collaborate with him on new material for possible inclusion on Glassheart . Lewis delayed the release of the album a third time , with Glassheart set for release on 26 November 2012 . As a result of her fans having to wait until November 2012 , a year after the album was originally set to be released , Lewis decided to release an extended play entitled Hurt : The EP , as something to " bridge the gap " while she recorded new material . 
 Hurt : The EP consists of three covers : " Hurt " by Nine Inch Nails , " Iris " by the Goo Goo Dolls and " Colorblind " by Counting Crows . The EP was produced by Smith . In an interview for In : Demand , Lewis explained why she chose to record the songs , saying that she thought female interpretations of them would provide a " powerful perspective " , because of how the originals were sung by male vocalists . Lewis stated that she chose to record " Iris " and " Colorblind " due to how she " loved " the songs after listening to them for the first time , and added that the latter has a " beautiful lyric " . The EP was only made available to purchase digitally , and it was released in Canada , Ireland and the United Kingdom on 9 December 2011 to download via iTunes . It was also made available to purchase on Amazon.co.uk on 11 December 2011 . Hurt : The EP was released in the United States on 17 January 2012 . The US track listing consists of " Hurt " , " Iris " and " Colorblind " , as well as a single mix of Lewis 's cover of " Run " . It was also made available to purchase on Amazon.com on the same day . 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 Hurt : The EP garnered a mixed response from music critics . Lewis Corner for Digital Spy was complimentary of Lewis 's rock song interpretations . He wrote that that the title track , which contains lyrics about heroin addiction , displays the singer 's " emotive tones " on which she sings in " spine @-@ chilling " falsetto notes . He continued to write that " Hurt " has a " compelling beauty " and " haunting quality " . Corner cited her cover of " Iris " as a " surprise highlight , " writing that she quivers the lyrics " And I don 't want the world to see me / ' Cause I don 't think that they 'd understand , " over a piano . He described " Colorblind " ' s composition as a " symphony of strings . " <unk> Akamatsu for The Times of India wrote that Lewis 's renditions were " powerful " and " spectacular " . Akamatsu described " Hurt " as a song which features " chills and thrills as the rawness of the lyrics meets the purity of Lewis 's voice . " She also noted that Lewis 's version is not based on the arrangement of the original by Nine Inch Nails , but rather that of Johnny Cash 's cover , which was included on his 2002 album American IV : The Man Comes Around . Akamatsu concluded her review of the songs with " All three performances feature intense , literate lyrics and are well @-@ suited to Lewis 's style . " 
 Priya Elan for NME was critical of Lewis 's execution of the song " Hurt " , writing that she sounds as though the singer took " too much Night Nurse the evening before . " Elan noted that the composition of " Hurt " was similar to that of Lewis 's cover of " Run " , writing " there 's an awful lot of layered build up to the chorus before a full band and orchestra come in during the second verse . " However , Elan concluded her review saying that although she appears not to know the legacy of the song , Lewis sounds " pretty " . Katherine St. Asaph for PopDust described Lewis 's interpretation of " Hurt " as being formulaic like a " template " , writing that it is something that American Idol and The X Factor winners and contestants seem do when covering a song . St. Asaph continued to explain her opinions with regard to Lewis and " Hurt " , writing " For Leona , that 's big notes in bigger arrangements , with a couple hushed sections for contrast . " She was also skeptical of Lewis 's emotive abilities , writing " Either she knows that quiet @-@ to @-@ loud arrangements and whispered vocals can simulate gravitas pretty well regardless of whether you ’ re thinking of pain or grocery lists , or she ’ s genuinely feeling something that comes out in her voice . " 
 Due to the mixed response " Hurt " received from fans and critics alike , Lewis defended her decision to record the song in an interview with BBC Radio 1 , saying " People write music and the music is out there for people to interpret it how they want to ... As long as it 's coming from a genuine place . I actually am a big fan of that song and a big fan of the Johnny Cash cover . But that song in particular really speaks to me . Lyrically it 's a song that is very intense and has painful lyrics . It 's reflective of a place where I was at . When I recorded it , it was healing to get it out . " 
 = = Promotion = = 
 As part of promotion for Hurt : The EP , Lewis performed " Hurt " on the eighth series finale of The X Factor on 10 December 2011 . The performance saw Lewis sing at Wembley Arena wearing a red full length dress . Katherine St. Asaph for Popdust was critical of Lewis 's interpretation of " Hurt " on The X Factor , writing " It 's written right into the X Factor contract that in order to consent to being televised , you must permanently forfeit all ability to feel pain or any other emotion , making it somewhat difficult to interpret a song . " The following week , Lewis performed " Hurt " at the 2011 Royal Variety Performance . Lewis held a competition for people to submit dress designs for her performance , with the singer wearing a black and beige coloured gown designed by winner <unk> <unk> . Lewis also performed " Somebody to Love " with Cee Lo Green , a tribute to British rock band Queen . The show was recorded on 5 December 2011 in Manchester , and aired on 13 December . Lewis performed an acoustic version of " Hurt " during a live webcam chat with her fans via Ustream , which was uploaded to her official YouTube account on 16 December 2011 . In the United States , Lewis performed " Run " on the first season finale of The X Factor USA on 22 December 2011 , whilst a montage of highlights of the season were screened behind her . Season one judge Nicole Scherzinger was complimentary of Lewis 's performance , saying " Leona blessed us with her beautiful voice . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) and Broadcast Music ( BMI ) . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Although a three track EP , Hurt : The EP charted on national singles charts . It debuted at number 15 in Ireland on 15 December 2011 . The following week , it dropped to number 45 . Hurt : The EP debuted and peaked at number eight on the UK Singles Chart on 24 December 2011 . The EP attained at number seven position on the UK Digital Chart . In Scotland , the EP debuted and peaked at number seven on 24 December 2011 . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Foster 's reactance theorem = 
 Foster 's reactance theorem is an important theorem in the fields of electrical network analysis and synthesis . The theorem states that the reactance of a passive , lossless two @-@ terminal ( one @-@ port ) network always strictly monotonically increases with frequency . It is easily seen that the reactances of inductors and capacitors individually increase with frequency and from that basis a proof for passive lossless networks generally can be constructed . The proof of the theorem was presented by Ronald Martin Foster in 1924 , although the principle had been published earlier by Foster 's colleagues at American Telephone & Telegraph . 
 The theorem can be extended to admittances and the encompassing concept of <unk> . A consequence of Foster 's theorem is that poles and zeroes of the reactance must alternate with frequency . Foster used this property to develop two canonical forms for realising these networks . Foster 's work was an important starting point for the development of network synthesis . 
 It is possible to construct non @-@ Foster networks using active components such as amplifiers . These can generate an impedance equivalent to a negative inductance or capacitance . The negative impedance converter is an example of such a circuit . 
 = = Explanation = = 
 <unk> is the imaginary part of the complex electrical impedance . Both capacitors and inductors possess reactance ( but of opposite sign ) and are frequency dependent . The specification that the network must be passive and lossless implies that there are no resistors ( lossless ) , or amplifiers or energy sources ( passive ) in the network . The network consequently must consist entirely of inductors and capacitors and the impedance will be purely an imaginary number with zero real part . Foster 's theorem applies equally to the admittance of a network , that is the susceptance ( imaginary part of admittance ) of a passive , lossless one @-@ port monotonically increases with frequency . This result may seem counterintuitive since admittance is the reciprocal of impedance , but is easily proved . If the impedance is 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is reactance and <formula> is the imaginary unit , then the admittance is given by 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is susceptance . 
 If X is monotonically increasing with frequency then 1 / X must be monotonically decreasing . − 1 / X must consequently be monotonically increasing and hence it is proved that B is increasing also . 
 It is often the case in network theory that a principle or procedure applies equally well to impedance or admittance — reflecting the principle of duality for electric networks . It is convenient in these circumstances to use the concept of immittance , which can mean either impedance or admittance . The mathematics is carried out without specifying units until it is desired to calculate a specific example . Foster 's theorem can thus be stated in a more general form as , 
 Foster 's theorem ( immittance form ) 
 The imaginary immittance of a passive , lossless one @-@ port strictly monotonically increases with frequency . 
 Foster 's theorem is quite general . In particular , it applies to distributed element networks , although Foster formulated it in terms of discrete inductors and capacitors . It is therefore applicable at microwave frequencies just as much as it is at lower frequencies . 
 = = Examples = = 
 The following examples illustrate this theorem in a number of simple circuits . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The impedance of an inductor is given by , 
 <formula> 
 <formula> is inductance 
 <formula> is angular frequency 
 so the reactance is , 
 <formula> 
 which by inspection can be seen to be monotonically ( and linearly ) increasing with frequency . 
 = = = Capacitor = = = 
 The impedance of a capacitor is given by , 
 <formula> 
 <formula> is capacitance 
 so the reactance is , 
 <formula> 
 which again is monotonically increasing with frequency . The impedance function of the capacitor is identical to the admittance function of the inductor and vice versa . It is a general result that the dual of any immittance function that obeys Foster 's theorem will also follow Foster 's theorem . 
 = = = Series resonant circuit = = = 
 A series LC circuit has an impedance that is the sum of the impedances of an inductor and capacitor , 
 <formula> 
 At low frequencies the reactance is dominated by the capacitor and so is large and negative . This monotonically increases towards zero ( the magnitude of the capacitor reactance is becoming smaller ) . The reactance passes through zero at the point where the magnitudes of the capacitor and inductor reactances are equal ( the resonant frequency ) and then continues to monotonically increase as the inductor reactance becomes progressively dominant . 
 = = = Parallel resonant circuit = = = 
 A parallel LC circuit is the dual of the series circuit and hence its admittance function is the same form as the impedance function of the series circuit , 
 <formula> 
 The impedance function is , 
 <formula> 
 At low frequencies the reactance is dominated by the inductor and is small and positive . This monotonically increases towards a pole at the anti @-@ resonant frequency where the susceptance of the inductor and capacitor are equal and opposite and cancel . Past the pole the reactance is large and negative and increasing towards zero where it is dominated by the capacitance . 
 = = Poles and zeroes = = 
 A consequence of Foster 's theorem is that the poles and zeroes of any passive immittance function must alternate as frequency increases . After passing through a pole the function will be negative and is obliged to pass through zero before reaching the next pole if it is to be monotonically increasing . 
 The poles and zeroes of an immittance function completely determine the frequency characteristics of a Foster network . Two Foster networks that have identical poles and zeroes will be equivalent circuits in the sense that their immittance functions will be identical . There can be a scaling factor difference between them ( all elements of the immitance multiplied by the same scaling factor ) but the shape of the two immitance functions will be identical . 
 Another consequence of Foster 's theorem is that the phase of an immitance must <unk> increase with frequency . Consequently , the plot of a Foster immittance function on a Smith chart must always travel around the chart in a clockwise direction with increasing frequency . 
 = = Realisation = = 
 A one @-@ port passive immittance consisting of discrete elements ( that is , not a distributed element circuit ) can be represented as a rational function of s , 
 <formula> 
 where , 
 <formula> is immittance 
 <formula> are polynomials with real , positive <unk> 
 <formula> is the Laplace transform variable , which can be replaced with <formula> when dealing with steady @-@ state AC signals . 
 This follows from the fact the impedance of L and C elements are themselves simple rational functions and any algebraic combination of rational functions results in another rational function . 
 This is sometimes referred to as the driving point impedance because it is the impedance at the place in the network at which the external circuit is connected and " drives " it with a signal . In his paper , Foster describes how such a lossless rational function may be realised in two ways . Foster 's first form consists of a number of series connected parallel LC circuits . Foster 's second form of driving point impedance consists of a number of parallel connected series LC circuits . The realisation of the driving point impedance is by no means unique . Foster 's realisation has the advantage that the poles and / or zeroes are directly associated with a particular resonant circuit , but there are many other realisations . Perhaps the most well known is Cauer 's ladder realisation from filter design . 
 = = Non @-@ Foster networks = = 
 A Foster network must be passive , so an active network , containing a power source , may not obey Foster 's theorem . These are called non @-@ Foster networks . In particular , circuits containing an amplifier with positive feedback can have reactance which declines with frequency . For example , it is possible to create negative capacitance and inductance with negative impedance converter circuits . These circuits will have an immittance function with a phase of ± π / 2 like a positive reactance but a reactance amplitude with a negative slope against frequency . 
 These are of interest because they can accomplish tasks a Foster network cannot . For example , the usual passive Foster impedance matching networks can only match the impedance of an antenna with a transmission line at discrete frequencies , which limits the bandwidth of the antenna . A non @-@ Foster network could match an antenna over a continuous band of frequencies . This would allow the creation of compact antennas that have wide bandwidth , violating the Chu @-@ Harrington limit . Practical non @-@ Foster networks are an active area of research . 
 = = History = = 
 The theorem was developed at American Telephone & Telegraph as part of ongoing investigations into improved filters for telephone multiplexing applications . This work was commercially important ; large sums of money could be saved by increasing the number of telephone conversations that could be carried on one line . The theorem was first published by Campbell in 1922 but without a proof . Great use was immediately made of the theorem in filter design , it appears prominently , along with a proof , in Zobel 's landmark paper of 1923 which summarised the state of the art of filter design at that time . Foster published his paper the following year which included his canonical realisation forms . 
 Cauer in Germany grasped the importance of Foster 's work and used it as the foundation of network synthesis . Amongst Cauer 's many innovations was the extension of Foster 's work to all 2 @-@ element @-@ kind networks after discovering an isomorphism between them . Cauer was interested in finding the necessary and sufficient condition for <unk> of a rational one @-@ port network from its polynomial function , a condition now known to be a positive @-@ real function , and the reverse problem of which networks were equivalent , that is , had the same polynomial function . Both of these were important problems in network theory and filter design . Foster networks are only a subset of realisable networks , 
 = Enema of the State = 
 Enema of the State is the third studio album by American rock band Blink @-@ 182 . Produced by Jerry Finn , the album was released on June 1 , 1999 by MCA Records . After a long series of performances at various clubs and festivals and several indie recordings throughout the 1990s , Blink @-@ 182 first achieved popularity on the Warped Tour and in Australia following the release of their sophomore effort Dude Ranch ( 1997 ) and its rock radio hit " Dammit " . To record their third album , Blink @-@ 182 turned to veteran punk rock producer Jerry Finn , who previously worked on Green Day 's breakthrough album , Dookie ( 1994 ) . Enema was the band 's first album to feature drummer Travis Barker , who replaced original drummer Scott Raynor . 
 The group recorded with Finn over a period of three months at numerous locations in their hometown of San Diego and Los Angeles . Finn was key in producing the fast @-@ paced , melodic mixes , creating pop punk with a more radio @-@ friendly , accessible polish . Lyrically , the album is inspired by adolescent frustration and relationships . Guitarist Tom DeLonge and bassist Mark Hoppus primarily culled stories from friends and autobiographical situations to craft summery tracks revolving around breakups , suburban parties and maturity , as well as more offbeat subject matter such as UFO conspiracy theories . The cover artwork for Enema of the State features porn star Janine Lindemulder famously clad in a nurse uniform , and the title is a pun on the term enemy of the state . 
 Enema of the State was an enormous commercial success . The album sold over 15 million copies worldwide , catapulting the band to become one of the biggest rock bands of the turn of the century . " What 's My Age Again ? " , " All the Small Things " and " Adam 's Song " became hit singles and MTV staples , generating heavy radio airplay . Enema of the State had an extensive impact on contemporary pop punk , reinventing it for a new generation and spawning countless tributes and acolytes . 
 = = Background = = 
 By 1997 , Blink @-@ 182 , consisting of Mark Hoppus , Tom DeLonge , and Scott Raynor , began to receive mainstream exposure as their sophomore record , Dude Ranch , shipped gold and the lead single " Dammit " began to be added to rock radio playlists across the country . The band entered an extended period of touring beginning that summer , which included each date of the worldwide 1997 Vans Warped Tour , a lifestyle tour promoting skateboarding and punk rock music . The trio would only return to their home of San Diego , California for days at a time before striking out the next tour . " When we did our longest tour stretch , it was right when I started dating my fiancee , " recalled guitarist Tom DeLonge in 2001 . " We were all new and in love , and I had to leave . It was just , ' Hey , I 'll see you in nine months . ' It was really hard . " Hoppus felt increasingly lonely ; while the other members had longtime girlfriends to return home to , Hoppus was single . In addition to the hefty touring schedule , the trio grew tired of other commitments , including interviews and TV appearances due to the success of " Dammit " . 
 Desperate for a break , the overworked band began to argue and tensions formed . Raynor , who was at the center of this drama , had been commenting of his desire to attend college for years , and had been taking homework out with him on tour to try and complete his high school diploma . The tension came to a head in February 1998 as the band embarked on SnoCore , described as " a winter version of the Warped Tour . " Sharing the stage with Primus , the band was enjoying more success than ever before , but the drama between the musicians had grown substantially . The band reached a low point when the band engaged in a fight on a Nebraska date after SnoCore 's conclusion . Raynor would depart following SnoCore , and the ensemble recruited Travis Barker , drummer for the opening ska punk group The Aquabats , to fill in for Raynor . Barker , who had not had time to prepare or practice with the duo , learned the drum tracks for the 20 @-@ song setlist in only 45 minutes before the first show and performed them flawlessly thereafter . " I remember Travis rehearsing backstage for an hour or two , then playing with them during sound @-@ check , " said Adam <unk> of the Aquabats . " A few of us were standing behind the stage and vividly remember the feeling of this is the new Blink . We should have looked for a new drummer right then because it was obvious what band he belonged in . " Shortly thereafter , the band embarked on a short minitour along the western coast , most notably Southern California , the band 's favorite place to play . The tour ended with the band headlining a sold @-@ out show at the Palladium in Hollywood , California , where the band had dreamed of performing at for years . Raynor returned for the band 's Palladium performance , but the band became increasingly uneasy and arguments grew worse . To offset personal issues and a " tragic loss , " Raynor began to drink heavily and it began to affect the band 's performances . 
 Following a largely successful Australian tour in the spring , Hoppus and DeLonge presented an ultimatum : quit drinking or go to an in @-@ patient rehab . Raynor agreed to both and informed the band of his decision after taking the weekend to mull options . According to Raynor , he was fired through a phone call despite his agreement to rehab . Despite this , he felt no malice toward his former bandmates and later conceded they were " right " to fire him . The band would minimize the impact of the situation in future interviews and remained vague regarding his departure . Initial news reports explained that Raynor had " reportedly returned to school . " DeLonge would later explain the drinking problem that led to his expulsion : " One show he dropped his sticks 10 times . It was so disturbing to see someone ruining himself . " The addition of Barker inspired DeLonge and Hoppus to " play better " and keep up with their new member , whom DeLonge called " perfect . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 MCA gave the band its first professional recording budget , and Blink @-@ 182 began work on Enema of the State in October 1998 . The trio had not been in a studio in two years and were anxious to record new material . Blink @-@ 182 returned to DML Studios to write new songs , where the band had previously spent time writing songs for their second record , Dude Ranch . The three spent much more time in the studio than on previous records , allowing them to try many different things . Barker would drive down each day from Riverside to take part in the writing process . Very satisfied with the results , the band completed writing in two weeks . Though Barker helped write the songs on Enema of the State , only Hoppus and DeLonge received songwriting credits , as Barker was technically a hired musician , not official band member . Don Lithgow , owner and operator of DML Studios , recalled that the trio 's celebrity had increased considerably during the recording process : " [ It ] was different than their other sessions — girls hanging around outside , calling their friends on cell phones . All the kids wanted autographs . ... They 'd unlock the doors and let kids into the studio , which most bands would never do . " Due to the success of Dude Ranch , the label and band management had high expectations . 
 When the band completed writing and recording demos for the songs , the three headed to Los Angeles to record drum tracks at Chick Corea 's Mad Hatter Studios in January 1999 . Barker recorded the majority of his drum tracks in eight hours . The recording process for the album was completed over a period of four months , and production was handled at several production facilities in southern California , including Signature Sound and Studio West in San Diego , Big Fish Studios in Encinitas , and Conway Recording Studios and The Bomb Factory in Los Angeles . For Barker , the album was " fueled by black coffee and Marlboro Lights " ; he was hopeful for the album as the band were well @-@ rehearsed and no time would be wasted . To record Enema of the State , Blink @-@ 182 turned to punk rock producer Jerry Finn , who previously worked on Green Day 's breakthrough album , Dookie ( 1994 ) . Hoppus and DeLonge were impressed with his work when they recorded " Mutt " for its placement on the American Pie soundtrack . Finn was harder on the trio to record better takes , and Hoppus credited Finn with knowing a great deal about punk rock music , but also helping the band establish a more pop @-@ inspired sound . Finn came with an array of amps , effects and equipments ; previously the band were forced to rent such equipment . Barker kept attempting to irritate Finn by sneaking in <unk> , which Finn hated . In addition , the band had so much fun with Finn that there were days when very little work was accomplished : " Recording can get pretty monotonous , but at least we could laugh with Jerry , " recalled Hoppus . " A pretty typical day would involve multiple takes for one part of one song , and then everyone would get naked and jump on Jerry . " The band chose " never to work with anyone else again , " and Finn would produce their next three releases . 
 Recording completed in March 1999 and all parties involved were enormously proud of the record . " When it was done , we were so stoked . It was like a masterpiece for our band , " remembered DeLonge . " We knew this was going to be the best thing we ever did . " Hoppus felt the band achieved the purest , cleanest sound on the record that they had been striving for . Finn felt similarly , proud of his work on the record and believing in retrospect that the album would appeal to the masses . As the album was recorded on analog tape , the trio put enormous trust into Finn to give the record the polished pop sound they wanted , recalled DeLonge in 2012 . " The Party Song " was the final song to be completed , and the three were mixing the song coincidentally when lead single " What 's My Age Again ? " premiered on Los Angeles @-@ based radio station KROQ . Roger Joseph Manning , Jr . , best known for his work with Beck , played keyboards for several songs on the album . After production completed , the album was mastered by Brian Gardner at Bernie Grundman Mastering in Hollywood . In 2013 , Hoppus referred to Enema of the State as " the heart of Blink @-@ 182 's musical sensibilities , " singling out " its simplicity , its purity , its singularity of purpose between the three of us . " According to Barker , the album 's title stemmed from DeLonge , who was worried about his diet at the time and using enemas . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The songs on Enema of the State are fast @-@ paced songs regarding " adolescent aimlessness , broken hearts and general confusion over the care and feeding of girls . " Summarizing the album 's content , The New York Times called Enema of the State a sampling of " ecstatic , goofy numbers about teenage uselessness , with a smattering of tender introspection . " The songs are mainly autobiographical , or are inspired by stories from friends ' experiences . Enema of the State largely revolves around age and maturity — " more specifically , their lack of it , their attitude toward their lack of it , or their eventual wide @-@ eyed exploration of it . " The band decided to emphasize arrangements , harmonies and melodic ideas rather than the fast @-@ paced nature of Dude Ranch ; the change was brought about by the band , rather than the label . Barker hoped to give the songs varying tempos , something missing in the group ’ s prior recordings . " I told Mark and Tom , ' It 's going to be repetitive if all our songs have the same punk @-@ rock beat all the time . Why don 't we try some different tempos ? ' " DeLonge noted he was open to his proposals , and responded , " Dude , I just play guitar and write melodies . You own the beats . If you have an idea , that ’ s what you 're supposed to do . " 
 DeLonge later reflected on his desire for a more " pop " sound : 
 Punk rock was becoming polished . NOFX [ was ] a punk band we grew up listening to , and they had a record called Punk in Drublic , and it was awesome . It was game @-@ changing ; it sounded good . We wanted to take it to the next level . [ ... ] There had never been a pop @-@ punk band that sounded like nursery rhymes on steroids , on the mainstream level at least . And that ’ s what I used to have daydreams of . I used to think the radio could use that , could use a band that was really powerful and catchy and fast and youthful and angsty . 
 = = Songs = = 
 " <unk> " kicks off the record , and explores sexual frustration . The song is based around the hook " I need a girl that I can train , " as in dog training . DeLonge , the song 's primarily lyricist , explains the song in a 2000 tour booklet : " Girls are so much smarter than guys and can see the future as well as never forget the past . So that leaves the dog as the only thing men are smarter than . " The song is a " callow complaint about girls not always doing exactly what you wish they would , " and is followed by Hoppus ' " Don 't Leave Me , " a song about a breakup , in irony . Hoppus wrote the song in ten minutes . The guitar swell preceding the second chorus is actually a digital reversal of the delaying guitar preceding it . " Aliens Exist " originates from DeLonge 's interest in UFOs and conspiracy theories . " Going Away to College " was written in ten minutes by Hoppus while at home sick on Valentine 's Day 1999 . While watching the movie Can 't Hardly Wait , Hoppus began to think about " how much it sucks when people are in love in high school " and are forced to be separated after graduation by different colleges in different cities . Since it was recorded late in production , the band had to go back to Los Angeles to record Barker 's drum track . 
 The track segues directly into " What 's My Age Again ? " , also penned by Hoppus , who created it partially as a joke to amuse friends . It was originally titled " Peter Pan Complex " , referencing the subject matter : one who refuses to grow up . " Dysentery Gary " leads off the second half of the album , and was written by DeLonge about a crush that instead chooses someone else . Left with " nothing better to do , " the devastated friend chooses to mock her boyfriend . It was one of the first songs the band wrote with Barker , who incorporated a " Latin groove " into his drumming . " Adam 's Song , " the piano @-@ laced seventh track of the record , was written primarily based on the loneliness that Hoppus experienced during the unending days of touring the previous year . When Hoppus brought the song to the band , the trio reacted positively but showed reluctance to add it to the record , believing the dark subject matter might off @-@ put listeners . Although usually vocals would take many alternate takes to complete , Hoppus completed the vocal track for " Adam 's Song " in a single take . The power pop @-@ inspired " All the Small Things " was composed by DeLonge as both an ode to his girlfriend and one of his favorite bands , the Ramones . During the recording process of Enema of the State , DeLonge came home to find roses at the top of the stairs from his girlfriend , which inspired the line : " She left me roses by the stairs ; surprises let me know she cares . " 
 " The Party Song " was inspired by when Hoppus attended a " jock @-@ infested " party at San Diego State University and met some students who thought highly of themselves . <unk> in the party , he felt he would much rather be at home , which found its way into the song 's lyrics . " Mutt " was written by DeLonge for his friend Benji Weatherly and his appearance in the Taylor Steele surf video The Show . An early version of " Mutt " , with Scott Raynor behind the drum kit , was recorded with producer Mark Trombino and appears on the film 's 1998 soundtrack . The title of " Wendy Clear " comes from Hoppus ' boat , named " Wendy , " and how boaters end transmissions by letting other boaters know the channel is open for use , or " clear " . Hoppus wrote the song while on tour with MxPx about having a crush on " someone that you are not supposed to like . " Lastly , " Anthem , " the final song on Enema of the State , is about being trapped in the suburbs , longing for freedom and the age of 21 . It is based on when DeLonge was in high school and told his peers that his band would be playing at a friend 's house . The party was later busted by the police and a " giant fight broke out . " Hoppus felt it a perfect summary of the album 's themes : " lots of youthful angst , energy , and suburban unrest . " 
 = = Artwork = = 
 The cover artwork features porn star Janine Lindemulder dressed in a nurse uniform , pulling on a rubber glove . The band — semi @-@ nude — appear on the back cover with Lindemulder preparing for some sort of injection . The trio was oblivious to the fact that Lindemulder worked in the porn industry until informed by producer Jerry Finn . The record company had delivered a stack of photos of potential cover girls , and the band members happened to pick Lindemulder . " So it 's kind of funny that they 've been lumped in with Kid Rock and Limp Bizkit , who play up that kind of pimp lifestyle , because Blink is so not that , " remarked Finn . According to Mark Hoppus , they always intended to have a sexy nurse on the cover , and the women considered included models from both Playboy and Janine 's employer Vivid Entertainment . David Goldman was the photographer behind the shoot , held March 12 , 1999 , and did not know the trio before shooting . In 2012 , he stated the glove was inspired by the album 's working title . " Up until the very last minute , the album was going to be called Turn Your Head and Cough , " he said . " And that 's why I came up with the idea of the glove . Obviously an enema is not really a glove type of thing . I thought it was a good visual . " The album cover has since been called iconic by many publications . Lindemulder is also featured in the music videos for " What 's My Age Again ? " and " Man Overboard " . 
 There are three different versions of the cover art . The first release has a red cross on the nurse 's hat and a capital B in the Blink @-@ 182 logo . The band preferred the lower @-@ case b in the band name , and the second version features the red cross and a lower @-@ case b . The American Red Cross then forced the band to remove the red cross from their artwork or they would be in violation of the Geneva Convention , and thus , the third iteration of the album cover features a plain white nurse 's hat . This third version is the only version to bear a Parental Advisory label for profane lyrics in " <unk> " and " Dysentery Gary . " Hoppus said the controversy some had with the cover was exaggerated as " it is just a picture of a girl . " Art direction for the album was headed by Tim Stedman , with Stedman and graphic designer Keith <unk> designing the package . In 2015 , Billboard ranked the cover among the top 15 " greatest of all @-@ time , " calling it " an image that was burned into the mind of every TRL viewer , one that became instantly iconic . " 
 = = Singles = = 
 To promote Enema of the State , MCA Records released three singles in support : " What 's My Age Again ? " , " All the Small Things " , and " Adam 's Song " . The singles were bigger than anyone in the band expected , crossing over into Top 40 radio format and experiencing major commercial success . " What 's My Age Again ? " became an " airplay phenomenon , " achieving mass success on both radio and television . Its television success made it into an MTV staple , and earned the band a spot on the coveted Tonight Show with Jay Leno . It achieved the highest success on Billboard 's Modern Rock Tracks chart , where it peaked at number two . It registered within the top 20 on UK Singles Chart as well , peaking at number 17 . The music video for " What 's My Age Again ? " , directed by Marcos Siega , famously depicted the band running naked through the streets of Los Angeles . A clip of the band streaking opened the 1999 Billboard Awards and the band 's affinity for nudity would be referenced in interviews for years to come . 
 " All the Small Things " , released in early 2000 , became an even bigger success — it crossed over from alt @-@ rock radio to contemporary hit radio , peaking at number six on Billboard Hot 100 and number one on the Modern Rock Tracks chart . It also peaked at number two on the official UK charts , and within the top ten in Italy , Ireland , Austria , Sweden and Australia . The music video for " All the Small Things " parodies boy bands and contemporary pop videos , and features the trio participating in choreographed dancing and dressing up as members of Backstreet Boys , 98 Degrees , and ' N Sync . " I was a little surprised it went over so well , " recalled Marcos Siega , director of the clip , commenting that he felt it would offend viewers of TRL and boy band fans . " I think we had the opposite effect . In some ways , I think that video put Blink at that sort of pop level with those other bands . We were making fun of them , but it kind of became [ what it was making fun of ] . " At the 2000 MTV Video Music Awards , it was nominated for Video of the Year and Best Pop Video , and won Best Group Video . 
 The third and final single , " Adam 's Song " , performed less substantially than the first two but still managed to peak at number two on Billboard 's Alternative Songs chart . The band was engulfed in controversy when Greg Barnes , a survivor of the Columbine High School massacre , set " Adam 's Song " on repeat on his stereo and committed suicide in May 2000 . Hoppus was very upset when he got the call from band manager Rick DeVoe explaining what happened , as he intended the track as an anti @-@ suicide song . Rolling Stone later compared the controversy to that of Ozzy Osbourne 's " Suicide Solution " . Despite that controversy , it managed to connect deeply with fans of the band , who wrote letters to the band remarking the track saved their lives during difficult situations . The constant airplay of the three videos on MTV and Total Request Live cemented the band 's image as video stars , amid teen pop and boy bands . 
 = = Release = = 
 By May 1999 , the group was nearing platinum status for Dude Ranch and sales targets were higher for Enema of the State . The Los Angeles Times ran a Sunday feature on the band two days prior to release , noting that " The musicians are sanguine about chances to repeat or exceed the sales of Dude Ranch , noting the always @-@ shifting sands of pop culture and that they 've already done better than they 'd ever anticipated . " Momentum began to build when US radio stations received advance copies of Enema of the State . MCA issued Enema of the State on June 1 , and the release peaked at number nine on the U.S. Billboard 200 . The album chart was gripped by the Backstreet Boys ' Millennium , but Enema of the State still managed to move 109 @,@ 000 units that week . The band was supporting Lagwagon in Europe when MCA executives phoned the trio about rising record sales . Joey Cape , frontman of Lagwagon , remarked that " They were selling , like , 90 @,@ 000 records a day [ ... ] I was saying things like , ' What are you doing here ? Go home ! Why do you want to be on tour with Lagwagon right now ? " At a show shortly following the release of the album , DeLonge was approached by Noodles from The Offspring to congratulate him . " He looks at me right in the eyes and he goes , ' You 're next , ' " remembered DeLonge , who blushed and shook off the compliment . 
 The major @-@ label debut sold strongly and nearly four times as fast as Dude Ranch , and shipped gold to stores , unlike its predecessor , which took seven months to achieve that certification . Enema of the State went platinum in October 1999 and went triple platinum in January 2000 ; in February 2001 , the album was certified five times platinum in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America . The record performed well in international markets as well . Enema of the State went quadruple platinum in Canada and triple platinum in Australia . It peaked at number seven on the Canadian Albums Chart , but peaked the highest worldwide on the New Zealand Albums Chart ( number two ) , where it was certified double platinum . It was also certified double platinum in Italy , platinum in the United Kingdom , and gold in six other territories ( Austria , Germany , Indonesia , Mexico , the Philippines , and Switzerland ) . In Europe , the album sold over one million copies . To further promote Enema of the State , the trio made a cameo appearance in American Pie , a teen comedy released several weeks following the album release . Hoppus , DeLonge and Barker appear in a scene in which they are interrupted rehearsing to see a webcast on a computer . Music from Enema of the State was also used in the film and on its soundtrack . The cameo appearance was well @-@ received , with New York commending the common sensibility and humor between the two : " green grass , sun , swimming pools , teen boys obsessed with and mildly terrified by sex , jokes about having sex with things that are not other humans , and a healthy side of toilet @-@ oriented gags . " 
 As of 2014 , Enema of the State remains the highest seller in the band 's catalogue , moving 4 @.@ 54 million units to date in the U.S. , according to Nielsen SoundScan . Combined sales from international markets estimate the album has sold over 15 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 In an early review , Billboard called the record " short , to the point , and bristling with attitude , " and predicted it would poise the band for commercial breakthrough . In a less enthusiastic review , Rolling Stone magazine 's Neva Chonin wrote , " It 's all harmless but still gnarly enough to foment the kind of anti @-@ everything rebellion that spawned rock & roll way back in the day . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic <unk> it as a " fun record that 's better than the average neo @-@ punk release . " Kerrang ! wrote that the album includes " enough energy , attitude and cracking songs here to ensure that blink will be remembered for more than just onstage nudity . " The catchy , pop sensibility of the album was praised by Stephen Thompson of The A.V. Club , describing the band as finding success within a " well @-@ worn genre " ( punk rock ) . The New York Times also designated the record its ' Album of the Week ' . The record did have its detractors : British music publication New Musical Express ( NME ) gave the record a very poor review , calling the record despicable , " wholly toothless and soulless " and deriding the band as " as bad , as meaningless , as the cock @-@ rockers and hippy wankers punk originally sought to destroy . " 
 Jon <unk> of Beats Per Minute wrote a retrospective review of the album in 2011 , regarding Enema of the State a seminal album of Generation Y and " one of those rare records that allows you to relive [ adolescence ] , a record where every song conjures up a specific memory or emotion that you could have only felt when you were a teenager . " Billboard described the album as a " classic " in a retrospective review , calling it the " catchiest batch of songs the band had ever written , " and commending the leap in quality both in production and vocals in comparison to its predecessor . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 The success of the album , as well as its cleaner sound and the group 's appearances on MTV , caused many longtime fans to accuse the band of " selling out " . Many commentators stated that the band 's polished pop sound only remotely resembled punk music . Although the video for " All the Small Things " was filmed as a mockery of boy bands and teen pop , " fame [ didn 't ] discriminate based on origin : soon the group was as famous as those it was parodying . " " Blink now had the backing of a major record company ... just like the synthesized pop acts they were spoofing , " said British journalist Tim Footman . " In what way were they less ' pop ' than Sugar Ray and 98 Degrees ? " Matt Diehl , author of the book My So @-@ Called Punk , called the basis for satire thin : " To seasoned ears , Blink @-@ 182 sounded and looked just as manufactured as the pop idols they were poking fun at . " The band faced a backlash shortly after Enema of the State was released from several punk and emo acts who wished to not be associated with their music . <unk> Laughter , employee of Bay Area record label Lookout ! Records , wrote in an issue of the influential zine Punk Planet that the band would have a genuinely negative impact on punk and accused the band of misogyny . DeLonge responded to the accusations , commenting , " I love all those criticisms , because fuck all those magazines ! I hate with a passion <unk> and all those zines that think they know what punk is supposed to be . I think it 's so much more punk to piss people off than to conform to all those <unk> views " . While ska veterans Blue Meanies tried to empathize ( " I think they [ Blink ] are just trying to get in the mindset of a teenager , which means a lot of curiosity about sex , " ) others , such as John Lydon , frontman of the Sex Pistols and Public Image Ltd , dismissed the band as a " bunch of silly boys ... an imitation of a comedy act . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The record proved very influential on the pop punk genre . With the release of the record , Blink @-@ 182 became celebrities and the biggest pop punk act of the era . The glossy production instantly set Blink @-@ 182 apart from the other crossover punk acts , such as Green Day . Scott Russo of Unwritten Law remarked that he would receive CDs from fans that mimicked the " pop punk " sound the album made famous . " It was revolutionary , it was equally as revolutionary as Green Day when it hit , they just didn 't get the credit , " Russo remarked in 2009 . Matt Diehl , author of My So @-@ Called Punk , writes that mainstream acolytes of their sound led to profound effects on the " pop punk " genre , such as the <unk> of regional scene identity — due to its wide popularity , pop punk bands became commonplace outside its origins . Jon <unk> of Beats Per Minute writes that " Enema 's success perpetuated pop @-@ punk ’ s viability on mainstream radio , which is where Blink ’ s progeny — bands like Fall Out Boy , Simple Plan , and New Found Glory — would receive a decent amount of airplay . " Rolling Stone 's Nicole <unk> wrote that the album influenced emo fans , while MTV News credited the album , alongside The Get Up Kids ' Something to Write Home About ( 1999 ) as pioneering emo pop , calling them " some of the scene ’ s most influential records . " 
 Enema of the State has been called an accurate representation of middle @-@ class teenage life , especially at the time of its release . Entertainment Weekly called it the " perfect encapsulation of the American adolescent male mind @-@ set circa 1999 . " New York describes the immense popularity of the record with adolescents in an article measuring its influence : " After you figure in singles , videos , CD @-@ R burns , copies on repeat in friends ' cars and finished basements , this was apparently enough to create blanket immersion among America 's twenty @-@ some million teenagers . " Alternative Press has ranked Enema of the State among Jerry Finn 's top production work , and UK @-@ based music magazine Rock Sound rated it number 2 on their list of " 101 Modern Classics " in 2012 , writing , " Enema didn 't just bring pop @-@ punk to the masses , it marked a complete shift in how music television , radio and the world at large viewed it . " In 2011 , The New York Times credited the record with " [ taking ] punk 's already playful core and [ giving ] it a shiny , accessible polish , " calling it " among the catchiest music of the time . " " In a literal sense , many indie bands evolved not from Velvet Underground or Sonic Youth , but Smash , Dookie , or Enema of the State — records that served as beginner 's manuals and inspired musicians in great numbers to buy their first guitar , " said Ian Cohen of Pitchfork Media in 2014 . 
 In 2014 , Alternative Press ran a special in celebration of the album 's fifteenth anniversary , which contains reflections from members of bands influenced by the album , including the Maine , the Story So Far , Mayday Parade , and Yellowcard , among others . " When I heard how massive and epic Enema was for the first time , my mind was blown . It definitely made me want to be a better songwriter and make bigger @-@ sounding records , " said Ryan Key of Yellowcard . In the article , the magazine credits the album with " single @-@ handedly changed the face of mainstream rock . " Property of Zack also gave the album a fifteenth anniversary feature , commenting , " Enema of the State has become the single most important album in our overarching community since its release in 1999 . It is more important , to this current generation and the one preceding it , than Dookie , or Smash , or whatever you want to put on that pedestal — and it will likely never give up that spot at the top of the standings . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 * denotes an unordered list 
 = = Touring = = 
 With massive radio and video play , Blink @-@ 182 played to larger crowds when they began touring in support of Enema of the State . The <unk> Tour commenced in the autumn of 1999 and was the band 's first arena tour . The band was forced to postpone remaining dates of a spring European tour in 2000 when both DeLonge and Barker came down with strep throat . The band played to sold @-@ out audiences and performed worldwide during the summer of 2000 on The Mark , Tom and Travis Show Tour . The tour was staged as a drive @-@ in movie , with a giant retro billboard suspended from the ceiling , and films were projected on the screen behind the band – including vintage gay porn as a joke . The tour was one of the most anticipated rock tours of the season and the band headed out on the road with Bad Religion and Fenix TX . Barker broke one of his fingers during an altercation with two men who kept flirting with his girlfriend in Ohio , and Damon <unk> , guitarist of Fenix TX , stepped in on drums for Barker . Hoppus recalled an overwhelming emotional feeling when the band sold out the Great Western Forum in Los Angeles . 
 The band also performed at the Reading and Leeds Festivals in August 2000 . To celebrate the success of the tour , the band released a limited edition live album titled The Mark , Tom and Travis Show ( The Enema Strikes Back ! ) , which featured snippets of the band 's between @-@ song dialogue . Released in November 2000 , the band returned to the studio with Finn to complete a song left off the final track listing of Enema of the State : " Man Overboard " . The final tour in support of Enema of the State was the 2001 Honda Civic Tour , for which the band designed a Honda Civic to promote the company . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Mark Hoppus and Tom DeLonge . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Geneva Conference ( 1976 ) = 
 The Geneva Conference ( 28 October – 14 December 1976 ) took place in Geneva , Switzerland during the Rhodesian Bush War . Held under British mediation , its participants were the unrecognised government of Rhodesia , led by Ian Smith , and a number of rival Rhodesian black nationalist parties : the African National Council , led by Bishop Abel Muzorewa ; the Front for the Liberation of Zimbabwe , led by James <unk> ; and a joint " Patriotic Front " made up of Robert Mugabe 's Zimbabwe African National Union and the Zimbabwe African People 's Union led by Joshua Nkomo . The purpose of the conference was to attempt to agree on a new constitution for Rhodesia and in doing so find a way to end the Bush War raging between the government and the guerrillas commanded by Mugabe and Nkomo respectively . 
 The Geneva Conference had its origins in the South African " détente " policy instituted in late 1974 , and more directly in the peace initiative headed by the United States Secretary of State , Henry Kissinger , earlier in 1976 . After the Kissinger plan was rejected by the nationalists , talks were organised in Geneva by Britain to try to salvage a deal . The proceedings began on 28 October 1976 , eight days behind schedule , and were chaired by a British mediator , Ivor Richard , who offended both delegations before the conference even started . When Richard read an opening statement from British Prime Minister James Callaghan which referred to the country as " Zimbabwe " , the nationalists were somewhat placated , while Smith 's team was insulted yet further . Little progress was made during the two sides ' discussions , causing the conference to be indefinitely adjourned on 14 December 1976 . It was never reconvened . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following a dispute over the terms for the granting of full statehood , the predominantly white minority government of Rhodesia , headed by Prime Minister Ian Smith , unilaterally declared independence from Britain on 11 November 1965 . Because British Prime Minister Harold Wilson and Whitehall had been insisting on an immediate transfer to majority rule before independence , this declaration went unrecognised and caused Britain and the United Nations ( UN ) to impose economic sanctions on Rhodesia . 
 The two most prominent black nationalist parties in Rhodesia were the Zimbabwe African National Union ( ZANU ) — a predominantly Shona movement , influenced by Chinese Maoism — and the Zimbabwe African People 's Union ( ZAPU ) , which was Marxist – Leninist , and mostly Ndebele . ZANU and its military wing , the Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army ( ZANLA ) , received considerable backing in training , materiel and finances from the People 's Republic of China and its allies , while the Warsaw Pact and associated nations , prominently Cuba , gave similar support to ZAPU and its Zimbabwe People 's Revolutionary Army ( ZIPRA ) . ZAPU and ZIPRA were headed by Joshua Nkomo throughout their existence , while the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole founded and initially led ZANU . The two rival nationalist movements launched what they called their " Second Chimurenga " against the Rhodesian government and security forces during the mid @-@ 1960s . The army , air force and police successfully repulsed numerous guerrilla incursions , most of which were perpetrated by ZIPRA , over the rest of that decade . 
 After abortive talks between Smith and Wilson in 1966 and 1968 , a constitution was agreed upon by the Rhodesian and British governments in November 1971 ; however , when a British test of Rhodesian public opinion was undertaken in early 1972 , black opinion was judged to be against the new deal , causing it to be shelved . The Rhodesian Bush War suddenly re @-@ erupted in December 1972 , after two years of relative inactivity , when ZANLA attacked Altena and Whistlefield Farms in north @-@ eastern Rhodesia . After a successful security force counter @-@ campaign during 1973 and 1974 , drastic changes in the foreign policy of the Rhodesian government 's two main backers , Portugal and South Africa , caused the conflict 's momentum to shift in the nationalists ' favour . In April 1974 , the Portuguese government was overthrown by a military coup and replaced with a leftist administration in favour of ending the unpopular Colonial War in Angola , Mozambique and Portugal 's other African territories . 
 The institution by Pretoria of a détente initiative in late 1974 forced a ceasefire in Rhodesia , and in June 1975 Mozambique became independent from Portugal under a communist government allied with ZANU . Unsuccessful rounds of talks were held between the Rhodesian government and the nationalists , united under the banner of Abel Muzorewa 's African National Council , across the Victoria Falls Bridge in August 1975 , then directly between the government and ZAPU starting in December 1975 . Around this time , Robert Mugabe replaced Sithole as ZANU leader , winning an internal leadership election which Sithole refused to recognise . Guerrilla incursions picked up strongly in the first months of 1976 , leading Smith to declare on the evening of 6 February 1976 that " a new terrorist offensive has begun and , to defeat it , Rhodesians will have to face heavier military commitments . " Security force reports indicated that around 1 @,@ 000 insurgent fighters were active within Rhodesia , with a further 15 @,@ 000 encamped in various states of readiness in Mozambique . 
 = = Prelude : Kissinger initiative = = 
 The United States Secretary of State , Henry Kissinger , announced a formal interest in the Rhodesian situation in February 1976 , and spent the rest of the year holding discussions with the British , South African and Frontline governments to produce a mutually satisfactory proposal . The plan that Kissinger eventually presented would give a transition period of two years before majority rule began , during which time an interim government would take control while a specially convened " council of state " , made up of three whites , three blacks and a white chairman , drew up a new constitution . This constitution would have to result in majority rule at the end of the two @-@ year interim period . This plan was supported by Kenneth Kaunda and Julius Nyerere , the presidents of Zambia and Tanzania respectively , which South African Prime Minister B. J. Vorster said guaranteed its acceptance by the black nationalists . Vorster had no reply when Smith ventured that he had said the same thing before the Victoria Falls talks in 1975 , when Kaunda and Nyerere had agreed on no preconditions for talks , then allowed the nationalists to seek them . 
 Smith met Kissinger in Pretoria on 18 September 1976 to discuss the terms . The American diplomat told the prime minister that although he was obliged to take part , his participation in what he termed the " demise of Rhodesia " was " one of the great tragedies of my life " . All the same , he encouraged Smith strongly to accept the deal he placed on the table , though he knew it was unpalatable , as any future offer could only be worse . Western opinion was already " soft and decadent " , Kissinger warned , and would become even more so if , as projected , American President Gerald Ford lost that year 's presidential election to Jimmy Carter . A session including Kissinger , Smith and Vorster then began , and here Smith relayed his concern that his acceptance could be perceived by the Rhodesian electorate as " selling out " and could cause a mass exodus of skilled workers and investment , which would in turn severely damage the country 's economy . Vorster requested a break in the session and took Smith 's team into a private side @-@ room , accompanied by South African Foreign Minister <unk> Muller . There he privately informed Smith that it was no longer viable for South Africa to support Rhodesia financially and militarily , and that Smith should make up his mind quickly and announce his acceptance that evening . This ultimatum deeply shocked the Rhodesian team ; two of Smith 's ministers , Desmond Lardner @-@ Burke and Jack <unk> , were unable to contain their anger and vociferously berated the South African prime minister for his " irresponsibility " , leading Vorster to rise from his seat without a word and leave the room . 
 The Rhodesians were then summoned back out into the main lounge , where Kissinger insisted that their prime minister sit next to him . " Ian Smith made accepting the deal worse by acting like a gentleman , " the American later said . Vorster opened the discussion by announcing that he had applied no pressure to the Rhodesian delegates , which caused further consternation amongst the Rhodesians which they had difficulty suppressing . It was agreed that the Rhodesians should return to Salisbury and consult their cabinet , then announce their answer . Despite expressing " incredulity " at what had happened in Pretoria , and showing deep reluctance , the politicians in Salisbury resolved that despite what they perceived as " South African treachery " the responsible course of action could only be to go on with the peace process , and that meant accepting Kissinger 's terms , which they agreed were better than any they could get in the future should they refuse . Smith announced his government 's answer on the evening of 24 September 1976 : " Yes . " South Africa 's wavering financial and military assistance suddenly became available again , but the Frontline States then abruptly changed tact and turned the Kissinger terms down , saying that any interim period before majority rule was unacceptable . A new constitutional conference in Geneva , Switzerland was hastily organised by Britain to try to salvage something from the wreckage , with 20 October 1976 set as the start date . 
 = = Geneva Conference = = 
 ZANU and ZAPU announced on 9 October that they would attend this conference and any thereafter as a joint " Patriotic Front " ( PF ) , including members of both parties under a combined leadership . Kaunda and Nyerere welcomed the new negotiations , but with the Soviet Union proposing that they once again alter their line , the talks were delayed indefinitely . In an attempt to encourage the other parties to travel to Switzerland , British mediator Ivor Richard asked the Rhodesian delegation to hasten their arrival , which they did , leaving Salisbury on 20 October 1976 . Richard himself did not arrive until two days later . Some of the guerrillas arriving for the conference from the heat of Mozambique were unprepared for the Swiss winter : Rex <unk> , for example , felt so cold that he turned every heating appliance in his room , including the stove , to maximum and went to sleep . When the room caught fire , he was forced to jump from the balcony in his pyjamas . 
 Even arranging the conference proved a struggle , with the Rhodesians taking exception to being served cards of admittance on 27 October denoting them " The Smith Delegation " , rather than the " Rhodesian Government Delegation " as had happened in previous conferences and correspondence . The Rhodesians unilaterally altered their cards to this effect , then confronted Richard with them , causing him some shock . The conference was eventually arranged to commence on 28 October at 15 : 00 , but at very short notice the British mediator delayed the start for two hours ; some Patriotic Front delegates were questioning his role as chairman and threatening not to attend , and Richard hoped to talk them around in the extra time . When the parties finally met , some hours later than planned , Muzorewa sat opposite Smith as the leader of the nationalist delegates , as at Victoria Falls , but with empty seats directly either side of him , marked " Comrade Enos Nkala " and " Comrade Edson Sithole " respectively — each of these ZANU cadres had refused to attend the opening meeting despite Richard 's entreaties . The mediator read an opening statement from British Prime Minister James Callaghan which , to the nationalists ' delight and the government 's chagrin , referred to the country as " Zimbabwe " . The proceedings were then adjourned , to start again the next day . 
 On the morning of 29 October , Mugabe and Nkomo spoke in turn , giving emotionally charged speeches about the " dreadful sacrifices which the white governments have exacted from the poor black people " . Neither made any comment relevant to a new constitution . Muzorewa then told the story of the life of the Ndebele King Lobengula in reverent tones , before Sithole made the only directly relevant nationalist contribution of the day , saying simply that he hoped the two sides could come to an agreement . A few days ' break were then agreed as constitutional lawyers drew up a plan based on Kissinger 's for the delegates to discuss . The American election result came through on the morning of 2 November 1976 ; as expected , Carter had won . In Geneva , meanwhile , it soon became clear that while the Rhodesians wished to stick to the plan they had agreed with Kissinger , the nationalists had no intention of doing so , regarding those terms only as a starting point for further negotiation . They continually interrupted the lawyers ' work with new demands , meaning that by 8 November practically no progress had been made . 
 A meeting was organised for the next day , 9 November : the chaotic parley led nowhere , with the nationalists once again taking turns to make long , irrelevant speeches while the Rhodesians attempted to have Richard return the subject to the new constitution . Smith , who had earlier supported Richard as mediator in the face of the nationalists ' criticism , became very frustrated by Richard 's refusal to be firm with the PF and restore order to the proceedings . <unk> discussions continued for another month , with Mugabe persistently arriving late to the meetings . When Rhodesian minister P K van der Byl confronted Mugabe about his tardiness and tersely demanded an apology , the ZANU leader became enraged and screamed , " Foul @-@ mouthed bloody fool ! " 
 = = Abandonment = = 
 Finally , on 14 December 1976 , British Foreign Minister Anthony Crosland announced that the conference was to be adjourned . It was never reconvened — the Patriotic Front now said that it would not return to Geneva or take part in any further talks unless immediate black rule was made the only subject for discussion . Apparently believing that the British and Rhodesians were secretly working together to prevent this , Nkomo laid down pre @-@ conditions for any new conference . " The Rhodesian situation is a war situation ... On our side it is the Patriotic Front , and on the British ... side it is the British government with the Rhodesian régime as [ its ] extension . ... The agenda must have only one item ... the transfer of power from the minority to the majority . This means a constitution based on universal adult suffrage . ... This item should take four to five days . " 
 = Controversy over the use of Manchester Cathedral in Resistance : Fall of Man = 
 The 2006 video game Resistance : Fall of Man , developed by Insomniac Games , published by Sony Computer Entertainment and released for the PlayStation 3 video game console , features combat scenes that take place within a virtual representation of Manchester Cathedral in England set in an alternate history . It was released on 23 March 2007 in the United Kingdom . The use of images of the cathedral caused controversy with the leaders of the Church of England , which claimed its depiction to be desecration and copyright infringement , and that it was inappropriate of Sony to allow players to fire guns in a city with a gun problem . They have made several legal threats against Sony . They intended to make several demands of Sony , including an apology , a substantial donation , complete withdrawal of the game or modifying the segment featuring the interior of the cathedral , and financial support of Manchester groups trying to reduce gun crime in the city . 
 In response to the allegations , Sony stated that the game was not based on reality , and they believed they had adequate permissions necessary . They later added that the game was purely entertainment and fictional , comparing it to the television programme Doctor Who . Former British Prime Minister Tony Blair commented that though companies should have more responsibility and sensitivity to the feelings of others , the issue would be immensely difficult . Although the copyright concerns were found to be without merit , Sony offered a formal apology to the Church of England and leaders of the cathedral in July 2007 , stating that they did not intend to cause offence . 
 The controversy increased awareness of Resistance in the UK , which showed a rise in sales during the controversy . It was selected as a finalist amongst six other games at the 2007 BAFTA British Academy Video Game Awards for PC World Gamers Award , which is based on the sales and public reception of the nominated games . The Dean of Manchester , the Very Reverend Rogers Govender , criticised its selection by BAFTA due to the current controversy , requesting that either BAFTA or Sony withdraw it from the award . Neither chose to withdraw it from the award , but it ultimately lost to Football Manager 07 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Resistance : Fall of Man is a science fiction first @-@ person shooter video game . The game is set in an alternate history 1951 , and focuses on human resistance forces attempting to drive a mysterious alien @-@ like invasion out of Great Britain . It was released as a PlayStation 3 launch title in Europe on 23 March 2007 . Resistance features recreations of English landmarks throughout the game , including at one point a gun fight between player protagonist Nathan Hale and the alien species around the exterior and interior of Manchester Cathedral . The cathedral is a medieval church on Victoria Street in central Manchester and is the seat of the Bishop of Manchester . Built in the 15th century , it has been extensively refaced , restored and extended during the Victorian period , and then again following severe bomb damage in the 20th century . 
 Church leaders accused Sony of the virtual desecration of Manchester Cathedral , referring to one scene which depicts a shoot @-@ out in which dozens of <unk> ( small , scorpion @-@ like enemies in the game ) are killed during a bloody gun battle inside the cathedral . Officials described the use of the building as sick and sacrilegious , and stated Sony did not ask for permission to use the cathedral . They demanded an apology from Sony and the withdrawal of the game from shops , otherwise legal action would be considered . The cathedral 's spokesman , David Marshall , told reporters that the cathedral had received many supportive e @-@ mails for its stance and that they intended to make several demands of Sony . These included an apology , a substantial donation , complete withdrawal of the game or modifying the segment featuring the interior of the cathedral , and financial support of Manchester groups trying to reduce gun crime in the city . 
 Cathedral officials also described the use of guns in a city which has a gun crime problem as irresponsible . The Bishop of Manchester , the Right Reverend Nigel McCulloch , stated that it was well known that Manchester had a gun crime problem , and that it was beyond belief that a global manufacturer would re @-@ create one of their Cathedrals with photo @-@ realistic quality . Insomniac , the game 's developer , declined to comment , referring all inquires to Sony Computer Entertainment Europe . Sony Computer Entertainment Europe issued a statement , stating that they were aware of the concerns expressed by the Bishop of Manchester and the Cathedral authorities , and take them seriously . However , they added that Resistance : Fall of Man is a fantasy science fiction game and not based on reality and that they believed they had sought and received all permissions necessary . Sony also stated that it would be contacting the Cathedral on 11 June 2007 to understand their concerns in more detail . David Wilson , a Sony spokesman , told The Times that it was game @-@ created footage , and not video or photography . Further , he compared it to science fiction shows such as Doctor Who , claiming that it was not based on reality at all . 
 At a meeting with church and cathedral officials , held on 11 June , reporters noted that three people had been shot within the city in the previous 72 hours . The attendees produced a letter by the Very Reverend Rogers Govender , on behalf of the Dean and Canons of Manchester Cathedral to Sony . It stated that they were currently seeking the advice of lawyers in the matter , and reserved their legal position in relation to the same . It demanded a substantial donation for the cathedral 's work with youth in resisting the culture of gun crime and other forms of violence in our society . It further demanded the immediate withdrawal of the game , and that Sony not re @-@ issue it without removing the section of the game containing the Cathedral interior . Govender described the use of images of the cathedral as virtual desecration . The letter stressed that they were in consultation with their lawyers and urged Sony to contact them so there can be a mutually satisfactory conclusion to the matter . Govender told reporters that the church officials had only been told of the content on 8 June 2007 , and , after watching footage of gameplay posted on YouTube , said they were dismayed beyond belief and were shocked to see a place of worship being presented to youths as a place where guns may be fired , and that every year , they invite hundreds of teenagers to see the Cathedral and appreciate it as an alternative to violence . They added that it was a shame to have a game like this undermining such important work . They also sought that Sony apologise unreservedly . 
 = = Response = = 
 Nanako Kato , a spokesperson from Sony Computer Entertainment , addressed the matter from Tokyo . She pointed out that historical buildings are often used in entertainment , such as in iconic movie scenes involving Godzilla and the Tokyo Tower and King Kong in Manhattan . She acknowledged the church in the game holds a resemblance to Manchester Cathedral , but that the point was to depict a backdrop of an old church , not to illustrate a specific church . She added that Sony understands why the Church of England was offended especially because of its efforts to reduce the serious problem of gun violence in Manchester . She did not answer on whether Sony would donate money to the Cathedral 's anti @-@ gun program as the Church has demanded . At the time , over 2 million copies of the game had been sold . 
 The controversy raises questions about the range to which copyright law can extend . Alex Chapman of Campbell Hooper solicitors , stated " The Church will have an uphill battle in a legal claim against Sony , and indeed it is likely that there is no basis for a claim . " He cited a provision in the UK 's 1988 Copyright Designs and Patents act that " explicitly states that it is not copyright infringement to represent certain artistic works that are on public display " . This includes sculptures and buildings which are " permanently situated in a public place or in premises open to the public " . Chapman also pointed out that , in the UK , copyright expires 70 years after the person who created the work dies . He went on to say , " What all this means is that public buildings are generally fair game for inclusion in video games , films et cetera , and it is something that their owners just have to accept . What isn 't fair game , however , is if the building is presented in a way that could be said to be defamatory in relation to those associated with it and this might be what the Church is more concerned about . Also if the representation of the building could be argued to have become so closely associated with a business that its representation amounts to a false endorsement of Sony or its products , or it is registered as a trademark , there may be issues . In each case however my impression is that the Church will have some difficulty in pursuing Sony . There is no law against insensitivity and as with many matters of this kind , it is the public reaction that might be more damaging than the legal one . " An unofficial review , by lawyers at Freeth Cartwright , of the rights that Sony might have infringed concluded that the Church of England did not have a case on either copyright or passing off grounds . 
 Tony Lloyd , the Member of Parliament for Manchester Central , addressed Prime Minister Tony Blair during the Prime Minister 's Questions , saying , " When large organisations like Sony find their copyright has been breached , they 're very quick to use the law . Would the Prime Minister agree with me then that when Sony used images of Manchester Cathedral as part a game which extols gun violence , this was not only in bad taste but also very , very insulting to not simply the Church of England , but people across the land who think it 's inappropriate that big corporations behave in this way ? " 
 Blair answered , " I agree with my honourable friend . I think it 's important that any of the companies engaged in promoting these types of goods have some sense of responsibility and also some sensitivity to the feelings of others . I think this is an immensely difficult area , the relationship between what happens with these games and its impact on young people . I 've no doubt this debate will go on for a significant period of time , but I do agree . I think it is important that people understand there is a wider social responsibility as well as an interior responsibility for profits . " 
 On 15 June 2007 , Sony issued the following statement : " We do not accept that there is any connection between contemporary issues of 21st century Manchester and a work of science fiction in which a fictitious 1950s Britain is under attack by aliens . It is not our intention to cause offence by using a representation of Manchester Cathedral in chapter eight of the work . If we have done so we sincerely apologise . " The apology was also included in an advertisement in a Manchester newspaper . The Dean of the Manchester Cathedral , the Reverend Rogers Govender , said in a statement : " We acknowledge the admission by Sony that the building in the game is Manchester Cathedral . We thank Sony for the apology they have made . However , we do not move from the position that we are against violence and especially the gun violence seen in this portrayal of the Cathedral . " On 6 July 2007 , Sony issued an unreserved apology to Manchester Cathedral by publishing it in the Manchester Evening News , although they refused to make a donation . 
 On the same day , the Cathedral announced a proposal for " Sacred Digital Guidelines " to prevent further virtual desecration of religious buildings . These guidelines were debated at the Church of England 's General Synod in York . Dean Govender called on Sony as well as all other video game publishers to sign up for these new guidelines . The codes of conduct in the guidelines include that publishers " respect our sacred spaces as places of prayer , worship , peace , learning and heritage " ; that they " do not assume that sacred space interiors are copyright free " ; that they " get permission from the faith leaders who are responsible for the building interiors you want to clone " ; and that they " support the work of those engaged in resisting the culture of gun crime and those involved in promoting the work of conflict resolution . " 
 Georgia Tech professor and <unk> Games CEO Ian Bogost defended the use of Manchester Cathedral in the game . He described Sony 's apology as " self @-@ defeating " and criticised Sony and Insomniac Games for not explaining their goals with the use of the cathedral . He wrote that the cathedral was " one of the only significant experiences in the whole game " , where he otherwise described it as " not a game richly imbued with wisdom . " He wrote that video games provided players with a way to experience war time situations and called the usage of the cathedral " the most powerful of these moments " and the " subtlest " in Resistance . He argued that the use of an accurate depiction of the monument instead of an anonymous location encourages players to pay attention to it as a structure that " demands respect . " He wrote that Resistance " adds a fictional homage to the church ’ s resolve " . 
 Author Harry Joe Brown commented that the protest against Resistance does not represent " just another protest by cultural conservatives against videogame violence " ; he described it as a new form of video game criticism . He added that the people involved were not " so uninformed that they mistake science fiction for simulated murder " , a notion which he stated was present in gamers ' reactions and implied in Sony 's apology . He elaborated that the controversy came from the use of assault weaponry in a place of worship , one that plays host to a yearly candlelight vigil for victims of gun violence . He wrote that the " jarring image of an American supersoldier spraying their church with bullets may indeed seem less like a meaningless violation of ' whiny dogma ' than a sick joke . " He added that , the controversy , while " ridiculous to Sony and the videogame community " , demonstrates a growing awareness of religion in a " virtual place " , even among the " severest critics of videogames " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 During the controversy , Resistance : Fall of Man rose from 40th place in the United Kingdom 's top 40 Full Priced video games chart to 22nd place for the week of 17 July to 23 July . It remained in the top 30 through the next week falling to 27th place , and to 36th place in the next week . In November 2009 , IGN.com placed the incident in their " Top 10 Gaming Controversies " . It was also selected as a finalist along with six other games in the BAFTA British Academy Video Game Awards for the " PC World Gamers Award " , which is the only category based on sales and public reception . The Dean of Manchester Cathedral , the Very Reverend Rogers Govender , criticised the selection , stating that " BAFTA should not be seen condoning such behaviour unless they are saying it is acceptable for producers to walk into historic buildings and film interiors – ignoring contracts , rights and liability " , asking for either BAFTA or Sony to withdraw the game from the award . Neither withdrew it , but it ultimately lost to Football Manager 2007 . 
 Resistance : Fall of Man has been highly successful despite the controversy , and has resulted in the production of multiple products , including three sequels titled Resistance 2 , Resistance 3 and Resistance : Retribution . Resistance developer , Ted Price , commented that there would be more " churches , mosques , and synagogues " in Resistance 2 before its release . While it was not known whether he was joking , he admitted to being Episcopalian , and considers the Church of England to be the " mother ship " . However , Sony pledged to not include the Cathedral in another game . 
 Despite the Cathedral 's reaction to its usage in Resistance : Fall of Man , the controversy has resulted in a significant increase in its visitor numbers according to David Marshall , director of communications for the Diocese of Manchester , writing in the Official PlayStation Magazine . Teachers tell him that teenagers in particular are interested to see a building which they thought was fictional . He adds that tourism has increased since the broadcast of pictures taken inside the Cathedral . 
 = New Jersey Route 162 = 
 Route 162 is an unsigned 0 @.@ 70 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 13 km ) long state highway in Lower Township , New Jersey , United States . The highway 's designation consists entirely of a bridge on Seashore Road ( County Route 626 ) , which is known as Relocated Seashore Road . The southern terminus of the highway is an intersection with County Routes 641 and 626 in Lower Township . After crossing the Cape May Canal , Route 162 terminates at an intersection with County Routes 603 and 626 in Lower Township . Route 162 and County Route 626 date back to the 1850s , when local businessmen and county financial Richard Holmes put together the Cape May Turnpike . The turnpike was chartered in 1854 , but construction did not begin until 1857 , with completion in April of the next year . The turnpike however , caused a lot of controversy , and struggled to live . For many years , railroads were proposed , becoming possible competition for Holmes , who did not appreciate the idea . The railroad was constructed in 1863 , just nine years after the charter of the turnpike syndicate . 
 Route S4C was designated by the New Jersey Legislature in 1929 as a spur of Route 4 ( now U.S. Route 9 ) , beginning at Bennett and running south on Seashore Road and Broadway , past Sunset Boulevard to the Delaware Bay . Route S4C was never taken over by the state . However , when the United States Army Corps of Engineers built the Cape May Canal during World War II , Seashore Road was chosen as one of two roads to cross the canal . ( The other was Route 4 , now Route 109 ) . The Army Corps built a low level bridge close to the pre @-@ canal alignment . The New Jersey Department of Transportation built a higher bridge in 1971 on a new alignment . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = The Cape May Turnpike : the precedent to Seashore Road = = = 
 Before 1854 , the area based around Bridgeton was a strong business and legal section in Cape May County . The local residents there , however , wanted to have a strong banking industry , but a local named Richard Holmes along with several other locals turned to the strong type of enterprise , a turnpike company . Holmes and the locals began a local turnpike syndicate with other businessmen and began the Cape May Turnpike Company upon incorporation in 1854 . The turnpike company , upon incorporation , was to build a toll road along roughly the U.S. Route 9 corridor . Progress in constructing the toll road was slow at first , with subscribers from Cape May County being hesitant to buy stock from the turnpike company . A friend of Richard Holmes , <unk> <unk> , owned a steamboat company in Cape May and apologized for not buying stock in the company . Citing the Panic of 1857 made it hard to convert securities to cash , <unk> suggested that a steamboat would be more profitable than the turnpike . The money from the steamboat would go ahead and helped the financially depressed businesses in local communities . 
 Although local business owners and land owners held out hope that the turnpike company would pay off , the turnpike experienced problems . Richard Holmes and Henry Swain , the director of the turnpike company , were running into problems including failure to buy land from Elijah Hand 's pasture and Samuel Hoffman 's local residence for the turnpike route , because they kept land prices high . The farmers refused to the sell their rightful land , and locals started showing opposition due to the fact it would cost money to deliver important foods . One of those locals , John Tomlin from Goshen , soon after brought up the idea of the " Shunpike " – a free turnpike road to the west of the Cape May Turnpike . However , the turnpike company kept pushing forward , persuading Hand and Hoffman to sell land in 1857 and erecting two tollhouses in the route , one at the Court House ( now Cape May Court House ) and one near Cold Spring . Eventually , locals finally began to move towards support of the turnpike . In April 1858 , John Wiley , who helped persuade Hand and Hoffman to sell , announced that in three weeks , the route would be complete as one continuous road from Cape Island to Cape May Court House . 
 After completion of the turnpike in April – May 1858 , the Cape May Turnpike did not receive much profits . Even with tolls being collected and stock being bought , these could not offset the costs of repairs and maintenance . The roadbed was commonly washed away in storms and it was becoming a less used route as the " Shunpike " ( now NJ 162 / County Route 626 ) nearby was free to use , taking away traffic from the turnpike . Walters Miller , a big investor of the turnpike company , decided to leave the syndicate in favor of working towards railroads . Miller himself looked into the construction of railroads in the area , hiring William Cook , who engineered the Camden and Amboy Railroad into producing routes along the peninsula . Cook proposed three routes in 1852 , one from the Camden waterfront to Cape May economic region , one through Millville and Bridgeton and a third through Salem . Although the rights for a railroad in the area by the New Jersey General Assembly had been allowed since 1832 , there has been no progress on any railroad in Cape May County until 1863 . That year , progress started on constructing the Camden and Atlantic Railroad using the first proposal by Cook in 1852 . Jonathan Pitney of Absecon spent two years trying to obtain the charter from the General Assembly . In a letter to Richard Holmes , Pitney said the chances of getting the railroad charter and building it were " good " . Holmes , however , was cautious towards the railroad company investment , showing little thought of having a railroad created that would compete with his struggling turnpike syndicate . 
 Businessmen in Cape May County believed the economy in the area was still unstable for quite an engineering project . An adviser to Richard Holmes suggested to be careful on future investments that he would take , including investing into the railroad company . The adviser believed that it would be " bad policy " to make such decisions . Debate continued about the railroad line for at least a decade , and the heads of the Camden and Atlantic Railroad put forth a proposal to build a portion of railroad from Absecon to Cape May along the Tuckahoe River . After attempts to revive the railroad were attempted by several other companies ( including the Glassboro and Millville Railroad ) , the attempts failed . An eventual formation of the Cape May and Millville Railroad in 1860 pushed forward more proposals , and a railroad was constructed in 1863 ( and leased in 1869 ) , and the alignment of Seashore Road became part of a stagecoach route from Cold Spring to Cape Island . 
 = = = Route S4C and construction of Route 162 = = = 
 In 1929 , a route from the Delaware Bay just short of Sunset Boulevard ( the former Cape Island Turnpike ) northward to U.S. Route 9 at Bennett Station via Broadway and Seashore Road was designated in the state legislature as State Highway Route S4C . The route was designated along County Route 626 's length along with County Route 604 as a county @-@ maintained highway , remaining the same until January 1 , 1953 . On that day , State Highway Route S4C was decommissioned during the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering . No number was designated to replace the highway 's former number . 
 During the 1930s and 1940s , the proposal for a canal to supply ships with an evacuation route from Germany 's U @-@ boats in World War II along with dangerous shoals of the Delaware Bay came forward . The canal , now the Cape May Canal , was approved in 1941 and was constructed in 1942 to supply this need along with a strong usage by yachts . By 1944 , a bridge was constructed across the canal , which was replaced in 1971 . That year , the state built a brand new bridge and denoted it as Relocated Seashore Road , a 485 @.@ 89 feet ( 148 @.@ 10 m ) long steel girder bridge over the Canal . The bridge was built south of U.S. Route 9 and has stood since and received the designation of Route 162 upon completion . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = County Route 626 ( south ) = = = 
 County Route 626 begins at an intersection with Beach Avenue ( County Route 604 ) in the city of Cape May . The route heads northward on Broadway through the residential portions of Cape May , reaching an intersection with Sunset Boulevard ( County Route 606 ) and West Perry Street ( County Route 633 ) . County Route 626 continues for several blocks before curving to the northwest into West Cape May . The route heads northward , passing into a commercial district along Broadway , turning to the northeast . Route 626 leaves West Cape May and switches names to Seashore Road through rural Cape May . The route passes several large farms before intersecting with Bridge Road and Seashore Road ( County Route 641 ) . At this intersection , the state takes over maintenance as State Route 162 . 
 = = = State Route 162 = = = 
 At the intersection with Bridge Road and County Route 641 , the New Jersey Department of Transportation maintains the alignment of County Route 626 from this intersection over the Relocated Seashore Road Bridge . The route heads northward from County Route 641 , paralleling both roads as it heads up the bridge approach and following the shoreline . From there , Route 162 reaches the Cape May Canal , crossing on the four @-@ lane Relocated Seashore Road Bridge for a short distance . The route returns to land on the other side of the canal , where more farms and residences can be seen from the bridge . Route 162 curves to the northwest , intersecting with Seashore Road ( County Route 603 ) . At that intersection , Cape May County resumes maintenance of Seashore Road , continuing as County Route 626 . 
 = = = County Route 626 ( north ) = = = 
 At the intersection with Seashore Road ( County Route 603 ) , the designation of Route 626 picks up again , following Seashore Road northward through rural Cape May County . The route leaves the rural area , intersecting with U.S. Route 9 ( Sandman Boulevard ) , where the commercial district picks up . County Route 626 heads northward through the short district , entering an area of residences and intersecting with Academy Road ( County Route 639 ) . The route passes a large field with one large red barn before turning northeastward past more residences . County Route 626 parallels U.S. Route 9 for a distance , intersecting with the Bennetts Crossing , which connects the two roads . The highway continues northeastward through Cape May County , intersecting with Tabernacle Road ( County Route 647 ) . County Route 626 continues through the residential districts in Lower Township , paralleling U.S. Route 9 and a local railroad for some distance . The highway intersects with the Old Stage Road , a dead @-@ end stagecoach road , heading through a short rural area before returning to the residential districts . The highway continues northward , switch names to South Railroad Avenue and into the community of Rio Grande . County Route 626 becomes a divided highway before reaching an intersection with New Jersey Route 47 , where county maintenance ends completely . North Railroad Avenue continues locally along the right @-@ of @-@ way . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Cape May County . 
 = Marge Gets a Job = 
 " Marge Gets a Job " is the seventh episode of The Simpsons ' fourth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 5 , 1992 . In this episode , Marge gets a job at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant to pay for foundation repair at the Simpson house . Mr. Burns develops a crush on Marge after seeing her at work and attempts to woo her . A subplot with Bart also takes place , paralleling the fable The Boy Who Cried Wolf . It was written by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein and directed by Jeffrey Lynch . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer and Marge discover that their house is sinking . Homer tries to repair the house himself , but is unsuccessful . Homer decides to call a foundation repairman and finds out that it will cost $ 8 @,@ 500 for the repairs . Homer takes Marge to a party for the retirement of a Springfield Nuclear Power Plant employee . With a new position open at the power plant , Marge decides to apply for it to get the money for the foundation repair . With the help of Lisa , Marge gets the job at the power plant . 
 Meanwhile , at school , Bart does not want to take a test , so he fakes a stomach ache . Mrs. Krabappel asks if Bart has ever read The Boy Who Cried Wolf . From his office , Mr. Burns watches surveillance footage of his plant . When Marge appears , however , he is infatuated and attempts to win her affection . He begins to take her advice on ways to cheer everyone up around the plant by playing the music of Tom Jones over the plant 's speakers , which further depresses the employees . 
 Bart returns to school , but when Mrs. Krabappel suggests that he take another test , he immediately <unk> . Grampa comes to pick him up and on the way home and references The Boy Who Cried Wolf . Again , Bart is unfazed . When he returns to school again , he is forced to take the test without any exception . Bart protests , but Mrs. Krabappel ignores him . She places him alone outside the classroom , hands him the test , and leaves . 
 At Krustylu Studios , the taping of Krusty the Clown 's latest show features a wildlife expert visiting , showing a hawk and a wolf , who warns that the latter is spooked by loud noises . Unfortunately for the wolf , Krusty declares " loud " being the secret word of the day . Celebration and noise ensue , causing the terrified wolf to panic and escape the studio . 
 The wolf runs to Springfield Elementary School , where it attacks Bart outside the classroom . He cries ' Wolf ! ' but Mrs. Krabappel ignores his pleas . Groundskeeper Willie rescues Bart by fighting the wolf , telling Bart to return to his classroom . Since he feels that he will not be believed that he was attacked by a wolf , Bart decides to say that he made it up by showing a ' little honesty ' to Mrs. Krabappel . He then passes out on the floor , where Mrs. Krabappel pokes him with a metre stick and realises that he was indeed telling the truth . Grampa takes him home , while Willie gives the wolf some alcohol and consoles him about losing . 
 Mr. Burns attempts to seduce Marge , who tells him that she is married . He dismisses her , so she threatens a lawsuit and enlists the help of Lionel Hutz , who is completely unsuccessful and flees from Mr. Burns 's army of real lawyers . Mr. Burns gives up after Homer defends Marge . The episode ends as Homer and Marge enjoy a private show performed by the captured Tom Jones , who secretly begs Marge to help him escape . 
 = = Production = = 
 The idea for the show came from Conan O 'Brien , who thought of Marge getting a job at the power plant and that Mr. Burns has a crush on her . The animators had trouble animating Marge with the suit and lipstick . Director Jeff Lynch said there were a few scenes where Marge " looks like a monster " . All the jargon used by Troy McClure was accurately taken from a Time – Life foundation repair book . The original subplot for the episode was Mr. Burns telling Homer to dress up as Mister Atom and have him go to schools to talk to the children . The cast really liked Tom Jones as a guest star . They said he was fun to work with , and was really nice , and even offered to perform a concert after he was done recording lines . 
 The animators had originally drawn three different versions of Bart after he was attacked by the wolf . They picked the version that looked the least scary , as they did not want Bart to look too " beaten up " . An animation error during the dream sequence with Mr. Burns also caused issues when dealing with network censors , mistaking a " lump in his bed " which was supposed to be Mr. Smithers ' knee as an erection . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The song performed for Mr. Burns at the retirement party is a reference to Citizen Kane . The photo of Mr. Burns meeting Elvis is very close to the photo of Richard Nixon meeting Elvis . While Mr. Burns is looking through the surveillance cameras , " The Imperial March " from the Star Wars films is played in the background . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Marge Gets a Job " finished 25th in ratings for the week of November 2 – 8 , 1992 , with a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 6 , equivalent to approximately 12 @.@ 7 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , beating Beverly Hills , 90210 and The Simpsons episode " Itchy & Scratchy : The Movie " , which aired on Tuesday in the same week . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide commented , " We like Bart 's fantasy of the radioactive Marie and Pierre Curie , and Smithers ' fantasy of his loved one flying through the window . A collection of wonderful set pieces rather than a story , which fizzles out without any real attempt at an ending . " Empire placed the " Mister Burns " dance member as the show 's fourth best film parody , " the pick of a big bunch " from the show 's many Citizen Kane parodies , coming " replete with <unk> camera angles and subtly altered lyrics " . 
 = = Alternate version = = 
 In the original airing of this episode , Mrs. Krabappel names several different diseases Bart has faked in order to get out of taking his English test , one of which is Tourette 's syndrome . After Bart claims that he is not over it , he begins barking and snarling and mutters , " Shove it , witch ! " This scene garnered many complaints from people who thought it was tasteless of the writers to make fun of an actual condition and Joshua Smith , a boy in Renton , Washington began seeking legal action . Smith demanded that they " not repeat the episode and have Bart Simpson befriend somebody with Tourette 's on the show " and include an apology from Bart at the end . Executive producer Mike Reiss replied with an apology saying " We kind of feel like we made a mistake this time . We felt bad about this . " In a move that was unprecedented for the show , the producers agreed to remove the scene from future broadcasts . However , Smith 's other requests went unfulfilled . In the version of the episode released on the season four DVD boxset , the part with Bart demonstrating his supposed Tourette 's syndrome to Mrs. Krabappel was kept intact , but Krabappel 's line about Bart having " ... that unfortunate bout of Tourette 's syndrome " was replaced with " ... that unfortunate bout of rabies . " 
 Additionally , during Smithers ' dream sequence with Mr. Burns , censors demanded the cutting of several seconds of animation that showed " Mr. Burns land [ ing ] in a particular position on Smithers anatomy " . 
 Following the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami and the associated nuclear emergency , the episode was pulled from an Austrian network due to jokes about radiation poisoning . 
 = Kirkcaldy = 
 Kirkcaldy ( / <unk> / ; Scottish Gaelic : Cair <unk> ) is a town and former royal burgh in Fife , on the east coast of Scotland . It is about 11 @.@ 6 miles ( 19 km ) north of Edinburgh and 27 @.@ 6 miles ( 44 km ) south @-@ southwest of Dundee . The town has a population of 49 @,@ 460 , making it Fife 's second @-@ largest locality and the eleventh @-@ largest locality in Scotland . 
 Kirkcaldy has long been nicknamed the Lang <unk> ( listen ; Scots for " long town " ) in reference to the early town 's 0 @.@ 9 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 4 km ) main street , as indicated on maps of the 16th and 17th centuries . The street later reached a length of nearly 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) , connecting the burgh to the neighbouring settlements of Linktown , Pathhead , Sinclairtown and Gallatown , which became part of the town in 1876 . The formerly separate burgh of Dysart was merged into Kirkcaldy in 1930 . 
 The area around Kirkcaldy has been inhabited since the Bronze Age . The first document to refer to the town was in 1075 , when Malcolm III granted the settlement to the church of Dunfermline . David I later gave the burgh to Dunfermline Abbey , which had succeeded the church : a status which was officially recognised by Robert I in 1327 . The town only gained its independence from Abbey rule when it was created a royal burgh by Charles I in 1644 . 
 From the early 16th century , the establishment of a harbour at the East Burn confirmed the town 's early role as an important trading port . The town also began to develop around the salt , coal mining and nail making industries . The production of linen which followed in 1672 was later instrumental in the introduction of floorcloth in 1847 by linen manufacturer , Michael Nairn . In 1877 this in turn contributed to linoleum , which became the town 's most successful industry : Kirkcaldy was a world producer until well into the mid @-@ 1960s . The town expanded considerably in the 1950s and 1960s , though the decline of the linoleum industry and other manufacturing restricted its growth thereafter . 
 The town is a major service centre for the central Fife area . It has a swimming pool , theatre , museum and art gallery , three public parks and an ice rink . Kirkcaldy is also known as the birthplace of social philosopher and economist Adam Smith , who wrote his magnum opus The Wealth of Nations in the town . In the early 21st century , employment is dominated by the service sector : the biggest employer in the town is <unk> , Formerly MGT plc . ( a call centre ) . Other main employers include NHS Fife , Forbo @-@ flooring ( floor coverings ) , Fife College ( formerly Adam Smith College ) and R Hutchison Ltd ( food ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 The name Kirkcaldy means " place of the hard fort " or " place of <unk> 's fort " . It is derived from the Pictish <unk> meaning " fort " , <unk> , which is Pictish " hard " or a personal name , and -in , a suffix meaning " place of " . <unk> may describe the fort itself or be an epithet for a local " hard " ruler . An interpretation of the last element as din ( again meaning " fort " , but from Gaelic ) rather than -n is incorrect . The Old Statistical Account gives a derivation from <unk> , which has been repeated in later publications , but this is also incorrect . 
 = = = Early = = = 
 The discovery of 11 Bronze Age cist burials which date from 2500 BC and 500 BC suggests that this is the most ancient funerary site in the area . What probably made this location ideal was its natural terraces stretching away from the sand bay , and the close proximity of the East Burn to the north and the West ( Tiel ) Burn to the south . Four Bronze Age burials dating from around 4000 BC have also been found around the site of the unmarked <unk> or Dysart Standing Stone to the east of the present A92 road . Although there are few Roman sites in Fife , a Roman camp was known to exist at Carberry Farm on the town 's outskirts . 
 The Battle of Raith in AD 596 is believed to have taken place to the west of the town 's site . The battle was fought between the Angles and an alliance , led by King Áedán mac Gabráin of Dál Riata , of Scots , Picts and Britons . 
 = = = Medieval = = = 
 The first document to recognise the town was issued in 1075 , when the King of Scots , Malcolm III ( reigned 1058 – 93 ) granted the shire of <unk> , among other gifts , to the church at Dunfermline . The residents were expected to pay dues and taxes for the church 's general upkeep . Two charters , later confirmed by Malcolm 's son David I in 1128 and 1130 , refer to <unk> and <unk> respectively , but do not indicate their locations . 
 In 1304 , a weekly market and annual fair for Kirkcaldy was proposed by the Abbot of Dunfermline to King Edward I , during a period of English rule in Scotland from 1296 to 1306 . The reason given for these discussions was that the town may have been referred to as " one of the most ancient of burghs " . This status as a burgh dependent on Dunfermline Abbey was later confirmed in 1327 by Robert I , King of Scots ( reigned 1306 – 29 ) . 
 A charter granted in 1363 by David II , King of Scots ( reigned 1329 – 71 ) , awarded the burgh the right to trade across the regality of Dunfermline . This charter allowed the burgesses of Kirkcaldy to purchase and sell goods to the burgesses of the three other regality burghs — Queensferry , Dunfermline and Musselburgh — that belonged to the Abbey . By 1451 , Kirkcaldy was awarded feu @-@ ferme status . Under the status , responsibility would now lie with the bailies and council to deal with the routine administration of the town and its fiscal policies ; conditional on an annual payment of two and a half marks ( 33s 4d or £ 1 @.@ 67 ) to the Abbot of Dunfermline . 
 = = = 16th to 18th centuries = = = 
 At the beginning of the 16th century , the town became an important trading port . The town took advantage of its east coast location , which facilitated trading contacts with the Low Countries , the Baltic region , England , and Northern France . The feu @-@ ferme charter of 1451 between the Abbot of Dunfermline and the burgesses of Kirkcaldy mentioned a small but functioning harbour ; it is not known when this harbour was established , or whether it was always located at the mouth of the East Burn . According to treasurers ' accounts of the early 16th century , timber imported via the harbour — possibly from the Baltic countries — was used at Falkland Palace and Edinburgh Castle , as well as in shipbuilding . Raw materials such as hides , wool , skins , herring , salmon , coal and salt were exported from the town until well into the 17th century . 
 A charter issued by Charles I granting royal burgh status in 1644 led to the full independence of the town . As a gesture , the king gave 8 @.@ 12 acres ( 3 @.@ 29 ha ) of common muir suitable for " bleaching of linen , drying of clothes , recreation and perpetuity " to the town . In 1638 , under the reign of Charles I , the town subscribed to the National Covenant , which opposed the introduction of <unk> and patronage in the Presbyterian church . Support for the Covenanting cause cost the town over 250 men at the Battle of Kilsyth in 1645 . The continuing civil wars killed at least another 480 men and led to the loss of many of the harbour 's trading vessels . By 1660 , this left the town with only twelve registered ships , down from 100 it is claimed were recorded between 1640 and 1644 . 
 Towards the end of the 17th century , the economy recovered , with growth in manufacturing . During this period , Daniel Defoe described Kirkcaldy as a " larger , more populous , and better built town than ... any on this coast " . A shipbuilding revival produced 38 vessels between 1778 and 1793 . In the mid @-@ 19th century , whaling became important to the town for a short time . In 1813 , the first Kirkcaldy whaling ship , The Earl Percy , sailed north to the Davis Strait ; the town 's last whaler , The Brilliant , was sold in 1866 to Peterhead , bringing an end to the industry . Construction of a new turnpike from <unk> to Newport @-@ on @-@ Tay via Cupar in 1790 , while improving only one section of Fife 's isolated road system , brought a huge increase in traffic along Kirkcaldy 's High Street , and helped to strengthen the town 's position . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 For most of the 19th century , the main industries in the town were flax spinning and linen weaving . To cope with increasing imports of flax , timber and hemp , and exports of coal , salt and linen , between 1843 and 1846 a new wet dock and pier was built at the harbour . In 1847 a canvas manufacturer , Michael Nairn , took out a licence on Frederick Walton 's patent for the production of floorcloth , and opened a factory in nearby Pathhead . When the patent expired in 1876 , Nairn and other floorcloth manufacturers began the manufacture of linoleum . Production of both floorcloth and linoleum occupied seven factories in the town by 1883 , employing 1 @,@ 300 . A further expansion of the harbour was completed between 1906 and 1908 , for another increase in linoleum and coal . 
 The expansion of the town led in 1876 to the extension of the royal burgh 's boundaries . The town absorbed its neighbouring settlements of Linktown , in the parish of Abbotshall ; <unk> in the parish of Kinghorn ; and Pathhead , Sinclairtown and Gallatown in the parish of Dysart . These formerly separate settlements had once been forbidden by the old guild rights to sell their goods in Kirkcaldy . In 1922 – 1923 a seawall and esplanade were constructed , funded by the Unemployment Grants Commission and built by unemployed residents . In 1930 , the town expanded to include the former royal burgh of Dysart . 
 During the 1950s and 1960s , new housing estates were built north @-@ west of the town . This was followed by the redevelopment of the town centre in the 1960s and 1970s , which destroyed much of the old high street . There was speculation that the town 's population could increase to around 55 – 60 @,@ 000 by 1970 . This did not happen : a decline in the linoleum industry in the mid @-@ 1960s led to a decrease in population , from a peak of 53 @,@ 750 in 1961 to 47 @,@ 962 in 1981 . 
 In the 21st century , Kirkcaldy remains an important centre for the surrounding areas , with a Museum and Art Gallery , three public parks and shopping facilities . The town also hosts the annual Links Market , commonly known as Europe 's longest street fair . The production of linoleum continues , though on a greatly reduced scale , under Swiss ownership ( Forbo Holding AG ) . Kirkcaldy Harbour , which closed in 1992 , re @-@ opened in October 2011 to cargo ships . A project between Carr 's Flour Mills , the parent of Hutchison 's , Forth Ports ( owners of the harbour ) and Transport Scotland , will allow Carr 's to bring in wheat via the harbour and remove a quarter of its lorries from the roads every year . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The grant of feu @-@ ferme status in the middle of the 15th century meant that the town could deal with its own administrative issues and fiscal policies for the first time . The first mention of a town council was around 1582 . The head courts of the burghs met either in the common muir ( now known as Volunteers ' Green ) or in the Tolbooth on Tolbooth Street , particularly in the summer months . When Kirkcaldy was awarded royal burgh status in 1644 , the duties of the provost were initially performed by bailies , councillors , and magistrates . The first Lord Provost , Robert <unk> , was elected to the post around 1658 . The burgh was one of four in Scotland to use two coats of arms , introduced in 1673 . One bears the motto <unk> <unk> ( " I secure by watching " ) , and the other displays the figure of Saint Bryce , Kirkcaldy 's patron saint . 
 Kirkcaldy enjoyed royal burgh status until this rank was abolished in 1975 under the Local Government ( Scotland ) Act 1973 , in favour of a three @-@ tier system of regions and districts . The royal burgh merged into Kirkcaldy District , which was one of three districts within the Fife region . The district council was abolished in 1996 under the Local Government etc ( Scotland ) Act 1994 when the region became a unitary council area . The new Fife Council adopted the areas of the former districts as council management areas and created area committees to represent each . 
 Kirkcaldy is represented by several tiers of elected government . It is divided into six community council areas : <unk> and Hayfield , Dysart , Kirkcaldy East , Kirkcaldy North , Kirkcaldy West , and <unk> . Of these , only Dysart , Kirkcaldy North and Kirkcaldy West have active community councils , which form the lowest tier , and whose statutory role is to communicate local opinion to local and central government . Together with the nearby village of Thornton , the town forms the civil parish of Kirkcaldy and Dysart , although civil parishes now have no administrative functions , and are used mainly for statistical purposes . 
 Fife Council , based in Glenrothes , the unitary local authority for Kirkcaldy , is the executive , deliberative , and legislative body responsible for local governance . Kirkcaldy Town House is the main administrative headquarters for the Kirkcaldy area within the local authority . The Kirkcaldy area also sends eleven councillors , elected from three wards , to Fife Council . Beyond the tiers of local government , the Scottish Parliament is responsible for devolved matters from the Parliament of the United Kingdom , such as education , health , and justice . 
 The first Member of Parliament to be elected to the House of Commons from Kirkcaldy was Colonel Abercrombie in 1710 . Prior to the Act of Union in 1707 , Kirkcaldy sent a Member of Parliament to the old Scottish Parliament , which usually met in Edinburgh . Kirkcaldy was represented by the constituency of Dysart Burghs from 1707 to 1832 , which was formed from the burgh itself and three other burghs , Dysart , Kinghorn , and Burntisland . Under the Reform Act of 1832 , the constituency of Kirkcaldy Burghs was created . Robert Ferguson of Raith was re @-@ elected as Member of Parliament . Kirkcaldy forms part of the county constituency of Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath , electing one Member of Parliament to the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom by the first past the post system . Roger Mullin of the Scottish National Party ( SNP ) is the Member of Parliament for Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath . 
 Kirkcaldy forms part of the Kirkcaldy constituency of the Scottish Parliament ( or Holyrood ) , and is one of nine within the Mid Scotland and Fife electoral region . Each constituency elects one Member of the Scottish Parliament by the first – past – the – post system of election , and the region elects seven additional members to produce a form of proportional representation . The Kirkcaldy seat was won at the 2011 Scottish Parliament elections by David Torrance for the Scottish National Party ( SNP ) . Following a review of Scottish Parliament constituency boundaries , the Kirkcaldy constituency was extended along the coast , taking in the Buckhaven , Methil , and East and West Wemyss villages ward , ahead of the 2011 elections . Kirkcaldy is part of the pan @-@ Scotland European Parliament constituency , which elects seven Members of the European Parliament ( MEPs ) . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Kirkcaldy curves around a sandy cove between the Tiel ( West ) Burn to the south and the East Burn to the north , on a bay facing southeast onto the Firth of Forth . The town lies 9 @.@ 3 miles ( 15 km ) south @-@ southeast of Glenrothes , 11 @.@ 8 miles ( 19 km ) east @-@ northeast of Dunfermline , 44 @.@ 4 miles ( 71 km ) west @-@ southwest of Dundee and 18 @.@ 6 miles ( 30 km ) north @-@ northeast of Edinburgh . The town adopted its nickname of the lang toun from the 0 @.@ 9 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 4 km ) single street , recorded on early maps of the 16th and 17th centuries . The street eventually reached a length of nearly 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) , linking the burgh to its neighbouring suburbs of Linktown , Pathhead , Sinclairtown and Gallatown . 
 Historians are not sure where the medieval centre of Kirkcaldy was located , but it may have been at the corner of Kirk Wynd and the High Street . This would have been the site of the town 's Mercat cross and focal point of the burgh . The linear market was important not only to the town itself but to the nearby hinterland . The main thoroughfare was either paved or cobbled , with flagstones covering small burns running down the hill towards the sea across the High Street . Running back from the High Street were burgage plots or " rigs " of the burgesses ; these narrow strips of land were at the front and to the rear of the houses . On the sea side of the High Street , plots may have served as beaching grounds for individual tenements . The plots on the other side of the High Street rose steeply to the terracing of the Lomond foothills . A back lane running behind the plots from Kirk Wynd went to the west end of the High Street in a southerly direction . This lane would in time be developed as Hill Street . At the top of Kirk Wynd was the Parish Church of St Bryce , now known as the Old Kirk , overlooking the small settlement . 
 The small burns that are tributaries to the East Burn contributed to the draining of the lands of Dunnikier Estate . The burn emerges from a deep @-@ set culvert to flow under the Victoria Viaduct , down a deep gorge , through the site of Hutchison 's Flour Mills before running parallel to the harbour wall and into the sea . From the mid @-@ 19th century , the Hutchison 's buildings became a significant landmark adjacent to the burn . The flour millers chose this area for its railway connection which linked the main station to the harbour , rather than for the need to use the burn to power the mills . The West ( or Tiel ) Burn , was also important , providing power for textile mills . This burn flowed out of the Raith Estate lands where scenically and recreationally it was used to create Raith Lake ( with its tributary , the <unk> Burn ) . The mill owners in Linktown also made use of the burn . 
 = = Demography = = 
 Towards the end of the sixteenth century , a detailed assessment on the size of the townscape was carried out . The first estimate of the parish population in 1639 was between 3 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 200 and around 3 @,@ 400 by 1691 . At the beginning of the eighteenth century , the population declined . A census by Webster 's Topographical Dictionary of Scotland in 1755 , recorded an estimate of 2 @,@ 296 in the parish . By the time of the first national census in 1801 , the population had risen to 3 @,@ 248 . The population of the burgh was recorded as 4 @,@ 785 in the 1841 census , and had risen to 34 @,@ 079 by 1901 . By the time of the 1951 census , the figure stood at 49 @,@ 050 . 
 According to the Census in 2001 , the census locality of Kirkcaldy has a total resident population of 46 @,@ 912 representing 13 @.@ 4 % of Fife 's total population . It hosts 21 @,@ 365 households . 14 @.@ 8 % were married couples living together , 16 @.@ 4 % were one @-@ person households , 18 @.@ 8 % were co @-@ habiting couples and 7 @.@ 9 % were lone parents . A 2010 assessment estimated that the town had a population of 49 @,@ 560 . The median age of males and females living in Kirkcaldy was 37 and 41 years respectively , compared to 37 and 39 years for the whole of Scotland . The age group from 30 to 44 forms the largest portion of the population ( 22 % ) . 
 The place of birth of the town 's residents was 96 @.@ 52 % United Kingdom ( including 87 @.@ 15 % from Scotland ) , 0 @.@ 28 % Republic of Ireland , 1 @.@ 18 % from other European Union countries , and 1 @.@ 86 % from elsewhere in the world . The economic activity of residents aged 16 – 74 was 40 @.@ 13 % in full @-@ time employment , 12 @.@ 17 % in part @-@ time employment , 4 @.@ 79 % self @-@ employed , 5 @.@ 68 % unemployed , 2 @.@ 57 % students with jobs , 3 @.@ 06 % students without jobs , 15 @.@ 70 % retired , 5 @.@ 51 % looking after home or family , 6 @.@ 68 % permanently sick or disabled , and 3 @.@ 71 % economically inactive for other reasons . Compared with the average demography of Scotland , Kirkcaldy has low proportions of immigrants , and has higher proportions for people over 75 years old . 
 In 2010 more than 7 @,@ 000 people claimed benefits in the Kirkcaldy area ; around 90 fewer than in 2009 but 500 more than the pre @-@ recession average for 2008 . A study undertaken by Heriot @-@ Watt University in 2004 estimated that the average gross weekly household income in Kirkcaldy in 2004 was £ 421 , which was 7 @.@ 5 % lower than the £ 455 Fife average . The below @-@ average income in the area may reflect more <unk> households , and relatively fewer households holding down well @-@ paid jobs . Recent Scottish Index of Multiple Deprivation ( SIMD ) figures indicate that the most deprived <unk> in Fife is Gallatown and Sinclairtown which has a rank of 82 , meaning that it is amongst the 5 % most deprived areas in Scotland . Linktown , Seafield , Hayfield , Smeaton and <unk> East areas in Kirkcaldy fall within the 5 – 10 % banding of most deprived communities in Scotland . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The first industries to develop in the town were coal mining and salt panning , which date back to the early sixteenth century . Early manufacturing both in Kirkcaldy and neighbouring Pathhead consisted of coarse cloth and <unk> ; the latter of which went to the Royal Master of Works for repairs at Holyrood Palace until the seventeenth century . Linen weaving , which began in 1672 , became important to the town , with yarn imported from Hamburg and Bremen . The pottery industry , which was originally established in 1714 as an offshoot of the Linktown Brick and Tile Works , was centred around Linktown , Gallatown and Sinclairtown . The Fife Pottery , built by Andrew and Archibald Grey in 1817 , produced Wemyss Ware , named after the family who owned Wemyss Castle . 
 The production of heavy canvas was started in 1828 by Michael Nairn at a small factory . Influenced by a visit to Bristol , Nairn started to make floorcloth at his new factory at Pathhead in 1847 , where his company pioneered the use of ovens to season the floorcloth and reduce production times . When the patent belonging to Frederick Walton expired , Nairn 's were able to manufacture linoleum from 1877 onwards . Other factories producing floorcloth and later linoleum were established by former employees of Michael Nairn . 
 Approximately 22 @,@ 200 people work in the Kirkcaldy area , the majority of which are in Kirkcaldy itself and to a lesser degree in Burntisland . This represents approximately 13 @.@ 6 % of the 163 @,@ 000 jobs in Fife . The local economy is dominated by service sector businesses . Other important economic sectors in the Kirkcaldy area are retailing and construction with moderate levels of jobs in financial and business services . The largest employer in the town is <unk> plc . Other important local employers include NHS Fife , Forbo @-@ Nairn flooring ( floor coverings ) , Fife College ( education ) and R Hutchison Ltd ( food ) . 
 The principal industrial and business estates include <unk> , Randolph , Hayfield , and John Smith Business Park . Local industrial activity has also increased with the reopening in 2011 of Kirkcaldy Harbour to cargo ships . This has been facilitated through a partnership between Forth Ports Ltd ( the owners of the harbour ) , Hutchison 's parent company of Carr 's Flour Mills , and Transport Scotland , who provided a freight facilities grant of over £ 800 @,@ 000 . The work included new silos and conveyors to allow fast delivery from coastal ships . 
 Kirkcaldy 's town centre , which serves a large catchment area of around 130 @,@ 000 residents within a 20 @-@ minute drive , is the largest in Fife in terms of retail floor space . Eligible businesses voted in favour of a <unk> ( Business Improvement District ) scheme for the town centre in 2010 . The High Street , which runs parallel to the Esplanade , is home to the Mercat Shopping Centre and Postings Shopping Centre . A regeneration programme to upgrade the appearance of the High Street was completed in late 2011 . A separate project has also created a ' green corridor ' to link the main railway station and bus station with the High Street . The budget for the entire project was £ 4 million , £ 2 million of which was provided through the Scottish Government 's Town Centre Regeneration Fund . 
 An out @-@ of @-@ town retail park constructed in 1997 north @-@ west of the town on Chapel Level , off the A92 is home to a number of warehouse retailers . The retail park was purchased by <unk> , a London @-@ based property developer for £ 75 million in April 2005 . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Kirkcaldy Galleries is home to the town 's museum and art gallery and central library . The building opened in 1925 under its former name of Kirkcaldy Museum and Art Gallery and was extended to provide a main library in 1928 . In 2011 , the building was closed to allow a £ 2 @.@ 4 million renovation which was completed in June 2013 . The work resulted in the integration of the facilities within the building through a single entrance and reception desk . The building also adopted its present name . 
 The Adam Smith Theatre , the town 's main auditorium , plays host to theatrical and musical productions as well as showing a selection of arthouse and commercial films . Originally known as the Adam Smith Halls , the theatre adopted its present name in 1973 after a renovation of the building in time for the 250th anniversary of the birth of Adam Smith . 
 The Links Market originated as a farmers market on Links Street , before moving to its present site in 1903 on The Promenade ( then known as Sands Road ) . The market visits the town every April and celebrated its 700th anniversary in 2004 . Kirkcaldy has had a twin @-@ town link with Ingolstadt in Germany since September 1962 . There are plans for a joint celebration to recognise the 50th anniversary of the town 's twinning with Ingolstadt in 2012 . 
 There are three main public parks in Kirkcaldy . 
 Beveridge Park , to the west of the town is a 104 acres ( 420 @,@ 000 m2 ) park created from the existing Robbie 's Park , and land purchased from the Raith Estate . This was part of a £ 50 @,@ 000 bequest from linen manufacturer and provost Michael Beveridge , who died in 1890 . On 24 September 1892 a crowd of over 10 @,@ 000 came to see the park 's opening hosted by his widow , the provost , magistrates , and the town council of the royal burgh . The park includes a boating lake , a formal garden with fountain , a skateboard park , rugby ground , football pitches and woodland walks . The park was awarded a green flag award in both 2010 and 2011 . 
 Ravenscraig Park , to the east of the town was formed from the estate of Dysart House . The grounds were bequeathed to the town by the linoleum manufacturer Sir Michael Nairn in 1929 . It is adjacent to Ravenscraig Castle 
 Dunnikier Park , to the north of the town , purchased by the town council in 1945 , consists of an area around Dunnikier House and is home to numerous woodland walkways . 
 = = Sport and leisure = = 
 Raith Rovers F.C. is the town 's senior association football team . They play in the Scottish Championship , the second tier of Scottish football at their ground , Stark 's Park . Founded in 1883 , the club were elected to the Scottish Football League in 1902 . They reached their highest league position in the 1921 – 1922 season , when they were placed third in the Scottish Football League . They achieved a British scoring record of 142 goals in 34 matches in the 1937 – 1938 season . Under manager Jimmy Nicholl , the team were promoted to the Scottish Premier Division as Division One champions in the 1994 – 1995 season . In 1994 the club won their first national trophy , when they defeated Celtic 6 – 5 on penalties after finishing the game 2 – 2 , to win the League Cup . This gained them qualification to the UEFA Cup in the following season , where they reached the second round before losing to Bayern Munich . 
 The junior football team , Kirkcaldy YM , play at Denfield Park in the East Region Premier League . Kirkcaldy RFC are the senior rugby team and play at Beveridge Park in BT National League Division 2 , the third tier of Scottish club rugby . Fife Flyers , established in 1938 , are the oldest ice hockey team in the United Kingdom . The team , who play at the Fife Ice Arena , have been members of the Elite League since the 2011 / 2012 season . A cricket club plays at Dunnikier Park and a flag football club at Beveridge Park . The town has a range of leisure facilities such as a swimming pool , an ice rink , and two golf courses ( Kirkcaldy and Dunnikier ) . 
 A new £ 15 million leisure centre on the town 's Esplanade opened its doors in September 2013 . This has replaced the old Kirkcaldy Swimming Pool from the 1970s . The decision to build a new leisure centre on this site was controversial , as it resulted in the loss of a public car park . A petition organised by the campaign group Save The Car Park collected over 7 @,@ 000 signatures in favour of keeping the car park open . The group said that the closure of the car park would discourage shoppers from coming to the High Street and raised issues over the loss of shopowners ' right of access to the car park . This decision was severely criticised in an internal audit report . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The oldest church in Kirkcaldy is the Old Kirk , the old parish church , on Kirk Wynd . The earliest mention of the Old Kirk is the record of its consecration in 1244 to St <unk> and St Patrick by David de Bernham , Bishop of St Andrews . The building 's deterioration in the late eighteenth century was addressed by major renovations to the main body of the church between 1807 and 1808 . Only the square western tower , which dates from around 1500 , was retained and is now the oldest building to have survived within the old burgh . In 2000 the Old Kirk was amalgamated with St Brycedale Church and was closed for public worship in 2008 . It has since been re @-@ opened by the Old Kirk Trust and is used for musical and dramatic performances . Other significant churches in the town include St Bryce Kirk built between 1877 and 1881 by James Matthews at the corner of St Brycedale Avenue and Kirk Wynd ; Abbotshall Parish Church on Abbotshall Road , the current building completed in 1788 and Linktown Church built in 1830 @-@ 1 by George Hay on <unk> Place . 
 Kirkcaldy Town House on <unk> is the centrepiece of the town 's civic square . It was designed in the 1930s by David Carr and William Howard of Edinburgh . World War II stopped work on the building until 1950 . Construction was split into two phases : the west wing , which was completed in 1953 , and the east wing , completed in 1956 . 
 Kirkcaldy War Memorial in War Memorial Gardens unveiled in 1923 was gifted to the town by John Nairn , linoleum manufacturer and grandson of Michael Nairn . This was dedicated to Ian Nairn , the son of John Nairn who died in the First World War . A Second World War memorial , designed by Thomas Hubbard , was later added and unveiled in 1958 . The memorial commemorates the lives of 1 @,@ 012 people from the First World War and 452 from the Second World War . Forming a centre piece to these gardens is Kirkcaldy Galleries , formerly known as Kirkcaldy Museum and Art Gallery , which was also donated by Nairn . 
 In the north @-@ east are two homes of early wealthy merchants and shipowners connected with Kirkcaldy 's harbour . The Merchant ’ s House or Law ’ s Close at 339 – 343 High Street ; once owned by the Law family , is one of the best surviving examples of a sixteenth @-@ century town house in Scotland . Sailors ' Walk , at 443 – 449 High Street ; consists of two seventeenth @-@ century houses , resting on foundations dating back to around 1460 . These two houses were once divided into four dwellings ; three of which were owned by the Oliphant family and the fourth by James Ferguson of Raith . 
 North of the harbour area , on The Path , are two examples of distinctive architectural styles . Hutchison 's House was designed by George Spears , the owner of the nearby East Bridge distillery , in 1793 . Path House , originally known as Dunnikier House , is a three @-@ storey L @-@ plan tower house designed by John Watson in 1692 for his bride , <unk> Orrock . In 1703 Watson sold the house to the Oswald family , who had important links with the town . 
 Two large stately homes also exist within the town . To the north of Kirkcaldy is Dunnikier House , built in the late eighteenth century as a seat for the Oswald family , replacing their previous residence at Path House . To the south @-@ west of Kirkcaldy is Raith House , built in the late seventeenth century by Sir Alexander Raith , 4th Earl of Raith and Melville , for his bride , Barbara Dundas . The house remains a private residence of the Munro @-@ Ferguson family . 
 To the east of the town are the ruins of Ravenscraig Castle on a rocky spit of land extending into the Firth of Forth . King James II began construction of the castle in 1460 for his queen , Mary of Gueldres . It was also a means of defending the upper reaches of the Forth , including the port of Dysart . To a lesser extent it protected the harbour of Kirkcaldy against piracy and English rivalry . Ravenscraig is one of the earliest British castles designed to defend against and use artillery , an innovation demonstrated by the massive walls , the regularly placed shot holes , and the deep rock @-@ cut ditch . Following the death of the King at the siege of Roxburgh Castle ( 1460 ) , work continued on Ravenscraig , and it became a home for Mary of Gueldres until her death in 1463 . In 1470 King James III granted the castle and lands to William Sinclair , Earl of Orkney and Caithness , in exchange for the castle in Kirkwall and the right to the Earldom of Orkney . 
 = = Education = = 
 The first school to be established in the town was Kirkcaldy Burgh School in 1582 with the help of the local minister , Dr David Spens . Until premises were found , pupils were taught in the minister 's house . Notable pupils include Robert Adam and Adam Smith . The school was located at Hill Street before being replaced by Kirkcaldy Grammar School on St Brycedale Avenue in 1843 . A Government list of 1872 described the school as being of ' higher class ' . A new building for the school was gifted to the town in 1893 by Michael Barker Nairn , a linen manufacturer . Other schools were established in the town , including girls schools , subscription schools , and apprentice schools . The passing of the Education ( Scotland ) Act in 1872 replaced voluntary education in the town with a school @-@ based education for all children aged 5 to 13 . 
 Kirkcaldy has four secondary schools and eleven primary schools . Other educational facilities include a private school and a school for children with learning difficulties . Kirkcaldy High School , the oldest secondary school , serves pupils living in the north of the town and has occupied a site on Dunnikier Way since 1958 . <unk> High School opened as a junior secondary school in 1964 and was upgraded to a high school in 1972 . The school serves pupils living in the western end of the town and neighbouring Kinghorn and Burntisland . Viewforth High School , which opened in 1908 , was also initially a junior secondary school , but upgraded to a high school in 1980 . Plans have been approved to build a new secondary school for Kirkcaldy East at the site of the Windmill Road Playing Fields . Work will be funded through the Building Fife 's School Project for completion in August 2016 . St Andrews RC High School , which opened in the late 1950s is one of two Roman Catholic secondary schools in Fife . This caters to pupils living in the eastern half of Fife , from St Andrews to Burntisland and Lochgelly . 
 Further education is provided by Fife College which have two campuses in the town : St Brycedale Campus on St Brycedale Avenue and the Priory Campus on Victoria Road . The college was created in August 2013 from the merger of Adam Smith College , Fife and Carnegie College , Dunfermline . The University of Dundee also has a campus in the town which specialises as a School for Nursing and Midwifery . Originally built by the Fife Health Board for the use of the old Fife College of Further and Higher Education , this campus was taken over by the University in 1996 . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Waste management is handled by the local authority , Fife Council . <unk> recycling operates in the town . A three @-@ bin collection is in place for the majority of residents . Kirkcaldy has one recycling centre and several recycling points , all operated by Fife Council . Non @-@ hazardous waste is sent to landfill at Lochhead near Dunfermline , and Lower Melville Wood , near <unk> . 
 Health care is supplied by NHS Fife , who have their main headquarters in the town at Hayfield House . The Victoria Hospital which is situated north of the town centre , is the town 's acute general and maternity hospital . A new £ 152 @.@ 5 million 530 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 49 @,@ 000 m2 ) extension to the hospital was completed in February 2012 . This new wing contains a maternity unit , children 's department , eleven operating theatres and a new Accident and Emergency Department . Within the grounds of the hospital , a Maggie 's Centre , under the name of Maggie 's Fife , specialises in care for cancer patients . The centre , which was completed between 2004 and 2006 , was the first building to be designed by Zaha Hadid , an Iraqi @-@ born architect in the United Kingdom . <unk> 's Brae Hospital , which is also part of the complex , serves psychiatric and elderly patients . 
 Statutory emergency fire and rescue services are provided by the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service . The main fire station in the town is on Dunnikier Road . Policing in Kirkcaldy is operated by Police Scotland . The main police station in the town is on St Brycedale Avenue . Kirkcaldy is also served by the East Central Region of the Scottish Ambulance Service , which covers Tayside , Forth Valley , and Fife . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The A92 , which connects Dunfermline to the west with Glenrothes and Dundee to the north , passes immediately north of Kirkcaldy . The <unk> road connects it to the western and central parts of the town . At <unk> Roundabout the A921 connects the A92 to the eastern side of Kirkcaldy . It continues via St Clair Street and The Esplanade on to Kinghorn , Burntisland , and Aberdour to the south @-@ west . The main route through the north of the town , the <unk> , runs roughly parallel to and one kilometre to the south of the A92 . This road also connects to the <unk> and the A921 , from Chapel Junction via Chapel Level and Dunnikier Way to Gallatown . From here the <unk> , known locally as the Standing Stane Road , connects the town to St Andrews and Leven to the north @-@ east . The <unk> runs along the coast from Dysart to East Wemyss and Buckhaven to the north @-@ east . 
 The main bus station , adjacent to the Postings Shopping Centre , is between Hill Place and Hunter Street . The Kirkcaldy railway station is to the north @-@ west of the town centre and is on the route for the Fife Circle Line and the East Coast Main Line . Other services run to locations such as Aberdeen , and Inverness to the north and London King 's Cross to the south . Nearby stations such as Burntisland and Kinghorn are to the south and west of the town . The nearest international airport is Edinburgh Airport , 26 miles ( 42 km ) away . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Kirkcaldy is the birthplace of social philosopher and economist Adam Smith , who wrote The Wealth of Nations at his mother 's house at 220 High Street between 1765 – 1767 . Architect and designer Robert Adam ( and his father , William ) came from the town . Sandford Fleming , the founder of Standard Time was born here . Explorer John <unk> Stuart , who led six expeditions into the centre and from the south to north of Australia , was born in nearby Dysart . 
 Politicians who come from the town include Ronald Munro Ferguson , the Governor @-@ General of Australia from 1914 – 1920 ; David Steel , leader of the Liberal Party from 1979 – 1988 and former Presiding Officer of the Scottish Parliament ; and Bertha Wilson , the first female judge of the Supreme Court of Canada and Court of Appeal for Ontario . 
 The former Chancellor of the Exchequer , Prime Minister and MP for the town 's constituency until his <unk> in 2015 , Gordon Brown , was brought up in the town from the age of three . The Scottish crime writer Val McDermid was born in the town . 
 Guy Berryman , bassist of the alternative rock band Coldplay , was born and brought up in the town until the age of thirteen . 
 Richard Park , the chief executive of Global Radio and the headmaster on the BBC talent show Fame Academy was born in the town , where he attended Kirkcaldy High School . 
 Sportsmen include the two @-@ time world darts champion <unk> Wilson , footballer Colin Cameron , professional golfer Peter Whiteford , professional ice hockey player Adam Walker and stock car driver Gordon Moodie . William Arnott ( 1827 – 1901 ) , a biscuit manufacturer in Australia , also came from the town . David Potter , sports historian and author , was not born in Kirkcaldy but has lived there for well over 40 years . David Danskin , who grew up in Kirkcaldy , was a principal founding member of Dial Square FC , later renamed Royal Arsenal , the team that are today known as Arsenal . 
 Frederick Coutts , the 8th General , or international leader , of the Salvation Army was born in Kirkcaldy . 
 The eminent zoologist , Prof David Raitt Robertson Burt FRSE ( 1899 @-@ 1983 ) was born and raised in Kirkcaldy . 
 The Very Rev John Drysdale , twice Moderator of the Church of Scotland ( 1773 and 1784 ) was born and raised in Kirkcaldy . 
 Prof Carstairs Cumming Douglas FRSE physician and hygienist was born in Kirkcaldy . He was largely the man responsible for introducing the obligatory use of <unk> soap throughout Scottish schools in 1907 . 
 Hibernian F.C. footballer Lewis Stevenson was born in Kirkcaldy . He is the only footballer in the club 's history to have won both the Scottish League Cup and Scottish Cup , in 2007 and 2016 respectively . He has made over 300 appearances for the Edinburgh club . 
 = Payback : Debt and the Shadow Side of Wealth = 
 Payback : Debt and the Shadow Side of Wealth is a non @-@ fiction book written by Margaret Atwood , about the nature of debt , for the 2008 Massey Lectures . Each of the book 's five chapters was delivered as a one @-@ hour lecture in a different Canadian city , beginning in St. John 's , Newfoundland , on October 12 and ending in Toronto on November 1 . The lectures were broadcast on CBC Radio One 's Ideas November 10 – 14 . The book was published by House of Anansi Press , both in paperback and in a limited edition hardcover . 
 The lectures and book had been originally scheduled for 2009 , but were moved up to 2008 to avoid conflicting with Atwood 's forthcoming novel after the latter book was delayed by its publisher . The content examines borrowing and lending from financial , psychological , theological , literary , and ecological points of view . Its release coincided with extensive media coverage of the recent financial crisis which led numerous critics to comment on the book 's timeliness . In the Canadian market , the book peaked at # 1 on the The Globe and Mail bestseller list on October 25 and out @-@ sold all previous Massey Lecture books . Critics found the book well @-@ researched , thought @-@ provoking , and humorous . Various reviewers found the discussions on the non @-@ monetary aspects of debt to be the better parts of the book , while some critics identified the sections on ecological debt as the worse parts of the book . 
 Atwood 's Massey Lectures have been adapted as a 2012 documentary Payback , produced by the National Film Board of Canada , which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2012 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Toronto @-@ based author Margaret Atwood was asked several times over numerous years to deliver a Massey Lecture , which would be broadcast over the radio on CBC Radio One 's Ideas and published by the House of Anansi Press . When she finally agreed , she chose her subject to be sociobiology of literary criticism , and specifically how an author 's gender and age affects critical reception . However , after delivering lectures at Oxford University and Cambridge University on similar topics she re @-@ considered her choice . She began thinking of ' debt ' as a topic after writing " Letter to America " for The Globe and Mail in March 2003 ( later reprinted in The Nation ) regarding the pending invasion of Iraq and asking whether Americans understood the debt to which they were committing . 
 Atwood was scheduled to release her new novel in fall 2008 and deliver the Massey Lectures in fall 2009 . At the insistence of Atwood 's American editor at Doubleday , her Canadian and British editors and agents agreed in January 2008 to postpone the release of her novel by one year to avoid competing with the US Presidential election for attention . The people organizing the Massey Lectures , Sarah McLachlan of House of Anansi Press , John Fraser of Massey College , and Bernie Lucht of CBC 's Ideas , discovered this re @-@ scheduling via a newspaper article . They asked Atwood to deliver her lectures in fall 2008 , meaning the text would be due in June . She agreed on condition of Massey College providing research and technical assistance . The text was written between late January and June 2008 , during which Atwood took time for two vacations ( birding in Cuba and in France ) . The original title was to be Debt but Scott Griffin , owner of House of Anansi Press , convinced Atwood to change it to something less depressing . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The content is divided into five parts . The first part , Ancient <unk> , considers psychological and historical aspects of debt . Atwood calls debt an imaginative human construct derived from a sense of need or greed and a sense of fairness in reciprocity and equivalent values . She cites a study by Frans de Waal that suggests a sense of fairness may be a genetic trait shared with other primates , and a study by Robert Axelrod which illustrates , given a level playing field , that the tit @-@ for @-@ tat strategy ( or ' Do unto others as they have done onto you ' strategy ) was the most superior strategy in game theory . Debt and borrowing mechanisms from ancient and biblical societies are compared , including provisions from the Code of Hammurabi , Ancient Egyptians , and the Greco @-@ Roman mythologies . 
 The second part , Debt and Sin , explores the theological side , including moral or ethical characteristics attributed to debtors and creditors by society and religion . Debt , like certain vices , such as cigarette @-@ smoking , have experienced times when it was considered sinful , and other times fashionable . Biblical references , like the Book of Deuteronomy , the Lord 's Prayer , and sin @-@ eating , are examined . The growth of debt is linked to the growth of the written media with the relationship symbolized by the Faustian contract with the devil . 
 The third part , Debt as Plot , examines the " Debtor " game from Eric Berne 's Games People Play and its derivative " Try and Collect " . Debt as a motif and theme is explained , especially in 19th century literature , with examples from " The Devil and Tom Walker " , Wuthering Heights , Vanity Fair , Madame Bovary , House of Mirth , and The Mill on the Floss . Atwood posits a theory that Charles Dickens ' Ebenezer Scrooge is the reverse character of Christopher Marlowe 's Doctor Faustus ; although Scrooge is rich , he is unwilling to spend his money and is living miserably before he is saved . , while Doctor Faustus is rich , happy , and generous but ends in hell . 
 The fourth part , The Shadow Side , looks at what happens to debtors and creditors when debts are not re @-@ paid . Some debts that are a matter of honour to which the debtor must repay by an equivalent value or creditor must either forgive or exact revenge . Debts to society , after committing crimes , are paid through vengeance @-@ based imprisonment . The United Kingdom had debtors ' prison for those who could not pay , but this was abolished for economic reasons as it prevented labourers from working and had a burdensome cost of operation . Other societies used the services of their family members or themselves as collateral . Sometimes the debtors overthrew the creditors , like King Philip IV of France against the Knights Templar , or the Ugandans against the Asians . Atwood applies the trickle @-@ down economics to debt and examines the psychology side through the Jungian Shadow . 
 In the final part , titled Payback , Atwood examines ecological debt . She recounts the journey of Scrooge in A Christmas Carol but placed in a modern setting . The modern @-@ day Scrooge is visited by the spirits of Earth Day . In the past Scrooge witnesses debts to nature being repaid through animal and human sacrifices and through pestilence in over @-@ crowded or unsustainable populations . In the present Scrooge witnesses current unsustainable practices , over @-@ fishing and deforestation , creating a debt to nature being repaid through effects on the climate and impacts on people . Finally , in the future , Scrooge is shown two versions : one , an eco @-@ friendly human society balanced with environmental systems , and the other , a dystopian future with a disaster affecting the fuel or food resources in such a way that hyperinflation sets in and renders money useless . 
 = = Publication and sales = = 
 The book was released in October 2008 as Atwood began the Massey lecture series in St. John 's , Newfoundland , on October 12 . The second lecture took place in Vancouver on the 15th , followed by Winnipeg on the 17th , Montreal on the 20th , and ending on November 1 in Toronto . The series was recorded then aired on CBC Radio One 's Ideas between November 10 and 14 . At each event Atwood fielded questions from the audience and participated in book signings . 
 Payback entered The Globe and Mail bestseller list at # 6 and peaked at # 1 on October 25 . It became the best selling Massey Lecture book to date and was in its fourth printing by the end of November . Excerpts were printed in The Times and the Financial Times . In April 2009 , it was a finalist for the annual National Business Book Award and won a silver medal in the Business Ethics category of the Axiom Business Book Awards . That same month , the National Film Board of Canada acquired the film rights , with plans to adapt Payback as a feature @-@ length documentary . They announced the involvement of Jennifer <unk> as director and <unk> Din as producer . In June 2009 , the book was awarded a Canadian Booksellers Association Libris Award for Non @-@ Fiction Book of the Year . 
 Almost all reviewers commented upon the timeliness of the book 's release as the magnitude and causes of the most recent financial crisis were becoming apparent . Some reviewers also commented upon the timeliness of her previous books , like her novel in which society is devastated by a genetically engineered virus , Oryx and Crake , which coincided with the SARS outbreak . Playing off this theme Canadian magazine The Walrus , at a fund @-@ raiser gala for its charitable foundation , auctioned a crystal decanter with five predictions written by Atwood sealed inside . Journalist Rebecca <unk> was the winning bidder and wrote about the predictions , which include the diminished use of fabric softener and the rise in use of industrial hemp , in an article for Maclean 's magazine . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Critics found the book well @-@ researched and thought @-@ provoking . Reviewers enjoyed Atwood 's humour and conversational writing . The style was described as " eclectic " , a " literary walkabout " , and " anecdotally rich " . Novelist David Liss wrote that the book was " delightfully engaging , smart , funny , [ and ] clever " . Canadian writer Charles Foran called the book " serious adult fun " that " displays some of the energy of a lively dinner party , one replete with anecdotes and opinions , witticisms and barbs " . The book 's most entertaining parts are discussions on non @-@ monetary debts and debts portrayed in literature . Regarding the speeches , the reviewer for The Montreal Gazette wrote : " Her delivery , as usual , was smooth , relentlessly paced , but with precise pauses for the frequent , much @-@ appreciated laugh lines . " John N. Gray , in The New York Review of Books , wrote that " Atwood has combined rigorous analysis , wide @-@ ranging erudition , and a beguilingly playful imagination " . The Library Journal recommended the book for all libraries . 
 Negative reviews came from Salon.com and The Scotsman . Louis Bayard of Salon.com disagreed with the delivery of the final chapter , on ecological debt , writing that Atwood " forsakes artistic engagement for ideological reflex " . William Skidelsky in The Guardian agreed that the chapter was " by no means the highlight of the book " . He also wrote : " Because Atwood constantly veers off in new directions she doesn 't always give herself time to sink her claws deep into a topic . The result is that , although Payback is packed with information , it can seem oddly thin ... Still , Atwood 's enthusiasm for her subject and lively style go a long way toward making up for these flaws . She can be a brilliant phrase @-@ maker , and has a gift for summing up an idea with a single vivid image . " Allan Massie , reviewing for The Scotsman , could not find a coherent argument being presented and found her writing style " veering uncomfortably between the academic and the <unk> colloquial , [ is ] tiresome , [ and ] some of her writing is pretentious , much obvious and platitudinous " . The reviewers in Salon.com and The Scotsman , as well as The Economist , were all uncomfortable with Atwood not distinguishing or contrasting ' good ' and ' bad ' debt . 
 = The Boys from Baghdad High = 
 The Boys from Baghdad High , also known as Baghdad High , is a British @-@ American @-@ French television documentary film . It was first shown in the United Kingdom at the 2007 Sheffield Doc / Fest , before airing on BBC Two on 8 January 2008 . It also aired in many other countries including France , Australia , the United States , Canada , Germany and the Netherlands . It documents the lives of four Iraqi schoolboys of different religious or ethnic backgrounds over the course of one year in the form of a video diary . The documentary was filmed by the boys themselves , who were given video cameras for the project . 
 Directed and produced by Ivan O 'Mahoney and Laura Winter of Renegade Pictures and <unk> , for the United Kingdom 's BBC , HBO in the United States , and the Franco @-@ German network Arte , The Boys from Baghdad High was produced by Alan Hayling and Karen O 'Connor for the BBC , Hans Robert <unk> for Arte , and Sheila Nevins for HBO . 
 The Boys from Baghdad High received high viewership when it initially aired in the UK , and was reviewed favourably in the media . It was named the Best News and Current Affairs Film at the European Independent Film Festival , won the Premier Prize at the Sandford St. Martin Trust Awards , and was nominated for awards at two film festivals . The documentary also received the Radio Times Readers Award , and a nomination for the Amnesty International 2008 Television Documentary and <unk> UK Media Award . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The film brings together the video diaries recorded by four friends and students at the Tariq bin Ziad High School for Boys in <unk> , a mixed @-@ race , middle @-@ class area in the Karrada suburb of Baghdad , Iraq . Entering their final year in 2006 , each has high expectations for the year ahead and hope to graduate so they can have a chance to attend university . At the same time , the boys must also deal with the increasing sectarian violence that is starting to extend into Karrada . They face the threats of roadside bombings , the hassles of security checkpoints on their way to school , frequent curfews , the constant presence of American Apache helicopters overhead , and the deterioration of their neighbourhood which becomes rife with assassinations , muggings and kidnappings . Many of their fellow students , unmotivated and academically underperforming , are absent from school . 
 Ali <unk> is one of the few Kurdish people remaining in Baghdad . His family are struggling financially and resort to siphoning petrol from their car to run their back @-@ up generator when the power grid fails . When the generator breaks down one night , Ali begins to wonder why he is fixing it against a backdrop of gunfire , instead of studying in peace . Another night , he reports the neighbourhood 's news but explains there is nothing to speak of other than the usual explosions , violence , and death . Anmar <unk> , a Syriac Christian , tries to remain philosophical and hopes that armed gangs will not attack the school . His family , however , are more nervous about any nearby gunfire , as their Christian beliefs increase the threat to their lives if anyone were to find out about them . Anmar has a girlfriend , whom he can contact only via his mobile phone , but he has not heard from her in several days , leaving him worried about whether she has found another boyfriend , or has been hurt in the violence . Hayder Khalid , a Shia Muslim , hopes to become a famous singer @-@ songwriter . He frequently downloads music videos of English @-@ language pop music so he can learn popular English songs and dance moves . Mohammad Raed , a Sunni Muslim , is the class clown at school , who prefers playing sports and fooling around with his friends to studying . Unaware of his behaviour at school , his mother believes he is hard @-@ working , self @-@ sufficient and mature , and believes he will graduate and go to university . 
 Halfway through the school year , Ali 's family moves to the more peaceful Kurdish region in Northern Iraq but after living there for several months , Ali says that he is homesick and misses the action and noise of Baghdad . Mohammad , feeling lonely , " adopts " a bird with a broken wing and a mouse he finds in the house . This brings him some comfort , but his mother later demands that he get rid of the mouse as she does not want " vermin " in the house . Mohammad 's family rejoice when Saddam Hussein is sentenced , and feel that his later execution was justified , as to do otherwise would have made the Iraqi people look weak . Conversely , Anmar 's family is upset at his execution , as they feel that the people who came into power were no better than Hussein was . Hyder 's mother says that many Iraqi people were hopeful about the arrival of American forces , and that it is wrong to blame America for all of the problems in Iraq . She notes that the bloodshed has yet to stop as the Sunni continues to kill the Shiite , and vice versa . As the film continues , Hyder 's family loses its income and they start to sell their furniture to earn extra money . 
 At the end of the year , the boys must pass seven final exams to graduate . Anmar , Hyder and Ali each fail two subjects , and are given the option to retake the exams . Anmar passes the retakes and aspires to study English literature in college , and his family decide to move to the safer region of <unk> now that he has graduated . Hyder also retakes his exams and passes , but his family can no longer afford to pay for the university fees . Ali chooses not to retake the exams , and his family leave Iraq . Mohammad fails four subjects and must repeat his senior year . He chooses to do so at a different school while working at his uncle 's scooter repair shop . As the documentary closes , it notes that during the year of filming , two of the boys ' classmates were killed , six were kidnapped , and seventy @-@ five left Iraq . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 The Boys from Baghdad High was co @-@ produced and co @-@ directed by Ivan O 'Mahoney and Laura Winter . Before working on the film , O 'Mahoney had been a United Nations peacekeeper in Bosnia and an attorney in the Netherlands , and had directed the 2006 documentary How to Plan a Revolution , which profiled two young activists who attempted to remove the Azerbaijani government from power by staging an " Orange " revolution . He had also worked for the BBC , Channel 4 , CNN , and PBS in Ethiopia , Iraq , Sudan and Colombia . Winter had previously worked for CNN , 60 Minutes , CBS Evening News , CBS Radio , The Christian Science Monitor and the New York Daily News in Afghanistan , Pakistan , Jordan and Iraq . The Boys from Baghdad High was the first time she was credited as a director . 
 O 'Mahoney and Winter began working on the film in 2006 . Winter had watched a film called The Women 's Story , about two Iraqi women who had journeyed around the country and filmed what they saw . They wanted to make a documentary about " the people never seen on the evening news , [ instead of ] presidents , prime ministers , generals and militants ... claiming to know something of Iraq 's future " . Winter explained that " all these documentaries coming out of Iraq were done for or by adults . Iraqi children had not been more than a UN statistic about the dead , kidnapped or injured " , so they decided to concentrate on what they viewed as the " real source of Iraq 's future " – teenagers . " I wanted to tell the story of Iraq in a different way . As journalists , we do stories about kids and teenagers , but we don 't hear from them . If you go to the UN reports , they are just a number and that 's it . " O 'Mahoney was a little more reticent ; he had recently worked in Iraq but did not wish to return due to the civil war and the deteriorating condition of the country . When it was decided to use a school as a backdrop to the story , which could also be used to provide a chronological narrative , O 'Mahoney and Winter realised it would be too dangerous for the students to be seen with either a Western or Iraqi camera crew because it would draw too much attention to them , and so they decided that the students would film the documentary themselves . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Producers chose boys who were students of Tariq bin Ziad High School . The school was holding on to the notion of a united Iraq , even as the country was becoming increasingly racially and religiously segregated . Having worked in Iraq in 2003 , Winter knew that the Baghdad district Karrada was mixed and integrated with high numbers of Shiites and Christians . She asked her former driver and translator , who had attended the school , if he would contact the principal . Initially the school was suspicious of their intentions , but decided to trust the judgement of Winter 's translator . Principal Ra 'ad Jawad selected eight boys to take part in the documentary because he knew they could be discreet about making the documentary , would not get bored , and would remain committed to filming their lives for a year . The producers wanted their cast to include girls , and had found a school and families willing to take part in the documentary , but the then @-@ Minister of Education refused to let them take part . Jawad travelled to London to meet the producers and he was trained to operate the video cameras that the boys were to use . The cameras and tapes were sent into Iraq via the BBC News department , which were then passed onto the school . Jawad and two Iraqi associate producers trained the boys how to use the cameras . Two months into filming , four of the boys dropped out of the project , leaving Hayder Khalid , Anmar <unk> , Ali <unk> , and Mohammad Raed . O 'Mahoney and Winter never met the boys while the documentary was being produced because it was such a high @-@ risk assignment . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The producers were diligent in ensuring the boys ' security . O 'Mahoney explained : " They were under very strict security rules when they were filming . They were told not to act as news cameramen . They were not allowed to film in the street . They could only film at school or at home , in secure environments . " Winter added , " they are not paid news cameramen , and that was not the point of the film . Would they normally be running down the street toward a firefight to film it ? No . Would they run toward a bombing , knowing that there could be a secondary explosion or a group of soldiers , who could start , at any second , firing wildly into the crowd , to film a piece of video ? No . That 's not real life for any Iraqi civilian . " Nevertheless , Hayder sometimes filmed outside at night , and explained to the camera that he had to be careful because people are robbed if they are seen carrying even a mobile phone . On New Year 's Eve , he and his friend celebrate with a bonfire in his friend 's back yard , but after debating whether a noise they hear is fireworks or gunfire , Hayder rushes home . Another boy is driven to school one morning , and reach a special forces roadside checkpoint along the way . He explains , " if they see me with a camera they will take me to prison ; they 'll think I 'm a terrorist who wants to bomb them . " 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 More than 300 hours of footage was recorded by the students and the two Iraqi associate producers . It was transcribed , translated and edited into a 90 @-@ minute film . Getting the tapes out of Iraq proved difficult for Winter and O 'Mahoney , who remained in the UK . They had to rely on journalists from many news agencies , especially those in the BBC News 's Baghdad Bureau high @-@ risk team , to smuggle the tapes out of Iraq . When curfews were enforced , weeks passed before the producers received new footage because it was impossible for anybody to leave their homes or the country . 
 The execution of Saddam Hussein , which Anwar had filmed from the internet from start to finish , was excluded from the documentary . " We had a big debate about whether or not that should go into the film " , O 'Connor explained . Water continued , " it was one of those things where to see it , it just gets you . But we had to ask ourselves , does it help our story ? No . " Footage that was nearly edited out included a scene where Anwar had to siphon petrol out of the family car for the house 's generator . Anwar explained to the camera that he needed to do it because their family was so poor . " That 's tough " , commented Water , " because that 's a dishonour to his family . " 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The Boys from Baghdad High received its world première at the 2007 Sheffield Doc / Fest , an annual film festival for documentary productions held in Sheffield , South Yorkshire . In the US it was screened on 29 April 2008 at the Tribeca Film Festival , and 1 August 2008 at the Traverse City Film Festival . The first time Winter and O 'Mahoney met one of the film 's subjects was at the 2008 Tribeca Film Festival , nearly a year after the filming had completed . Ali and his family had relocated to the US since completing the documentary , and so he was able to attend the screening . Winter and Ali met a second time at the Traverse City Film Festival . The producers had tried to get the boys visas to enter the UK for a screening in London , but they were denied entry by the British Government . 
 It premièred on television in the UK on BBC Two , a national terrestrial television network , on 8 January 2008 at 9 : 00 p.m. as part of the This World documentary series . Overnight viewing figures indicated that 600 @,@ 000 households had watched the film , which was three percent of the total television audience for that time slot . It was broadcast in France and Germany on the joint @-@ venture network Arte on 18 March 2008 at 9 : 00 p.m. , with the French title Bagdad , le Bac Sous les Bombes , and Die <unk> von der Bagdad @-@ High in Germany . It aired on the American cable network HBO as Baghdad High on 4 August 2008 at 9 : 00 p.m. , and was available on HBO 's video on demand service until 21 September 2008 . The documentary also aired in Australia on the Special Broadcasting Service , Canada on CBC Newsworld , and in the Netherlands on VPRO . 
 The documentary was streamed online by the BBC using its BBC iPlayer service to UK residents for seven days after the initial broadcast . A Region 2 DVD of the documentary can be obtained , although it can only be purchased directly from the BBC and is not available in stores . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Reviews for The Boys from Baghdad High were generally favourable . The Huffington Post said that giving the video cameras to the students was an excellent idea because the depiction of their school @-@ life versus the increasing danger was captured " with neutral equality [ so ] that the film is able to capture the interiority of its subjects more acutely than a straight @-@ forward examination of violence would " . Thomas Sutcliffe of The Independent said , " its storyline was governed not by a tick @-@ list of stock narrative dilemmas and secrets but the cruel uncertainties that occupation and insurgency have brought to Baghdad . " Time Out New York gave the film five out of five stars , and PopMatters rated it 8 out of 10 . The Washington Post 's Paul Farhi said , " HBO has carved a niche as the TV home of some of the most compelling programs about the Iraq war ... Baghdad High does no harm to HBO 's burgeoning war cred [ <unk> ] . " Variety , The Christian Science Monitor , LA Weekly , and the Los Angeles Times also praised the film . At the Question @-@ and @-@ Answer session following a screening at the Tribeca Film Festival , one audience member , a new recruit to the United States Marine Corps , told Ali , who had also attended , " I finally know what life is like behind those walls and what you guys are like , and it 's been really , really fantastic . " 
 There were complaints , however , that the documentary did not depict enough of the political aspects of the Iraqi War . Farhi said , " The 90 @-@ minute documentary doesn 't say much about the larger issues facing Iraq , but it does capture some small and captivating human stories .... They happen to live in what one boy describes as ' the most dangerous city on Earth . ' You don 't see much of Iraq 's violence in Baghdad High , but you surely feel its gravity and their dread . " The Boston Herald 's Mark Perigard said that he felt the documentary was " a personal story , not a political one " . In The New York Times , Mike Hale commented , " While the boys talk frequently about violence and despair , they rarely discuss politics or ethnic differences ( with the exception of Anmar , the Christian ) and they almost never directly address the American presence . We do hear some parental opinions , which are surprisingly neutral . One mother says : ' We shouldn 't blame the Americans for everything . There is something wrong with us too ' . " Jennifer Marin , a culture columnist from the Los Angeles Times , wrote at About.com , that while it was innovative , informative and a noble experiment , the footage is " undistinguished and rough because the hands holding the cameras weren 't skilled and the eyes framing the shots were not those of artists or keen observers . " She thought that , with the exception of Mohammad , the boys lacked charisma , and that the film failed to capture the drama of living in a war @-@ zone , due to the lack of a director calling the shots . Perigard said , " After the time you 've invested [ as a viewer ] , it 's not nearly satisfying enough . For all the questions this fascinating film raises , it might as well be written in sand . " 
 Many reviewers noted the similarities between the Iraqi boys and those from Western cultures . Peter Scarlet , the artistic director at the Tribeca Film Festival , said , " What 's fascinating about the film that resulted is how very familiar and ordinary these kids are – they 're not really all that different from your own teenagers or the kids you went to school with . The kids of Baghdad High also open us up to a very different sense of life in Iraq than what we 've been seeing on the nightly news for five years . " The Huffington Post said , " previously it had been unfathomable that students in Baghdad might be experiencing the same ephemeral and narcissistic heartbreak as we are in the United States . " Farhi and Nicholls noticed that the Iraqi students do the same things as American high school students , such as listening to rap music , trying to study without distractions , playing sports , becoming stressed over their final exams and acting silly with their friends . Perigard commented , " despite the cultural differences , Ali , Anmar , Hayder and Mohammad will seem instantly familiar to anyone who has spent time around a teenage boy . They like to wrestle each other , love Western music , dream big and have trouble buckling down in school . " 
 The New York magazine said that the film 's premise of four high @-@ school friends videotaping their senior year " sounds like a fluffy reality show " ; Bill Weber of Slant Magazine said , " putting the trials of MTV reality @-@ show prima donnas in perspective , the middle @-@ class quartet will be relatable to this BBC / HBO production 's audience in their easy embrace of Western kid stuff ... Directors Ivan O 'Mahoney and Laura Winter balance [ portray ] an everyday sense of the adolescents ' wartime anxiety with the more commonplace juvenile relief . " Similarly , The Huffington Post raised comparisons with MTV reality shows , but was pleased to see that the Iraqi boys did not play to the cameras because they had not been exposed to programmes such as Laguna Beach : The Real Orange County or The Paper . That juvenile relief was commented on by many ; The Washington Post highlighted Mohammad 's adoption of an unwelcome mouse in the house . Hale described a scene where Mohammad and Ali act like hostage and captor . " Suddenly Ali is holding a large knife . ' He 's being naughty ! ' Mohammad says . Ali holds the knife near Mohammad and says , a little too <unk> : ' Allah ! This is the first hostage . I 'm going to slaughter him this way . ' Mohammad tells him to stop fooling around . Ali relents . ' O.K. He just got a presidential pardon . He can live ' . " Reuters also commented on this , and more banter between Ali and Mohammad . " Ali is shown making a pretend hostage video with Mohammad , and then teasing his friend for his smelly feet . ' If Chemical Ali really wanted to destroy the north he should have fired a rocket with Mohammad 's socks in it ' . " 
 The depiction of the stark differences between Iraq and the Western world also received comments . Farhi described the school as having " all the charm of an abandoned prison " , and continued with , " visiting a friend who lives a few hundred yards away involves running a potential gauntlet of kidnappers and snipers ; getting to school on time means navigating military checkpoints . Before a big exam , teachers frisk their students for explosives , " while Perigard said , " at night , their neighbourhoods are riddled with gunfire and explosions " . In the New York Daily News , Patrick <unk> wrote , " American teens wouldn 't recognize other scenes showing how life slips into a heavily regulated series of checkpoints and curfews . " Hale said , " The way the boys can tell without looking whether it 's an Apache or a Chinook helicopter overhead , the way the curtains are always drawn , the level of physical contact and affection among the men ... would be alien to American sensibilities . " 
 = = Accolades = = 
 The Boys from Baghdad High was well @-@ received from its initial screening . It was nominated for a Youth Jury Award at the 2007 Sheffield Doc / Fest , shortlisted for an Amnesty International 2008 UK Media Award in the category for Television Documentary and Docudramas , and the European Independent Film Festival named it the Best News and Current Affairs film . It was nominated for the Readers ' Award in the Radio Times , and in May 2008 it won the Premiere Prize at the Sandford St. Martin Trust Awards , which acknowledges excellence in religious broadcasting . The Trust 's chairman and former BBC Head of Religious Broadcasting Colin Morris said of the documentary , " We saw the way faith breaks into secular life in the chaos of present @-@ day Iraq . Coming from different ethnic and religious backgrounds the boys showed that despite the war their daily preoccupations were much the same as those of teenage boys the world over – girlfriends , parents , sport , fashion , exams , music . Would their friendship survive ? Ultimately the programme confronted British viewers with the question : ' What in God 's name are we doing there ? ' " The film received a standing ovation from the audience at the Traverse City Film Festival , and at the Tribeca Film Festival it was short @-@ listed for the 2008 World Documentary Feature Competition , competing against eleven other non @-@ fiction films for Best Documentary Film and Best New Documentary Filmmaker . 
 = Brad Hennessey = 
 Brad Martin Hennessey ( born February 7 , 1980 ) is a former American professional baseball pitcher for the San Francisco Giants of Major League Baseball . He stands 6 feet 2 inches ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) tall and weighs 185 pounds ( 84 kg ) . He played for the Giants from 2004 – 08 and threw five pitches : a fastball , a slider , a changeup , a curveball , and a cutter . 
 Hennessey attended Youngstown State University and set several school records during his tenure with the team . In 2001 , he was selected by the Giants in the first round of the draft . He did not pitch in 2002 because of surgery to remove a non @-@ cancerous tumor from his back . In 2004 , he reached the major leagues for the first time . He spent much of the 2005 season in the major leagues , making 21 starts and posting a 4 @.@ 64 earned run average ( ERA ) . In 2006 , Hennessey spent time both in the Giants ' starting rotation and the bullpen . He became a relief pitcher full @-@ time in 2007 , spending the entire season in the majors and closing for the Giants part of the time . After posting a 7 @.@ 81 ERA with the Giants in 2008 , Hennessey was outrighted to the minors ; he refused the assignment and became a free agent . He attempted to pitch for the Baltimore Orioles in 2009 but was unable due to injury . Hennessey then spent parts of 2010 and 2011 in the minor leagues . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hennessey was born on February 7 , 1980 , in Toledo , Ohio . In 1997 , he graduated from Whitmer High School , where he was named a USA Today honorable mention All @-@ American and won All @-@ Ohio honors for his baseball playing . He went to Youngstown State University , where he played shortstop and pitched until his senior year , when he converted exclusively to pitching . As a senior , he had a 6 – 5 record and a 4 @.@ 06 earned run average ( ERA ) in 16 games while setting school single @-@ season records for innings pitched ( 88 2 ⁄ 3 ) and strikeouts ( 126 ) . That year , he was named the Mid @-@ Continent Conference co @-@ Pitcher of the Year . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues ( part 1 ) = = = 
 Hennessey was drafted by the San Francisco Giants in the first round ( 21st overall ) of the 2001 Major League Baseball draft . He began his career with the Salem @-@ Keizer Volcanoes of the Single @-@ A short season Northwest League , where he had a 1 – 0 record , a 2 @.@ 38 ERA , 22 strikeouts , and 34 innings pitched in nine starts . That year , Salem @-@ Keizer won the Northwest League championship . While pitching in an instructional league later that year , Hennessey began experiencing soreness that was initially attributed to a muscle strain but turned out to be a non @-@ cancerous tumor in his back . He had it removed in February 2002 , but it grew back later that season , and he missed the entire year while undergoing a second surgery . 
 Hennessey began 2003 in extended spring training but pitched for the Hagerstown Suns of the Single @-@ A South Atlantic League from June 14 to the end of the season . With Hagerstown , Hennessey had a 3 – 9 record , a 4 @.@ 21 ERA , 44 strikeouts , one complete game , and 79 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 15 starts . He began the 2004 season with the Norwich Navigators of the Double @-@ A Eastern League , where he had a 5 – 5 record , a 3 @.@ 56 ERA , 55 strikeouts , and 101 innings pitched in 18 starts . On July 14 , he was promoted to the Fresno Grizzlies of the Triple @-@ A Pacific Coast League . In 5 starts with Fresno , he had a 4 – 1 record , a 2 @.@ 02 ERA , 16 strikeouts , and 35 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . 
 = = = Major leagues = = = 
 = = = = 2004 = = = = 
 Following an injury to Jerome Williams in 2004 , Hennessey was called up to join the Giants ' starting rotation . He made his debut on August 7 against Greg Maddux of the Chicago Cubs , who was looking for his 300th win . Hennessey allowed four runs in 4 2 ⁄ 3 innings and took the loss in the 8 – 4 defeat , becoming the first pitcher to lose his debut to a pitcher who won his 300th game since 1901 , when Cy Young defeated John McPherson . In his next start , against the Philadelphia Phillies on August 13 , he allowed four unearned runs in five innings , got his first career hit ( against Brian Powell ) , and earned his first career win in a 16 – 6 victory . After another start , he was sent to Fresno on August 18 when Wayne Franklin returned from the disabled list , but he was called up on August 28 when David <unk> was demoted . On September 16 , he threw a season @-@ high seven shutout innings in a 4 – 0 victory over the Milwaukee Brewers . Hennessey finished the season with a 2 – 2 record , a 4 @.@ 98 ERA , 25 strikeouts , and 34 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in seven starts . 
 = = = = 2005 = = = = 
 Hennessey began 2005 in the minors . He was called up to make a start on May 1 , and he gave up three runs over seven innings while earning the win in an 8 – 3 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates . After the game , he was returned to Fresno to make room for Jeremy Accardo on the roster , but he was called up on May 12 to replace the injured Jason Schmidt in the rotation . He made four starts on this stint ; after he gave up six runs in two innings in a 6 – 5 loss to the Phillies on June 2 , he was replaced in the rotation by Jeff <unk> and returned to Fresno . On July 9 , he was called up to rejoin the Giants ' rotation as Kirk <unk> was demoted to the bullpen . Facing the St. Louis Cardinals that day , he pitched seven shutout innings and earned the win in the Giants ' 2 – 0 victory . For the rest of the year , he remained in the Giants ' rotation . In a start against the Brewers on July 28 , Hennessey pitched 7 shutout innings , striking out seven and allowing only three hits , and won the game 3 – 0 . The three runs came on a home run by Hennessey himself against Víctor Santos . He allowed one run over a career @-@ high 7 2 ⁄ 3 innings on September 21 and hit a home run against John Patterson as he defeated the Washington Nationals 5 – 1 . He ended up making 21 starts for the Giants , tallying a 5 – 8 record , a 4 @.@ 64 ERA , 64 strikeouts , and 52 walks in 118 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . With Fresno , he had a 4 – 2 record , a 5 @.@ 19 ERA , 46 strikeouts , 22 walks , and 67 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . 
 = = = = 2006 = = = = 
 Kevin Correia and the newly acquired Jamey Wright competed for the Giants ' fifth starting job with Hennessey in 2006 ; Hennessey struggled and began the season with the Grizzlies as Wright won the job . Hennessey was called up on April 16 due to an injury to Noah Lowry . After posting a 2 – 1 record and a 3 @.@ 33 ERA , he was sent to the bullpen upon Lowry 's return to the starting rotation on May 9 , though Hennessey was frequently called upon to make spot starts . He got his first career save on June 5 , pitching the final four innings of the Giants ' 14 – 2 victory over the Florida Marlins . On August 11 , Giants ' manager Felipe Alou announced that Hennessey would replace the struggling Wright in the rotation . In his first start since rejoining the rotation on August 14 , he threw 5 2 ⁄ 3 shutout innings , earning the win in a 1 – 0 victory over the San Diego Padres . He posted an 8 @.@ 62 ERA over his next four starts and returned to the bullpen when Lowry returned from an injury in September , though he made one more start before the end of the year . In 34 games ( 12 starts ) , Hennessey had a 5 – 6 record , a 4 @.@ 26 ERA , 42 strikeouts , and 42 walks in 99 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . 
 = = = = 2007 = = = = 
 Hennessey spent the entire 2007 season in the bullpen for the Giants . At the beginning of June , he was named the closer by Giants ' manager Bruce Bochy after Armando Benítez was traded . From June 30 to August 31 , he converted saves in 14 straight save opportunities , the longest streak by a Giant since Robb Nen had a 28 @-@ save streak in 2000 ; overall , Hennessey converted 17 out of 19 saves from May 30 to August 31 . Afterwards , he converted only two out of five opportunities before Brian Wilson took over the closer role . In 2007 , he went 4 – 5 and had a 3 @.@ 42 ERA and 19 saves ( out of 24 opportunities ) . 
 = = = = 2008 = = = = 
 On January 18 , 2008 , the Giants and Hennessey avoided arbitration and agreed to a $ 1 @.@ 6 million , one @-@ year deal . After he posted a 12 @.@ 94 in his first 11 games of the season , he got sent down to the minors on May 6 to make room for Billy Sadler . Used as a starter at Fresno , Hennessey posted a 7 – 10 record , a 4 @.@ 83 ERA , 69 strikeouts , 37 walks , and 132 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 21 starts . He was called back up when rosters expanded on September 1 . After initially pitching out of the bullpen , he was moved to the rotation to replace Correia . On September 15 , he threw the only complete game of his career , allowing three runs in eight innings in a 3 – 1 loss to the Arizona Diamondbacks at Chase Field . In 17 games ( four starts ) , he had a 1 – 2 record , a 7 @.@ 81 ERA , 21 strikeouts , and 15 walks in 40 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He was outrighted to the minors in October , but he refused the assignment and became a free agent . 
 = = = Minor leagues ( part 2 ) = = = 
 Hennessey signed a minor league deal with the Baltimore Orioles on November 17 , 2008 . Spencer Fordin of MLB.com wrote that Hennessey was " consistently hyped as a favorite to break camp in the rotation " for the Orioles . However , an elbow injury kept Hennessey from making any appearances with the Orioles or their affiliates . On June 1 , 2009 , Hennessey was released . 
 On March 2 , 2010 , Hennessey signed with the Minnesota Twins . He spent the 2010 season with the Rochester Red Wings of the Triple @-@ A International League , posting a 1 – 3 record , a 7 @.@ 76 ERA , 13 strikeouts , and eight walks in 26 2 ⁄ 3 innings . After 14 games ( one start ) , Hennessey was released on August 5 . 
 The Houston Astros signed Hennessey to a minor league contract on May 31 , 2011 . He played for the Double @-@ A Corpus Christi Hooks of the Texas League and the Triple @-@ A Oklahoma City RedHawks of the Pacific Coast League . His four games with Corpus Christi were all relief appearances ; he had an 0 – 1 record and a 1 @.@ 80 ERA . In seven games ( six starts ) with Oklahoma City , he had an 0 – 3 record , an 11 @.@ 45 ERA , 10 strikeouts , and five walks in 22 innings pitched . On August 1 , Hennessey was released by the Astros . 
 = = Pitching Style = = 
 Hennessey threw five pitches : a fastball , a slider , a changeup , a curveball , and a cutter . The fastball was Hennessey 's main pitch ; he threw it over 60 % of the time in the majors . He did not throw it very hard , averaging speeds under 90 mph in 2007 and 2008 . His slider was his secondary pitch , and his changeup was his third most @-@ used pitch . Hennessey rarely used the cutter except for in 2006 , when he threw it 10 @.@ 1 % of the time . <unk> often was plagued by a big inning , displaying a tendency to allow several runs in an inning during his starts . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hennessey married a nurse , Erin Bullard , on December 14 , 2002 . The couple has two children : Emma ( born April 18 , 2003 ) and Colin Jacob ( born October 26 , 2006 ) . Hennessey participated in numerous charitable events during his tenure with the Giants . 
 = Never Again ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Never Again " is the thirteenth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It was written by producers Glen Morgan and James Wong , and directed by Rob Bowman . The episode aired in the United States on February 2 , 1997 on the Fox network and in the United Kingdom on BBC One on December 3 , 1997 . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . The episode received a Nielsen rating of 13 and was viewed by 21 @.@ 36 million viewers . It received mostly positive reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Scully leaves town — and Mulder — for a solo assignment . She soon meets Ed Jerse , a man who is being mentally controlled by a drug @-@ related side effect of his tattoo . His tattoo , affectionately named Betty , does not want to share him , especially not with Scully . 
 Although " Never Again " was directed by Bowman , it was originally scheduled to be directed by noted movie director Quentin Tarantino . Tarantino was unable to direct the entry due to a dispute with the Directors Guild of America . Gillian Anderson was particularly pleased with the episode showing a different side of Scully ; she had specifically asked Morgan and Wong to write an episode that explored Scully 's dark side . Several cast members from Morgan and Wong 's series Space : Above and Beyond were cast in the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Philadelphia , Ed Jerse loses a divorce settlement to his ex @-@ wife , who has sole custody of his children . After getting drunk at a bar , Ed wanders into a tattoo parlor and impulsively receives a tattoo depicting a Sailor Jerry @-@ like pin @-@ up girl with the words " Never Again " under her image . At work the next day , Ed hears a woman calling him a " loser " ; he has a violent confrontation with a female co @-@ worker — who denies saying anything — and is subsequently subdued . 
 In Washington , Agents Fox Mulder and Dana Scully conduct a discreet meeting with a Russian informant , <unk> Pudovkin , who claims to have seen a UFO at a secret research center . Upon returning to FBI headquarters , Mulder heads out on vacation to visit Graceland , leaving Scully to follow up on the Pudovkin case for him . Scully is uninterested in the case and expresses serious doubts about Pudovkin 's credibility , leading to an argument with an inconsiderate Mulder . Scully becomes upset over the direction her life and career are going . 
 Meanwhile , Ed is fired via telephone . He hears the same voice as before and yells at the woman living below him , thinking it was her . Upon hearing the voice after a pair of Jehovah 's Witnesses stop by , Ed goes downstairs and murders his neighbor , throwing her body in the furnace . When her voice talks to him again , Jerse realizes it is coming from his new tattoo . Scully heads to Philadelphia and watches Pudovkin enter a tattoo parlor . Inside , she sees Ed arguing with the owner , wanting the tattoo removed . Ed strikes up a conversation with Scully and invites her out to dinner , which she initially declines . 
 That night , Scully talks to Mulder over the phone and informs him that Pudovkin is a con man and part of the Russian mafia . Frustrated by the conversation , Scully calls Jerse and tells him that she changed her mind . At a nearby lounge , Scully is concerned about Ed 's arm , where he has burned the tattoo with a cigarette butt . Ed convinces Scully to get a tattoo , and she has one of an Ouroboros applied to her back . Scully stays at Ed 's apartment . The tattoo is angry at him , saying she will be dead if he kisses her , which he does anyway . 
 The next morning , two detectives arrive at the apartment after Ed goes out , telling Scully that Ed 's neighbor is missing and blood was found in her apartment with an unusual chemical substance in it . Scully researches the material on Ed 's laptop and tries to call Mulder , but hangs up before Mulder has a chance to answer . When Ed arrives , Scully tells him that they found blood in his neighbor 's apartment and that it was likely his . She thinks that the chemical came from the tattoo ink and wants them both to head to the hospital to be tested . Ed tells Scully about the voice he has been hearing from his tattoo . 
 As Scully heads to the other room to get ready , her FBI badge falls out of her coat pocket . Scully discreetly picks it back up without Ed noticing . The tattoo begins to talk again , convincing Ed to redial Scully 's last call to see who she was speaking to . An FBI operator answers and , upon learning that Scully is a FBI agent , the tattoo forces Ed to attack her . Scully tries to escape but is overpowered by Ed , who binds her in a bedsheet and carries her down to the basement to throw her in the furnace . At the last moment , Ed is able to overpower the impulses of the tattoo and instead thrusts his own arm into the furnace . 
 Scully returns to Washington and is congratulated by Mulder for being the first person to make a second X @-@ File appearance . Ed was brought to a burn center in Philadelphia where the ergot chemicals were found in his blood ; it was also in Scully 's blood , but not enough to cause hallucinations . Mulder wonders if this all happened because of their earlier argument , to which Scully replies that not everything is about him . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and directing = = = 
 " Never Again " was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong , and directed by Rob Bowman . The episode was the final episode that the pair wrote for the show , as they took over as executive producers for the series ' sister show Millennium shortly after . The initial story the two developed was a “ sort of Abraham Lincoln ’ s ghost in the White House type of thing ” . Both writers had desired to write a story wherein Lincoln 's ghost haunts the White House and Mulder and Scully investigate . Morgan explained that he had " done a lot of research and I had always wanted to write a feature about Lincoln ’ s ghost " . However , due to the massive amounts of rewrites the two were forced to do for " Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man " , both Morgan and Wong lost interest in the story . Morgan explained , " I felt they didn ’ t want my heart and soul anymore , so I wouldn ’ t give this one to them " . The two later crafted " Never Again " in its place . Years later , Frank Spotnitz said that he " always wondered about " the story and what the finished product would have been like . 
 Gillian Anderson was particularly pleased with the episode showing a different side of Scully and said , " I thought it was a great idea . I personally was going through a dark period at the time , and I wanted to explore Scully 's dark side . For some reason , Glen and Jim were on the same wavelength that week . Afterward , a lot of people told me that on that episode I was so ' unlike ' Scully or that ' it showed my range ' . I told them I thought they were wrong . I don 't think that what I did here was out of character for Scully . The only thing different is that the audience hadn 't seen it before . " Initially , Anderson called up Morgan and asked him to write a story wherein Scully " fall [ s ] hard " for another man , which leads to an " intense kind of romantic or passionate relationship " . Morgan obliged and wrote a scene where Scully enjoys a passionate night with Jerse . This was later removed from the script by series creator Chris Carter , the only time in Glen Morgan 's tenure on the show where a scene of his was removed by Carter . Morgan later noted " I think Chris thought that I was <unk> around with him , but I really wasn 't . " 
 Quentin Tarantino was originally intended to direct this episode , but was stopped from doing so by the Directors Guild of America . Although the episode was written specifically for Tarantino to direct , the DGA complained that Tarantino , who is not a member , failed to join the union after working on ER as a director , per an agreement between the two entities . A spokeswoman from 20th Century Fox later noted , " Quentin approached us , we were very excited at the opportunity . We made some special arrangements , and we 're disappointed that it 's not happening . But we bow to Quentin 's philosophical stance [ and ] we hope something can be worked out for the future . " The episode 's air date was flipped with the episode " Leonard Betts " in order to ensure that the latter episode , which featured the show 's two stars in their traditional roles , aired after the Super Bowl . Anderson has said that she would have played the part differently had she been aware of this at the time , as Scully discovers she has cancer at the end of " Leonard Betts " . 
 = = = Casting and effects = = = 
 Rodney Rowland was a former cast member of Glen Morgan and James Wong 's series Space : Above and Beyond . He and Anderson dated for a period of time after this episode . Jodie Foster provided the voice for Ed 's tattoo , Betty . Foster was a close friend of casting agent Randy Stone and Gillian Anderson . Anderson initially volunteered to get a real Ouroboros — a depiction of a serpent coiled into a circle devouring its own tail — tattoo for the episode , but was later told by the production crew that getting an actual tattoo would create too many problems . As such , fake tattoos were created . These tattoos were decals designed by art department staffer Kristina Lyne and altered by makeup artist Laverne Basham . The Bettie Page tattoo was inspired by " Brooklyn Joe " Lieber , a tattoo artist from San Francisco . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Never Again " was originally broadcast in the United States on the Fox network on February 2 , 1997 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on December 3 , 1997 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 13 , with a 19 share , meaning that roughly 13 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 19 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 21 @.@ 36 million viewers . 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews from television critics . Zack Handlen from The A.V. Club was positive towards the episode and gave it an A. He applauded the fact that it " lets Scully be flawed " and allowed her to be " far more human " than usual on the show . Handlen concluded that the episode was a success because it illustrated " the way our need to connect with others makes us vulnerable " . He was , however , critical of Mulder 's actions in the episode , calling him a " spoiled ass " and noted that there was a " little boy ignored feel to his dialogue at the end " . John Keegan from Critical Myth awarded the episode a 7 out of 10 and called it " one of the best character studies of the entire series " . He concluded that " Much of Scully ’ s underlying psychology is explored in this episode , and in keeping with what has been revealed about Mulder , it ’ s not pretty . The final act doesn ’ t quite match the intensity of the third , but it ’ s rather clear what the writers were trying to convey . " Meghan Deans from Tor.com wrote positively of the episode and noted that " [ i ] t is fortunate , I think , that the Super Bowl forced the change in sequence . " She argued that , had “ Leonard Betts ” not aired before " Never Again " , the audience would have been forced to " read her actions as reactions to Mulder and Mulder alone " rather than against the fact that she has cancer . 
 Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a positive review and awarded it three stars out of four . She called Scully 's unhappiness with her situation " understandable " and positively critiqued Gillian Anderson , calling her performance " wonderful " . Vitaris , however , was critical of the " Leonard Betts " / " Never Again " switch , writing that " nothing in this episode points to fear of cancer as Scully 's motivation " . She concluded , however , that " [ ' Never Again ' ] is a fascinating look at a whole new side of [ Scully ] . " Not all reviews were glowing . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , on the other hand , gave the episode a mixed review and rated it two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . The two were critical of Scully 's behavior , noting that " seeing Scully as angry and bored and believing her life is pointless isn 't really Scully " . They argued that Scully 's belief that her life is boring is easily countered by the fact that " she hunts fluke monsters , catches serial killers , and gets abducted by aliens " . Despite this , Shearman and Pearson wrote that " Gillian Anderson makes it work . " 
 = Carmelo Camet = 
 Carmelo Félix Camet ( October 29 , 1904 – July 22 , 2007 ) was an Argentine fencer who competed in the Olympic games in 1928 . He was the son of Francisco Carmelo Camet , a fencer at the 1900 Summer Olympics who is sometimes considered to be Argentina 's first participant at the Olympics . Trained as a lawyer , Carmelo Camet gained his training and love for fencing at an early age from his father . By the 1920s he had already won several tournaments and , in 1926 , he won the Argentine national fencing championship . 
 Although Camet successfully completed all of the trials required of him by the nascent Argentine Olympic Committee , he did not attend the 1924 Summer Olympics in Paris , although his name was on the official register as a non @-@ participant . After taking a brief break to finish his law degree , he was part of the Argentine fencing delegation sent to the 1928 Summer Olympics . There , as the substitute on the foil team foil , he won a bronze medal , Argentine 's only medal in that sport as of 2008 . Although he sat out the first two matches with Norway and Spain , he replaced Héctor Lucchetti during the matches against Belgium and all subsequent events . At the time of his death in 2007 , in Buenos Aires , Camet was believed to be the world 's oldest living Olympic competitor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Carmelo Camet was born on October 29 , 1904 , the son of Francisco Carmelo Camet , a fencer at the 1900 Summer Olympics in Paris , and Clara Isa . The elder Camet , though officially an athlete from France , is considered by some to be Argentina 's first Olympic participant . This is disputed , however , by those who claim that Horatio <unk> should hold this title as the first official Argentine representative . Carmelo had one brother , Carlos Ernesto Camet , who pursued a political career . Carlos , who served as a deputy to the national congress , was , like the rest of his family , supportive of the Radical Civil Union , an Argentine political reform party formed in the 1890s . 
 Although trained as a lawyer , Carmelo began fencing at an early age , beginning in the 1910s , at the behest of his father and , much like his father , specialized in épée , while also being proficient at <unk> . In 1918 he came in first place in the former category and second in the latter at a competition , organized by the city of Buenos Aires . In the next two years , he finished at the top in both events and became nationally known . In 1921 the Argentine Fencing Federation was founded and , in 1922 , the organization sent him to represent Argentina in the <unk> <unk> , a celebration overseen by the International Olympic Committee to celebrate the centenary of Brazil 's declaration of independence . His native country won first place in the épée , <unk> and sabre events in the host city of Rio de Janeiro . At the age of 17 , he was one of the youngest competitors to represent his country at these games . 
 = = Olympic career = = 
 The Argentine Fencing Committee had great difficulty in organizing a team to attend the 1924 Summer Olympics . Despite the establishment of the Argentine Olympic Committee , and his participation and success in all of the trials , Camet did not attend a congratulatory gala for the Olympic delegation , nor did he travel to Paris to participate in the games themselves , for personal reasons . The official report lists him as a member of the official delegation , albeit one who did not participate . That year , the Argentines placed fifth in the team foil competition . He continued to practice fencing until 1926 when , after winning a national championship , he put the sport on hold to complete his law degree . 
 Camet did , however , travel to Amsterdam to participate in the 1928 Summer Olympics . He was joined by four teammates : Roberto <unk> and Luis Lucchetti , who were part of the 1924 delegation that had placed in fifth place , and newcomers Raul <unk> and Héctor Lucchetti . The fencing competition took place from July 29 to August 11 . Camet , who was a substitute , sat out of the matches against Norway and Spain , before being called to replace Héctor Lucchetti against Belgium . After entering the quarter @-@ finals , the team defeated the United States and the Netherlands , advancing undefeated to the quarter @-@ finals , where they bested Hungary . The Argentine team then lost against Italy and France , the eventual gold and silver medal @-@ winning teams respectively . The competition for the bronze medal , which would have been between Belgium and Argentina , was scrapped because the latter had already defeated the former . 
 Camet , therefore , won the bronze medal in the team foil category , along with his teammates , despite what he considered to be adverse rulings from the jurors . This was the first and , at the time of Camet 's death , only Olympic medal for Argentina in fencing . It was also the only bronze medal won by the Argentine delegation in Amsterdam , although silver medals were won by Raúl <unk> , Víctor Peralta and the football team , along with gold medals from Víctor Avendaño , Arturo Rodríguez and Alberto Zorrilla . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After the Olympics , Camet traveled to <unk> in France to visit his old family home , where his father had studied both academics and fencing . While the victory at Amsterdam was considered a milestone in Argentine athletics at the time , Camet , as a substitute was often forgotten as a contributor by his contemporaries in the fencing community such as Oscar Viñas and Eugenio <unk> , despite being a legitimate and official medal winner . He was always given credit by his teammates , however , even if they emphasized his position as a substitute on the team . Camet 's father died on July 15 , 1931 , a few years after Carmelo 's success at the Olympics . Carmelo subsequently married Elsie Muir and , in 1981 , returned to <unk> for a second visit . He lived the rest of his life in Buenos Aires . At the time of his death , on July 22 , 2007 , at the age of 102 , he was believed to be the world 's oldest living Olympic athlete , although that distinction actually belonged to Erna Sondheim . 
 = Lebanon in the Eurovision Song Contest = 
 Lebanon has never participated in the Eurovision Song Contest . The country 's broadcasting organization , Télé Liban , was set to make the country 's debut at the Eurovision Song Contest 2005 with the song " Quand tout s <unk> " performed by Aline Lahoud , but withdrew due to Lebanon 's laws banning the broadcast of Israeli content . 
 = = Internal selection = = 
 On October 21 , 2004 , Ibrahim El Khoury , President Director General of Télé Liban , stated that Lebanon intended to make its debut at the Eurovision Song Contest 2005 in Kiev , Ukraine . On November 3 , 2004 , it was announced that Aline Lahoud was internally selected by the network to represent Lebanon . Her orient @-@ <unk> song " Quand tout s <unk> " , sung in French and written by Jad <unk> and Romeo Lahoud , was chosen in mid @-@ February . Lahoud was scheduled to present her song in the semi @-@ final held on May 19 , 2005 . 
 = = Withdrawal = = 
 On December 15 , 2004 , Télé Liban announced that financial constraints forced them to withdraw from the contest , and denied reports that it was due to political conflicts with Israel . However , five days later , the European Broadcasting Union ( EBU ) reached an agreement with Télé Liban and Lebanon was put on the official list of participants . 
 In early March 2005 , the official Lebanese Eurovision Song Contest website did not list Israel as a participant . After the EBU asked Télé Liban to resolve the issue within 24 hours or face disqualification , the site removed the complete list of participants and replaced the page with a link to <unk> , the official Eurovision website . 
 Later that month , the EBU asked Télé @-@ Liban to assure that they would broadcast the entire contest , including the Israeli entry , without interruption . Télé Liban could not guarantee that request , so on March 18 , 2005 , it once again announced its withdrawal from the contest . Lebanese legislation prohibited the broadcast of Israeli content on Lebanese television networks . Télé @-@ Liban wrote on its website that it " is not permitted to broadcast the performance of the Israeli participant , thereby breaching the rules of the Eurovision Song Contest 2005 " and forcing its withdrawal . Since Télé Liban withdrew almost three months after the December 15 " no consequence " withdrawal deadline , the broadcaster was penalized , losing its participation fee and being given a three @-@ year ban . 
 = = Post @-@ 2005 = = 
 With the three @-@ year ban , Télé Liban was not eligible to enter the Eurovision Song Contest again until the 2009 Contest . 
 In 2007 , Lebanon @-@ born singer Mika , stated that he was interested in entering the contest for Lebanon in 2008 , but for one of the other Lebanese television stations not serving a ban , such as the Lebanese Broadcasting Corporation International or Future Television , either of which could have joined the EBU . His participation never came to be and the country has not made another attempt to join the contest following the conclusion of its broadcaster 's ban . 
 = Meica Christensen = 
 Meica Christensen ( born 24 February 1989 ) is an Australian goalball player . She began playing the sport in 2004 , the same year she made her national team debut . After the national team took a three @-@ year break , she was named the captain in 2010 and played in the Goalball World Championships . She was selected to represent Australia at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in goalball , where she captained the side . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Christensen was born in <unk> North , Queensland , on 24 February 1989 . She has a visual disability , with partial sight . She attended Cavendish Road State High School , and played in a goalball demonstration game there in 2004 . Other sports she participates in include skiing . In 2005 , she lived in Birkdale , Queensland , but was living in Wellington Point again by 2011 . In 2011 , she worked at Royal Brisbane and Women 's Hospital as an administrator . 
 = = Goalball = = 
