 Christensen is a goalball player , and is classified as a B3 competitor . She started playing the sport in 2004 , when she was 15 years old . In 2005 , she played in the New Zealand Goalball Nationals for the Queensland women 's goalball team . 
 Christensen made her national team debut in 2004 , the same year she started playing the sport , when she played in a game against Sweden women 's national goalball team in Malmo , Sweden , as part of a ten team Malmo Women 's International Cup that included seven teams that had qualified for the 2004 Summer Paralympics . She was coached in the competition by Robyn Stephens . In late 2004 , she had a goal of making the Paralympic team for the 2008 Summer Paralympics , but the Australian team did not qualify . She was named the national team captain in 2010 . In her role as captain , she plays the song " The Final Countdown " before competitions . Going into the 2010 Goalball World Championships with the national team not having played a match in three years , her team finished eighth . She was the national team captain again in 2011 , and was with the team during the 2011 IBSA Africa Oceania Goalball Regional Champions , which served as the Paralympic qualifying tournament . In her first game against New Zealand , her team won 11 @-@ 4 after leading 7 @-@ 1 at the half . She scored seven goals in the team 's victory . She also played in the final match against New Zealand women 's national goalball team . Australia won the game against New Zealand by a score of 6 @-@ 2 , Christensen scored three goals , the second one from a penalty shot . She finished the competition as the fifth highest scorer , and her team finished sixth overall . 
 Christensen was named to the Aussie Belles team going to the 2012 Summer Paralympics . She was the team 's longest serving member going into the Games , and the team 's captain . That the team qualified for the Games came as a surprise , as the Australian Paralympic Committee had been working on player development with an idea of the team qualifying for the 2016 Summer Paralympics , and an Australian team had not participated since the 2000 Summer Paralympics , when they earned an automatic selection as hosts , and the team finished last in the competition . The country has not medalled in the event since 1976 . Going into the Paralympics , her team was ranked eighth in the world . In the 2012 Summer Paralympics tournament , the Belles played games against Japan , Canada , the United States and Sweden . They lost every game , and did not advance to the finals . She scored three goals . 
 = John A. Macdonald = 
 Sir John Alexander Macdonald GCB KCMG PC PC QC ( 11 January 1815 – 6 June 1891 ) was the first Prime Minister of Canada ( 1867 – 1873 , 1878 – 1891 ) . The dominant figure of Canadian Confederation , he had a political career which spanned almost half a century . He drank heavily , and in 1873 was voted out during the Pacific Scandal , in which his party took bribes from businessmen seeking the contract to build the Pacific Railway . Macdonald 's greatest achievements were building and guiding a successful national government for the new Dominion , using patronage to forge a strong Conservative Party , promoting the protective tariff of the National Policy , and building the transcontinental Canadian Pacific Railway . Economic growth was slow during his years in office , as Canada verged on stagnation ; many residents migrated to the fast @-@ growing United States . He fought to block provincial efforts to take power back from Ottawa . His most controversial move was to approve the execution of Métis leader Louis Riel for treason in 1885 ; it alienated many Francophones . 
 Macdonald was born in Scotland ; when he was a boy his family immigrated to Kingston in the colony of Upper Canada ( today in eastern Ontario ) . As a lawyer he was involved in several high @-@ profile cases and quickly became prominent in Kingston , which elected him in 1844 to the legislature of the colonial United Province of Canada . By 1857 had become premier under the colony 's unstable political system . 
 When in 1864 no party proved capable of governing for long , Macdonald agreed to a proposal from his political rival , George Brown , that the parties unite in a Great Coalition to seek federation and political reform . Macdonald was the leading figure in the subsequent discussions and conferences , which resulted in the British North America Act and the birth of Canada as a nation on 1 July 1867 . Macdonald was the first Prime Minister of the new nation , and served 19 years ; only William Lyon Mackenzie King served longer . 
 = = Early years , 1815 – 1830 = = 
 John Alexander Macdonald was born in Ramshorn parish in Glasgow , Scotland , on 11 January 1815 . His father was Hugh Macdonald , an unsuccessful merchant , who had married John 's mother , Helen Shaw , on 21 October 1811 . John Alexander Macdonald was the third of five children . After Hugh Macdonald 's business ventures left him in debt , the family immigrated to Kingston , in Upper Canada ( today the southern and eastern portions of Ontario ) , in 1820 , where there were already a number of Macdonald relatives and connections . 
 The Macdonalds initially lived with another family , but then resided over a store which Hugh Macdonald ran . Soon after their arrival , John 's younger brother James died from a blow to the head by a servant who was supposed to look after the boys . After Hugh 's store failed , the family moved to Hay Bay ( south of Napanee , Ontario ) , west of Kingston , where Hugh unsuccessfully ran another shop . His father , in 1829 , was appointed a magistrate for the Midland District . John Macdonald 's mother was a lifelong influence on her son , helping him in his difficult first marriage and remaining a force in his life until her 1862 death . 
 John initially attended local schools . When he was aged 10 , his family scraped together the money to send him to Midland District Grammar School in Kingston . Macdonald 's formal schooling ended at 15 , a common school @-@ leaving age at a time when only children from the most prosperous families were able to attend university . Nevertheless , Macdonald later regretted leaving school when he did , remarking to his secretary Joseph Pope that if he had attended university , he might have embarked on a literary career . 
 = = Law career , 1830 – 1843 = = 
 = = = Legal training and early career , 1830 – 1837 = = = 
 Macdonald 's parents decided he should become a lawyer after leaving school . As Donald Creighton ( who penned a two @-@ volume biography of Macdonald in the 1950s ) wrote , " law was a broad , well @-@ trodden path to comfort , influence , even to power " . It was also " the obvious choice for a boy who seemed as attracted to study as he was uninterested in trade . " Besides , Macdonald needed to start earning money immediately to support his family because his father 's businesses were again failing . " I had no boyhood , " he complained many years later . " From the age of 15 , I began to earn my own living . " 
 Macdonald travelled by steamboat to Toronto ( known until 1834 as York ) , where he passed an examination set by The Law Society of Upper Canada , including mathematics , Latin , and history . British North America had no law schools in 1830 ; students were examined when beginning and ending their tutelage . Between the two examinations , they were apprenticed , or articled to established lawyers . Macdonald began his apprenticeship with George Mackenzie , a prominent young lawyer who was a well @-@ regarded member of Kingston 's rising Scottish community . Mackenzie practised corporate law , a lucrative speciality that Macdonald himself would later pursue . Macdonald was a promising student , and in the summer of 1833 , managed the Mackenzie office when his employer went on a business trip to Montreal and Quebec in Lower Canada ( today the southern portion of the province of Quebec ) . Later that year , Macdonald was sent to manage the law office of a Mackenzie cousin who had fallen ill . 
 In August 1834 , George Mackenzie died of cholera . With his supervising lawyer dead , Macdonald remained at the cousin 's law office in Hallowell ( today Picton , Ontario ) . In 1835 , Macdonald returned to Kingston , and even though not yet of age nor qualified , began his practice as a lawyer , hoping to gain his former employer 's clients . Macdonald 's parents and sisters also returned to Kingston , and Hugh Macdonald became a bank clerk . 
 Soon after Macdonald was called to the Bar in February 1836 , he arranged to take in two students ; both became , like Macdonald , Fathers of Confederation . Oliver Mowat became premier of Ontario , and Alexander Campbell a federal cabinet minister and Lieutenant Governor of Ontario . One early client was Eliza <unk> , an Irish immigrant then aged sixteen , who sought advice concerning a shop she and her husband wanted to buy . <unk> would become one of Macdonald 's richest and most loyal supporters , and may have also become his lover . Macdonald joined many local organisations , seeking to become well known in the town . He also sought out high @-@ profile cases , representing accused child rapist William Brass . Brass was hanged for his crime , but Macdonald attracted positive press comments for the quality of his defence . According to his biographer , Richard Gwyn : 
 As a criminal lawyer who took on dramatic cases , Macdonald got himself noticed well beyond the narrow confines of the Kingston business community . He was operating now in the arena where he would spend by far the greatest part of his life – the court of public opinion . And , while there , he was learning the arts of argument and of persuasion that would serve him all his political life . 
 = = = Legal prominence , 1837 – 43 = = = 
 All male Upper Canadians between 18 and 60 years of age were members of the Sedentary Militia , which was called into active duty during the Rebellions of 1837 . Macdonald served as a private in the militia , patrolling the area around Kingston , but the town saw no real action and Macdonald was not called upon to fire on the enemy . 
 Although most of the trials resulting from the Upper Canada Rebellion took place in Toronto , Macdonald represented one of the defendants in the one trial to take place in Kingston . All the Kingston defendants were acquitted , and a local paper described Macdonald as " one of the youngest barristers in the Province [ who ] is rapidly rising in his profession " . 
 In late 1838 , Macdonald agreed to advise one of a group of American raiders who had crossed the border to liberate Canada from what they saw as the yoke of British colonial oppression . The inept invaders had been captured after the Battle of the Windmill ( near Prescott , Ontario ) , in which 16 Canadians were killed and 60 wounded . Public opinion was inflamed against the prisoners , as they were accused of mutilating the body of a dead Canadian lieutenant . Macdonald biographer Donald Creighton wrote that Kingston was " mad with grief and rage and horror " at the allegations . Macdonald could not represent the prisoners , as they were tried by court @-@ martial and civilian counsel had no standing . At the request of Kingston relatives of Daniel George , paymaster of the ill @-@ fated invasion , Macdonald agreed to advise George , who , like the other prisoners , had to conduct his own defence . George was convicted and hanged . According to Macdonald biographer Donald Swainson , " By 1838 , Macdonald 's position was secure . He was a public figure , a popular young man , and a senior lawyer . " 
 The British Parliament merged Upper and Lower Canada into the Province of Canada effective in 1841 . Kingston became the initial capital of the new province ; Upper Canada and Lower Canada became known as Canada West and Canada East . 
 Macdonald continued to expand his practice while being appointed director of many companies , mainly in Kingston . Macdonald became both a director of and a lawyer for the new Commercial Bank of the Midland District . Throughout the 1840s , Macdonald invested heavily in real estate , including commercial properties in downtown Toronto . Meanwhile , he was suffering from some illness , and in 1841 , his father died . Sick and grieving , he decided to take a lengthy holiday in Britain in early 1842 . He left for the journey well supplied with money , as he spent the last three days before his departure gambling at the card game loo and winning substantially . Sometime during his two months in Britain , he met his first cousin , Isabella Clark . As Macdonald did not mention her in his letters home , the circumstances of their meeting are not known . In late 1842 , Isabella journeyed to Kingston to visit with a sister . The visit stretched for nearly a year before John and Isabella Macdonald married on 1 September 1843 . 
 = = Political rise , 1843 – 64 = = 
 = = = Parliamentary advancement , 1843 – 57 = = = 
 In February 1843 , Macdonald announced his candidacy for the post of alderman in Kingston 's Fourth Ward . On 29 March 1843 , Macdonald celebrated his first election victory , with 156 votes against 43 for his opponent , a Colonel Jackson . He also suffered what he termed his first downfall , as his supporters , carrying the victorious candidate , accidentally dropped him onto a slushy street . 
 In March 1844 , Macdonald was asked by local businessmen to stand as Conservative candidate for Kingston in the upcoming legislative election . Macdonald followed the contemporary custom of supplying the voters with large quantities of alcohol . In the era preceding the secret ballot when votes were publicly declared , Macdonald defeated his opponent , Anthony Manahan , by 275 " shouts " to 42 when the two @-@ day election concluded on 15 October 1844 . At that time , the Legislative Assembly met in Montreal . Macdonald was never an orator , and especially disliked the bombastic addresses of the time . Instead , he found a niche in becoming an expert on election law and parliamentary procedure . 
 In 1844 , Isabella fell ill . She recovered , but the illness recurred the following year , and she became an invalid . John Macdonald took his wife to Savannah , Georgia , in the United States in 1845 , hoping that the sea air and warmth would cure her ailments . Although John Macdonald was able to return to Canada after six months , Isabella remained in the United States for three years . He visited her again in New York at the end of 1846 , and returned several months later when she informed him she was pregnant . In August 1847 their son John Alexander Macdonald Jr. was born in New York , but as Isabella remained ill , relatives cared for the infant . 
 Although he was often absent due to his wife 's illness , Macdonald was able to gain professional and political advancement . In 1846 , he was made a Queen 's Counsel . The same year , he was offered the non @-@ cabinet post of Solicitor General , but declined it . In 1847 , the Joint Premier , William Henry Draper , appointed Macdonald as Receiver General . Accepting the government post required Macdonald to give up his law firm income and spend most of his time in Montreal , away from Isabella . When elections were held in December 1848 and January 1848 , Macdonald was easily reelected for Kingston , but the Conservatives lost seats and were forced to resign when the legislature reconvened in March 1848 . Macdonald returned to Kingston when the legislature was not sitting , and Isabella joined him there in June . In August , the child John Jr. died suddenly . In March 1850 , Isabella Macdonald gave birth to another boy , Hugh John Macdonald , and his father wrote , " We have got Johnny back again , almost his image . " Macdonald began to drink heavily around this time , both in public and in private , which Patricia Phenix , who studied Macdonald 's private life , attributes to his family troubles . 
 The Liberals , or Grits , maintained power in the 1851 election , but soon , they were divided by a parliamentary scandal . In September , the government resigned , and a coalition government uniting parties from both parts of the province under Sir Allan MacNab took power . Macdonald did much of the work of putting the government together and served as Attorney General . The coalition which came to power in 1854 became known as the Liberal @-@ Conservatives ( referred to , for short , as the Conservatives ) . In 1855 , George @-@ Étienne Cartier of Canada East ( today Quebec ) joined the Cabinet . Until Cartier 's 1873 death , he would be Macdonald 's political partner . In 1856 , MacNab was eased out as premier by Macdonald , who became the leader of the Canada West Conservatives . Though the most powerful man in the government he remained as Attorney General , with Sir Étienne @-@ Paschal Taché as premier . 
 = = = Colonial leader , 1838 – 64 = = = 
 In July 1857 , Macdonald departed for Britain to promote Canadian government projects . On his return to Canada , he was appointed premier in place of the retiring Taché , just in time to lead the Conservatives in a general election . Macdonald was elected in Kingston by 1 @,@ 189 votes to 9 for John Shaw , who was subsequently hanged in effigy ; however , other Conservatives did badly in Canada West , and only French @-@ Canadian support kept Macdonald in power . On 28 December , Isabella Macdonald died , leaving John A. Macdonald a widower with a seven @-@ year @-@ old son . Hugh John Macdonald would be principally raised by his paternal aunt and her husband . 
 In 1838 , the Assembly had voted to move the seat of government permanently to Quebec City . Macdonald had opposed that , and used his power to force the Assembly to reconsider in 1857 . Macdonald proposed that Queen Victoria decide which city should be Canada 's capital . Opponents , especially from Canada East , argued that the Queen would not make the decision in isolation ; she would be bound to receive informal advice from her Canadian ministers . Nevertheless , Macdonald 's scheme was adopted , with Canada East support assured by allowing Quebec City to serve a three @-@ year term as the seat of government before the Assembly moved to the permanent capital . Macdonald privately asked the Colonial Office to ensure that the Queen would not respond for at least 10 months , or until after the general election . In February 1858 , the Queen 's choice was announced , much to the dismay of many legislators from both parts of the province : the isolated Canada West town of Ottawa . 
 On 28 July 1838 , an opposition Canada East member proposed an address to the Queen informing her that Ottawa was an unsuitable place for a national capital . Macdonald 's Canada East party members crossed the floor to vote for the address , and the government was defeated . Macdonald resigned , and the Governor General , Sir Edmund Walker Head , invited opposition leader George Brown to form a government . Under the law at that time , Brown and his ministers lost their seats in the Assembly by accepting office , and had to face by @-@ elections . This gave Macdonald a majority pending the by @-@ elections , and he promptly defeated the government . Head refused Brown 's request for a dissolution of the Assembly , and Brown and his ministers resigned . Head then asked Macdonald to form a government . The law allowed anyone who had held a ministerial position within the last thirty days to accept a new position without needing to face a by @-@ election ; Macdonald and his ministers accepted new positions , then completed what was dubbed the " Double Shuffle " by returning to their old posts . In an effort to give the appearance of fairness , Head insisted that Cartier be titular premier , with Macdonald as his deputy . 
 In the late 1850s and early 1860s , Canada enjoyed a period of great prosperity . The railroad and telegraph improved communications . According to Macdonald biographer Richard Gwyn , " In short , Canadians began to become a single community . " At the same time , the provincial government became increasingly difficult to manage . An act affecting both Canada East and Canada West required a " double majority " — a majority of legislators from each of the two sections of the province . This led to increasing deadlock in the Assembly . The two sections each elected 65 legislators , even though Canada West had a larger population . One of Brown 's major demands was " rep by pop " , that is , representation by population , which would lead to Canada West having more seats , and was bitterly opposed by Canada East . 
 The American Civil War led to fears in Canada and in Britain that once the Americans had concluded their internal warfare , they would invade Canada again . Britain asked the Canadians to pay a part of the expense of defence , and a Militia Bill was introduced in the Assembly in 1862 . The opposition objected to the expense , and Canada East representatives feared that French @-@ Canadians would have to fight in a British @-@ instigated war . At the time , Macdonald was drinking heavily , and he failed to provide much leadership on behalf of the bill . The government fell over the bill , and the Grits took over under the leadership of John <unk> Macdonald ( no relation to John A. Macdonald ) . John A. Macdonald did not remain out of power long ; the parties remained closely matched , with a handful of independents able to destroy any government . The new government fell in May 1863 , but Head allowed a new election , which made little change to party strength . In December 1863 , Canada West MP Albert Norton Richards accepted the post of Solicitor @-@ General , and so had to face a by @-@ election . John A. Macdonald campaigned against Richards personally , and Richards was defeated by a Conservative . The switch in seats cost the Grits their majority , and they resigned in March . John A. Macdonald returned to office with Taché as titular premier . The Taché @-@ Macdonald government was defeated in June . The parties were deadlocked to such an extent that , according to Swainson , " It was clear to everybody that the constitution of the Province of Canada was dead " . 
 = = Confederation of Canada , 1864 – 67 = = 
 As his government had fallen again , Macdonald approached the new governor general , Lord Monck , and obtained a dissolution . Before he could act on it , he was approached by Brown through intermediaries ; the Grit leader felt that the crisis gave the parties the opportunity to join together for constitutional reform . Brown had led a parliamentary committee on confederation among the British North American colonies , which had reported back just before the Taché @-@ Macdonald government fell . Brown was more interested in representation by population ; Macdonald 's priority was a federation that the other colonies could join . The two compromised and agreed that the new government would support the " federative principle " — a conveniently elastic phrase . The discussions were not public knowledge and Macdonald stunned the assembly by announcing that the dissolution was being postponed because of progress in negotiations with Brown — the two men were not only political rivals , but were known to hate each other . 
 The parties resolved their differences , joining in the Great Coalition , with only the Parti rouge of Canada East , led by Jean @-@ Baptiste @-@ Éric Dorion , remaining apart . A conference , called by the Colonial Office , was scheduled for 1 September 1864 in Charlottetown , Prince Edward Island ; the Maritimes were to consider a union . The Canadians obtained permission to send a delegation — led by Macdonald , Cartier , and Brown — to what became known as the Charlottetown Conference . At its conclusion , the Maritime delegations expressed a willingness to join a confederation if the details could be worked out . 
 In October 1864 , delegates for confederation met in Quebec City for the Quebec Conference , where the Seventy @-@ Two Resolutions were agreed to — they would form the basis of Canada 's government . The Great Coalition was endangered by Taché 's 1865 death : Lord Monck asked Macdonald to become premier , but Brown felt that he had as good a claim on the position as his coalition partner . The disagreement was resolved by appointing another compromise candidate to serve as titular premier , Narcisse @-@ <unk> Belleau . 
 In 1865 , after lengthy debates , Canada 's legislative assembly approved confederation by 91 votes to 33 . However , none of the Maritimes had approved the plan . In 1866 , Macdonald and his colleagues financed pro @-@ confederation candidates in the New Brunswick general election , resulting in a pro @-@ confederation assembly . Shortly after the election , Nova Scotia 's premier , Charles Tupper , pushed a pro @-@ confederation resolution through that colony 's legislature . A final conference , to be held in London , was needed before the British parliament could formalise the union . Maritime delegates left for London in July 1866 , but Macdonald , who was drinking heavily again , did not leave until November , angering the <unk> . In December 1866 , Macdonald both led the London Conference , winning acclaim for his handling of the discussions , and wooed and won his second wife , Agnes Bernard . Bernard was the sister of Macdonald 's private secretary , Hewitt Bernard ; the couple first met in Quebec in 1860 , but Macdonald had seen and admired her as early as 1856 . In January 1867 , while still in London , he was seriously burned in his hotel room when his candle set fire to the chair he had fallen asleep in , but Macdonald refused to miss any sessions of the conference . In February , he married Agnes at St George 's , Hanover Square . On 8 March , the British North America Act , which would thereafter serve as the major part of Canada 's constitution , passed the House of Commons ( it had previously passed the House of Lords ) . Queen Victoria gave the bill Royal Assent on 29 March 1867 . 
 Macdonald had favoured the union coming into force on 15 July , fearing that the preparations would not be completed any earlier . The British favoured an earlier date and , on 22 May , it was announced that the Dominion of Canada would come into existence on 1 July . Lord Monck appointed Macdonald as the new nation 's first prime minister . With the birth of the Dominion , Canada East and Canada West became separate provinces , known as Quebec and Ontario . Macdonald was knighted on that first observance of what came to be known as Canada Day , 1 July 1867 . 
 = = Prime Minister of Canada = = 
 Canada 's economic growth was quite slow at only 1 % annually 1867 @-@ 1896 . Canada verged on stagnation so many residents emigrated to the United States , where growth was much more rapid . Macdonald 's solution was to build the transcontinental railroad to stimulate growth , and to implement a " National Policy " of high tariffs that would protect the small Canadian firms from American competition . 
 = = = First majority , 1867 – 71 = = = 
 Macdonald and his government faced immediate problems upon formation of the new country . Much work remained to do in creating a federal government . Nova Scotia was already threatening to withdraw from the union ; the Intercolonial Railway , which would both conciliate the Maritimes and bind them closer to the rest of Canada , was not yet built . Anglo @-@ American relations were in a poor state , and Canadian foreign relations were matters handled from London . The withdrawal of the Americans in 1866 from the Reciprocity Treaty had increased tariffs on Canadian goods in US markets . Much of present @-@ day Canada remained outside confederation — in addition to the separate colonies of Prince Edward Island , Newfoundland , and British Columbia , which remained governed by the British , vast areas in the north and west belonged to the British and to the Hudson 's Bay Company . American and British opinion was that the experiment of Confederation would quickly unravel , and the nascent nation absorbed by the United States . 
 In August 1867 , the new nation 's first general election was held ; Macdonald 's party won easily , with strong support in both large provinces , and a majority from New Brunswick . Parliament convened in November , surprisingly without Brown , who was defeated in Ontario and never served as a member of the House of Commons of Canada . By 1869 , Nova Scotia had agreed to remain part of Canada after a promise of better financial terms — the first of many provinces to negotiate concessions from Ottawa . Pressure from London and Ottawa failed to gain the accession of Newfoundland , whose voters rejected a Confederation platform in a general election in October 1869 . 
 In 1869 , John and Agnes Macdonald had a daughter , Mary . It soon became apparent that Mary had ongoing developmental issues . She was never able to walk , nor did she ever fully develop mentally . Hewitt Bernard , Deputy Minister of Justice and Macdonald 's former secretary , also lived in the Macdonald house in Ottawa , together with Bernard 's widowed mother . In May 1870 , John Macdonald fell ill with gallstones ; coupled with his frequent drinking , he may have developed a severe case of acute pancreatitis . In July , he moved to Prince Edward Island to convalesce , most likely conducting discussions aimed at drawing the island into Confederation at a time when some there supported joining the United States . The island joined Confederation in 1873 . 
 Macdonald had once been tepid on the question of westward expansion of the Canadian provinces ; as Prime Minister he became a strong supporter of a bicoastal Canada . Immediately upon Confederation , he sent commissioners to London who in due course successfully negotiated the transfer of Rupert 's Land and the North @-@ Western Territory to Canada . The Hudson 's Bay Company received $ 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 , and retained some trading posts as well as one @-@ twentieth of the best farmland . Prior to the effective date of acquisition , the Canadian government faced unrest in the Red River Colony ( today southeastern Manitoba , centred on Winnipeg ) . The local people , including the Métis , were fearful that rule would be imposed on them which did not take into account their interests , and rose in the Red River Rebellion led by Louis Riel . Unwilling to pay for a territory in insurrection , Macdonald had troops put down the uprising before 15 July 1870 formal transfer , but as a result of the unrest , the Red River Colony joined Confederation as the province of Manitoba , while the rest of the purchased lands became the North @-@ West Territories . Following the North @-@ West Rebellion of 1885 Macdonald implemented restrictions upon the movement of indigenous groups , requiring them to receive formal permission from an Indian Department Official in order to go off reserve . 
 Macdonald also wished to secure the Colony of British Columbia . There was interest in the United States in bringing about the colony 's annexation , and Macdonald wished to ensure his new nation had a Pacific outlet . The colony had an extremely large debt that would have to be assumed should it join Confederation . Negotiations were conducted in 1870 , principally during Macdonald 's illness and recuperation , with Cartier leading the Canadian delegation . Cartier offered British Columbia a railroad linking it to the eastern provinces within 10 years . The British Columbians , who privately had been prepared to accept far less generous terms , quickly agreed and joined Confederation in 1871 . The Canadian Parliament ratified the terms after a debate over the high cost that cabinet member Alexander Morris described as the worst fight the Conservatives had had since Confederation . 
 There were continuing disputes with the Americans over deep @-@ sea fishing rights , and in early 1871 , an Anglo @-@ American commission was appointed to settle outstanding matters between the British ( and Canadians ) and the Americans . Canada was hoping to secure compensation for damage done by Fenians raiding Canada from bases in the United States . Macdonald was appointed a British commissioner , a post he was reluctant to accept as he realised Canadian interests might be sacrificed for the mother country . This proved to be the case ; Canada received no compensation for the raids and no significant trade advantages in the settlement , which required Canada to open her waters to American fishermen . Macdonald returned home to defend the Treaty of Washington against a political firestorm . 
 = = = Second majority and Pacific Scandal , 1872 – 73 = = = 
 In the run @-@ up to the 1872 election , Macdonald had yet to formulate a railway policy , or to devise the loan guarantees that would be needed to secure the construction . During the previous year , Macdonald had met with potential railway financiers such as Hugh Allan and considerable financial discussion took place . Nevertheless , the greatest political problem Macdonald faced was the Washington treaty , which had not yet been debated in Parliament . 
 In early 1872 , Macdonald submitted the treaty for ratification , and it passed the Commons with a majority of 66 . The general election was held through late August and early September ( future Canadian elections would be conducted , for the most part , on one day ) . Redistribution had given Ontario increased representation in the House ; Macdonald spent much time campaigning in the province , for the most part outside Kingston . Widespread bribery of voters took place throughout Canada , a practice especially effective in the era when votes were publicly declared ; in future elections the secret ballot would be used . Macdonald and the Conservatives saw their majority reduced from 35 to 8 . The Liberals ( as the Grits were coming to be known ) did better than the Conservatives in Ontario , forcing the government to rely on the votes of Western and Maritime MPs who did not fully support the party . 
 Macdonald had hoped to award the charter for the railway in early 1872 , but negotiations dragged on between the government and the financiers . Macdonald 's government awarded the Allan group the charter in late 1872 . In 1873 , when Parliament opened , Liberal MP Lucius Seth Huntington charged that government ministers had been bribed with large , undisclosed political contributions to award the charter . Documents soon came to light which substantiated what came to be known as the Pacific Scandal . The Allan @-@ led financiers , who were secretly backed by the United States 's Northern Pacific Railway , had donated $ 179 @,@ 000 to the Tory election funds , they had received the charter , and Opposition newspapers began to publish telegrams signed by government ministers requesting large sums from the railway interest at the time the charter was under consideration . Macdonald had taken $ 45 @,@ 000 in contributions from the railway interest himself . Substantial sums went to Cartier , who waged an expensive fight to try to retain his seat in Montreal East ( he was defeated , but was subsequently returned for the Manitoba seat of Provencher ) . During the campaign Cartier had fallen ill with Bright 's disease , which may have been causing his judgment to lapse ; he died in May 1873 while seeking treatment in London . 
 Even before Cartier 's death , Macdonald attempted to use delay to extricate the government . The Opposition responded by leaking documents to friendly newspapers . On 18 July , three papers published a telegram dated August 1872 from Macdonald requesting another $ 10 @,@ 000 and promising " it will be the last time of asking " . Macdonald was able to get a prorogation of Parliament in August by appointing a Royal Commission to look into the matter , but when Parliament reconvened in late October , the Liberals , feeling Macdonald could be defeated over the issue , applied immense pressure to wavering members . 
 On 3 November , Macdonald rose in the Commons to defend the government , and according to his biographer P.B. Waite , gave " the speech of his life , and , in a sense , for his life " . He began his speech at 9 p.m. , looking frail and ill , an appearance which quickly improved . As he spoke , he consumed glass after glass of gin and water . He denied that there had been a corrupt bargain , and stated that such contributions were common to both political parties . After five hours , Macdonald concluded , 
 I leave it with this House with every confidence . I am equal to either fortune . I can see past the decision of this House either for or against me , but whether it be against me or for me , I know , and it is no vain boast to say so , for even my enemies will admit that I am no boaster , that there does not exist in Canada a man who has given more of his time , more of his heart , more of his wealth , or more of his intellect and power , as it may be , for the good of this Dominion of Canada . 
 Macdonald 's speech was seen as a personal triumph , but it did little to salvage the fortunes of his government . With eroding support both in the Commons and among the public , Macdonald went to the Governor General , Lord Dufferin on 5 November and resigned ; Liberal leader Alexander Mackenzie became the second Prime Minister of Canada . Following the resignation , Macdonald returned home and told his wife Agnes , " Well , that 's got along with " , and when asked what he meant , told her of his resignation , and stated , " It 's a relief to be out of it . " He is not known to have spoken of the events of the Pacific Scandal again . When Macdonald announced his resignation in the Commons , Conservative and Liberal MPs traded places on the benches of the House of Commons , though one Conservative MP , British Columbia 's Amor De Cosmos remained in his place , thereby joining the Liberals . 
 On 6 November 1873 , Macdonald offered his resignation as party leader to his caucus ; it was refused . Mackenzie called an election for January 1874 ; the Conservatives were reduced to 70 seats out of the 206 in the Commons , giving Mackenzie a massive majority . The Conservatives bested the Liberals only in British Columbia ; Mackenzie had called the terms by which the province had joined Confederation " impossible " . Macdonald was returned in Kingston but was unseated on an election contest when bribery was proven ; he won the ensuing by @-@ election by 17 votes . According to Swainson , most observers viewed Macdonald as finished in politics , " a used @-@ up and dishonoured man " . 
 = = = Opposition , 1873 – 78 = = = 
 Macdonald cat was content to lead the Conservatives in a relaxed manner in opposition and await Liberal mistakes . He took long holidays and resumed his law practice , moving his family to Toronto and going into partnership with his son Hugh John . One mistake that Macdonald believed the Liberals had made was a free @-@ trade agreement with Washington , negotiated in 1874 ; Macdonald had come to believe that protection was necessary to build Canadian industry . The Panic of 1873 had led to a worldwide depression ; the Liberals found it difficult to finance the railroad in such a climate , and were generally opposed to the line anyway — the slow pace of construction led to British Columbia claims that the agreement under which it had entered Confederation was in jeopardy of being broken . 
 By 1876 , Macdonald and the Conservatives had adopted protection as party policy . This view was widely promoted in speeches at a number of political picnics , held across Ontario during the summer of 1876 . Macdonald 's proposals struck a chord with the public , and the Conservatives began to win a string of by @-@ elections . By the end of 1876 , the Tories had picked up 14 seats as a result of by @-@ elections , reducing Mackenzie 's Liberal majority from 70 to 42 . Despite the success , Macdonald considered retirement , wishing only to reverse the voters ' verdict of 1874 — he considered Charles Tupper his heir apparent . 
 When Parliament convened in 1877 , the Conservatives were confident and the Liberals defensive . After the Tories had a successful session in the early part of the year , another series of picnics commenced in a wide belt around Toronto . Macdonald even campaigned in Quebec , which he had rarely done , leaving speechmaking there to Cartier . More picnics followed in 1878 , promoting proposals which would come to be collectively called the " National Policy " : high tariffs , rapid construction of the transcontinental railway ( the Canadian Pacific Railway or CPR ) , rapid agricultural development of the West using the railroad , and policies which would attract immigrants to Canada . These picnics allowed Macdonald venues to show off his talents at campaigning , and were often lighthearted — at one , the Tory leader blamed agricultural pests on the Grits , and promised the insects would go away if the Conservatives were elected . 
 The final days of the 3rd Canadian Parliament were marked by explosive conflict , as Macdonald and Tupper alleged that MP and railway financier Donald Smith had been allowed to build the Pembina branch of the CPR ( connecting to American lines ) as a reward for betraying the Conservatives during the Pacific Scandal . The altercation continued even after the Commons had been summoned to the Senate to hear the dissolution read , as Macdonald spoke the final words recorded in the 3rd Parliament : " That fellow Smith is the biggest liar I ever saw ! " 
 The election was called for 17 September 1878 . Fearful that Macdonald would be defeated in Kingston , his supporters tried to get him to run in the safe Conservative riding of Cardwell ; having represented his hometown for 35 years , he stood there again . In the election , Macdonald was defeated in his riding by Alexander Gunn , but the Conservatives swept to victory . Macdonald remained in the House of Commons , having quickly secured his election for Marquette , Manitoba ; elections there were held later than in Ontario . His acceptance of office vacated his parliamentary seat , and Macdonald decided to stand for the British Columbia seat of Victoria , where the election was to be held on 21 October . Macdonald was duly returned for Victoria , although he had never visited either Marquette or Victoria . 
 = = = Third and fourth majorities , 1878 – 87 = = = 
 Part of the National Policy was implemented in the budget presented in February 1879 . Under that budget , Canada became a high @-@ tariff nation like the United States and Germany . The tariffs were designed to protect and build Canadian industry — finished textiles received a tariff of 34 % , but the machinery to make them entered Canada free . Macdonald continued to fight for higher tariffs for the remainder of his life . 
 By the 1880s , Macdonald was becoming more frail , but he maintained his political acuity . In 1883 , he secured the " <unk> Liquors Bill " which took the regulation system away from the provinces , in part to stymie his foe Premier Mowat . In his own case , Macdonald took better control of his drinking and binges had ended . " The great drinking @-@ bouts , the gargantuan in sobriety 's of his middle years , were dwindling away now into memories . " As the budget moved forward , Macdonald studied the railway issue , and found the picture unexpectedly good . Although little money had been spent on the project under Mackenzie , several hundred miles of track had been built and nearly the entire route surveyed . In 1880 , Macdonald found a syndicate , led by George Stephen , willing to undertake the CPR project . Donald Smith ( later Lord Strathcona ) was a major partner in the syndicate , but because of the ill will between him and the Conservatives , Smith 's participation was initially not made public , though it was well @-@ known to Macdonald . In 1880 , the Dominion took over Britain 's remaining Arctic territories , which extended Canada to its present @-@ day boundaries , with the exception of Newfoundland , which would not enter Confederation until 1949 . Also in 1880 , Canada sent its first diplomatic representative abroad , Sir Alexander Galt as High Commissioner to Britain . With good economic times , Macdonald and the Conservatives were returned with a slightly decreased majority in 1882 . Macdonald was returned for the Ontario riding of Carleton . 
 The transcontinental railroad project was heavily subsidised by the government . The CPR was granted 25 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 100 @,@ 000 km2 ; 39 @,@ 000 sq mi ) of land along the route of the railroad , and $ 25 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 from the government . In addition , the government was pledged to build $ 32 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 of other railways to support the CPR . The entire project was extremely costly , especially for a nation with only 4 @.@ 1 million people in 1881 . Between 1880 and 1885 , as the railway was slowly built , the CPR repeatedly came close to financial ruin . Not only was the terrain in the Rocky Mountains difficult , the route north of Lake Superior proved treacherous , as tracks and engines sank into the muskeg . When Canadian guarantees of the CPR 's bonds failed to make them salable in a declining economy , Macdonald obtained a loan to the corporation from the Treasury — the bill authorizing it passed the Senate just before the firm would have become insolvent . 
 The Northwest again saw unrest . Many of the Manitoban Métis had moved into the territories . Negotiations between the Métis and the Government to settle grievances over land rights proved difficult , Riel had lived in exile in the United States since 1870 , he journeyed to Regina with the connivance of Macdonald 's government , who believed he would prove a leader they could deal with . Instead , the Métis rose the following year under Riel in the North @-@ West Rebellion . Macdonald put down the rebellion with militia troops transported by rail , and Riel was captured , tried for treason , convicted , and hanged . Macdonald refused to consider <unk> Riel , who was of uncertain mental health . The hanging of Riel proved bitterly controversial , and alienated many Quebecers ( like Riel , Catholic and culturally French Canadian ) from the Conservatives — they soon realign themselves with the Liberals . 
 The CPR was almost bankrupt , but its essential role in rushing troops to the crisis proved its worth , and Parliament provided money for its completion . On 7 November 1885 , CPR manager William Van Horne who wired Macdonald from Craigellachie , British Columbia that the last spike was driven home . 
 In the summer of 1886 , Macdonald traveled for the only time to western Canada , traveling from town to town by private railway car , and addressing large crowds . Macdonald traveled with his wife , and to get a better view , the two would sometimes sit in front of the locomotive on the train 's cowcatcher . On 13 August 1886 , Macdonald used a silver hammer and pounded a gold spike to complete the Esquimalt and Nanaimo Railway . 
 In 1886 , another dispute arose over fishing rights with the United States . Americans fishermen had been using treaty provisions allowing them to land in Canada to take on wood and water as a cover for clandestine inshore fishing . Several vessels were detained in Canadian ports , to the outrage of Americans , who demanded their release . Macdonald sought to pass a Fisheries Act which would override some of the treaty provisions , to the dismay of the British , who were still responsible for external relations . The British government instructed the Governor General , Lord Lansdowne , to reserve Royal Assent for the bill , effectively placing it on hold without vetoing it . After considerable discussion , the British government allowed Royal Assent at the end of 1886 , and indicated it would send a warship to protect the fisheries if no agreement was reached with the Americans . 
 = = = Fifth and sixth majorities , 1887 – 91 ; death = = = 
 Fearing continued loss of political strength as poor economic times continued , Macdonald planned to hold an election by the end of 1886 , but had not yet issued the writ when an Ontario provincial election was called by Macdonald 's former student , Liberal Ontario Premier Oliver Mowat . The provincial election was seen as a bellwether for the federal poll . Despite considerable campaigning by the Prime Minister , Mowat 's Liberals were returned in Ontario , and increased their majority . Macdonald finally dissolved Parliament on 15 January 1887 for an election on 22 February . During the campaign , Macdonald suffered another blow when the Quebec provincial Liberals were able to form a government ( four months after the October 1886 Quebec election ) , forcing the Conservatives from power in Quebec City . Nevertheless , Macdonald and his cabinet campaigned hard in the winter election , with Tupper ( the new High Commissioner to London ) postponing his departure to try to bolster Conservative hopes in Nova Scotia . The Liberal leader , Edward Blake , ran an uninspiring campaign , and the Conservatives were returned nationally with a majority of 35 , winning easily in Ontario , Nova Scotia and Manitoba . The Tories even took a narrow majority of Quebec 's seats despite resentment over Riel 's hanging . Macdonald became MP for Kingston once again . Even the younger ministers , such as future Prime Minister John Thompson , who sometimes differed with Macdonald on policy , admitted the Prime Minister was an essential electoral asset for the Conservatives . 
 Blake , whom Macdonald biographer Gwyn describes as the Liberal Party 's " worst campaigner until Stéphane Dion early in the twenty @-@ first century " , resigned after the defeat , to be replaced by Wilfrid Laurier . Under Laurier 's early leadership , the Liberals , who had accepted much of the National Policy under Blake while questioning details , rejected it entirely , calling for " unrestricted reciprocity " , or free trade , with the United States . Advocates of Laurier 's plan argued that north – south trade made more economic sense than trying to trade across the vast , empty prairies , using a CPR which was already provoking resentment for what were seen as high freight rates . Macdonald was willing to see some reciprocity with the United States , but was reluctant to lower many tariffs . American advocates of what they dubbed " commercial union " saw it as a prelude to political union , and did not scruple to say so , causing additional controversy in Canada . 
 Macdonald called an election for 5 March 1891 . The Liberals were heavily financed by American interests ; the Conservatives drew much financial support from the CPR . The 76 @-@ year @-@ old Prime Minister collapsed during the campaign , and conducted political activities from his brother @-@ in @-@ law 's house in Kingston . The Conservatives gained slightly in the popular vote , but their majority was trimmed to 27 . The parties broke even in the central part of the country but the Conservatives dominated in the Maritimes and Western Canada , leading Liberal MP Richard John Cartwright to claim that Macdonald 's majority was dependent on " the shreds and patches of Confederation " . After the election , Laurier and his Liberals grudgingly accepted the National Policy , and when Laurier himself later became Prime Minister , he adopted it with only minor changes . 
 After the election , Macdonald suffered a stroke , which left him partially paralysed and unable to speak . " The Old Chieftain " lingered for days , remaining mentally alert , before dying in the late evening of Saturday , 6 June 1891 . Thousands filed by his open casket in the Senate Chamber ; his body was transported by funeral train to his hometown of Kingston , with crowds greeting the train at each stop . On arrival in Kingston , Macdonald lay in state again in City Hall , wearing the uniform of an Imperial Privy Counselor . He was buried in Cataraqui Cemetery in Kingston , his grave near that of his first wife , Isabella . 
 Wilfrid Laurier paid tribute to Macdonald in the House of Commons : 
 In fact the place of Sir John A. Macdonald in this country was so large and so absorbing that it is almost impossible to conceive that the politics of this country , the fate of this country , will continue without him . His loss overwhelms us . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 Macdonald served just under 19 years as Prime Minister , a length of service only surpassed by William Lyon Mackenzie King . Unlike his American counterpart , George Washington , no cities or political subdivisions are named for Macdonald ( with the exception of a small Manitoba village ) , nor are there any massive monuments . A peak in the Rockies , Mount Macdonald ( c . 1887 ) at Rogers Pass , is named for him . In 2001 , Parliament designated 11 January as Sir John A. Macdonald Day , but the day is not a federal holiday and generally passes unremarked . Since 1971 he has appeared on the Canadian ten @-@ dollar note . In 2015 the Royal Canadian Mint featured Macdonald 's face on the Canadian two dollar coin , the <unk> , to celebrate his 200th birthday . He also gives his name to Ottawa 's Sir John A. Macdonald Parkway ( River Parkway before 2012 ) , Ottawa Macdonald – Cartier International Airport ( renamed in 1993 ) and Ontario Highway 401 ( the Macdonald – Cartier Freeway c . 1968 ) , though these facilities are rarely referred to using his name . 
 A number of sites associated with Macdonald are preserved . His gravesite has been designated a National Historic Site of Canada . Bellevue House in Kingston , where the Macdonald family lived in the 1840s , is also a National Historic Site administered by Parks Canada , and has been restored to that time period . His Ottawa home , <unk> , still stands and is today the official residence of the British High Commissioner to Canada . Statues have been erected to Macdonald across Canada ; one stands on Parliament Hill in Ottawa ( by Louis @-@ Philippe Hebert c . 1895 ) . A statue of Macdonald stands atop a granite plinth originally intended for a statue of Queen Victoria in Toronto 's Queen 's Park , looking south on University Avenue . Macdonald 's statue also stands in Kingston 's City Park ; the Kingston Historical Society annually holds a memorial service in his honour . 
 A square outside of Union Station ( Toronto ) will be named in his honour . 
 A memorial was erected around 1895 on the front buttress of St David 's Church on Ingram Street in Glasgow next to the Ramshorn Cemetery , near his birthplace in Glasgow . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Historian Thomas H.B. Symons argues that Macdonald 's greatest achievement was building a strong sense of community that tied together the British and the French <unk> Senator Hugh Segal believes that Macdonald 's true monument is Canada itself : " Without Macdonald we 'd be a country that begins somewhere at the Manitoba @-@ Ontario border that probably goes throughout the east . Newfoundland would be like Alaska and I think that would also go for Manitoba , Saskatchewan , Alberta and B.C. We 'd be buying our oil from the United States . It would diminish our quality of life and range of careers , and our role in the world would have been substantially reduced . " Macdonald 's biographers note his contribution to establishing Canada as a nation . He was not an innovator ; instead he adopted ideas such as Confederation , the CPR , and the protective tariff and focused the political forces in Canada to make them realities . Swainson suggests that Macdonald 's desire for a free and tolerant Canada became part of its national outlook : " He not only helped to create Canada , but contributed immeasurably to its character . " Gwyn notes that Macdonald 's reputation is mixed , and somewhat negative : 
 Macdonald is viewed by many Canadian historians , and by many ordinary Canadians , as an exceptionally clever , very charming politician who possessed little else -- no vision , no creativity , and no ideas but the tactical stratagems of a pragmatist and opportunist @-@ as well as being corrupt and cynical , and a drunk . 
 Gwyn himself has a higher opinion of Macdonald : 
 his accomplishments were staggering : Confederation above all , but almost as important , if not more so , extending the country across the continent by a railway that was , objectively , a fiscal and economic insanity ... On the ledger 's other side , he was responsible for the CPR scandal , the execution of Louis Riel , and for the head tax on Chinese workers . He 's thus not easy to scan . His private life was mostly barren . Yet few other Canadian leaders — Pierre Trudeau , John Diefenbaker for a time , Wilfrid Laurier — had the same capacity to inspire love . 
 Macdonald was survived by Susan Agnes , son Hugh and daughter Mary ( d . 1933 ) . Both Susan and Mary left Canada for England , where they both lived for the rest of their lives . 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 <unk> , Patrice and Roger Hall , eds . ( 2014 ) . Macdonald at 200 : New Reflections and Legacies . Toronto : Dundurn . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) , essays by scholars 
 Symons , Thomas H.B. " Macdonald 's qualities as leader , builder withstand welcome wave of critiques , " Canadian Issues ( May 2015 ) online 
 = SpongeBob SquarePants ( season 3 ) = 
 The third season of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants , created by Stephen Hillenburg , aired on Nickelodeon from October 5 , 2001 to October 11 , 2004 , and consists of 20 episodes . The series chronicles the exploits and adventures of the title character and his various friends in the fictional underwater city of Bikini Bottom . The season was executive produced by series creator Hillenburg , who also acted as the showrunner . Hillenburg halted production on the show to work on the 2004 film adaptation of the series , The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie . After production on the film , Hillenburg resigned from the show as its showrunner , and appointed staff writer Paul Tibbitt to overtake the position . Season 3 was originally set to end the series after the release of the film , but the success prevented the series from ending , leading to a fourth season . 
 The season was well received by media critics and fans . During its run , SpongeBob SquarePants became the highest rated children 's show on cable , with over 50 million viewers a month . The show received several recognition , including its nomination at the Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Children 's Program . The episodes " New Student Starfish " and " Clams " were nominated for Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) category , while the entry " SpongeBob B.C. ( Ugh ) " won the same category . The season was also the first time the show received a nomination at the Kids ' Choice Awards and won . It won the 2003 Kids ' Choice Awards for Favorite Cartoon , and also won the following year 's Kids ' Choice Award for the same category . Celebrities — including Justin Timberlake , Kelly Osbourne , Britney Spears , Bruce Willis , Noel Gallagher , rapper Dr. Dre , and Mike Myers — have been reported to be fans of the show . 
 Several compilation DVDs that contained episodes from the season were released . The SpongeBob SquarePants : The Complete 3rd Season DVD was released in Region 1 on September 27 , 2005 , Region 2 on December 3 , 2007 , and Region 4 on November 8 , 2007 . 
 = = Production = = 
 The season aired on Nickelodeon , which is owned by Viacom , and was produced by United Plankton Pictures and Nickelodeon . The season 's executive producer was series creator Stephen Hillenburg , who also functioned as the showrunner . During production of the previous season , Nickelodeon already picked up a third season for SpongeBob SquarePants on September 20 , 2000 , due to the show 's high ratings across basic cable television . It premiered more than a year later , on October 5 , 2001 . 
 In 2002 , Hillenburg and the show 's staff members decided to stop making episodes to work on the 2004 film The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie , after completing production of the third season . As a result , the show went into a " self @-@ imposed " two @-@ year hiatus on television . During the break , Nickelodeon expanded the programming for the third season to cover the delay , however , according to Nickelodeon executive Eric Coleman , " there certainly was a delay and a built @-@ up demand . " Nickelodeon announced nine " as @-@ yet @-@ unaired " ( full ) episodes would be shown . " The Sponge Who Could Fly " first aired during a two @-@ hour " Sponge " -a @-@ thon , while the other eight were broadcast subsequently . 
 Once the film was completed , Hillenburg wanted to end the series " so the show wouldn 't jump the shark , " but Nickelodeon wanted to do more episodes . Hillenburg said " Well , there was concern when we did the movie [ in 2004 ] that the show had peaked . There were concerns among executives at Nickelodeon . " Hillenburg resigned as the series ' showrunner , and appointed Paul Tibbitt , who previously served as the show 's supervising producer , writer , director , and storyboard artist , to overtake the role . Hillenburg considered Tibbitt one of his favorite members of the show 's crew , and " totally trusted him . " Tibbitt still holds the showrunner position and also functions as an executive producer . Hillenburg no longer writes or runs the show on a day @-@ to @-@ day basis , but reviews each episode and delivers suggestions . He said " I figure when I 'm pretty old I can still paint [ ... ] I don 't know about running shows . " Tom Kenny and Bill Fagerbakke and the rest of the crew confirmed they have completed four new episodes for broadcast on Nickelodeon in early 2005 , and planned to finish about 20 total for the then @-@ fourth season . 
 Animation was handled overseas in South Korea at Rough Draft Studios . Animation directors credited with episodes in the third season included Sean Dempsey , Andrew Overtoom , Frank Weiss , and Tom Yasumi . Episodes were written by a team of writers , which consisted of Walt Dohrn , C.H. Greenblatt , Sam Henderson , Kaz , Jay Lender , Joe Liss ( The Great Snail Race only ) , Mark O 'Hare , Kent Osborne , Aaron Springer , Paul Tibbitt , and Merriwether Williams . The season was storyboarded by Zeus Cervas , Dohrn , Greenblatt , Henderson , Kaz , Chuck Klein , Carson Kugler , Lender , Heather Martinez , Caleb Meurer , O 'Hare , Osborne , Dan Povenmire , William Reiss , Mike Roth , Springer , Tibbitt , and Wiese . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The third season had a cast of six main actors . Tom Kenny provided the voice of the title character SpongeBob SquarePants and his pet snail Gary . SpongeBob 's best friend , a starfish named Patrick Star , was voiced by Bill Fagerbakke , while Rodger Bumpass played the voice of Squidward Tentacles , an arrogant and ill @-@ tempered octopus . Other members of the cast were Carolyn Lawrence as Sandy Cheeks , a squirrel from Texas ; Clancy Brown as Mr. Krabs , a miserly crab obsessed with money and SpongeBob 's boss at the Krusty Krab ; and Mr. Lawrence as Plankton , a small green copepod and Mr. Krabs ' business rival . The season had a number of secondary characters including Jill Talley as Plankton 's computer wife , Karen ; Mary Jo Catlett as Mrs. Puff , SpongeBob 's driving instructor ; Lori Alan as Pearl , Mr. Krabs ' daughter ; and Brian Doyle @-@ Murray as the Flying Dutchman . 
 In addition to the regular cast members , episodes feature guest voices from many ranges of professions , including actors , musicians , and artists . Former McHale 's Navy actors Ernest Borgnine and Tim Conway returned in the episode " Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy IV " , reprising their roles as Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy , respectively . Borgnine and Conway reappeared in the episode " Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy V " , which was also guest starred by John Rhys @-@ Davies as Man Ray , and Martin Olson as The Chief . Radio disc jockey Rodney Bingenheimer guest starred in the episode " Krab Borg " as The DJ . In " Party <unk> Pants " , American rock band the Cramps lead vocalist Lux Interior performed the voice of the lead singer of the all @-@ bird rock band called the Bird Brains . Kevin Michael Richardson also appeared in the live action segments of the episode as King Neptune . Various other characters were voiced by Dee Bradley Baker , Steve <unk> , Frank Welker and Thomas F. Wilson . 
 = = Reception = = 
 During its third season , SpongeBob SquarePants passed Rugrats and earned the title of being the highest rated children 's show on cable , with a 6 @.@ 7 rating and 2 @.@ 2 million kids 2 to 11 in the second quarter of 2002 , up 22 % over 2001 . Forbes called the show " a $ 1 billion honeypot , " and said the show is " almost single @-@ handedly responsible for making Viacom 's Nickelodeon the most @-@ watched cable channel during the day and the second most popular during prime time . " It was also reported that of the 50 million viewers who watch it every month , 20 million are adults . 
 The season was well received by media critics and fans . In 2002 , the show itself was nominated at the Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Children 's Program . Its episodes " New Student Starfish " and " Clams " were nominated for Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) category , while the entry " Ugh " won the same category . The show also won the Television Critics Association Awards for Outstanding Achievement in Youth Programming . The season was also the first time the show received a nomination at the Kids ' Choice Awards and won . In 2003 , the show won the 2003 Kids ' Choice Awards for Favorite Cartoon , and also won the succeeding year 's Kids ' Choice Award for the same category . At the 2003 Golden Reel Awards , the show won Best Sound Editing in Television Animation and Best Sound Editing in Television Animation — Music categories for the episodes " Nasty Patty " / " Idiot Box " and " Wet Painters " / " Krusty Krab Training Video " , respectively . The episodes " The Great Snail Race " and " Mid @-@ Life Crustacean " won at the 2004 Golden Reel Awards for " Best Sound Editing in Television Animation — Music " , while the episode " Mid @-@ Life Crustacean " itself received a nomination for " Best Sound Editing in Television Animation " . 
 In his review for the DVD Verdict , Bryan Pope wrote that " the show 's charm lies in the vast world of nautical nonsense " and that the show is " a world of <unk> squirrels , clarinet @-@ playing squids , underwater campfires , retired superheroes , plankton obsessed with world domination , and the most head @-@ scratching family units I 've ever come across ( a crab and a puffer fish are parents to a teenage whale , while pint @-@ sized Plankton is married to a no @-@ nonsense computer named Karen ) . " Pope pointed out that the season " remains the high point for the series " as it had produced " classic " episodes such as " No <unk> Allowed " , " SpongeBob Meets the Strangler " , and " Krusty Krab Training Video " . However , Pope described " The Lost Episode " as a " misstep " that " veers too far away from Bikini Bottom and into unfunny live @-@ action territory . " Furthermore , various celebrities — including Justin Timberlake , Kelly Osbourne , Britney Spears , Bruce Willis , Noel Gallagher , rapper Dr. Dre , and Mike Myers — were reported that they are fans of the show . American actor Rob Lowe said , " You 've got to love a sponge in <unk> <unk> . " In 2002 , fans of the show formed a " new religion " — the Church of SpongeBob SquarePants . The organization has more than 700 members . Its manifesto said it wanted to push " simple things like having fun and using your imagination " , and even offered study courses on the show . A Nickelodeon spokesman said " SpongeBob 's appeal is extraordinary . " 
 The popularity of SpongeBob translated well into sales figures . In 2002 , SpongeBob SquarePants dolls sold at a rate of 75 @,@ 000 per week , which was faster than Tickle Me Elmo dolls were selling at the time . SpongeBob has gained popularity in Japan , specifically with Japanese women . Nickelodeon 's parent company Viacom purposefully targeted marketing at women in the country as a method of the SpongeBob SquarePants brand . Skeptics initially doubted that SpongeBob could be popular in Japan as the character 's design is very different from already popular designs for Hello Kitty and Pikachu . Nickelodeon also expanded the merchandising of the show , bringing it around $ 500 million revenue . It was reported that SpongeBob @-@ themed goods are the best @-@ selling character merchandise at Hot Topic store at Park City Center . T @-@ shirts , pillows , shoelaces , pins , sunglasses , and air fresheners were sold " extremely well if they have SpongeBob 's likeness on them , " said Erin Aguirre , lead sales associate of Hot Topic . He added " [ Customers ] come in and they just jump right into it . " Did you see last week 's episode ? ' They totally talk all about it , just that it 's funny , that it 's hilarious . " 
 Moreover , the gay community had embraced the show , according to BBC Online . The Wall Street Journal also raised questions about SpongeBob and Patrick in a recent article that pointed up the show 's popularity in the gay community . Tom Kenny , in response to the article , said " [ I ] felt the insinuation was a stretch . " Kenny said " I had heard that gay viewers enjoy the show in the same way that lots of people — college students , parents and children — like the show [ ... ] I thought it was rather silly to hang an entire article on that . I don 't think it 's a case of it being a gay @-@ friendly show — It 's a human @-@ being @-@ friendly show . They 're all welcome . " Hillenburg responded about the character 's sexual orientation that it is " [ a ] cheerful character [ but ] is not gay . " He clarified that he considers the character to be " almost asexual " . The show 's popularity among gay men would become controversial . In 2005 a promotional video , which showed SpongeBob along with other characters from children 's shows singing together to promote diversity and tolerance , was attacked by an evangelical group in the United States because they saw SpongeBob being used as an " advocate for homosexuality " . James Dobson of Focus on the Family accused the makers of the video of " promoting homosexuality due to a pro @-@ tolerance group sponsoring the video " . After Dobson made the comments , Hillenburg repeated this assertion that sexual preference was never considered during the creation of the show . Tom Kenny and other production members were shocked and surprised that such an issue had arisen . Dobson later asserted that his comments were taken out of context and that his original complaints were not with SpongeBob , the video , or any of the characters in the video but with the organization that sponsored the video , We Are Family Foundation . Dobson indicated that the We Are Family Foundation posted pro @-@ homosexual material on their website , but later removed it . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Key 
 The following episodes listed in the chart are arranged according to their production order , rather than by their original air dates . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 The DVD boxset for season three was released by Paramount Home Entertainment and Nickelodeon in the United States and Canada in September 2005 , almost a year after the season had completed broadcast on television . The DVD release features bonus materials including the pilot episode " Help Wanted " and featurettes . 
 = HMS Jupiter ( 1895 ) = 
 HMS Jupiter was a Majestic @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the Royal Navy . Commissioned in 1897 , she was assigned to the Channel Fleet until 1905 . After a refit , she was temporarily put in reserve before returning to service with the Channel Fleet in September 1905 . In 1908 and rendered obsolete by the emergence of the dreadnought type of battleships , she once again returned to the reserve , this time with the Home Fleet . After another refit , she had a spell as a gunnery training ship in 1912 . 
 Following the outbreak of World War I , Jupiter served with the Channel Fleet and then as a guard ship on the River Tyne . She was dispatched to Russia in February 1915 to serve as an icebreaker , clearing a route to Arkhangelsk while the regular icebreaker was undergoing a refit . She underwent her own refit later in 1915 and once completed , was transferred to the Suez Canal Patrol . She returned to England late 1916 , and spent the remainder of the war based at Devonport . She was scrapped in 1920 . 
 = = Design = = 
 HMS Jupiter was laid down by J & G Thomson , Clydebank at Clydebank on 26 April 1894 and launched on 18 November 1895 . In February 1897 she was transferred to Chatham Dockyard , where she was completed in May 1897 . The ship was 421 feet ( 128 m ) long overall and had a beam of 75 ft ( 23 m ) and a draft of 27 ft ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) . She displaced up to 16 @,@ 060 t ( 15 @,@ 810 long tons ; 17 @,@ 700 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines powered by eight coal @-@ fired cylindrical boilers . By 1907 – 1908 , she was re @-@ boilered with oil @-@ fired models . Her engines provided a top speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) at 10 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 kW ) . The Majestics were considered good seaboats with an easy roll and good steamers , although they suffered from high fuel consumption . She had a crew of 672 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with four BL 12 @-@ inch Mk VIII guns in twin turrets , one forward and one aft . The turrets were placed on pear @-@ shaped barbettes ; six of her sisters had the same arrangement , but her sisters Caesar and Illustrious and all future British battleship classes had circular barbettes . Jupiter also carried twelve QF 6 @-@ inch / 40 guns . They were mounted in casemates in two gun decks amidships . She also carried sixteen QF 12 @-@ pounder guns and twelve QF 2 @-@ pounder guns . She was also equipped with five 18 in ( 460 mm ) torpedo tubes , four of which were submerged in the ship 's hull , with the last in a deck @-@ mounted launcher . Jupiter and the other ships of her class had 9 inches ( 229 mm ) of Harvey armour , which allowed equal protection with less cost in weight compared to previous types of armour . This allowed Jupiter and her sisters to have a deeper and lighter belt than previous battleships without any loss in protection . The barbettes for the main battery were protected with 14 in ( 360 mm ) of armor , and the conning tower had the same thickness of steel on the sides . The ship 's armored deck was 2 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 5 in ( 64 to 114 mm ) thick . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 HMS Jupiter was commissioned on 8 June 1897 at Chatham Dockyard for service in the Channel Fleet . She was present at both the Fleet Review at Spithead for the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria on 26 June 1897 and the Coronation Fleet Review for King Edward VII on 16 August 1902 . Captain John Durnford was appointed in command in October 1899 , followed by Captain Sir Archibald Berkeley Milne from December 1900 . In March 1901 she visited Cork . On 1 January 1905 , the Channel Fleet became the new Atlantic Fleet , making her an Atlantic Fleet unit . She was paid off at Chatham on 27 February 1905 to undergo a refit there , and her Atlantic Fleet service ended when she emerged from refit and was commissioned at Chatham into the Portsmouth Reserve on 15 August 1905 . Jupiter was commissioned for service in the new Channel Fleet on 20 September 1905 . This service ended on 3 February 1908 when she was paid off . By this time , Jupiter had been surpassed in the role of front @-@ line battleship by the new " all @-@ big @-@ gun " dreadnought battleships inaugurated by HMS Dreadnought in 1906 . 
 On 4 February 1908 , Jupiter was recommissioned for reserve service in the Portsmouth Division of the new Home Fleet with a nucleus crew . She was flagship of the division from February to June 1909 and later second flagship of the 3rd Division , Home Fleet . During this service , she underwent refits at Portsmouth in 1909 – 1910 , during which she received fire control equipment for her main battery , and 1911 – 1912 . From June 1912 to January 1913 she served as a seagoing gunnery training ship at the Nore . In January 1913 she was transferred to the 3rd Fleet , and was based at Pembroke Dock and Devonport . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 When World War I broke out in August 1914 , Jupiter was transferred to the 7th Battle Squadron of the Channel Fleet . During this service , she covered the passage of the British Expeditionary Force from England to France in September 1914 . In late October 1914 , Jupiter was reassigned to serve alongside her sister ship Majestic as a guard ship at the Nore . On 3 November 1914 , Jupiter and Majestic left the Nore and relieved their sister ships Hannibal and Magnificent of guard ship duty on the Humber . In December 1914 , Jupiter moved on to guard ship duty on the Tyne . On 5 February 1915 , Jupiter was detached from her guard ship duty to serve temporarily as an icebreaker at Arkhangelsk , Russia , while the regular icebreaker there was under refit . In this duty , Jupiter made history by becoming the first ship ever to get through the ice into Arkhangelsk during the winter ; her February arrival was the earliest in history there . Tsar Nicholas II authorised the striking and issue of medals commemorating the feat to all officers , petty officers and seamen ( class 1 , 2 and 3 respectively ) . 
 Jupiter left Arkhangelsk in May 1915 to return to the Channel Fleet , and was paid off at Birkenhead on 19 May 1915 . She then began a refit by Cammell Laird there that lasted until August 1915 . Her refit completed , Jupiter was commissioned at Birkenhead on 12 August 1915 for service in the Mediterranean Sea on the Suez Canal Patrol . On 21 October 1915 , she was transferred to the Red Sea to become guard ship at Aden and flagship of the Senior Naval Officer , Red Sea Patrol . She was relieved of flagship duty by the troopship RIM Northbrook of the Royal Indian Marine on 9 December 1915 and returned to the Suez Canal Patrol for Mediterranean service . This lasted from April to November 1916 , with a home port in Port Said , Egypt . 
 Jupiter left Egypt on 22 November 1916 and returned to the United Kingdom , where she was paid off at Devonport to provide crews for antisubmarine vessels . She remained at Devonport until April 1919 , in commission as a special service vessel and auxiliary patrol ship until February 1918 , when she was again paid off . After that she became an accommodation ship . In April 1919 , Jupiter became the first Majestic @-@ class ship to be placed on the disposal list . She was sold for scrapping on 15 January 1920 , and on 11 March 1920 was towed from Chatham to Blyth to be scrapped . 
 = Battles of Fort Budapest = 
 The Battles of Fort Budapest ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> ) refer to two attempts by the Egyptian Army to capture Fort Budapest , part of the Bar Lev Line during the Yom Kippur War . The first attempt took place at noon on October 6 , 1973 with the start of Operation Badr , but failed due to Israeli Air Force intervention . The second attempt took place on October 15 , at the onset of Operation Stouthearted Men , the Israeli military operation to cross the Suez Canal . Despite significant setbacks caused by poor sea conditions , the second attack was on the verge of success when the Israeli Air Force once again intervened , and this , coupled with Israeli reinforcements , repelled the Egyptian attack . 
 = = Background = = 
 Fort Budapest was the northernmost fort of the Israeli Bar Lev Line . Unlike all other Bar Lev Line fortifications , Budapest was not located on or immediately east of the Suez Canal . Rather , it was located on the Mediterranean Sea , 16 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 10 @.@ 3 mi ) south @-@ east of Port Fouad . Fort Budapest was the strongest of all the Bar Lev positions due to its strategic location ; the fort had control over the coastal road connecting Port Fouad to el @-@ Arish to the east . The fort had exceptional engineering preparations and a considerable amount of weaponry . The fort incorporated nine bunkers , and was surrounded by barbed wire and minefields to a depth of 600 metres ( 660 yd ) . On October 6 , the fort was garrisoned by an infantry company and two tank platoons , under the command of Captain Motti Ashkenazi . 
 The Budapest garrison also had the advantage of terrain . Located on a narrow strip of land bounded to the north by the Mediterranean , and to the south by salt marshes , the main route of approach for an attacker was by land over the strip , which spanned 170 metres ( 190 yd ) at its widest . Alternatively , the fort could be attacked via the salt marshes , or by a naval landing . However the marshes could only be traversed on foot and then only very slowly , while a naval landing was subject to sea conditions . 
 = = = Prelude to first attack = = = 
 Capturing Fort Budapest fell within the responsibility of the Port Said Sector , an Egyptian military command independent of the Second Field Army to the south . The commander of the sector , Major General Omar Khalid , assigned the task of capturing the fort to the 135th Independent Infantry Brigade , commanded by Brigadier General Salah ' Abd el @-@ Halim . The 135th was also tasked with capturing another position , Fort Orkal , so Salah committed one battalion under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Ali al @-@ Mezahi to capture Budapest . However , Salah had the following reinforcements : six obsolete T @-@ 34 tanks equipped with mine flails to breach the Israeli minefield , eight amphibious armored vehicles , a 120 mm mortar company , and a company of the 128th Sa 'iqa Group ( Sa 'iqa , meaning lightning , were Egyptian commando forces ) . The Sa 'iqa company would join the attack via a naval landing and would be separated into two groups . One group would land four kilometers east of Budapest to isolate it and prevent Israeli reinforcements from reaching the fort . The other group would land one kilometer east of Budapest , and then attack the fort . The main assault would come from the west , to be carried out by the battalion and the six tanks . The battalion would attack from Port Fouad , the only part of the Sinai under Egyptian control . 
 To allow the Sa 'iqa company to perform its landing , the Port Said Sector was to be supplied 24 assault dinghies . Only ten were received however , and on October 3 , Second Army informed Khalid that there were no more dinghies available , and that he would have to improvise . Khalid resorted to renting two fishing boats . Consequently , the Sa 'iqa company was tasked with simply isolating the fort ; no attack from the east would be carried out . 
 = = First Battle = = 
 On October 6 , at 14 : 00 , as part of Operation Badr , over 200 Egyptian aircraft participated in an air strike against various Israeli targets in the Sinai . As part of the strike , IL @-@ 28 tactical bombers attacked Fort Budapest . The bombers were moderately accurate , some of the bombs finding their targets and others landing outside the fort 's perimeter . Budapest was also targeted by an artillery barrage , beginning at 14 : 05 . While the fire preparation was underway , the Sa 'iqa company moved out of Port Said to conduct its landing east of the fort . At the same time the main attacking force began moving from its positions east of Port Fouad . In the lead were three T @-@ 34s with mine flails to breach the minefield , closely followed by combat engineers , and then the advance fireteams . Behind these , forming the first echelon of the battalion , was a platoon in amphibious vehicles supported by the three remaining T @-@ 34s . 
 As soon as the lead T @-@ 34s reached the minefield , they came under heavy fire from the fort 's garrison . Soon all three tanks were either destroyed or damaged , so the combat engineers proceeded to breach the minefield on their own . Israeli aircraft began strafing and bombing the Egyptian forces for over two and a half hours while encountering no resistance , leading to the destruction of all six tanks and five vehicles . The Israelis bombed Egyptian forces at the minefield and on an area of the strip stretching two kilometers towards Port Fouad . Under fire from the air and from the fort , the attack bogged down to a complete halt before the Egyptians began to retreat . Salah ordered his battalion to assume defensive positions east of Port Fouad to repel any Israeli counterattack and to regroup . 
 The Sa 'iqa company achieved the only discernible success of the attack . It managed to land four kilometers east of the fort without facing any aerial resistance ( as the company was sailing in civilian fishing boats ) . The company managed to prevent Israeli reinforcements from reaching the fort , destroying a number of tanks and vehicles . It also captured six Israeli soldiers . 
 Salah planned to attempt another attack against Budapest on October 8 , and al @-@ Mezahi , whose battalion would carry out the second attempt , took the necessary preparations . The attack was canceled however , due to heavy Israeli aerial attacks against Port Said throughout the night of October 7 / 8 . The Sa 'iqa company continued to hold its positions east of Budapest for four days , until Salah decided to withdraw it due to the casualties it had sustained . 
 = = Second Battle = = 
 = = = Prelude = = = 
 On October 11 , the Port Said Sector was reinforced with the 103rd Sa 'iqa battalion of the 139th Sa 'iqa Group . The battalion had arrived from Cairo , and three days later the sector received ten new fiberglass boats from Alexandria . The boats however had been sent without necessary maintenance of the boats themselves or their engines . With the arrival of these reinforcements and equipment , Salah began to lay a plan of attack . 
 As in the first attempt , a Sa 'iqa company from the 103rd Battalion would occupy positions four kilometers east of Budapest to isolate the fort . It would be supported by an AT @-@ 3 Sagger ATGM platoon . The main attack would be launched from the east by a Sa 'iqa company and a company from al @-@ Mezahi 's battalion as the first echelon . Other units of al @-@ Mezahi 's battalion would conduct a secondary attack from the west , while one company remained in reserve near Port Fouad along with a Sa 'iqa company . A reinforced company ( less one platoon ) of al @-@ Mezahi 's battalion would land by sea directly upon the Israeli fort . The attack would be preceded by a 30 @-@ minute long fire preparation . 
 Salah presented his plan to Maj. Gen. Khalid on the morning of October 13 . Khalid authorized the attack and informed Second Army . The 103rd Sa 'iqa Battalion spent the night of October 12 / 13 and October 14 preparing for the attack ; reconnoitering the area around the fort by means of patrol groups and aerial photographs , as well as studying routes of approach through the marshes . The attacking forces began moving to their positions at 19 : 00 on October 14 , taking advantage of the darkness . The secondary attack force took up position east of Port Fouad while the main force reached its position east of the fort through the marshes in four waves . The march was extremely difficult to cross due to the nature of the terrain and the high concentration of salt , which meant the soldiers had to traverse the marshes barefoot . Towards midnight , the Egyptians began harassing the fort 's garrison with artillery fire using a range of calibers , along with Katyusha rockets launched from a naval vessel . 
 = = = Attack = = = 
 At 3 : 00 AM on October 15 , the reinforced company ( less one platoon ) began moving out of Port Said in preparation for its landing . At 3 : 30 , the fire preparation began against the fort . It was carried out by the 135th Brigade 's artillery and an additional artillery battalion . At 4 : 00 , the attack began . The secondary attack force approaching from the west opened fire to draw the garrison 's attention . The main force advanced towards the fort , spearheaded by the Sa 'iqa company . The Egyptians managed to reach the fort and surprise its garrison . Soon the company was on the verge of entering the fort . The naval force however , due to bad sea conditions ( sea state 4 ) arrived at 4 : 30 , half an hour late , and then was forced to land one kilometer west of the fort . It joined the secondary attack group in its advance against the fortification . The mixed force came under heavy fire , and the battalion commander , Ali al @-@ Mezahi was killed . The Sa 'iqa company east of the fort finally succeeded in breaching the fort 's defenses under heavy fire ; the company commander was hit several times but continued to lead his men . The secondary force also managed to reach the fort 's northern sand embankment . The fighting became intense , and the Egyptians picked up a radio signal sent by the garrison commander in which he detailed his men 's precarious position and requested immediate assistance , especially air support . Despite the initial success achieved , Salah did not have his reserves on either side of the fort join the attack . With sunrise , Israeli aircraft began attacking Egyptian troops . Two F @-@ 4 Phantoms strafed the secondary force and made several bombing runs against it , while helicopters attacked the main force . 
 The Israelis reinforced the fort with two tank companies . They came up against the Sa 'iqa company isolating the fort . In the ensuing firefight , the company leader and every platoon commander were killed as the Egyptians were caught in open ground , bereft of any cover . There were also many casualties , but the Sa 'iqa destroyed twenty Israeli tanks and half @-@ tracks during the battle . 
 The Egyptians , under heavy and effective fire from the Israelis inside the bunkers , ceased entering the fort . The Sa 'iqa company to the east , under concentrated Israeli tank fire and aerial bombardment , was finally overwhelmed by the Israeli reinforcements , which proceeded towards the fort , opening fire on the main force . Consequently , all Egyptian forces east of the fort attempted to retreat through the marshes . The Israelis attempted to hamper the retreat by dropping smoke capsules over the area from four A @-@ 4 Skyhawks . The lack of visibility caused injuries as men tripped and were trampled during the retreat through the marshes . 
 The sector 's command contacted Saad El Shazly , the Egyptian Chief of Staff , and informed him of the failure of the attack , and requested that paratroopers – who were supposedly promised in support of the attack but never arrived – be sent to protect the retreating forces . Artillery fire was used to provide cover . Khalid instructed Salah to have his forces retreat to their original defensive positions east of Port Fouad to reorganize , and to defend against counterattacks at all costs . Throughout October 15 , troops that had retreated through the lake continued to arrive at the defensive positions , where Israeli counterattacks were repulsed with the help of artillery . At 8 : 00 that morning , two Egyptian Sukhoi Su @-@ 7 fighter @-@ bombers flew over the battlefield . On arriving over the fort , one was shot down by ground fire , and the other withdrew . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The second Egyptian attempt was the last ; the Port Said Sector did not launch another attack to capture the fort . Thus Budapest remained the only Israeli fortification of the Bar Lev Line to remain under Israeli control . Four months after the Yom Kippur War , Captain Motti Ashkenazi , the commander of Fort Budapest , led the protests against the Israeli government 's handling of the war . 
 = Pancho Coimbre = 
 Francisco " Pancho " Coimbre <unk> ( 29 January 1909 – 4 November 1989 ) , more commonly known as Pancho Coimbre , was a Puerto Rican professional baseball player . He was born in the municipality of Coamo and moved to Ponce early in his life . It was in Ponce where he would begin to actively participate in sports , both in sprinting and baseball . Coimbre played thirteen seasons in the Puerto Rican Professional Baseball League ( LBPPR ) , with the Leones de Ponce . During this period the team won five league championships . He finished his career with an average of .337 , and had an average of 2 @.@ 2 strikeouts per season , this included four consecutive seasons from 1939 to 1942 , without any strikeouts . Coimbre also won two LBPPR batting titles and the league 's Most Valuable Player Award in 1943 . 
 Coimbre traveled to New York City , after completing his first professional season in Puerto Rico , where he joined the Porto Rico Stars baseball team of the Negro Leagues . He was contracted by the New York Cubans , while playing with the Porto Rico Stars . He joined the NY Cubans and played several seasons for them . Coimbre 's batting average remained over the .300 mark , including two seasons where he batted over .400 . While playing in the Negro leagues he was selected to play in the league 's East – West All @-@ Star games twice , where he played with several players who in the future would be elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum . He also played with teams established in Colombia , Venezuela , the Dominican Republic and Mexico . Following his retirement Coimbre worked as a coach and manager of teams in both the professional and amateur leagues of Puerto Rico . Coimbre , who was eighty years old , died because he was unable to escape the flames of a burning building in which he lived . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Francisco Coimbre was born in Coamo , Puerto Rico , to Guillermo Coimbre and Zoila <unk> . Upon his birth , he was inscribed as a resident of Arroyo in his birth certificate , following a common practice at the time . In 1922 , he moved to Ponce along his mother , in order to live closer to his sister , Angela Coimbre . There he began playing baseball under the training and supervision of Miguel <unk> and Antonio Gordan , two hall of <unk> in the local league . 
 His first accomplishments in sports where in track and field , where he competed in the 50 @-@ yard dash , eventually developing his skills in other aspects of the sport . He continued practicing this sport while attending high school . Later he was transferred to another educational institution in Caguas , Puerto Rico , but when he tried to participate in an athletic competition he was denied permission because he was classified in a different division on the records of Puerto Rico 's Instruction Department . 
 This event led to a court case which marked the first time in Puerto Rico that a court hearing was scheduled for a case involving sports . He subsequently transferred to Ponce High School , where the Instruction Department tried to have him removed of the athleticism team based on allegations that he had received payment as a student athlete . Judge Roberto <unk> Jr. determined that the evidence against Coimbre was insufficient during the hearing and the case was dropped . 
 = = Baseball career = = 
 In high school , Coimbre played in a school league in the positions of pitcher and second baseman . His incursion in organized baseball came about when he was recommended by a member of the Leones de Ponce , to the team officials . The Leones de Ponce was the local team of the Puerto Rican amateur league who was to play in a series against the San Juan Athletics . During that season the team needed additional players and he was selected by the team 's owner , Pipo Maldonado . He debuted in a game that took place in Ponce , where he was given the position of right fielder and he had four hits in five at bats . He continued in the team and in 1928 participated in a championship series between his team and the team of Guayama , where Ponce won on six games . In the last game of this series Coimbre pitched and won with a final score of 5 – 3 , in a game where the team almost lost following an error . 
 Coimbre 's first performance outside Puerto Rico was in the Dominican Republic , where he played with a team named Sandino in Santiago de los Caballeros in 1927 . He was accompanied by several Puerto Rican players during this stay . In 1929 , he played for the " Magallanes " a team in Venezuela where he played as a pitcher and outfielder . Four of his teammates , who now had homes in Caracas , had played with him in the Puerto Rican league . After having a solid performance in the 1930 season of the amateur league , he was recruited by the Tigres del <unk> team to play in the Dominican Republic , which was coached by Charles Dore . Following that season , he continued alternating between both leagues , playing with Santo Domingo in 1931 . 
 After the Puerto Rican league season came to an end in 1932 , Coimbre went to work as a security guard in a penal institution and only played with a semi @-@ professional team . Shortly after , he was offered a contract to play in La Guaira , with a team called Santa Marta . The season concluded with <unk> , a second team owned by Santa Marta 's proprietor winning the league 's championship . Following his participation with Santa Marta , he continued playing , both in Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic . While playing with <unk> , the team developed a rivalry with El Escogido , which gave Coimbre an opportunity to establish relationships with several players , from both countries . During this period the team continued to be coached by Dore , and included several known Dominican players . The team would win the league 's championship once , but Coimbre decided not to assist the ceremony where the trophy was awarded choosing to stay in his hotel room instead . Dore took the cup to Coimbre so that he could have it in his possession some days , but he rejected this and suggested that it be filled with money for a donation . 
 In 1935 , he moved to Maracaibo where he played for Pastora , in Zulia 's Stadium . The team reached the league 's final series but lost to Magallanes . Prior to this series , the team had to travel to <unk> , an industrial city where the games where scheduled . The usual way of traveling there was by boat , but following Coimbre 's advice the team was transported there by airplane . After the season was over he moved to La Victoria , Aragua , where one of his friends resided in a hacienda . There he played in a series that served to determine what the final roster of Concordia , a team that was going to travel to Puerto Rico that year , would be . Coimbre participated in the series , but choose to play with Ponce instead of Concordia . In 1937 , he returned to the Dominican Republic and his team won the league 's championship in what he described as the " most powerful team in his memory " . 
 = = = Formation of the LBPPR and participation in Negro league baseball = = = 
 Later that year , when he returned to Puerto Rico , Coimbre discovered that the Liga de <unk> Profesional de Puerto Rico ( LBPPR ) was being organized . When the league was organized they elected Teófilo Maldonado , a press writer , as their president . Coimbre joined the Ponce @-@ <unk> team , that represented Ponce . The team was coached by Isidro <unk> and owned by Juan Luis <unk> and the team 's roster included several players that were known by the local fanbase , After the season 's conclusion , Coimbre traveled to New York for the first time in his life , after being invited by a close friend . Coimbre 's original intention was to visit his sister instead , with whom he lived while in the city . In New York , he met Santiago Bartolomei who was the owner of a team named Puerto Rico Stars ( also known as " Puerto Rican Stars " ) . Bartolomei visited Coimbre along a group of players and offered him a contract to play with the team . He accepted and joined the team that included players from Puerto Rico and Cuba . 
 While he played for the Porto Rico Stars , Alejandro Pompéz called him and made him an offer to play with the New York Cubans , which at the time he owned . Pompéz became interested in Coimbre after hearing several reviews of his work , but he was skeptical of these claims and therefore he was hesitant to contract him at first and didn 't do so until a group of players recommended him . He debuted in a game against a team named <unk> , in a game that took place in Brooklyn , New York . In his first two games with the team he connected four hits , three singles and a double . Following this performance Pompéz informed him that he was going to stay with the team . After the season concluded he was instantly offered a second contract with the Cubans , which by this time where playing in the National League of the Negro League . He also participated with Ponce during the 1940 – 1941 season of the winter league and concluded the season with a batting average of <unk> and no strikeouts . During his second season with the Cubans he had an average of .409 , and was included in the league 's All @-@ star Game for the first time in his career . 
 Following this , he returned to Puerto Rico and had an average of .372 with his team . This season marked the first time that Ponce won the LBPPR championship . The next season Coimbre won his first batting championship in the Puerto Rican Professional Baseball League , finishing with an average of .342 after he connected hits in 22 consecutive games . In 1943 , he had his best season in the Negro leagues in the United States , when he was selected to the East 's All @-@ Star team for a second occasion and had an average of .428 , the highest one in his career with the Cubans . That year Coimbre received a tribute in the Yankee Stadium , where hundreds of Puerto Ricans reunited and awarded him a scroll and a ring recognizing his performance . That same year , he led the LBPPR in runs batted in , scoring 27 RBIs . He was subsequently invited to play in the Liga Mexicana de <unk> ( Mexican Baseball League ) for the first time in his career , where he joined a team called Puebla . In the beginning , he had problems adapting to Mexico 's climate however , his average improved over the course of the season , eventually finishing as one of the league 's leaders . Coimbre experienced a similar pattern in the 1944 – 1945 LBPPR season , where he was unable to score a hit in the first games , but finished winning his second batting championship . 
 Later that year , he joined a team named El <unk> , which was organized in Barranquilla , Colombia . His participation with the team mostly consisted of managing work since he was unable to play due to a previous injury . During his time of inactivity , he worked in the Administration of Parks and Recreation , supervising softball games organized by local businessmen . Another injury product of an accidental pitch ended Coimbre 's participation in the 1946 LBPPR season , the injury 's treatment required hospitalization and recovery treatment . After recovering from the injury he traveled to New York in 1948 , originally with the intention of joining the Baltimore Elite Giants or the New York Black Yankees . During this visit he was contacted by <unk> , a team of the Canadian league to play in the right field position . 
 Coimbre was not able to play in his full capacity because he still experienced problems with the injury on his knee . He ended the season batting an average of .316 , in a season where the team won the league 's championship . Coimbre spent the 1948 – 1951 working as a designated hitter in the LBPPR . His final season in the league was in 1952 , when he was reassigned to play in the right field and was the fourth player in the batting lineup . His last game was against the Cangrejeros de Santurce , where a wild pitch re @-@ injured his knee , prompting Coimbre 's decision to retire as an active player . 
 = = Retirement , death and legacy = = 
 Following his retirement Coimbre began working as the coach of the Leones de Ponce , leading the team to two championships as well as extending his work to the Caribbean Series , a tournament where the champions of each Caribbean league participate . He received an invitation from the team owner of the Caguas @-@ Guayama team , which was established in Panama , to work as the team manager . Coimbre also worked in the administration of the Indios de Mayagüez , when the team traveled to play in Havana , Cuba . He subsequently decided to work as a coach in the amateur league , while continuing his participation with the professional Ponce team and began coaching a team that represented Juana Díaz , Puerto Rico . 
 Coimbre began promoting an idea that focused in the performance of the team , instead of the success of individual players . In his first day as an amateur coach , Coimbre summoned the players to a conference , where he noted that if all of them felt like " stars " and played for statistics their collective performance would suffer . He won a national championship with the team , but decided to leave it and work with the <unk> de Ponce , where he won another championship . During this time he also worked as a talent scout with the Pittsburgh Pirates . As a scout he was directly responsible for the hiring of Roberto Clemente , when he urged the Pirates to draft him in the first draw of the Major League Baseball Draft , even though Clemente was under a minor league contract with the Brooklyn Dodgers . 
 Coimbre died on November 4 , 1989 , when he was trapped in a house fire . The fire originated in the house 's kitchen while he was cooking , consuming the structures wooden frame . When Coimbre tried to escape he was unable to open the front door , because he had locked it with a padlock . 
 The City of Ponce honored the memory of Coímbre by naming its sports museum the " Museo Pancho Coímbre " . The museum , which contains a large collection of sports memorabilia , is located on the Calle ( Street ) Lolita Tizol . Also , in Ponce , he is honored at the Park for the Illustrious Ponce Citizens . Also the building housing the Secretaría de <unk> y Deportes on Avenida Las Américas in Ponce is named " Francisco “ Pancho " Coímbre " . The town of Coamo also honored Coimbre by naming a sports complex " <unk> Deportivo Francisco Pancho Coimbre Park " after him . 
 = Phoenix Zoo = 
 The Phoenix Zoo opened in 1962 and is the largest privately owned , non @-@ profit zoo in the United States . Located in Phoenix , Arizona , the zoo was founded by Robert Maytag , a member of the Maytag family , and operates on 125 acres ( 51 ha ) of land in the Papago Park area of Phoenix . It has been designated as a Phoenix Point of Pride . 
 The zoo has over 1 @,@ 400 animals on display and contains 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) of walking trails . It is divided into four main themed areas or trails : The Arizona Trail ( American Southwest flora and fauna ) , the Africa Trail ( animals from Africa ) , the Tropics Trail ( residents of the rain forests ) , and the Children 's Trail , which includes a petting zoo . 
 The zoo has been conservation minded from its inception . Soon after it opened it hosted what was thought to be the last few Arabian oryx , which formed the basis of the world herd created for Operation Oryx and eventually allowed the reintroduction of the species into the wild . It now includes a sanctuary to care for animals that are endangered or unwanted . 
 = = History = = 
 The Phoenix Zoo began as a personal project of Robert Maytag , who formed the Arizona Zoological Society with the intention of opening a zoo in Phoenix . Although Maytag died a few months before its opening , the zoo opened on schedule in November 1962 . It was originally named the " Maytag Zoo " , but was renamed the following year to " Phoenix Zoo " to identify it more closely with the community . The zoo has always been a privately owned , non @-@ profit venture . 
 Although the zoo had some financial struggles in the early 1960s , it grew substantially during the 1970s as it added numerous new exhibits , landscaping features , and visitor amenities . The 1980s saw continued growth , with the addition of African Savanna habitat areas , a children 's zoo , a new entrance complex , and other exhibits . During this time , the zoo also underwent a renovation project to divide it into four themed zones ( called " trails " ) , featuring different types of exhibits . 
 The zoo expanded again in 1998 with the opening of Harmony Farms , home to a petting zoo and many domestic farm animals . In 2000 , the zoo opened Desert Lives , and in 2004 it added a new primate walk @-@ through exhibit called Monkey Village . In November 2006 , aquatic species were added to the zoo with the opening of Stingray Bay , . In November 2009 , two Komodo dragons were brought to the zoo as a part of the zoo 's capital campaign . In April 2011 , as a part of the zoo 's capital campaign , Orang @-@ <unk> : People of the Forest , the new orangutan exhibit opened to the public . 
 = = Areas and attractions = = 
 The Phoenix Zoo has four major themed areas , or " trails " , where visitors can experience exhibits representing different areas of the world and their native wildlife : the Arizona Trail , the Africa Trail , the Tropics Trail , and the Discovery / Children 's Trail . 
 = = = Arizona Trail = = = 
 The Arizona Trail is designed to emulate the wildlife and plant life of the state of Arizona . It features several plants native to the Sonoran Desert including the saguaro cactus , and animals such as the coyote , collared peccary ( more commonly known as the <unk> ) , cougar , bobcat , raven , turkey vulture , <unk> , thick billed parrot , Sonoran pronghorn , and the Mexican gray wolf . 
 = = = Africa Trail = = = 
 The Africa Trail showcases many of the most popular animals in the world , including the African wild dogs , hamadryas baboon , mandrill , ostrich , <unk> 's gazelle , white rhino , Grévy 's zebras , African lions , cheetahs , and Masai giraffes . The Desert Lives ( pronounced like " life " ) trail , diverts off of the Africa Trail before and after the lion and hyaena exhibits , and features bighorn sheep and Arabian oryx among the natural buttes . 
 = = = Tropics Trail = = = 
 The Tropics Trail has two parts . The inner trail following the lake is home to the Tropical Flights aviary as well as the ring @-@ tailed lemurs , and Bornean orangutans , and Monkey Village . The outer tropics trail passes by the Land of the Dragons exhibit , Asian elephants , jaguar , Galápagos tortoises , Aldabra giant tortoises , iguanas , anteaters , Sumatran tiger , and an assortment of tropical birds . It includes the Forest of <unk> , a lush rainforest landscape that surrounds visitors along a 1 @-@ mile walking trail and includes reproductions of a South American <unk> and a scientific expedition and ruins , and highlights several tropical animals including the Andean bear . 
 = = = Children 's Trail = = = 
 The Children 's Trail lets children get close to many small mammals from around the world , including emus , an ocelot , a caracal , <unk> gibbons , and golden @-@ mantled tamarins . 
 Next to the Wallaby Walkabout is a rectangular display called " Feel the Difference " , with three vertebrate charts ( reptile , fish , and amphibian ) , and an invertebrate chart created by Frank Schaffer Publications . 
 Continuing on the trail will take you through Harmony Farm , featuring many farm animals , a petting zoo , and demonstrations on farming and agriculture oriented toward children . 
 = = = Hunt Bass Hatchery House = = = 
 The Hunt Bass Hatchery Caretaker 's House was built in 1936 and is located in the Phoenix Zoo grounds . Following the Great Depression , Governor Hunt ( Arizona 's first elected governor ) commissioned a bass fish hatchery to be established in the Papago Park of Arizona during 1932 . The property was listed in the National Register of Historic Places on January 23 , 2003 , reference : # <unk> . 
 = = = Other attractions = = = 
 In addition to the trails , the zoo has several specialty attractions . 
 Stingray Bay was opened in November 2006 , and included more than 30 <unk> rays and southern stingrays in a 15 @,@ 000 gallon " touch tank . " The " touch tank " lets visitors to touch the rays , whose barbs have been trimmed for safety . The exhibit is now permanent after installation of equipment to adjust water temperatures in the summer . In October 2007 , bamboo sharks were added to the exhibit . 
 An endangered species carousel is featured by the Leapin ' Lagoon Splash Pad . 
 The Safari Train provides a nonstop guided tour of the zoo . 
 Camel rides . 
 Giraffe Encounter 
 = = = Programs = = = 
 The zoo has a wide array of youth programs and animal encounters , including field trips , Night Camp , an outreach program which includes a <unk> for outreach to locations outside the city , a summer camp , and a large volunteer program for teenagers 13 – 17 , known as the <unk> program . 
 = = Conservation efforts = = 
 Since opening in 1962 , the zoo has focused on animal conservation efforts . Programs at the Phoenix Zoo include captive breeding for reintroduction ( for instance the Arabian oryx , black @-@ footed ferret , Mexican wolf , Ramsey Canyon leopard frog , and thick @-@ billed parrot , sanctuary for animals that are no longer breeding ( for instance the African wild dogs at the zoo ) , and rescue and rehabilitation ( for instance lead poisoning treatments for the California condor ) . 
 The Phoenix Zoo participates in the Species Survival Plan ( SSP ) for 29 species with the Association of Zoos and Aquariums . The goal of the SSP is to engage in animal husbandry and research projects for selected species that are in need of conservation efforts . 
 = = = Reintroduction = = = 
 In its first years , the zoo hosted a captive breeding program ( " Operation Oryx " ) with the specific goal of reintroducing the almost extinct Arabian oryx to the wild . By the early 1990s this program was still one of only two programs ( the other being the golden lion tamarin ) to have gone through the full wilderness @-@ zoo @-@ wilderness sequence . Nine oryx had been caught or donated for the breeding program . However , two pairs were delayed , so the " World Herd " was started in Phoenix in 1963 with only five animals shipped to the zoo and two born quickly after . The two delayed pairs arrived in 1964 to increase the herd to 11 individuals . The program was very successful , and the zoo celebrated its 225th Arabian oryx birth in 2002 . The Arabian oryx became extinct in the wild in 1972 , and reintroduction efforts were started in 1982 when oryx were released to the wild in the Omani Central Desert and Coastal Hills . Additional captive herds have been discovered and used as the basis for reintroductions , for instance in Saudi Arabia , but there has been some interbreeding even with these herds and most of the Arabian oryx in the wild today have ancestors from the Phoenix Zoo . 
 = = = Sanctuary = = = 
 The zoo provides sanctuary to many animals that need a place to live for various reasons . Some ( like the Arabian oryx , Bali <unk> , rhinoceros hornbill , Mexican gray wolf , and white rhinoceros ) participate in captive breeding programs , some ( such as the African spotted dogs ) have retired from such programs and need a home , some have behavioral problems , and some are being rehabilitated to return to the wild . Animals that are in sanctuary are treated somewhat differently from other animals by the zoo . While normal exhibits balance the needs of the animals with those of visitors ( for example , incorporating large viewing areas ) , the sanctuary exhibits are almost completely focused on the comfort and well @-@ being of the animals . 
 After the 1998 death of Ruby , the zoo 's famous painting elephant , the zoo abandoned its elephant breeding program and began to focus on elephant behavior . The zoo is currently home to three Asian elephants that have a variety of behavioral issues , the most common being aggression toward other elephants . One elephant is a former performer at a circus and was subject to mistreatment , while the other two were captured in remote regions where they were never properly socialized . 
 = = = Rescue and rehabilitation = = = 
 The zoo provides lead poisoning treatment for California condors from the Grand Canyon area . These birds are one of the most endangered species on the planet , having at one time been reduced to 22 individuals in the wild . In February 2006 , they treated a female ( # 149 ) who had been released in the 1990s and her son ( # 304 ) who survived a very rare birth in the wild . Both birds were captured in the Grand Canyon region and brought back to the zoo to be treated . A California condor ( # 133 ) was still being treated for lead poisoning at the zoo as of March 2010 . 
 = = Ruby the elephant = = 
 The Phoenix Zoo garnered worldwide attention for one of its animals , an Asian elephant named Ruby . Ruby came to the zoo in 1973 , just months after being born in Thailand . After noticing Ruby doodling in the sand with sticks , her keeper decided to give her a brush and paint . Ruby quickly became known for her paintings , whose sales raised over US $ 200 @,@ 000 for the zoo . Art collectors all over the world joined 18 @-@ month waiting lists and paid hundreds of dollars for original prints . 
 In 1997 , Ruby became pregnant . Near the end of her 22 @-@ month pregnancy , veterinarians discovered that the calf was dead . Ruby 's uterus had ruptured , and the calf had slipped out and into Ruby 's abdomen . Due to complications during the surgery to remove the 320 @-@ pound fetus , Ruby had to be euthanized . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 In 1997 , then @-@ zoo director Jeff Williamson merged some departments of the zoo in a business move that was intended to provide a clearer direction for zoo operations . Many of the zoo 's approximately 350 volunteers interpreted the merger as an elimination of volunteer training efforts . As a result , more than half of them left the zoo by 1999 . 
 In May 2005 , a veterinarian named Kris Nelson filed a series of complaints against the zoo regarding animal care and management . Her complaints were backed by two former zoo employees : a chief veterinarian and an animal nutritionist . The complaints stated that dozens of animals had been harmed or died as a result of poor management , feeding practices , and quarantine procedures . Another veterinarian , 15 @-@ year zoo employee Kathy Orr , discounted many of Nelson 's claims as being either invalid , or having been corrected already . 
 The following June , an independent committee of zoological experts from other areas of the country cleared the Phoenix Zoo of the charges . In a published report , the committee outlined some minor flaws in the zoo 's operation , but reported no " serious deficiencies " . 
 = = Fundraising for redesign = = 
 A Phoenix municipal bond election in March 2006 provided $ 2 million to the project , marking the first time the zoo has received public funds in its history . On 8 June 2006 , then @-@ zoo director Jeff Williamson announced a major fund @-@ raising drive over the next 10 years to update the zoo 's infrastructure and many of its aging exhibits . The zoo needs to raise $ 70 million to complete the project . In 2009 , a shorter term goal is to raise $ 20 million by 2012 to pay for a number of improvements that are already under way . 
 = Chester Canal = 
 The Chester Canal was an English canal linking the south Cheshire town of Nantwich with the River Dee at Chester . It was intended to link Chester to Middlewich , with a branch to Nantwich , but the Trent and Mersey Canal were <unk> @-@ operative about a junction at Middlewich , and so the route to Nantwich was opened in 1779 . There were also difficulties negotiating with the River Dee Company , and with no possibility of through traffic , the canal was uneconomic . Part of it was closed in 1787 , when Beeston staircase locks collapsed , and there was no money to fund repairs . When the Ellesmere Canal was proposed in 1790 , the company saw it as a ray of hope , and somehow managed to keep the struggling canal open . The Ellesmere Canal provided a link to the River Mersey at Ellesmere Port from 1797 , and the fortunes of the Chester Canal began to improve . 
 The Ellesmere Canal was also building branches in North Wales , which were intended to link up to the River Dee at Chester , but eventually linked to the Chester Canal at Hurleston Junction , just to the north of Nantwich , in 1805 . The canal then became the middle section of a much longer and more profitable canal . The two companies merged in 1813 , becoming the Ellesmere and Chester Canal . When the Birmingham and Liverpool Junction Canal was proposed in 1826 , which would provide a link from Nantwich to Wolverhampton and the Birmingham canal system , the company saw it as an opportunity to build the Middlewich Branch , which would provide a connection to Manchester and the Potteries . The branch opened in 1833 , and the Junction Canal opened in 1835 . Amalgamation followed in 1845 , with the new company retaining the name of the Ellesmere and Chester Canal . The following year , the Shropshire Union Railways and Canal Company was formed from the Ellesmere and Chester company , which also took over a number of canals which joined theirs . Plans to convert some of the canals to railways were put on hold in the 1847 , when the canal company was leased to the London and North Western Railway . Under railway control , the canals continued to operate successfully , but decline set in during the 20th century , and when many of the adjoining canals were closed in 1944 , the sections which had been the Ellesmere and Chester Canal and the Birmingham and Liverpool Junction Canal , together with the Middlewich Branch , were retained . 
 The canals were nationalised in 1948 , and long @-@ distance commercial traffic had all but ended by 1958 . In 1963 , the British Waterways Board was formed and the canal ceased to be operated by railway interests for the first time in over 100 years . It was designated as a cruising waterway in the Transport Act 1968 , with potential for leisure use , and since then , it has been enjoyed by recreational boaters , by walkers and by fishermen . In 1997 , the Chester Canal Heritage Trust was formed and has worked to promote the canal and its heritage . Responsibility for the canal passed from British Waterways to the newly formed Canal & River Trust in 2012 . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1771 , the people of Chester , fearing that the construction of the Trent and Mersey Canal would divert trade away from their city to Liverpool , announced in the Press that they would be applying to build a canal between Middlewich , on the Trent and Mersey , and Chester . The city was at the time served by the River Dee , and the River Dee Company had recently spent £ 80 @,@ 000 on improvements to the river , but they realised that without a connection to the growing canal network , there was little future for the river or the Port of Chester . The idea had first been raised three years earlier , when merchants suggested a line from the Trent and Mersey to near Runcorn . There were no objections from the Corporation of Liverpool , but the canal company was non @-@ committal . By 1770 , the plans were a little clearer , with a main line from Chester to Middlewich and a branch to Nantwich . Although the Corporation of Chester subscribed £ 100 towards the scheme , and the Societies and Clubs of Chester put up another £ 2 @,@ 000 , there was little enthusiasm for it . Neither the Weaver Navigation nor the Trent and Mersey were supportive , as both might have lost some trade if the canal were built , and when the Duke of Bridgewater was approached for support , he replied that provided the canal did not physically link with the Trent and Mersey at Middlewich , he would not oppose the plans . Despite attempts at flattery , the Duke would not alter his position , and so the Company promoting the bill in parliament began with a serious disadvantage . 
 The bill became an Act of Parliament on 1 April 1772 , authorising the construction of a canal to run " from the River Dee , within the liberties of the city of Chester , to or near Middlewich and Nantwich " . The Act allowed the company to raise £ 42 @,@ 000 by issuing £ 100 shares , and an additional £ 20 @,@ 000 if necessary . Of this , only £ 28 @,@ 000 had been subscribed at the time of the Act , but construction began near Chester , with <unk> Weston acting as engineer and John Lawton working as his assistant . Weston had previously worked as a surveyor , and had been involved in excavating canals as a contractor , but had no experience of managing a major engineering project . The Mayor of Chester cut the first sod at the end of April . There were concerns that while the canal was being constructed past Northgate Gardens , prisoners from Northgate Prison might escape , and the company had to give a bond against this possibility . The canal was conceived as a broad canal , designed with locks which were 80 feet ( 24 m ) by 14 feet 9 inches ( 4 @.@ 50 m ) suitable for broad @-@ beam barges . Most of the Trent and Mersey Canal north of the proposed junction was suitable for barges which were 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) wide , but the final three locks in Middlewich , and all of those south of the junction , are only suitable for 7 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) narrow @-@ beam barges . 
 The project was hampered by financial and engineering problems , and so progress was slow . At the Chester end , the River Dee Company had managed to insert a clause into the Act which restricted the width of the final lock into the river to 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) . Although the lock was built , and some narrow boats capable of using it were constructed , agreement was reached on a wider connection after four years of argument . The solution adopted was a single pair of gates , which provided a 15 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) entrance into a basin from which the canal rose to the Northgate level . The land on which the basin was built was owned by the River Dee Company , who therefore charged tolls on all traffic using it . In 1774 , part of an aqueduct collapsed , and had to be dismantled and repaired . 
 Soon afterwards , Weston left the project , and Thomas Morris was recalled from Ireland to take over . He had previous experience building the extension of the Bridgewater Canal to Runcorn . Under his direction , the canal opened from Chester to Huxley Aqueduct on 16 January 1775 , and to Beeston in June . Morris was sacked in September , to be replaced by Josiah Clowes . He too was sacked , and was followed by Moon , who had previously acted as assistant to Morris . The canal was completed under the direction of Joseph Taylor . In September 1776 , the junction with the Dee was opened , but the project was now in financial difficulties . By late 1777 , they had spent all of the share capital of £ 42 @,@ 000 and another £ 19 @,@ 000 , which had been raised as a loan guaranteed by Samuel Egerton of Tatton . He was a shareholder in the company and related to the Duke of Bridgewater . They applied for another Act of Parliament , which allowed them to raise another £ 25 @,@ 000 , by additional calls on existing shareholders , and to borrow £ 30 @,@ 000 as a mortgage . They succeeded in raising £ 6 @,@ 000 by making additional calls , and borrowed £ 4 @,@ 000 from Richard Reynolds , an ironmaster from Ketley , who was responsible for several of the East Shropshire Canals , including the <unk> Canal and the Ketley Canal . 
 The money was used to complete the line to Nantwich , and to build a reservoir at Bunbury Heath . The work was completed in August 1779 , and the company hoped to raise enough money to then build the line to Middlewich . They proposed building it with narrow locks , to reduce the cost , but the shareholders were not prepared to support them ; instead they concentrated on trying to generate traffic on the line that had been built . They attempted to mine salt at Nantwich , but failed to find any , and tried running boats on the Trent and Mersey , from which goods were carried over land to Nantwich , for onward carriage to Liverpool . They also ran boats for cargo and passengers on the canal itself . By the end of 1781 , the company had no money and was unable to meet interest payments on the loans . They decided to forfeit the canal to Egerton , the main mortgagee , but he did not respond to their offer . Angry landowners who had not been paid drained Bunbury reservoir in March 1782 , but somehow the committee managed to keep the canal open , by selling boats and land . Disaster struck in November 1787 , when Beeston Staircase Locks collapsed , and there was no money to fund repairs . 
 = = = The impact of the Ellesmere Canal = = = 
 In 1790 the plans for the Ellesmere Canal were published , and the directors of the Chester canal saw this as a chance to make the canal profitable again , and to build the Middlewich branch . Following the chairman 's report to a meeting of the shareholders , they resolved to try to raise some money to carry out repairs , any by the end of the year reported that the canal was " nearly filled with water and business begins to stir . " The Ellesmere scheme was extensive , with a line from the River Mersey at <unk> ( later renamed Ellesmere Port ) to the River Dee near Chester , to give access to the Chester Canal , and branches to Shrewsbury , Ruabon , Llangollen , Bersham , Llanymynech and maybe Whitchurch and Wem . Although William Jessop estimated that the cost would be £ 196 @,@ 898 , it was the time of the Canal Mania , and 1 @,@ 234 subscribers offered £ 967 @,@ 700 . Applications were scaled down and the company accepted £ 246 @,@ 500 . A rival group were proposing canals to the east , which resulted in the first group proposing a direct link with the Chester Canal from their Whitchurch Branch , and in February 1793 , the two groups amalgamated . On 30 April they obtained an Act of Parliament authorising them to raise £ 400 @,@ 00 with an additional £ 100 @,@ 000 if necessary . Jessop was assisted by John Duncombe , Thomas Denson and William Turner , and from 30 October , Thomas Telford was appointed to set out the line and oversee the construction . 
 Work began on the Wirral line from Ellesmere Port to Chester in November 1793 , and packet boats began using most of it on 1 July 1795 . The locks connecting it to the River Mersey were completed early the following year , and the connection to the Chester Canal opened in January 1797 . The 8 @.@ 75 miles ( 14 @.@ 08 km ) line was supplied with water from the Chester Canal , supplemented by a steam engine at Ellesmere Port which pumped water from the Mersey . Passenger boats along the canal proved very popular , with connections from Ellesmere Port to Liverpool provided by larger boats , although passenger services from Chester to Nantwich lasted for less than a year . Commercial traffic also grew steadily , helped by the construction of new basins at Chester and the provision of a tide lock into the Dee , which made access into the lower basin possible at all times , and helped to keep it free from silt . 
 The Ellesmere Canal company had been constructing canals to the west , linking Llangollen to Frankton , but the route from there to Chester had not been decided . In 1796 , they obtained an Act of Parliament , authorising a line from near the great aqueduct at Pontcysyllte running roughly northwards through Ruabon , Bersham , <unk> and Pulford to join the River Dee opposite the canal basin at Chester . The Chester company , who were trying to put their financial affairs into order , noticed that the 1796 Act failed to mention a connection with their canal . They decided to obtain an Act to enforce a connection , and to stop supplying water to the Wirral line . The Ellesmere company responded quickly , agreeing to make changes to their Act , and the Chester company continued to supply water . On the strength of this , they were also able to raise some money to put the canal into good order and to repay some of their debts . The Ellesmere company extended their canal eastwards from Frankton to Whitchurch , and in 1802 , the two companies reached agreement on a line from near Whitchurch to Hurleston Junction , just to the north of Nantwich . It opened on 25 March 1805 , and water supply was enhanced by the construction of a navigable feeder through Llangollen to Horseshoe Falls on the River Dee at <unk> . 
 In 1804 , the Ellesmere company offered to buy out the Chester Canal for 1 @,@ 000 of their shares , and to take over debts up to £ 4 @,@ 000 . The Chester Canal held out for more , and the negotiations failed . Three years later , the financial position of the Chester Canal was better , and they began paying off their debts . Finally in 1813 , they agreed to amalgamate , and the action was authorised by a further Act of Parliament . The Ellesmere company paid just half of their 1804 offer , and the 500 Ellesmere shares were distributed between the various Chester shareholders . The Ellesmere and Chester Canal Company took over on 1 July 1813 . A new section of canal and an iron lock were built at Beeston in 1827 , to resolve continual problems with leakage there . 
 = = = A new route to the south = = = 
 In 1826 , the Birmingham and Liverpool Junction Canal was authorised by an Act of Parliament , to construct a canal from Nantwich to a junction with the Staffordshire and Worcestershire Canal at <unk> in the Midlands . With the prospect of being part of a link between Liverpool and the Midlands , the joint company had again pressed for the construction of the Middlewich branch , which would give them an outlet to Manchester and the Potteries industrial centre around Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent . The Trent and Mersey Canal refused to sanction the idea of a canal which would effectively reduce their income until the Birmingham and Liverpool Junction Canal was authorised . Once it was , the Ellesmere and Chester company obtained an Act of Parliament in 1827 , but the Trent and Mersey insisted that they build a short connecting canal , the Wardle Canal , consisting of a lock and not much more , the tolls for which were exorbitant . The 1827 Act repealed all previous legislation for the Ellesmere and Chester Canals and consolidated their position . The branch was built as a narrow canal , and cost £ 129 @,@ 000 . It opened on 1 September 1833 , but was little used until the Birmingham and Liverpool Junction Canal was completed . It finally opened on 2 March 1835 , having suffered from engineering problems during construction . Again , it was a narrow canal , suitable for boats which were 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) wide . 
 The two canal companies worked together from the start , in a bid to ensure that both remained profitable despite competition from the railways . This came soon , for the Grand Junction Railway from Warrington to Birmingham had been authorised before the canal opened , and was carrying goods by January 1838 . Tolls on the canals were considerably lower than had been envisaged when the route was promoted . Experiments with steam tugs to haul trains of narrow boats were carried out in 1842 , and a report in 1844 indicated that they were then used extensively . By the following year , however , the Ellesmere and Chester company were thinking about converting the canal to a railway , and argued that steam tugs were no cheaper than locomotive haulage on a railway . A merger with the Birmingham and Liverpool Junction Canal was discussed in 1844 , and was authorised on 8 May 1845 , the new company retaining the name of the Ellesmere and Chester Canal . 
 = = = Part of the Shropshire Union = = = 
 Almost immediately , the company began looking at the possibility of converting all or part of the system into railways . W A <unk> , their engineer , was convinced that railways could be built along the routes at around half the cost of building a new line . The move was opposed by the Staffordshire and Worcestershire Canal who argued that closing bits of the inland waterways system would have serious repercussions on the parts left . Robert Stephenson suggested that a number of railways and canals should amalgamate , to reduce competition when bills were presented to Parliament . The canals to join the Ellesmere and Chester Company were the eastern and western branches of the Montgomeryshire Canal , the Shrewsbury Canal and the Shropshire Canal . Although some would be converted to railways , the route from Ellesmere Port to Middlewich via <unk> Junction was part of the system that would be retained as a waterway , on which salt was a major source of revenue . The plans resulted in the formation of the Shropshire Union Railways and Canal Company in 1846 . The new company could raise £ 3 @.@ 3 million of new capital , in addition to that already in existence , with another £ 1 @.@ 1 million if necessary . They prompted new railways , but before any of the existing canals were converted , the company was leased to the London and North Western Railway , who took control in June 1847 . They allowed the Shropshire Union to continue to operate fairly independently , and by 1849 , the idea of conversion had been dropped , as the canals could still operate profitably . 
 Profitability was maintained , with the result then when most of the Shropshire Union network of canals were abandoned in 1944 , the sections which had originally been the Chester Canal , the Ellesmere Canal , the Birmingham and Liverpool Junction Canal and the Middlewich Branch were all retained . The only other section which was not abandoned was the Llangollen branch ; this was kept because of its function as a water supply channel , rather than for navigation . 
 = = Leisure era = = 
 In common with many operational canals , the remains of the Shropshire Union system , including what had been the Chester Canal , were nationalised on 1 January 1948 , and became the responsibility of the Docks and Inland Waterways Executive , which was part of the British Transport Commission . At the time , the function of canals was still viewed as commercial . An official reply to the Inland Waterways Association in 1947 stated that the Ministry of Transport " ... do not look very favourably upon any scheme for pleasure craft on the canals at the present time . " Despite such official attitudes , Eric Wilson , who produced the first edition of Inland Waterways of Great Britain in 1939 , noted that those wishing to use the Shropshire Union for leisure cruising should apply to the Agent at Chester . He advised that application should be made well in advance , in case there were problems due to the condition of the waterway and its locks . 
 Control of the canal passed to the British Waterways Board on 1 January 1963 , and for the first time in over 100 years , it was managed by an organisation which was not under railway control . The Transport Act 1968 classified all waterways under the jurisdiction of British Waterways into commercial , cruising and remainder waterways . All of the remaining Shropshire Union network was designated as cruising waterway , with the potential for leisure use . By that time there was little commercial traffic . The branch to the River Dee at Chester had been unused since 1932 – 34 , with the demise of steel traffic from Shotton steelworks to Ellesmere Port , and long distance carrying of tar from Ellesmere Port to the Midlands had ended in 1957 – 58 . 
 The canal is popular with pleasure boaters , as much of it is pleasantly rural , with added interest provided by the city of Chester and Ellesmere Port with its waterways museum . The towpath through Chester provides an attractive route for walkers . The canal is well connected , with links to the Trent and Mersey Canal via the Middlewich Branch to the east , the Staffordshire and Worcestershire Canal via the former Birmingham and Liverpool Junction Canal to the south , and provides a route to the Llangollen Canal , from which the Montgomeryshire Canal , which is the subject of an ongoing restoration scheme , can be accessed . Boaters can also access the River Dee at Chester , although advance notice must be given , and the river is only accessible for four hours either side of high tide . At Ellesmere Port , the canal has connected to the Manchester Ship Canal since its opening in 1894 . For many leisure cruisers , the requirements of the ship canal company for taking small boats onto a large commercial waterway are too daunting , and Ellesmere Port acts as the end of their journey . 
 The Chester Canal Heritage Trust was set up in 1997 to promote the canal and its heritage . Among other projects , they have received funding from the Local History Initiative and the Nationwide Building Society , which has allowed them to research the history of the canal and publish the results as a book . In 2012 , responsibility for the canal passed from British Waterways to the newly formed Canal & River Trust . 
 = = Traffic = = 
 Although the Chester Canal was not a success as traffic was sparse , this changed once it was connected to the Ellesmere Canal . The Ellesmere company expected to carry limestone from the quarries at Llanymynech and Trevor , iron from the ironworks at Ruabon and Bersham , and coal from mines at Chirk , Ruabon and Wrexham to Chester , Liverpool and Shrewsbury . The canal to Bersham and Wrexham was not built , and that to Shrewsbury was built much later on , but trade in coal , limestone , lime and building materials developed within the network of canals , and traffic between the canals and Liverpool increased steadily , much of it passing along the former Chester Canal . Receipts for the Ellesmere Canal were £ 12 @,@ 568 in 1807 and £ 15 @,@ 707 just two years later . 
 In 1836 , a review of trade on the canals showed that limestone from Llanymynech and coal from Chirk was used to produce lime at a number of locations along the canals . Coal from Chirk for industrial and household use was carried , although there was a competing trade in coal from Flintshire , which travelled along the River Dee and entered the canal system at Chester . There was trade in iron from Ruabon to Chester , but the tolls were very low , as the canal route was 58 miles ( 93 km ) long , whereas the land journey was only 20 miles ( 32 km ) . In 1838 , the canals carried 60 @,@ 406 tons of iron bound for Liverpool , most of it manufactured goods , of which 38 @,@ 758 tons came from Staffordshire , 11 @,@ 687 tons from North Wales and 9 @,@ 961 tons from Shropshire . An additional 10 @,@ 370 tons , most of which originated in North Wales , passed along the Middlewich Branch , bound for Manchester . 
 The canal company carried goods in their own boats , and produced a report on the four years from August 1846 to June 1850 in 1851 . This showed an income of £ 180 @,@ 746 from tolls , and identified six main types of traffic . These included iron goods from the Wolverhampton area to Liverpool ; limestone from Trevor and <unk> to Nantwich or <unk> on the Shrewsbury Canal , with a back trade in iron ore from near Burslem ; general merchandise , which was carried between Chester and Liverpool ; and general merchandise for Shropshire and North Wales . All of these were profitable . The carriage of general goods from Birmingham to Liverpool and the Chester coal trade both made a small loss . 
 Once the canals were owned by the London and North Western Railway , restrictions were imposed on what they could carry , and the canals failed to make sufficient money to cover the interest on mortgages . However , they made a substantial operating profit for some years . Around 1850 , the average annual income was £ 104 @,@ 638 , which yielded a surplus of £ 45 @,@ 885 . Most of the income was from carrying , and by 1870 , income had risen to £ 143 @,@ 976 , although this only yielded a surplus of £ 11 @,@ 727 . Total traffic was 855 @,@ 462 tons in 1858 , but this had dropped to 742 @,@ 315 tons in 1868 . The carrying business was expanded in the 1870s , but although turnover increased , operating profits fell dramatically , to just £ 1 @,@ 568 in 1876 . By 1905 , total traffic was 469 @,@ 950 tons , nearly all of it in boats owned by the company , and between the 1870s and the onset of the First World War the company sometimes made a small operating profit and sometimes a loss . Following the end of the war , working hours were cut , wages increased , and the cost of materials increased . Losses escalated , to £ 153 @,@ 318 on an income of £ 227 @,@ 845 in 1920 , and carriage by the company ceased in 1921 , in an attempt to reduce losses . 433 @,@ 230 tons of goods carried in 1929 had dropped to 151 @,@ 144 tons in 1940 , by which time income from tolls was £ 17 @,@ 763 , and total income was £ 40 @,@ 985 . 
 = = Route = = 
 The River Dee branch heads eastwards from the river , and passes through two locks before turning to the north . Another two locks raise its level to that of the Ellesmere Canal , and the junction was the site of a historic boatyard . Originally , the branch continued eastwards after the first two locks , and another two brought it up to the level of the Chester Canal main line . From the junction , the Ellesmere main line headed south , to another right @-@ angled band where it joined the Chester Canal . There are moorings at Tower Wharf , just before the bend . To the south of the canal is the old city , one of the few English cities which retains nearly all of its city walls , the cathedral much of which dates from 1092 , and the King Charles ' Tower , which overshadows the canal . After rising 33 feet ( 10 m ) through the Northgate Staircase locks , which were cut out of solid rock , the canal enters a steep @-@ sided rock cutting . After several bridges , the first of five locks which raise the level of the canal by another 43 @.@ 3 feet ( 13 @.@ 2 m ) is reached . Between the fourth and fifth locks , the North Wales Coast railway line to Crewe crosses under the canal in a tunnel . 
 The canal passes along the south @-@ western edge of <unk> , and through the centre of <unk> , where there is a large grade II listed mill building , which was once steam powered and includes bays in the right gable from which boats were loaded . The parish church is some distance from the main centre of population , on the edge of the flat Cheshire plain . The tall tower dates from the 16th century , and the roof of the nave is of hammer @-@ beam construction , dating from 1635 . There are several accommodation bridges on this section , all dating from the time of the construction of the canal , including Davies Bridge , Salmon 's Bridge , and <unk> Bridge , all built in orange brick and grade II listed structures . The railway line to Crewe follows the same general alignment as the canal , but a little further to the south , as both follow the valley of the River <unk> . The canal crosses from the south bank of the river to the north bank on an aqueduct and continues eastwards , passing the massive ruined remains of Beeston Castle , which was built in the 1220s by the Earl of Chester on top of a steep hill , and dominates the countryside . 
 The castle is opposite Wharton 's Lock , which is followed by the village of Tiverton on the north bank . Immediately after a bridge carrying the A49 road over the canal is the first of the two Beeston locks . The first is called Beeston Iron Lock , and was built from cast iron plates in 1828 by Telford . Cast iron was used because of problems with running sand under the original stone locks . It is both a grade II * listed structure and a scheduled ancient monument , and is unique in England . Shortly afterwards is Beeston Stone Lock , also a listed structure , but dating from the construction of the canal and using conventional materials . 
 The next lock is Tilston Lock , situated about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the north of Bunbury . The railway crosses to the north side of the canal near Bunbury Staircase Locks , a staircase of two locks which share the intermediate gates . These are the last locks before the end of the Chester canal , and are the last locks which wide @-@ beam boats can use when travelling south . As the canal approaches <unk> Junction , the railway turns away , heading east , and the canal turns towards the south . The junction is the start of the Middlewich Branch , which descends through four locks to reach the Trent and Mersey Canal at Middlewich . After another 1 @.@ 3 miles ( 2 @.@ 1 km ) , the Llangollen Canal turns off at Hurleston Junction immediately rising through four locks . Soon , Nantwich Basin is reached , which was the historic terminus of the Chester Canal . Telford 's original plan was to terminate the Birmingham and Liverpool Junction Canal by running it across Dorfold Park and joining the basin end @-@ on , but the owner objected , and an embankment had to be built around the edge of the park . This crossed the road on Nantwich Aqueduct , and joined the canal just to the north of the basin . Dorfold Hall , to the west of the basin , is a grade I listed mansion , built in 1616 for Ralph Wilbraham . 
 = = = Boat sizes = = = 
 As built , the locks on the Chester Canal were originally 80 by 14 @.@ 75 feet ( 24 @.@ 38 by 4 @.@ 50 m ) . Over the years the maximum size for vessels using the canal has altered . By 1985 , it had been reduced to 72 by 13 @.@ 25 feet ( 21 @.@ 95 by 4 @.@ 04 m ) , and in 2009 , sizes were quoted as 72 by 9 feet ( 21 @.@ 9 by 2 @.@ 7 m ) . 
 = = Points of interest = = 
 = Marshal Clarke = 
 Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Sir Marshal James Clarke KCMG ( 24 October 1841 – 1 April 1909 ) was a British colonial administrator and an officer of the Royal Artillery . He was the first Resident Commissioner in Basutoland from 1884 to 1893 ; Resident Commissioner in Zululand from 1893 to 1898 ; and , following the botched Jameson Raid , the first Resident Commissioner in Southern Rhodesia from 1898 to 1905 . 
 For his work in Basutoland , Clarke drew praise from the economist John A. Hobson in his treatise Imperialism for his devotion to the education and development of the native people , while Viscount Bryce noted that his approach fostered goodwill amongst native people towards Britain . In Zululand , Clarke granted considerable authority and special judicial functions to the hereditary chiefs ; and was commended by Sir Walter Hely @-@ Hutchinson , Governor of Natal , for his action in the face of potential famine . He recommended to the Imperial Government the return from exile of Dinuzulu , the paramount chief . While in Southern Rhodesia , he was appointed to protect the interests of native people against the overarching ambitions of the British South Africa Company . 
 He married Annie Stacy Lloyd , daughter of Major General <unk> Pryce Lloyd in 1880 and had three children . He died suddenly of pneumonia in his home country of Ireland . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Reverend Mark Clarke , the Rector and Vicar of <unk> , County Tipperary , married Maria Hill on 6 April 1837 . Marshal James Clarke was their eldest son , born on 24 October 1841 . He was born in Tipperary , educated at a private school in Dublin and studied at Trinity College , Dublin . He went on to study at the Royal Military Academy , Woolwich and was made a Lieutenant in the Royal Artillery in February 1863 . 
 He served in India , where he lost an arm to a tiger . Moving to Africa , he was Resident Magistrate of Pietermaritzburg in 1874 . He was made up to Captain in December 1875 . He was Aide @-@ de @-@ Camp to Sir Theophilus Shepstone , the Special Commissioner of South Africa in 1876 on his mission to the Transvaal . He was appointed Special Commissioner to South Africa in 1876 . He was Political Officer and Special Commissioner of Lydenburg in 1877 . During the First Boer War , Clarke was twice mentioned in despatches . He was brevetted Major in April 1880 in recognition of his services during operations in South Africa . He was Resident Magistrate of Basutoland in 1881 . He was promoted to Major in November 1882 . He was Commissioner of Cape Police in 1882 . He was seconded to the Sultan of Turkey 's army in command of a regiment of the Egyptian Gendarmerie in 1882 . 
 He retired from the military in March 1883 with the honorary rank of Lieutenant @-@ Colonel . 
 = = Basutoland ( 1884 – 1893 ) = = 
 Clarke was appointed the first Resident Commissioner in Basutoland ( today Lesotho ) and took office on 16 March 1884 . In the preceding years , Basutoland had become unruly . In 1879 , an uprising by Chief Morosi was quelled but led to intertribal strife over the partition of his land . The Cape government sought to regain control in 1880 by extending the Cape Peace Preservation Act of 1878 to Basutoland , which provided for the disarmament of natives . Attempts to enforce the law resulted in the Basuto Gun War of 1880 to 1881 . Unrest continued until it was agreed in 1884 to place the territory under direct British control . 
 Under Imperial Administration through Clarke , Basutoland once again demonstrated the loyalty seen under previous Imperial rule and returned to prosperity , supplying neighbouring territories with grain and livestock , as well as labour for the Kimberley Diamond Fields . James Bryce ( later Viscount Bryce ) noted in his Impressions , after his tour of Southern Africa in 1897 , that Clarke combined <unk> with firmness in order to inspire goodwill towards the British government . While he suppressed the more " noxious " customs of the native people , he did not allow Europeans to own land and mineral prospectors were forbidden : the only whites permitted to reside were officials , missionaries and certain traders . Clarke 's policy was to reinstate the tribal institutions and to govern through the recognised chiefs , amongst whom <unk> , son of <unk> , was paramount . An annual <unk> ( national assembly ) was held to debate questions of welfare . The white authorities only intervened when disturbances occurred between natives . 
 Clarke served until 1893 . John A. Hobson , in Imperialism , A Study ( 1902 ) , summed up Clarke 's work in Basutoland saying that , along with other administrators like Sir George Grey and Lord Ripon , he " ... brought sympathy and knowledge to the establishment of careful experiments in self @-@ government . " Hobson compares the approach to imperialism in Basutoland with that in Rhodesia and the Cape Colony , noting that " in the former it is devoted to protecting and aiding the education and development of the native people , while in the latter two , the policy allows for the exploitation of the people and lands by white colonists . " The Paris Evangelical Missionary Society honoured him in appreciation for his work to bring about peace and good governance . 
 = = Zululand ( 1893 – 1898 ) = = 
 Sir Marshal Clarke succeeded Sir Melmoth Osborn as Resident Commissioner and Chief Magistrate in Zululand in June 1893 . Sir Walter Hely @-@ Hutchinson was appointed successor to Sir Charles Mitchell as Governor of the colony in August 1893 , as well as Governor of Natal , which was to gain responsible government two months later . 
 The conclusion of the Anglo @-@ Zulu War in 1879 had resulted in the imprisonment of the Zulu king Cetshwayo on Robben Island and the division of the Zulu Kingdom into 13 chiefdoms . In 1883 , after John Colenso , Bishop of Natal , appealed on his behalf , Cetshwayo was released and restored to power . <unk> <unk> , one of the 13 Zulu chiefs , led a force against Cetshwayo and on 22 July 1883 defeated him in Ulundi . Cetshwayo escaped injured but died in February 1884 , leaving his son Dinuzulu to inherit the throne . He ultimately succeeded in driving out <unk> with the help of Transvaal Boers . 
 Dinuzulu rebelled against the British in 1888 but was defeated and fled to the Transvaal . He gave himself up in November 1888 , and he and his uncles <unk> and <unk> were found guilty of high treason in April 1889 and exiled to St Helena . Bishop Colenso 's daughter , Harriette , intervened on their behalf in London . On her return to Zululand in August 1893 , Clarke invited her to his residence in <unk> . While there , she was visited by Zulu from across the land . The Zulu people had great affection for Bishop Colenso and his daughter . She persuaded them that Clarke 's appointment was beneficial to them and they gave Clarke the nickname ' <unk> ' , meaning ' Keeper ' or ' Protector ' . A sign of this was the release of a number of <unk> 's followers from prison . 
 In his first year in office , Clarke established good order in the colony . Unlike Osborn , who treated Colenso 's presence at the trials in 1888 as an affront , Clarke took up Colenso 's cause and recommended to the Colonial Office in London that Dinuzulu and his uncles be allowed to return from exile , having been sufficiently punished for his supposed offences . Clarke , persuaded by Colenso , argued that Dinuzulu would not cause further trouble so long as the policy of fomenting intertribal strife were discontinued and Dinuzulu be appointed <unk> . He began the process for the return of Dinuzulu and sought to harness the authority of the Zulu leader to the administration . In January 1895 , the exiles received notice of their return to Zululand with an official position for Dinuzulu . Their departure was set for February 1895 but was delayed after Ministers in London recommended that Zululand first be annexed to Natal . 
 Clarke 's tenure marked a difference in policy : instead of trying to divide and rule and undermine the power of the hereditary chiefs , he granted considerable authority to them . He applied a similar approach to that of his previous work in Basutoland . His view was that the native people were " better able to manage their own affairs than we can do it for them , though they need our help in international matters and in matters between white and black . " He gave special judicial functions to <unk> of the Basotho , <unk> of the <unk> and <unk> of the <unk> , enabling them to try certain cases referred to them by Resident Magistrates . In 1895 , according to Harriette Colenso , the Zulu people approved of direct rule with Clarke as Resident Commissioner . However , when Clarke was appointed Resident Commissioner in Rhodesia in 1898 , Charles Saunders replaced him and he bowed to pressure from settlers and officials to minimise Dinuzulu 's influence over the Zulu people , especially during the Second Boer War . 
 Clarke had to deal with four natural disasters during his tenure . An outbreak of smallpox in 1894 was the result of labour migration and men returning from working in Witwatersrand . When it proved too costly for the people , he waived the charge for the vaccination . Locust swarms in 1894 and 1895 caused damage to crops and resulted in famine in 1896 . The government response was to offer the chief of each tribe a reward of 3 d for every <unk> of locusts collected as well as cattle to slaughter when a swarm was eradicated . At the same time , Clarke bought 1 @,@ 090 <unk> of quick @-@ growing <unk> to be given on payment to families requiring immediate relief , a measure of which Sir Walter Hely @-@ Hutchinson , Governor of Natal , approved : " It is better to err on the side of unnecessary expenditure than to run the risk of exposing the people to starvation . " Finally , in 1897 , an outbreak of rinderpest killed many cattle and the government responded with a programme of inoculation . 
 = = Southern Rhodesia ( 1898 – 1905 ) = = 
 As a result of the debacle of the Jameson Raid in the winter of 1895 – 1896 , the imperial government determined by order in council to appoint a permanent Resident Commissioner to supervise the affairs of the British South Africa Company in Southern Rhodesia . Joseph Chamberlain , Secretary of State for the Colonies , offered the role to Clarke , whose impressive prior administrative career was an indication of the importance being placed on the role . Graham Bower , the imperial secretary , wrote recommending him for the role : " Clarke is far and away the best man in this country " . Clarke was in post from 1898 to 1905 , reporting directly to Alfred Milner , the High Commissioner for Southern Africa based in Johannesburg , who in turn reported to the Colonial Office in London . His role was to safeguard the interests of the natives and to call on the High Commissioner for interference where he saw fit . The Aborigines Protection Society in London approved of his appointment , stating in its annual report of 1900 that he had a " rare capacity for dealing justly with native communities " . 
 From the outset of his posting , Clarke had to deal with issues regarding land and labour . The latter was of major significance at this time in Southern Rhodesia . In response to questioning by the African Association and the Manchester Society for the Protection of Native Races , Chamberlain in 1898 responded that forced labour was not permitted . A year later , Chamberlain was concerned by a chief native commissioner instructing chiefs at an indaba that it was their duty to supply labour . Clarke 's subsequent report accused officials of the administration of requisitioning labour by ' pressure only short of force ' , causing ' discontent amongst the natives ' . Clarke 's view was that a mutually beneficial relationship between capital and labour was possible through market forces alone , without additional pressure . Chamberlain agreed , although Milner was in favour of compulsory labour even to the extent of ' recommending the corvée ' . 
 Towards the end of 1899 , the Second Boer War gave Clarke cause for concern and he requested aid from Britain for the defence of Rhodesia . He was particularly concerned with the possibility of Africans avenging their recent defeat in the Second Matabele War by joining forces against the government . So , along with the native commissioners , he summoned and addressed <unk> around the country to reassure the Africans that they would be protected and would not be called to fight , so could continue to pursue their peaceful occupations as normal . During this time , Africans deserted the mines , keeping their options open and " watching events " . 
 The administration in 1901 proposed a scheme similar to that of the Glen Grey Act , imposing a tax of £ 2 to induce natives to work . In 1903 , Rhodesian capitalists even proposed a £ 4 tax but Chamberlain preferred the lower rate of £ 2 and sought Clarke 's opinion on its potential to cause trouble . Clarke argued that even £ 2 was too high . Milner disagreed and wrote to Sir William Milton , the company administrator , saying : ' I am embarrassed by a report form the Resident Commissioner in which he utterly condemns the proposed Native Tax Ordinance ' . In 1904 , finally , Alfred Lyttelton , Chamberlain 's successor refused assent , citing Clarke 's reports and an ordinance limited the tax to £ 1 . 
 In the meantime , in 1902 , Scott , a native commissioner , brought to Clarke 's attention that many work @-@ seekers were suffering great privation yet were unable to find work while some businesses were short of labour . Clarke took up the cause : ' This indicates the necessity of the organisation of an Association for bringing those wanting labour and those seeking employment into contact and prevent , what I have myself seen , gangs of destitute natives wandering about the country . ' In 1903 , a Rhodesian Native Labour Bureau was proposed . 
 Clarke was a critic of migrant labour schemes , which were designed to attract foreign labour to Rhodesia , and in 1900 he defended the rights of indigenous labour against infringement by foreign Africans from Mozambique , Nyasaland , Zambia and South Africa . As early as 1900 , the BSAC came to the Colonial Office with a proposal regarding Chinese labour . In London , the Land and Mine Owners Association was formed in 1902 to lobby the Colonial Office and continued to press throughout 1903 . The Colonial Office postponed its decision saying that the question concerned not only Rhodesia but all of southern Africa . Milner was lobbied by the BSAC and he promised his support . Clarke , however , dismissed the demands , arguing that ' the introduction of large numbers of Asiatics ... will subject the aboriginal natives to unfair competition ' . He forecast that the labour shortage was temporary and that the new bureau would satisfy demand . Clarke also argued that most Rhodesians were opposed to the introduction of Chinese labour . The Duke of Marlborough , then Permanent Under @-@ Secretary of State for the Colonies , recorded that he found Clarke 's argument more convincing than Milner 's , and the Colonial Office refused the proposal . 
 After serving in office for an extra year to 1905 , Clarke retired , having helped to create a better system for the benefit of all . While the Colonial Office sought to mediate conflicts of interest , its impact was varied due to its desire to avoid expense . Milner was preoccupied with his vision of a new South Africa incorporating Southern Rhodesia , for which he needed the support of the BSAC . He appears to have had respect for Clarke , although he seems to have resented his influence at the Colonial Office , denying him an increase in salary or an official secretary . On Clarke 's retirement , Milner wrote ' Personally I hardly think the office of Resident Commissioner any longer necessary ' . 
 Arthur Cripps , the Anglican missionary and supporter of the rights of natives , said at the end of the BSAC era : 
 " Southern Rhodesian natives have surely had much in past years to thank a succession of Imperial Representatives for , Resident Commissioners , to whom the first of their number , Sir Marshal Clarke , handed on a fine tradition . " 
 = = Honours = = 
 He was made Companion of the Order of St. Michael and St. George in April 1880 , and promoted to Knight Commander in 1886 . 
 He was granted authority to wear the insignia of the Third Class of the Order of the <unk> in November 1883 conferred on him by Tewfik Pasha , Khedive of Egypt , as authorised by Abdul Hamid II , Sultan of the Ottoman Empire , in recognition of his services in the employ of the Khedive . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Clarke married Annie Stacy Lloyd , eldest daughter of Major General <unk> Pryce Lloyd in 1880 and had three children : Elizabeth Clarke ( 17 June 1885 – 26 July 1952 ) , Admiral Sir Marshal Llewelyn Clarke KBE CB DSC ( 9 May 1887 – 8 April 1959 ) and Captain Brian Lloyd Clarke ( 30 September 1888 – 19 April 1915 ) . 
 H. Rider Haggard was a friend of Clarke 's and he dedicated Swallow , his story of the Boer Great Trek of 1836 , to him : " ... I hope that you will accept these pages in memory of past time and friendship , and more especially for the providential events connected with a night @-@ long ride which once we took on duty together ... " 
 Clarke died suddenly on 1 April 1909 of pneumonia at The Lodge , <unk> , County Wicklow , Ireland . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Haggard , Henry Rider ( 1882 ) . <unk> and his White Neighbours . London : Trübner & Co . OL <unk> . 
 Phimister , Ian ( 1988 ) . An Economic and Social History of Zimbabwe 1890 – 1914 . London . 
 Phimister , Ian ( 1994 ) . <unk> <unk> : Coal , Capital and Labour in Colonial Zimbabwe 1894 – 1954 . Harare : <unk> Books . 
 = = = Journal articles = = = 
 Clarke , Marshal ( August 1888 ) . " <unk> Basuto Land " . Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society and Monthly Record of Geography 10 ( 8 ) : 519 – <unk> @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . JSTOR <unk> . 
 Duncan , Patrick ( April 1959 ) . " Basutoland in transition " ( PDF ) . Africa South 3 ( 3 ) : 55 – 59 . 
 Kerr , A. J. ( 1958 ) . " The Reception and Codification of Systems of Law in Southern Africa " . Journal of African Law 2 ( 2 ) : 82 – 100 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1017 / <unk> . JSTOR <unk> . 
 Phimister , Ian ( April 1974 ) . " Peasant Production and <unk> in Southern Rhodesia , 1890 – 1914 " . African Affairs 73 ( 291 ) : 217 – 228 . JSTOR <unk> . 
 Phimister , Ian ( April 1977 ) . " White Miners in Historical Perspective : Southern Rhodesia , 1890 – 1953 " . Journal of Southern African Studies 3 ( 2 ) : 187 – 206 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1080 / <unk> . JSTOR <unk> . 
 Warhurst , Philip ( April 1978 ) . " A Troubled Frontier : North @-@ Eastern Mashonaland , 1898 – 1906 " . African Affairs 77 ( 307 ) : 214 – 229 . JSTOR <unk> . 
 = = = Pamphlets = = = 
 The Native question in South Africa : outlines of a suggested charter for natives under British rule in South Africa : submitted to Her Majesty 's Government on behalf of the <unk> Protection Society , Foreign and Commonwealth Office Collection , 1900 , JSTOR <unk> 
 Zulu affairs : correspondence , December , 1896 – January , 1897 between Sir John Robinson and H. E. Colenso , Foreign and Commonwealth Office Collection , 1897 , JSTOR <unk> 
 The Zulu question in 1895 , Foreign and Commonwealth Office Collection , 1895 , JSTOR <unk> 
 = Bloeme Evers @-@ Emden = 
 Bloeme Evers @-@ Emden ( Dutch pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; 5 July 1926 – 18 July 2016 ) was a Dutch Jewish teacher and child psychologist who extensively researched the phenomenon of " hidden children " during World War II and wrote four books on the subject in the 1990s . Her interest in the topic grew out of her own experiences during World War II , when she was forced to go into hiding from the Nazis and was subsequently arrested and deported to Auschwitz on the last transport leaving the Westerbork transit camp on 3 September 1944 . Together with her on the train were Anne Frank and her family , whom she had known in Amsterdam . She was liberated on 8 May 1945 . 
 In the 1980s , Evers @-@ Emden earned a doctorate in developmental psychology and began interviewing and writing about the phenomenon of " hidden children " from the points of view of the children , their biological parents , their non @-@ Jewish foster parents , and their non @-@ Jewish foster siblings . She was also interviewed for several television documentaries on her remembrances of Anne Frank and her family before they went into hiding and after they were sent to Auschwitz . 
 = = Early life = = 
 She was born Bloeme Emden in Amsterdam to Emanuel Emden , a diamond cutter and a socialist , and Rosa Emden @-@ DeVries , a seamstress . Her younger sister , Via <unk> , was born 29 May 1932 . 
 In 1941 , Bloeme attended the Jewish lyceum , where she befriended Anne Frank and her sister , Margot . Bloeme was in the same grade as Margot , but in a different class . In July 1942 , Bloeme received a deportation order from the local government office . Her father went to the Central Room for Jewish Resettlement and found a sympathetic German who stamped the order " released . " She returned to the high school in September , but her class kept shrinking from deportations throughout the year , to the point that only three students were left at the end of the year . By the time oral examinations were administered three weeks later , Bloeme was the only student in her class . 
 On the first day of the oral examinations in May 1943 , Bloeme 's non @-@ Jewish boyfriend warned her that the Germans were looking for her . She asked the school board to administer all 12 of her examinations at once , and she received her high school diploma that same day . When the Germans arrived , they took her to an assembly point for Amsterdam Jews , but she managed to enter the building without being registered . A few days later , she sneaked out with a group of younger teens . At first she hid in the home of Christian friends of her parents who worked in the Dutch underground , but they were afraid that if they were arrested , Bloeme would be , too . She spent the next year hiding in 15 to 16 different places , including an Amsterdam old @-@ age home and a job as a maid for a widow and her son in Rotterdam . When she returned to the people who worked in the underground , she was arrested and sent to Westerbork . 
 = = Deportation and incarceration = = 
 Bloeme was deported to Auschwitz on the last train leaving Westerbork on 3 September 1944 . On the same train were the Frank family who had been discovered in hiding on 4 August . Bloeme saw Anne , Margot and their mother regularly in Auschwitz , although she was part of a separate group of eight women who stayed together , encouraging and helping one another . In October 1944 , Bloeme and her group were selected for transfer to the Liebau labor camp in Upper Silesia . For the filming of the 1995 BBC documentary Anne Frank Remembered , Bloeme recalled that Anne , Margot , and their mother , Edith , also planned to join the transport , but Anne was prohibited from joining because she had developed scabies . Her mother and sister opted to stay with her , and Bloeme went on without them . Bloeme was also interviewed for her remembrances of the Frank women in Auschwitz in the 1988 television documentary The Last Seven Months of Anne Frank by Dutch filmmaker Willy <unk> . 
 Bloeme was liberated by the Soviets at Liebau on 8 May 1945 . She and a small group of friends began walking back to the Netherlands on foot , arriving six weeks later . She discovered that her parents and sister had been deported to the Sobibor extermination camp , where they all perished . 
 = = Post @-@ war research = = 
 After the war , she married Hans Evers and raised a " relatively large family " in Amsterdam . However , she testified , she was unable to talk about her war experiences with her family . She began studying psychology part @-@ time and became a lecturer in psychology at the University of Amsterdam in 1973 . She earned her doctorate in the late 1980s . 
 In the 1980s , she began holding group therapy sessions for former hidden children , addressing " our grief , our anger , our aggression and our mourning " . At the Hidden Child Conference held in Amsterdam in 1992 , she interviewed 73 former hidden children , and with questionnaires completed by another 321 attendants , she began her research into the emotional and psychological trauma of hidden children , widening her scope to include the points of view of the children , their biological parents , their non @-@ Jewish foster parents , and their non @-@ Jewish foster siblings . 
 In the 1990s , Evers @-@ Emden published four books in Dutch based on her research . <unk> <unk> ( Borrowed Children ) ( 1994 ) focused on the foster parents who hid the children . <unk> <unk> , Een <unk> <unk> ? ( Hidden During the War : A Closed @-@ Off Past ? ) ( 1995 ) examined the written responses of 300 hidden children to a questionnaire . <unk> <unk> ( Shattered Existence ) ( 1996 ) interviewed the parents who sent their children into hiding . Je <unk> <unk> ( Sharing Your Parents ) ( 1999 ) focused on the foster siblings of the hidden children . 
 In 1991 , she was decorated by Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands as an officer of the Order of Orange @-@ Nassau . 
 Her son , Raphael Evers , is the Rabbi of Rotterdam . 
 Evers @-@ Emden died July 2016 , a few days after her 90th birthday . 
 = RMS Queen Mary 2 = 
 RMS Queen Mary 2 ( also referred to as the QM2 ) is a transatlantic ocean liner . She is the only major ocean liner built for Cunard Line since Queen Elizabeth 2 in 1969 , the vessel she succeeded as flagship of the Cunard Line . 
 The new ship was named Queen Mary 2 by Queen Elizabeth II in 2004 after the first 1936 namesake ship RMS Queen Mary . Queen Mary was in turn named after Mary of Teck , consort of King George V. With the retirement of Queen Elizabeth 2 in 2008 , Queen Mary 2 is the only transatlantic ocean liner in line service between Southampton and New York , which operates for part of each year . The ship is also used for cruising , including an annual world cruise . 
 The ship was designed by a team of British naval architects led by Stephen Payne , and was constructed in France by Chantiers de l 'Atlantique in 2003 . At the time of her construction , Queen Mary 2 was the longest passenger ship ever built , and with her gross tonnage of 148 @,@ 528 also the largest . She no longer holds this distinction after the construction of Royal Caribbean International 's 154 @,@ 407 GT Freedom of the Seas in April 2006 , but remains the largest ocean liner ever built . 
 Queen Mary 2 was intended for routine crossings of the Atlantic Ocean , and was therefore designed differently from many other passenger ships . The ship 's final cost was approximately $ 300 @,@ 000 US per berth . Expenses were increased by the high quality of materials , and having been designed as an ocean liner , she required 40 % more steel than a standard cruise ship . Queen Mary 2 has a maximum speed of just over 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) and a cruising speed of 26 knots ( 48 km / h ; 30 mph ) , much faster than a contemporary cruise ship . Instead of the diesel @-@ electric configuration found on many ships , Queen Mary 2 uses integrated electric propulsion to achieve her top speed . This uses gas turbines to augment the power generated from the ship 's diesels . 
 Queen Mary 2 's facilities include fifteen restaurants and bars , five swimming pools , a casino , a ballroom , a theatre , and the first planetarium at sea . There are also kennels and a nursery on board . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Queen Mary 2 is the flagship of Cunard Line . The ship was constructed for eventual replacement of the aging Queen Elizabeth 2 , the Cunard flagship from 1969 to 2004 and the last major ocean liner built before the construction of Queen Mary 2 . Queen Mary 2 had the Royal Mail Ship ( RMS ) title conferred on her , as a gesture to Cunard 's history , by Royal Mail when she entered service in 2004 on the Southampton to New York route . 
 Queen Mary 2 is not a steamship like many of her predecessors , but is powered primarily by four diesel engines , with two additional gas turbines used when extra power is required ; this integrated electric propulsion configuration is used to produce the power to drive her four electric propulsion pods as well as powering the ship 's hotel services . 
 Like her predecessor Queen Elizabeth 2 she is built for crossing the Atlantic Ocean , though she is regularly used for cruising ; in the winter season she cruises from New York to the Caribbean on twelve- or thirteen @-@ day tours . Queen Mary 2 's 30 @-@ knot ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) open ocean speed sets the ship apart from cruise ships , such as MS Oasis of the Seas , which has an average speed of 22 @.@ 6 knots ( 41 @.@ 9 km / h ; 26 @.@ 0 mph ) ; QM2 's normal service speed is 26 knots ( 48 km / h ; 30 mph ) . While the hull of a cruise ship will typically have a block coefficient of 0 @.@ 73 ( a number closer to 1 @.@ 0 would represent a rectangular block ) Queen Mary 2 has a coefficient of 0 @.@ 61 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Cunard completed a design for a new class of 84 @,@ 000 GT , 2 @,@ 000 passenger liners on 8 June 1998 , but revised them upon comparing those specifications with Carnival Cruise Line 's 100 @,@ 000 GT Destiny @-@ class cruise ships and Royal Caribbean International 's 137 @,@ 276 GT Voyager class . 
 In December 1998 , Cunard released details of Project Queen Mary , the project to develop a liner that would complement Queen Elizabeth 2 . Harland and Wolff of Northern Ireland , Aker Kværner of Norway , Fincantieri of Italy , Meyer Werft of Germany , and Chantiers de l 'Atlantique of France were invited to bid on the project . The contract was finally signed with Chantiers de l 'Atlantique , a subsidiary of Alstom , on 6 November 2000 . This was the same yard that built Cunard 's former rivals , the SS Normandie and SS France of the Compagnie Générale <unk> . Due to QM2 's size and complexity , the shipyard resourced the project at 1 @.@ 7 to 2 times higher than a typical cruise ship . 
 Her keel was laid down on 4 July 2002 , in the construction dock at Saint @-@ Nazaire , France , with the hull number <unk> . Approximately 3 @,@ 000 craftsmen spent around eight million working hours on the ship , and around 20 @,@ 000 people were directly or indirectly involved in her design , construction , and fitting out . In total , 300 @,@ 000 pieces of steel were assembled into 94 " blocks " off the dry dock , which were then stacked and welded together to complete the hull and superstructure . After floating out on 21 March 2003 , the QM2 was fitted out in the large fitting out basin ( " Bassin C " ) , the first ship to use this huge dry dock since the shipyard built large tankers in the 1970s , such as the MV <unk> . Her sea trials were conducted during 25 – 29 September and 7 – 11 November 2003 , between Saint @-@ Nazaire and the offshore islands of Île d <unk> and Belle @-@ Île . The final stages of construction were marred by a fatal accident on 15 November 2003 , when a gangway collapsed under a group of shipyard workers and their relatives who had been invited to visit the vessel . In total , 32 people were injured and 16 were killed , after a 15 @-@ metre ( 49 ft ) fall into the drydock . 
 Construction was completed on schedule . Cunard took delivery in Southampton , England , on 26 December 2003 . On 8 January 2004 , the liner was officially named by Queen Elizabeth II . 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 Queen Mary 2 's principal naval architect was Carnival 's in @-@ house designer , Stephen Payne . Payne intended many aspects of the ship 's design to resemble notable aspects of former ocean liners , such as Queen Elizabeth 2 and the ship 's predecessor Queen Mary . These features include the three thick black lines that wrap around either edge of the ship 's bridge screen , and at the stern end of the superstructure , which are to recall the appearance of the crossovers of the forward decks on the first Queen Mary . 
 Queen Mary 2 has 14 @,@ 164 square metres ( 152 @,@ 460 @.@ 0 sq ft ) of exterior deck space , with wind screens to shield passengers as the ship travels at high speeds . Three of the ship 's four swimming pools are outdoors . One of the pools on Deck 12 is covered with a retractable <unk> . The indoor pool is on Deck 7 , in the Canyon Ranch Spa Club . 
 In common with liners such as RMS Queen Mary , there is a continuous wrap @-@ around promenade deck on Deck 7 . The promenade passes behind the bridge screen and allows passengers to completely circumnavigate the deck while protected from the strong winds generated by the ship at speed . One circuit of the promenade is a distance of 620 m ( 2 @,@ 030 ft ) . The flanking promenades are created by the need to step the superstructure in , to allow for space for lifeboats . By SOLAS standards , the lifeboats should have been lower on the ship 's hull ( 15 m ( 49 ft ) above the waterline ) , but for the sake of Queen Mary 2 's appearance as well as to avoid the danger of large North Atlantic waves damaging the boats in a storm , Payne convinced SOLAS officials to exempt Queen Mary 2 from this requirement , and the boats are 25 m ( 82 ft ) above the waterline . 
 Payne 's initial intent was to make the ship 's stern profile with a spoon shape , similar to that on most previous ocean liners , but the mounting of the propeller pods required a flat transom . The compromise was a Constanzi stern — a combination of the two . The final design was agreed upon , as a Constanzi stern provides the transom required for azimuthal pod propulsors , and provides better <unk> characteristics in a following swell than a standard transom stern . In common with many modern ships , both passenger and cargo , Queen Mary 2 has a bulbous bow to reduce drag and thereby increase speed , range , and fuel efficiency . 
 While of a design similar to that of Queen Elizabeth 2 , Queen Mary 2 's funnel has a slightly different shape , because a taller funnel would have made it impossible for the ship to pass under the Verrazano – Narrows Bridge in New York City at high tide . The final design now permits a minimum of 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) of clearance under the bridge at high tide . 
 As Queen Mary 2 is too large to dock in many ports , passengers are ferried to and from the ship in tenders , which can be used as lifeboats in an emergency . These are stored while at sea in davits alongside the lifeboats . To transport passengers to shore the tenders pull up to one of four loading stations , each of which has a large hull door that hydraulically opens outwards to form a boarding platform , complete with railings and decking . 
 Queen Mary 2 is a post @-@ panamax ship . As a result , Queen Mary 2 must circumnavigate South America to cross between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans . The decision not to constrain her size to transit the Panama Canal was taken as Queen Elizabeth 2 only transited once a year , during the world cruise . Cunard decided to pass up the convenience of the occasional passage in favour of a greater passenger capacity . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 As is the case with many modern passenger ships , many of the major public rooms on board Queen Mary 2 are on the lowest public decks of the ship , with the passenger cabins stacked above . This is the opposite of the traditional practice on ocean liners , but the design allowed for larger rooms to be contained within the stronger hull , as well as for more passenger cabins to have private balconies higher up on the ship , where they are less affected by large waves . Payne attempted to create a central axis to the two main public room decks ( similar in fashion to the Normandie ) , but a full vista is broken by various public rooms that span the full beam of the ship . The dining rooms were placed further aft , though not directly at the stern , where the fore @-@ and @-@ aft pitching of the ship is most noticeable , and might cause discomfort to dining passengers . 
 Deck 2 , the lowest passenger deck , contains the Illuminations theatre , cinema and planetarium ( the first at sea ) ; Royal Court Theatre ; Grand Lobby ; " Empire Casino " ; " Golden Lion Pub " ; and the lower level of the " Britannia Restaurant " . Deck 3 holds the upper levels of " Illuminations " , the " Royal Court theatre " and the " Britannia Restaurant " , as well as a small shopping arcade , " <unk> <unk> champagne bar " , the " Chart Room " , " Sir Samuel 's " wine bar , the " Queen 's Room " , and the " <unk> " Nightclub . The other main public deck is Deck 7 , on which are the " Canyon Ranch Spa " , " Winter Garden " , " King 's Court " , the " Queen 's Grill Lounge " , and the " Queen 's Grill " and " Princess Grill " restaurants for higher @-@ fare passengers . The public rooms on Deck 8 include the à la carte Todd English Restaurant , an 8 @,@ 000 @-@ volume library , ( the largest of any cruise ship ) a book shop and the upper part of the Canyon Ranch Spa . Also on Deck 8 is a large outdoor pool and terrace at the stern . The kennels , located aft on starboard side of Deck 12 , are available only for transatlantic crossings . They can accommodate up to twelve dogs and cats in six small and six large cages . 
 The King 's Court area on the ship is open twenty four hours a day , serving as a buffet restaurant for breakfast and lunch . The overall space is divided into quarters , with each section decorated according to the theme of the four separate alternate dining venues that are " created " each evening through lighting , tableware , and menus : Lotus , which specialises in Asian cuisine ; the <unk> , a British style grille ; La Piazza , with Italian food ; and the Chef 's Galley , which offers an interactive experience to food preparation . 
 The passengers ' dining arrangements on board are dictated by the type of accommodation in which they choose to travel . Around 85 % of passengers are in Britannia class , and , therefore , dine in the main restaurant . However , passengers can choose to upgrade to either a " junior suite " , and dine in the " Princess Grill " ' , or a suite , and dine in the " Queens ' Grill " . Those in the two latter categories are grouped together by Cunard as " Grill Passengers " , and they are permitted to use the " Queens ' Grill Lounge " and a private outdoor area on deck 11 with its own whirlpool . This feature is also present on both Queen Victoria and Queen Elizabeth . However , all other public areas can be used by all passengers . 
 As the Britannia Restaurant takes up the full width of the ship on two decks , a ' tween deck , called Deck 3L , was devised to allow passengers to walk from the Grand Lobby to the Queen 's Room without traversing the dining room mid @-@ meal . The deck consists of two corridors that run beneath the upper balcony of the restaurant on Deck 3 , and above the main dining area on Deck 2 . This is why the balcony of the Britannia has tiers that step up towards the hull . This arrangement is illustrated on the hull where there is a stack of three rows of windows in the area where the main restaurant sits , the two upper and lower most rows illuminate the dining room , while the centre row serves Deck 3L . There is a similar arrangement through the Royal Court Theatre . As well , the passages that run on either side of Illuminations on Deck 3 ramp upwards to compensate for the change in deck elevation between the entrance to Illuminations and an elevator bank forward of the room . 
 More than 5000 commissioned works of art are visible in Queen Mary 2 's public rooms , corridors , staterooms and lobbies , having been created by 128 artists from sixteen different countries . Two of the most notable pieces are Barbara <unk> 's tapestry , an abstract depiction of an ocean liner , bridge , and New York skyline which spans the full height of the Britannia Restaurant , and the British sculptor John McKenna 's sheet bronze relief mural in the Grand Lobby , a 7m square portrait of the ship fabricated in bronze inspired by the Art Deco mural in the main dining room of the original Queen Mary . 
 = = = = 2016 refit = = = = 
 In July 2015 , Cunard announced plans for a month @-@ long refit of Queen Mary 2 at the Blohm + Voss Shipyard in Germany in late May and June 2016 . Major changes include the addition of fifteen individual staterooms , which will be the first on the ship , thirty additional balcony staterooms , and ten more animal kennels . 
 = = Technical = = 
 = = = Power plant and propulsion system = = = 
 Queen Mary 2 's power plant comprises both four sixteen cylinder Wärtsilä <unk> <unk> marine diesel engines , generating a combined 67 @,@ 200 kW ( 90 @,@ 100 hp ) at 514 rpm , as well as two General Electric <unk> + gas turbines , which together provide a further 50 @,@ 000 kW ( 67 @,@ 000 hp ) , all of which is converted into electricity used to power electric motors that drive the propellers . Such an arrangement , known as integrated electric propulsion , provides for economical cruising at low speed combined with an ability to sustain much higher speeds when required , and has been common in naval vessels for some time . While Queen Mary 2 is the first passenger ship to feature IEP propulsion , the first major passenger vessel to be powered by gas turbines was the Finnish ferry GTS <unk> in 1977 . 
 Thrust is provided by four Rolls @-@ Royce Mermaid azimuth thruster type podded propulsion units , each featuring one forward @-@ facing low @-@ vibration propeller with separately bolted blades . The forward pair of thrusters is fixed , but the aft pair can swivel through 360 ° , removing the need for a rudder . The Queen Mary 2 is the first quadruple @-@ propeller passenger ship completed since the SS France in 1961 . Queen Mary 2 carries eight spare blades on the foredeck , immediately forward of the bridge screen . 
 Because Queen Mary 2 's propulsion machinery is electrically decoupled from her propellers , her propulsion arrangement may arguably be more accurately described as " <unk> electric " ( by analogy with turbo @-@ electric and diesel @-@ electric ) ; however " integrated electric propulsion " is the term of art . The diesel engines and gas turbines drive electric generators , which provide the power to drive four 21 @,@ 500 kW ( 28 @,@ 800 hp ) Alstom electrical motors located inside the podded propulsors ( and thus entirely outside the vessel 's hull ) . Unusually , Queen Mary 2 's gas turbines are not housed along with her diesels in the engine room deep in her hull , but instead are in a soundproofed enclosure directly beneath the funnel . This arrangement allowed the vessel 's designers to supply the oxygen @-@ hungry turbines with air intakes without having to run air ducts the height of the ship , which would have wasted valuable interior space . 
 = = = Navigation = = = 
 Queen Mary 2 has a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art navigation system designed by British firm Kelvin Hughes , meeting and exceeding all International Maritime Organization regulations . The system consists of six radar navigation scanners and eight multifunction display units . The system includes the latest generation of Electronic Chart Display and Information System ( <unk> ) , allowing for fully paperless navigation and redundancy of operation . 
 Queen Mary 2 is fitted with Kelvin Hughes solid state <unk> ™ radar scanners . 
 = = = Water supply = = = 
 Fresh water aboard Queen Mary 2 is supplied by three seawater desalination plants . The plants , each with a capacity of 630 @,@ 000 litres ( 170 @,@ 000 US gal ) per day , use multiple effect plate ( MEP ) distillation technology . The plants ' energy is supplied primarily by steam and cooling water from the ship 's gas turbines and diesel engines , or if needed by steam from the ship 's two oil @-@ fired boilers . The traditional multiple @-@ effect distillation technology has been improved for the ship 's plant , so that scaling of plates is reduced , vastly reducing maintenance required . The desalinated water has a very low salt content of less than five parts per million . Average total water production is 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 litres ( 290 @,@ 000 US gal ) per day with a capacity of 1 @,@ 890 @,@ 000 litres ( 500 @,@ 000 US gal ) so that there is ample spare capacity . The ship could easily be supplied by only two of the three plants . Potable water tanks have a capacity of 3 @,@ 830 @,@ 000 litres ( 1 @,@ 010 @,@ 000 US gal ) , enough for more than three days of supply . If the engines are running on low load ( when the ship is running at a slow speed ) the engine jacket cooling water temperature is insufficient to heat the seawater to run the desalination plants . In that case steam from oil @-@ fired boilers is used to heat the sea water . This is uneconomical as generating steam is expensive . It may be cheaper , therefore , to buy water in a particular port than to produce it on board . The seawater intakes are located in the hull of the ship . Concentrated salt solution ( brine ) is discharged to the sea closer to the ship 's stern together with cooling water from the engines . An additional plant was added during the 2016 refit works . 
 = = Service history = = 
 On 12 January 2004 Queen Mary 2 set sail on her maiden voyage from Southampton , England , to Fort Lauderdale , Florida , in the United States , carrying 2 @,@ 620 passengers . She was under the command of captain Ronald Warwick , who had previously commanded Queen Elizabeth 2 . Warwick is the son of William ( Bil ) Warwick , who had also been a senior Cunard officer and the first captain of Queen Elizabeth 2 . The ship returned to Southampton late from her maiden voyage after bow doors covering the thrusters failed to shut in Portugal . 
 During the 2004 Summer Olympics Queen Mary 2 sailed to Athens and docked at Piraeus for two weeks for use as a floating hotel , serving the then Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Tony Blair and his wife Cherie , French President Jacques Chirac , then United States President George W. Bush , and the United States Olympic men 's basketball team . Queen Mary 2 's passengers have also included jazz musician Dave Brubeck , comedian and actor John Cleese , actor Richard Dreyfuss , author and editor Harold Evans , director George Lucas , singer Carly Simon , singer Rod Stewart , talk show host Katie Couric , and financier Donald Trump . 
 One 2005 transatlantic crossing saw Queen Mary 2 carrying , in a locked steamer trunk , the first United States copy of J. K. Rowling 's book Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , autographed by the author . In a promotional press release for the event , Cunard said that this marked the first time a book had been transported to its international launch aboard an ocean liner . 
 In January 2006 Queen Mary 2 embarked on a circumnavigation of South America . Upon departure from Fort Lauderdale , one of her propeller pods was damaged when it struck a channel wall , forcing the ship to sail at a reduced speed , which resulted in Commodore Warwick 's decision to skip several calls on its voyage to Rio de Janeiro . Many of her passengers threatened to stage a sit @-@ in protest because of the missed calls , before Cunard offered to refund the voyage costs . Queen Mary 2 continued to operate at a reduced service speed and several itinerary changes were necessary until repairs had been completed after the ship returned to Europe in June , where Queen Mary 2 paid a visit to dry dock and the damaged propeller pod was unseated . In November , Queen Mary 2 was drydocked once more at the Blohm + Voss yard in Hamburg ( drydock Elbe 17 ) for the reinstallation of the repaired propeller pod . At the same time , sprinkler systems were installed in all of the vessel 's balconies to comply with new safety regulations which had come into effect since the MS Star Princess fire . Additionally , both bridge wings were extended by two metres to improve visibility . 
 After completing the journey around South America , on 23 February 2006 , Queen Mary 2 met her namesake , the original RMS Queen Mary , which is permanently docked at Long Beach , California . Escorted by a flotilla of smaller ships , the two Queens exchanged a " whistle salute " which was heard throughout the city of Long Beach . Queen Mary 2 met the other serving Cunard liners Queen Victoria and Queen Elizabeth 2 on 13 January 2008 near the Statue of Liberty in New York City harbour , with a celebratory fireworks display ; Queen Elizabeth 2 and Queen Victoria made a tandem crossing of the Atlantic for the meeting . This marked the first time three Cunard Queens have been present in the same location . Cunard stated this would be the last time these three ships would ever meet , due to Queen Elizabeth 2 's impending retirement from service in late 2008 . However this would prove not to be the case , as the three Queens met in Southampton on 22 April 2008 . Queen Mary 2 rendezvoused with Queen Elizabeth 2 in Dubai on Saturday 21 March 2009 , after the latter ship 's retirement , while both ships were berthed at Port Rashid . With the withdrawal of Queen Elizabeth 2 from Cunard 's fleet and its docking in Dubai , Queen Mary 2 became the only operational ocean liner left in active passenger service . 
 On 19 October 2011 , Queen Mary 2 had her registry changed to Hamilton , Bermuda , from her previous home port of Southampton , to allow the ship to host on @-@ board weddings . This marked the first time in its 171 @-@ year history that Cunard has not had a ship registered within the UK . 
 = = = World cruises = = = 
 On 10 January 2007 , Queen Mary 2 started her first world cruise , circumnavigating the globe in 81 days . On 20 February , she met her fleet @-@ mate , Queen Elizabeth 2 , also on her 2007 world cruise , in Sydney harbour . This is the first time two Cunard Queens had been together in Sydney since the original Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth served as troop ships in 1941 . Despite the early arrival time of 5 : 42 am , the Queen Mary 2 's presence attracted so many viewers that the Sydney Harbour Bridge and Anzac Bridge were blocked . With 1 @,@ 600 passengers leaving the ships in Sydney , Cunard estimated the stopovers injected more than $ 3 million into the local economy . 
 On 10 January 2012 , the ship embarked on a three @-@ month world cruise from Southampton , travelling south and then east around Africa , a first ever circumnavigation of Australia , to Japan , then back to Southampton along the south coastline of Eurasia and through the Suez Canal . 
 = = = Anniversary voyage = = = 
 In October 2009 , Queen Mary 2 celebrated her fifth year in service with an 8 @-@ night voyage around the British Isles . The voyage included maiden visits to Greenock and Liverpool . 
 = = = The Boston Cup = = = 
 Carried aboard Queen Mary 2 is the Boston Cup . Sometimes referred to as The Britannia Cup , this artifact was created for Sir Samuel Cunard in Boston , United States , to commemorate the arrival of his first vessel RMS Britannia . Cunard had selected Boston as the American port for his Atlantic service , which resulted in a strong connection between Boston and the Cunard Line . It is believed that the cup was presented to Sir Samuel Cunard sometime in 1840 ; however , for much of its life it was missing . It was discovered in an antique shop in 1967 and returned to Cunard , where it was placed aboard Queen Elizabeth 2 . In 2004 , when QM2 became the flagship , the Boston Cup was placed aboard QM2 . It is in a glass case , aft of the Chart Room lounge . 
 In July 2007 the National Geographic Channel broadcast an episode of the documentary series <unk> about Queen Mary 2 . The vessel also featured in the pilot episode of the documentary TV series Mighty Ships . 
 = = = Propulsion failures = = = 
 The Rolls @-@ Royce Mermaid <unk> pods fitted to QM2 have proven to be prone to failure . The failures had been so frequent and extensive that Carnival Corp. ( USA ) , by way of its Cunard Line division , has taken Rolls @-@ Royce Corp. ( UK ) to court in the United States in January 2009 . The former placed claim that the Mermaid pod propulsion systems fitted to Cunard Line 's flagship Queen Mary 2 are inherently defective in design . Cunard contends that Rolls Royce knew about the design deficiencies and deliberately conspired to mislead , deceive and defraud in the course of winning the contract . The Achilles heel of the design has been the motors ' massive thrust bearings , which have continued to show a tendency to fail even after numerous attempts at redesign . In January 2011 Carnival Corporation was awarded US $ 24 million ( approx . UK £ 15 million at the time of verdict ) by the United States court due to the repeated failure of the propulsors . 
 = = = Cunard Royal Rendezvous = = = 
 Two years after the first Cunard Royal Rendezvous on the same date Queen Mary 2 met up with Queen Victoria and the then brand @-@ new MS Queen Elizabeth for another Royal Rendezvous in New York City on 13 January 2011 . Queen Victoria and Queen Elizabeth made a tandem crossing of the Atlantic for the event . All three ships met in front of the statue of Liberty at 6 : 45 pm for <unk> fireworks . The Empire State Building was lit up in red to mark the event . 
 On 5 June 2012 , the three Queens met again , but this time in Southampton to celebrate the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II . 
 = = = Atlantic rowing = = = 
 Queen Mary 2 has rendezvoused with ocean rowing teams in the middle of the Atlantic . On 30 July 2010 she met up with Artemis Investments whose rowing crew were Don Lennox , <unk> <unk> , Ray Carroll , Leven Brown . Carroll had been a former engineer and was patched through via marine VHF radio and QM2 's tannoy system to speak to the captain and crew . On 26 September 2013 Queen Mary 2 resupplied solo @-@ rower Mylène Paquette and her vessel Hermel with a replacement satellite phone , drogue anchor and groceries . Queen Mary 2 changed her course by 20 @-@ degrees and only added 14 miles to the overall distance of the crossing . 
 = = = Engine fire = = = 
 A small fire broke out in the gas turbine engine room ( located high on the ship behind the Queen Mary 2 sign ) on the evening of 5 October 2011 . The fire was started in one of the ship 's gas turbines . No injuries were reported , and crew on board the ship managed to safely extinguish the fire . 
 = = = Plant incident = = = 
 On 23 September 2010 , an explosion occurred in Queen Mary 2 's aft harmonic filter room . This resulted in the shutdown of all four propulsion motors and a loss of electrical power throughout the ship . Within an hour of the explosion , the ship 's main generators were restarted and it was able to resume passage . The explosion was caused by electrical arcing within the aft harmonic filter igniting leaked dielectric fluid vapour . 
 = = = 200th transatlantic voyage = = = 
 On 6 July 2013 Queen Mary 2 departed New York en route to Southampton on her 200th transatlantic voyage . On board speakers were Stephen Payne OBE — the ship 's designer — and presenter and newsreader Nick Owen , who presented talks about the ship 's design . 
 = = = 10th birthday celebrations = = = 
 On 6 May 2014 , all three Queens met up for the first time in Lisbon , Portugal . The three ships sailed <unk> of each other from Lisbon to Southampton . On 9 May 2014 Queen Elizabeth and Queen Victoria led Queen Mary 2 up the Southampton channel where they docked in formation at the QEII terminal and performed a birthday salute to Queen Mary 2 . The anniversary included a tour of the ship by His Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh . 
 = = = Cunard 175th anniversary = = = 
 On 25 May 2015 , all three Queens met , once again , at Liverpool , in order to celebrate the 175th anniversary of the shipping line . After arriving at Liverpool the previous day , Queen Mary 2 made a brief excursion to the entrance of the River Mersey to welcome her two <unk> into port in the early afternoon . The three <unk> then sailed , in formation , towards Liverpool . The ships spent several hours together , before the departure of Queen Mary 2 to Saint Peter Port , Guernsey . 
 On 2 July 2015 , Queen Mary 2 began a 175th Anniversary Crossing in Southampton . She sailed first to Liverpool , leaving that city after a fireworks display on 4 July , the actual anniversary date of Cunard 's first transatlantic voyage . Queen Mary 2 followed the route of the original ship Britannia , calling first at Halifax , Nova Scotia . After a day there , she headed first upriver into the harbor , using her bow thrusters and swivel @-@ pod motors to negotiate the tight turnaround to come back down close to the <unk> . A 21 @-@ gun salute and bagpipe band honored the ship . 
 From Halifax , the ship sailed to Boston and was there for a full day at the cruise terminal . ( Boston was the terminus of the original crossing in 1840 . ) In the evening , the captain backed the ship out of the slip and continued backing up all the way to the Maritime History Museum , where a fireworks display was presented before Queen Mary 2 sailed away . After a night and day at sea , the vessel entered New York Harbor early the morning of 14 July and docked at the Brooklyn Cruise Terminal . Later in the evening the vessel sailed to the lower harbor , between the Statue of Liberty and the Battery , for the Forever Cunard Queen Mary 2 Light Show . 
 = = In art and culture = = 
 On 3 August 2007 three men were stopped by police while escorting and piloting a replica of the first American combat submarine within 200 feet ( 61 m ) of Queen Mary 2 , then docked at the cruise ship terminal in Red Hook , Brooklyn . The replica was created by New York artist Philip " Duke " Riley and two out @-@ of @-@ town residents , one of whom claimed to be a descendant of David Bushnell , who had invented it . The Coast Guard issued Riley a citation for having an unsafe vessel , and for violating the security zone around Queen Mary 2 . 
 = = Environmental performance = = 
 When designing Queen Mary 2 , the designers aimed to reduce the ship 's impact on the environment by improving fuel efficiency , and through better management of waste , not only to reduce fuel costs , but also to increase the service life of the ship , as it was predicted that tighter environmental regulations would be implemented while the ship was in service . Initial targets included the reuse of treated wastewater for non @-@ potable uses and zero discharge of solid waste into the sea . For economic and other reasons , as well as in order to reduce energy consumption from incineration , some of these measures were not implemented . However , Queen Mary 2 's environmental performance exceeds that of many older ships , as well as international standards on waste . 
 According to Cunard , the ship exceeds some requirements of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution From Ships ( MARPOL 73 / 78 ) of the International Maritime Organization . It discharges waste into the sea only in areas more than 12 nmi ( 14 mi ) from any coast , although MARPOL allows discharge of treated organic waste and treated bilge water closer to the shore . Discharges of potentially harmful substances , in particular the residual oil content of treated bilge water and air emissions , are monitored regularly to ensure compliance with environmental standards . In areas where air pollution from sulfur dioxide , which causes acid rain , is a concern , the ship switches to low @-@ sulfur fuel to minimise air pollution . 
 According to the carbon offset company Climate Care , passenger ships release more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere per passenger mile than long haul flights . Cunard attempted to reduce the carbon footprint of Queen Mary 2 by improving engine efficiency and reducing friction while the ship is in motion . In November 2008 , the ship was given a refit in Hamburg , part of which involved the repainting of the hull in paint which is designed to reduce drag , and thus improve fuel economy . According to Blohm + Voss , her 2016 refit will include the installation of " scrubbers " and exhaust gas filters to reduce emissions . 
 = Ethel Sands = 
 Ethel Sands ( 6 July 1873 – 19 March 1962 ) was an American @-@ born artist and hostess who lived in England from her early childhood . She studied art in Paris for several years under Eugène Carrière , and it was there that she met Anna Hope Hudson ( Nan ) , her life partner . Her works were influenced by the artist Edouard Vuillard and Walter Sickert , and were generally of still lifes and interior scenes , many of which are of Château d 'Auppegard that she shared with Hudson in France . Sands was a Fitzroy Street Group and London Group member . Her works are in the collections of museums , the National Portrait Gallery , London and public collections . During both world wars , she nursed soldiers ; she established a hospital in France in World War I. In 1916 she was made a citizen of England . 
 Due to her family 's wealth she collected art and was a patron , but she is best known as a hostess for the cultural elite in her homes in England and Hudson 's house in France . Her friends included Henry James , Virginia Woolf , Roger Fry , Augustus John and many other writers and artists of her day . She continued to entertain into the 1950s when she was in her late 70s and 80s . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ethel Sands was born on 6 July 1873 in Newport , Rhode Island , the first child of Mary Morton <unk> and Mahlon Sands , who married in 1872 . Mahlon Sands was secretary of the American Free Trade League , who in 1870 advocated for civil service reform and free trade . He was partner of his deceased father 's pharmaceutical importing firm , A.B. Sands and Company . Ethel had two younger brothers , <unk> Alan and Morton Harcourt Sands , who were respectively 5 and 11 years younger than Ethel . 
 In 1874 the family left the United States for England , intending to only visit the country . However , Mahlon Sands and his family stayed in England and travelled among European countries . They also visited the United States annually and were there for an extended visit from 1877 to 1879 . They kept their house in Newport , Rhode Island throughout this time . 
 The wealthy Sands circulated amongst London society , including writer and statesman John Morley , politician William Ewart Gladstone , writer Henry James , artist John Singer Sargent , the Rothschild family , and Henry Graham White . Mahlon 's sister , Katherine , was married to journalist and newspaper editor Edwin Lawrence Godkin . They were part of Edward VII , then Prince of Wales ' , social circle . John Singer Sargent painted the portrait of her mother 's portrait , who was considered " a famous society beauty of her day . " Mary Sands was " much admired " by writer Henry James , who called her " that gracious lady " and based his heroic character " Madame de <unk> " on her . 
 Ethel Sands was raised in a respectable upper @-@ class household in which her parents were " happily married " . While her father was considered handsome and her mother beautiful , Anthony Powell states that some people wrote in their diaries and letters that she was plain . In her later years , Powell met her and said that " so great was her elegance , charm , capacity to be amusing in a no @-@ nonsense manner , that I could well believed her to be good @-@ looking in her youth . 
 Her father had ridden horseback through Hyde Park , was thrown from the horse and died an accidental death in 1888 . His widow , Mary Sands , raised Ethel and her brothers until her death on 28 July 1896 . 
 = = Art = = 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Encouraged by artist John Singer Sargent , Sands studied painting in Paris at the Académie Carrière under Eugène Carrière for several years , beginning in 1894 . There she met fellow student Nan Hudson , born Anna Hope Hudson in the United States , who became her life partner . During this time , Sands became the guardian of her two younger brothers following her mother 's death in 1896 . 
 = = = Painting = = = 
 Sands painted still lifes and interior settings . Tate suggests that was inspired by Edouard Vuillard 's dry brush technique , color palette and depiction of " intimate " scenes . Her first exhibition was at Salon d 'Automne in Paris in 1904 . 
 In 1907 , at Walter Sickert 's invitation , she became a member and exhibited paintings she made at the Fitzroy Street Group . She also purchased the works of other artists . She was one of the artists that founded the London Group . According to author Kate <unk> , her works , and those of Vanessa Bell and other women , were evaluated differently at that time than those made by men : The best critique of woman 's work at the time would be that they had individuality , but they would not have been considered innovative , modern works like those made by men . 
 In Paris in 1911 she had her first show dedicated to her works . Hudson and Sands had a show at Carfax Gallery in 1912 . The next year she was part of the " English Post @-@ Impressionists , Cubists and Others " show in Brighton . Her works were exhibited at Goupil Gallery , and in 1922 she had her initial solo show . She also exhibited often at the Women 's International Art Club and the New English Art Club . 
 Hudson purchased Château d 'Auppegard near Dieppe , France in 1920 , which was the subject of several of Sand 's paintings . Some of the interior paintings are A Spare Room , Château d 'Auppegard and Double Doors , Château d 'Auppegard . Other examples are the landscape <unk> Church from Château , France and one of per partner , Nan Hudson Playing Patience at <unk> . Her works are in the collections of Tate museum Government Art Collection , and Fitzwilliam Museum . 
 = = Socialite and patron = = 
 Like Lady Sibyl Colefax and Lady <unk> Morrell , Sands entertained artists and writers with the intention to nurture and discuss ideas relevant to their careers . Affiliated with the Bloomsbury Group , she was most well known as " one of the leading artist hostesses of her time , " her lavish affairs were financially possible due to the significant wealth she inherited from her parents . She was mainly at the Oxford , Newington house until 1920 , but when in England she also entertained at her London Lowndes Street house , and between 1913 and 1937 at 15 Vale , Chelsea , London house , where she lived near her mother 's friend , Henry James . Notable artists Augustus John and Walter Sickert . Henry James , Virginia Woolf , Roger Fry and Arnold Bennett were among the writers of the " cultural elite " who visited her . Her friends included artist Jacques @-@ Émile Blanche , writer Edith Wharton , poet William Butler Yeats , essayist and critic Logan Pearsall Smith and novelist Howard <unk> Sturgis . 
 Lytton Strachey ( a founder of the Bloomsbury Group } met at Sand 's house and her uncle , Edwin Lawrence Godkin wrote of his upcoming visit to Sand 's house in Oxfordshire , " There one fortnight , and then back to " holy wars , " patriotism , and <unk> ... " 
 She was a patron and collector of works by other contemporary artists . For instance , she commissioned Boris Anrep , a Russian immigrant , to create mosaics and murals in her Vale , Chelsea house . Sands continued to entertain into the 1950s with her friends , including Duncan Grant and Desmond MacCarthy , until he died in 1952 . 
 She was described as a " plain woman of immense charm , cultivation and perception , and a painter of considerable talent " in the Dictionary of Real People and Places in Fiction . It was suggested there that Henry James modelled the character Nanda in The Awkward Age after Sands . 
 = = World wars = = 
 Sands tended to soldiers who had been injured in France during World War I , having established a hospital for soldiers near Dieppe with Hudson . It was forced to close down , and they continued their nursing efforts in both France and England . Sands was then in Britain working as a forewoman in a factory that made overalls . In 1916 she became a British citizenship . During World War II , Sands served as a nurse . The house in Chelsea , London was destroyed during The Blitz by a parachute mine , and the house in France was broken into and its contents were stolen or destroyed . The two war @-@ time events resulted in the loss of most of Sands and Hudson 's works . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Sands and Hudson divided their time between England and France to accommodate their lifestyle preferences . Hudson enjoyed living a relatively quiet life in France and Sands liked the London and Oxford social life . 
 Sands entertained people within and outside of the cultural elite throughout her life . When her Hudson 's health began to fail , Sands nursed her until she died in 1957 . Sand continued to entertain after Hudson 's death . Her date of death was 19 March 1962 . 
 Friend Virginia Woolf wrote a sketch based upon her called " The Lady in the Looking Glass , " subtitled " A Reflection , " about a time that she saw her come " in from the garden and not reading her letters . " The mirror symbolised the way in which art is used to take a snapshot in time , but can also cut . 
 Wendy Baron , an author and art historian , wrote a biography about Sands , partly based upon the letters that Sands exchanged with Hudson and others . Tate Archives now holds the correspondence . 
 She was made Dame Ethel Sands in 1920 . 
 = = Works = = 
 Among the works that survived World War II plunders and bombings are : 
 = Presbyterian Ladies ' College , Sydney = 
 The Presbyterian Ladies ' College , Sydney ( PLC Sydney ) is an independent , Presbyterian , day and boarding school for girls in Croydon , an inner @-@ western suburb of Sydney , Australia . The school has a non @-@ selective enrolment policy for all years but Year 11 , and caters for approximately 1 @,@ 250 girls from age four ( Branxton Reception ) to age eighteen ( Year 12 ) , including 65 boarders . Students attend PLC from all regions of the greater metropolitan area , New South Wales , and overseas . 
 Established in 1888 by the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of NSW , PLC is the oldest continuously running Presbyterian Church school in its state . The college is a founding member of the Association of Heads of Independent Girls ' Schools and is affiliated with the Association of Heads of Independent Schools of Australia , the Junior School Heads Association of Australia , and the Australian Boarding Schools ' Association . PLC is one of two Sydney schools in the Round Square organisation . 
 In 2001 , The Sun @-@ Herald ranked PLC Sydney fourth in Australia 's top ten girls ' schools , based on the number of alumnae mentioned in the Who 's Who in Australia ( a listing of notable Australians ) . Notable alumnae include the first qualified female architect in Australia and other pioneering women in education , law , and medicine . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 In 1883 the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of NSW formed a special committee to investigate a proposal to establish boarding schools for girls and for boys , to provide Presbyterian alternatives to the proliferating number of Roman Catholic secondary schools in the colony . The Minister at Richmond , Rev James Cameron stated : " Presbyterians should take prompt action because the Popish party , seeing the want that was felt throughout the colony in regard to higher education , has stepped in to supply that want , and if Protestants did not look to the matter , the Roman Catholics would take advantage of them . " The General Assembly was also inspired to establish a school , particularly a Ladies ' College , by less worthy motives . Other Protestant denominations in NSW had recently established their own Ladies ' Colleges , and the neighbouring colony of Victoria had maintained a Presbyterian Ladies ' College since 1875 , and so it was felt that NSW Presbyterians should also have one . At the 1884 Assembly the Committee announced that while a boys ' school was not needed , the secondary education options available to girls were not satisfactory , and they recommended that a Ladies ' College , similar to the Presbyterian Ladies ' College , Melbourne , be established as soon as possible . 
 A Ladies ' College Committee was formed and by July 1887 they had leased a property in Ashfield . For principal , they unanimously selected Dr. John Marden , a science master from the Methodist Ladies ' College ( MLC ) in Melbourne , " because of his high academic standing , his experience and success in teaching and his high Christian character " . Marden was a strong believer in equal opportunity in education , and has been described as an " early feminist " . He rejected the idea that PLC was to be merely a finishing school for the daughters of the wealthy , and was once quoted as saying : 
 I am ... out of sympathy with the cry that education is unnecessary for girls , and that all they require is a few accomplishments . Women have also to live their life - in most cases a harder one than men have . This notion of accomplishments being sufficient for girls is surely a remnant of those barbarous days when women were looked on as the plaything of men . 
 The Presbyterian Ladies ' College was finally opened by Marden and lady superintendent , Ms M. McCormick , on 30 January 1888 , with 39 girls . It was modelled on the great English Public Schools , and was the first school to be established by the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales . Together with the Committee , Marden was responsible for organising the curriculum and hiring the appropriate staff . During the opening ceremony the Governor invited his wife , the Countess of Jersey , Margaret Child @-@ Villiers , to speak . She made what the Sydney Morning Herald described as a " capital impromptu speech " . The Countess ' speech was widely reported throughout Australia and elsewhere around the world , as at the time it was quite unusual for a woman to speak in public . PLC 's Jersey Day , an annual event in which ex @-@ students return to the College on the Sunday closest to 10 March , is named in honour of the Countess . 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 In the early years at Croydon , girls tended to be enrolled at an older age , typically over fourteen . It was apparent that despite Marden 's insistence , many parents viewed the College as a finishing school . As today , it was not a requirement for students to be Presbyterians , and early school records indicate there were a number of Roman Catholic and Jewish students . By 1900 the reputation of the school had spread , and pupils were starting to come from a wider geographic area , including New Caledonia , Fiji , New Zealand , the Northern Territory , Western Australia , Queensland and South Australia . 
 The increase in enrolments also convinced the Council of the need to set up a branch school on another site , preferably on the North Shore . In 1913 Marden reported that many applications were being refused because of " shortness of space . " The Assembly approved the establishment of a branch at Pymble and gave the Council of PLC Croydon £ 5 @,@ 000 to erect new buildings and lay out the grounds . The Presbyterian Ladies ' College , Pymble was opened on 8 February 1916 with 48 day girls and 86 boarders . Marden became the Principal of both schools . The opening of the Pymble campus necessitated a change of name for the Croydon College , from The Presbyterian Ladies ' College , Sydney to The Presbyterian Ladies ' College , Croydon . Marden retired at the end of 1919 and a Principal was appointed to each branch . Dr E. Neil McQueen , a prominent educational innovator who had previously been the Vice @-@ Principal of the two schools , became the second Principal of PLC Croydon . In 1918 the school magazine Aurora Australis was first published . On the cover it bore a quotation from Thomas Carlyle : ' . . . here hath been dawning another blue day . Think wilt thou let it slip useless <unk> 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 In 1941 , both the Principal Mary Hamilton , and the Senior Mistress ( novelist , critic and historian ) Flora <unk> , left the school to fill wartime positions in the bureaucracy . In 1942 , the new Principal , Dr Helen Wilkie , arrived to find falling enrolments , staffing problems and food shortages due to the effects of the Second World War . Word was soon received that Australian military authorities wished to inspect the school with a view to taking it over . On 24 March 1942 , it was requested that PLC be occupied by the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) for the purpose of establishing a top secret Radar Unit and military barracks known as No.1 <unk> ( Radio Installation and Maintenance Unit ) . In order to accommodate PLC 's students and classes , the Council approached Meriden School in Strathfield . Meriden agreed to house the boarders and the singing , domestic science , and physical education classes . PLC also purchased Lingwood , a property in Strathfield , as a centre for the school 's remaining activities . 
 At the end of 1942 , the Meriden authorities indicated that they could no longer house the PLC boarders , so Lauriston , Strathfield , on The <unk> , and Welbeck , at 18 Margaret Street , were rented for them . In July 1944 the Council agreed to purchase Lingwood , at 16 Margaret Street , to house a Kindergarten feeder school for the College , or as a site for a permanent move . A few months later the Council decided that the future of PLC lay in Strathfield . The Croydon campus was offered to the military for £ 36 @,@ 500 and plans were made to purchase Welbeck and Lauriston to form the new PLC . 
 The Council 's preference for Strathfield as a permanent location for the school was not shared by most of the school community , and after an intervention by the Education Trust of the NSW General Assembly it was decided that PLC would reopen once again at Croydon in first term 1946 . The military agreed to pay for the extensive renovations that were required , with the final cheque handed over by the government on 21 March 1949 . Lauriston and Welbeck were disposed of in 1946 , but the Lingwood property was retained as a preparatory school . The Council negotiated with Margaret Thompson , the owner and principal of Branxton , a private school in Strathfield , about moving her school to the Lingwood property , where it would retain the name Branxton and come under the control of the PLC Council . 
 Evidence of PLC 's war @-@ time occupation remain , with tunnels and bomb shelters accessible from below the stage of College Hall . A plaque presented to the school by the RAAF , in commemoration of PLC 's war @-@ time involvement , can be found on the school verandah at the entrance to the Main School . 
 = = = Modern day = = = 
 Miss Freda Whitlam ( born 1920 ) , sister of Prime Minister Gough Whitlam was principal between 1958 and 1976 . It was a period of great social transition . In 1968 Miss Whitlam wrote : ' Ours is a world where each year we become more conscious of how quickly and radically our environment is changing . Technology is taking the drudgery out of our lives and opening up exciting opportunities for those who have a good general education and are willing to think positively and creatively . Here we help the girls with this aim in view . ' In 1970 , after the Rev. Bill McLeod spoke to some of the seniors and advised those intending to become a nurse or a teacher to learn Greek or Italian ( to aid communication with immigrants ) , Miss Whitlam took up the suggestion : ' We have people with time to do something after the exams at the end of each year - let 's organise Greek classes for them ' . In March 1972 the school also produced a newsletter <unk> <unk> providing background on Greek culture and language and a bibliography of relevant books in the school library . 
 In 1977 , a Union of the Congregational , Methodist and Presbyterian Churches took place , forming the Uniting Church in Australia . Approximately one third of the Presbyterian Church decided to remain Presbyterian , and consequently the property of the Church had to be divided . In May of that year it was announced that PLC Croydon was to remain Presbyterian and PLC Pymble would be transferred , with its name changed to Pymble Ladies ' College . Then in 1978 it was decided that PLC Croydon should return to its original name : The Presbyterian Ladies ' College , Sydney . Freda Whitlam took part in the movement to form the Uniting Church and thus ended her principalship of the school . She was moderator of the NSW Synod of the Uniting Church in Australia ( 1985 @-@ 6 ) . 
 In late August 2005 , due to financial troubles at the Presbyterian Ladies ' College , Armidale , it was announced that PLC Armidale and PLC Sydney would join to form an alliance , with both schools coming under the executive leadership of Dr William <unk> , the Principal of PLC Sydney . Members of the PLC Armidale Council formed part of the new joint school Council , essentially making the two PLC 's true sister schools . 
 The aim of this alliance is to strengthen PLC Armidale through cooperative marketing , a change in management , and a stronger financial base . It is also meant to benefit both schools by providing student exchanges , accommodations for sporting events or excursions , and an additional " country or city " option to prospective students . Both schools will maintain their separate identities in order to preserve the unique histories and traditions that both have developed over many years . PLC celebrated their 120th anniversary in 2008 and to mark the occasion the College commissioned a limited edition commemorative coffee table book , PLC Sydney 1888 @-@ 2008 : A Photographic Essay . 
 = = Principals = = 
 = = Campus = = 
 The Presbyterian Ladies ' College , Sydney , initially opened on 30 January 1888 , at <unk> , a 14 @-@ room gentleman 's residence set on 1 @.@ 21 hectares ( 3 acres ) in Ashfield . But by August they had already outgrown this location , so they purchased Shubra Hall , the home of department store owner Anthony Hordern III at Croydon , for £ 7 @,@ 500 . Plans were drawn up for the additional buildings required , and Marden worked closely with the architect , Albert Bond . Marden was responsible for most of the ideas for the new buildings , based on those he had seen at MLC Melbourne . Keenly interested in horticulture , he also laid out gardens and playing fields . By the beginning of the 1891 school year , the new site was complete and ready for furnishing as the permanent home of PLC . 
 The Presbyterian reported the opening of the College on 10 March 1891 , by the Governor of NSW , the Rt Hon Victor Albert George , 7th Earl of Jersey at its new site : 
 Standing in 2 @.@ 43 hectares ( 6 acres ) of ground , laid out in lawn tennis courts , gardens , etc . , in an elevated position , it forms , with its tower 84 ft ( 26 m ) [ 26 m ] high , a very conspicuous feature in the landscape . The central feature of the building is the tower , and the architectural design of the facade is classic . Altogether the effect is very imposing ... The main staircase window is a work of art well worth seeing . The central window is beautifully designed , and contains two female figures representing Literature and Music . 
 By 1902 PLC was running out of space again and Marden urged that new classrooms be built . The Council reluctantly agreed and an extension was made to the Main School , with six classrooms downstairs and 18 rooms upstairs . The addition was completed on 6 October 1904 , at a cost of £ 2 @,@ 000 . 
 On 24 March 1942 , it was requested that PLC be occupied by the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) for the purpose of establishing a top secret Radar Unit and military barracks known as No.1 <unk> ( Radio Installation and Maintenance Unit ) . PLC 's displaced boarders , and some of the classrooms , found a temporary home at Meriden School in Strathfield . The school purchased Lingwood , also in Strathfield , as a centre for the school 's remaining activities . 
 At the end of 1942 , the Meriden authorities indicated that they could no longer house the PLC boarders , so Lauriston ( now the primary school of Santa Sabina College ) and Welbeck , on The <unk> at Strathfield , were rented for them . The PLC Council nearly kept the school at Strathfield permanently , but ultimately it was decided that PLC would reopen once again at Croydon in first term 1946 . The military agreed to pay for the extensive renovations that were required , Lauriston and Welbeck were disposed of in 1946 , and the Lingwood property was retained as a preparatory school . Evidence of PLC 's war @-@ time occupation remain , with tunnels and bomb shelters accessible from below the stage of College Hall . A plaque presented to the school by the RAAF , in commemoration of PLC 's war @-@ time involvement , can be found on the school verandah at the entrance to the Main School . 
 And so the Presbyterian Ladies ' College , Sydney , still sits on a 5 hectares ( 12 acres ) campus , now adjacent to Croydon Railway Station and within 15 minutes of the Sydney central business district , Sydney University , and the University of Technology . Having grown significantly since its foundation , particularly since the 1980s , the school today features a mix of 19th @-@ century and modern buildings , historic landscaped gardens and playing fields . 
 = = Curriculum = = 
 The Presbyterian Ladies ' College is a comprehensive school with a traditional academic approach designed to prepare students for attending a university . The school is registered and accredited with the New South Wales Board of Studies , and therefore follows the mandated curriculum for all years . 
 = = = Primary = = = 
 Students in stages 1 to 3 ( Kindergarten to Year 6 ) study the six Key Learning Areas : English , Mathematics , Human Society and its Environment ( <unk> ) , Science and Technology , Creative Arts , Personal Development , Health and Physical Education ( PD / H / PE ) . The youngest students also follow the Reggio Emilia approach to education . Specialist extension courses are offered to select students from Year 2 to 6 with gifts and talents in special areas ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Secondary = = = 
 Subjects offered to stage 4 students ( Years 7 and 8 ) include : English , Mathematics , Science , Geography , History , French , Mandarin , Latin , Japanese , German , Italian , Design and Technology , Visual Arts , Music , PDHPE , Computing and Religious Education . The " Excelsior class " is an enrichment programme offered to gifted students in this stage and includes additional classes such as Philosophy and Olympiad activities . 
 In stage 5 ( Years 9 and 10 ) , students are prepared for the School Certificate and study a programme that comprises two elective classes and Religious Education , as well as the courses mandated by the Board of Studies . The compulsory core subjects are : English , Mathematics , Science , Australian History and Geography , and PDHPE . <unk> are chosen from : Elective History , Elective Geography , French , German , Mandarin , Latin , Japanese , Italian , Commerce , Drama , Design and Technology , Textiles and Design , Music , Visual Arts , and Physical Activity and Sports Science . In Year 10 , the Excelsior class begins its study of the 1 – Unit Higher School Certificate ( HSC ) course in Studies of Religion . 
 In the final school stage ( Years 11 and 12 ) students are prepared for the New South Wales HSC . The curriculum at this stage has a clear university orientation . The Board of Studies requires stage 6 students to study a minimum of 12 units in the Preliminary Year and 10 units in their HSC Year ( most subjects being worth 2 units ) . HSC English is compulsory ; Standard and Advanced Extension courses , as well as 2 @-@ unit English as a Second Language are also offered . Students may then choose from all levels of Mathematics , Senior Science , Biology , Chemistry , Physics , Modern History , Ancient History , Business Studies , Economics , Geography , Legal studies , French , German , Latin , Japanese , Italian , Indonesian ( Beginners ) , Mandarin , Design and Technology , Textiles and Design , Food Technology , Visual Arts , Music ( Course 1 and 2 ) , Drama and PDHPE . 
 University entry levels are high following the completion of stage 6 . Each year approximately 50 % of graduating PLC students receive a Universities Admission Index ( <unk> ) higher than 90 . In the 2006 Higher School Certificate , a PLC student received a perfect <unk> score of 100 , and in 2007 The Daily Telegraph named PLC the best @-@ performing independent school in Sydney 's inner – west . 
 = = = Special education = = = 
 PLC also offers a unique special education unit catering to students with mild to moderate intellectual disabilities . The transition programme was developed in 1992 in response to a decision by academic staff to provide a special @-@ needs stream . Through this unit , up to 20 girls between the ages of 11 and 18 are provided with an individual curriculum incorporating mainstream classes where possible . 
 Senior students focus on the Board of Studies Life Skills programme . Girls spend time as residential students in the on @-@ campus Transition House , learning to manage their lives independently . Transition students also run an outdoor café to gain small business skills . 
 = = Co @-@ curriculum = = 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 PLC Sydney is arguably one of Australia 's best girls ' sporting schools . The College has been a member of the Independent Girls ' Schools Sporting Association ( IGSSA ) since its foundation in 1922 , and through this association senior students compete against 27 other girls ' schools in graded weekend sports and carnivals . Sports available to students through IGSSA include swimming , diving , rowing , cross country , athletics , gymnastics , softball , tennis , basketball , soccer , Field hockey , netball , cricket and water polo . The College also offers sports such as skiing , snowboarding , equestrian and badminton through other competitions . In 2007 PLC won three IGSSA carnival premierships : in diving ( for the ninth consecutive year ) , swimming , and gymnastics . 
 Primary school girls have the opportunity to participate in interschool sports through PLC 's membership in the New South Wales branch of the Junior School Heads Association of Australia ( JSHAA ) . Students with special sporting talent are provided a pathway to compete at the highest level available at PLC , IGSSA / JSHAA , Combined Independent Schools , state representation at School Sport Australia , and Commonwealth and Olympic level . 
 In September 2007 , the college broke the under @-@ 19 female Australian record for 24 @-@ hour non @-@ stop rowing , with a distance of 337 kilometres ( 209 mi ) . Also in 2007 , PLC was named the New South Wales School <unk> Club of the Year by the NSW <unk> Association , later winning the national award at the 2007 Ski and Snowboard Australia Awards . 
 The 2008 rowing season has been one of the school 's best to date . In March , the PLC 1st Eight crew won the Schoolgirl Eight race at the IGSSA regatta for the first time in the school 's history . This crew was also successful at the 2008 Australian Rowing Championships , winning the A Final of the Schoolgirls Eight race ( the Sydney Cup ) , ahead of St Catherine 's School , Toorak and Pymble Ladies ' College , thus ranking them as the best schoolgirl eight in Australia . 
 = = = Ensembles = = = 
 Junior and Senior School students can participate in musical ensembles , both selective and non @-@ selective , including several bands , string orchestras , a full school orchestra , chamber music ensembles , choral groups and several smaller instrumental and vocal groups . 
 = = = Debating and public speaking = = = 
 One of the strengths of PLC Sydney is their long history of achievement in debating and public speaking . The college has competed in the Independent Schools Debating Association ( <unk> ) for the past five years and has had a long @-@ standing commitment to the <unk> Debating Competition . PLC students have had success at the semi @-@ final level , and they won the competition in 2006 . 
 PLC Sydney enters teams in the Junior and Senior sections of the Association of Heads of Independent Girls ' Schools ( <unk> ) Festival of Speech , producing the best results of any <unk> school over the history of the competition , with 10 consecutive wins in the competition 's 12 @-@ year history . 
 Students may also participate in the Macquarie Cup and the Commonwealth Bank Senior Debating , vying with students from a range of public , Catholic and independent schools . There are also Social Debates with surrounding schools as well as a regular competition with Trinity Grammar School called the PLC / Trinity Challenge . 
 = = = Aid projects = = = 
 The PLC Overseas Aid Fund has been established to enhance the college 's work with aid projects in developing countries , and is an important part of the school 's Round Square membership . Current projects undertaken by the school include the establishment and on @-@ going management of two <unk> in East Timor , the management and support of Birla Children 's Orphanage in Vietnam , and the establishment of the " Adopt a School " programme . This programme was developed and is directed by the Principal , Dr <unk> , and matches schools in Australia with schools in Sri Lanka requiring rebuilding following the 2004 Tsunami . PLC 's school , allocated through this programme , is the <unk> Counselling , Training and Rehabilitation Centre for Girls . 
 = = Motto and crest = = 
 The school crest was adopted at a College Council meeting on 23 August 1888 . The College Council decided to use the same crest as that used by the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales , with minor modifications . 
 The Church 's crest consisted of a shield with the words <unk> <unk> <unk> ( translated from Latin as " And yet it was not consumed " ) surrounding it . On the shield were the stars of the Southern Cross , a burning bush , and a Latin cross in outline . At the base were the floral emblems of Scotland , England and Ireland . Surrounding the shield was a border with the words " Presbyterian Church of New South Wales " , with a Star of David placed on top . Behind both shield and borders was the cross of St. Andrew in blue . 
 The School modified this crest by changing the words " Presbyterian Church of New South Wales " to " Presbyterian Ladies ' College , Sydney " , placing a Maltese cross at the top of the shield and inserting the School motto Sancte <unk> . The motto had been adopted by the school on 23 August 1888 , and although no translation was given of the Latin , it may be loosely translated to " be holy wisely " or " holy , wisely . " 
 = = School badge = = 
 The school 's highly symbolic badge was inspired by the first Principal , Dr. Marden , and designed in 1888 by the first art teacher , J.A. Bennett . The maiden on the lion represents Knowledge , which is crowned by a tower representing the home , and holding a trident representing Sovereignty . A laurel wreath represents the victory of true womanhood , while the sun symbolises light and energy , and the crescent moon stands for youth . The words " Presbyterian Ladies ' College , Sydney " surround the badge . 
 The motto All <unk> <unk> is Italian and comes from Dante 's Commedia ( Paradiso I , 13 ) . It has variously been translated as " for the crowning task " , " strive for the highest " , " the utmost for the highest " , or " I work for the highest " , with the first of these being the most direct translation . 
 The badge is reproduced in the <unk> over the front door of Shubra Hall , and may also be found on the recently opened Ex @-@ Students ' pathway . It was traditionally worn as part of the uniform on the Tam o ' Shanter , until it was phased out in 1995 . The badge is currently not worn on the academic uniform , partially due to its adoption by Pymble Ladies ' College as their school crest in 1977 . It was , however , reintroduced in 2003 as an addition to the Beret of the PLC Pipes and Drums uniform , and is also used by the college 's Ex @-@ students ' Union , as it has been since 1905 , with the addition of the words " Ex @-@ students ' Union " below . 
 = = Uniform = = 
 When the College first opened in 1888 there was no uniform , instead the girls wore long cotton dresses , gloves and hat . A straw boater was introduced in the early 20th century , worn with a red and white hat band featuring the college crest with its burning bush woven into it in red . During this time Prefects wore red silk arm @-@ bands embroidered with a gold crest . 
 The distinctive Black Watch Tartan of the college was introduced in 1918 . Senior girls wore heavy box @-@ pleated skirts and white blouses ; junior girls wore pinafore dresses . All girls wore a navy blazer and heavy woollen stockings . Prefects also wore a special hat badge with a ring of bright blue enamel . A black felt Breton was introduced for winter use , and no change was made until the introduction of the green beret in 1952 . 
 The current uniform for Year 11 and 12 was introduced in 1966 . It was designed by the senior students of 1965 and consists of a Black Watch kilt , white blouse , green blazer , green jumper or vest , black stockings for winter and bottle green knee @-@ high socks for summer , and black leather lace @-@ up shoes . Girls of Scottish origin are permitted wear the kilt pin representing their family or clan name , rather than the standard school pin . A green and Black Watch Tam o ' Shanter ( known as ' the Beret ' ) was also introduced for all grades a few years earlier . 
 The girls found the school 's distinctive Beret difficult to wear , so it was phased out in 1995 . It was replaced by the current Panama hat , but the Beret was reintroduced in 2003 as an addition to the Pipes and Drums uniform . 
 The current junior ( R – 10 ) uniform was introduced in 1997 . In summer , girls are required to wear a Black Watch tunic , short @-@ sleeve white blouse , green blazer with tartan piping , short green socks and black leather shoes . The winter uniform consists of the tunic , long @-@ sleeve white blouse , the blazer , green jumper or vest , Black Watch Tartan tie , Black Watch Tartan scarf and either green knee @-@ high socks or black stockings . School pockets are awarded for student achievements , and are embroidered in red on the pockets of junior blazers ( R – 10 girls ) , and white on the left @-@ breast of senior blazers ( 11 – 12 girls ) . 
 = = = College tartan = = = 
 The school has adopted the Black Watch Tartan of the Royal Highland Regiment as its school and Pipes and Drums uniform . PLC was granted permission to wear the tartan after its brother school , The Scots College , was issued a royal decree allowing them to use Black Watch as their Pipes & Drums and Cadets uniform . The Black Watch is the oldest of the highland regiments . The 1958 Aurora Australis ( the school yearbook ) explained the tartan 's origin : " This tartan was specially designed for the regiment to prevent the jealousy which would have been aroused , if any existing clan tartan had been used . " 
 = = House system = = 
 The house system was established by Dr. John Marden , shortly after the opening of the school , with three houses : East , West and Boarders . In 1924 the senior houses were reorganised and renamed Kinross , Harper and Ferguson ( with Anderson added in 1968 ) , followed in 1926 by the introduction of junior houses , named Vicars and McQueen ( with Thompson added in 1937 ) . The school moved to four houses in 1979 , from primary to secondary , and thus the junior houses disappeared . Finally , two new houses named Pickard and Wilkie were introduced in 1995 . The Houses are named after women and men who have made a significant contribution to the life of the College . 
 Anderson 
 Mrs E.O. Anderson ( 1885 – 1985 ) attended PLC from 1898 to 1902 . She was an original member of the Committee of the Ex @-@ Students ' Union in 1906 , then President ( 1927 – 1932 ) , and Patroness from 1936 . In 1932 she petitioned the Assembly for the appointment of women to the PLC Council . Anderson was a member of the Council ( 1932 – 1958 ) , and a benefactor to the College all her life . 
 Ferguson 
 Rev John Ferguson ( 1852 – 1925 ) was a minister of St Stephen 's Church , Sydney , and in 1917 , Acting Principal of St Andrew 's College at the University of Sydney . He was appointed Senior Chaplain and Chairman of the PLC Council in 1913 , serving until 1923 . 
 Harper 
 Rev Dr Andrew Harper ( 1844 – 1936 ) was the third Principal of PLC Melbourne ( 1879 – 1888 ) . He then lectured at Ormond Theological College , Melbourne before coming to Sydney , where he was Principal of St Andrew 's College ( 1902 – 1923 ) . He was Chairman of the PLC Council from 1907 until 1913 . 
 Kinross 
 Rev Dr John Kinross ( 1833 – 1908 ) was a Presbyterian minister at Kiama ( 1858 – 1875 ) . He then became Principal of St Andrew 's College from 1875 until 1901 , and Chairman of the PLC Council from 1888 until 1906 . 
 Pickard 
 Marion Pickard was appointed to the College as a teaching governess in June 1888 . She was Lady Superintendent from 1894 until her resignation in 1907 . In 1905 Pickard was elected the first President of the Ex @-@ Students ' Union . 
 Wilkie 
 Dr Helen Wilkie ( 1895 – 1984 ) was the second Headmistress at PLC Armidale ( 1938 – 1941 ) , and then the fourth Principal of PLC Sydney ( 1942 – 1946 ) . On her appointment to Croydon she was immediately confronted with the takeover by the RAAF , and organised the move of the College to Strathfield . 
 = = Ex @-@ Students ' Union = = 
 The Ex @-@ Students ' Union is the school 's alumnae association , inaugurated on the evening of 9 December 1905 . At the invitation of Dr. Marden several former students discussed the proposal , elected Marion Pickard ( who was at that time Lady Superintendent ) as their President , and formed a committee to produce a constitution . These actions were confirmed at a General Meeting on Jersey Day 1906 , and the committee took office until 1907 . In the beginning , the main objectives of the Union were " the accumulation of a special fund to be devoted to the erection of a chapel and library at the College , and an Ex @-@ Students ' prize to be awarded annually to the girl most proficient in work and sport . " 
 The Union achieved much in its first few years : renting a building in the CBD to serve as a club and committee meeting place , making garments for hospitals , visiting kindergartens , the YWCA , Home of Peace , Infants ' Home and the Royal Institute for Deaf and Blind Children . An Ex @-@ Students ' Orchestra and Dramatic Club were formed , and tennis and croquet matches were held between current and former pupils . 
 In 1916 the Pymble College was opened and its first Ex @-@ Students ' Union expressed an interest in joining that of PLC . Subsequently a combined Union was formed , known as the PLC Croydon and Pymble Ex @-@ Students ' Union , and an Ex @-@ Students ' prize was established at Pymble on the same conditions as at Croydon . 
 One of the Union 's most significant contributions to the school was planned following the death of Dr. Marden in 1924 . With the desire to provide Marden with a " fitting and lasting memorial " , it was decided that a library , to be called the John Marden Memorial Library , should be built at the Croydon College . This building was opened by Mrs. Marden in 1927 and although no longer suitable as a library due its size , it remains a treasured part of the school . 
 In 1929 , it was proposed that " Pymble students should form a separate Union " and that an equitable division of Union funds should be undertaken . This explains the two separate groups that exist today , however , it is still not uncommon for Pymble students to attend Croydon reunions and events , particularly regional or interstate activities . 
 = = = Notable alumnae = = = 
 Alumnae of the Presbyterian Ladies ' College , Sydney are commonly referred to as PLC Old Girls , and may elect to join the schools alumnae association , the PLC Ex @-@ Students ' Union . 
 In 2001 , The Sun @-@ Herald ranked PLC Sydney fourth in Australia 's top ten girls ' schools , based on the number of its alumnae mentioned in the Who 's Who in Australia ( a listing of notable Australians ) . Among these women are Sibyl Morrison , the first female barrister in New South Wales , Marie Byles , the first practicing female solicitor in New South Wales , Jessie Aspinall , the first female junior resident medical officer at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital , and Florence Mary Taylor , the first qualified female architect and first woman to train as an engineer in Australia , and the first woman in Australia to fly in a heavier @-@ than @-@ air craft . 
 = Italian battleship Regina Elena = 
 Regina Elena was the lead ship of her class built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) . The ship was built by the La Spezia shipyard between 1901 and 1907 , and was armed with a main battery of two 12 in ( 300 mm ) guns and twelve 8 in ( 200 mm ) guns . She was quite fast for the period , with a top speed of nearly 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . Regina Elena was active in both the Italo @-@ Turkish War with the Ottoman Empire in 1911 – 1912 , where she participated in the Italian conquest of Cyrenaica , and World War I in 1915 – 1918 , where she saw no action due to the threat of submarines in the narrow confines of the Adriatic Sea . She was retained for a few years after the war , but was ultimately stricken in February 1923 and broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Regina Elena was 144 @.@ 6 meters ( 474 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 22 @.@ 4 m ( 73 ft ) and a maximum draft of 8 @.@ 58 m ( 28 @.@ 1 ft ) . She displaced 13 @,@ 807 long tons ( 14 @,@ 029 t ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two vertical triple expansion engines . Steam for the engines was provided by twenty @-@ eight coal @-@ fired Belleville boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 20 @.@ 8 knots ( 38 @.@ 5 km / h ; 23 @.@ 9 mph ) and a range of approximately 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Regina Elena had a crew of 742 – 764 officers and enlisted men . 
 As built , the ship was armed with two 12 in ( 300 mm ) 40 @-@ caliber guns placed in two single gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The ship was also equipped with twelve 8 in ( 200 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns in six twin turrets amidships . Close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats was provided by a battery of sixteen 3 in ( 76 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns . Regina Elena was also equipped with two 17 @.@ 7 in ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes placed in the hull below the waterline . Regina Elena was protected with Krupp steel manufactured in Terni . The main belt was 9 @.@ 8 in ( 250 mm ) thick , and the deck was 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) thick . The conning tower was protected by 10 in ( 250 mm ) of armor plating . The main battery guns had 8 in ( 200 mm ) thick plating , and the 8 @-@ inch gun turrets had 6 in ( 150 mm ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Regina Elena was laid down at the La Spezia shipyard on 27 March 1901 , and was launched on 19 June 1904 . After fitting @-@ out work was completed , she was commissioned into the Italian fleet on 11 September 1907 . She thereafter served in the Mediterranean Squadron , and was ready for the annual maneuvers in late September and early October , under the command of Vice Admiral Alfonso di Brocchetti . In April 1908 , Regina Elena participated in a naval demonstration off Asia Minor in protest of the Ottoman decision to prohibit Italian post offices in Ottoman territory . The ship was at that time commanded by Prince Luigi Amedeo , the Duke of the Abruzzi . The ship went to Messina in the aftermath of the 1908 Messina earthquake . Regina Elena remained in the active duty squadron through 1910 , by which time her three sisters had been completed , bringing the total number of front @-@ line battleships to six , including the two Regina Margherita @-@ class battleships . 
 = = = Italo @-@ Turkish War = = = 
 On 29 September 1911 , Italy declared war on the Ottoman Empire in order to seize Libya . For the duration of the conflict , Regina Elena was assigned to the 1st Division of the 1st Squadron along with her three sisters , under the command of Vice Admiral Augusto Aubry . She joined the squadron late , on 5 October . On 18 October , Regina Elena and her three sisters , along with three cruisers and several destroyers and torpedo boats escorted a convoy that carried half of the 2nd Infantry Division to Benghazi . When the Ottomans refused to surrender the city before the amphibious assault , the Italian fleet opened fire on the Turkish defenders at 08 : 00 , while landing parties from the ships and the Army infantry went ashore . The Italians quickly forced the Ottomans to withdraw into the city by evening . After a short siege , the Ottoman forces withdrew on 29 October , leaving the city to the Italians . 
 By December , Regina Elena and the other ships of the 1st Squadron were dispersed in the ports of Cyrenaica . Regina Elena , Roma , and the armored cruiser San Marco were stationed in Benghazi , with Regina Elena recently arriving from Tobruk . While there , they supported the Italian Army as it occupied the city and surrounding area by contributing landing parties and providing fire support to the ground troops . The gunfire support supplied by Regina Elena contributed to the defeat of a major attack on the city by an Ottoman army on 14 – 15 December . In early 1912 , most of the fleet had withdrawn to Italy for repairs and refit , leaving only a small force of cruisers and light craft to patrol the North African coast . 
 In March 1914 , Regina Elena was involved in experiments with wireless telegraphy in Syracuse , Sicily . The tests were conducted by Guglielmo Marconi and were supervised by the Duke of the Abruzzi . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Italy declared neutrality after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , but by July 1915 , the Triple Entente had convinced the Italians to enter the war against the Central Powers . The primary naval opponent for the duration of the war was the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ; the Naval Chief of Staff , Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , believed the threat from submarines in the confined waters of the Adriatic was too serious to permit an active fleet policy . He therefore planned a distant blockade with the battle fleet , while smaller vessels , such as the MAS boats conducted raids . The heavy ships of the Italian fleet would be preserved for a potential major battle in the event that the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet should emerge from its bases . As a result , the ship 's career during the war was limited . During the war , Regina Elena and her three sisters were assigned to the 2nd Division . They spent much of the war rotating between the bases at Taranto , Brindisi , and Valona , but did not see combat . On 14 – 15 May 1917 , three light cruisers of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy raided the Otranto Barrage ; in the ensuring Battle of the Strait of Otranto , Regina Elena and her sisters raised steam to assist the Allied warships , but the Italian commander refused to permit them to join the battle for fear of risking their loss in the submarine @-@ infested Adriatic . 
 Under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty , Italy was permitted to retain Regina Elena and her three sisters . The Italian Navy could have kept the ships in service indefinitely , but they could not be replaced by new battleships under the normal practice of the Treaty system . Nevertheless , she was stricken from the naval register on 16 February 1923 and subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = Louis Riel = 
 Louis David Riel ( English / <unk> <unk> / , French pronunciation : ​ [ lwi <unk> ] ; 22 October 1844 – 16 November 1885 ) was a Canadian politician , a founder of the province of Manitoba , and a political leader of the Métis people of the Canadian prairies . He led two resistance movements against the Canadian government and its first post @-@ Confederation prime minister , Sir John A. Macdonald . Riel sought to preserve Métis rights and culture as their homelands in the Northwest came progressively under the Canadian sphere of influence . Over the decades , he has been made a folk hero by the Francophones , the Catholic nationalists , the native rights movement , and the New Left student movement . Riel has received more scholarly attention than practically any other figure in Canadian history . 
 His first resistance was the Red River Rebellion of 1869 – 1870 . The provisional government established by Riel ultimately negotiated the terms under which the modern province of Manitoba entered the Canadian Confederation . Riel ordered the execution of a Protestant who annoyed him , Thomas Scott , and fled to the United States to escape prosecution . Despite this , he is frequently referred to as the " Father of Manitoba " . While a fugitive , he was elected three times to the Canadian House of Commons , although he never assumed his seat . During these years , he was frustrated by having to remain in exile despite his growing belief that he was a divinely chosen leader and prophet , a belief which would later resurface and influence his actions . Because of this new religious conviction , Catholic leaders who had supported him before increasingly repudiated him . He married in 1881 while in exile in Montana in the United States ; he fathered three children . 
 In 1884 Riel was called upon by the Métis leaders in Saskatchewan to articulate their grievances to the Canadian government . Instead he organized a military resistance that escalated into a military confrontation , the North @-@ West Rebellion of 1885 . Ottawa used the new rail lines to send in thousands of combat soldiers . It ended in his arrest and conviction for high treason . Rejecting many protests and popular appeals , Prime Minister MacDonald decided to hang him . Riel was seen as a heroic victim by francophone Canadians ; his execution had a lasting negative impact on Canada , polarizing the new nation along ethno @-@ religious lines . Although only a few hundred people were directly affected by the Rebellion in Saskatchewan , the long @-@ term result was that the Prairie provinces would be controlled by the Anglophones , not the Francophones . An even more important long @-@ term impact was the bitter alienation Francophones across Canada showed and anger against the repression of their countrymen . 
 Riel 's historical reputation has long been polarized between portrayals as a dangerous half @-@ insane religious fanatic and rebel against the Canadian nation , or by contrast a heroic rebel who fought to protect his Francophone people from the unfair encroachments of an Anglophone national government . He is increasingly celebrated as a proponent of multiculturalism , although that downplays his primary commitment to Métis nationalism and political independence . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The Red River Settlement was a community in Rupert 's Land nominally administered by the Hudson 's Bay Company ( HBC ) , and largely inhabited by First Nations tribes and the Métis , an ethnic group of mixed Cree , Ojibwa , Saulteaux , French Canadian , Scottish , and English descent . Louis Riel was born there in 1844 , near modern Winnipeg , Manitoba , to Louis Riel , Sr. and Julie <unk> . 
 Riel was the eldest of eleven children in a locally well @-@ respected family . His father , who was of Franco @-@ Ojibwa Métis descent , had gained prominence in this community by organizing a group that supported Guillaume Sayer , a Métis imprisoned for challenging the HBC 's historical trade monopoly . Sayer 's eventual release due to agitations by Louis Sr. ' s group effectively ended the monopoly , and the name Riel was therefore well known in the Red River area . His mother was the daughter of Jean @-@ Baptiste <unk> and Marie @-@ Anne <unk> , one of the earliest white families to settle in the Red River Settlement in 1812 . The <unk> were noted for their devout Catholicism and strong family ties . 
 Riel was first educated by Roman Catholic priests at St. Boniface . At age 13 he came to the attention of Alexandre Taché , the <unk> Bishop of St. Boniface , who was eagerly promoting the priesthood for talented young Métis . In 1858 Taché arranged for Riel to attend the Petit Séminaire of the Collège de Montréal , under the direction of the Sulpician order . Descriptions of him at the time indicate that he was a fine scholar of languages , science , and philosophy , but exhibited a frequent and unpredictable moodiness . 
 Following news of his father 's premature death in 1864 , Riel lost interest in the priesthood and he withdrew from the college in March 1865 . For a time he continued his studies as a day student in the convent of the Grey Nuns , but was soon asked to leave following breaches of discipline . He remained in Montreal over a year , living at the home of his aunt , Lucie Riel . Impoverished by the death of his father , Riel took employment as a law clerk in the Montreal office of Rodolphe <unk> . During this time he was involved in a failed romance with a young woman named Marie – Julie <unk> . This progressed to the point of Riel having signed a contract of marriage , but his fiancée 's family opposed her involvement with a Métis , and the engagement was soon broken . Compounding this disappointment , Riel found legal work unpleasant , and by early 1866 he had resolved to leave Canada East . Some of his friends said later that he worked odd jobs in Chicago , Illinois , while staying with poet Louis @-@ Honoré <unk> , and wrote poems himself in the manner of Lamartine ; also that he was then for a time employed as a clerk in Saint Paul , Minnesota , before returning to the Red River Settlement on 26 July 1868 . 
 = = Red River Rebellion = = 
 The majority population of the Red River had historically been Métis and First Nation people . Upon his return , Riel found that religious , nationalistic , and racial tensions were exacerbated by an influx of Anglophone Protestant settlers from Ontario . The political situation was also uncertain , as ongoing negotiations for the transfer of Rupert 's Land from the Hudson 's Bay Company to Canada had not addressed the political terms of transfer . Finally , despite warnings to the Macdonald government from Bishop Taché and the HBC governor William <unk> that any such activity would precipitate unrest , the Canadian minister of public works , William McDougall , ordered a survey of the area . The arrival on 20 August 1869 of a survey party headed by Colonel John Stoughton Dennis increased anxiety among the Métis . The Métis did not possess title to their land , which was in any case laid out according to the seigneurial system rather than in English @-@ style square lots . 
 = = = Riel emerges as a leader = = = 
 In late August , Riel denounced the survey in a speech , and on 11 October 1869 , the survey 's work was disrupted by a group of Métis that included Riel . This group organized itself as the " Métis National Committee " on 16 October , with Riel as secretary and John Bruce as president . When summoned by the HBC @-@ controlled Council of Assiniboia to explain his actions , Riel declared that any attempt by Canada to assume authority would be contested unless Ottawa had first negotiated terms with the Métis . Nevertheless , the non @-@ bilingual McDougall was appointed the lieutenant governor @-@ designate , and attempted to enter the settlement on 2 November . McDougall 's party was turned back near the American border , and on the same day , Métis led by Riel seized Fort Garry . 
 On 6 November , Riel invited Anglophones to attend a convention alongside Métis representatives to discuss a course of action , and on 1 December he proposed to this convention a list of rights to be demanded as a condition of union . Much of the settlement came to accept the Métis point of view , but a passionately pro @-@ Canadian minority began organizing in opposition . Loosely constituted as the Canadian Party , this group was led by John Christian Schultz , Charles Mair , Colonel John Stoughton Dennis , and a more reticent Major Charles Boulton . McDougall attempted to assert his authority by authorizing Dennis to raise a contingent of armed men , but the Anglophone settlers largely ignored this call to arms . Schultz , however , attracted approximately fifty recruits and fortified his house and store . Riel ordered Schultz 's home surrounded , and the outnumbered Canadians soon surrendered and were imprisoned in Upper Fort Garry . 
 = = = Provisional government = = = 
 Hearing of the unrest , Ottawa sent three emissaries to the Red River , including HBC representative Donald Alexander Smith . While they were en route , the Métis National Committee declared a provisional government on 8 December , with Riel becoming its president on 27 December . Meetings between Riel and the Ottawa delegation took place on 5 and 6 January 1870 , but when these proved fruitless , Smith chose to present his case in a public forum . Smith assured large audiences of the Government 's goodwill in meetings on 19 and 20 January , leading Riel to propose the formation of a new convention split evenly between French and English settlers to consider Smith 's instructions . On 7 February , a new list of rights was presented to the Ottawa delegation , and Smith and Riel agreed to send representatives to Ottawa to engage in direct negotiations on that basis . The provisional government established by Louis Riel published its own newspaper titled New Nation and established the Legislative Assembly of Assiniboia to pass laws . 
 = = = Canadian resistance and the execution of Scott = = = 
 Despite the apparent progress on the political front , the Canadian party continued to plot against the provisional government . However , they suffered a setback on 17 February , when forty @-@ eight men , including Boulton and Thomas Scott , were arrested near Fort Garry . 
 Boulton was tried by a tribunal headed by Ambroise @-@ <unk> Lépine and sentenced to death for his interference with the provisional government . He was pardoned , but Scott interpreted this as weakness by the Métis , whom he regarded with open contempt . After Scott repeatedly quarreled with his guards , they insisted that he be tried for insubordination . At his court martial he was found guilty and was sentenced to death . Riel was repeatedly entreated to commute the sentence , but Riel responded , " I have done three good things since I have commenced : I have spared Boulton 's life at your instance , I pardoned <unk> , and now I shall shoot Scott . 
 Scott was executed by firing squad on 4 March . Riel 's motivations have been the cause of much speculation , but his own justification was that he felt it necessary to demonstrate to the Canadians that the Métis must be taken seriously . Protestant Canada did take notice , swore revenge , and set up a " Canada First " movement to mobilize their anger . 
 = = = Creation of Manitoba and the Wolseley expedition = = = 
 The delegates representing the provisional government departed for Ottawa in March . Although they initially met with legal difficulties arising from the execution of Scott , they soon entered into direct talks with Macdonald and George @-@ Étienne Cartier . An agreement enshrining the demands in the list of rights was quickly reached , and this formed the basis for the Manitoba Act of 12 May 1870 , which formally admitted Manitoba into the Canadian confederation . However , the negotiators could not secure a general amnesty for the provisional government . 
 As a means of exercising Canadian authority in the settlement and dissuading American expansionists , a Canadian military expedition under Colonel Garnet Wolseley was dispatched to the Red River . Although the government described it as an " errand of peace " , Riel learned that Canadian militia elements in the expedition meant to lynch him , and he fled as the expedition approached the Red River . The arrival of the expedition on 20 August marked the effective end of the Red River Rebellion . 
 = = Intervening years = = 
 = = = Amnesty question = = = 
 It was not until 2 September 1870 that the new lieutenant @-@ governor Adams George Archibald arrived and set about the establishment of civil government . Without an amnesty , and with the Canadian militia beating and intimidating his sympathisers , Riel fled to the safety of the St. Joseph 's mission across the American border in the Dakota Territory . However the results of the first provincial election in December 1870 were promising for Riel , as many of his supporters came to power . Nevertheless , stress and financial troubles precipitated a serious illness — perhaps a harbinger of his future mental afflictions — that prevented his return to Manitoba until May 1871 . 
 The settlement now faced a possible threat , from cross @-@ border Fenian raids coordinated by his former associate William Bernard O 'Donoghue . Archibald proclaimed a general call to arms on 4 October . Companies of armed horsemen were raised , including one led by Riel . When Archibald reviewed the troops in St. Boniface , he made the significant gesture of publicly shaking Riel 's hand , signaling that a rapprochement had been affected . This was not to be — when this news reached Ontario , Mair and members of the Canada First movement whipped up anti @-@ Riel ( and anti @-@ Archibald ) sentiment . With Federal elections coming in 1872 , Macdonald could ill afford further rift in Quebec @-@ Ontario relations and so he did not offer an amnesty . Instead he quietly arranged for Taché to offer Riel a bribe of $ 1 @,@ 000 to remain in voluntary exile . This was supplemented by an additional £ 600 from Smith for the care of Riel 's family . 
 Nevertheless , by late June Riel was back in Manitoba and was soon persuaded to run as a member of parliament for the electoral district of Provencher . However , following the early September defeat of George @-@ Étienne Cartier in his home riding in Quebec , Riel stood aside so that Cartier — on record as being in favour of amnesty for Riel — might secure a seat in Provencher . Cartier won by acclamation , but Riel 's hopes for a swift resolution to the amnesty question were dashed following Cartier 's death on 20 May 1873 . In the ensuing by @-@ election in October 1873 , Riel ran unopposed as an Independent , although he had again fled , a warrant having been issued for his arrest in September . Lépine was not so lucky ; he was captured and faced trial . 
 Riel made his way to Montreal and , fearing arrest or assassination , vacillated as to whether he should attempt to take up his seat in the House of Commons — Edward Blake , the Premier of Ontario , had announced a bounty of $ 5 @,@ 000 for his arrest . Famously , Riel was the only Member of Parliament who was not present for the great Pacific Scandal debate of 1873 that led to the resignation of the Macdonald government in November . Liberal leader Alexander Mackenzie became the interim prime minister , and a general election was held in January 1874 . Although the Liberals under Mackenzie formed the new government , Riel easily retained his seat . Formally , Riel had to sign a register book at least once upon being elected , and he did so under disguise in late January . He was nevertheless stricken from the rolls following a motion supported by Schultz , who had become the member for the electoral district of Lisgar . Undeterred , Riel prevailed again in the resulting by @-@ election , and although again expelled , his symbolic point had been made and public opinion in Quebec was strongly tipped in his favour . 
 = = = Exile and mental illness = = = 
 During this period , Riel had been staying with priests of the Oblate order in Plattsburgh , New York , who introduced him to Father Fabien Martin dit Barnabé in the nearby village of Keeseville . It was here that he received news of Lépine 's fate : following his trial for the murder of Scott , which had begun on 13 October 1874 , Lépine was found guilty and sentenced to death . This sparked outrage in the sympathetic Quebec press , and calls for amnesty for both Lépine and Riel were renewed . This presented a severe political difficulty for Mackenzie , who was hopelessly caught between the demands of Quebec and Ontario . However , a solution was forthcoming when , acting on his own initiative , the Governor General Lord Dufferin commuted Lépine 's sentence in January 1875 . This opened the door for Mackenzie to secure from parliament an amnesty for Riel , on the condition that he remain in exile for five years . 
 During his time of exile , he was primarily concerned with religious rather than political matters . Spurred on by a sympathetic Roman Catholic priest in Quebec , he was increasingly influenced by his belief that he was a divinely chosen leader of the Métis . Modern biographers have speculated that he may have suffered from the psychological condition megalomania . His mental state deteriorated , and following a violent outburst he was taken to Montreal , where he was under the care of his uncle , John Lee , for a few months . But after Riel disrupted a religious service , Lee arranged to have him committed in an asylum in Longue Pointe on 6 March 1876 under the assumed name " Louis R. David " . Fearing discovery , his doctors soon transferred him to the Beauport Asylum near Quebec City under the name " Louis <unk> " . While he suffered from sporadic irrational outbursts , he continued his religious writing , composing theological tracts with an admixture of Christian and Judaic ideas . He consequently began calling himself Louis " David " Riel , prophet of the new world , and he would pray ( standing ) for hours , having servants help him to hold his arms in the shape of a cross . Nevertheless , he slowly recovered , and was released from the asylum on 23 January 1878 with an admonition to lead a quiet life . He returned for a time to Keeseville , where he became involved in a passionate romance with Evelina Martin dit Barnabé , sister of his friend , the oblate father Fabien Barnabé . But with insufficient means to propose marriage , Riel returned to the west , hoping that she might follow . However , she decided that she would be unsuited to prairie life , and their correspondence soon ended . 
 = = = Montana and family life = = = 
 In the fall of 1878 , Riel returned to St. Paul , and briefly visited his friends and family . This was a time of rapid change for the Métis of the Red River — the buffalo on which they depended were becoming increasingly scarce , the influx of settlers was ever @-@ increasing , and much land was sold to unscrupulous land speculators . Like other Red River Métis who had left Manitoba , Riel headed further west to start a new life . Travelling to the Montana Territory , he became a trader and interpreter in the area surrounding Fort Benton . Observing rampant alcoholism and its detrimental impact on the Native American and Métis people , he engaged in an unsuccessful attempt to curtail the whisky trade . In 1881 , he married Marguerite Monet dit <unk> ( 1861 – 1886 ) , a young Métis , " in the fashion of the country " on 28 April , an arrangement that was solemnized on 9 March 1882 . They were to have three children : Jean @-@ Louis ( 1882 – 1908 ) ; Marie @-@ Angélique ( 1883 – 1897 ) ; and a boy who was born and died on 21 October 1885 , less than one month before Riel was hanged . 
 Riel soon became involved in the politics of Montana , and in 1882 , actively campaigned on behalf of the Republican Party . He brought a suit against a Democrat for rigging a vote , but was then himself accused of fraudulently inducing British subjects to take part in the election . In response , Riel applied for United States citizenship and was naturalized on 16 March 1883 . With two young children , he had by 1884 settled down and was teaching school at the St. Peter 's Jesuit mission in the Sun River district of Montana . 
 = = The North @-@ West Rebellion = = 
 = = = Grievances in the Saskatchewan territory = = = 
 Following the Red River Rebellion , Métis travelled west and settled in the Saskatchewan Valley , especially along the south branch of the river in the country surrounding the Saint @-@ Laurent mission ( near modern St. Laurent de Grandin , Saskatchewan ) . But by the 1880s , it had become clear that westward migration was no panacea for the troubles of the Métis and the plains Indians . The rapid collapse of the buffalo herd was causing near starvation among the Plains Cree and Blackfoot First Nations . This was exacerbated by a reduction in government assistance in 1883 , and by a general failure of Ottawa to live up to its treaty obligations . The Métis were likewise obliged to give up the hunt and take up agriculture — but this transition was accompanied by complex issues surrounding land claims similar to those that had previously arisen in Manitoba . Moreover , settlers from Europe and the eastern provinces were also moving into the Saskatchewan territories , and they too had complaints related to the administration of the territories . Virtually all parties therefore had grievances , and by 1884 English settlers , Anglo @-@ Métis and Métis communities were holding meetings and petitioning a largely unresponsive government for redress . In the electoral district of Lorne , a meeting of the south branch Métis was held in the village of Batoche on 24 March , and thirty representatives voted to ask Riel to return and represent their cause . On 6 May a joint " Settler 's Union " meeting was attended by both the Métis and English @-@ speaking representatives from Prince Albert , including William Henry Jackson , an Ontario settler sympathetic to the Métis and known to them as Honoré Jackson , and James Isbister of the Anglo @-@ Métis . It was here resolved to send a delegation to ask Riel 's assistance in presenting their grievances to the Canadian government . 
 = = = Return of Riel = = = 
 The head of the delegation to Riel was Gabriel Dumont , a respected buffalo hunter and leader of the Saint @-@ Laurent Métis who had known Riel in Manitoba . James Isbister was the lone Anglo @-@ Métis delegate . Riel was easily swayed to support their cause — which was perhaps not surprising in view of Riel 's continuing conviction that he was the divinely selected leader of the Métis and the prophet of a new form of Christianity . Riel also intended to use the new position of influence to pursue his own land claims in Manitoba . The party departed 4 June , and arrived back at Batoche on 5 July . Upon his arrival Métis and English settlers alike formed an initially favourable impression of Riel following a series of speeches in which he advocated moderation and a reasoned approach . During June 1884 , the Plains Cree leaders Big Bear and <unk> were independently formulating their complaints , and subsequently held meetings with Riel . However , the Native grievances were quite different from those of the settlers , and nothing was then resolved . Inspired by Riel , Honoré Jackson and representatives of other communities set about drafting a petition , and Jackson on 28 July released a manifesto detailing grievances and the settler 's objectives . A joint English @-@ Métis central committee with Jackson acting as secretary worked to reconcile proposals from different communities . In the interim , Riel 's support began to waver . As Riel 's religious pronouncements became increasingly heretical the clergy distanced themselves , and father Alexis André cautioned Riel against mixing religion and politics . Also , in response to bribes by territorial lieutenant @-@ governor and Indian commissioner Edgar Dewdney , local English @-@ language newspapers adopted an editorial stance critical of Riel . Nevertheless , the work continued , and on 16 December Riel forwarded the committee 's petition to the government , along with the suggestion that delegates be sent to Ottawa to engage in direct negotiation . Receipt of the petition was acknowledged by Joseph @-@ Adolphe Chapleau , Macdonald 's Secretary of State , although Macdonald himself would later deny having ever seen it . By then many original followers had left ; only 250 remained at Batoche when it fell in May 1885 . 
 = = = Break with the church = = = 
 Historian Donald Creighton has argued that Riel 's had become a changed man : 
 In the 15 years since he had left Red River , his megalomania had grown greater than ever . His ungovernable rages , delusions of grandeur , messianic claims , and dictatorial impulses had all become more extreme ; but these violent excesses were not the only symptoms of his curious mental and moral decline . He had lost his shrewd appreciation of realities . His sense of direction was confused in his purposes were equivocal . He showed , at intervals , a cynical selfishness and the ruthless cupidity .... although in public he professed that his sole aim was the redress of the Métis grievances , and private he was quite ready to promise that if the government made him a satisfactory personal payment of a few thousand dollars he would induce his credulous followers to accept almost any settlement the federal authorities desired , and would quietly leave Canada forever . 
 While Riel awaited news from Ottawa he considered returning to Montana , but had by February resolved to stay . Without a productive course of action , Riel began to engage in obsessive prayer , and was experiencing a significant relapse of his mental agitations . This led to a deterioration in his relationship with the Catholic hierarchy , as he publicly espoused an increasingly heretical doctrine . On 11 February 1885 , a response to the petition was received . The government proposed to take a census of the North @-@ West Territories , and to form a commission to investigate grievances . This angered a faction of the Métis who saw it as a mere delaying tactic ; they favoured taking up arms at once . Riel became the leader of this faction , but he lost the support practically all the Anglophones ( who included many Métis ) , the Catholic Church , and the great majority of Indians . He also lost the support of the Métis faction supporting local leader Charles Nolin . But Riel , undoubtedly influenced by his messianic delusions , became increasingly supportive of this course of action . In the church at Saint @-@ Laurent on 15 March , Riel disrupted a sermon to argue for this position , following which he was barred from receiving the sacraments . He took more and more about his " divine revelations " . But disenchanted with the status quo , and swayed by Riel 's charisma and eloquent rhetoric , hundreds of Métis remained loyal to Riel , despite his proclamations that Bishop Ignace Bourget should be accepted as pope , and that " Rome has fallen " . 
 At his trial , Riel denied allegations that his religious beliefs were as irrational as was being ( and continue to be ) alleged . He explained as follows : 
 " I wish to leave Rome aside , inasmuch as it is the cause of division between Catholics and Protestants . I did not wish to force my views ... If I could have any influence in the new world it would be to help in that way , even if it takes 200 years to become practical ... so my children 's children can shake hands with the Protestants of the new world in a friendly manner . I do not wish those evils which exist in Europe to be continued , as much as I can influence it , among the ( Metis ) . I do not wish that to be repeated in America . 
 = = = Open rebellion = = = 
 On 18 March it became known that the North @-@ West Mounted Police garrison at Battleford was being reinforced . Although only 100 men had been sent in response to warnings from father Alexis André and NWMP superintendent <unk> Crozier , a rumour soon began to circulate that 500 heavily armed troops were advancing on the territory . Métis patience was exhausted , and Riel 's followers seized arms , took hostages , and cut the telegraph lines between Batoche and Battleford . The Provisional Government of Saskatchewan was declared at Batoche on 19 March , with Riel as the political and spiritual leader and with Dumont assuming responsibility for military affairs . Riel formed a council called the <unk> ( a neologism meaning " those who have left the flock " ) , and sent representatives to court <unk> and Big Bear . On 21 March , Riel 's emissaries demanded that Crozier surrender Fort Carlton , but this was refused . The situation was becoming critical , and on 23 March Dewdney sent a telegraph to Macdonald indicating that military intervention might be necessary . Scouting near Duck Lake on 26 March , a force led by Gabriel Dumont unexpectedly chanced upon a party from Fort Carlton . In the ensuing Battle of Duck Lake , the police were routed , and the Natives also rose up once the news became known . The die was cast for a violent outcome , and the North @-@ West Rebellion was begun in earnest . 
 Riel had counted on the Canadian government being unable to effectively respond to another uprising in the distant North @-@ West Territories , thereby forcing them to accept political negotiation . This was essentially the same strategy that had worked to such great effect during the 1870 rebellion . But in that instance , the first troops did not arrive until three months after Riel seized control . However , Riel had completely overlooked the significance of the Canadian Pacific Railway . Despite some uncompleted gaps , the first Canadian regular and militia units , under the command of Major @-@ General Frederick Dobson Middleton , arrived in Duck Lake less than two weeks after Riel had made his demands . Knowing that he could not defeat the Canadians in direct confrontation , Dumont had hoped to force the Canadians to negotiate by engaging in a long @-@ drawn out campaign of guerrilla warfare ; Dumont realised a modest success along these lines at the Battle of Fish Creek on 24 April 1885 . Riel , however , insisted on concentrating forces at Batoche to defend his " city of God " . The outcome of the ensuing Battle of Batoche which took place from 9 to 12 May was never in doubt , and on 15 May a disheveled Riel surrendered to Canadian forces . Although Big Bear 's forces managed to hold out until the Battle of Loon Lake on 3 June , the rebellion was a dismal failure for Métis and Natives alike , as they surrendered or fled . 
 = = Trial for treason = = 
 Several individuals closely tied to the government requested that the trial be held in Winnipeg in July 1885 . There are historians who contend that the trial was moved to Regina because of concerns with the possibility of an ethnically mixed and sympathetic jury . Tom Flanagan states that an amendment of the North @-@ West Territories Act ( which dropped the provision that trials with crimes punishable by death should be tried in Manitoba ) meant that the trial could be convened within the North @-@ West Territories and did not have to be held in Winnipeg . 
 Prime Minister Sir John A. Macdonald ordered the trial to be convened in Regina , where Riel was tried before a jury of six English and Scottish Protestants , all from the area surrounding the city . The trial began on 28 July 1885 , and lasted five days . Riel delivered two long speeches during his trial , defending his own actions and affirming the rights of the Métis people . He rejected his lawyer 's attempt to argue that he was not guilty by reason of insanity , asserting , 
 Life , without the dignity of an intelligent being , is not worth having . 
 The jury found him guilty but recommended mercy ; nonetheless , Judge Hugh Richardson sentenced him to death , with the date of his execution initially set for 18 September 1885 . " We tried Riel for treason , " one juror later said , " And he was hanged for the murder of Scott . " 
 = = Execution = = 
 Boulton writes in his memoirs that , as the date of his execution approached , Riel regretted his opposition to the defence of insanity and vainly attempted to provide evidence that he was not sane . Requests for a retrial and an appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Britain were denied . Sir John A. Macdonald , who was instrumental in upholding Riel 's sentence , is famously quoted as saying : 
 He shall die though every dog in Quebec bark in his favour . 
 Before his execution , Riel was reconciled with the Catholic Church , and assigned Father André as his spiritual advisor . He was also given writing materials so that he could employ his time in prison to write a book . Louis Riel was hanged for treason on 16 November 1885 at the North West Mounted Police barracks in Regina . 
 Boulton writes of Riel 's final moments , 
 ... Père André , after explaining to Riel that the end was at hand , asked him if he was at peace with men . Riel answered " Yes . " The next question was , " Do you forgive all your enemies ? " " Yes . " Riel then asked him if he might speak . Father André advised him not to do so . He then received the kiss of peace from both the priests , and Father André exclaimed in French , " <unk> , <unk> au ciel ! " meaning " so , to heaven ! " 
 ... [ Riel 's ] last words were to say good @-@ bye to Dr. Jukes and thank him for his kindness , and just before the white cap was pulled over his face he said , " <unk> , Madame Forget . " meaning " thank , Ms. Forget " . 
 The cap was pulled down , and while he was praying the trap was pulled . Death was not instantaneous . Louis Riel 's pulse ceased four minutes after the trap @-@ door fell and during that time the rope around his neck slowly strangled and choked him to death . The body was to have been interred inside the gallows ' enclosure , and the grave was commenced , but an order came from the Lieutenant @-@ Governor to hand the body over to Sheriff Chapleau which was accordingly done that night . 
 Following the execution , Riel 's body was returned to his mother 's home in St. Vital , where it lay in state . On 12 December 1886 , his remains were laid in the churchyard of the Saint @-@ Boniface Cathedral following the celebration of a requiem mass . 
 The trial and execution of Riel caused a bitter and prolonged reaction which convulsed Canadian politics for decades . The Orange Irish Protestant element in Ontario had demanded the execution as the punishment for Riel 's treason and his execution of Thomas Scott in 1870 . With their revenge satisfied , the Orange turned their attention to other matters ( especially the Jesuit Estates proposal ) . In Quebec there was no forgetting , and the politician Honoré Mercier rose to power by mobilizing the opposition in 1886 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Political = = = 
 The Saskatchewan Métis ' requested land grants were all provided by the government by the end of 1887 , and the government resurveyed the Métis river lots in accordance with their wishes . The Métis did not understand the long term value of their new land , however , and it was soon bought by speculators who later turned huge profits from it . Riel 's worst fears were realised — following the failed rebellion , the French language and Roman Catholic religion faced increasing marginalisation in both Saskatchewan and Manitoba , as exemplified by the controversy surrounding the Manitoba Schools Question . The Métis themselves were increasingly forced to live on undesirable land or in the shadow of Indian reserves ( as they did not themselves have treaty status ) . Saskatchewan did not attain <unk> until 1905 . 
 Riel 's execution and Macdonald 's refusal to commute his sentence caused lasting discord in Quebec , and led to a fundamental alteration in the Canadian political order . In Quebec , Honoré Mercier exploited the discontent to reconstitute the Parti National . This party , which promoted Quebec nationalism , won a majority in the 1886 Quebec election by winning a number of seats formerly controlled by the Quebec Conservative Party . The federal election of 1887 likewise saw significant gains by the federal Liberals , again at the expense of the Conservatives . This led to the victory of the Liberal party under Sir Wilfrid Laurier in the federal election of 1896 , which in turn set the stage for the domination of Canadian federal politics by the Liberal party in the 20th century . 
 = = <unk> Riel 's conviction = = 
 That Riel 's name still has resonance in Canadian politics was evidenced on 16 November 1994 , when Suzanne Tremblay , a Bloc Québécois member of parliament , introduced private members ' bill C @-@ 228 , " An Act to revoke the conviction of Louis David Riel " . The unsuccessful bill was widely perceived in English Canada as an attempt to arouse support for Quebec nationalism before the 1995 referendum on Quebec sovereignty . Bill C @-@ 213 or Louis Riel Day Act and Bill C @-@ 417 Louis Riel Act are the more notable acts which have gone through parliament . Bill C @-@ 297 to revoke the conviction of Louis Riel was introduced to the House of Commons 21 October and 22 November 1996 , however the motion lacked unanimous consent from the House and was dropped . Bill C @-@ 213 or the Louis Riel Day Act of 1997 attempted to revoke the conviction of Louis Riel for high treason and establish a National Day in his honour on 16 November . Bill C @-@ 417 or the Louis Riel Act which also had a first reading in parliament to revoke the conviction of Louis Riel , and establish 15 July as Louis Riel Day was tabled . 
 On 18 February 2008 , the province of Manitoba officially recognized the first Louis Riel Day as a general provincial holiday . It will now fall on the third Monday of February each year in the Province of Manitoba . 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 Historians have debated the Riel case so often and so passionately that he is the most written @-@ about person in all of Canadian history . Interpretations have varied dramatically over time . The first amateur English language histories hailed the triumph of civilization , represented by English @-@ speaking Protestants , over savagery represented by the half @-@ breed Métis who were Catholic and spoke French . Riel was portrayed as an insane traitor and an obstacle to the expansion of Canada to the West . By the mid @-@ 20th century academic historians had dropped the theme of savagery versus civilization , deemphasized the Métis , and focused on Riel , presenting his execution as a major cause of the bitter division in Canada along <unk> and geographical lines of religion and language . W. L. Morton says the execution : 
 gave rise to a bitter and prolonged reaction which convulsed the course of national politics for the next decade . In Ontario it had been demanded and applauded by the Orange element as the punishment of treason and a vindication of loyalty . In Quebec Riel was defended , despite his apostasy and megalomania , as the symbol , indeed as a hero of his race . 
 Morton argued that Riel 's demands were unrealistic : 
 [ They ] did touch on some real grievances , such as the need for increased representation of the people in the Council of the Territories , but they did not present a program of practical substance which the government might have granted without betrayal of its responsibilities .... the Canadian government can hardly be blamed for refusing to continue its private negotiations with him , or for sending in the troops to suppress rebellion . 
 The Catholic bishops had originally supported the Métis but reversed themselves when they realized that Riel was leading a heretical movement . They made sure that he was not honored as a martyr . However the bishops lost their influence during the Quiet Revolution , and activists in Québec found in Riel the perfect hero , with the image now of a freedom fighter who stood up for his people against an oppressive government in the face of widespread racist bigotry . His insanity was ignored and he was made a folk hero by the Francophones , the Catholic nationalists , the native rights movement , and the New Left student movement . Activists who espoused violence embraced his image ; in the 1960s , the Quebec terrorist group , the Front de libération du Québec adopted the name " Louis Riel " for one of its terrorist cells . Riel has received more scholarly attention than practically any other figure in Canadian history . 
 Across Canada there emerged a new interpretation of reality in his rebellion , holding that the Métis had major unresolved grievances ; the government Was unresponsive ; that Riel resorted to violence only as a last resort ; and he was given a questionable trial then executed by vengeful government . John Foster said in 1985 that : 
 the interpretive drift of the last half @-@ century ... has witnessed increasingly shrill though frequently uncritical condemnations of Canadian government culpability and equally uncritical identification with the " victimization " of the " innocent " Métis . 
 However , a leading specialist Thomas Flanagan reversed his views after editing Riel 's writings : 
 As I sifted the evidence this became less and less convincing to me until I concluded that the opposite was closer to the truth : that the Métis grievances were at least partly of their own making ; that the government was on the verge of resolving them when the Rebellion broke out ; That Riel 's resort to arms could not be explained by the failure of constitutional agitation and that he received a surprisingly fair trial . 
 As for the insanity , historians have noted that many religious leaders the past have exhibited behavior that looks exactly like insanity . Flanigan emphasizes that Riel exemplified the tradition of religious mystics involved in politics , especially those with a sense that the world was about to be totally transformed by their religious vision . In his case it meant his delivering the Métis from colonial domination . More broadly , Flanagan argues that Riel was devoutly religious and rejected <unk> ( which he equated with secularism ) , concluding he was " a millenarian <unk> , sympathetic to the ' ancien régime ' and opposed to the French Revolution , democracy , individualism , and secular society . " 
 Métis scholars have noted that Riel is a more important figure to non @-@ Métis than to Métis ; he is the only Métis figure most non @-@ Métis are aware of . Political scientists such as Thomas Flanagan have pointed out certain parallels between Riel 's following during the North @-@ West Rebellion and millenarian cults . 
 = = = Commemorations = = = 
 A resolution was passed by Parliament on 10 March 1992 citing that Louis Riel was the founder of Manitoba . Two statues of Riel are located in Winnipeg . One of the Winnipeg statues , the work of architect Étienne <unk> and sculptor <unk> Lemay , depicts Riel as a naked and tortured figure . It was unveiled in 1970 and stood in the grounds of the Legislative Assembly of Manitoba for 23 years . After much outcry ( especially from the Métis community ) that the statue was an undignified misrepresentation , the statue was removed and placed at the Collège <unk> de Saint @-@ Boniface . It was replaced in 1994 with a statue designed by Miguel Joyal depicting Riel as a dignified statesman . The unveiling ceremony was on 16 May 1996 , in Winnipeg . 
 A statue of Riel on the grounds of the Saskatchewan legislative building in Regina was installed and later removed for similar reasons . 
 In numerous communities across Canada , Riel is commemorated in the names of streets , schools , neighbourhoods , and other buildings . Examples in Winnipeg include the landmark Esplanade Riel pedestrian bridge linking Old Saint @-@ Boniface with Winnipeg , the Louis Riel School Division , Louis Riel Avenue in Old Saint @-@ Boniface , and Riel Avenue in St. Vital 's Minnetonka neighbourhood ( which is sometimes called Riel ) . The student centre and campus pub at the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon are named after Riel ( Place Riel and Louis ' , respectively ) . Highway 11 , stretching from Regina to just south of Prince Albert , has been named Louis Riel Trail by the province ; the roadway passes near locations of the 1885 rebellion . One of the student residences at Simon Fraser University in Burnaby , British Columbia is named Louis Riel House . There is a Louis Riel School in <unk> and Ottawa . On 26 September 2007 , Manitoba legislature passed a bill establishing a statutory holiday on the third Monday in February as Louis Riel Day , the same day some other provinces celebrate Family Day , beginning in 2008 . The first Louis Riel Day was celebrated on 18 February 2008 . This new statutory holiday coincides with the celebration on 15 – 24 February of the Festival du Voyageur . 
 In the spring of 2008 , the Government of Saskatchewan Tourism , Parks , Culture and Sport Minister Christine Tell proclaimed in Duck Lake that " the 125th commemoration , in 2010 , of the 1885 Northwest Resistance is an excellent opportunity to tell the story of the prairie Métis and First Nations peoples ' struggle with Government forces and how it has shaped Canada today . " One of three Territorial Government Buildings remains on Dewdney Avenue in the Saskatchewan capital city of Regina , Saskatchewan which was the site of the Trial of Louis Riel , where the drama the " Trial of Louis Riel " is still performed . Following the May trial , Louis Riel was hanged 16 November 1885 . The RCMP Heritage Centre , in Regina , opened in May 2007 . The Métis brought his body to his mother 's home , now the Riel House National Historic Site , and then interred at the St. Boniface Basilica in Manitoba , his birthplace , for burial . 
