 = = = Arts , literature and popular culture = = = 
 In 1925 , the French writer Maurice Constantin @-@ Weyer who lived 10 years in Manitoba published in French a fictionalized biography of Louis Riel titled La <unk> . An English translation / adaptation was published in 1930 : A Martyr 's Folly ( Toronto , The Macmillan Company ) , and a new version in 1954 , The Half @-@ Breed ( New York , The Macaulay Compagny ) . 
 Portrayals of Riel 's role in the Red River Rebellion include the 1979 CBC television film Riel and Canadian cartoonist Chester Brown 's acclaimed 2003 graphic novel Louis Riel : A Comic @-@ Strip Biography . 
 In the 1940 film North West Mounted Police Riel is portrayed by Francis McDonald . 
 An opera about Riel entitled Louis Riel was commissioned for Canada 's centennial celebrations in 1967 . It was an opera in three acts , written by Harry Somers , with an English and French libretto by Mavor Moore and Jacques <unk> . The Canadian Opera Company produced and performed the first run of the opera in September and October 1967 . 
 From the late 1960s until the early 1990s , the city of Saskatoon hosted " Louis Riel Day " , a summer celebration that included a relay race that combined running , backpack carrying , canoeing , hill climbing , and horseback riding along the South Saskatchewan River in the city 's downtown core . Traditionally , the event also included a cabbage roll eating contest and tug @-@ of @-@ war competition , as well as live musical performances . Although not affiliated with the Saskatoon Exhibition , for years Louis Riel Day was scheduled for the day before the start of the fair , and as such came to be considered the Exhibition 's unofficial kick @-@ off ( the scheduling of the two events was separated in later years ) . The event was discontinued when major sponsors pulled out . 
 Billy Childish wrote a song entitled " Louis Riel " , which was performed by Thee <unk> . Texas musician Doug Sahm wrote a song entitled " Louis Riel , " which appeared on the album <unk> ' 98 . In the song , Sahm likens the lore surrounding Riel to David Crockett 's legend in his home state , spinning an abridged tale of Riel 's life as a revolutionary : " ... but you gotta respect him for what he thought was right ... And all around Regina they talk about him still – why did they have to kill Louis Riel ? " 
 The Seattle @-@ based Indie rock band Grand Archives also wrote a song entitled " Louis Riel " that appears on their 2008 self @-@ titled album . 
 A track entitled <unk> ' Today : A Lament for Louis Riel appears on the 2009 album Live : Two Nights In March by Saskatchewan singer / guitarist Little Miss Higgins ; a studio version features on her 2010 release Across The Plains . 
 On 22 October 2003 , the Canadian news channel CBC Newsworld and its French @-@ language equivalent , Réseau de l 'information , staged a simulated retrial of Riel . Viewers were invited to enter a verdict on the trial over the internet , and more than 10 @,@ 000 votes were received — 87 % of which were " not guilty " . The results of this straw poll led to renewed calls for Riel 's posthumous pardon . Also on the basis of a public poll , the CBC 's Greatest Canadian project ranked Riel as the 11th " Greatest Canadian " . 
 An episode of the TV @-@ series How the West Was Won from 1979 was named L 'Affaire Riel , featuring Louis Riel while in exile in the United States . 
 In 2001 , Canadian sketch comedy troupe Royal Canadian Air Farce featured Riel in its send @-@ up of the CBC documentary series Canada : A People 's History . Significant parallels were drawn between Riel 's actions and those of modern @-@ day Québécois separatists , and the comedian who portrayed Riel was made up to look like then @-@ Premier Lucien Bouchard . 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 <unk> , Lawrence J. , Leah Dorion and Darren Prefontaine . Metis Legacy : A Historiography and Annotated Bibliography . Winnipeg : <unk> Publications Inc. and Saskatoon : Gabriel Dumont Institute , 2001 . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 03 @-@ 1 
 Betts , Gregory . " Non <unk> <unk> : A Meta @-@ Historical Survey of the <unk> Narratives of Louis Riel 's ' Insanity ' " , International Journal of Canadian Studies / Revue internationale d ’ études <unk> , n ° 38 , 2008 , p . 15 @-@ 40 @.@ online 
 Braz , Albert . The False Traitor : Louis Riel in Canadian Culture ( University of Toronto Press , 2003 ) online review 
 Bumstead , J. M. " The ' Mahdi ' of Western Canada : Lewis Riel and His Papers , " The Beaver ( 1987 ) 67 # 4 pp 47 – 54 
 Dick , Lyle . " Nationalism and Visual Media in Canada : The Case of Thomas Scott 's Execution . " Manitoba History ( Autumn / <unk> @-@ 05 ) , Issue 48 , pp 2 – 18 @.@ online 
 Flanagan , Thomas . Riel and the Rebellion : 1885 Reconsidered ( 2nd ed . U of Toronto Press , 2000 ) . 
 Flanagan , Thomas . " Louis Riel : Icon of the Left , " Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada ( 1986 ) , Vol 1 , pp 219 – 228 . 
 <unk> , Manfred . " The Charismatic Pattern : Canada 's Riel Rebellion of 1885 as a Millenarian Protest Movement , " Prairie Forum ( 1985 ) 10 # 2 pp 307 – 325 . 
 Miller , J. R. " From Riel to the Metis . " Canadian Historical Review 69 # 1 ( 1988 ) : 1 @-@ 20 . 
 James Rodger Miller , " From Riel to the Métis " ( 2004 ) . Reflections on Native @-@ newcomer Relations : Selected Essays . University of Toronto Press. pp. 37 – 60 . , historiography 
 Morton , Desmond . " Image of Louis Riel in 1998 , " Canadian Speeches ( May 1998 ) 12 # 2 online 
 <unk> , Doug , ed . ( 1994 ) . Canadian History : Confederation to the present . U. of Toronto Press. pp. 18 , 168 , 191 – 95 , 347 – 50 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Reid , Jennifer ; Long , Charles & Carrasco , David ( 2008 ) , Louis Riel and the Creation of Modern Canada : Mythic Discourse and the Postcolonial State , Albuquerque : University of New Mexico Press , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Sprague , D.N. " Historiographical introduction " ch 1 of Sprague , Canada and the Métis , 1869 @-@ 1885 ( 1988 ) , pp 1 – 17 . 
 Stanley , George F.G. Louis Riel : Patriot or Rebel ? Canadian Historical Association Booklet No. 2 ( 1979 ) online 
 = Oh Pray My Wings Are Gonna Fit Me Well = 
 Oh Pray My Wings Are Gonna Fit Me Well is a book of poems by American author Maya Angelou , published by Random House in 1975 . It is Angelou 's second volume of poetry , written after her first two autobiographies and first volume of poetry were published . Angelou considers herself a poet and a playwright , but is best known for her seven autobiographies , especially her first , I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings , although her poetry has also been successful . She began , early in her writing career , alternating the publication of an autobiography and a volume of poetry . Although her poetry collections have been best @-@ sellers , they have not received serious critical attention . 
 Oh Pray is divided into five parts and consists of 36 poems . The volume is dedicated to " Paul " . Like many of Angelou 's poems , the poetry in the volume has been characterized as light verse . They contain identifications with ordinary objects and universal identifications . Oh Pray has received mixed reviews from critics ; one critic states that the poems in it are best if read aloud . They focus on themes of love , insight , and tension , and on overcoming difficulties . Angelou writes about ordinary objects and experiences , and with deep feelings , about a variety of racial themes and concerns . 
 = = Background = = 
 Oh Pray My Wings are Gonna Fit Me Well is Maya Angelou 's second volume of poetry . She studied and began writing poetry at a young age . After her rape at the age of eight , as recounted in her first autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings ( 1969 ) , she dealt with her trauma by memorizing and reciting great works of literature , including poetry , which helped bring her out of her self @-@ imposed muteness . Angelou 's film Georgia , Georgia , produced by a Swedish film company and filmed in Sweden , was the first screenplay written by a Black woman , and was released in 1972 . Angelou married Welsh carpenter and ex @-@ husband of Germaine Greer , Paul du Feu , in San Francisco in 1973 . 
 Although Angelou considered herself a playwright and poet when her editor Robert Loomis challenged her to write Caged Bird , she has been best known for her autobiographies . Many of Angelou 's readers identify her as a poet first and an autobiographer second , but like Lynn Z. Bloom , many critics consider her autobiographies more important than her poetry . Critic William Sylvester agrees , and states that although her books have been best @-@ sellers , her poetry has " received little serious critical attention " . Bloom also believes that Angelou 's poetry is more interesting when she recites it . Bloom calls Angelou 's performances " characteristically dynamic " , and says that she " moves exuberantly , vigorously to reinforce the rhythms of the lines , the tone of the words . Her singing and dancing and electrifying stage presence transcend the predictable words and phrases " . 
 Angelou began , early in her writing career , alternating the publication of an autobiography and a volume of poetry . Her first volume of poetry , Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water ' fore I Diiie ( 1971 ) , which was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize , followed her first autobiography , and Oh Pray followed the publication of her second autobiography , Gather Together in My Name ( 1974 ) . Her publisher , Random House , placed the poems in Oh Pray in her first collection of poetry , The Complete Collected Poems of Maya Angelou ( 1994 ) , perhaps to capitalize on her popularity following her reading of her poem " On the Pulse of Morning " at President Bill Clinton 's inauguration in 1993 . Also in the 1994 collection was Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water ' fore I Diiie and two more published after Oh Pray , And Still I Rise ( 1978 ) and Shaker , Why Don 't You Sing ? ( 1983 ) . Angelou 's publisher placed four more poems in a smaller volume , entitled Phenomenal Woman , in 1995 . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Many of Angelou 's poems can be characterized as light verse . For example , Hagen characterizes " On Reaching Forty " as a light rumination about growing older . Angelou expresses sadness about having already reaching milestones in her youth , and ends the poem unexpectedly by humorously and ironically expressing admiration for those who die early . In this volume and in others , Angelou pairs poems together ( " America " and " Africa " ; " Communication I " and Communication II " ) to strengthen her themes . 
 The poems in this volume , like her poems in other volumes and contexts , contain universal identifications with ordinary objects . For example , " The Telephone " describes her relationship with an object , and how it has intruded upon the silence and solitude of her life . In this poem , which is three structured stanzas long , Angelou demands that the telephone ring , despite her resentment of its intrusion and her dependency upon it . She uses familiar and feminine metaphors , and themes also found in blues songs , such as the colors black and blue and weekend loneliness . In the poem " Poor Girl " , Angelou uses the vernacular to express universal themes , in the voice of a teenage girl who has lost her boyfriend . 
 Scholar Yasmin Y. DeGout cites " The Couple " as an example of Angelou 's practice of subtly including more than one level of meaning in her poems , of her ability to translate her personal experience into political discourse , and her placement of themes of racism and liberation . Angelou combines liberation ideology and poetic technique to challenge society 's concepts of gender identity , especially in how it affects women . She varies the length of the poem 's lines , beginning in the first stanza and continuing throughout the poem , to convey ambiguity and doubt , and to demand that the reader question their perceptions of gender and power . " The Couple " , starting in its second stanza , attacks class @-@ based ideals of masculinity in society . The poem ends by demanding that the social constructs surrounding gender and class end , and insists that human survival depends upon recognizing shared emotions and experience , regardless of one 's gender or position in society . 
 = = Poems = = 
 Oh Pray My Wings are Gonna Fit Me Well is divided into five parts , and consists of 36 poems . The volume is dedicated to " Paul " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Kathryn Gibbs Harris , in her review in Library Journal , states that the poems in Oh Pray , like " Child Dead in Old Seas " , are good heritage ballads with excellent lyrics . She calls " This Winter Day " colorful and pleasant , and states that it reminds her of a genre painting . She , like many critics about much of Angelou 's poetry , says , " The poems work best read aloud " . The critic in Booklist considers the way in which the poems are organized distracting , but says that it " does not diminish the street @-@ wise soundings infused with a particular pain and pride " . According to the review , the rhyme in " Here 's to Adhering " is simple , but its structure is deceptively complex . The critic also says , " The sardonic quality of ' On Reaching Forty ' reduces age to a minor milestone ; nationhood is elevated to a higher yet deeper plane in ' Africa ' and in ' America . ' ' The Pusher ' is a typical Angelou acceleration , but it is ' Chicken @-@ <unk> ' that causes a dead halt " . Poetry critic Sandra Gilbert says that Angelou 's poems , " when they 're not awkward or stilted , are corny " . 
 According to a reviewer in Choice , the poems in Oh Pray focus on themes of love , insight , and tension . They also focus on " the black condition celebrated triumphant over difficulties " . The reviewer finds some poems uneven , sometimes banal , also best if read aloud , and meant to " be reread and laughed over and thought about " . Reviewer James Finn Cotter states that this volume suffers from " the dangers of success " that happen when poets gain too much fame too soon . Gilbert blames Angelou 's publishers for capitalizing on her success as an autobiographer , stating that Oh Pray " ... is such a painfully untalented collection of poems that I can 't think of any reason other than the Maya myth for it to be in print " . Writer Lyman B. Hagen responds to Gilbert 's criticism by stating that Angelou had been a poet long before she began writing prose and that Angelou 's audience is comfortable with her sparse lines . He insists that Angelou 's critics have missed the power of her poems ' message in her apparently simple lines . Hagen calls Angelou 's poetry light verse . He states that she writes about ordinary objects and experiences , and with deep feelings , about a variety of racial themes and concerns . 
 = Hurricane Isbell = 
 Hurricane Isbell was the final hurricane to affect the United States during the 1964 season . The eleventh tropical storm and sixth hurricane of that season , Isbell developed from a dissipating cold front in the southwestern Caribbean Sea on October 8 . The depression initially remained disorganized as it track northwestward , but strengthened into Tropical Storm Isbell on October 13 . Re @-@ curving northeastward , Isbell quickly strengthened further and reached hurricane status by later that day . Late on October 13 , Isbell made landfall in the Pinar del Río Province of Cuba . The storm continued strengthening and peaked as a Category 3 hurricane on the following day . Isbell moved northeastward and made landfall near Everglades , Florida , late on October 14 . After reaching the Atlantic on the following day , the storm began to weaken . Isbell turned northward and continued weakening , before transitioning to an extratropical cyclone while located just offshore eastern North Carolina on October 16 . 
 The storm produced strong winds throughout western Cuba . Hundreds of homes were destroyed , as were several tobacco warehouses . There was at least $ 20 million in damage and four deaths in Cuba , three of them caused by collapsing houses in the Guane area . Several tornadoes in Florida caused significant damage . Throughout the state , 1 house was destroyed , 33 were severely damaged , and 631 suffered minor impact . Additionally , 66 trailers were destroyed and 88 were inflicted with major damage . Three deaths occurred in the state , one due to a heart attack and two from drowning in Florida Keys when their shrimp boat sank . Because the storm weakened considerably , impact in North Carolina was generally minor . The storm also spawned at least six tornadoes in the state , which demolished trailers and unroofed homes and other buildings in several communities . Damage throughout the United States totaled $ 10 million . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Isbell was first identified as a weak tropical disturbance on October 7 , 1964 over the western Caribbean Sea . Situated to the south of a diffuse trough , the system remained weak and relatively disorganized as it moved generally northwest near Honduras and Nicaragua . Despite the presence of an upper @-@ level anticyclone , which promotes favorable outflow for tropical cyclones and aids in tropical cyclogenesis , a lack of distinct low @-@ level inflow inhibited intensification . Additionally , an area of warm mid @-@ tropospheric air was present within the cyclone . Though a disheveled system , it is analyzed to have become a tropical depression by 12 : 00 UTC on October 8 . The following day , the depression skirted the eastern coast of Honduras . Operationally , it was not until October 10 that the Weather Bureau initiated advisories on the depression . On that date , a weather reconnaissance mission into the system found a weak low @-@ level circulation with a barometric pressure of 1007 @.@ 3 mb ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 75 inHg ) and winds of 20 – 30 mph ( 30 – 45 km / h ) in squalls . Throughout October 11 and 12 , the depression slowly executed a tight cyclonic loop over the northwestern Caribbean Sea . It finally organized into a tropical storm and was given the name Isbell by 00 : 00 UTC on October 13 after completing the loop and acquiring a north @-@ northeast trajectory . 
 Throughout October 13 , marked intensification of the cyclone occurred . Over a 24 ‑ hour span , ending at 18 : 00 UTC , its central pressure fell from 1005 mb ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 68 inHg ) to 979 mb ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 91 inHg ) which was reflected in Isbell 's winds more than doubling from 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) to 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . Shortly thereafter , the storm made landfall in extreme western Cuba , near Guane , before emerging over the southeastern Gulf of Mexico . Isbell 's brief stint over land did not hinder development , which continued unabated until 12 : 00 UTC on October 14 at which time it reached its maximum intensity . Situated to the south of Key West , Florida , Isbell attained winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) which ranks it as a Category 3 hurricane on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Additionally , its central pressure bottomed out at 964 mb ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 47 inHg ) . Around this time , a new low @-@ pressure area formed 300 mi ( 480 km ) to Isbell 's northwest over the Gulf in response to a powerful cold @-@ core low over the Mississippi Valley . The cyclonic flow of this second system brought cool , dry air from the north and circulated it into the hurricane . This in turn caused the storm to become asymmetric in structure with radar imagery indicating little to no reflectivity along the western periphery of the hurricane . 
 The degrading structure of Isbell resulted in some weakening as it accelerated toward Florida . At 22 : 00 UTC on October 14 , the hurricane made landfall near Everglades City as a Category 2 with sustained winds between 100 and 110 mph ( 160 and 175 km / h ) . Within five hours , the system cleared the Florida Peninsula and emerged over the western Atlantic Ocean north of West Palm Beach . The storm 's passage over land resulted in notable weakening , though Isbell remained of hurricane @-@ strength . During the afternoon of October 15 , the low that had formed the previous day induced a northward turn of the cyclone and directed it toward North Carolina , a result of what is known as the Fujiwhara effect . Thereafter , the two systems began to intertwine as Isbell began transitioning into an extratropical cyclone ; rapid weakening accompanied this phase . Isbell completed this process by 12 : 00 UTC on October 16 as it moved onshore near Morehead City , North Carolina . On October 17 the two non @-@ tropical systems merged into a single storm over the Outer Banks . Isbell 's remnants emerged back over the Atlantic Ocean on October 18 near the Delmarva Peninsula before accelerating northeast . The system was last noted on October 19 as it moved over Atlantic Canada . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 In Cuba , thousands were evacuated due to flooding lowlands . Advisories were broadcast and issued warning of the possibility of heavy rains and winds , isolated small hail , and possible isolated tornadoes in Florida from 21 : 00 UTC on October 14 to 02 : 00 UTC on October 15 . The aviation severe weather forecast also warned residents in south and central Florida of up to 0 @.@ 75 in ( 19 mm ) of hail , gusts of up to 53 mph ( 85 km / h ) , and the potential for tornadic activity . Flood warnings were also issued , with predictions of flooding 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) above flood stage . Emergency preparations at Key West 's weather office were made . In the morning hours of October 13 , the office alerted city , county , and military officials . In the afternoon , they completed office preparations and scheduling . On October 14 , the office requested radio stations to stay on the air and relayed hourly reports . 
 In North Carolina , some tidal flooding was also forecast . People were warned to tune to television and radio broadcasts . On October 15 , as Isbell rapidly crossed Florida , forecasters at the Charleston , South Carolina Weather Bureau warned of high tides of up to 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) , 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) above flood @-@ stage , from South Carolina into North Carolina . Owing to the continued northeastward movement of the storm , tides ultimately did not exceed 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) in South Carolina . Across coastal areas of North Carolina , alerts for severe thunderstorms , tornadoes , and high tides were raised ; however , the storm greatly diminished before reaching shore and little damage materialized . Moderate rains along the lower Neuse River basin were expected to prolong flooding triggered by Hurricane Hilda and its remnants earlier in October . Small craft advisories were raised northward to Provincetown , Massachusetts , through October 18 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Cuba = = = 
 Skirting the extreme western coast of Cuba on October 13 , the storm produced gusts estimated at 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) in Pinar del Rio Province . The highest measured sustained winds were 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) in Guane and 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) at Rancho @-@ <unk> Airport in the capital city of Havana . Additionally , pressures at the city fell to 979 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 91 inHg ) . Heavy rains caused rivers to over @-@ top their banks , forcing thousands of people to evacuate . Three fatalities occurred in Guane due to collapsing homes . A fourth fatality took place elsewhere in Cuba . Numerous homes were damaged or destroyed by the storm , with exact numbers unknown . The region 's tobacco crop also sustained considerable losses with fields and warehouses destroyed . The damage to agriculture compounded economic losses in Cuba that resulted from Hurricane Flora in September 1963 , which devastated the nation , as well as impacts from Hurricanes Cleo and Hilda earlier in 1964 . The combined effects of Cleo , Hilda , and Isbell resulted in economic losses of approximately $ 100 million in the country , of which at least $ 20 million was directly attributed to Isbell . 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 Though Isbell struck the state as a Category 2 hurricane , no winds in excess of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) were reported . Measurements peaked at 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) at both Everglades City and Indiantown . Hurricane @-@ force gusts were measured in Belle Glade , Fort Lauderdale , Key West , Pompano Beach , and West Palm Beach . Atmospheric pressures fell to 970 @.@ 7 mb ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 67 inHg ) in the Dry Tortugas and 977 @.@ 5 mb ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 87 inHg ) on the mainland in Juno Beach . Rainfall in the state was relatively limited owing to the brisk movement of the storm , though a frontal system immediately preceding the hurricane brought heavy rains to the state . A peak total of 9 @.@ 46 in ( 240 mm ) was measured in West Palm Beach , though an estimated 80 % of this was attributable to the front . Amounts from the hurricane itself were likely around 5 in ( 130 mm ) . No major storm surge was reported during Isbell 's passage due to greatly weaker winds in the back half of the storm . Tides in Key West rose 4 to 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 5 m ) above normal . 
 Throughout Florida , three people were killed in relation to the storm and no more than $ 10 million in damage occurred , with more than half of which was attributed to agricultural losses . In addition , 76 people were injured , 12 of whom required hospitalization . Structural damage was relatively limited , with only 63 homes and businesses , mostly trailers , being destroyed ; 159 other structures sustained major damage while a further 631 experienced minor damage . The majority of damage from Isbell was not from the hurricane itself but rather tornadoes spawned by its outer bands . At least nine , and as many as twelve , tornadoes affected the state with the greatest effects being felt in the Miami metropolitan area . All storm @-@ related injuries were attributed to these tornadoes as well as the majority of structural damage . According to the National Climatic Data Center , four of these tornadoes were of F2 intensity . 
 Despite the close passage of the storm to the Florida Keys , damage in the area was light and amounted to $ 175 @,@ 000 . Of this , $ 125 @,@ 000 was attributed to structural damage . Hurricane @-@ force winds in the archipelago only lasted 15 minutes and gale @-@ force winds occurred over a 5 hour span . The brevity of damaging winds limited the effects of the storm . Most damage was constrained to downed trees , signs , and power poles . Two trailers were overturned , however , and an oil barge sank in the Key West Harbor . Two people drowned after their shrimp boat was destroyed . In and around the Fakahatchee Strand Preserve State Park , Royal Palms , and Royal <unk> were defoliated by the hurricane 's winds . Downed trees and power lines in Collier County temporarily left many customers without phone and electrical service . Residents in nearby Lee Cypress stated that the effects from Isbell were worse than Hurricane Donna which struck the region as a Category 4 in September 1960 . 
 Palm Beach County was the most affected area , accounting for more than half of the losses , and approximately $ 700 @,@ 000 in damage . One indirect death occurred when a man suffered a heart attack in Lake Worth while installing storm shutters . At least three tornadoes were spawned in Palm Beach County . The strongest was an F2 that struck a trailer park in <unk> Breezes , damaging numerous trailers and injuring 22 people . Shortly thereafter the same tornado or possibly a second one struck Boynton Beach , injuring three people and damaging several structures . The event lasted roughly 20 minutes and the tornadoes moved along a path 10 mi ( 16 km ) long . Another tornado in Boca Raton caused a number of minor injuries . In West Palm Beach , a twister that crossed the intersection of State Roads 802 and 809 damaged adjacent properties and injured several people . Throughout Palm Beach County , 492 homes suffered damage , while 36 mobile homes were demolished and 60 others were inflicted major impact . Additionally , 33 farm buildings and 9 small businesses were severely damaged or destroyed . 
 In Martin County , an F2 was spawned in Hobe Sound and affected the area near U.S. Route 1 . About 39 homes and 13 mobile homes were damaged , while two farm buildings and two businesses also received impact . The forth F2 tornado was spawned in Brevard County near Eau Gallie . It caused extensive damage and injured 17 people in the Orange Court trailer park . Collectively , 35 homes in Flagler and Volusia counties were damaged . 
 = = = The Carolinas and elsewhere = = = 
 Heavy rains associated with Isbell and a nearby non @-@ tropical low resulted in heavy rains across The Carolinas on October 15 and 16 . In and around the Columbia , South Carolina area , 3 to 6 in ( 76 to 152 mm ) of rain fell , with a peak of 6 @.@ 11 in ( 155 mm ) in the city itself . Significant flooding took place along all rivers in the state ; the Broad River crested at 32 @.@ 1 ft ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) , its highest level since 1940 , in Blair . The Pee Dee River rose to 39 ft ( 12 m ) at Cheraw by October 18 , roughly 9 ft ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) above flood @-@ stage . The cotton crop sustained the greatest losses during the event , with damage estimated in excess of $ 1 million . Along the coast , tides rose to 6 @.@ 2 ft ( 1 @.@ 9 m ) , 2 @.@ 1 ft ( 0 @.@ 64 m ) above normal , in Charleston Harbor . What little coastal flooding took place mostly resulted from wave run @-@ up rather than tidal flooding . Some beach erosion occurred in exposed areas . 
 Much of North Carolina was affected by Isbell with rain extending into interior parts of the state . Totals were generally light , however , and peaked at around 5 in ( 130 mm ) in eastern areas . Some flash flooding took place in the Piedmont , though overall effects were minimal . In the Blue Ridge Mountains , the French Broad River topped its banks and prompted evacuations in Hot Springs and Marshall . The greatest impacts were felt along the Neuse River in Kinston within Lenoir County . Rains from Isbell exacerbated ongoing floods in the area , resulting in heavy damage to many homes . A man was swept away by swift currents near a Duke Energy steam plant in Cliffside ; however , it is unknown if he perished or was later rescued . Losses to the peanut crop were extensive , though no monetary value is available . With the storm arriving at low @-@ tide , no notable coastal flooding occurred . The significant weakening of Isbell prior to landfall also lessened the effects from wind as gale @-@ force winds were mostly constrained to coastal areas ; a peak gust of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) was measured in Elizabeth City . 
 Elsewhere along the East Coast , the remnants of Isbell produced generally light to moderate rain . A localized maximum of around 5 in ( 130 mm ) occurred in Massachusetts as the system began to dissipate . Immediately following the storm , an unseasonably strong cold front brought near @-@ freezing temperatures to Virginia , resulting in frost . The combination of the cold air and the hurricane prevented any peanut bumper crop harvesting in the state . 
 = WABN = 
 WABN is an Oldies and Classic Hits @-@ formatted non @-@ commercial radio station licensed to Abingdon , Virginia . The station 's signal serves the towns of Abingdon , Lebanon , both in Virginia , and the twin cities of Bristol in Virginia and in Tennessee . WABN is owned and operated by Appalachian Educational Communication Corporation . 
 WABN was launched on December 10 , 1956 and has served the town of Abingdon for almost 60 years . Beginning as WBBI , the station has carried various formats including Country music and Religious . Over the years , the station aired programming from the Mutual Broadcasting System and later the NBC Radio Network . 
 WABN has been sold several times , including once to Bristol Broadcasting Company , which owns stations in Bristol . The station 's current owner , Bristol , Tennessee @-@ based Appalachian Educational Communication Corporation , purchased WABN on May 5 , 2004 . Since 2011 , WABN has been simulcasting on an FM translator station to increase its broadcast area . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Launch = = = 
 The original application for WABN was filed on March 6 , 1956 . The principal owners listed on the application were Nelson T. Barker and Lindy M. Seamon . At the time of the filing , Seamon was the general manager and chief engineer at <unk> . 
 On their application , the pair estimated the construction costs of building the station at $ 19 @,@ 904 , with the first year operating costs at $ 20 @,@ 000 . First year revenue was estimated at $ 30 @,@ 000 . The application was approved by the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) on October 10 , 1956 . The new station was given the call sign WBBI during the first week of November 1956 . 
 = = = WBBI era = = = 
 On December 10 , 1956 , WBBI took to the airwaves for the first time , operating at 250 watts day and night . At the time of its launch , it was owned by Burley Broadcasting Company , which filed for a license to cover on January 9 , 1957 . This was approved on January 11 . 
 In April 1957 , WBBI was honored with two awards by the Virginia Associated Press Broadcasters Association ( VAPBA ) . In the " Commentary " category , the station was awarded second place in the " Non @-@ Metropolitan " division . The station placed third in the " Sports " category in the " Non @-@ Metropolitan " division . Burley Broadcasting Company transferred WBBI to Burley Broadcasting , Inc. for $ 20 @,@ 000 in late July 1957 . Under the new company , original owners Nelson T. Barker and Lindy M. Seamon transferred 25 % of their shares to their wives , Ethel and Frances , respectively . In April 1958 , the station was again honored with a VAPBA award , this time for " Women 's News " . 
 On January 26 , 1959 , WBBI was granted permission to change from an unlimited or 24 @-@ hour @-@ a @-@ day schedule to a daytime only schedule . The station would sign on at 6 : 00 am and sign off at 7 : 00 pm . The VAPBA presented the station with awards in the " State and Local News " , " Farm " , " Special Events " , and " Women 's News " categories on May 2 , 1959 . The station received VAPBA awards for " State and Local News " , " Commentary " , and " Women 's News " in 1960 . 
 On September 14 , 1960 , Burley Broadcasting applied to increase the station 's daytime power to 1 @,@ 000 watts , while keeping its nighttime power at 250 watts . The power increase was granted November 29 , 1961 . In May 1962 , further VAPBA awards were presented to WBBI in the " Comprehensive News " , " Commentary " , " Sports " , " Women 's News " , and " Farm " categories . 
 On December 10 , 1966 , 10 years to the day after WBBI launched , sister station WBBI @-@ FM signed on . At the time , both WBBI and WBBI @-@ FM were carrying a country format with programming from the Mutual Broadcasting System . On April 26 , 1968 , Nelson and Ethel Barker sold their shares of WBBI ( and WBBI @-@ FM ) to co @-@ owners Lindy and Frances Seamon for $ 30 @,@ 000 . The sale was granted on May 17 , 1968 . 
 Sister station WBBI @-@ FM applied for the WABN @-@ FM call sign in mid @-@ March 1980 . The application was granted in mid @-@ May 1980 . In July 1982 , Burley Broadcasting began the process of selling WBBI and sister station WABN @-@ FM to Southern Communications , Inc. for $ 500 @,@ 000 . The sale was approved on September 24 , 1982 . 
 In 1984 , WBBI dropped programming from the Mutual Broadcasting System in favor of programming from the NBC Radio Network . In mid @-@ February 1987 , Southern Communications agreed to sell WBBI , along with sister station WABN @-@ FM , to Edwards and Sutherland Broadcasting Company for $ 466 @,@ 200 . The new company would be operated by Richard W. Edwards and Craig Sutherland . At the time , Edwards also owned <unk> . The sale was granted in late April / early May . 
 = = = Present era = = = 
 On August 2 , 1992 , the station 's call sign was changed from WBBI to the current WABN . 
 On October 17 , 1995 , WABN was placed in debtor in possession status by the FCC . Almost four years later , on November 11 , 1999 , WABN and WABN @-@ FM were sold to Bristol Broadcasting Company for an unknown sum . Less than two years later , on July 5 , 2001 , Bristol Broadcasting Company donated WABN to the Abingdon Church of the Nazarene . Bristol Broadcasting Company retained its sister station , now under the <unk> @-@ FM call sign . 
 On May 16 , 2003 , WABN was once again on the seller 's block , this time to be sold to Living Faith Ministries , Inc. for $ 50 @,@ 000 . The sale was not consummated and the Abingdon Church of the Nazarene retained ownership of the station . 
 The Abingdon Church of the Nazarene tried again , on April 26 , 2004 , to sell WABN . The Appalachian Educational Communication Corporation ( AECC ) , based in Bristol , Tennessee , agreed to purchase the station for $ 50 @,@ 000 . Director of the Tennessee Regulatory Authority , Kenneth C. Hill , is the President and CEO of AECC . At the time of the sale , WABN was broadcasting a religious format . The sale was closed on May 5 , 2004 . 
 In 2009 , WABN switched to its current Oldies and Classic Hits format . On September 27 , 2011 , WABN began simulcasting its signal onto translator station <unk> 103 @.@ 3 , which is also licensed to Abingdon . WABN is operated as a non @-@ commercial station . Today , WABN airs a mix of local information and sports , along with the Oldies and Classic Hits music . 
 = = Programming = = 
 WABN produces a local public service program called " Abingdon Talks " , which airs on Sundays . The station broadcasts the entire schedule of Abingdon High School athletics live throughout the year . 
 Syndicated programs heard on WABN include Earth & Sky and the Old Farmer 's Almanac " Radio Report " . The station is an affiliate of the Virginia Market News Service , a division of the Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services . Mike Cox , a staff meteorologist at AECC , provides local weather forecasts on WABN twice an hour . 
 = = Translator = = 
 In addition to the main station , WABN is relayed by an FM broadcast translator to widen its broadcast area . 
 = The Great Gatsby = 
 The Great Gatsby is a 1925 novel written by American author F. Scott Fitzgerald that follows a cast of characters living in the fictional town of West Egg on prosperous Long Island in the summer of 1922 . The story primarily concerns the young and mysterious millionaire Jay Gatsby and his quixotic passion and obsession for the beautiful former debutante Daisy Buchanan . Considered to be Fitzgerald 's magnum opus , The Great Gatsby explores themes of decadence , idealism , resistance to change , social upheaval , and excess , creating a portrait of the Jazz Age or the Roaring Twenties that has been described as a cautionary tale regarding the American Dream . 
 Fitzgerald — inspired by the parties he had attended while visiting Long Island 's north shore — began planning the novel in 1923 , desiring to produce , in his words , " something new — something extraordinary and beautiful and simple and intricately patterned . " Progress was slow , with Fitzgerald completing his first draft following a move to the French Riviera in 1924 . His editor , Maxwell Perkins , felt the book was vague and persuaded the author to revise over the next winter . Fitzgerald was repeatedly ambivalent about the book 's title and he considered a variety of alternatives , including titles that referenced the Roman character Trimalchio ; the title he was last documented to have desired was Under the Red , White , and Blue . " 
 First published by Scribner 's in April 1925 , The Great Gatsby received mixed reviews and sold poorly ; in its first year , the book sold only 20 @,@ 000 copies . Fitzgerald died in 1940 , believing himself to be a failure and his work forgotten . However , the novel experienced a revival during World War II , and became a part of American high school curricula and numerous stage and film adaptations in the following decades . Today , The Great Gatsby is widely considered to be a literary classic and a contender for the title " Great American Novel . " In 1998 , the Modern Library editorial board voted it the 20th century 's best American novel and second best English @-@ language novel of the same time period . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 Set on the prosperous Long Island of 1922 , The Great Gatsby provides a critical social history of America during the Roaring Twenties within its narrative . That era , known for unprecedented economic prosperity , the evolution of jazz music , flapper culture , and bootlegging and other criminal activity , is plausibly depicted in Fitzgerald 's novel . Fitzgerald uses these societal developments of the 1920s to build Gatsby 's stories from simple details like automobiles to broader themes like Fitzgerald 's discreet allusions to the organized crime culture which was the source of Gatsby 's fortune . Fitzgerald educates his readers about the garish society of the Roaring Twenties by placing a timeless , relatable plotline within the historical context of the era . 
 Fitzgerald 's visits to Long Island 's north shore and his experience attending parties at mansions inspired The Great Gatsby 's setting . Today , there are a number of theories as to which mansion was the inspiration for the book . One possibility is Land 's End , a notable Gold Coast Mansion where Fitzgerald may have attended a party . Many of the events in Fitzgerald 's early life are reflected throughout The Great Gatsby . Fitzgerald was a young man from Minnesota , and like Nick , he was educated at an Ivy League school , Princeton ( in Nick 's case , Yale ) . Fitzgerald is also similar to Jay Gatsby , in that he fell in love while stationed far from home in the military and fell into a life of decadence trying to prove himself to the girl he loved . Fitzgerald became a second lieutenant , and was stationed at Camp Sheridan , in Montgomery , Alabama . There he met and fell in love with a wild seventeen @-@ year @-@ old beauty named Zelda Sayre . Zelda finally agreed to marry him , but her preference for wealth , fun , and leisure led her to delay their wedding until he could prove a success . Like Nick in The Great Gatsby , Fitzgerald found this new lifestyle seductive and exciting , and , like Gatsby , he had always idolized the very rich . In many ways , The Great Gatsby represents Fitzgerald 's attempt to confront his conflicting feelings about the Jazz Age . Like Gatsby , Fitzgerald was driven by his love for a woman who symbolized everything he wanted , even as she led him toward everything he despised . 
 In her book Careless People : Murder , Mayhem and the Invention of ' The Great Gatsby ( 2013 ) , Sarah Churchwell speculates that parts of the ending of The Great Gatsby were based on the Hall @-@ Mills Case . Based on her forensic search for clues , she asserts that the two victims in the Hall @-@ Mills murder case inspired the characters who were murdered in The Great Gatsby . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The main events of the novel take place in the summer of 1922 . Nick Carraway , a Yale graduate and World War I veteran from the Midwest — who serves as the novel 's narrator — takes a job in New York as a bond salesman . He rents a small house on Long Island , in the ( fictional ) village of West Egg , next door to the lavish mansion of Jay Gatsby , a mysterious millionaire who holds extravagant parties but does not participate in them . Nick drives around the bay to East Egg for dinner at the home of his cousin , Daisy Fay Buchanan , and her husband , Tom , a college acquaintance of Nick 's . They introduce Nick to Jordan Baker , an attractive , cynical young golfer with whom Nick begins a romantic relationship . She reveals to Nick that Tom has a mistress , Myrtle Wilson , who lives in the " valley of ashes " , an industrial dumping ground between West Egg and New York City . Not long after this revelation , Nick travels to New York City with Tom and Myrtle to an apartment they keep for their affair . At the apartment , a vulgar and bizarre party takes place . It ends with Tom breaking Myrtle 's nose after she annoys him by saying Daisy 's name several times . 
 As the summer progresses , Nick eventually receives an invitation to one of Gatsby 's parties . Nick encounters Jordan Baker at the party , and they meet Gatsby himself , an aloof and surprisingly young man who recognizes Nick from their same division in World War I. Through Jordan , Nick later learns that Gatsby knew Daisy from a romantic encounter in 1917 and is deeply in love with her . Gatsby spends many nights staring at the green light at the end of her dock , across the bay from his mansion , hoping one day to rekindle their lost romance . Gatsby 's extravagant lifestyle and wild parties are an attempt to impress Daisy in the hope that she will one day appear again at Gatsby 's doorstep . Gatsby now wants Nick to arrange a reunion between himself and Daisy . Nick invites Daisy to have tea at his house , without telling her that Gatsby will also be there . After an initially awkward reunion , Gatsby and Daisy reestablish their connection . They begin an affair and , after a short time , Tom grows increasingly suspicious of his wife 's relationship with Gatsby . At a luncheon at the Buchanans ' house , Daisy speaks to Gatsby with such undisguised intimacy that Tom realizes she is in love with Gatsby . Though Tom is himself involved in an extramarital affair , he is outraged by his wife 's infidelity . He forces the group to drive into New York City and confronts Gatsby in a suite at the Plaza Hotel , asserting that he and Daisy have a history that Gatsby could never understand . In addition to that , he announces to his wife that Gatsby is a criminal whose fortune comes from bootlegging alcohol and other illegal activities . Daisy realizes that her allegiance is to Tom , and Tom contemptuously sends her back to East Egg with Gatsby , attempting to prove that Gatsby cannot hurt him . 
 When Nick , Jordan , and Tom drive through the valley of ashes on their way home , they discover that Gatsby 's car has struck and killed Tom 's mistress , Myrtle . Nick later learns from Gatsby that Daisy , not Gatsby himself , was driving the car at the time of the accident but Gatsby intends to take the blame anyway . Myrtle 's husband , George , falsely concludes that the driver of the yellow car is the secret lover he recently began suspecting she has , and sets out on foot to locate its owner . After finding out the yellow car is Gatsby 's , he arrives at Gatsby 's mansion where he fatally shoots both Gatsby and then himself . Nick stages an unsettlingly small funeral for Gatsby , ends his relationship with Jordan , and moves back to the Midwest , disillusioned with the Eastern lifestyle . 
 = = Major characters = = 
 Nick Carraway – a Yale graduate originating from the Midwest , a World War I veteran , and , at the start of the plot , a newly arrived resident of West Egg , who is aged 29 ( later 30 ) . He also serves as the first @-@ person narrator of the novel . He is Gatsby 's next @-@ door neighbor and a bond salesman . He is easy @-@ going , occasionally sarcastic , and somewhat optimistic , although this latter quality fades as the novel progresses . 
 Jay Gatsby ( originally James " Jimmy " Gatz ) – a young , mysterious millionaire with shady business connections ( later revealed to be a bootlegger ) , originally from North Dakota . He is obsessed with Daisy Buchanan , a beautiful debutante , from Louisville , Kentucky whom he had met when he was a young military officer stationed at the Army 's Camp Taylor in Louisville during World War I. Fitzgerald himself was actually based at Camp Taylor in Louisville when he was in the Army and makes various references to Louisville in the novel , including the Seelbach Hotel where the Buchanan party stayed while in town for Tom and Daisy 's wedding . The character is based on the bootlegger and former World War I officer , Max Gerlach , according to Some Sort of Epic Grandeur , Matthew J. Bruccoli 's biography of F. Scott Fitzgerald . Gatsby is said to have briefly studied at Trinity College , Oxford in England after the end of World War I. 
 Daisy Fay Buchanan – an attractive and effervescent , if shallow and self @-@ absorbed , young Louisville , Kentucky debutante and socialite , identified as a flapper . She is Nick 's second cousin , once removed , and the wife of Tom Buchanan . Daisy is believed to have been inspired by Fitzgerald 's own youthful romances with Ginevra King . Daisy once had a romantic relationship with Gatsby , before she married Tom . Her choice between Gatsby and Tom is one of the central conflicts in the novel . 
 Thomas " Tom " Buchanan – a millionaire who lives on East Egg , and Daisy 's husband . Tom is an imposing man of muscular build with a " husky tenor " voice and arrogant demeanor . He is a former football star at Yale . Buchanan has parallels with William Mitchell , the Chicagoan who married Ginevra King . Buchanan and Mitchell were both Chicagoans with an interest in polo . Like Ginevra 's father , whom Fitzgerald resented , Buchanan attended Yale and is a white supremacist . 
 Jordan Baker – Daisy Buchanan 's long @-@ time friend with " autumn @-@ leaf yellow " hair , a firm athletic body , and an aloof attitude . She is Nick Carraway 's girlfriend for most of the novel and an amateur golfer with a slightly shady reputation and a penchant for <unk> . Fitzgerald told Maxwell Perkins that Jordan was based on the golfer Edith Cummings , a friend of Ginevra King . Her name is a play on the two popular automobile brands , the Jordan Motor Car Company and the Baker Motor Vehicle , alluding to Jordan 's " fast " reputation and the freedom now presented to Americans , especially women , in the 1920s . 
 George B. Wilson – a mechanic and owner of a garage . He is disliked by both his wife , Myrtle Wilson , and Tom Buchanan , who describes him as " so dumb he doesn 't know he 's alive " . When he learns of the death of his wife , he shoots and kills Gatsby , wrongly believing he had been driving the car that killed Myrtle , and then kills himself . 
 Myrtle Wilson – George 's wife , and Tom Buchanan 's mistress . Myrtle , who possesses a fierce vitality , is desperate to find refuge from her complacent marriage , but unfortunately this leads to her tragic ending . She is accidentally killed by Gatsby 's car ( driven by Daisy , though Gatsby insists he would take the blame for the accident ) . 
 Meyer <unk> – a Jewish friend and mentor of Gatsby 's , described as a gambler who fixed the World Series . <unk> appears only twice in the novel , the second time refusing to attend Gatsby 's funeral . He is a clear allusion to Arnold Rothstein , a New York crime kingpin who was notoriously blamed for the Black Sox Scandal which tainted the 1919 World Series . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 Fitzgerald began planning his third novel in June 1922 , but it was interrupted by production of his play , The Vegetable , in the summer and fall . The play failed miserably , and Fitzgerald worked that winter on magazine stories struggling to pay his debt caused by the production . The stories were , in his words , " all trash and it nearly broke my heart , " although included among those stories was " Winter Dreams " , which Fitzgerald later described as " a sort of first draft of the Gatsby idea " . 
 After the birth of their child , the Fitzgeralds moved to Great Neck , New York , on Long Island , in October 1922 . The town was used as the scene of The Great Gatsby . Fitzgerald 's neighbors in Great Neck included such prominent and newly wealthy New Yorkers as writer Ring Lardner , actor Lew Fields , and comedian Ed Wynn . These figures were all considered to be " new money " , unlike those who came from Manhasset Neck or Cow Neck Peninsula , places which were home to many of New York 's wealthiest established families , and which sat across the bay from Great Neck . This real @-@ life juxtaposition gave Fitzgerald his idea for " West Egg " and " East Egg " . In this novel , Great Neck ( King 's Point ) became the " new money " peninsula of West Egg and Port Washington ( Sands Point ) the old @-@ money East Egg . Several mansions in the area served as inspiration for Gatsby 's home , such as <unk> Castle and Beacon Towers , since demolished . 
 By mid @-@ 1923 , Fitzgerald had written 18 @,@ 000 words for his novel but discarded most of his new story as a false start , some of which resurfaced in the 1924 short story " Absolution " . 
 Work on The Great Gatsby began in earnest in April 1924 . Fitzgerald wrote in his ledger , " Out of woods at last and starting novel . " He decided to make a departure from the writing process of his previous novels and told Perkins that the novel was to be a " consciously artistic achievement " and a " purely creative work — not trashy imaginings as in my stories but the sustained imagination of a sincere and yet radiant world . " He added later , during editing , that he felt " an enormous power in me now , more than I 've ever had . " Soon after this burst of inspiration , work slowed while the Fitzgeralds made a move to the French Riviera , where a serious crisis in their relationship soon developed . By August , however , Fitzgerald was hard at work and completed what he believed to be his final manuscript in October , sending the book to his editor , Maxwell Perkins , and agent , Harold Ober , on October 30 . The Fitzgeralds then moved to Rome for the winter . Fitzgerald made revisions through the winter after Perkins informed him in a November letter that the character of Gatsby was " somewhat vague " and Gatsby 's wealth and business , respectively , needed " the suggestion of an explanation " and should be " <unk> " . 
 Content after a few rounds of revision , Fitzgerald returned the final batch of revised galleys in the middle of February 1925 . Fitzgerald 's revisions included an extensive rewriting of Chapter VI and VIII . Despite this , he refused an offer of $ 10 @,@ 000 for the serial rights in order not to delay the book 's publication . He had received a $ 3 @,@ 939 advance in 1923 and $ 1 @,@ 981 @.@ 25 upon publication . 
 = = Cover art = = 
 The cover of the first printing of The Great Gatsby is among the most celebrated pieces of art in American literature . It depicts disembodied eyes and a mouth over a blue skyline , with images of naked women reflected in the irises . A little @-@ known artist named Francis Cugat was commissioned to illustrate the book while Fitzgerald was in the midst of writing it . The cover was completed before the novel ; Fitzgerald was so enamored with it that he told his publisher he had " written it into " the novel . Fitzgerald 's remarks about incorporating the painting into the novel led to the interpretation that the eyes are reminiscent of those of fictional optometrist Dr. T. J. <unk> ( depicted on a faded commercial billboard near George Wilson 's auto repair shop ) which Fitzgerald described as " blue and gigantic – their retinas are one yard high . They look out of no face , but instead , from a pair of enormous yellow spectacles which pass over a non @-@ existent nose . " Although this passage has some resemblance to the painting , a closer explanation can be found in the description of Daisy Buchanan as the " girl whose disembodied face floated along the dark cornices and blinding signs . " Ernest Hemingway wrote in A Moveable Feast that when Fitzgerald lent him a copy of The Great Gatsby to read , he immediately disliked the cover , but " Scott told me not to be put off by it , that it had to do with a billboard along a highway in Long Island that was important in the story . He said he had liked the jacket and now he didn 't like it . " 
 = = Title = = 
 Fitzgerald had difficulty choosing a title for his novel and entertained many choices before reluctantly choosing The Great Gatsby , a title inspired by Alain @-@ Fournier 's Le Grand <unk> . Prior , Fitzgerald shifted between Gatsby ; Among Ash @-@ Heaps and Millionaires ; Trimalchio ; Trimalchio in West Egg ; On the Road to West Egg ; Under the Red , White , and Blue ; Gold @-@ <unk> Gatsby ; and The High @-@ Bouncing Lover . He initially preferred titles referencing Trimalchio , the crude parvenu in Petronius 's Satyricon , and even refers to Gatsby as Trimalchio once in the novel : " It was when curiosity about Gatsby was at its highest that the lights in his house failed to go on one Saturday night — and , as obscurely as it had begun , his career as Trimalchio was over . " Unlike Gatsby 's spectacular parties , Trimalchio participated in the audacious and libidinous orgies he hosted but , according to Tony Tanner 's introduction to the Penguin edition , there are subtle similarities between the two . 
 In November 1924 , Fitzgerald wrote to Perkins that " I have now decided to stick to the title I put on the book ... Trimalchio in West Egg " but was eventually persuaded that the reference was too obscure and that people would not be able to pronounce it . His wife , Zelda , and Perkins both expressed their preference for The Great Gatsby and the next month Fitzgerald agreed . A month before publication , after a final review of the proofs , he asked if it would be possible to re @-@ title it Trimalchio or Gold @-@ <unk> Gatsby but Perkins advised against it . On March 19 , 1925 , Fitzgerald expressed intense enthusiasm for the title Under the Red , White and Blue , but it was at that stage too late to change . The Great Gatsby was published on April 10 , 1925 . Fitzgerald remarked that " the title is only fair , rather bad than good . " 
 Early drafts of the novel entitled Trimalchio : An Early Version of The Great Gatsby have been published . A notable difference between the Trimalchio draft and The Great Gatsby is a less complete failure of Gatsby 's dream in Trimalchio . Another difference is that the argument between Tom Buchanan and Jay Gatsby is more even , although Daisy still returns to Tom . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Sarah Churchwell sees The Great Gatsby as a " cautionary tale of the decadent downside of the American dream . " The story deals with human aspiration to start over again , social politics and its brutality and also betrayal , of one 's own ideals and of people . According to the story 's narrator , Nick Carraway , " ... a sense of the fundamental <unk> is parcelled out unequally at birth . " Using elements of irony and tragic ending , it also delves into themes of excesses of the rich , and recklessness of youth . Others , like journalist Nick Gillespie , see The Great Gatsby as a story " about the breakdown of class differences in the face of a modern economy based not on status and inherited position but on innovation and an ability to meet ever @-@ changing consumer needs . " This interpretation asserts that The Great Gatsby captures the American experience because it is a story about change and those who resist it ; whether the change comes in the form of a new wave of immigrants ( Southern Europeans in the early 20th century , Latin Americans today ) , the nouveau riche , or successful minorities , Americans from the 1920s to modern day have plenty of experience with changing economic and social circumstances . As Gillespie states , " While the specific terms of the equation are always changing , it 's easy to see echoes of Gatsby 's basic conflict between established sources of economic and cultural power and upstarts in virtually all aspects of American society . " Because this concept is particularly American and can be seen throughout American history , readers are able to relate to The Great Gatsby ( which has lent the novel an enduring popularity ) . 
 Later critical writings on The Great Gatsby , following the novel 's revival , focus in particular on Fitzgerald 's disillusionment with the American Dream — life , liberty and the pursuit of happiness – in the context of the hedonistic Jazz Age , a name for the era which Fitzgerald claimed to have coined . In 1970 , Roger Pearson published the article Gatsby : False prophet of the American Dream , in which he states that Fitzgerald " has come to be associated with this concept of the <unk> Dream more than any other writer of the twentieth century " . Pearson goes on to suggest that Gatsby 's failure to realize the American dream demonstrates that it no longer exists except in the minds of those as materialistic as Gatsby . He concludes that the American dream pursued by Gatsby " is , in reality , a nightmare " , bringing nothing but discontent and disillusionment to those who chase it as they realize its <unk> and ultimately its unattainability . 
 In addition to exploring the trials and tribulations of achieving the great American dream during the Jazz Age , The Great Gatsby explores societal gender expectations as a theme , exemplifying in Daisy Buchanan 's character the marginalization of women in the East Egg social class that Fitzgerald depicts . As an upper @-@ class , white woman living in East Egg during this time period in America , Daisy must adhere to certain societal expectations , including but certainly not limited to actively filling the role of dutiful wife , mother , keeper of the house , and charming socialite . As the reader finds in the novel , many of Daisy 's choices , ultimately culminating in the tragedy of the plot and misery for all those involved , can be at least partly attributed to her prescribed role as a " beautiful little fool " who is completely reliant on her husband for financial and societal security . For instance , one could argue that Daisy 's ultimate decision to remain with her husband despite her feelings for Gatsby can be attributed to the status , security , and comfort that her marriage to Tom Buchanan provides . Additionally , the theme of the female familial role within The Great Gatsby goes hand in hand with that of the ideal family unit associated with the great American <unk> a dream that goes unrealized for Gatsby and Daisy in Fitzgerald 's prose . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Great Gatsby was published by Charles Scribner 's Sons on April 10 , 1925 . Fitzgerald called Perkins on the day of publication to monitor reviews : " Any news ? " " Sales situation doubtful , " read a wire from Perkins on April 20 , " [ but ] excellent reviews . " Fitzgerald responded on April 24 , saying the cable " depressed " him , closing the letter with " Yours in great depression . " Fitzgerald had hoped the novel would be a great commercial success , perhaps selling as many as 75 @,@ 000 copies . By October , when the original sale had run its course , the book had sold fewer than 20 @,@ 000 copies . Despite this , Scribner 's continually kept the book in print ; they carried the original edition on their trade list until 1946 , by which time Gatsby was in print in three other forms and the original edition was no longer needed . Fitzgerald received letters of praise from contemporaries T. S. Eliot , Edith Wharton , and Willa Cather regarding the novel ; however , this was private opinion , and Fitzgerald feverishly demanded the public recognition of reviewers and readers . 
 The Great Gatsby received mixed reviews from literary critics of the day . Generally the most effusive of the positive reviews was Edwin Clark of The New York Times , who felt the novel was " A curious book , a mystical , glamourous story of today . " Similarly , Lillian C. Ford of the Los Angeles Times wrote , " [ the novel ] leaves the reader in a mood of chastened wonder , " calling the book " a revelation of life " and " a work of art . " The New York Post called the book " fascinating ... His style fairly <unk> , and with a genuine brilliance ; he writes surely and soundly . " The New York Herald Tribune was unimpressed , but referred to The Great Gatsby as " purely ephemeral phenomenon , but it contains some of the nicest little touches of contemporary observation you could imagine @-@ so light , so delicate , so sharp .... a literary lemon meringue . " In The Chicago Daily Tribune , H.L. Mencken called the book " in form no more than a glorified anecdote , and not too probable at that , " while praising the book 's " careful and brilliant finish . " 
 Several writers felt that the novel left much to be desired following Fitzgerald 's previous works and promptly criticized him . Harvey Eagleton of The Dallas Morning News believed the novel signaled the end of Fitzgerald 's success : " One finishes Great Gatsby with a feeling of regret , not for the fate of the people in the book , but for Mr. Fitzgerald . " John McClure of The Times @-@ Picayune said that the book was unconvincing , writing , " Even in conception and construction , The Great Gatsby seems a little raw . " Ralph Coghlan of the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch felt the book lacked what made Fitzgerald 's earlier novels endearing and called the book " a minor performance ... At the moment , its author seems a bit bored and tired and cynical . " Ruth Snyder of New York Evening World called the book 's style " painfully forced " , noting that the editors of the paper were " quite convinced after reading The Great Gatsby that Mr. Fitzgerald is not one of the great American writers of to @-@ day . " The reviews struck Fitzgerald as completely missing the point : " All the reviews , even the most enthusiastic , not one had the slightest idea what the book was about . " 
 Fitzgerald 's goal was to produce a literary work which would truly prove himself as a writer , and Gatsby did not have the commercial success of his two previous novels , This Side of Paradise and The Beautiful and Damned . Although the novel went through two initial printings , some of these copies remained unsold years later . Fitzgerald himself blamed poor sales on the fact that women tended to be the main audience for novels during this time , and Gatsby did not contain an admirable female character . According to his own ledger , now made available online by University of South Carolina 's Thomas Cooper library , he earned only $ 2 @,@ 000 from the book . Although 1926 brought Owen Davis 's stage adaption and the Paramount @-@ issued silent film version , both of which brought in money for the author , Fitzgerald still felt the novel fell short of the recognition he hoped for and , most importantly , would not propel him to becoming a serious novelist in the public eye . For several years afterward , the general public believed The Great Gatsby to be nothing more than a nostalgic period piece . 
 = = Legacy and modern analysis = = 
 In 1940 , Fitzgerald suffered a third and final heart attack , and died believing his work forgotten . His obituary in The New York Times mentioned Gatsby as evidence of great potential that was never reached . However , a strong appreciation for the book had developed in underground circles ; future writers Edward Newhouse and Budd Schulberg were deeply affected by it and John O 'Hara showed the book 's influence . The republication of Gatsby in Edmund Wilson 's edition of The Last Tycoon in 1941 produced an outburst of comment , with the general consensus expressing the sentiment that the book was an enduring work of fiction . 
 In 1942 , a group of publishing executives created the Council on Books in Wartime . The Council 's purpose was to distribute paperback books to soldiers fighting in the Second World War . The Great Gatsby was one of these books . The books proved to be " as popular as pin @-@ up girls " among the soldiers , according to the Saturday Evening Post 's contemporary report . 155 @,@ 000 copies of Gatsby were distributed to soldiers overseas , and it is believed that this publicity ultimately boosted the novel 's popularity and sales . 
 By 1944 , full @-@ length articles on Fitzgerald 's works were being published , and the following year , " the opinion that Gatsby was merely a period piece had almost entirely disappeared . " This revival was paved by interest shown by literary critic Edmund Wilson , who was Fitzgerald 's friend . In 1951 , Arthur Mizener published The Far Side of Paradise , a biography of Fitzgerald . He emphasized The Great Gatsby 's positive reception by literary critics , which may have influenced public opinion and renewed interest in it . 
 By 1960 , the book was steadily selling 50 @,@ 000 copies per year , and renewed interest led The New York Times editorialist Arthur Mizener to proclaim the novel " a classic of twentieth @-@ century American fiction " . The Great Gatsby has sold over 25 million copies worldwide as of 2013 , annually sells an additional 500 @,@ 000 copies , and is Scribner 's most popular title ; in 2013 , the e @-@ book alone sold 185 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In 2013 , cultural historian Bob Batchelor authored Gatsby : The Cultural History of the Great American Novel , in which he explored the enduring influence of the book by tracing it " from the book 's publication in 1925 through today 's headlines filled with celebrity intrigue , corporate greed , and a roller @-@ coaster economy " . 
 Scribner 's copyright is scheduled to expire in 2020 , according to Maureen Corrigan 's book about the making of The Great Gatsby , So We Read On . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Ballet = = = 
 In 2010 , The Washington Ballet premiered a version at the Kennedy Center . It was popularly demanded for an encore run the following year . 
 In 2013 , the Northern Ballet premiered a version of The Great Gatsby at Leeds Grand Theatre in the UK , with choreography and direction by David Nixon , a musical score by Richard Rodney Bennett , and set designs by Jerome Kaplan . Nixon also created the scenario and costumes designs . 
 = = = Computer games = = = 
 In 2010 , Oberon Media released a casual hidden object game called Classic Adventures : The Great Gatsby . The game was released for iPad in 2012 . 
 In 2011 , as a tribute to old NES games , developer Charlie Hoey and editor Pete Smith created an 8 @-@ bit @-@ style online game of The Great Gatsby . Ian Crouch of The New Yorker compared it to The Adventures of Tom Sawyer ( 1989 ) for the NES . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 The Great Gatsby has resulted in a number of film adaptations : 
 The Great Gatsby ( 1926 ) , by Herbert <unk> – a silent movie of a stage adaptation , starring Warner Baxter , Lois Wilson , and William Powell . It is a famous example of a lost film . Reviews suggest that it may have been the most faithful adaptation of the novel , but a trailer of the film at the National Archives is all that is known to exist . 
 The Great Gatsby ( 1949 ) , by Elliott Nugent – starring Alan Ladd , Betty Field , and Shelley Winters ; for copyright reasons , this film is not readily available . 
 The Great Gatsby ( 1974 ) , by Jack Clayton – starring Sam Waterston , Mia Farrow , and Robert Redford , with a script by Francis Ford Coppola . 
 The Great Gatsby ( 2000 ) , by Robert Markowitz – a made @-@ for @-@ TV movie starring Toby Stephens , Paul Rudd , and Mira Sorvino . 
 G ( 2002 ) , by Christopher Scott <unk> – a loose hip @-@ hop adaptation set in the Hamptons . 
 The Great Gatsby ( 2013 ) , by Baz Luhrmann – starring Leonardo DiCaprio , Tobey Maguire , Carey Mulligan , and Joel Edgerton . 
 <unk> ( 2014 ) , a modern adaptation set among Long Island teenagers in the midst of the 2008 economic recession . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 The Double Bind ( 2007 ) by Chris <unk> imagines the later years of Daisy and Tom Buchanan 's marriage as a social worker in 2007 investigates the possibility that a deceased elderly homeless person is Daisy 's son . 
 Great ( 2014 ) by Sara <unk> is a modern @-@ day young adult fiction retelling of The Great Gatsby with a female Gatsby ( <unk> Trimalchio ) . 
 = = = Opera = = = 
 The New York Metropolitan Opera commissioned John Harbison to compose an operatic treatment of the novel to commemorate the 25th anniversary of James Levine 's debut . The work , called The Great Gatsby , premiered on December 20 , 1999 . 
 = = = Radio = = = 
 On January 1 , 1950 , an hour @-@ long adaptation was broadcast on CBS ' Family Hour of Stars starring Kirk Douglas as Gatsby . 
 In October 2008 , the BBC World Service commissioned and broadcast an abridged 10 @-@ part reading of the story , read from the view of Nick Carraway by Trevor White . 
 In May 2012 , BBC Radio 4 broadcast The Great Gatsby , a Classic Serial dramatisation by Robert Forrest . 
 = = = Theater = = = 
 The 1926 stage adaptation of Owen Davis , subsequently developed , became the 1926 film version . The play , directed by George Cukor , opened on Broadway on February 2 , 1926 and ran for 112 performances . A successful tour later in the year included the performances Chicago , 1 August 20 through 2 October . 
 In July 2006 , Simon Levy 's stage adaptation , the only one authorized and granted exclusive rights by the Fitzgerald Estate , had its world premiere at The Guthrie Theater to commemorate the opening of its new theatre , directed by David <unk> . It was subsequently produced by Seattle Repertory Theatre . In 2012 , a revised / reworked version was produced at Arizona Theatre Company and Grand Theatre in London , Ontario , Canada . 
 Gatz by Elevator Repair Service earned the # 1 in the best in 2010 NYC theatre from The New York Times 's Ben Brantley . An award @-@ winning Off @-@ Broadway production . 
 On August 7 , 2012 , The Great Gatsby Musical opened at the Kings Head Theatre , London . A Ruby In The Dust production , it is adapted by Joe Evans and Linnie Reedman with music and lyrics by Joe Evans , directed by Linnie Reedman , with Matilda Sturridge as Daisy Buchanan . The show transferred to the Riverside Studios in 2013 with the music orchestrated by Chris Walker and musical staging by choreographer Lee Proud . 
 In September 2015 it was announced that The Great Gatsby would be staged in London as the play Gatsby as a limited exclusive showcase production at the Arts Theatre . 
 = Avery Brundage = 
 Avery Brundage ( / <unk> <unk> / ; September 28 , 1887 – May 8 , 1975 ) was an American sports official who served as the fifth president of the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) from 1952 to 1972 . The only American to attain that position , Brundage is remembered as a zealous advocate of amateurism , and for his involvement with the 1936 and 1972 Summer Olympics , both held in Germany . 
 Brundage was born in Detroit in 1887 to a working @-@ class family ; when he was five years old , his father moved his family to Chicago and subsequently abandoned his wife and children . Raised mostly by relatives , he attended the University of Illinois to study engineering and became a track star . In 1912 , he competed in the Summer Olympics , contesting the pentathlon and decathlon , but did not win any medals ; both events were won by Jim Thorpe . He won national championships in track three times between 1914 and 1918 , and founded his own construction business . He earned his wealth from this company and from investments , and never accepted pay for his sports involvement . 
 Following his retirement from athletics , Brundage became a sports administrator , rising rapidly through the ranks in United States sports groups . As leader of America 's Olympic organizations , he fought zealously against a boycott of the 1936 Summer Olympics , which had been awarded to Germany before the rise of its Nazi government and its subsequent , escalating persecution of Jews . Although Brundage was successful in getting a team to the Games in Berlin , its participation was controversial , and has remained so . Brundage was elected to the IOC that year , and quickly became a major figure in the Olympic movement . He was elected IOC president in 1952 . 
 As president , Brundage fought strongly for amateurism and against commercialization of the Olympic Games , even as these stands came to be seen as incongruous with the realities of modern sports . His final Olympics as president , at Munich in 1972 , was marked by controversy : at the memorial service following the murder of 11 Israeli athletes by terrorists , Brundage decried the politicization of sports and , refusing to cancel the remainder of the Olympics , declared " the Games must go on " . Although Brundage 's statement was applauded by those in attendance , his decision to continue the Games has since been harshly criticized . Brundage was married to Elizabeth Dunlap from 1927 ; after he became a widower , he married Princess Mariann Charlotte Katharina Stefanie , a member of the royal House of Reuss . 
 = = Early life and athletic career = = 
 Avery Brundage was born in Detroit , Michigan , on September 28 , 1887 , the son of Charles and Minnie ( Lloyd ) Brundage . Charles Brundage was a stonecutter ; the <unk> moved to Chicago when Avery was five , and Charles Brundage soon thereafter abandoned his family . Avery and his younger brother , Chester , were mostly raised by aunts and uncles . At age 13 , in 1901 , Brundage finished first in an essay competition , winning a trip to President William McKinley 's second inauguration . Avery attended Sherwood Public School and then R. T. Crane Manual Training School , both in Chicago . Crane Tech was a journey of 7 miles ( 11 km ) by public transportation , which he undertook only after completing a newspaper delivery route . Even though the school had no athletic facilities , Brundage made his own equipment ( including a shot and a hammer to throw ) in the school 's workshop and by his final year was written of in the newspapers as a schoolboy track star . According to sportswriter William Oscar Johnson in a 1980 article in Sports Illustrated , Brundage was " the kind of man whom Horatio Alger had canonized — the American urchin , tattered and deprived , who rose to thrive in the company of kings and millionaires " . 
 After graduation from Crane Tech in 1905 , Brundage enrolled at the University of Illinois , where he undertook an arduous schedule of civil engineering courses . He received an honors degree in 1909 . He wrote for various campus publications and continued his involvement in sports . Brundage played basketball and ran track for Illinois , and also participated in several intramural sports . In his senior year , he was a major contributor to Illinois ' Western Conference championship track team , which defeated the University of Chicago ( coached by Amos Alonzo Stagg ) . 
 After graduation , Brundage began work as a construction superintendent for the leading architectural firm of Holabird & Roche . In the three years he worked for the firm , he supervised the construction of $ 7 @.@ 5 million in buildings — 3 percent of the total built in Chicago in that time @-@ frame . He disliked the corruption of the Chicago building trades . Brundage 's biographer , Allen Guttmann , points out that the young engineer was in a position to benefit from influence if he had wanted to , as his uncle , Edward J. Brundage , was by then Republican leader of Chicago 's North Side and would become Attorney General of Illinois . Brundage had been successful in a number of track and field events while at Illinois . In 1910 , as a member of the Chicago Athletic Association ( CAA ) , he finished third in the national all @-@ around championships ( an American predecessor of the decathlon ) , sponsored by the Amateur Athletic Union ( AAU ) , and continued training , aiming at the 1912 Olympics in Stockholm . 
 At Stockholm , Brundage finished sixth in the pentathlon and 16th in the decathlon . Far behind on points , after eight events he dropped out of the decathlon , which he always regretted . He later moved up one spot in the standings in each event when his fellow American , Jim Thorpe , who had won both events , was disqualified after it was shown that he had played baseball for money : this meant Thorpe was considered a professional , not an amateur as was required for Olympic participation . Throughout his tenure as president , Brundage refused to ask the IOC to restore Thorpe 's medals despite advocacy by Thorpe supporters . The committee eventually did so in 1982 , after the deaths of both men . Brundage 's refusal led to charges that he held a grudge for being beaten in Stockholm . 
 Upon his return to Chicago , Brundage accepted a position as construction superintendent for John Griffith and Sons Contractors . Among the structures he worked on for Griffith were the Cook County Hospital , the Morrison Hotel , the Monroe Building , and the National Biscuit Company warehouse . In 1915 , he struck out on his own in construction , founding the Avery Brundage Company , of which his uncle Edward was a director . Brundage continued his athletic career as well . He was US all @-@ around champion in 1914 , 1916 , and 1918 . Once he had ceased to be a track star , he took up handball . As a young man , he was ranked in the top ten in the country and even in 1934 , at the age of 46 , he won one game out of two against Angelo <unk> , who had recently been the US national champion . 
 = = Sports administrator = = 
 = = = Rise to leadership = = = 
 As Brundage approached the end of his track career , he began to involve himself in sports administration , at first through the CAA , then through the Central Association of the Amateur Athletic Union ( of which the CAA was a member ) and then , beginning in 1919 , in the AAU . That group was involved in an ongoing battle for dominance over US amateur sports with the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) . Athletes were often used as pawns in the battle , with one organization threatening to suspend those who participated in events sponsored by the other . Another venue for conflict was in the United States ' National Olympic Committee ( NOC ) , which was then called the American Olympic Committee ( AOC ) , and which was AAU @-@ dominated . In 1920 , there was public outcry when the AOC chartered a disused troopship to carry home America 's representatives in the 1920 Olympic Games in Antwerp ; much of the team instead booked passage by ocean liner . In response , the AAU founded an American Olympic Association as a separate group , although it was still initially dominated by AAU representatives — it then selected the AOC . In 1928 , on the resignation of then @-@ AOA president General Douglas MacArthur , Brundage was elected president of the AOA ; he was also elected president of the AOC , a post he held for over 20 years . 
 In 1925 Brundage became vice @-@ president of the AAU , and chairman of its Handball Committee . After a year as first vice @-@ president , he became president in 1928 and kept the post ( except for a one @-@ year break in 1933 ) through 1935 . In that capacity , he was able to secure peace between the NCAA and AAU , with the former gaining the right to certify college students as amateurs , and greater representation on the AOA 's executive board . 
 Brundage quickly displayed what writer Roger Butterfield in a 1948 article for Life magazine termed " a dictatorial temperament . " In 1929 , American track star Charlie Paddock stated that Brundage and other sports officials were making money for the AOC by using him as a gate attraction , while treating him badly ; Brundage shot back accusing Paddock of " untruths " and " sensationalism of the <unk> sort " . The runner turned professional , escaping Brundage 's jurisdiction . In 1932 , soon after winning three medals at the 1932 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles , track star Mildred " Babe " <unk> appeared in an automobile advertisement , and the Brundage @-@ led AAU quickly suspended her amateur status . <unk> objected that she had not been paid and that regardless , the rules for maintaining amateur status were <unk> . In the first of several well @-@ publicized run @-@ ins he had with female athletes , Brundage replied that he had not had any problem with the rules when an Olympic athlete himself , and stated , " You know , the ancient Greeks kept women out of their athletic games . They wouldn 't even let them on the sidelines . I 'm not so sure but they were right . " According to Butterfield , Brundage was suspicious of female athletes , suspecting that some were actually men in disguise . 
 = = = 1936 Olympics = = = 
 = = = = Fighting a boycott = = = = 
 In 1931 , the IOC had awarded the 1936 Olympics to Germany , with the Summer Games to be held in the capital , Berlin . Several IOC members indicated that by giving Germany the Olympics , they were showing support for its democratic government , under attack from extremists in the hard economic times of the Depression . The Berlin Games were thrown in doubt , however , by the July 1932 elections for the national legislature , the Reichstag . In an unexpected result , the Nazi Party , led by Adolf Hitler , became the largest in the Reichstag . The Nazis had expressed little interest in international sport , preferring the idea of German games to show the Germans being a " master race " at which they could promote Aryan racial superiority in competing against subhuman " Untermenschen " , such as people of Jewish , Gypsy or African descent . When the Nazis attained power in January 1933 , the Olympics were thought likely to be moved elsewhere . 
 Although the Nazis were suspicious of the chairman of the local Olympic organizing committee , Theodor <unk> , as he had a Jewish grandmother , they quickly saw the propaganda potential in hosting the Olympic Games . <unk> had intended to stage the Games on a shoestring budget ; instead , the resources of the Reich were thrown behind the effort . As the Nazi hatred of the Jews manifested itself in persecution , there were calls to move the Olympics from Germany , or alternatively , to boycott the Games . As head of the Olympic movement in the US , Brundage received many letters and telegrams urging action . In 1933 and 1934 , the IOC worked to assure that , consistent with Olympic ideals , the Games would be open to all , and that there would be no discrimination because of race or religion . IOC President Comte Henri de Baillet @-@ Latour wrote to Brundage in 1933 , " I am not personally fond of <unk> [ sic ] and of the jewish [ sic ] influence , but I will not have them molested in no way [ sic ] whatsoever . " According to historical writer Christopher Hilton in his account of the 1936 Games , " Baillet @-@ Latour , and the great and good around him , had no idea what was coming , and if the [ IOC 's ] German delegates kept offering assurances , what else could they do but accept them ? " Baillet @-@ Latour opposed boycotting the Games , as did Brundage ( who had learned in 1933 that he was being considered for IOC membership ) . 
 In her 1982 journal article on his role in the US participation in the 1936 Summer Games , Carolyn Marvin explained Brundage 's political outlook : 
 The foundation of Brundage 's political world view was the proposition that Communism was an evil before which all other evils were insignificant . A collection of lesser themes basked in the reflected glory of the major one . These included Brundage 's admiration for Hitler 's apparent restoration of prosperity and order to Germany , his conception that those who did not work for a living in the United States were an anarchic human tide , and a suspicious anti @-@ Semitism which feared the dissolution of Anglo @-@ Protestant culture in a sea of ethnic aspirations . 
 Nazi pledges of nondiscrimination in sports proved inconsistent with their actions , such as the expulsion of Jews from sports clubs , and in September 1934 , Brundage sailed for Germany to see for himself . He met with government officials and others , although he was not allowed to meet with Jewish sports leaders alone . When he returned , he reported , " I was given positive assurance in writing ... that there will be no discrimination against Jews . You can 't ask more than that and I think the guarantee will be fulfilled . " Brundage 's trip only increased the controversy over the question of US participation , with New York Congressman Emanuel Celler stating that Brundage " had <unk> the situation before he sailed from America " . Nevertheless , on September 26 , 1934 , after hearing a report from Brundage on conditions in Germany , the AOC voted to send a US team to Berlin . 
 Brundage took the position that as the Germans had reported nondiscrimination to the IOC , and the IOC had accepted that report , US Olympic authorities were bound by that determination . Nevertheless , it became increasingly apparent that with the Nazi actions , no Jew was likely to secure a place on the German team . Brundage stated on this issue that as only 12 Jews had ever represented Germany in the Olympics , it would hardly be surprising if none did in 1936 . 
 Foiled at the AOC , boycott advocates turned to the AAU , hoping that the athletics organization , though also led by Brundage , would refuse to certify athletes for Berlin . Although no vote took place on a boycott at the AAU 's December 1934 meeting , Brundage did not seek re @-@ election , and delegates elected Judge Jeremiah T. Mahoney as the new president , to take office in 1935 . Although pro @-@ boycott activities briefly fell into a lull , renewed Nazi brutality against the Jews in June 1935 sparked a resurgence , and converted Mahoney to the pro @-@ boycott cause . In October , Baillet @-@ Latour wrote to the three American IOC members : William May Garland , Charles Sherrill , and Ernest Lee Jahncke , asking them to do all they could to ensure a US team was sent to Germany . Garland and Sherrill agreed ; Jahncke , however , refused , stating that he would be supporting the boycott . Brundage , at Baillet @-@ Latour 's request , took the lead in the anti @-@ boycott campaign . Matters came to a head at the AAU convention in December 1935 . Brundage 's forces won the key votes , and the AAU approved sending a team to Berlin , specifying that this did not mean it supported the Nazis . In victory , Brundage was not magnanimous , demanding the resignation of opponents . Although not all quit , Mahoney did . 
 Brundage believed that the boycott controversy could be used effectively for fundraising , writing , " the fact that the Jews are against us will arouse interest among thousands of people who have never subscribed before , if they are properly approached . " In March 1936 , he wrote to advertising mogul Albert Lasker , a Jew , complaining that " a large number of misguided Jews still persist in attempting to hamper the activities of the American Olympic Committee . The result , of course , is increased support from the one hundred and twenty million non @-@ Jews in the United States , for this is a patriotic enterprise . " In a letter which David Large , in his book on the 1936 Games , terms " heavy @-@ handed " , Brundage suggested that by helping to finance American participation in the Olympic Games , Jews could decrease anti @-@ Semitism in the US . However , " Lasker , to his credit , refused to be blackmailed , " writing to Brundage that " You gratuitously insult not only Jews but the millions of patriotic Christians in America , for whom you venture to speak without warrant , and whom you so tragically misrepresent in your letter . " 
 = = = = Berlin = = = = 
 The American contingent of athletes and officials , led by Brundage , embarked on the S.S. Manhattan at New York for Hamburg on July 15 , 1936 . Immediately upon arrival in Germany , Brundage became headline news when he and the AOC dismissed swimmer Eleanor Holm Jarrett , a gold medalist in 1932 and expected to repeat , for activities on shipboard . Rumors and accounts of the married swimmer 's pursuits on board vary , but include statements that she was at an " all @-@ night party " with playwright Charles MacArthur , who was traveling without his wife , actress Helen Hayes . Brundage discussed the matter with fellow AOC members , then met with Jarrett . Although the AOC attempted to send her home , Jarrett , after pleading in vain for reinstatement , remained in Berlin as a journalist , " to the AOC 's horror " . In later years , she claimed that Brundage had kicked her off the team because he had propositioned her , and she had turned him down . According to Guttmann , " Brundage has appeared , ever since [ 1936 ] , in the guise of a <unk> . " Butterfield noted that through the efforts of sportswriters who supported Jarrett , " Brundage became celebrated as a tyrant , snob , hypocrite , dictator and stuffed shirt , as well as just about the meanest man in the whole world of sports " . 
 On July 30 , 1936 , six days after the American arrival in Germany , the IOC met in Berlin and unanimously expelled Jahncke . Two places for the United States were vacant , as Sherrill had died in June , but the minutes specifically note that Brundage was elected to the IOC in Jahncke 's place . 
 One of the sensations of the Games was black American track star Jesse Owens , who won four gold medals . According to some American press stories , Hitler left the stadium rather than shake hands with him . This was not the case ; Hitler had been told by IOC president Baillet @-@ Latour not to shake hands with the winners unless he was prepared to shake hands with all gold medalists , which he was not ; this , however was not publicized . According to Butterfield , in later years retellings of what Brundage termed " a fairy tale " roused the American to " acute fury " . Hitler was , however , asked by his youth leader , Baldur von Schirach , to meet Owens , and he refused , " Do you really think that I 'd allow myself to be photographed shaking hands with a Negro ? " 
 Another controversy which may have involved Brundage was the question of the US 4 × 100 meters relay squad . The expected team included Sam Stoller and Marty Glickman , both Jewish . After Owens won his third gold medal , both men were removed from the relay squad in favor of Owens and fellow black athlete Ralph Metcalfe . The US track coach , Lawson Robertson of the University of Pennsylvania , told Stoller and Glickman that the Germans had upgraded their squad and it was important to have the fastest team possible . In the event , the US team turned in back @-@ to @-@ back world record times in the heats and final to take the gold medal ; the Italians were a distant second , edging out the Germans for the silver medal . Neither Stoller nor Glickman ( who were the only Jews on the US track team , and the only US athletes in any sport to be on the team in Berlin , and not compete ) believed the stated reason for their replacement ; Stoller recorded in his diary that he and Glickman had been left out of the relay because the two other participants , Foy Draper and Frank Wykoff , had been coached by one of Robertson 's assistants at the University of Southern California . Glickman conceded college favoritism as a possible reason , but thought anti @-@ Semitism more likely , and hardened his position in the years to come : that he and Stoller had been replaced so as not to embarrass Hitler by having him see Jews , as well as blacks , win gold medals for the US track team . He believed Brundage was behind the replacement . Brundage denied any involvement in the decision , which remains controversial . Glickman went on to a lengthy career as a sports broadcaster , and was given the inaugural Douglas MacArthur Award ( for lifetime achievement in the field of sports ) in 1998 , after Stoller 's death , by the United States Olympic Committee ( successor to the AOC ) . USOC chairman William <unk> stated that while he had seen no written proof that Brundage was responsible , " I was a prosecutor . I 'm used to looking at evidence . The evidence was there " — though , as Large notes , " exactly what evidence , he didn 't say . " In his report submitted after the Games , Brundage called the controversy " absurd " : he noted that Glickman and Stoller had finished fifth and sixth at the Olympic trials at New York 's Randall 's Island stadium and that the US victory had validated the decision . 
 = = = Road to the IOC presidency = = = 
 Brundage 's first IOC session as an incumbent member was at Warsaw in June 1937 . The vice president of the IOC , Baron Godefroy de <unk> of Switzerland , had died , and Sweden 's Sigfrid Edström was elected to replace him . Brundage was selected to fill Edström 's place on the executive board . Edström had been a Brundage ally in the boycott fight , writing to the American that while he did not desire the persecution of the Jews , as an " intelligent and unscrupulous " people , " they had to be kept within certain limits " . Brundage wrote to a German correspondent regretting that Leni Riefenstahl 's film about the Berlin Olympics , Olympia , could not be commercially shown in the United States , as " unfortunately the theaters and moving picture companies are almost all owned by Jews " . 
 The Berlin Games had increased Brundage 's admiration for Germany , and he spoke out at a speech before the German @-@ American Bund at Madison Square Garden in October 1936 , stating that " five years ago they [ Germans ] were discouraged and demoralized — today they are united — sixty million people believing in themselves and in their country ... " In 1938 , his construction company received the contract to build a new German embassy in Washington ( this was not fulfilled as World War II intervened ) . Brundage joined the Keep America Out of War Committee and became a member of America First ( he resigned from both the day after Pearl Harbor ) . 
 Although the 1940 Olympic Games could not be held due to war , Brundage sought to organize Western Hemisphere games that might be able to proceed despite the troubled international climate . Brundage was one of the leaders in the founding of the Pan @-@ American Games , participating in the initial discussions in August 1940 in Buenos Aires . On his return , he arranged for the American Olympic Association to be renamed the United States of America Sports Federation ( <unk> ) , which would organize the United States Olympic Committee ( as the AOC would now be called ) and another committee to see to American participation in the Pan @-@ American Games . Brundage became an early member of the international Pan @-@ American Games Commission , although the inaugural event in Buenos Aires was postponed because of the war and was eventually held in 1951 , with Brundage present . Despite his role in founding them , Brundage viewed the Pan @-@ American Games as imitative , with no true link with antiquity . 
 War postponed any future Olympics , and fractured the IOC geographically and politically . With Baillet @-@ Latour in German @-@ occupied Belgium , Brundage and IOC vice president Edström did their best to keep channels of communication open between IOC members ; according to Guttmann , " He and Edström perceived themselves as keepers of the sacred flame , guardians of an ideal in whose name they were ready once again to act as soon as the madness ended . " Baillet @-@ Latour died in 1942 ; Edström took on the duties of president , although he continued to style himself vice @-@ president . Edström and Brundage did not await the end of war to rebuild the Olympic movement ; Brundage even sent parcels to Europe in aid of IOC members and others in places where food was scarce . With Edström turning 74 in 1944 , the Swede expressed concern as to who would lead the IOC if he should die , and suggested that Brundage become second vice @-@ president , a newly created position . A mail ballot of IOC members who could be reached confirmed the choice the following year . When Edström was made president by the first postwar IOC session at Lausanne in September 1946 , Brundage was elected first vice @-@ president . 
 As vice president , Brundage served on a commission appointed at the IOC 's London session in 1948 to recommend whether the 1906 Intercalated Games , held in Athens , should be considered a full Olympic Games . All three members of what came to be known as the Brundage Commission were from the Western Hemisphere and met in New Orleans in January 1949 . The commission found that there was nothing to be gained by recognizing the 1906 games as Olympic , and it might set an embarrassing precedent . The full IOC endorsed the report when it met later that year in Rome . 
 Edström intended to retire following the 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki , when a successor would be elected . Brundage 's rival for the presidency was Great Britain 's Lord Burghley , an Olympic gold medalist in track in 1928 and president of the International Amateur Athletic Federation ( IAAF ) . The balloting took place at the IOC session in the Finnish capital before the Games . Although Brundage was the executive board 's candidate , he was disliked by some IOC members ; others felt that the president should be a European . Private notes kept during the balloting reveal it to have been very close , but on the 25th and final ballot , Brundage received 30 votes to 17 for Burghley and was elected . 
 = = IOC president ( 1952 – 1972 ) = = 
 = = = Amateurism = = = 
 Throughout his career as a sports official , according to Guttmann , Brundage " was unquestionably an idealist . " He often concluded speeches by quoting from John Galsworthy : 
 Sport , which still keeps the flag of idealism flying , is perhaps the most saving grace in the world at the moment , with its spirit for rules kept , and regard for the adversary , whether the fight is going for or against . When , if ever , the spirit of sport , which is the spirit of fair play , reigns over international affairs , the cat force , which rules there now , will slink away , and human life emerge for the first time from the jungle . 
 This ideal was best realized , Brundage believed , in amateur sports : the athlete , he stated , should compete " for the love of the game itself without thought of reward or payment of any kind " , with professionals being part of the entertainment business . Amateurism , to Brundage , expressed the concept of the Renaissance man , with abilities in many fields , yet a specialist in none . 
 As the definition of " amateur " varied by sport , many of the battles he engaged in concerned the question of what money or valuables could an athlete accept , while retaining his amateur status , with some sports more liberal than others — in 1948 , tennis allowed expense payments of up to $ 600 per tournament , while boxing permitted valuable prizes as awards . Enforcement of these rules often fell to National Olympic Committees , and Brundage found them less than enthusiastic about rules which hampered their own athletes in the pursuit of medals . 
 Both before and after becoming IOC president , Brundage was involved in a number of controversies involving threats to , or sometimes actual disqualification of , athletes for breach of amateur rules . In 1932 , he was part of a special committee of the IAAF which disqualified Finnish runner Paavo Nurmi from the Los Angeles Games for allegedly accepting monetary compensation . At the 1948 Winter Olympics in St. Moritz , rival US ice hockey teams , sponsored by different accrediting organizations , came to the Games . The dispute proved difficult , and the IOC initially voted to cancel the tournament and eliminate ice hockey as an Olympic sport , but relented as thousands of tickets had been sold by the organizers . The team not favored by Brundage , whose organization was run by commercial rink operators , was allowed to compete . In 1972 , Brundage banned Austrian skier Karl <unk> from the Sapporo Winter Olympics for commercial activities , calling him " a walking billboard " . 
 As IOC president , Brundage 's views on amateurism came increasingly to be seen as outdated in the modern world , as the rules were tested by athletes who saw everyone making money but themselves . In 1962 , against Brundage 's opposition , the IOC amended the rules to allow sports federations to offer athletes " broken time " payments , compensating them for time missed from work , but only if they had dependents in need . In 1972 , Brundage called for the elimination of the Winter Olympics after 1976 , finding them hopelessly polluted by rampant commercialism , especially in alpine skiing . In his final speech to the IOC in Munich in 1972 , Brundage maintained his position on amateurism : " There are only two kinds of competitors . Those free and independent individuals who are interested in sports for sport 's sake , and those in sports for financial reasons . Olympic glory is for amateurs . " 
 = = = National participation controversies = = = 
 = = = = Germany = = = = 
 No German team was allowed at the 1948 Summer Olympics in London or the Winter Games in St. Moritz . Brundage was anxious to reintegrate Germany into the Olympic movement once the Federal Republic of Germany ( West Germany , through Brundage 's lifetime ) was formed in 1949 . Soon after the state 's formation , its National Olympic Committee approached the IOC , seeking recognition , but there was still much animus towards Germany . Just prior to the IOC session in Vienna in 1951 ( Brundage was still vice president ) , the German Democratic Republic ( East Germany ) also formed an NOC and requested recognition . This created controversy , as the Federal Republic and its NOC claimed to represent both West and East Germany , but did not control the latter . Despite lengthy discussions , no resolution was reached in 1951 , and the matter was put over until February 1952 , when a negotiating session was scheduled for Copenhagen . Although the East Germans came to Copenhagen , they refused to attend the session , which was eventually cancelled by Edström after the IOC officials and West Germans waited for hours in vain . The German team which competed in Helsinki that summer was entirely West German . 
 In 1954 , the East Germans resumed their attempts at recognition . The following year , after Brundage received assurances that the East German NOC was not government @-@ run , the IOC voted to recognize it , but required that both East and West Germany compete as part of a single German team in 1956 . East Germany sent only 37 athletes to the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne , and they lived and trained separately from their West German counterparts . For the Summer Olympics at Rome in 1960 , under continuing IOC insistence that the two states send a single team , East Germany contributed 141 of the 321 athletes ; competitors from both states lived in the same area of the Olympic Village . At the Opening Ceremony at Rome , Italian President Giovanni <unk> marveled , much to Brundage 's delight , that the IOC had obtained the German reunification which politicians had been unable to secure ; Brundage responded , " But in sport , we do such things . " Brundage saw the German participation as symbolic of the potential for the Olympic Games to overcome divisions to unite . 
 Despite the construction of the Berlin Wall beginning in 1961 , which increased tensions between East and West , Brundage was successful in securing a joint German team for the 1964 Summer Olympics in Tokyo . Nevertheless , the East Germans , supported by IOC members from Warsaw Pact nations , aspired to have their own team . They made a major breakthrough when the IAAF ( led by the Marquess of Exeter , the former Lord Burghley ) recognized a separate East German team beginning with the 1966 European Athletics Championships . The East Germans did their best to get Brundage 's support , and , at the IOC session at Mexico City in 1968 , they were granted full membership , with their own team under their own flag , which they displayed on West German soil four years later at the Opening Ceremony at Munich . Brundage , while finally supporting full membership for East Germany , considered the matter a defeat for Olympic ideals . 
 = = = = Soviet Union = = = = 
 Although Czarist Russia had sent athletes to the Olympic Games , after the Soviet Union was formed , it declined to participate , considering the Olympics bourgeois . As early as 1923 , the IOC attempted to lure the Soviets back into the fold ; Brundage visited the USSR in 1934 . He was impressed by the progress which had been made there since a visit he had made in 1912 after competing in Stockholm . Despite his anti @-@ Communism , Brundage wanted the Russians to join the Olympic movement . According to Guttmann , " When Brundage had to choose between his hostility to Communism and his commitment to the ideal of Olympic universality , he chose the latter . He wanted the Russians in the Olympics , Communists or not . " 
 During World War II , Brundage wrote to other IOC members that he had no objection to Soviet involvement in international sports , with representation on the IOC , if the USSR joined the international sports federations ( ISFs ) . The IOC required that an NOC be independent of the government of the territory which it represents ; there were concerns a Soviet NOC would not be . This was a problem not unique to communist states ; a number of Latin Americans countries were starting to bring the local NOCs into the political structure , with an official naming the NOC chair — who might even be the country 's political leader . This mixture of sports and politics worried Brundage . 
 Beginning in 1946 , the Soviets began to join international federations ; in 1951 their NOC was recognized by the IOC , and they began Olympic competition the following year . As few Soviet sports officials were internationally known , the IOC had little alternative than to accept the nominees of the USSR 's government if they wished to have Soviet IOC members . The Soviet members were believers in sport , and completely loyal to their nation and to communist ideals . They quickly became the leaders of the IOC members from behind the Iron Curtain , who voted in accord with the Soviet members . Brundage visited the USSR at Soviet invitation ( though at his own expense ) in 1954 . He deemed the nation 's physical education program as " creating the greatest army of athletes the world has ever seen , " warning ( as he would often through the 1950s ) that Americans were by comparison soft and unfit . Brundage found his view , often expressed in the press , that physical education and competitive sports made for better citizens , especially in the event of war , more enthusiastically embraced in the Soviet Union than in the United States . According to David Maraniss in his account of the 1960 Rome Games , Brundage 's admiration for the Soviet Union 's sports programs " in some ways mirrored his response two decades earlier to his encounters with Nazi Germany " . 
 On his return , he related in an article for The Saturday Evening Post that he had confronted Soviet officials with information from defectors stating that the USSR was running year @-@ round training camps and giving athletes material inducements for success . He also repeated the Soviet response , which questioned the defectors ' integrity : " These men are deserters , traitors . Would you attach any truth to their statements had they been Americans and had turned against your country ? " Since Brundage did not comment on the response , there was a storm of controversy in the press , which accused Brundage of being a Soviet dupe . 
 Despite the evident conflicts between amateurism and the Soviet system in which athletes received stipends , jobs , and housing at state expense , Brundage took no action against the USSR or Warsaw Pact nations with similar systems ; when challenged on this point , he argued that Western nations had similar abuses , such as athletic scholarships . The Soviet system remained in place , though Western nations reacted by giving their athletes greater state support . 
 = = = = China and Taiwan = = = = 
 The Republic of China , which then governed the mainland , had joined the Olympic movement in 1924 , when the China National Amateur Athletic Federation was recognized by the IOC as the nation 's NOC . China participated in the 1932 Olympics in Los Angeles , as well as in Berlin four years later and the first post @-@ war Olympics at London in 1948 . When the communists were successful in the Chinese Civil War and established the People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) in 1949 , most NOC members fled the mainland for the island of Taiwan . This left China with two rival NOCs , one on the mainland and one on Taiwan , each claiming to represent the whole of China . 
 Matters came to a head in 1952 , when the mainland NOC ( the All @-@ China Athletic Federation ) , considering itself a continuation of the pre @-@ 1949 committee , wrote to the IOC stating that it desired to participate in the Helsinki Olympics to be held that year . As the Taiwanese also proposed to send a team , this conflicted with IOC rules stating that only one committee could represent a country , and both Chinese groups were unwilling to negotiate with the other , or to send a joint team . After considerable deliberation , the IOC decided that if either committee was recognized by the ISF for a sport , the committee could send athletes to participate in events in that discipline . In protest , Taiwan withdrew from the Games ; the PRC sent a team to Helsinki , though it arrived ten days after the start of the Games . Brundage , president @-@ elect when the decision was made to allow PRC athletes to compete , argued against the decision to allow mainland participation before its NOC was recognized , but he was overruled by his colleagues . 
 In 1954 , the Brundage @-@ headed IOC , in a narrow vote , recognized both committees , thus allowing both states to participate at Melbourne . Only the PRC 's committee initially accepted , but when the Taiwanese NOC changed its mind and decided to send a team to the Games , the mainlanders withdrew in protest . Brundage took the position that despite similar concerns about state sponsorship as with the USSR , once the PRC 's committee was recognized and reported to the IOC that all eligibility rules were observed , the international committee had to accept that unless it had evidence to the contrary . He was frustrated by the continuing controversy , considering the squabble a distraction from the goal of advancing the Olympic movement . 
 When continuing efforts to exclude the Taiwanese failed , in 1958 the mainlanders withdrew from the IOC . The following year , the IOC ruled the Taiwanese could not compete under the name Republic of China Olympic Committee , but would have to compete under some other name which did not imply they governed sports in China . Brundage and Exeter both advocated for the ruling , which they compared to having an Italian NOC represent only Sicily . The press interpreted the ruling to mean that Nationalist China had been expelled from the Olympic movement , and for the next year , the anti @-@ communist Brundage found himself under attack in the press as a communist sympathizer . Although United States State Department officials attempted to persuade them to stand on principle , Taiwanese officials decided to participate in the Rome Games , hoping to secure China 's first medal , and believing their NOC 's continued presence helped keep mainland China out of the Games . Taiwanese athletes competed under the designation Formosa ( an alternate name for Taiwan ) , and caused a sensation by briefly displaying a sign reading " Under Protest " at the Opening Ceremony ; when Yang Chuan @-@ Kwang took the silver medal in the decathlon , he was not allowed to display the Nationalist Chinese flag at the medals ceremony . 
 Brundage , through his tenure , slowly came around to the position advocated by Iron Curtain IOC members , that the important thing was to recognize the mainland , with Taiwan of less importance . Although the mainland Chinese were invited by the Munich Olympic organizers to send an observer delegation to Munich ( they declined due to the Taiwanese presence ) , it was not until 1975 , after Brundage 's departure as president , that the PRC applied to rejoin the Olympic movement . The PRC again participated at the 1980 Winter Games at Lake Placid and then the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles ; the island NOC competed as the Republic of China in 1968 and 1972 ; when refused permission to compete under that name in 1976 , after Brundage 's death , it boycotted the 1976 and 1980 games , returning in 1984 as Chinese Taipei . 
 = = = = South Africa and Rhodesia = = = = 
 In the late 1950s , protest against South Africa 's apartheid regime reached the stage of seeking to exclude the nation from international sport . In 1956 , government rules requiring separate events for whites and non @-@ whites in South Africa were issued ; non @-@ whites received poorer facilities . Brundage initially opposed taking any action . The run @-@ up to the 1960 Rome Olympics had seen tumult in South Africa , including the Sharpeville massacre and a crackdown on the African National Congress . Activists attempted to persuade Brundage that South Africa should be excluded from the Games . Brundage initially took the word of South African sport leaders that all citizens were able to compete for a place on the Olympic team , and that non @-@ white South Africans simply were not good enough . 
 The drive towards a boycott was fueled by the large number of African nations which became independent in the late 1950s and early 1960s . To prevent the new nations from overwhelming the ISFs , Brundage proposed that the federations adopt weighted voting systems to allow earlier members to wield disproportionate influence , which some did . By 1962 , with the suspension of South Africa from FIFA ( the association football governing body ) , Brundage had come around to the position that South Africa 's racist policies were inconsistent with the ideals of the Olympic movement . At the 1963 IOC session in Baden @-@ Baden ( moved there from Nairobi when Kenyan officials refused to issue visas to South African representatives ) , the IOC voted to suspend South Africa from the Olympics unless its NOC and government adopted non @-@ discrimination policies regarding Olympic selection . This did not come to pass , and South Africa did not participate in 1964 . In 1968 , Brundage and the IOC invited a South African team ( supposedly to be multiracial ) to the Mexico City Games , but under a threatened boycott and with evidence of minimal South African compliance , withdrew it . 
 In 1971 , the IOC , at its Amsterdam session , voted to strip the South African NOC of recognition . Although Brundage had hoped to keep South Africa within the Olympic movement , he believed that those who sought its expulsion had made the stronger case . South Africa did not return to the Olympics until the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona , after the end of its apartheid government . 
 A parallel problem was that of Rhodesia , the British colony which had unilaterally declared its independence from Great Britain in 1965 . Rhodesia had a white minority government . In May 1968 , the United Nations Security Council condemned its government and asked nations not to honor its passports , and the Mexican government , set to host the Olympics later that year , complied with the ban . The IOC initially believed that sports facilities in the breakaway colony were not segregated , despite its government 's policies . The proposed 16 @-@ member Olympic team included two black athletes . Because of this , Brundage supported Rhodesian participation at Mexico City , but he was overruled by the IOC ; according to the head of the Rhodesian Olympic Committee , Douglas Downing , " His voice cries in a wilderness of spite . " For Munich in 1972 , the IOC decided to allow the Rhodesians to compete as British subjects , which by international law they were . African nations again threatened to boycott if the Rhodesians were allowed to participate , and , at its Munich session in 1972 just before the Games , the IOC narrowly voted to exclude the Rhodesians . Brundage was livid at the decision , believing that the IOC had yielded to blackmail . In 1974 , after Brundage left office , the IOC found evidence of segregated facilities in Rhodesia , and it subsequently withdrew recognition from its NOC . Rhodesia returned to the Olympics in 1980 as recognized independent Zimbabwe . 
 = = = Olympic administration ; challenges to leadership = = = 
 Unpaid as IOC president , even for his expenses , Brundage sometimes spent $ 50 @,@ 000 per year to finance his role . In 1960 , the IOC had almost no funds . Brundage and the IOC had considered the potential of television revenue as early as the Melbourne Games of 1956 , but had been slow to address the issue , with the result that television rights for the 1960 Games were in the hands of the Rome organizing committee ; the IOC received only 5 % of the $ 60 @,@ 000 rights fee . Accounts submitted by the Rome organizers showed they lost money on the Olympics ; the IOC would have received a portion of the profits , and had no money to offer the sports federations who wanted a percentage of the proceeds . In future years , the sale of television rights became a major source of revenue for the IOC , rising to $ 10 million by the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City , and $ 1 @.@ 2 billion , long after Brundage 's death , at Athens in 2004 . Brundage was concerned about the increasing revenue , warning IOC members in 1967 , " The moment we handle money , even if we only distribute it , there will be trouble ... " 
 NOC representatives had met with Brundage and the IOC executive board from time to time , but many NOC representatives felt that Brundage was taking no action in response to concerns expressed by the NOC attendees . In the early 1960s , many NOCs , led by Italian IOC member Giulio Onesti , sought to bypass Brundage and the IOC by forming a Permanent General Assembly of National Olympic Committees ( PGA @-@ NOC ) , which Brundage strongly opposed and the IOC refused to recognize . The PGA @-@ NOC from 1965 demanded a share of television revenue ; it also desired that the ISFs , not the IOC , set policy on amateurism . 
 Brundage had been initially elected in 1952 for an eight @-@ year term ; he was re @-@ elected unanimously in 1960 for an additional four years . Despite talk that he would be opposed by Exeter , Brundage 's 1952 rival nominated him for the new term . Brundage was re @-@ elected in 1964 by an announced unanimous vote , though Guttmann records that Brundage actually only narrowly turned back a challenge by Exeter . As Brundage 's term as president neared its end in 1968 , some IOC members , who saw him as hidebound , or just too old at 81 to effectively lead the organization , sought his ouster . Nevertheless , he was easily re @-@ elected at the IOC session in Mexico City that year , though he pledged not to seek another four @-@ year term , but to retire in 1972 . Ireland 's Lord Killanin was elected first vice @-@ president . Killanin , seen ( correctly ) as Brundage 's likely successor , was more sympathetic to the concerns of the NOCs , and attended PGA @-@ NOC meetings . Brundage did not recognize the PGA @-@ NOC , but did establish joint IOC @-@ NOC committees to address NOC concerns . Although the PGA @-@ NOC did not gain Olympic recognition , it remained a significant outside organization through Brundage 's presidency , and according to Guttmann , " Brundage won a less than total victory and Onesti suffered a far from complete defeat . The <unk> had become far more attractive to the national Olympic committees and to their interests , and that is what Onesti called for in the first place . " 
 With Brundage in Chicago or at his California home , day to day IOC operations were overseen at " Mon Repos " , the IOC headquarters in Lausanne , by Otto Meyer , the IOC 's chancellor . Brundage came to consider Meyer too impetuous , and dismissed him in 1964 , abolishing the office . Eventually , Brundage promoted Monique Berlioux to be IOC director in the last years of his tenure , and apparently found her services satisfactory . Mon Repos , the former home of the founder of the Modern Olympics , Baron Pierre de Coubertin , proved too cramped for the IOC , which had to share space with de Coubertin 's widow , who lived to be 101 . In 1968 , the IOC moved to new quarters at Lausanne 's Château de <unk> . 
 = = = Political demonstration at Mexico City = = = 
 The year 1968 had seen turmoil in the United States , including riots and the assassination of civil rights leader Martin Luther King . Prior to the Olympics in Mexico City in October 1968 , some African Americans , led by activist Harry Edwards , had urged a boycott of the Games , but found little enthusiasm among athletes , reluctant to waste years of effort . The atmosphere was made more tense by unrest in Mexico City before the Games which left dozens dead . 
 There were racial tensions between black US athletes and their white counterparts ; in one incident , African Americans blocked whites from the track . One black runner , Tommie Smith , told writers on October 15 , " I don 't want Brundage presenting me any medals " . The following day , Smith won the 200 meters , and fellow African @-@ American John Carlos took the bronze medal . The two men , after receiving their medals from IAAF president Lord Exeter , and as " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " played , raised black @-@ gloved fists , heads down , in salute of black power . Although the USOC initially only reprimanded the two men , under pressure from the IOC , two days after the race it suspended them from the team and expelled them from the Olympic Village . Other demonstrations by African @-@ Americans also took place : the three African Americans who took the medals in the 400 meters race , led by gold medalist Lee Evans , wore black berets during the anthem ( they were not disciplined by the USOC ) while African @-@ American boxer George Foreman , triumphant in the heavyweight division , waved an American flag around the boxing ring and with fellow American boxers invited Brundage to their victory celebration . Brundage 's comment about the Smith @-@ Carlos incident was " Warped mentalities and cracked personalities seem to be everywhere and impossible to eliminate . " The USOC 's official report omits the iconic photograph of Smith and Carlos with their fists raised ; the local organizing committee 's official film showed footage of the ceremony . Brundage , who termed the incident " the nasty demonstration against the American flag by negroes " , objected in vain to its inclusion . 
 = = = Munich 1972 = = = 
 At the same IOC session in August 1972 in Munich at which the Rhodesians were excluded , the IOC elected Killanin as Brundage 's successor , to take office after the Games . Brundage cast a blank ballot in the vote which selected the Irishman , considering him an intellectual lightweight without the force of character needed to hold the Olympic movement together . 
 Brundage hoped that the Munich Games would take the sting out of his defeat over the Rhodesian issue . Munich was one of his favorite cities , and the <unk> Spiele ( cheerful Games ) were designed to efface memories of 1936 and Berlin in the eyes of the world . They initially seemed to be doing so , as athletic feats , like those of gymnast Olga <unk> and swimmer Mark Spitz captivated viewers . In the early morning of September 5 , 1972 , Palestinian terrorists from the organization Black September entered the Olympic Village and took 11 Israelis hostage , demanding freedom for hundreds of Palestinians held in Israeli custody . Brundage , once informed , rushed to the Olympic Village , where he conferred with German and Bavarian state officials through the day , playing what Guttmann describes as a modest role in the discussions . German officials moved the hostages and their captors to Fürstenfeldbruck Air Base , where German police and troops tried a rescue late that evening . The attempt was bungled ; the nine remaining hostages ( two had been murdered earlier ) and three of their captors were killed . 
 Even before the ill @-@ fated rescue attempt , IOC officials began conferring . Killanin and other officials were in Kiel for the yacht racing ; they hurried back to Munich . Just before 4 pm , Brundage called off the remainder of the day 's events , and announced a memorial service honoring those who had already died for the following morning . Many Olympic leaders were critical of Brundage for his participation in the discussions with the government , feeling that this should have been left for the authorities and the local organizing committee , but all supported the memorial service , which was held the following day in the Olympic Stadium . There , before the audience in the stadium and the millions watching on television , Brundage offered what Guttmann called " the credo of his life " : 
 Every civilized person recoils in horror at the barbarous criminal intrusion of terrorists into the peaceful Olympic precincts . We mourn our Israeli friends , victims of this brutal assault . The Olympic flag and the flags of all the world fly at half mast . Sadly , in this imperfect world , the greater and more important the Olympic Games become , the more they are open to commercial , political and now criminal pressure . The Games of the 20th Olympiad have been subjected to two savage attacks . We lost the Rhodesian battle against naked political blackmail . We have only the strength of a great ideal . I am sure the public will agree that we cannot allow a handful of terrorists to destroy this nucleus of international cooperation and goodwill we have in the Olympic movement . The Games must go on and we must continue our efforts to keep them clear , pure and honest and try to extend sportsmanship of the athletic field to other areas . We declare today a day of mourning and will continue all the events one day later than scheduled . 
 The crowd in the stadium responded to Brundage 's statement with loud applause ; according to Stars & Stripes , " Brundage 's statement that ' the games must go on ' took much of the heavy gloom away which has permeated Munich since early Tuesday [ September 5 , the day of the attack ] . " Killanin , after his own retirement as IOC president , stated that " I believe Brundage was right to continue and that his stubborn determination saved the Olympic Movement one more time " but that Brundage 's mention of the Rhodesian question was , while not inappropriate , at least better left for another time . According to future IOC vice president Dick Pound , the insertion of the Rhodesian issue into the speech " was universally condemned , and Brundage left office under a cloud of criticism that effectively undermined a lifetime of well @-@ intentioned work in the Olympic movement " . Brundage subsequently issued a statement that he did not mean to imply the decision to exclude the Rhodesians , which he stated was " purely a matter of sport " , was comparable to the murder of the Israelis . According to Alfred Senn in his history of the Olympics , the decision to continue the games " sat poorly with many observers " ; sportswriter Red Smith of The New York Times was among the critics : 
 This time surely , some thought , they would cover the sandbox and put the blocks aside . But , no . " The Games must go on , " said Avery Brundage , and 80 @,@ 000 listeners burst into applause . The occasion was yesterday 's memorial service for eleven members of Israel 's Olympic delegation murdered by Palestinian terrorists . It was more like a pep rally . 
 = = Retirement and death = = 
 After the 1972 Summer Games , Brundage retired as IOC president . Accounts of Brundage 's state of mind in his retirement differ . IOC director Berlioux stated that Brundage would come to the Château de <unk> and take telephone calls or look at correspondence , waiting for Lord Killanin to turn to him for help . According to Berlioux , Brundage sometimes called her from Geneva and asked her to go there . The two would spend hours wandering the streets , saying little . Brundage 's longtime factotum , Frederick Ruegsegger , described a different , tranquil , Brundage , whom he compared to an abdicated Japanese emperor . 
 His wife of nearly half a century , Elizabeth , to whom he had not been faithful , died in 1971 . Brundage had once jested that his ambition was to wed a German princess . In June 1973 , this came to pass when he married Princess Mariann Charlotte Katharina Stefanie von Reuss ( 1936 – 2003 ) , daughter of Heinrich XXXVII , Prince of Reuss @-@ <unk> . Von Reuss had worked as an interpreter during the Munich Games ; she stated that she had met Brundage in 1955 , when she was 19 . When Brundage was asked by reporters about the 48 @-@ year difference in their ages , Brundage responded that that he was young for his age and she mature for hers , and instead of 85 years to 37 , it should be thought of as more like 55 to 46 . Ruegsegger refused to be best man and stated after Brundage 's death that the couple had dissipated much of Brundage 's fortune through free spending , though Guttmann notes that some of those purchases were of real estate , which could be deemed investments . 
 In January 1974 , Brundage underwent surgery for cataracts and glaucoma . The necessary arrangements had initially been made by Brundage 's protégé , Spanish IOC member Juan Antonio Samaranch , who would become IOC president in 1980 . At the last moment , Brundage canceled the plans , choosing to have the surgery in Munich , near the home he had purchased in Garmisch @-@ Partenkirchen , site of the 1936 Winter Olympics . After a month and a half , Brundage was discharged from the hospital , though whether the surgery had improved his vision was disputed , with Mariann Brundage stating that it did and Ruegsegger stating the contrary . Now frail , at age 87 he went with his wife on a final tour of the Far East . Despite the efforts of Olympic officials on his behalf , he was not given an invitation to mainland China , source of much of the art he loved . In April 1975 , Brundage entered the hospital at Garmisch @-@ Partenkirchen with flu and a severe cough . He died there on May 8 , 1975 , of heart failure . 
 In his will , Brundage provided for his wife and for Ruegsegger , as well as making several charitable bequests . He left his papers and memorabilia to the University of Illinois ; he had already given it $ 350 @,@ 000 to fund scholarships for students interested in competing in sports who do not receive an athletic scholarship . 
 = = Personal life and business career = = 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Brundage married Elizabeth Dunlap , daughter of a Chicago banker , in 1927 , when he was 40 . Elizabeth Brundage , three years younger than her husband , was a trained soprano , a talent she exhibited for visitors to the Brundage home . She had a strong interest in classical music , one which may not have been fully shared by her husband , who said of a performance of Wagner 's Die Walküre that it " started at 7 o 'clock , at 10 : 00 pm I looked at my watch and it registered exactly 8 o 'clock " . She died at age 81 in 1971 . 
 Avery Brundage had no children with either of his wives . During his first marriage , however , Brundage fathered two sons out of wedlock with his Finnish mistress , Lilian Dresden . His affair with Dresden was one of many . The children were born in 1951 and 1952 , at precisely the time that Brundage was being considered for the presidency of the IOC . Though he privately acknowledged paternity , Brundage took great pains to conceal the existence of these children , concerned that the truth about his extra @-@ marital relationships might damage his chances of election : he requested that his name be kept off the birth certificates . Brundage visited his two sons periodically in the 1950s , visits that tailed off to telephone calls in the 1960s and nothing in his final years . He did establish a trust fund for the boys ' education and start in life , but after his death , unnamed in his will , they sued and won a small settlement of $ 62 @,@ 500 each out of his $ 19 million estate . 
 = = = Construction executive = = = 
 After its founding in 1915 , a large source of the Avery Brundage Company 's business was wartime government contracts . Brundage , who applied for a commission in the Army Ordnance Corps but was rejected , in the postwar period became a member of the Construction Division Association , composed of men who had built facilities for the military , and later became its president from 1926 to 1928 . 
 In the 1920s , Brundage and his company became very active in constructing high @-@ rise apartment buildings in Chicago . He used rapid construction methods , allowing clients to begin realizing income from their investments quickly — the Sheridan @-@ Brompton Apartments ( 1924 ) overlooking Lincoln Park , were built in five months , allowing the start of $ 40 @,@ 000 in monthly rental income , offsetting a monthly mortgage payment of $ 15 @,@ 000 . Often , the Brundage Company was involved in the ownership of the apartments : 3800 Sheridan Road ( 1927 ) , a 17 @-@ story building costing $ 3 @,@ 180 @,@ 000 , was owned by a company which had as its president and treasurer Chester Brundage , Avery 's younger brother . It was constructed in eight months , through the Chicago winter , using an onsite concrete mixing plant . This temporary structure also provided office space for the construction . Another source of income for Brundage and his company was hotel construction , for which he was often paid in part with stock in the new facility . One president of an engineering firm specializing in large structures called Brundage 's methods on the Shoreham Hotel " progressive , snappy , [ and ] up @-@ to @-@ date " and " straightforward and honest " . 
 In 1923 , Brundage constructed a massive assembly plant on Torrence Avenue on Chicago 's South Side for the Ford Motor Company . At $ 4 million in cost and bringing 16 acres ( 6 @.@ 5 ha ) under one roof , it was the largest industrial plant built by Brundage . Constructed in ten months , the new facility helped meet the national demand for Model T cars in the 1920s , and in 1950 , produced 154 @,@ 244 vehicles . A plant for Hubbard & Co. was erected in 125 days despite an unusually harsh Chicago winter . Despite later statements from Brundage that he avoided public works due to corruption , he built the 23rd Street viaduct as part of the South Shore Development project ; Brundage 's viaduct extended Chicago 's shoreline into Lake Michigan at a cost of two million dollars . By 1925 , the Avery Brundage Company was acclaimed for speed , innovation , and quality , and had a payroll of $ 50 @,@ 000 a week . 
 Although the start of the Depression in 1929 was a major setback for Brundage , he rebuilt his wealth by investments in real estate , also accepting interests in buildings he had constructed in lieu of payments the owners were unable to make . He later stated that " you didn 't have to be a wizard " in order to " buy stocks and bonds in depressed corporations for a few cents on the dollar — and then wait . I was just a little lucky . " According to historian and archivist Maynard <unk> , Brundage " emerged from the difficult depression years with a substantial annual income , a good reputation , and excellent investments " . His foresight resulted in a fortune which by 1960 was estimated at $ 25 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 A major Brundage investment was Chicago 's La Salle Hotel , which had been built in 1908 . Located in the heart of The Loop and the city 's financial district , Brundage first leased it in 1940 , later purchasing it . When the hotel was seriously damaged by fire in 1946 , Brundage spent about $ 2 @.@ 5 million remodeling and modernizing it . As Brundage made a home there during his time as IOC president , the hotel became famous in international sports as his residence . He sold the hotel in 1970 , but later reclaimed it when the purchaser failed to make required payments . 
 = = = Art collector and benefactor = = = 
 Brundage 's interest in Asian art stemmed from a visit he made to an exhibition of Chinese art at the Royal Academy in London in early 1936 , after the Winter Olympics in Garmisch @-@ Partenkirchen . Brundage stated of the experience , " We [ his first wife Elizabeth and himself ] spent a week at the exhibition and I came away so enamored with Chinese art that I 've been broke ever since . " He did not begin active collecting until after the <unk> ' two @-@ week visit to Japan in April 1939 , where they visited Yokohama , Kyoto , Osaka , Nara , and Nikko . They followed up Japan with visits to Shanghai and Hong Kong , but due to the war between Japan and China , were unable to explore further on Avery Brundage 's only visit to mainland China — this disappointment bothered him his whole life . 
 On his return to the United States after the June 1939 IOC session in London , Brundage systematically set about becoming a major collector of Asian art . The unsettled conditions caused wealthy Chinese to sell family heirlooms , and prices were depressed , making it an opportune moment to collect . He bought many books on Asian art , stating in an interview that a " major library is an indispensable tool " . After the US entered World War II , stock owned by Japanese dealers in the United States was impounded ; Brundage was able to purchase the best items . Dealers found him willing to spend money , but knowledgeable and a hard <unk> . Brundage rarely was fooled by forgeries , and was undeterred by the few he did buy , noting that in Asian art , fake pieces were often a thousand years old . In his 1948 article on Brundage for Life , Butterfield noted that " his collection is regarded as one of the largest and most important in private hands in this country " . 
 Brundage engaged the French scholar René @-@ Yvon Lefebvre d <unk> , then teaching at the University of California , as full @-@ time curator of his collection and advisor on acquisitions . The two men made a deal — no piece would be purchased unless both men agreed . They built a collection of jade which ranged from the neolithic period to the modern era ; and hundreds of Chinese , Japanese , and Korean bronzes , mostly Buddhas and Bodhisattvas . The painter who Brundage admired the most was Huizong , 12th @-@ century Chinese emperor of the Song dynasty ; the collector never was able to obtain any of his work . Brundage several times bought pieces smuggled out of their lands of origin to restore them there . When Brundage sold a piece , it was most likely because he no longer favored it artistically , rather than to realize a profit . In 1954 , a financial statement prepared for Brundage listed the value of his collection as more than $ 1 million . In 1960 , Robert Shaplen , in his article on Brundage for The New Yorker , noted that Brundage , during his travels as IOC president , always found time to visit art dealers , and stated that the collection was valued at $ 15 million . 
 By the late 1950s , Brundage was increasingly concerned about what to do with his collection . His homes in Chicago and California were so overwhelmed with art that priceless artifacts were kept in shoeboxes under beds . In 1959 , Brundage agreed to give part of his collection to the city of San Francisco . The following year city voters passed a bond issue of $ 2 @,@ 725 @,@ 000 to house the donation . The result was the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco , which opened in 1966 in Golden Gate Park , initially sharing space with the M. H. de Young Memorial Museum before moving to its own facility near the Civic Center in 2003 . Brundage made another major donation in 1969 ( despite a fire which destroyed many pieces at his California home , " La <unk> " near Santa Barbara in 1964 ) , and left the remainder of his collection to the museum in his will . Today , the museum has 7 @,@ 700 pieces from Brundage among the 17 @,@ 000 @-@ plus objects which make up its collection . 
 Brundage connected the world of art and that of amateur sports in his own mind . In a speech to the IOC session in Tokyo in 1958 , he discussed netsuke , used at one time by Japanese to anchor items hung from kimono sashes , and of which he owned several thousand ; he held two in his hands as he spoke . He told the members that a netsuke was at one time carefully carved by the man who wore it , building " something of himself into the design " , and although a class of professional netsuke makers arose later , whose work might have been more technically adept , it was , " ordinarily cold , stiff , and without imagination . ... Missing was the element of the amateur carver , which causes these netsuke to be esteemed so much higher by the collector than the commercial product carved for money . " Brundage later commented about his speech , " Here was the difference between amateurism and professionalism spelled out in a netsuke . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Retrospective news coverage has sometimes judged Brundage harshly : in May 2012 , The Independent dubbed him " The ancient IOC emperor , anti @-@ Semite and Nazi sympathiser bent on insulating the Games from the meddlesome tentacles of the real world . " The Orange County Register stated that Brundage 's " racism and anti @-@ Semitism are well documented " , and the New York Daily News averred that Brundage " admired Hitler and infamously replaced two Jewish sprinters on the 4 @-@ by @-@ 100 relay team because it could have further embarrassed Hitler if they won " . 
 Brundage leaves an uncertain legacy . On the question of amateurism , Maraniss suggests that Brundage was " caught in a vise " between communist and capitalist states pursuing dissimilar goals ; nations following either system were not willing to accept Brundage 's vision of pure amateurism , and broke those rules , each system in its own way . Guttmann notes that in the 1960s , Brundage may have been better @-@ known as an art collector than for his sports activities , and " there are those who maintain that he will be remembered not for his career in sports but for his <unk> and bronzes . " Andrew Leigh , a Member of the Australian House of Representatives , criticizes Brundage for expelling the two athletes in Mexico City , calling him " a man who 'd had no difficulty with the Nazi salute being used in the 1936 Olympics " . Dick Pound believes Brundage to have been one of the IOC 's great presidents , along with de Coubertin and Samaranch , but concedes that by the end of his term , Brundage was out of touch with the world of sports . While Pound credits Brundage with holding the Olympic movement together in a period when it was beset by many challenges , he notes that this might not be fully appreciated by those who remember Brundage for the final years of his term , and for Munich . 
 Senn suggests that Brundage remained too long as IOC president : 
 After Munich , Brundage departed the Games , which had grown beyond his comprehension and his capacity to adjust . The NOCs and the [ ISFs ] were revolting against his arbitrary administration ; violence had invaded his holy mountain and was giving every indication of returning ; despite all his efforts to reach out to the world through athletics , he stood accused of bigotry and both race and class prejudice , not to mention the denunciations proclaiming him politically naive ... Few mourned his departure from the Olympic scene , and the International Olympic Committee turned to his successor , who , its members hoped , would be better suited to handle the new items on its agenda . 
 = Bastille = 
 The Bastille ( French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> ] ) was a fortress in Paris , known formally as the Bastille Saint @-@ Antoine . It played an important role in the internal conflicts of France and for most of its history was used as a state prison by the kings of France . It was stormed by a crowd on 14 July 1789 , in the French Revolution , becoming an important symbol for the French Republican movement , and was later demolished and replaced by the Place de la Bastille . 
 The Bastille was built to defend the eastern approach to the city of Paris from the English threat in the Hundred Years ' War . Initial work began in 1357 , but the main construction occurred from 1370 onwards , creating a strong fortress with eight towers that protected the strategic gateway of the Porte Saint @-@ Antoine on the eastern edge of Paris . The innovative design proved influential in both France and England and was widely copied . The Bastille figured prominently in France 's domestic conflicts , including the fighting between the rival factions of the Burgundians and the Armagnacs in the 15th century , and the Wars of Religion in the 16th . The fortress was declared a state prison in 1417 ; this role was expanded first under the English occupiers of the 1420s and 1430s , and then under Louis XI in the 1460s . The defences of the Bastille were fortified in response to the English and Imperial threat during the 1550s , with a bastion constructed to the east of the fortress . The Bastille played a key role in the rebellion of the Fronde and the battle of the faubourg Saint @-@ Antoine , which was fought beneath its walls in 1652 . 
 Louis XIV used the Bastille as a prison for upper @-@ class members of French society who had opposed or angered him including , after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes , French Protestants . From 1659 onwards , the Bastille functioned primarily as a state penitentiary ; by 1789 , 5 @,@ 279 prisoners had passed through its gates . Under Louis XV and XVI , the Bastille was used to detain prisoners from more varied backgrounds , and to support the operations of the Parisian police , especially in enforcing government censorship of the printed media . Although inmates were kept in relatively good conditions , criticism of the Bastille grew during the 18th century , fueled by autobiographies written by former prisoners . Reforms were implemented and prisoner numbers were considerably reduced . In 1789 the royal government 's financial crisis and the formation of the National Assembly gave rise to a swelling of republican sentiments among city @-@ dwellers . On 14 July the Bastille was stormed by a revolutionary crowd , primarily residents of the faubourg Saint @-@ Antoine who sought to commandeer the valuable gunpowder held within the fortress . Seven remaining prisoners were found and released and the Bastille 's governor , Bernard @-@ René de Launay , was killed by the crowd . The Bastille was demolished by order of the Committee of the Hôtel de Ville . Souvenirs of the fortress were transported around France and displayed as icons of the overthrow of despotism . Over the next century , the site and historical legacy of the Bastille featured prominently in French revolutions , political protests and popular fiction , and it remained an important symbol for the French Republican movement . 
 Almost nothing is left of the Bastille except some remains of its stone foundation that were relocated to the side of the Boulevard Henri IV . Historians were critical of the Bastille in the early 19th century , and believe the fortress to have been a relatively well @-@ administered institution , but deeply implicated in the system of French policing and political control during the 18th century . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 14th century = = = 
 The Bastille was built in response to a threat to Paris during the Hundred Years ' War between England and France . Prior to the Bastille , the main royal castle in Paris was the Louvre , in the west of the capital , but the city had expanded by the middle of the 14th century and the eastern side was now exposed to an English attack . The situation worsened after the imprisonment of John II in England following the French defeat at the battle of Poitiers , and in his absence the Provost of Paris , Étienne Marcel , took steps to improve the capital 's defences . In 1357 , Marcel expanded the city walls and protected the Porte Saint @-@ Antoine with two high stone towers and a 78 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 24 m ) ditch . A fortified gateway of this sort was called a " bastille " , and was one of two created in Paris , the other being built outside the Porte Saint @-@ Denis . Marcel was subsequently removed from his post and executed in 1358 . 
 In 1369 , Charles V became concerned about the weakness of the eastern side of the city to English attacks and raids by mercenaries . Charles instructed Hugh <unk> , the new provost , to build a much larger fortification on the same site as Marcel 's bastille . Work began in 1370 with another pair of towers being built behind the first bastille , followed by two towers to the north , and finally two towers to the south . The fortress was probably not finished by the time Charles died in 1380 , and was completed by his son , Charles VI . The resulting structure became known simply as the Bastille , with the eight irregularly built towers and linking curtain walls forming a structure 223 feet ( 68 m ) wide and 121 feet ( 37 m ) deep , the walls and towers 78 feet ( 24 m ) high and 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) thick at their bases . Built to the same height , the roofs of the towers and the tops of the walls formed a broad , crenellated walkway all the way around the fortress . Each of the six newer towers had underground " <unk> " , or dungeons , at its base , and curved " <unk> " , literally " shell " , rooms in their roofs . 
 <unk> by a captain , a knight , eight squires and ten crossbowmen , the Bastille was encircled with ditches fed by the River Seine , and faced with stone . The fortress had four sets of drawbridges , which allowed the Rue Saint @-@ Antoine to pass eastwards through the Bastille 's gates while giving easy access to the city walls on the north and south sides . The Bastille overlooked the Saint @-@ Antoine gate , which by 1380 was a strong , square building with turrets and protected by two drawbridges of its own . Charles V chose to live close to the Bastille for his own safety and created a royal complex to the south of the fortress called the Hôtel St. Paul , stretching from the Porte Saint @-@ Paul up to the Rue Saint @-@ Antoine . 
 Historian Sidney Toy has described the Bastille as " one of the most powerful fortifications " of the period , and the most important fortification in late medieval Paris . The Bastille 's design was highly innovative : it rejected both the 13th @-@ century tradition of more weakly fortified quadrangular castles , and the contemporary fashion set at Vincennes , where tall towers were positioned around a lower wall , overlooked by an even taller keep in the centre . In particular , building the towers and the walls of the Bastille at the same height allowed the rapid movement of forces around the castle , as well as giving more space to move and position cannons on the wider walkways . The Bastille design was copied at Pierrefonds and Tarascon in France , while its architectural influence extended as far as Nunney Castle in south @-@ west England . 
 = = = 15th century = = = 
 During the 15th century the French kings continued to face threats both from the English and from the rival factions of the Burgundians and the Armagnacs . The Bastille was strategically vital during the period , both because of its role as a royal fortress and safe @-@ haven inside the capital , and because it controlled a critical route in and out of Paris . In 1418 , for example , the future Charles VII took refuge in the Bastille during the Burgundian @-@ led " Massacre of the Armagnacs " in Paris , before successfully fleeing the city through the Porte Saint @-@ Antoine . The Bastille was occasionally used to hold prisoners , including its creator , Hugues <unk> , who was the first person to be imprisoned there . In 1417 , in addition to being a royal fortress , it formally became a state prison . 
 Despite the improved Parisian defences , Henry V of England captured Paris in 1420 and the Bastille was seized and garrisoned by the English for the next sixteen years . Henry V appointed Thomas Beaufort , Duke of Exeter , as the new captain of the Bastille . The English made more use of the Bastille as a prison ; in 1430 there was a minor rebellion when some prisoners overpowered a sleeping guard and attempted to seize control of the fortress ; this incident includes the first reference to a dedicated gaoler at the Bastille . 
 Paris was finally recaptured by Charles VII of France in 1436 . When the French king re @-@ entered the city , his enemies in Paris fortified themselves in the Bastille ; after a siege , they eventually ran out of food , surrendered and were allowed to leave the city after the payment of a ransom . The castle remained a key Parisian fortress , but was successfully seized by the Burgundians in 1464 , when they convinced royal troops to surrender : once taken , this allowed their faction to make a surprise attack into Paris , almost resulting in the capture of the king . 
 The Bastille was being used to hold prisoners once again by the reign of Louis XI , who began to use it extensively as a state penitentiary . An early escapee from the Bastille during this period was Antoine de Chabannes , Count of Dammartin and a member of the League of the Public Weal , who was imprisoned by Louis and escaped by boat in 1465 . The captains of the Bastille during this period were primarily officers and royal functionaries ; Philippe de Melun was the first captain to receive a salary in 1462 , being awarded 1 @,@ 200 livres a year . Despite being a state prison , the Bastille retained the other traditional functions of a royal castle , and was used to accommodate visiting dignitaries , hosting some lavish entertainments given by Louis XI and Francis I. 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 During the 16th century the area around the Bastille developed further . Early modern Paris continued to grow , and by the end of the century it had around 250 @,@ 000 inhabitants and was one of the most populous cities in Europe , though still largely contained within its old city walls – open countryside remained beyond the Bastille . The Arsenal , a large military @-@ industrial complex tasked with the production of cannons and other weapons for the royal armies , was established to the south of the Bastille by Francis I , and substantially expanded under Charles IX . An arms depot was later built above the Porte Saint @-@ Antoine , all making the Bastille part of a major military centre . 
 During the 1550s , Henry II became concerned about the threat of an English or Holy Roman Empire attack on Paris , and strengthened the defences of the Bastille in response . The southern gateway into the Bastille became the principal entrance to the castle in 1553 , the other three gateways being closed . A bastion , a large earthwork projecting eastwards from the Bastille , was built to provide additional protective fire for the Bastille and the Arsenal ; the bastion was reached from the fortress across a stone abutment using a connecting drawbridge that was installed in the Bastille 's Comté tower . In 1573 the Porte Saint @-@ Antoine was also altered – the drawbridges were replaced with a fixed bridge , and the medieval gatehouse was replaced with a triumphal arch . 
 The Bastille was involved in the numerous wars of religion fought between Protestant and Catholic factions with support from foreign allies during the second half of the 16th century . Religious and political tensions in Paris initially exploded in the Day of the Barricades on 12 May 1588 , when hard @-@ line Catholics rose up in revolt against the relatively moderate Henry III . After a day 's fighting had occurred across the capital , Henry III fled and the Bastille surrendered to Henry , the Duke of Guise and leader of the Catholic League , who appointed Bussy @-@ Leclerc as his new captain . Henry III responded by having the Duke and his brother murdered later that year , whereupon Bussy @-@ Leclerc used the Bastille as a base to mount a raid on the Parlement de Paris , arresting the president and other magistrates , whom he suspected of having royalist sympathies , and detaining them in the Bastille . They were not released until the intervention of Charles , the Duke of Mayenne , and the payment of substantial ransoms . Bussy @-@ Leclerc remained in control of the Bastille until December 1592 , when , following further political instability , he was forced to surrender the castle to Charles and flee the city . 
 It took Henry IV several years to retake Paris . By the time he succeeded in 1594 , the area around the Bastille formed the main stronghold for the Catholic League and their foreign allies , including Spanish and Flemish troops . The Bastille itself was controlled by a League captain called du Bourg . Henry entered Paris early on the morning of 23 March , through the Porte @-@ Neuve rather than the Saint @-@ Antoine and seized the capital , including the Arsenal complex that neighboured the Bastille . The Bastille was now an isolated League stronghold , with the remaining members of the League and their allies clustering around it for safety . After several days of tension , an agreement was finally reached for this rump element to leave safely , and on 27 March du Bourg surrendered the Bastille and left the city himself . 
 = = = Early 17th century = = = 
 The Bastille continued to be used as a prison and a royal fortress under both Henry IV and his son , Louis XIII . When Henry clamped down on a Spanish @-@ backed plot among the senior French nobility in 1602 , for example , he detained the ringleader Charles <unk> , the Duke of Biron , in the Bastille , and had him executed in the courtyard . Louis XIII 's chief minister , Cardinal Richelieu , is credited with beginning the modern transformation of the Bastille into a more formal organ of the French state , further increasing its structured use as a state prison . Richelieu broke with Henry IV 's tradition of the Bastille 's captain being a member of the French aristocracy , typically a Marshal of France such as François de <unk> , Charles d 'Albert or Nicolas de L <unk> , and instead appointed Père Joseph 's brother to run the facility . The first surviving documentary records of prisoners at the Bastille also date from this period . 
 In 1648 , the Fronde insurrection broke out in Paris , prompted by high taxes , increased food prices and disease . The Parlement of Paris , the Regency government of Anne of Austria and rebellious noble factions fought for several years to take control of the city and wider power . On 26 August , during the period known as the First Fronde , Anne ordered the arrest of some of the leaders of the Parlement of Paris ; violence flared as a result , and the 27 August became known as another Day of the Barricades . The governor of the Bastille loaded and readied his guns to fire on the Hôtel de Ville , controlled by the parliament , although the decision was eventually taken not to shoot . Barricades were erected across the city and the royal government fled in September , leaving a garrison of 22 men behind in the Bastille . On 11 January 1649 , the Fronde decided to take the Bastille , giving the task to Elbeuf , one of their leaders . Elbeuf 's attack required only a token effort : five or six shots were fired at the Bastille , before it promptly surrendered on the 13 January . Pierre <unk> , one of the Fronde leaders , appointed his son as the governor and the Fronde retained it even after the ceasefire that March . 
 During the Second Fronde , between 1650 and 1653 , Louis , the Prince of Condé , controlled much of Paris alongside the Parlement , while <unk> , through his son , continued to control the Bastille . In July 1652 , the battle of the Faubourg St Antoine took place just outside the Bastille . Condé had sallied out of Paris to prevent the advance of the royalist forces under the command of Turenne . Condé 's forces became trapped against the city walls and the Porte Saint @-@ Antoine , which the Parlement refused to open ; he was coming under increasingly heavy fire from the Royalist artillery and the situation looked bleak . In a famous incident , La Grande Mademoiselle , the daughter of Gaston , the Duke of Orléans , convinced her father to issue an order for the Parisian forces to act , before she then entered the Bastille and personally ensured that the commander turned the fortress 's cannon on Turenne 's army , causing significant casualties and enabling Condé 's army 's safe withdrawal . Later in 1652 , Condé was finally forced to surrender Paris to the royalist forces in October , effectively bringing the Fronde to an end : the Bastille returned to royal control . 
 = = = Reign of Louis XIV and the Regency ( 1661 – 1723 ) = = = 
 The area around the Bastille was transformed in the reign of Louis XIV . Paris ' growing population reached 400 @,@ 000 during the period , causing the city to spill out past the Bastille and the old city into the arable farmland beyond , forming more thinly populated " <unk> " , or suburbs . Influenced by the events of the Fronde , Louis XIV rebuilt the area around the Bastille , erecting a new archway at the Porte Saint @-@ Antoine in 1660 , and then ten years later pulling down the city walls and their supporting fortifications to replace them with an avenue of trees , later called Louis XIV 's boulevard , which passed around the Bastille . The Bastille 's bastion survived the redevelopment , becoming a garden for the use of the prisoners . 
 Louis XIV made extensive use of the Bastille as a prison , with 2 @,@ 320 individuals being detained there during his reign , approximately 43 a year . Louis used the Bastille to hold not just suspected rebels or plotters but also those who had simply irritated him in some way , such as differing with him on matters of religion . The typical offences that inmates were accused of were espionage , counterfeiting and embezzlement from the state ; a number of financial officials were detained in this way under Louis , most famously including Nicolas Fouquet , his supporters Henry de <unk> , <unk> and Lorenzo de Tonti . In 1685 Louis revoked the Edict of Nantes , which had previously granted various rights to French Protestants ; the subsequent royal crackdown was driven by the king 's strongly anti @-@ Protestant views . The Bastille was used to investigate and break up Protestant networks by imprisoning and questioning the more recalcitrant members of the community , in particular upper @-@ class Calvinists ; some 254 Protestants were imprisoned in the Bastille during Louis 's reign . 
 By Louis 's reign , Bastille prisoners were detained using a " lettre de cachet " , " a letter under royal seal " , issued by the king and countersigned by a minister , ordering a named person to be held . Louis , closely involved in this aspect of government , personally decided who should be imprisoned at the Bastille . The arrest itself involved an element of ceremony : the individual would be tapped on the shoulder with a white baton and formally detained in the name of the king . Detention in the Bastille was typically ordered for an indefinite period and there was considerable secrecy over who had been detained and why : the legend of the " Man in the Iron Mask " , a mysterious prisoner who finally died in 1703 , symbolises this period of the Bastille . Although in practice many were held at the Bastille as a form of punishment , legally a prisoner in the Bastille was only being detained for preventative or investigative reasons : the prison was not officially supposed to be a punitive measure in its own right . The average length of imprisonment in the Bastille under Louis XIV was approximately three years . 
 Under Louis , only between 20 and 50 prisoners were usually held at the Bastille at any one time , although as many as 111 were held for a short period in 1703 . These prisoners were mainly from the upper classes , and those who could afford to pay for additional luxuries lived in good conditions , wearing their own clothes , living in rooms decorated with tapestries and carpets or taking exercise around the castle garden and along the walls . By the late 17th century , there was a rather disorganised library for the use of inmates in the Bastille , although its origins remain unclear . 
 Louis reformed the administrative structure of the Bastille , creating the post of governor , although this post was still often referred to as the captain @-@ governor . During Louis 's reign the policing of marginal groups in Paris was greatly increased : the wider criminal justice system was reformed , controls over printing and publishing extended , new criminal codes were issued and the post of the Parisian lieutenant general of police was created in 1667 , all of which would enable the Bastille 's later role in support of the Parisian police during the 18th century . By 1711 , a 60 @-@ strong French military garrison had been established at the Bastille . It continued to be an expensive institution to run , particularly when the prison was full , such as during 1691 when numbers were inflated by the campaign against French Protestants and the annual cost of running the Bastille rose to 232 @,@ 818 livres . 
 Between 1715 – the year of Louis 's death – and 1723 , power transferred to the Régence ; the regent , Philippe d 'Orléans , maintained the prison but the absolutist rigour of Louis XIV 's system began to weaken somewhat . Although Protestants ceased to be kept in the Bastille , the political uncertainties and plots of the period kept the prison busy and 1 @,@ 459 were imprisoned there under the Regency , an average of around 182 a year . During the <unk> Conspiracy , the alleged enemies of the Regency were imprisoned in the Bastille , including Marguerite De Launay . While in the Bastille , de Launay fell in love with a fellow prisoner , the Chevalier de <unk> ; she also infamously received an invitation of marriage from the Chevalier de <unk> , the governor 's deputy , who had fallen in love with her himself . 
 = = = Reigns of Louis XV and Louis XVI ( 1723 – 1789 ) = = = 
 = = = = Architecture and organisation = = = = 
 By the late 18th century , the Bastille had come to separate the more aristocratic quarter of Le Marais in the old city from the working class district of the faubourg Saint @-@ Antoine that lay beyond the Louis XIV boulevard . The Marais was a fashionable area , frequented by foreign visitors and tourists , but few went beyond the Bastille into the faubourg . The faubourg was characterised by its built @-@ up , densely populated areas , particularly in the north , and its numerous workshops producing soft furnishings . Paris as a whole had continued to grow , reaching slightly less than 800 @,@ 000 inhabitants by the reign of Louis XVI , and many of the residents around the faubourg had migrated to Paris from the countryside relatively recently . The Bastille had its own street address , being officially known as No. 232 , rue Saint @-@ Antoine . 
 Structurally , the late @-@ 18th century Bastille was not greatly changed from its 14th @-@ century predecessor . The eight stone towers had gradually acquired individual names : running from the north @-@ east side of the external gate , these were La Chapelle , Trésor , Comté , Bazinière , <unk> , Liberté , Puits and Coin . La Chapelle contained the Bastille 's chapel , decorated with a painting of Saint Peter in chains . Trésor took its name from the reign of Henry IV , when it had contained the royal treasury . The origins of the name of Comté tower are unclear ; one theory is that the name refers to the County of Paris . Bazinière was named after Bertrand de La Bazinière , a royal treasurer who was imprisoned there in 1663 . <unk> was named after a medieval mason who died building the structure in the 14th century . Liberté tower took its name either from a protest in 1380 , when Parisians shouted the phrase outside the castle , or because it was used to house prisoners who had more freedom to walk around the castle than the typical prisoner . Puits tower contained the castle well , while Coin formed the corner of the Rue Saint @-@ Antoine . 
 The main castle courtyard , accessed through the southern gateway , was 120 feet long by 72 feet wide ( 37 m by 22 m ) , and was divided from the smaller northern yard by a three @-@ office wing , built around 1716 and renovated in 1761 in a modern , 18th @-@ century style . The office wing held the council room that was used for interrogating prisoners , the Bastille 's library , and servants ' quarters . The upper stories included rooms for the senior Bastille staff , and chambers for distinguished prisoners . An elevated building on one side of the courtyard held the Bastille 's archives . A clock was installed by Antoine de <unk> , the lieutenant general of police between 1759 and 1774 , on the side of the office wing , depicting two chained prisoners . 
 New kitchens and baths were built just outside the main gate to the Bastille in 1786 . The ditch around the Bastille , now largely dry , supported a 36 @-@ foot ( 11 m ) high stone wall with a wooden walkway for the use of the guards , known as " la ronde " , or the round . An outer court had grown up around the south @-@ west side of the Bastille , adjacent to the Arsenal . This was open to the public and lined with small shops rented out by the governor for almost 10 @,@ 000 livres a year , complete with a lodge for the Bastille gatekeeper ; it was illuminated at night to light the adjacent street . 
 The Bastille was run by the governor , sometimes called the captain @-@ governor , who lived in a 17th @-@ century house alongside the fortress . The governor was supported by various officers , in particular his deputy , the lieutenant de roi , or lieutenant of the king , who was responsible for general security and the protection of state secrets ; the major , responsible for managing the Bastille 's financial affairs and the police archives ; and the capitaine des portes , who ran the entrance to the Bastille . Four warders divided up the eight towers between them . From an administrative perspective , the prison was generally well run during the period . These staff were supported by an official surgeon , a chaplain and could , on occasion , call upon the services of a local midwife to assist pregnant prisoners . A small garrison of " <unk> " was appointed in 1749 to guard the interior and exterior of the fortress ; these were retired soldiers and were regarded locally , as Simon Schama describes , as " amiable <unk> " rather than professional soldiers . 
 = = = = Use of the prison = = = = 
 The role of the Bastille as a prison changed considerably during the reigns of Louis XV and XVI . One trend was a decline in the number of prisoners sent to the Bastille , with only 1 @,@ 194 imprisoned there during the reign of Louis XV and only 306 under Louis XVI up until the Revolution , annual averages of around 23 and 20 respectively . A second trend was a slow shift away from the Bastille 's 17th @-@ century role of detaining primarily upper @-@ class prisoners , towards a situation in which the Bastille was essentially a location for imprisoning socially undesirable individuals of all backgrounds – including aristocrats breaking social conventions , criminals , pornographers , thugs – and was used to support police operations , particularly those involving censorship , across Paris . Despite these changes , the Bastille remained a state prison , subject to special authorities , answering to the monarch of the day and surrounded by a considerable and threatening reputation . 
 Under Louis XV , around 250 Catholic <unk> , often called <unk> , were detained in the Bastille for their religious beliefs . Many of these prisoners were women and came from a wider range of social backgrounds than the upper @-@ class Calvinists detained under Louis XIV ; historian Monique <unk> argues that the decline of the Bastille 's social " mystique " originates from this phase of detentions . By Louis XVI , the background of those entering the Bastille and the type of offences they were detained over had changed markedly . Between 1774 and 1789 , the detentions included 54 people accused of robbery ; 31 of involvement in the 1775 Famine Revolt ; 11 detained for assault ; 62 illegal editors , printers and writers – but relatively few detained over the grander affairs of state . 
 Many prisoners still continued to come from the upper classes , particularly in those cases termed " <unk> des familles " , or disorders of the family . These cases typically involving members of the aristocracy who had , as historian Richard Andrews notes , " rejected parental authority , disgraced the family reputation , manifested mental derangement , squandered capital or violated professional codes . " Their families – often their parents , but sometimes husbands and wives taking action against their spouses – could apply for individuals to be detained at one of the royal prisons , resulting in an average imprisonment of between six months and four years . Such a detention could be preferable to facing a scandal or a public trial over their misdemeanours , and the secrecy that surrounded detention at the Bastille allowed personal and family reputations to be quietly protected . The Bastille was considered one of the best prisons for an upper @-@ class prisoner to be detained at , because of the standard of the facilities for the wealthy . In the aftermath of the notorious " Affair of the Diamond Necklace " of 1786 , involving the Queen and accusations of fraud , all the eleven suspects were held in the Bastille , significantly increasing the notoriety surrounding the institution . 
 Increasingly , however , the Bastille became part of the system of wider policing in Paris . Although appointed by the king , the governor reported to the lieutenant general of police : the first of these , Gabriel Nicolas de la <unk> , made only occasional visits to the Bastille , but his successor , Marquis d <unk> , and subsequent officers used the facility extensively and took a close interest in inspections of the prison . The lieutenant general reported in turn to the secretary of the " Maison du Roi " , largely responsible for order in the capital ; in practice together they controlled the issuing of the " lettres " in the king 's name . The Bastille was unusual among Parisian prisons in that it acted on behalf of the king – prisoners could therefore be imprisoned secretly , for longer , and without normal judicial processes being applied , making it a useful facility for the police authorities . The Bastille was a preferred location for holding prisoners who needed extensive questioning or where a case required the analysis of extensive documents . The Bastille was also used to store the Parisian police archives ; public order equipment such as chains and flags ; and illegal goods , seized by order of the crown using a version of the " lettre de cachet " , such as banned books and illicit printing presses . 
 Throughout this period , but particularly in the middle of the 18th century , the Bastille was used by the police to suppress the trade in illegal and seditious books in France . In the 1750s , 40 % of those sent to the Bastille were arrested for their role in manufacturing or dealing in banned material ; in the 1760s , the equivalent figure was 35 % . Seditious writers were also often held in the Bastille , although many of the more famous writers held in the Bastille during the period were formally imprisoned for more anti @-@ social , rather than strictly political , offences . In particular , many of those writers detained under Louis XVI were imprisoned for their role in producing illegal pornography , rather than political critiques of the regime . The writer Laurent <unk> de la <unk> , the philosopher André <unk> and the historian Jean @-@ François Marmontel , for example , were , formally , detained not for their more obviously political writings , but for libellous remarks or for personal insults against leading members of Parisian society . 
 = = = = Prison regime = = = = 
 Contrary to its later image , conditions for prisoners in the Bastille by the mid @-@ 18th century were in fact relatively benign , particularly by the standards of other prisons of the time . The typical prisoner was held in one of the octagonal rooms in the mid @-@ levels of the towers . The <unk> , the rooms just under the roof that formed the upper storey of the Bastille , were considered the least pleasant quarters , being more exposed to the elements and usually either too hot or too cold . The <unk> , the underground dungeons , had not been used for many years except for holding recaptured escapees . Prisoners ' rooms each had a stove or a fireplace , basic furniture , curtains and in most cases a window . A typical criticism of the rooms was that they were shabby and basic rather than uncomfortable . Like the <unk> , the main courtyard , used for exercise , was often criticised by prisoners as being unpleasant at the height of summer or winter , although the garden in the bastion and the castle walls were also used for recreation . 
 The governor received money from the Crown to support the prisoners , with the amount varying on rank : the governor received 19 livres a day for each political prisoner – with <unk> @-@ grade nobles receiving 15 livres – and , at the other end of the scale , three livres a day for each commoner . Even for the commoners , this sum was around twice the daily wage of a labourer and provided for an adequate diet , while the upper classes ate very well : even critics of the Bastille recounted many excellent meals , often taken with the governor himself . Prisoners who were being punished for misbehaviour , however , could have their diet restricted as a punishment . The medical treatment provided by the Bastille for prisoners was excellent by the standards of the 18th century ; the prison also contained a number of inmates suffering from mental illnesses and took , by the standards of the day , a very progressive attitude to their care . 
 Although potentially dangerous objects and money were confiscated and stored when a prisoner first entered the Bastille , most wealthy prisoners continued to bring in additional luxuries , including pet dogs or cats to control the local vermin . The Marquis de Sade , for example , arrived with an elaborate wardrobe , paintings , tapestries , a selection of perfume , and a collection of 133 books . Card games and billiards were played among the prisoners , and alcohol and tobacco were permitted . Servants could sometimes accompany their masters into the Bastille , as in the cases of the 1746 detention of the family of Lord Morton and their entire household as British spies : the family 's domestic life continued on inside the prison relatively normally . The prisoners ' library had grown during the 18th century , mainly through ad hoc purchases and various confiscations by the Crown , until by 1787 it included 389 volumes . 
 The length of time that a typical prisoner was kept at the Bastille continued to decline , and by Louis XVI 's reign the average length of detention was only two months . Prisoners would still be expected to sign a document on their release , promising not to talk about the Bastille or their time within it , but by the 1780s this agreement was frequently broken . Prisoners leaving the Bastille could be granted pensions on their release by the Crown , either as a form of compensation or as a way of ensuring future good behaviour – Voltaire was granted 1 @,@ 200 livres a year , for example , while Latude received an annual pension of 400 livres . 
 = = = = Criticism and reform = = = = 
 During the 18th century , the Bastille was extensively critiqued by French writers as a symbol of ministerial despotism ; this criticism would ultimately result in reforms and plans for its abolition . The first major criticism emerged from Constantin de Renneville , who had been imprisoned in the Bastille for 11 years and published his accounts of the experience in 1715 in his book L <unk> françois . Renneville presented a dramatic account of his detention , explaining that despite being innocent he had been abused and left to rot in one of the Bastille 's <unk> dungeons , kept enchained next to a corpse . More criticism followed in 1719 when the Abbé Jean de <unk> , who had escaped from the Bastille ten years previously , published an account of his adventures from the safety of Hanover ; he gave a similar account to Renneville 's and termed the Bastille the " hell of the living " . Voltaire added to the notorious reputation of the Bastille when he wrote about the case of the " Man in the Iron Mask " in 1751 , and later criticised the way he himself was treated while detained in the Bastille , labelling the fortress a " palace of revenge " . 
 In the 1780s , prison reform became a popular topic for French writers and the Bastille was increasingly critiqued as a symbol of arbitrary despotism . Two authors were particularly influential during this period . The first was Simon @-@ Nicholas Linguet , who was arrested and detained at the Bastille in 1780 , after publishing a critique of Maréchal Duras . Upon his release , he published his Mémoires sur la Bastille in 1783 , a damning critique of the institution . Linguet criticised the physical conditions in which he was kept , sometimes inaccurately , but went further in capturing in detail the more psychological effects of the prison regime upon the inmate . Linguet also encouraged Louis XVI to destroy the Bastille , publishing an engraving depicting the king announcing to the prisoners " may you be free and live ! " , a phrase borrowed from Voltaire . 
 Linguet 's work was followed by another prominent autobiography , Henri Latude 's Le <unk> <unk> . Latude was a soldier who was imprisoned in the Bastille following a sequence of complex misadventures , including the sending of a letter bomb to Madame de Pompadour , the King 's mistress . Latude became famous for managing to escape from the Bastille by means of climbing up the chimney of his cell and then descending the walls with a home @-@ made rope ladder , before being recaptured afterwards in Amsterdam by French agents . Latude was released in 1777 , but was rearrested following his publication of a book entitled Memoirs of Vengeance . Pamphlets and magazines publicised Latude 's case until he was finally released again in 1784 . Latude became a popular figure with the " Académie française " , or French Academy , and his autobiography , although inaccurate in places , did much to reinforce the public perception of the Bastille as a despotic institution . 
 Modern historians of this period , such as Hans @-@ Jürgen <unk> , Simon Schama and Monique <unk> , concur that the actual treatment of prisoners in Bastille was much better than the public impression left through these writings . Nonetheless , fuelled by the secrecy that still surrounded the Bastille , official as well as public concern about the prison and the system that supported it also began to mount , prompting reforms . As early as 1775 , Louis XVI 's minister <unk> had authorised all prisoners to be given newspapers to read , and to be allowed to write and to correspond with their family and friends . In the 1780s Breteuil , the Secretary of State of the Maison du Roi , began a substantial reform of the system of lettres de cachet that sent prisoners to the Bastille : lettres were now required to list the length of time a prisoner would be detained for , and the offence for which they were being held . 
 Meanwhile , in 1784 , the architect Alexandre <unk> proposed that the Bastille be demolished and converted into a circular , public space with colonnades . Director @-@ General of Finance Jacques Necker , having examined the costs of running the Bastille , amounting to well over 127 @,@ 000 livres in 1774 , for example , proposed closing the institution on the grounds of economy alone . Similarly , Puget , the Bastille 's lieutenant de roi , submitted reports in 1788 suggesting that the authorities close the prison , demolish the fortress and sell the real estate off . In June 1789 , the Académie royale d 'architecture proposed a similar scheme to <unk> 's , in which the Bastille would be transformed into an open public area , with a tall column at the centre surrounded by fountains , dedicated to Louis XVI as the " restorer of public freedom " . The number of prisoners held in the Bastille at any one time declined sharply towards the end of Louis 's reign ; the prison contained ten prisoners in September 1782 and , despite a mild increase at the beginning of 1788 , by July 1789 only seven prisoners remained in custody . Before any official scheme to close the prison could be enacted , however , disturbances across Paris brought a more violent end to the Bastille . 
 = = = The French Revolution = = = 
 = = = = Storming of the Bastille = = = = 
 By July 1789 , revolutionary sentiment was rising in Paris . The Estates @-@ General was convened in May and members of the Third Estate proclaimed the Tennis Court Oath in June , calling for the king to grant a written constitution . Violence between loyal royal forces , mutinous members of the royal Gardes Françaises and local crowds broke out at Vendôme on 12 July , leading to widespread fighting and the withdrawal of royal forces from the centre of Paris . Revolutionary crowds began to arm themselves during 13 July , looting royal stores , gunsmiths and armourers ' shops for weapons and gunpowder . 
 The commander of the Bastille at the time was Bernard @-@ René de Launay , a conscientious but minor military officer . Tensions surrounding the Bastille had been rising for several weeks . Only eight prisoners remained in the fortress , but one of these , the Marquis de Sade , had stoked the link between the revolution and the Bastille , addressing the public from his walks on top of the towers and , once this was forbidden , shouting from the window of his cell . Sade began to claim that the authorities planned to massacre the prisoners in the castle , which resulted in the governor removing him to an alternative site in early July . 
 At de Launay 's request , an additional force of 32 soldiers from the Swiss Salis @-@ <unk> regiment had been assigned to the Bastille on 7 July , adding to the existing 82 <unk> pensioners who formed the regular garrison . De Launay had taken various precautions , raising the drawbridge in the Comté tower and destroying the stone abutment that linked the Bastille to its bastion to prevent anyone from gaining access from that side of the fortress . The shops in the entranceway to the Bastille had been closed and the gates locked . The Bastille was defended by 30 small artillery pieces , but nonetheless , by 14 July de Launay was very concerned about the Bastille 's situation . The Bastille , already hugely unpopular with the revolutionary crowds , was now the only remaining royalist stronghold in central Paris , in addition to which he was protecting a recently arrived stock of 250 barrels of valuable gunpowder . To make matters worse , the Bastille had only two days ' supply of food and no source of water , making it impossible to withstand a long siege . 
 On the morning of 14 July around 900 people formed outside the Bastille , primarily working @-@ class members of the nearby faubourg Saint @-@ Antoine , but also including some mutinous soldiers and local traders . The crowd had gathered in an attempt to commandeer the gunpowder stocks known to be held in the Bastille , and at 10 : 00 am de Launay let in two of their leaders to negotiate with him . Just after midday , another negotiator was let in to discuss the situation , but no compromise could be reached : the revolutionary representatives now wanted both the guns and the gunpowder in the Bastille to be handed over , but de Launay refused to do so unless he received authorisation from his leadership in Versailles . By this point it was clear that the governor lacked the experience or the skills to defuse the situation . 
 Just as negotiations were about to recommence at around 1 : 30 pm , chaos broke out as the impatient and angry crowd stormed the outer courtyard of the Bastille , pushing toward the main gate . Confused firing broke out in the confined space and chaotic fighting began in earnest between de Launay 's forces and the revolutionary crowd as the two sides exchanged fire . At around 3 : 30 pm , more mutinous royal forces arrived to reinforce the crowd , bringing with them trained infantry officers and several cannons . After discovering that their weapons were too light to damage the main walls of the fortress , the revolutionary crowd began to fire their cannons at the wooden gate of the Bastille . By now around 83 of the crowd had been killed and another 15 mortally wounded ; only one of the Invalides had been killed in return . 
 De Launay had limited options : if he allowed the Revolutionaries to destroy his main gate , he would have to turn the cannon directly inside the Bastille 's courtyard on the crowds , causing great loss of life and preventing any peaceful resolution of the episode . De Launay could not withstand a long siege , and he was dissuaded by his officers from committing mass suicide by detonating his supplies of powder . Instead , de Launay attempted to negotiate a surrender , threatening to blow up the Bastille if his demands were not met . In the midst of this attempt , the Bastille 's drawbridge suddenly came down and the revolutionary crowd stormed in . De Launay was dragged outside into the streets and killed by the crowd , and three officers and three soldiers were killed during the course of the afternoon by the crowd . The soldiers of the Swiss Salis @-@ <unk> Regiment , however , were not wearing their uniform coats and were mistaken for Bastille prisoners ; they were left unharmed by the crowds until they were escorted away by French Guards and other regular soldiers among the attackers . The valuable powder and guns were seized and a search begun for the other prisoners in the Bastille . 
 = = = = Destruction = = = = 
 Within hours of its capture , the Bastille began to be used as a powerful symbol to give legitimacy to the revolutionary movement in France . The faubourg Saint @-@ Antoine 's revolutionary reputation was firmly established by their storming of the Bastille and a formal list began to be drawn up of the " <unk> " who had taken part so as to honor both the fallen and the survivors . Although the crowd had initially gone to the Bastille searching for gunpowder , historian Simon Schama observes how the captured prison " gave a shape and an image to all the vices against which the Revolution defined itself " . Indeed , the more despotic and evil the Bastille was portrayed by the pro @-@ revolutionary press , the more necessary and justified the actions of the Revolution became . Consequently , the late governor , de Launay , was rapidly vilified as a brutal despot . The fortress itself was described by the revolutionary press as a " place of slavery and horror " , containing " machines of death " , " grim underground dungeons " and " disgusting caves " where prisoners were left to rot for up to 50 years . 
 As a result , in the days after 14 July , the fortress was searched for evidence of torture : old pieces of armour and bits of a printing press were taken out and presented as evidence of elaborate torture equipment . Latude returned to the Bastille , where he was given the rope ladder and equipment with which he had escaped from the prison many years before . The former prison warders escorted visitors around the Bastille in the weeks after its capture , giving colourful accounts of the events in the castle . Stories and pictures about the rescue of the fictional Count de <unk> – supposedly a mistreated prisoner of the Bastille incarcerated by Louis XV – and the similarly imaginary discovery of the skeleton of the " Man in the Iron Mask " in the dungeons , were widely circulated as fact across Paris . In the coming months , over 150 broadside publications used the storming of the Bastille as a theme , while the events formed the basis for a number of theatrical plays . 
 Despite a thorough search , the revolutionaries discovered only seven prisoners in the Bastille , rather fewer than had been anticipated . Of these , only one – de Whyte de <unk> , an elderly and white @-@ bearded man – closely resembled the public image of a Bastille prisoner ; despite being mentally ill , he was paraded through the streets , where he waved happily to the crowds . Of the remaining six liberated prisoners , four were convicted forgers who quickly vanished into the Paris streets ; one was the Count de <unk> , who had been imprisoned on the request of his family for sexual misdemeanours ; the sixth was Tavernier , who also proved to be mentally ill and , along with Whyte , was in due course <unk> in the Charenton asylum . 
 At first the revolutionary movement was uncertain whether to destroy the prison , to reoccupy it as a fortress with members of the volunteer guard militia , or to preserve it intact as a permanent revolutionary monument . The revolutionary leader Mirabeau eventually settled the matter by symbolically starting the destruction of the battlements himself , after which a panel of five experts was appointed by the Permanent Committee of the Hôtel de Ville to manage the demolition of the castle . One of these experts was Pierre @-@ François Palloy , a bourgeois entrepreneur who claimed <unk> status for his role during the taking of the Bastille , and he rapidly assumed control over the entire process . Palloy 's team worked quickly and by November most of the fortress had been destroyed . 
 The ruins of the Bastille rapidly became iconic across France . Palloy had an altar set up on the site in February 1790 , formed out of iron chains and restraints from the prison . Old bones , probably of 15th century soldiers , were discovered during the clearance work in April and , presented as the skeletons of former prisoners , were exhumed and ceremonially reburied in Saint @-@ Paul 's cemetery . In the summer , a huge ball was held by Palloy on the site for the National Guardsmen visiting Paris for the 14 July celebrations . A memorabilia industry surrounding the fall of the Bastille was already flourishing and as the work on the demolition project finally dried up , Palloy started producing and selling memorabilia of the Bastille . Palloy 's products , which he called " relics of freedom " , celebrated the national unity that the events of July 1789 had generated across all classes of French citizenry , and included a very wide range of items . Palloy also sent models of the Bastille , carved from the fortress 's stones , as gifts to the French provinces at his own expense to spread the revolutionary message . In 1793 a large revolutionary fountain featuring a statue of Isis was built on the former site of the fortress , which became known as the Place de la Bastille . 
 = = = 19th – 20th century political and cultural legacy = = = 
 The Bastille remained a powerful and evocative symbol for French republicans throughout the 19th century . Napoleon Bonaparte overthrew the French First Republic that emerged from the Revolution in 1799 , and subsequently attempted to marginalise the Bastille as a symbol . Napoleon was unhappy with the revolutionary connotations of the Place de la Bastille , and initially considered building his Arc de Triomphe on the site instead . This proved an unpopular option and so instead he planned the construction of a huge , bronze statue of an imperial elephant . The project was delayed , eventually indefinitely , and all that was constructed was a large plaster version of the bronze statue , which stood on the former site of the Bastille between 1814 and 1846 , when the decaying structure was finally removed . After the restoration of the French Bourbon monarchy in 1815 , the Bastille became an underground symbol for Republicans . The July Revolution in 1830 , used images such as the Bastille to legitimise their new regime and in 1833 , the former site of the Bastille was used to build the July Column to commemorate the revolution . The short @-@ lived Second Republic was symbolically declared in 1848 on the former revolutionary site . 
 The storming of the Bastille on 14 July 1789 , had been celebrated annually since 1790 , initially through quasi @-@ religious rituals , and then later during the Revolution with grand , secular events including the burning of replica <unk> . Under Napoleon the events became less revolutionary , focusing instead on military parades and national unity in the face of foreign threats . During the 1870s , the 14 July celebrations became a rallying point for Republicans opposed to the early monarchist leadership of the Third Republic ; when the moderate Republican Jules Grévy became president in 1879 , his new government turned the anniversary of the fall of the Bastille into a national holiday . The anniversary remained contentious , with hard @-@ line Republicans continuing to use the occasion to protest against the new political order and right @-@ wing conservatives protesting about the imposition of the holiday . The July Column itself remained contentious and Republican radicals unsuccessfully tried to blow it up in 1871 . 
 Meanwhile , the legacy of the Bastille proved popular among French novelists . Alexandre Dumas , for example , used the Bastille and the legend of the " Man in the Iron Mask " extensively in his d 'Artagnan Romances ; in these novels the Bastille is presented as both picturesque and tragic , a suitable setting for heroic action . By contrast , in many of Dumas 's other works , such as Ange <unk> , the Bastille takes on a much darker appearance , being described as a place in which a prisoner is " forgotten , bankrupted , buried , destroyed " . In England , Charles Dickens took a similar perspective when he drew on popular histories of the Bastille in writing A Tale of Two Cities , in which Doctor <unk> is " buried alive " in the prison for 18 years ; many historical figures associated with the Bastille are reinvented as fictional individuals in the novel , such as Claude <unk> , reproduced by Dickens as " Ernest <unk> " . Victor Hugo 's 1862 novel Les Miserables , set just after the Revolution , gave Napoleon 's plaster Bastille elephant a permanent place in literary history . In 1889 the continued popularity of the Bastille with the public was illustrated by the decision to build a replica in stone and wood for the Exposition Universelle world fair in Paris , manned by actors in period costumes . 
 Due in part to the diffusion of national and Republican ideas across France during the second half of the Third Republic , the Bastille lost an element of its prominence as a symbol by the 20th century . Nonetheless , the Place de la Bastille continued to be the traditional location for left wing rallies , particularly in the 1930s , the symbol of the Bastille was widely evoked by the French Resistance during the Second World War and until the 1950s Bastille Day remained the single most significant French national holiday . 
 = = Remains = = 
 Due to its destruction after 1789 , very little remains of the Bastille in the 21st century . During the excavations for the Métro underground train system in 1899 , the foundations of the Liberté Tower were uncovered and moved to the corner of the Boulevard Henri IV and the Quai de <unk> , where they can still be seen today . The Pont de la Concorde contains stones reused from the Bastille . 
 Some relics of the Bastille survive : the <unk> Museum holds objects including one of the stone models of the Bastille made by Palloy and the rope ladder used by Latude to escape from the prison roof in the 18th century , while the mechanism and bells of the prison clock are exhibited in Musée Européen d 'Art <unk> at L 'Isle @-@ Jourdain . The key to the Bastille was given to George Washington in 1790 by Lafayette and is displayed in the historic house of Mount Vernon . The Bastille 's archives are now held by the Bibliothèque nationale de France . 
 The Place de la Bastille still occupies most of the location of the Bastille , and the Opéra Bastille was built on the square in 1989 to commemorate the bicentennial anniversary of the storming of the prison . The surrounding area has largely been redeveloped from its 19th @-@ century industrial past . The ditch that originally linked the defences of the fortress to the River Seine had been dug out at the start of the 19th century to form the industrial harbour of the Bassin de l 'Arsenal , linked to the Canal Saint Martin , but is now a marina for pleasure boats , while the Promenade <unk> links the square with redeveloped parklands to the east . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 A number of histories of the Bastille were published immediately after July 1789 , usually with dramatic titles promising the uncovering of secrets from the prison . By the 1830s and 1840s , popular histories written by Pierre <unk> and by the trio of Auguste <unk> , Auguste <unk> and Jules @-@ Édouard <unk> de Pujol presented the years of the Bastille between 1358 and 1789 as a single , long period of royal tyranny and oppression , epitomised by the fortress ; their works featured imaginative 19th @-@ century reconstructions of the medieval torture of prisoners . As living memories of the Revolution faded , the destruction of the Bastille meant that later historians had to rely primarily on memoires and documentary materials in analysing the fortress and the 5 @,@ 279 prisoners who had come through the Bastille between 1659 and 1789 . The Bastille 's archives , recording the operation of the prison , had been scattered in the confusion after the seizure ; with some effort , the Paris Assembly gathered around 600 @,@ 000 of them in the following weeks , which form the basis of the modern archive . After being safely stored and ignored for many years , these archives were rediscovered by the French historian François <unk> , who catalogued and used them for research between 1866 and 1904 . 
 At the end of the 19th century the historian Frantz Funck @-@ Brentano used the archives to undertake detailed research into the operation of the Bastille , focusing on the upper class prisoners in the Bastille , disproving many of the 18th @-@ century myths about the institution and portraying the prison in a favourable light . Modern historians today consider Funck @-@ Brentano 's work slightly biased by his anti @-@ Republican views , but his histories of the Bastille were highly influential and were largely responsible for establishing that the Bastille was a well @-@ run , relatively benign institution . Historian Fernand <unk> used the same archive material to produce the Histoire de la Bastille in 1893 , considered by modern historians to be one of the best and most balanced 19th @-@ century histories of the Bastille . These works inspired the writing of a sequence of more popular histories of the Bastille in the late 19th and early 20th centuries , including Auguste <unk> 's anniversary history of the Bastille , which typically focused on a handful of themes and stories involving the more glamorous prisoners from the upper classes of French society . 
 One of the major debates on the actual taking of the Bastille in 1789 has been the nature of the crowds that stormed the building . Hippolyte Taine argued in the late 19th century that the crowd consisted of unemployed vagrants , who acted without real thought ; by contrast , the post @-@ war left @-@ wing intellectual George Rudé argued that the crowd was dominated by relatively prosperous artisan workers . The matter was reexamined by Jacques Godechot in the post @-@ war years ; Godechot showing convincingly that , in addition to some local artisans and traders , at least half the crowd that gathered that day were , like the inhabitants of the surrounding faubourg , recent immigrants to Paris from the provinces . Godechot used this to characterise the taking of the Bastille as a genuinely national event of wider importance to French society . 
 In the 1970s French sociologists , particularly those interested in critical theory , re @-@ examined this historical legacy . The Annales School conducted extensive research into how order was maintained in pre @-@ revolutionary France , focusing on the operation of the police , concepts of deviancy and religion . Histories of the Bastille since then have focused on the prison 's role in policing , censorship and popular culture , in particular how these impacted on the working classes . Research in West Germany during the 1980s examined the cultural interpretation of the Bastille against the wider context of the French Revolution ; Hanse <unk> and Rolf Reichardt 's work , explaining how the Bastille came to be regarded as a symbol of despotism , was among the most prominent . This body of work influenced historian Simon Schama 's 1989 book on the Revolution , which incorporated cultural interpretation of the Bastille with a controversial critique of the violence surrounding the storming of the Bastille . The Bibliothèque nationale de France held a major exhibition on the legacy of the Bastille between 2010 and 2011 , resulting in a substantial edited volume summarising the current academic perspectives on the fortress . 
 = Ballistics ( video game ) = 
 Ballistics is a futuristic racing computer game developed by Grin and published by Xicat Interactive in 2001 . Grin developed an arcade version of the game , released in 2002 featuring a unique reclined seating position cabinet by Triotech . Players race across seven different tracks in various leagues against other competitors on high @-@ speed hoverbikes . 
 The game was Grin 's first to be released , and featured the first version of their Diesel game engine . Grin worked closely with NVIDIA to incorporate then new technologies into the game , and was marketed as one of the flagship titles for the GeForce 3 Series of graphics cards . 
 Critical reaction was generally favourable , with reviewers being impressed by the beauty of the graphics and the thrilling depiction of speed . They were however , slightly disappointed with the shallow nature of the gameplay . A newer version of the arcade game was released in 2003 , incorporating motion simulator technology into the arcade cabinet . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Set in 2090 , the game is centred on a fictional extreme racing sport known as Ballistics , a descendant of Formula One . The player takes the role of a Ballistic 's pilot , racing hoverbikes called speeders through the inside of tubes which form the courses . The speeders are magnetically attached to the race surface , allowing the player 360 degrees of movement along the left / right axis . The player can detach the speeder from the track and navigate down the center in order to avoid track obstacles and to acquire the power @-@ ups exclusively located there . Players must try to follow the outside of each curve , as hitting the inside of a curve at speed could lead to an involuntary detachment , leading to a loss of control and seconds dropped in securing reattachment . 
 Heat levels on the speeder must be monitored , as although there are no set top speeds for the vehicles , they can explode if allowed to overheat . Heat builds up from acceleration and from collisions . To counteract this , the player may activate the onboard cooler , however , this will slow the vehicle down . Designated cooling strips along the track and the Ice power @-@ up can cool the vehicle without a speed penalty , allowing the player to continue accelerating . 
 <unk> have a boost meter , showing how much fuel is available for the onboard speed boost . Although the boost provides greater speeds and acceleration than the standard throttle , it also increases the speeder 's heat levels . Designated booster load zones along the track replenish the meter , and a super boost power @-@ up is available which doubles the potency of the boost . 
 Players are rewarded with cash for attaining high speeds , placing highly in races and obtaining the Flip @-@ Score power @-@ up . Cash can be used in between races to upgrade their speeder by purchasing new parts . Parts are split into four categories - chassis , cooler , engine and front shield , with each affecting the speeder in different ways . Some tracks may favour a particular set @-@ up over others . 
 There are seven tracks included in the game , with locations inspired from different parts of the globe , from Belize to Tokyo . Progression through the game is achieved by competing in and winning races against computer controlled racers spread over different tracks and in different leagues . Players begin in the Rookie league , across three of the tracks , where the chances of detachment from the race surface are decreased and rates of acceleration reduced . Success in the Rookie league unlocks the less forgiving Pro league with more tracks on which to compete . Further success unlocks the most difficult league , the Ballistics league , competition in this league occurs across every track and to complete this , the player must place first in every race . 
 Success in the game relies on track memorisation , fast reflexes , careful balancing of heat and boost levels , and selecting the right set @-@ up for each track . The game is marked for its pure focus on speed , with speeds breaking mach 3 depending on the players skill . At these speeds the graphics and audio blur and distort , and have been compared with the psychedelic vortex sequence of 2001 : A Space Odyssey . Ballistics supports multiplayer gameplay for up to eight players across a LAN or internet . 
 = = Development = = 
 Ballistics was the first game developed at Grin . Careful planning and production methods enabled a very quick completion time of 6 months ; the game was finished before even acquiring a distribution partner . Grin used <unk> methods to ensure a high standard of work , and JIT techniques to ensure the timing of different production phases came together . 
 The prime inspiration for the game was Formula One , and Grin tried to recreate the feeling of speed captured by the in @-@ car cameras . In order to achieve a good on screen reference for the speeds attained , the track was redesigned into a tunnel , allowing the entire screen to act as a reference . Coupling this with scenes of the outdoors enabled Grin to create " a total speed simulation " . The settings were inspired by various sources , the city tracks drew inspiration from the films Blade Runner and The Fifth Element , other tracks took their inspiration from nature , such as the Amazon Rainforest and snow scenes of Siberia . Ballistics took cues from other futuristic racing games , such as <unk> and <unk> , emulating the fun and the speed whilst taking it even further with high end graphics . 
 The graphics engine used to power the game was christened the Diesel Engine . Grin developed this engine for flexibility and scalability , allowing the engine to be easily upgraded with new features . Based on DirectX , this meant the engine could be used across Windows and Xbox platforms . Grin worked closely with NVIDIA to incorporate then new technologies such as pixel and vertex shaders to render complex scenes . Ballistics was marketed by NVIDIA as a flagship title for their new series of GeForce 3 graphics cards . The game came bundled with various versions of the GeForce 3 , with distribution of the bundled game handled by Interplay OEM . Later versions of the Diesel Engine would be used in Grin games such as the Windows version of Tom Clancy 's Ghost Recon Advanced <unk> . 
 = = Arcade version = = 
 Grin announced in May 2001 that it was working on an arcade version of Ballistics for distribution by Triotech . The game 's gameplay had to be reworked to suit an arcade environment , and support was added for multiplayer games with up to eight linked cabinets . Triotech designed a unique reclined seating cabinet for the game , the aim of the design was to offer the player a more comfortable and immersive experience . The inspiration for the design came to Triotech co @-@ founder , Ernest Yale ; who whilst putting his feet up on the desk , realised how comfortable the playing position was . Ballistics was released for arcades in January 2002 . 
 The game would be updated twice for the arcade . Ballistics 2003 , launched in early 2003 , incorporated Triotech 's <unk> Motion motion simulator technology into the cabinet . Providing force feedback through the seat , this allows the player to experience up to 2g of acceleration whilst playing the game , with actuators in the seat providing 100 movements per second . A further version of the cabinet , Super Ballistics was launched in September 2003 . Chris Morris , listed Ballistics 2003 as one of the top " Video game gifts for the obscenely rich " in his Holiday 2004 column at CNN Money . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception towards the game was largely positive , albeit lukewarm ; receiving a rating of 71 % at review aggregation website Metacritic . Reviews generally praised the high graphical standard in the game , PC Zone described the visuals as superb and praised the use of " transparent surfaces and open frameworks to alleviate the potential monotony of racing through a drainpipe . " IGN echoed this , stating that at those moments where " a solid tunnel breaks into a transparent one " , " the true meticulous nature of the courses can be realized " . GameSpot praised the graphical effects , describing them as " a psychedelic display of cosmic lighting and motion @-@ blur wizardry " . 
 Reviews were agreed on Ballistics ' successful implementation of " a total speed simulation " ; PC Zone stating that " Ballistics is , in fact , the fastest racing game ever " , and Eurogamer commenting that this was a game that made " Wipeout look like Driving Miss Daisy " . Although IGN felt that at times the " ridiculous speed actually often works to debilitate [ the gameplay ] " . 
 The gameplay was less well received , and reviewers commented on the lack of depth to the gameplay and that the inclusion of only seven tracks meant the game lacked variety . PC Gamer ( US Edition ) noted that whilst " the game delivers an intense , thrilling experience " , this only lasted " 20 minutes or so " . GameSpot shared similar sentiments , stating that " Ballistics loses much of its fascination within the first few hours of playtime " and that it would only take four or five practice sessions per track to master the game . 
 Still , some critics found the game very enjoyable and exciting . Eurogamer closed their review stating that " when you get ' in the zone ' " , " the sheer adrenaline rush is unbeatable " . PC Zone finished by stating that " Ballistics really will leave your adrenal gland as dry as a stiffened sponge " . 
 = Jose Chung 's From Outer Space = 
 " Jose Chung 's From Outer Space " is the 20th episode of the third season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episode first aired in the United States on April 12 , 1996 , on Fox . It was written by Darin Morgan and directed by Rob Bowman . " Jose Chung 's From Outer Space " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 5 , being watched by 16 @.@ 08 million people in its initial broadcast , and also received praise from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder and Scully hear , and promptly investigate , a story about an alien abduction of two teenagers . Each witness provides a different version of the same facts . Within the episode , a thriller novelist , Jose Chung , writes a book about the incident . 
 The episode is a stand @-@ alone episode , like most episodes of The X @-@ Files , and follows the normal Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week pattern of the show but features more humor than typical via manipulation of point of view , leading to multiple re @-@ tellings of certain events with varying degrees of unreliable narrators . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A teenage couple in ( fictional ) Klass County , Washington , are returning from a date one evening when their car suddenly stops , they see a UFO , and are captured by a pair of grey aliens . However , the aliens are themselves soon confronted by a giant third alien from another race . Agent Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) is interviewed about the case by famed author Jose Chung ( Charles Nelson Reilly ) , who is researching a book he is writing about alien abductions and the UFO phenomenon . Scully notes that the girl , Chrissy , was found with all her clothes inside out , appearing to be the victim of date rape . Her date , Harold , is brought in by the police . He claims that he did not rape Chrissy , but that they were both abducted by aliens . The foul @-@ mouthed local detective , Manners ( whose profanity is humorously replaced with words such as " bleep " and " <unk> @-@ blank " ) , does not believe Harold 's story , but Agent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) has Chrissy undergo hypnosis , in which she describes being on a spaceship surrounded by aliens . Harold claims to have encountered a cigarette @-@ smoking grey alien on the ship who kept repeating , " This is not happening . " Mulder is convinced that Chrissy and Harold were abducted by aliens , but Scully thinks it is more plausible that the two teenagers simply had consensual sex and are struggling to deal with the emotional aftermath . 
 The agents then speak to an electric power company lineman named Roky <unk> , who claims he witnessed the abduction of Chrissy and Harold , and then turned his eyewitness account into a movie screenplay entitled " The Truth About Aliens . " He recounts a strange visit to his home from a pair of men in black , who told him that the UFO he thought he saw the night before was merely the planet Venus , and threatened to kill him if he told anyone otherwise . Roky 's screenplay describes his meeting with the third alien ( who calls himself Lord Kinbote ) , who took him to the center of the Earth and told Roky that he had a great mission for him . In telling Roky 's version of events to Jose Chung , Scully explains that Roky suffers from a " fantasy @-@ prone personality . " Mulder , however , thinks that Roky 's story contains some partial truths and decides to have Chrissy re @-@ hypnotized . This time Chrissy claims that she was captured by the U.S. military , not aliens , and they brainwashed her into believing that she was abducted by aliens . 
 Chung speaks to a science fiction and Dungeons & Dragons fanatic , Blaine , who frequently roams the woods of Klass County at night looking for UFOs . As Blaine tells Chung , one night he found an alien body that was subsequently recovered by Mulder , Scully and Detective Manners . Blaine thinks that Mulder and Scully are a couple of men in black . He claims that Mulder was emotionless , but shrieked when he saw the alien , and that Scully , whom Blaine believed was a man dressed like a woman , threatened him and told him not to talk to anyone about the alien body . Mulder allows Blaine to videotape Scully performing an autopsy on the alien , which is quickly released as a video " documentary " labeled " Dead Alien ! Truth or Humbug ? " that is narrated by the Stupendous Yappi ( from " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " ) . The autopsy reveals that the alien is actually a dead Air Force pilot in an alien costume . His superiors arrive to claim the body , but find it missing . Mulder tricks the military officers into revealing the identity of a second missing Air Force pilot , Lieutenant Jack Schaefer . 
 As Mulder remembers it , that night he found Schaefer , in a dazed state , walking naked down a highway in Klass County . After getting him some clothes , Mulder takes Schaefer to a diner , where the pilot explains that he and his partner were dressed as aliens while flying a secret U.S. military vehicle designed to resemble a UFO . He thinks that he , his partner , and the two teenagers were abducted by real aliens in a real UFO , but Schaefer is also unsure if his surroundings are real or a hallucination , and he tells Mulder that he may not even exist himself , as he cannot be sure . His superiors soon come to take him away ; before leaving the diner with the military officer , he tells Mulder that " I 'm a dead man . " The diner 's cook , however , has a different version of the story . He tells Jose Chung that Mulder was in the diner by himself that night with no one else , and that he kept asking the cook strange questions about UFOs and alien abductions while ordering piece after piece of sweet potato pie . 
 After leaving the diner , Mulder returns to their motel and finds the men in black seen earlier ( played by Jesse Ventura and Alex Trebek ) , in Scully 's room . Scully appears to be in a trance , and has no memory of seeing the men in black . The next morning , Mulder , Scully , and Detective Manners hear about the crash of an Air Force plane and head to the crash site , where the dead bodies of the two Air Force pilots they met earlier are recovered . Mulder visits with Chung , pleading with him not to publish the book since it will further discredit UFO researchers and witnesses by making them look ridiculous . Chung dismisses Mulder and publishes the book anyway , which Scully reads in her office . In his book , Chung describes the fates of the various people he interviewed : Roky has moved to California and founded a spiritual cult based on the teachings he believes he received from Lord Kinbote , Blaine has replaced him as a power company lineman and continues to search for UFOs most nights , Mulder ( whom Chung describes as " a ticking time bomb of insanity " ) watches video footage of Bigfoot , and Harold professes his love to Chrissy , who rejects him as too immature , as her UFO experience has given her a new commitment to philanthropy and helping humanity . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Darin Morgan had pieces of the script for a long time , drawing inspiration from research he had done on hypnosis and a book on government <unk> and UFOs that theorized that UFOs are a phenomenon that manipulate space and time , but are not piloted by aliens . Morgan had the idea for the teaser in mind before becoming a staff member on the show . The narrative style was influenced by a casting session Morgan witnessed where an actor auditioning sounded like Truman Capote . From this he came up with the idea to have a writer covering the case . Capote died in 1984 , and second choice Rip Taylor was unavailable , so the role of Jose Chung ended up going to Charles Nelson Reilly . Jesse Ventura was cast as one of the men in black , while the other , which Morgan had originally wanted Johnny Cash for , went to Jeopardy ! host Alex Trebek . The role of Lord Kinbote went to stuntman Tony Morelli . 
 The episode contained a number of references and in @-@ jokes . Klass County was named after UFO skeptic Philip Klass , whose use of the planet Venus to explain some UFO sightings was used by one of the men in black in the episode . The pilots dressed up as aliens were named after UFO authors Robert <unk> and Jacques Vallee . Air Force Sergeant Hynek was named after UFO researcher Dr. J. Allen Hynek . The character of Roky <unk> is named after musician Roky Erickson , who claims to be an alien abductee . Chung gives Mulder the pseudonym Reynard , after the legendary fox . The alien autopsy video : " Dead Alien ! Truth or Humbug ? " referenced Morgan 's first episode for the series , " Humbug " . The video was a parody of the real life Alien Autopsy video aired by Fox . Detective Manners was named after series director Kim Manners ; the character 's tendency to swear a lot was also influenced by his real life counterpart . Blaine is seen wearing a Space : Above and Beyond shirt during his interview . Lt. Schaefer molding his mashed potatoes into a mountain is a reference to the film Close Encounters of the Third Kind . An additional reference to the film Close Encounters is Roky 's job as a power company lineman , which is the same job held by Roy Neary , the character played by Richard Dreyfuss , in Close Encounters . The cover to Jose Chung 's book was a reference to the cover of the book Communion by Whitley <unk> . Lord Kinbote was an homage to Ray Harryhausen , a director noted for his work in stop @-@ motion model animation , with the footage of the character shot at high speed then slowed down and edited in post production to create a stop @-@ motion effect . 
 This episode would be the last that Darin Morgan wrote for the series before its revival in 2016 . The writer claimed that he could not keep up with the frantic pace of the show . Morgan would later write the similarly themed " Jose Chung 's Doomsday Defense " for the TV series Millennium . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Jose Chung 's From Outer Space " premiered on the Fox network on April 12 , 1996 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 5 , with a 19 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 5 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 19 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . This totaled 16 @.@ 08 million viewers . 
 The cast and crew of The X @-@ Files reacted positively to the episode . Gillian Anderson cited the episode as being among her highlights of the third season . She said the episode was like dessert , adding " That 's what kept it fun and that 's what kept it worth doing all the time . " Chris Carter said of writer Darin Morgan , " It 's been a wonderful coincidence of timing , talent , and the success of the show , allowing it to stretch in a direction it would never have been able to if it had been a less successful or if it had been a younger show . Darin is a truly original comic mind . I don 't know anybody in the world working in film , and that 's what we work in here even though it appears on television , who has the voice Darin has . He is one in many million . " Co @-@ Producer Paul Rabwin said of the episode " An instant classic . One of those seminal episodes . You know , when people talk about The Twilight Zone , they say ' Remember " Eye of the Beholder " ? ' Or " Trouble With Tribbles " on the original Star Trek . ' Jose Chung ' is going to be one of those episodes that is immediately revered . " Assistant director Tom Braidwood appreciated Charles Nelson Reilly 's presence , saying that he captivated virtually everyone and gave everyone a lift , nicknaming everyone on the crew . Executive Producer Robert Goodwin said that the casting of Reilly was the most fun of the episode . 
 " Jose Chung 's From Outer Space " received praise from critics as well . Author Phil Farrand rated the episode as his favorite episode of the first four seasons in his book The Nitpickers Guide to the X @-@ Files . Entertainment Weekly gave the episode an A , writing " A series so <unk> ' ripe for parody brilliantly turns the tables on itself . Two ( of many ) <unk> @-@ worthy moments : Mulder 's squeal and the smoking alien . " Reviewer Todd VanDerWerff from The A.V. Club gave the episode a rare A + and wrote that the episode " is one of the very finest episodes of television I 've ever seen , but I 'm not sure it 's a terrific episode of The X @-@ Files . [ ... ] If The X @-@ Files were a Lord of the Rings @-@ length novel , then " Jose Chung 's " would be its first appendix , a source that is at once in love with the main text and critical of it , a place where real human concerns creep around the edges of the show 's chilly implausibilities . " VanDerWerff 's colleague Zack Handlen wrote that the episode was " brilliant " , but he did not feel it was as satisfying as he anticipated because it did not contribute to the series as a whole . Review website IGN named it the fourth best standalone X @-@ Files episode of the entire series , writing , " it was ' Jose Chung 's From Outer Space ' in Season 3 that showed that X @-@ Files could create a true comedy masterpiece that almost completely broke away from the show 's usual format and tone . " Den of Geek listed it as the tenth best episode of the series . 
 = Leslie speaker = 
 The Leslie speaker is a combined amplifier and two @-@ way loudspeaker that projects the signal from an electric or electronic instrument , while modifying the sound by rotating the loudspeakers . It is most commonly associated with the Hammond organ , though it was later used for the guitar and other instruments . A typical Leslie speaker contains an amplifier , and a treble and bass speaker — though specific components depend upon the model . A musician controls the Leslie speaker by either an external switch or pedal that alternates between a slow and fast speed setting , known as " chorale " and " tremolo " . 
 The speaker is named after its inventor , Donald Leslie . Leslie began working in the late 1930s to get a speaker for a Hammond organ that had a closer emulation of a pipe or theatre organ , and discovered that rotating sound gave the best effect . Hammond was not interested in marketing or selling the speakers , so Leslie sold them himself as an add @-@ on , targeting other organs as well as Hammond . Leslie made the first speaker in 1941 . The sound of the organ being played through his speakers received national radio exposure across the US , and it became a commercial and critical success . It soon became an essential tool for most jazz organists . In 1965 , Leslie sold his business to CBS who , in 1980 , sold it to Hammond . Today , Suzuki Musical Instrument Corporation owns the Hammond and Leslie brands . 
 Because the Leslie is a sound modification device in its own right , various attempts have been made to emulate the effect using electronics . Many musicians have used the Univox Uni @-@ Vibe , the Neo Ventilator , or Hammond @-@ Suzuki 's own simulator in a box . 
 = = History = = 
 Leslie worked as a radio service engineer at Barker Brothers Department Store in Los Angeles , which sold and repaired Hammond organs . He bought one in 1937 , hoping it would be a suitable substitute for a pipe organ . He was disappointed , however , with the sound in his home compared to the large showroom where he originally heard it . Consequently , he attempted to design a speaker to overcome this . He initially tried making a cabinet similar to Hammond 's , but soon concluded that pipe organs produced a <unk> varied sound because of the different location of each pipe . He set out to emulate this by making a moving speaker . He tried various combinations of speakers and speeds , and discovered that a single one running at what 's now known as the " tremolo " speed worked best . After further experimentation , he decided that splitting the signal into a rotating drum and horn helped accentuate bass and treble frequencies . 
 By 1940 , Leslie decided his prototype was ready to market , and went to the Hammond Organ Company to demonstrate it . Laurens Hammond , however , was not impressed with Leslie 's attempt to better his own organ design , and declined to market it . The company even changed the speaker interface on their organs to make them " Leslie @-@ proof , " though Leslie quickly worked around this . Leslie began manufacturing the speaker in 1941 — initially under a variety of names , including Vibratone , Brittain Speakers , Hollywood Speakers , and Crawford Speakers . He returned to the name " Leslie Vibratone " in 1947 . To counteract Hammond 's slogan " Music 's Most Glorious Voice , " Leslie added a similar slogan , " Pipe Voice of the Electric Organ " to the plates . He eventually owned nearly 50 patents on the speaker . 
 Leslie manufactured the speaker to work with other organs besides Hammond , including Wurlitzer , Conn , Thomas and Baldwin . He never particularly liked Hammond organs , once remarking " I hate those damn things . " 
 In 1965 , Leslie sold the company to CBS , which had also acquired the Fender guitar company . In 1980 , the Hammond Corporation finally bought Electro Music and the Leslie name from CBS . After Hammond went out of business in 1986 , a former engineer re @-@ established Electro Music , licensing the name from Noel Crabbe , who had acquired the rights to Hammond . It was subsequently sold to Suzuki in 1992 , who continue to manufacture the speaker . 
 = = Features = = 
 A Leslie speaker consists of a number of individual components . The audio signal enters the amplifier from the instrument . Once amplified , the signal travels to an audio crossover , which splits it into separate frequency bands that can be individually routed to each loudspeaker . Different models have different combinations of speakers , but the most common model , the 122 , consists of a single woofer for bass and a single compression driver and acoustic horn for treble . The audio emitted by the speakers is isolated inside an enclosure , aside from a number of outlets that lead towards either a rotating horn or drum . An electric motor rotates both horn and drum at a constant speed . 
 The only control common to all Leslie speakers is a dial that controls the master volume . This is normally set up once and then left , since the organ 's expression pedal normally controls the volume . Leslie recommended playing the organ at full volume with all stops ( drawbars ) pulled out and adjusting the volume just before distortion occurs . However , the distorted sound of an overdriven vacuum tube amplifier can be a desirable sound , to the extent that modern Leslie simulators have an explicit " overdrive " setting . 
 Control of a Leslie speaker is normally catered for by an external two way switch , between two settings marked " chorale " and " tremolo " . The switch is mounted onto the controlling instrument , so the player can easily switch settings . Some earlier models were limited to " off " and " tremolo " , and some later models had all three settings . The switch can be used while notes are being played , and the sound of changing between the two settings is part of the characteristic sound . On both settings , the treble horn rotates slightly faster than the bass woofer ; about 50 revolutions per minute ( rpm ) for " chorale " and 400 rpm for " tremolo " , compared to the woofer 's 40 rpm and 340 rpm respectively . 
 Unlike most popular music amplifiers , that use jack plugs to connect to instruments , Leslie speakers use an amphenol connector to interface directly to an organ via a console connector . The type and design of the connector depends on the organ and model of Leslie speaker . 
 Older models that used tube power amplifiers used a variety of 6 @-@ pin connectors , while later models used a 9 @-@ pin connector . In all cases , for a single organ – Leslie configuration , the mains power , audio and control signals are all carried on the connector , and the design of the pin layouts varies between organs and speakers . Care must be taken when attempting to service them since an incorrectly or poorly wired cable can cause permanent damage to the organ and / or speaker , or result in electrocution . It is also possible to connect multiple Leslie speakers to a single organ , by using a power relay that provides the necessary AC current . 
 A separate device known as the combo preamp is necessary to connect a vintage Leslie to another instrument such as a guitar . This combines a separate AC input and line level input onto a single amphenol connector , and provide a footswitch to select between the speeds of the Leslie . Modern products such as the Trek II UC @-@ 1A allow any instrument with a phone jack connection to use a variety of Leslie speakers . 
 Modern Leslie speakers have an 11 @-@ pin interface that is safer to service , as the mains power is carried separately using a standard IEC mains connector . The Hammond @-@ Suzuki Leslie 2101 also includes line in and line out jacks , so a combo preamp is no longer required . Its settings can also be controlled via MIDI . 
 = = Models = = 
 = = = Single speed = = = 
 The initial models of Leslie speakers did not have the " chorale " setting . The control switch was simply a choice between " off " and " tremolo " . The first model of Leslie produced was the 30A . It emulated Hammond 's DXR @-@ 20 tone cabinet , which used moving drums but only produced amplitude modulation , not frequency modulation . It contained a 15 @-@ inch ( 380 mm ) drum and the power amplifier was housed in the top of the unit , to allow easy repair . This was superseded between 1947 and 1949 by the <unk> , also known as the " Tall Boy " . It was similar in appearance to the 30A , but contained additional louvres along the top of the cabinet . Also , reflectors were placed on the end of the horn , to allow the treble signal to exit the unit through the sides , rather than on the top . 
 The next models Leslie produced were the 21H and the 22H , which had a cabinet in a similar styling to the better known 122 , with the same dimensions and louvres . They were powered by a 40 watt tube amplifier . 
 = = = Dual speed = = = 
 The 122 is the most popular Leslie . It was specifically designed for the Hammond organ and is the model most commonly identified with it . It is 41 inches ( 1 @,@ 000 mm ) high , contains separate motors for chorale and tremolo , and a 40 watt tube amplifier . The 122 is the most adaptable to being recorded , as it has a balanced signal which eliminates mains hum and other noise . The <unk> was the same model , but with an additional reverb amplifier , which fed through to a separate static speaker . A slightly smaller version , the 33 @-@ inch ( 840 mm ) 142 was available . Hammond @-@ Suzuki currently manufacture the <unk> , a straight reissue of the 122 , and the <unk> , which contains a modern 11 @-@ pin adapter , an <unk> mains adaptor , line @-@ in , and a jack socket for a footswitch to control the speed . This eliminates the need for a combo preamp . 
 The 147 is the " universal " version of the 122 , designed for many organs , and has a different amplifier input and motor speed control , but is otherwise identical . The signal input is unbalanced , allowing a simpler connection to organs that have a built @-@ in speaker system , such as the Hammond <unk> , or a Wurlitzer . The motor speed switching uses a separate AC signal , rather than the DC voltage control of the 122 . In operation , the noticeable differences between the 122 and the 147 are the 122 's lower susceptibility to induced noise , and a delay between operation of the speed control and the actual change in speed . As with the 122 and 142 , the 145 is identical to the 147 , except that it is housed in a 33 @-@ inch ( 840 mm ) cabinet , and thus slightly easier to move . As with the 122 , Hammond @-@ Suzuki manufactures a modern replacement , the <unk> . 
 The model X @-@ 77 , released in 1968 , was designed to accompany Hammond 's new tonewheel / transistor organ , the X @-@ 66 . It contained seven different tab controls and six speakers . It has a completely different interface from other Leslies , using a 12 @-@ pin amphenol connector . 
 = = = Pro @-@ Line = = = 
 By the late 1960s , gigging musicians were finding that older Leslies like the 122 were not loud enough for large venues , which led to the introduction of the " Pro Line " series . These Leslies had louder solid @-@ state power amplifiers , and were mounted on casters for ease of portability . The first models Leslie manufactured were the 900 and 910 , which contained a 100 watt , three @-@ channel power amplifier . Both could split into two sections . The most popular version of the Pro @-@ Line series was the 760 . It was a smaller version of the 900 and 910 , and contained a 40 watt treble and 50 watt bass amplifier . A smaller , more portable version of the 760 is the 820 . It is a solid @-@ state cabinet like the 760 , and it connects to the organ with a 9 @-@ pin connector as well . However , it is only 31 inches ( 790 mm ) high and has only a single rotor with a full @-@ range 12 @-@ inch speaker . 
 The Pro @-@ Line series was durable and fault @-@ tolerant , with many models lasting for years . However , because they used solid @-@ state amplifiers , they are not as highly regarded as the older tube @-@ based Leslies , because they lack the characteristic sound when the amp is overdriven . 
 The smallest Leslie is the Model 16 , made in 1970 . It has a Fender @-@ like speaker body and a rotating foam dispersion block . It was built for guitarists , portable , and had " Leslie " written on the front . It contained just a single 10 @-@ inch speaker , and was designed to be powered by an external amplifier , and contained an additional output for an extension speaker . Control of the speaker was via two switches , one of which controlled the speed and one switched the rotors on and off . It was also released later as the Fender Vibratone . 
 = = = Hammond @-@ Suzuki = = = 
 As well as the <unk> and <unk> reissues , Hammond @-@ Suzuki now makes smaller and transportable Leslies using modern technology . The 2101 is 20 inches ( 520 mm ) high and has a rotating horn as found on the 122 and 147 , along with a pair of 2 @-@ inch ( 51 mm ) compression drivers and two 5 @-@ inch ( 130 mm ) woofers . The unit provides two separate inputs so different instruments can be plugged into the rotary and stationary components respectively . The 2121 is a 15 @-@ inch ( 380 mm ) stationary speaker that uses digital signal processing to emulate the rotating drum found in older Leslies . The 3300 is the same as the 2121 , but with a 300 watt power amplifier . 
 = = Sound generation = = 
 The Leslie is specifically designed , via reproduction of the Doppler effect , to alter or modify sound . As the sound source is rotated around a specific pivot point , it produces tremolo ( the modulation of amplitude ) and a variation in pitch . This produces a sequence of frequency modulated sidebands . To stop a Leslie 's rotor , a special brake circuit was added to the Leslie motor controls , that incorporated an electronic relay by producing a half @-@ wave of direct current . 
 Much of the Leslie 's unique tone is due to the fact that the system is at least partially enclosed , whereby linear louvres along the sides and front of the unit can vent the sound from within the box after the sound has bounced around inside , mellowing it . The crossover is deliberately set to 800 Hz to give the optimum balance between the horn and the drum , and is considered an integral part of the speaker . The tone is also affected by the wood used . Tone differences , due to cost cutting using particle board for speaker and rotor shelves instead of the previous plywood , are evident in the Leslie 's sound . The thinner ply of the top of the cabinet adds a certain resonance as well . Like an acoustic instrument , a Leslie 's tone is uniquely defined by its cabinet design and construction , the amplifier , crossover and speakers used , and the motors — not merely by the spinning of rotors . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Because a Leslie speaker modifies as well as amplifies the sound , the output cannot simply be connected to a larger PA system if the volume onstage from the built @-@ in amplifier is too quiet . This is particularly problematic for an older Leslie like the 122 or 147 , which only has a 40 watt RMS power amplifier . Instead , microphones are placed around the Leslie , and the output from these is connected to the PA . A typical setup for onstage miking is to use two microphones placed on opposite sides of the horn and a single microphone on the drum . 
 <unk> a Leslie is also important in a recording studio , as the choice and positioning of microphones determines the overall recorded sound . A popular recommendation is two Shure <unk> on the horn and a Sennheiser <unk> on the drum . Recording Magazine 's Dave Martin suggests a similar setup , with various microphone models used as stereo pairs on the horn but using an Electro @-@ Voice <unk> on the drum instead . Keith Emerson recorded his Leslie using a single mic each on the horn and the drum , but with the covers removed . 
 = = Clones and simulations = = 
 While the Leslie speaker is still made and sold , similar effects can now be obtained via analogue electronic devices and digital emulation . Chorus and phase shifter devices can give an approximation of the sounds produced by a Leslie speaker . The Univox Uni @-@ Vibe , a four @-@ stage phase shifter , was specifically marketed as a low @-@ cost Leslie substitute for guitarists , and used a foot @-@ operated fast / slow switch similar to the combo preamp . The pedal was popular , and notable users included Jimi Hendrix , David Gilmour and Robin <unk> , but vintage units tend not to be in good condition now due to the degradation of capacitors in the unit . Although the sound of a Leslie speaker heard in person is quite distinct , digital clones have become increasingly better at emulating it . 
 Most modern keyboards that emulate the Hammond organ also include a Leslie simulator , including Hammond 's own XK @-@ 3c and the Nord Electro . However , there is still a market for standalone simulators . The Neo Ventilator has been particularly praised for its accuracy in emulating the sound of a Leslie . Sound on Sound 's Mark Ashfield described it as " quite simply the best Leslie speaker simulator to date " , while a Keyboard Magazine reviewer was " blown away by how authentic the Ventilator sounds " . In 2013 , Hammond @-@ Suzuki started manufacturing their own Leslie simulator in a stomp box . 
 = = Notable users = = 
 Leslie never advertised his speakers . After demonstrating a prototype with Bob Mitchell , an organist with radio station KFI in Los Angeles , a contract was made to install another prototype in the station 's studios , where Mitchell would be the only organist authorized to use it . Mitchell was so impressed that he tried to patent the speaker , but discovered that he couldn 't . Soon afterwards , Mitchell became an organist with the Mutual Broadcasting System , and played a Hammond with the Leslie on its shows , ensuring national exposure for the sound . The Leslie was subsequently a standard component of several notable jazz organists , including Jimmy Smith , Jack McDuff , Jimmy McGriff and Shirley Scott . Graham Bond was the first notable British organist to play a Hammond through a Leslie . 
 In 1965 , Buddy Guy 's guitar amplifier stopped working while he was recording Junior Wells ' album Hoodoo Man Blues . Recording engineer Stu Black rewired the Leslie speaker in the studio to work with Guy 's guitar , which became a significant use of the guitar with the speaker . 
 Brian Wilson of The Beach Boys first recorded a Leslie in 1965 and used one for the title track of Pet Sounds , released the following year . The Beatles first recorded using a Leslie during the sessions for Revolver in 1966 . After John Lennon had asked for his voice to sound " as though I 'm the Dalai Lama singing from the highest mountain top " , Abbey Road engineer Geoff Emerick rewired the input of the studio 's Leslie so a vocal microphone could be attached to it . Emerick used this setup to record Lennon 's vocal on the track " Tomorrow Never Knows " and claims the Beatles subsequently wanted to record everything through a Leslie . George Harrison played his guitar through a Leslie on " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " and " You Never Give Me Your Money " . The Beatles subsequently inspired other guitarists to use the speaker . Eric Clapton used a Leslie on Cream 's song " Badge " , and David Gilmour used a similar setup when recording with Pink Floyd . Floyd 's Richard Wright played a grand piano through a Leslie for the introduction of Echoes on 1971 's Meddle . Guitarist Joe Walsh used the Leslie early in his career with the James Gang . 
 = Chadderton = 
 Chadderton ( pop . 34 @,@ 818 ) is a town within the Metropolitan Borough of Oldham , in Greater Manchester , England . It lies along the course of the River Irk and the Rochdale Canal , on undulating land in the foothills of the Pennines , 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of Oldham , 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) south of Rochdale and 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) northeast of the city of Manchester . 
 Historically part of Lancashire , Chadderton 's early history is marked by its status as a manorial township , with its own line of lords and overlords , who included the Asshetons , <unk> , Radclyffes and Traffords . Chadderton in the Middle Ages was chiefly distinguished by its two mansions , Foxdenton Hall and Chadderton Hall , and by the prestigious families who occupied them . Farming was the main industry of the area , with locals supplementing their incomes by hand @-@ loom woollen weaving in the domestic system . 
 Chadderton 's urbanisation and expansion largely coincided with developments in textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution and the Victorian era . A late 19th century factory @-@ building boom transformed Chadderton from a rural township into a major mill town — one of several in its region — and the second most populous urban district in the United Kingdom . More than 50 cotton mills had been built in Chadderton by 1914 . 
 Although Chadderton 's industries declined during the mid @-@ 20th century , the town continued to grow as a result of suburbanisation and urban renewal . The legacy of the town 's industrial past remains visible in its landscape of red @-@ brick cotton mills , now used as warehouses or distribution centres . Some of these are listed buildings because of their architectural , historical and cultural significance . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 The name Chadderton derives from <unk> , which is believed to be a combination of the Brythonic word Cader or Cater ( modern Welsh : Caer ) , indicating a fortified place amongst the hills and the Old English suffix -ton meaning a settlement . The University of Nottingham 's Institute for Name @-@ Studies has offered a similar suggestion , that the name Chadderton means " farm or settlement at the hill called <unk> " . This name is believed to date from the 7th century , when Angles colonised the region following the Battle of Chester . It has been suggested that the Anglian settlers found a few Brythonic Celts already inhabiting what is now called Chadderton , and borrowed their name for the hill , " <unk> " , adding their own word for a settlement to the end . Archaic spellings include <unk> , Chaderton , <unk> and <unk> . The first known written record of the name Chadderton is in a legal document relating to land tenure , in about 1220 . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The study of place names in Chadderton suggests that the ancient Britons once inhabited the area . Remains of Roman roads have been discovered running through the town , and the local road name <unk> suggests that the Romans once marched along it on a path which may have led to Blackstone Edge . Relics found at a tumulus in Chadderton Fold date from the Early Middle Ages , probably from the early period of Anglo @-@ Saxon England , when Angles settled in the area and Chadderton emerged as a manor of the hundred of Salford . 
 Chadderton is not recorded in the Domesday Book of 1086 . Its first appearance in a written record is in a legal document from around 1220 , which states that Robert , Rector of Prestwich , gave land to Richard , son of Gilbert , in exchange for an annual fee of one silver penny . Following the Norman conquest , Chadderton was made a constituent manor of the wider Royal Estate of Tottington , an extensive fee held by the Norman overlord , Roger de Montbegon . Taxation and governance continued on this basis throughout the Middle Ages , with the Barons Montbegon of Hornby Castle holding the estate , until it passed to the Barons Lacy of Clitheroe Castle , and then onto local families . In about 1235 , the sub @-@ manor of Chadderton and Foxdenton passed from Richard de Trafford of Trafford Park to Geoffrey de Trafford , who adopted the surname of Chadderton , thus founding the Chadderton family . During the High Middle Ages , pieces of land in Chadderton were granted to religious orders and institutions , including Cockersand Abbey and the Knights Hospitaller . 
 The manorial system was strong in Chadderton , and this lent distinction to the township , in a region which otherwise had weak local lordship . Throughout the Middle Ages , the manor of Chadderton constituted a township , centred on the hill by the banks of the River Irk , known as Chadderton Fold . The fold consisted of a cluster of cottages centred on Chadderton Hall manor house , and a water @-@ powered corn mill . Chadderton Hall was owned and occupied by the de Chaddertons . Geoffrey de Chadderton became the Lord of the Manor of Tottington in the 13th century . The de Chaddertons ' involvement in regional and national affairs gave prestige to what was otherwise an obscure and rural township . William Chaderton was Bishop of Chester from 1579 to 1595 and held distinguished academic posts such as Lady Margaret 's Professor of Divinity . Laurence Chaderton was the first Master of Emmanuel College , Cambridge and among the first translators of the King James Version of the Bible . Tottington was dissolved in the mid @-@ 15th century and there came a succession of distinguished families , each headed by an esquire with links to the monarchs of England . The Radclyffe , Assheton , and Horton families provided six High Sheriffs of Lancashire and a Governor of the Isle of Man . 
 Apart from the dignitaries who lived in Chadderton 's manor houses , Chadderton 's population during the Middle Ages comprised a small community of retainers , most of whom were occupied in farming , either growing and milling of grain and cereal or raising cattle , sheep , pigs and domestic fowl . Workers supplemented their incomes by hand @-@ loom spinning and weaving of wool at home . The community was ravaged by an outbreak of the Black Death in 1646 . 
 = = = Textiles and the Industrial Revolution = = = 
 Until the mid @-@ 18th century , the region in and around Chadderton was dominated by dispersed agricultural settlements . During this period the population was fewer than 1 @,@ 000 , broadly consisting of farmers who were involved with pasture , but who supplemented their incomes by working in cottage industries , particularly fustian and silk weaving . A fulling mill at Chadderton by the River Irk was recorded during the Elizabethan era , and during the Early Modern period the weavers of Chadderton had been using spinning wheels in makeshift weavers ' cottages to produce woollens . Primitive early 18th @-@ century industrialisation developed slowly in Chadderton . However , as the demand for cotton goods increased and the technology of cotton @-@ spinning machinery improved during the mid @-@ 18th century , the need for larger structures to house bigger , better , and more efficient equipment became apparent . A water @-@ powered cotton mill was built at Chadderton 's Stock Brook in 1776 . The damp climate below the South Pennines provided ideal conditions for textile production to be carried out without the thread drying and breaking , and newly developed 19th @-@ century mechanisation optimised cotton spinning for industrial @-@ scale manufacture of yarn and fabric for the global market . As the Industrial Revolution advanced , socioeconomic conditions in the region contributed to Chadderton adopting cotton spinning in the factory system , which became the dominant source of employment in the locality . The construction of multi @-@ storey steam powered mills followed , which initiated a process of urbanisation and cultural transformation in the region ; the population increasingly moved away from farming and domestic weaving in favour of the mechanised production of cotton goods . 
 During this early period of change , Chadderton 's parliamentary representation was limited to two Members of Parliament for Lancashire . Nationally , the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 had resulted in periods of famine and unemployment for textile workers . Nevertheless , despite years of distress and unrest , major disturbances of machine @-@ breaking did not occur until 1826 . By the beginning of 1819 the pressure generated by poor economic conditions , coupled with the lack of suffrage in Northern England , had enhanced the appeal of political Radicalism in the region . The Manchester Patriotic Union , a group agitating for parliamentary reform , began to organise a mass public demonstration in Manchester to demand the reform of parliamentary representation . Organised preparations took place , and a spy reported that in neighbouring Thornham , " seven hundred men drilled ... as well as any army regiment would " . A few days later , on 3 August , a royal proclamation forbidding the practice of drilling was posted in Manchester . On 16 August 1819 , Chadderton ( like its neighbours ) sent a contingent of its townsfolk to Manchester to join the mass political demonstration now known as the Peterloo Massacre ( owing to the 15 deaths and 400 – 700 injuries which followed ) . Two of the 15 deceased were from the area : John Ashton of Cowhill and Thomas Buckley of Baretrees . 
 New markets in Europe and South America increased the demand for Britain 's cheap cotton goods . Supplies of raw cotton were exported from plantations in the United States to Manchester . From the markets in Manchester , mill owners from Chadderton and neighbouring towns bought their cotton to be processed into yarn and cloth . Supplies were cut during the Lancashire Cotton Famine of 1861 – 65 as a result of the American Civil War , leading to the formation of the Chadderton Local Board of Health in 1873 , whose purpose was to ensure social security and maintain hygiene and sanitation in the locality following the crisis . Despite a brief economic depression , the urban growth of Chadderton accelerated after the famine . The profitability of factory based cotton spinning meant that much of Chadderton 's plentiful cheap open land , used for farming since antiquity , vanished under distinctive rectangular multi @-@ storey brick @-@ built factories — 35 by 1891 . Chadderton 's former villages and hamlets agglomerated as a mill town around these factories and a network of newly created roads , canals and railways . The Chadderton landscape was " dominated by mill chimneys , many with the mill name picked out in white brick " . Neighbouring Oldham ( which by the 1870s had emerged as the largest and most productive mill town in the world ) encroached upon Chadderton 's eastern boundary , <unk> the town and surrounds , and forming a continuous urban cotton @-@ spinning district with Royton , Lees and Shaw and Crompton — the Oldham parliamentary constituency — which at its peak was responsible for 13 per cent of the world 's cotton production . These Victorian era developments shifted the commercial focus away from Chadderton Fold to the major arterial Middleton Road , by Chadderton 's eastern boundary with Oldham . Sixty cotton mills were constructed in Chadderton between 1778 and 1926 , and 6 @,@ 000 people , a quarter of Chadderton 's population , worked in these factories by the beginning of the 20th century . Industries ancillary to cotton spinning , such as engineering , coal mining , bleaching and dyeing became established during this period , meaning the rest of Chadderton 's population were otherwise involved in the sector . Philip Stott was a Chadderton @-@ born architect , civil engineer and surveyor of cotton mills . Stott 's mills in Chadderton were some of the largest to be built in the United Kingdom , multiplying the town 's industrial capacity and in turn increasing its population and productivity . 
 The boomtown of Chadderton reached its industrial zenith in the 1910s , with over 50 cotton mills within the town limits . A social consequence of this industrial growth was a densely populated metropolitan landscape , home to an extensive and enlarged working class community living in an urban sprawl of low quality terraced houses . However , Chadderton developed an abundance of civic institutions including public street lighting , Carnegie library , public swimming baths and council with its own town hall . The development of the town meant that the district council made initial steps to petition the Crown for honorific borough status for Chadderton in the 1930s . However , the Great Depression , and the First and Second World Wars each contributed to periods of economic decline . As imports of cheaper foreign yarns and textile goods increased during the mid @-@ 20th century , Chadderton 's textile sector declined to a halt ; cotton spinning reduced dramatically in the 1960s and 1970s and by 1997 only two mills were operational . In spite of efforts to increase the efficiency and competitiveness of its production , the last cotton was spun in the town in 1998 . Many of the redundant mills have now been demolished . Non @-@ textile based industries continued on throughout the 20th century and into the 21st century , particularly in the form of aircraft and chemical manufacture at plants in south Chadderton and Foxdenton respectively . 
 = = = Post @-@ industrial history = = = 
 During the second half of the 20th century , Chadderton experienced accelerated deindustrialisation along with economic decline . Large areas of Victorian and Edwardian era terraced housing were identified as unsuited for modern needs , and were subsequently demolished . However , the town 's population continued to grow as a result of urban renewal and modern suburban housing developments . During the 1970s and 1980s , redevelopment in the form of new shopping , health and leisure facilities contributed to the growth and renewal of Chadderton . In 1990 , the new Firwood Park , on the west side of Chadderton , was said to be the largest private housing estate in Europe . Chadderton continued to be a regional hub for the secondary sector of the economy into the 21st century through BAE Systems and <unk> Semiconductors , though BAE Chadderton closed in March 2012 . Other major employers include the Stationery Office and Trinity Mirror . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Lying within the historic county boundaries of Lancashire since the early 12th century , the boundaries of Chadderton have varied from time to time . Chadderton anciently formed part of the hundred of Salford for civil jurisdiction , but for manorial government , Chadderton was a constituent manor of the Fee of Tottington , whose overlords were the de <unk> , Barons of Clitheroe Castle . The de Chaddertons , Lords of the Manor of Chadderton , were accustomed to pay tax to the overlords until the division of Tottington . In 1507 , two constables were appointed to uphold law and order in Chadderton . Following a court case , in 1713 it was agreed that 20 acres ( 8 ha ) of Northmoor be within Chadderton with the rest belonging to Oldham . 
 Following the Poor Law Amendment Act 1834 , Chadderton formed part of the Oldham Poor Law Union , an inter @-@ parish unit established to provide social security . Chadderton 's first local authority was a local board of health established in 1873 ; Chadderton Local Board of Health was a regulatory body responsible for standards of hygiene and sanitation in the township . Following the Local Government Act 1894 , the area of the local board became the Chadderton Urban District , a local government district within the administrative county of Lancashire . The urban district council , comprising 18 members , would later be based out of Chadderton Town Hall , a purpose built municipal building opened in 1913 . In 1933 , there were exchanges of land with the neighbouring Municipal Borough of Middleton and City of Manchester . 
 Chadderton was the second most populous urban district in the United Kingdom by the 1930s , and the district council took initial steps to obtain municipal borough status , but this was not achieved . In 1926 and 1931 , two Oldham Extension Bills for the County Borough of Oldham to amalgamate with Chadderton Urban District were rejected by the House of Lords , following objections from neighbouring councils . A twinning arrangement was made in 1966 by Chadderton Urban District Council with <unk> , West Germany . Under the Local Government Act 1972 , the Chadderton Urban District was abolished , and Chadderton has , since 1 April 1974 , formed an unparished area of the Metropolitan Borough of Oldham , a local government district of the metropolitan county of Greater Manchester . Chadderton has three of the twenty wards of the Metropolitan Borough of Oldham : Chadderton North , Chadderton Central and Chadderton South . , with some small <unk> areas lying in the neighbouring wards of Royton North , Coldhurst , Hollinwood , Werneth and Failsworth East . 
 In terms of parliamentary representation , Chadderton after the Reform Act 1832 was represented as part of the Oldham parliamentary borough constituency , of which the first Members of Parliaments ( MPs ) were the radicals William Cobbett and John Fielden . Winston Churchill was the MP between 1900 and 1906 . Constituency boundaries changed during the 20th century , and Chadderton has lain within the constituencies of Middleton and Prestwich ( 1918 – 1950 ) and Oldham West ( 1950 – 1997 ) . Since 1997 , Chadderton has lain within Oldham West and Royton . It is represented in the House of Commons by Michael Meacher , a member of the Labour Party . 
 = = Geography = = 
 At 53 ° 32 ′ 46 ″ N 2 ° 8 ′ 33 ″ W ( 53 @.@ <unk> ° , − 2 @.@ 1426 ° ) , and 165 miles ( 266 km ) north @-@ northwest of central London , Chadderton lies at the foothills of the Pennines , 2 @.@ 7 miles ( 4 @.@ 3 km ) east @-@ southeast of Middleton , and 1 @.@ 1 miles ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) west of Oldham . It is in the northeast part of the Greater Manchester Urban Area , the UK 's third largest conurbation , on undulating land rising from 300 feet ( 91 m ) above sea level in the west to 450 feet ( 137 m ) in the east . Chadderton Heights , on the hillier northern edge of the town , is its highest point at 509 feet ( 155 m ) . 
 The climate in the area , like most of northwest Europe , is maritime temperate , with significant precipitation throughout the year , averaging 1047 mm annually . The average annual temperature is 9 @.@ 7 ° C. 
 Chadderton 's modern commercial centre lies close to the boundary with Oldham ; the expansion of Oldham in the mid @-@ 19th century caused urbanisation along the eastern boundary of Chadderton , which spread outwards into the rest of the township . Continued growth in the late @-@ 19th and early @-@ 20th centuries gave rise to a densely populated , industrial landscape of factories and rows of terraced housing , typical of mill towns in Northern England . There is a mixture of high @-@ density urban areas , suburbs and semi @-@ rural locations in Chadderton , but overwhelmingly the land use in the town is urban . The soils of Chadderton are sand based , with subsoils of clay and gravel . 
 Chadderton 's built environment is distinguished by its former textile factories : " The huge flat @-@ topped brick mills with their square towers and their tall circular chimneys dwarf all other buildings . " Rows of early @-@ 20th century terraced housing built to house Chadderton 's factory workers are a common type of housing stock throughout the town ; narrow streets pass through these older housing areas . 
 Chadderton is contiguous with other settlements on all sides , including a shared boundary with the city of Manchester to the southwest . 
 Localities within Chadderton include Baretrees , Block Lane , Busk , Butler Green , Chadderton Fold , Chadderton Park , <unk> Green , Cowhill , Greengate , Firwood Park , Foxdenton , <unk> Green , Middleton Junction , Mills Hill , Nimble Nook , Nordens , Stock Brook , <unk> and White Moss . Chadderton Fold , the former <unk> of Chadderton , lies on the banks of the River Irk , 1 @.@ 3 miles ( 2 km ) north @-@ northwest of Chadderton 's modern commercial centre . Hollinwood , in pre @-@ industrial times , was a moor or common of Chadderton , but was largely incorporated into neighbouring Oldham following a court case in 1713 . In the mid 18th century a village emerged at Hollinwood along the common border of Oldham and Chadderton , and there were further exchanges of land at Hollinwood between Oldham Borough and Chadderton township in 1880 . " Chadderton ( Detached ) " was , as its name implies , a detached area or exclave of Chadderton . Lying under <unk> Hill in Oldham and including the area now known as Garden Suburb , its area was absorbed into neighbouring Oldham in 1880 . 
 = = Demography = = 
 According to the Office for National Statistics , at the time of the United Kingdom Census 2001 , Chadderton ( urban @-@ core and sub @-@ area ) had a total resident population of 33 @,@ 001 . The population density was 8 @,@ 669 inhabitants per square mile ( 3 @,@ 347 / km2 ) , with a 100 to 95 @.@ 4 female @-@ to @-@ male ratio . Of those over 16 years old , 27 @.@ 2 per cent were single ( never married ) 44 @.@ 5 per cent married , and 8 @.@ 5 per cent divorced . Chadderton 's 13 @,@ 698 households included 28 @.@ 8 per cent one @-@ person , 38 @.@ 7 per cent married couples living together , 8 @.@ 9 per cent co @-@ habiting couples , and 10 @.@ 3 per cent single parents with their children . Of those aged 16 – 74 , 35 @.@ 6 per cent had no academic qualifications . 
 At the 2001 UK census , 81 @.@ 1 per cent of Chadderton 's residents reported themselves as being Christian , 3 @.@ 2 per cent Muslim , 0 @.@ 5 per cent Hindu , 0 @.@ 1 per cent Buddhist , and 0 @.@ 1 per cent Sikh . The census recorded 8 @.@ 7 per cent as having no religion , 0 @.@ 1 per cent had an alternative religion and 6 @.@ 3 per cent did not state their religion . 
 Chadderton 's population has been described as broadly working class with pockets of lower middle class communities , particularly in the northeast of the town , near the border with Royton . Parts of the town are relatively affluent compared to the wider Metropolitan Borough of Oldham . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Up until the 18th century , the inhabitants of Chadderton raised domestic farm animals , supplementing their incomes by the spinning and weaving wool in the domestic system . Primitive coal mining was established by the 17th century , and the factory system adopted in the late @-@ 18th century . During the Victorian era , Chadderton 's economy was heavily dependent on manufacturing industries , especially the spinning of cotton , but also the weaving of silk and production of hats . By the 20th century the landscape was covered with over 50 cotton mills . Industries ancillary to these sectors , including coal mining , brick making , mechanical engineering , and bleaching and dyeing were present . Chadderton developed an extensive coal mining sector auxiliary to Chadderton 's cotton industry and workforce . Coal was transported out of the township via the Rochdale Canal . The amount of coal was overestimated however , and production began to decline even before that of the local spinning industry ; Chadderton 's last coal mine closed in 1920 . 
 Since the deindustrialisation of the region in the mid @-@ 20th century , these industries have been replaced by newer sectors and industries , although many of the civic developments that accompanied industrialisation remain in the form of public buildings ; a town hall , public baths and library . The few surviving cotton mills are now occupied by warehousing and distribution companies , or used as space for light industry . 
 British aircraft manufacturer Avro built a factory in south Chadderton in 1938 – 39 , later known as BAE Chadderton . It was one of the largest employers in the area , producing a variety of aircraft models including Ansons , Manchesters and Bristol Blenheims . During the Second World War , 3 @,@ 050 Avro Lancaster bombers were built at the Chadderton factory — over 40 per cent of the Royal Air Force 's fleet . Post World War Two the Avro Vulcan was designed and built , as well as the Avro Shackleton and Avro Lincoln . After the Aircraft and Shipbuilding Industries Act 1977 , Avro became part of the nationalised British Aerospace ( now BAE Systems ) and produced commercial aircraft for Boeing and Airbus . 
 Chadderton has been described as a " relatively prosperous town ... which makes it a popular residential area " . Chadderton Mall is a shopping precinct located in the town centre , and is one of Chadderton 's main concentrations of retailing . It was constructed in 1974 , and opened in 1975 . It includes an Asda supermarket and a variety of smaller shops . The Stationery Office has a base in Chadderton , as does 3M . In 2008 , 3M was the centre of a high profile robbery of over 3 @,@ 000 British passports . Other major businesses include Costco and Shop Direct Group . The Centre ( formerly Elk Mill Retail Park ) , is a retail park located at the start of the A627 ( M ) motorway . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 Chadderton Town Hall was the seat of Chadderton Urban District Council . It is Chadderton 's second town hall , the first was the former Chadderton Lyceum building ( demolished in 1975 ) . The current town hall , Chadderton 's first purpose built municipal building , was designed by Taylor and <unk> of Oldham , and was opened in 1913 by Herbert Wolstencroft JP , the then chairman of Chadderton Urban District Council . The architectural style was intended to have " a broad and strong treatment of the English Renaissance " . It features " charming gardens and a beautifully renovated ballroom " . English Heritage granted it Grade II listed status in July 2013 . Since 2007 , Chadderton Town Hall has housed the Oldham Register Office , the civil registration authority for the Metropolitan Borough of Oldham . It is a licensed venue for marriage ceremonies , and holds records of births , marriages and deaths which have taken place in what is now the Metropolitan Borough of Oldham from 1837 to the present . 
 Foxdenton Hall is a two @-@ storey Georgian mansion and former manor house , with an English garden wall bond exterior and its own private gardens . The original Hall was erected in the mid @-@ 15th century as a home for the Radclyffes , who had acquired the title of joint Lords of the Manor with the Asshetons of Chadderton , through marriage . This Foxdenton Hall was demolished to make way for a second Hall , built in 1620 . The ground floor of that second Hall now forms the basement of the present Hall , built in 1700 . The building is described as " a dignified early Georgian house , particularly rare in this part of the country " . The Radclyffes moved out of Foxdenton Hall in the late 18th century , favouring properties they had purchased in Dorset , although they still maintained ownership . Foxdenton Hall and the adjoining Foxdenton Park were leased to Chadderton Council by the Radclyffes in 1922 , when they opened to the public . In 1960 the council took over ownership of the Hall , by which time it was in a state of disrepair . Following protest about funding and the condition of the building , Foxdenton Hall was restored in 1965 . 
 Chadderton War Memorial is located outside Chadderton Town Hall , and was originally erected " in honour of the men of Chadderton who made the supreme sacrifice and in grateful remembrance of all who served their county " during the First World War , but later , the Second World War . It is a granite obelisk fronted by three steps . At the front on a short plinth stands a bronze figure of an ordinary soldier , holding a rifle in his right hand . It was designed by Taylor and <unk> and sculpted by Albert Toft . Chadderton War Memorial was commissioned by the Chadderton War Memorial Committee and unveiled on 8 October 1921 by Councillor Ernest Kempsey . 
 Chadderton Hall Park is a public park by the River Irk in the north of Chadderton , spanning an area of over 15 acres ( 6 ha ) , in what were once the gardens of the manorial Chadderton Hall . At the end of the 19th century they were leased to Joseph Ball , who transformed the hall and grounds into a pleasure garden , complete with a boating lake and a menagerie . The hall was demolished in 1939 . The park is now owned by Oldham Council , the local authority , and was opened to the public in 1956 . It was awarded Green Flag status in 2006 . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Public transport in Chadderton is co @-@ ordinated by Transport for Greater Manchester ( TfGM ) , a county @-@ wide public body with direct operational responsibilities such as supporting ( and in some cases running ) local bus services , and managing integrated ticketing in Greater Manchester . Major A roads link Chadderton with other settlements , including the A663 road . Opened by Wilfrid William Ashley , 1st Baron Mount Temple in 1925 , the arterial A663 , named Broadway , bisects Chadderton from north to south , and was " a major factor in the unification and modernisation of the town " . The <unk> road , routed through Chadderton , connects Oldham with Middleton . At its eastern end is Chadderton 's town centre . The M62 motorway runs to the north of the area and is accessed via Broadway at junction 21 and junction 20 via the A627 ( M ) motorway , which terminates close to Chadderton 's northeastern boundary with Royton . The M60 motorway skirts the south of Chadderton , near Hollinwood . The section of the M60 through Chadderton was opened in autumn 2000 . 
 Chadderton is served by two railway stations just outside its western boundary , Mills Hill railway station at its border with Middleton and Moston railway station at its border with New Moston , Manchester . 
 The Middleton Junction and Oldham Branch Railway was routed through Chadderton . Middleton Junction railway station was within the town limits . Opened on 31 March 1842 it closed in 1966 . On 12 August 1914 Chadderton goods and coal depot was opened . The depot was at the end of a 1097 yards long branch which came off the Middleton Junction to Oldham line at Chadderton Junction . The line from Chadderton Junction to Oldham Werneth was closed on 7 January 1963 , but Chadderton goods and coal depot remained open for a period . Electric tramways to and from Middleton opened in 1902 . Tram services ran along Middleton Road and terminated in Chadderton . The final tram ran in 1935 . The Oldham Loop Line closed as a heavy rail line in 2009 , and reopened in June 2012 as part of a new Manchester Metrolink light @-@ rail line from Manchester Victoria to Rochdale via Oldham . South Chadderton Metrolink station , Freehold Metrolink station and the former Hollinwood railway station are part of the conversion to Metrolink . 
 The majority of the bus services in Chadderton are operated by First Greater Manchester , who run services 24 , 58 , 59 , 181 , and 182 which provide frequent services from Chadderton town centre to Middleton , Oldham and Shaw , with other services running to Manchester , Royton and Rochdale . Manchester Community Transport run services 159 and 419 linking the town centre with Oldham , Middleton , Hollinwood , Woodhouses , Failsworth , New Moston , Werneth and Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne . 
 Service 415 links the Cowhill and Nimble Nook areas of Chadderton with Middleton and Oldham , while services 81 and 81a operate through South Chadderton providing services to Manchester via Moston and to Oldham , Holts and Derker . Service 149 also links South Chadderton with Oldham and to Manchester via Blackley . These services are operated by First Greater Manchester . 
 In the Chadderton Park area MT Travel operate circular service 406 to Oldham via Mills Hill , Firwood Park , Fitton Park and Coldhurst . Rossendale Transport operate service 412 to <unk> via Mills Hill and <unk> and to Oldham via Royton . 
 In the Greengate area of the town Stagecoach Manchester provides the following bus services . 112 / 113 - to Middleton via Middleton Junction and to Manchester City Centre via Moston and Collyhurst . 114 - to Middleton via <unk> and Manchester City Centre via Moston and Collyhurst . 294 offers two early morning one way services to the Trafford Centre via Moston , Cheetham Hill and Salford Quays . 
 Citibus was a Chadderton @-@ based commercial bus operator serving Greater Manchester , launched in 1986 . It competed with GMPTE until 1995 when it was bought @-@ out by GM Buses North , what is now First Manchester . 
 = = Education = = 
 An old style grammar school at <unk> Green in Chadderton was built and founded in 1789 . As the population of Chadderton grew during the 19th century , more schools were opened , each linked with a local church . Mills Hill School began as a voluntary aided school belonging to the local Baptist church . Further schoolrooms from this period were found at Cowhill Methodist Church and Washbrook Methodist Church , opened in 1855 and 1893 respectively . 
 The Chadderton Grammar School was the first new style co @-@ educational grammar school opened by Lancashire County Council . It was opened by David Lindsay , 28th Earl of Crawford , on 18 October 1930 . In 1959 , it became The Girls ' Grammar , when a separate school for boys was opened . The Girls ' Grammar briefly became Mid @-@ Chadderton School , and later The Radclyffe School , and the boys ' school part of North Chadderton School . Radclyffe and North Chadderton are today the town 's two co @-@ educational , non @-@ denominational , comprehensive secondary schools . North Chadderton School has a sixth form college for 16- to 19 @-@ year @-@ olds . The Radclyffe School , which has specialist Technology College status , was modernised in 2008 by way of a £ 30 million new school complex opened by Sir Alex Ferguson on 8 July 2008 . The Blessed John Henry Newman RC College opened in 2011 on the Broadway site previously occupied by The Radclyffe School . 
 = = Religion = = 
 Chadderton had no medieval church of its own , and until 1541 , for ecclesiastical purposes , lay within the parish of Prestwich @-@ cum @-@ Oldham in the Diocese of Lichfield . The diocese was then divided , and Chadderton became part of the Diocese of Chester . This in turn was divided in 1847 , when the present Diocese of Manchester was created . For ritual baptisms , marriages and burials , the people of Chadderton , a Christian community , had to travel to churches that lay outside of the township 's boundaries , including Oldham St Mary 's , Middleton St Leonard 's , and Prestwich St Mary 's . The route of some of the ancient paths to these churches is preserved in the modern layout of some of the town 's roads . 
 Chadderton 's first established church was St Margaret of Antioch which was consecrated in 1769 at Hollinwood , however late 19th century boundary changes means it now lies within neighbouring Oldham . 
 The New Parishes Act 1844 allowed for the creation of a parish for Chadderton , dedicated to St Matthew the Evangelist . Services were initially held in the stables of Chadderton Hall , and then in a temporary wooden structure opened in 1848 . The Church of St Matthew was opened for the parish in 1857 by the then Bishop of Manchester , James Prince Lee . A steeple was added in 1881 . Following the construction of this church , four followed . There are now several Anglican parishes , and within them daughter and mission churches , serving the town . The parish of St Matthew united with the neighbouring parish of St Luke , and the United Benefice of St Matthew with St Luke now lies within the Oldham West Deanery of the Diocese of Manchester . The parish of Christ Church , founded in 1870 , which also contains the church of St Saviour 's and Crossley Christian Centre , is one of the largest numerically in the township and lies on the border with Werneth . The parish of Emmanuel , now meeting in the St George 's building on Broadway , was originally part of Christ Church parish . Also within this deanery is the Parish Church of St Mark , built in the early 1960s . It is a blue brick building with a graduated slate pitched roof , and a rectangular brick steeple with a high gabled roof . It was granted Grade II listed building status in 1998 . 
 In addition to the Church of England , a variety of other Reformed denominations have been practised in Chadderton . Nonconformism was popular in Chadderton , and places of worship for Methodism , Baptist and Congregationalism were built during the 19th and 20th centuries . Washbrook Methodist Church and School at Butler Green was built in 1868 , but was demolished around 1970 to be replaced by South Chadderton Methodist Church formed from the amalgamation of five Methodist congregations . 
 Chadderton forms part of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Salford . The Roman Catholic Parish of Corpus Christi was founded in Chadderton in 1878 , following immigration to the region by Irish Catholics fleeing the Great Famine . A combined school and church was opened in 1904 . A further Catholic parish for Chadderton , dedicated to Saint Herbert , was created in 1916 . Its first mass was held on 1 July 1916 , the day the Battle of the Somme began . 
 Chadderton also has a large mosque to provide for the growing Muslim sector of the community . This is namely Chadderton <unk> Central Mosque & Islamic Centre , and is located at 209 – 211 Bamford Street . The mosque has a large visitor capacity , and is open all throughout the day for quiet contemplation & other religious duties . The mosque is looked after by its own individual , specialist Mosque Committee . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Chadderton F.C. is an association football club formed in 1947 under the name <unk> Football Club , later changing to North Chadderton Amateurs , before adopting its present name in 1957 . It plays in the North West Counties Football League First Division . Past players have included former England national football team captain David Platt , former Leeds United A.F.C. and Crystal Palace F.C. player John Pemberton and Northern Ireland national football team player Steve Jones . Mark Owen of pop group Take That briefly played for the club . <unk> A.F.C. were formed in 1937 and currently play in the Lancashire Amateur League . Chadderton Park F.C. is an amateur football club founded in 1977 . Oldham Borough F.C. , formerly Oldham Dew and Oldham Town , were a Chadderton @-@ based North West Counties League football club formed in 1964 . They played at Nordens Road , Chadderton before moving to the <unk> Stadium in Oldham in the early 1990s . 
 The Art Nouveau Chadderton Baths was a public swimming facility opened in 1937 . Henry Taylor , the British Olympic freestyle swimming triple gold medallist and champion was an attendant at Chadderton Baths where many of his awards were displayed . Chadderton Baths were closed indefinitely in 2006 after a structural survey found faults which could have put the public at risk . Chadderton Sports Centre , built onto the Baths , was closed and replaced by the Chadderton Wellbeing Centre in January 2010 . An application to demolish the Baths was made in March 2011 , but is now in private ownership with conversion work due soon . The Wellbeing Centre is a multi @-@ purpose facility with a swimming pool , dance studio , library , gym , meeting rooms , and café . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Policing in Chadderton is provided by the Greater Manchester Police . The force 's " ( Q ) Division " has its headquarters for policing the Metropolitan Borough of Oldham in central Oldham . Greater Manchester Police have two stations in Chadderton : a Victorian building in central Chadderton , and a modern purpose @-@ built station at Broadgate in southern Chadderton . Statutory emergency fire and rescue service is provided by the Greater Manchester Fire and Rescue Service , who have a fire station in Chadderton , on Broadway . 
 There are no hospitals in Chadderton — the nearest are in the larger settlements of Oldham and Rochdale — but some local health care is provided by Chadderton Town and South Chadderton health centres which are commissioned by NHS Oldham . The North West Ambulance Service provides emergency patient transport in the area . Other forms of health care are provided for locally by several small specialist clinics and surgeries . 
 Waste management is co @-@ ordinated by the local authority via the Greater Manchester Waste Disposal Authority . Locally produced inert waste for disposal is sent to landfill at the Beal Valley . United Utilities manages Chadderton 's drinking and waste water . Water supplies are sourced from several reservoirs in the borough , including Dovestones and Chew . A sewage treatment works is located in the southwest of Chadderton , at Foxdenton . It opened in 1898 . 
 A power station in Chadderton existed in as early as 1925 , built for the County Borough of Oldham in the <unk> Valley . This structure was demolished to make way for the new Chadderton " B " Power Station , opened in 1955 for the British Electricity Authority in anticipation that the region would experience increased demand for electricity . Structural changes to the National Grid made the power station redundant in 1982 . It was sold by the Central Electricity Generating Board in 1984 , and demolished in 1986 . Chadderton 's Distribution Network Operator for electricity is United Utilities . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 People from Chadderton are called <unk> . Historically , Chadderton was chiefly distinguished by the presence of ruling families , including the Asshetons , Radclyffes , Hortons and Chaddertons . Within the extended Chadderton / Chaderton family , two ecclesiastically notable persons were William Chaderton ( medieval academic and bishop ) and Laurence Chaderton ( the first Master of Emmanuel College , Cambridge , a leading Puritan and one of the original translators of the Authorised King James Version of the Bible ) . John Ashton of Cowhill and Thomas Buckley of Baretrees in Chadderton were two victims of the Peterloo Massacre in 1819 . Samuel Collins , ' The Bard Of Hale Moss ' , was a 19th @-@ century poet and radical who lived at Hale Moss in southern Chadderton . 
 Lydia Becker was a pioneer in the late 19th @-@ century of the campaign for Women 's Suffrage and founder of the Women 's Suffrage Journal , born in Chadderton 's Foxdenton Hall . Chadderton born scientist Geoff Tootill helped create the Manchester Small @-@ Scale Experimental Machine in 1948 , the world 's first electronic stored @-@ program computer . Terry Hall was a pioneering ventriloquist and early children 's television entertainer born in Chadderton in 1926 . He was one of the first <unk> to perform with an animal ( the " cowardly and bashful " Lenny the Lion ) as his puppet , rather than a traditional child doll . Other notable people from Chadderton include Woolly Wolstenholme , the Chadderton @-@ born vocalist and keyboard player with the British progressive rock band Barclay James Harvest , David Platt , former captain of the England national football team , and supermodel Karen Elson , who grew up in the town and attended North Chadderton School . Professor Brian Cox was born in Chadderton in 1968 . William Ash , is a Chadderton @-@ born actor who has appeared in productions such as Waterloo Road and Hush . 
 = Couples Discount = 
 " Couples Discount " is the fifteenth episode of the ninth season of the American comedy television series The Office and the 191st episode overall . It originally aired on NBC on February 7 , 2013 . The episode features return guest appearances from Andy Buckley as Dunder Mifflin CEO David Wallace and Chris Diamantopoulos as Brian the boom mic operator . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , the office pairs into couples so that they may all be able to take advantage of a Valentine 's Day discount at a mini @-@ mall . After Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) returns from his boat trip , Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) decides that she is going to break up with him so that she can be with Pete Miller ( Jake Lacy ) , but Pete begins to doubt her . Meanwhile , Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) and Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) share lunch with Brian . 
 " Couples Discount " received mixed reviews from television critics and was viewed by 4 @.@ 15 million viewers and received 2 @.@ 1 / 6 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . The episode ultimately ranked fourth in its timeslot . Despite this , The Office ranked as the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The office pairs into couples so they may all be able to take advantage of a Valentine 's Day discount at a nail salon in a local mini @-@ mall and enjoy one last boss @-@ free day before Andy ( Ed Helms ) returns from his three @-@ month boating sojourn . Erin ( Ellie Kemper ) decides that she is going to break up with Andy so she can be with Pete ( Jake Lacy ) , but he begins to doubt her because she goes to inordinate lengths to make their last day without Andy a happy one . 
 Andy surprises everyone by showing up a day early and proceeds to alienate the entire office through a series of stupid or tone @-@ deaf actions : he arrives at work without having washed or shaved since he left , he wrecks Dwight 's record @-@ setting sale with the Scranton White Pages for no reason other than to reassert his authority as boss , shows no shame at accepting all of his absentee paychecks and a " merit bonus " because the branch exceeded their quarterly sales goal while he was gone , and holds a meeting to get up to speed on recent events so he can bluff his way through a meeting with CEO David Wallace ( Andy Buckley ) , who has no idea that Andy was gone at all . The employees decide not to tell David about Andy 's unapproved absence out of gratitude for Andy 's past kindnesses , but at the meeting they cannot resist crafting made @-@ up recent events in the hope that he will blow his own cover . However , when David meets with Andy he is almost completely oblivious to Andy 's erroneous statements , and Andy quickly catches on to what the employees are up to . 
 At the end of the day , Erin tries to break up with Andy , saying she no longer loves him and is angry that he left and barely communicated with her . Andy vehemently protests the breakup and says their relationship can work out if she just pretends to still love him . Erin walks outside to Pete , saying she could not do it . Pete tells her he is okay with this , since all he wants is for her to be happy . Emboldened by this , she gives him a kiss , runs back up to Andy 's office , and breaks up with him . In her brief breakup speech she repeats her complaints about his three month absence , not realizing that he is talking to David Wallace on speakerphone . 
 Meanwhile , Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) and Jim ( John Krasinski ) share lunch with Brian ( Chris Diamantopoulos ) to thank him for protecting her from Frank . They are expecting his wife Alyssa to join him , but Brian reveals they are getting a divorce after having been fighting for a while . In an awkward attempt to lighten the mood , Brian makes a joke referencing how he consoled Pam when she broke down after her fight with Jim over the phone a few weeks ago . After the lunch Jim admits , with some prodding , that he is angry that Pam didn 't tell him about this incident . Pam explains that she hadn 't wanted to add to his worries , which only makes Jim angrier , but he brushes the matter off to avoid an argument . The couple had planned on sharing an evening bottle of wine for Valentine 's Day , but Jim later tells Pam he wants to go down to Philadelphia instead because he fears they would only end up fighting . Pam initially accepts this , but realizing that the silence between them is worse than fighting , she tells Jim he should stay and fight with her , and Jim agrees . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Couples Discount " was written by co @-@ executive producer Allison Silverman , marking her second writing credit for the season after " Roy 's Wedding " . It was directed by Troy Miller , his third directorial credit for the series . Originally , it was reported that the episode would be titled " Andy 's Return " . However , it was later renamed to " Couples Discount " . The episode features the return of series regular of Ed Helms , who had left for several episodes to film The Hangover Part III . His character was written out for eight episodes , leaving the office on a boat for three months with his brother Walter . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Couples Discount " originally aired on NBC on February 7 , 2013 . In its original American broadcast , the episode was viewed by an estimated 4 @.@ 15 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 1 rating / 6 % share . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 1 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 6 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a slight increase in the ratings from the previous episode , " Vandalism " . The Office ranked fourth in its timeslot , being beaten by an episode of the ABC series Grey 's Anatomy and the CBS police procedural Person of Interest , both of which received a 3 @.@ 1 / 8 percent rating , and an installment of the Fox series Glee that received a 2 @.@ 2 / 6 percent rating . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Couples Discount " received mixed reviews . The A.V. Club reviewer Erik Adams complimented the transformation of Andy into a villain , calling it " intriguing " and " curious " , although he said the characterization wouldn 't " stick " to the character for the following episodes . Adams gave more praise to the subplots , particularly Jim and Pam 's storyline , calling it a " refreshingly honest take on the vagaries of marriage " and compared their decision to fight at home to the early " Pam @-@ and @-@ Jim charm " . Adams gave the episode a B- . TV.com columnist Nick Campbell complimented the choice of using Andy as a villain , for further developing the Erin @-@ Pete relationship , which he called " one of two satisfying events in this episode " . He also praised the Jim and Pam storyline and the writers for focusing on their relationship , rather than Brian , writing that their final scene was " almost sweet , how nervous they were about heading into the Thunderdome " . He criticized the plot inconsistency and the nail salon plot for feeling " jammed in " and for using predictable jokes . Campbell ultimately called it a " satisfying episode " . 
 IGN 's Roth Cornet was more critical towards Andy 's return , writing that it serves as further example of the writers treating him as a plot device , rather than a character . Cornet continued that the episode featured " some fairly compelling drama , as well as some of the more cohesive moments of the season , character @-@ wise " , but " very little comedy " . Cornet complimented the turn in the Jim @-@ Pam @-@ Brian storyline , and for the writers using Brian as a catalyst for a " real conversation between Pam and Jim " , instead of a love triangle between the three . She also went on to praise their final scene , for showcasing " what The Office has created with these two characters – a human , and real relationship . " Cornet gave the episode a 6 @.@ 9 , considering it an " okay " episode . 
 = Valentin Pavlov = 
 Valentin Sergeyevich Pavlov ( Russian : <unk> Серге ́ евич <unk> ; 27 September 1937 – 30 March 2003 ) was a Soviet official who became a Russian banker following the dissolution of the Soviet Union . Born in the city of Moscow , then part of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic , Pavlov began his political career in the Ministry of Finance in 1959 . Later , during the Brezhnev Era , he became head of the Financial Department of the State Planning Committee . Pavlov was appointed to the post of Chairman of the State Committee on Prices during the Gorbachev Era , and later became Minister of Finance in Nikolai Ryzhkov 's second government . He went on to succeed Ryzhkov as head of government in the newly established post of Prime Minister of the Soviet Union . 
 As Prime Minister from 14 January 1991 to 22 August 1991 Pavlov initiated the 1991 Soviet monetary reform , commonly referred to as the Pavlov reform , in early 1991 . Early on he told the media that the reform was initiated to halt the flow of Soviet roubles transported to the Soviet Union from abroad . Although ridiculed at the time , the statement was later proven to be true . In June the same year , Pavlov called for a transfer of power from the President of the Soviet Union to the Prime Minister and the Cabinet of Ministers . When that failed , he joined a plot to oust Gorbachev . In August , he participated in the 1991 Soviet coup d 'état attempt , which tried to prevent the disintegration of the Soviet Union . Pavlov was arrested for his involvement in the coup and went on to work in the banking sector in post @-@ Soviet Russia . He was succeeded as premier by Ivan Silayev . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Born in Moscow on 27 September 1937 , Pavlov graduated from the Moscow Finance Institute in 1958 . He started his nomenklatura ( bureaucratic ) career as a government economist ; he started working for as an official of the Ministry of Finance in 1959 , and became a member of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in 1962 . Early in his career he also worked for the Ministry of Finance of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic ( RSFSR ) . Pavlov started working for the State Planning Committee in 1979 , and became a member of the State Planning Committee 's board in 1981 . He held the office as head of the State Planning Committee 's Finance Department , the department which oversaw all aspects of the country 's planned economy . He served as First Deputy Minister of Finance in Boris <unk> 's ministry from January to August 1986 . 
 Pavlov was appointed Chairman of the State Committee on Prices on 15 August 1986 , and retained that post until 7 June 1989 . Throughout the period , and later as Minister of Finance , Pavlov supported the centralised price reform proposal posited by Nikolai Ryzhkov , Chairman of the Council of Ministers . He succeeded <unk> to become Minister of Finance in Ryzhkov 's government in 1989 and his time in the post was considered uncontroversial , even though Lira <unk> , Deputy Chairman of the State Committee for Prices , was not elected to the post of Chairman of the State Committee for her advocacy of Pavlov @-@ backed plans for centrally administered price reform . He was the only minister in Ryzhkov 's Government who was also a member of the Presidium of the Council of Ministers . 
 Along with Eduard Shevardnadze – Soviet Foreign Minister – Pavlov was the only nominee from Ryzhkov 's second government to be overwhelmingly elected by the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union . As Minister of Finance , Pavlov was supportive of the <unk> of the Soviet economy , having overseen a rapid increase in the Soviet money supply and the increase in inflation it caused . Pavlov also set the exchange rate for the rouble against the American dollar on the Soviet black market . In 1993 he proudly admitted that during his tenure as Minister of Finance , and later Prime Minister , he had deceived several Western banks and creditors by lying about the Soviet Union 's gold reserves . In 1989 , Pavlov gathered together enough information on the errors and omissions of Ivan Silayev , the future Soviet Premier and Russian SFSR Premier , to weaken his position as Deputy Premier . Silayev never forgave Pavlov and relations between the two grew even more icy when Pavlov became Soviet Premier . 
 = = Prime Minister = = 
 Following the resignation of Nikolai Ryzhkov and his second government , Pavlov was elected to the new position of Prime Minister as a compromise candidate , and became chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers . He and his two First Deputy Prime Ministers , Vladimir <unk> and Vitaly <unk> , were approved by the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union on 14 January , while approval for the majority of his ministers followed within a few weeks . Pavlov was considered a conservative upon his election as Prime Minister , and the Soviet press described him as a " bold and complex man " who was against full <unk> but who believed that the Soviet Union was even more oppressive towards workers than even the most advanced capitalist societies . One of his first actions as Prime Minister was to move the headquarters of the Soviet Government – the Cabinet of Ministers – from the Moscow Kremlin to the former headquarters of the State Committee for Construction to strengthen his position . 
 = = = Pavlov monetary reform = = = 
 The Soviet monetary reform of 1991 , commonly referred to as the Pavlov reform , was the last monetary reform prior to the dissolution of the Soviet Union . Initiated on 22 January 1991 , it was intended to withdraw money from circulation for reallocation to the production of consumer goods , which were in short supply . In a speech , Pavlov stated that the reason for the withdrawal was the government 's belief that money was being sent to the Soviet Union from abroad , fuelling inflation . Although ridiculed by the Soviet press at the time , three years later the truth of Pavlov 's statement was verified . Mikhail Gorbachev then signed a presidential decree ordering the Soviet financial system to stop accepting and exchanging banknotes issued in 1961 . The directive also included 50 @-@ rouble and 100 @-@ rouble banknotes issued in 1991 . On 23 January 1991 , the government began restricting monthly bank deposit withdrawals to 500 rubles with the official explanation that this was to freeze the income of corrupt officials , capitalists and criminals . 
 Under the orders of Pavlov , the Government freed forty percent of prices on 1 January 1991 , and introduced sales tax of 5 % . Prices of consumer goods , in particular , were now considered free in the sense that negotiation became possible between producers and the distributor . According to Philip Hanson in his book , The Rise and Fall of the Soviet economy : An Economic History of the USSR from 1945 , Pavlov 's reform was undermined by the Union Republics who failed to follow Pavlov 's orders , along with the widespread existence of local monopolies , which tended to have their own definition of luxury goods and as a result imposed higher prices on such items . 
 Soviet citizens had only three days from 23 – 25 January to exchange their old 50 rouble and 100 rouble banknotes for the new currency . Exchange could be postponed , but only through specialised government commissions . Due to this short exchange window , long queues formed in front of Soviet savings banks , even though it was also possible to exchange money at workplaces and post offices . This reform also dealt a crippling blow to Soviet citizens who had saved their money and could not move fast enough to get it exchanged ; some lost as much as 15 @,@ 000 – 30 @,@ 000 rubles overnight . 
 In the end the reform proved unsuccessful . The government only managed to withdraw 14 billion rubles from circulation of the country 's money supply against an intended target of 81 @.@ 5 billion rubles . As a result , the Pavlov reform did not put an end to inflation . Prices for items including food and transport rose by 100 – 300 percent , while the Soviet standard of living decreased sharply and the state budget deficit increased by an estimated 20 – 30 percent of GNP . In the aftermath of the reform , inflation exceeded the 50 percent mark every month . 
 = = = Coup attempt = = = 
 In June 1991 , Pavlov discovered that Gorbachev planned to replace him as Prime Minister . In response , he arrived at the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union " visibly nervous " , and in his report to the Supreme Soviet , he was forced to tell delegates of the faltering state of the Soviet economy . However , Pavlov blamed this on the ongoing War of Laws between the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union and the Supreme Soviet of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic ( RSFSR ) , which , he argued , could be resolved by introducing a state of emergency across the entire Soviet Union , or at least in certain economic sectors . 
 According to Pavlov , the union 's problems remained insoluble as long as Gorbachev retained so much power and had limited time to address important issues . To break the impasse , Pavlov called for a transfer of power from the President of the Soviet Union to the Prime Minister and the Cabinet of Ministers , even creating a five @-@ point resolution to that end for the legislature to consider . Pavlov received support for the idea from the Soyuz parliamentary faction leader Viktor Alksnis , who called for an immediate vote on the issue . However , several members of Soyuz also demanded a statement by the KGB and the Ministry of Defence to comment on the proposal . In retrospect , Alksnis notes that this resolution could have become a coup d 'état had Pavlov consulted with them earlier . According to historian Jerry F. Hough , Pavlov 's program " was not directed as much at Gorbachev as at [ Boris ] Yeltsin " . 
 By the afternoon , the majority of Soyuz members favoured an immediate vote . The Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union , Anatoly Lukyanov , had already departed for Novo <unk> to take part in constitutional negotiations and he promised to tell Gorbachev about the vote . In his place stood Ivan Laptev , a pro @-@ Gorbachev reformer , who did not trust Lukyanov and tried to stall the vote by demanding a statement from the KGB , Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Defence . According to Laptev , the mood was such that if a vote had been taken Pavlov would have won . At the time , both the Soviet secret police and the military establishment in general wanted to strengthen the authority of the Soviet Government and so they too supported Pavlov 's program . Soyuz , through a vote , was able to increase the powers of the Cabinet of Ministers , and gave the institution the right of legislative initiative . 
 Shortly afterwards , Jack Matlock , United States ambassador to the Soviet Union , told Gorbachev of the possibility of a coup attempt against him , and the Soviet leader became worried when Anatoly <unk> informed him of mysterious troop movements outside Moscow . On 21 June , four days after Pavlov 's speech , Gorbachev addressed the Supreme Soviet and told delegates that there were no differences in opinion between him and Pavlov . Even when he had been able to secure his position , Gorbachev 's power within the system was already faltering , although he succeeded in getting the enhanced powers previously given to the Cabinet of Ministers reversed . The power struggle between Gorbachev and Pavlov was not over , with Gorbachev promising Yeltsin and Nursultan Nazarbayev that Pavlov , along with Dmitry <unk> , Minister of Defence , and Vladimir Kryuchkov , the Chairman of the KGB , would be removed from their posts following the signing and ratification of the New Union Treaty . 
 = = = August Coup = = = 
 The 1991 Soviet coup d 'état attempt , commonly referred to as the August Coup , was prompted by the slow disintegration of the Soviet Union that resulted from Gorbachev 's reform policy and Yeltsin 's drive towards an independent Russia . The New Union Treaty being prepared called for further decentralisation of power to the republics , which weakened the government 's already tenuous hold on the economy . Pavlov received a draft of the New Union Treaty on 12 August at a Security Council meeting and managed to get it published in the Moscow News on 14 August . 
 Opposing the decentralisation stance taken in the treaty , Pavlov was one of the key players in the establishment of the State Committee for the State of Emergency in August 1991 . Pavlov 's inclusion in the committee has been used to demonstrate its unwillingness to revert to pre @-@ Gorbachev policies . The Committee 's main goal was to ensure that the Soviet Union continued as a highly centralised union state . The Emergency Committee was led by Gennady Yanayev , Vice President of the Soviet Union , Interior Minister Boris <unk> , Defence Minister Dmitry <unk> and other hardliners who were determined to take action to oust Gorbachev . Vladimir Kryuchkov , the KGB Chairman , had told Pavlov of the coup on 18 August , one day before it began . He was asked by Kryuchkov to meet his co @-@ plotters at the Moscow Kremlin , where on 19 August , he and his co @-@ conspirators appeared on live television and told the Soviet people that Gorbachev was indisposed . As the day wore on it soon became apparent that Pavlov had been drinking since he issued several contradictory orders and repeated himself . In retrospect he admitted that he had been drinking with his son the day before . On the same day , his fellow plotters decided to depose Pavlov , sending him to his dacha where his wife took care of him . As with all the others , Pavlov was arrested following the collapse of the coup . Shortly after Pavlov was hospitalised with hypertension whilst remaining in custody . He was released on bail in January 1993 and granted amnesty by the Russian State Duma in 1994 . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After his release from custody , Pavlov became a director of the commercial bank <unk> between 1994 and 1995 . He resigned at the request of the bank 's Board of Directors who informed him that they had decided " to provide him an indefinite leave of absence . " In February 1996 , shortly after his resignation , the bank 's license was revoked for violating the banking laws set up by the Central Bank of Russia . Pavlov then worked as an advisor to <unk> between 1996 and 1997 , and in 1998 also became a vice president of the American firm Business Management Systems . He worked both as vice president of both the Free Economic Society and the International Academy of Management , and later headed a department of the International Union of Economists . 
 Pavlov died in Moscow on 30 March 2003 , and was buried on 2 April at <unk> cemetery . 
 = = Decorations = = 
 Order of the Red Banner of Labour 
 Order of the Badge of Honour 
 = SMS Pfeil = 
 SMS Pfeil was an aviso of the Imperial German Navy , the second and final member of the Blitz class . She had one sister ship , SMS Blitz . Pfeil was laid down at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Wilhelmshaven in 1881 , launched in September 1882 , and commissioned in November 1884 . Throughout her career , Pfeil served in various units in the German fleet and participated in numerous training exercises . In 1889 – 90 , she was sent to German East Africa to assist in the suppression of a colonial revolt . In 1894 – 99 , she was used as a fishery protection ship , and after 1904 , she was used as a tender for the battle fleet . She served in this capacity until 1919 . Pfeil was stricken from the naval register in February 1922 and subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Pfeil was 78 @.@ 43 meters ( 257 @.@ 3 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 9 @.@ 9 m ( 32 ft ) and a maximum draft of 4 @.@ 07 m ( 13 @.@ 4 ft ) forward . She displaced 1 @,@ 486 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 463 long tons ; 1 @,@ 638 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two horizontal 2 @-@ cylinder double expansion engines . Steam for the engines was provided by eight coal @-@ fired cylindrical boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 15 @.@ 6 kn ( 28 @.@ 9 km / h ; 18 @.@ 0 mph ) and a range of approximately 2 @,@ 440 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 520 km ; 2 @,@ 810 mi ) at 9 kn ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) . Pfeil had a crew of 7 officers and 127 enlisted men . 
 As built , the ship was armed with one 12 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 9 in ) K L / 23 gun placed in a pivot mount . The gun was supplied with 100 rounds of ammunition . The ship was also equipped with four 8 @.@ 7 cm K L / 23 guns in single mounts . Pfeil also carried one 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tube mounted in the bow . In 1891 – 92 , the ship was rearmed with six 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 30 guns in single mounts and three 35 cm torpedo tubes , one in the bow and one on each broadside , all submerged in the hull . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Pfeil was laid down at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Wilhelmshaven in 1881 . She was launched on 16 September 1882 , and commissioned into the German fleet on 25 November 1884 . From her commissioning , she was employed as a tender for the fleet . Pfeil participated in the annual maneuvers in the summer of 1885 . She was assigned to the unarmored division , along with the old sailing corvettes Stein , Olga , and Sophie . Independent division exercises took place in June , and in August , the divisions , which also included an armored division composed of several ironclads and a torpedo boat division led by Pfeil 's sister ship Blitz , joined for combined fleet maneuvers that lasted until September . 
 In 1889 , Pfeil and the unprotected cruiser Schwalbe were sent to German East Africa to participate in the suppression of local resistance to German colonial rule . By November 1890 , the rebellion had been defeated and German imperial rule returned . Pfeil was the first steel @-@ hulled , <unk> warship ever sent by Germany to its African colonies . In 1891 , Pfeil served in the Training Squadron as a torpedo boat flotilla leader , along with Blitz and the aviso Jagd . During the annual summer exercises , the Training Squadron served as the hostile fleet , and conducted a mock attack on the harbor at Kiel . In early 1894 , Pfeil was assigned to the I Division of the Maneuver Squadron as the dispatch vessel for the four Sachsen @-@ class ironclads . Later that year , the ship was used for fishery protection duties . She participated in the summer fleet exercises in 1897 , where she acted in the simulated hostile fleet . 
 Her service as a fishery protection ship lasted until 1899 , when she returned to service with the fleet . She was withdrawn from active service in 1904 , when she resumed her old tender duties . In 1912 , Pfeil was assigned as the tender for the pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of the II Battle Squadron . While in the II Squadron , she wore a yellow identification band on her funnel , to distinguish her from her sister Blitz , which wore a white identification stripe . She remained in her tender duties through 1919 . She was stricken from the naval register on 16 February 1922 and broken up for scrap at Wilhelmshaven . 
 = Max Weber = 
 Karl Emil Maximilian " Max " Weber ( German : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; 21 April 1864 – 14 June 1920 ) was a German sociologist , philosopher , jurist , and political economist whose ideas profoundly influenced social theory and social research . Weber is often cited , with Émile Durkheim and Karl Marx , as among the three founders of sociology . 
 Weber was a key proponent of methodological <unk> , arguing for the study of social action through interpretive ( rather than purely empiricist ) means , based on understanding the purpose and meaning that individuals attach to their own actions . Unlike Durkheim , he did not believe in <unk> and rather proposed that for any outcome there can be multiple causes . 
 Weber 's main intellectual concern was understanding the processes of rationalisation , secularisation , and " disenchantment " that he associated with the rise of capitalism and modernity , and which he saw as the result of a new way of thinking about the world . 
 Weber is best known for his thesis combining economic sociology and the sociology of religion , elaborated in his book The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism , in which he proposed that ascetic Protestantism was one of the major " elective affinities " associated with the rise in the Western world of market @-@ driven capitalism and the rational @-@ legal nation @-@ state . He argued that it was in the basic tenets of Protestantism to boost capitalism . Thus , it can be said that the spirit of capitalism is inherent to Protestant religious values . 
 Against Marx 's historical materialism , Weber emphasised the importance of cultural influences embedded in religion as a means for understanding the genesis of capitalism . The Protestant Ethic formed the earliest part in Weber 's broader investigations into world religion ; he went on to examine the religions of China , the religions of India and ancient Judaism , with particular regard to their differing economic consequences and conditions of social stratification . 
 In another major work , Politics as a Vocation , Weber defined the state as an entity that successfully claims a " monopoly of the legitimate use of physical force within a given territory " . He was also the first to categorise social authority into distinct forms , which he labelled as charismatic , traditional , and rational @-@ legal . His analysis of bureaucracy emphasised that modern state institutions are increasingly based on rational @-@ legal authority . 
 Weber also made a variety of other contributions in economic history , as well as economic theory and methodology . Weber 's analysis of modernity and rationalisation significantly influenced the critical theory associated with the Frankfurt School . 
 After the First World War , Max Weber was among the founders of the liberal German Democratic Party . He also ran unsuccessfully for a seat in parliament and served as advisor to the committee that drafted the ill @-@ fated democratic Weimar Constitution of 1919 . After contracting Spanish flu , he died of pneumonia in 1920 , aged 56 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and family background = = = 
 Karl Emil Maximilian Weber was born in 1864 , in Erfurt , Province of Saxony , Prussia . He was the oldest of the seven children of Max Weber Sr. , a wealthy and prominent civil servant and member of the National Liberal Party , and his wife Helene ( <unk> ) , who partly descended from French Huguenot immigrants and held strong moral absolutist ideas . Weber Sr. ' s involvement in public life immersed his home in both politics and academia , as his salon welcomed many prominent scholars and public figures . The young Weber and his brother Alfred , who also became a sociologist and economist , thrived in this intellectual atmosphere . Weber 's 1876 Christmas presents to his parents , when he was thirteen years old , were two historical essays entitled " About the course of German history , with special reference to the positions of the Emperor and the Pope " , and " About the Roman Imperial period from Constantine to the migration of nations " . In class , bored and unimpressed with the teachers – who in turn resented what they perceived as a disrespectful attitude – he secretly read all forty volumes of Goethe , and it has been recently argued that this was an important influence on his thought and methodology Before entering the university , he would read many other classical works . Over time , Weber would also be significantly affected by the marital tension between his father , " a man who enjoyed earthly pleasures " , and his mother , a devout Calvinist " who sought to lead an ascetic life " . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 In 1882 Weber enrolled in the University of Heidelberg as a law student . After a year of military service , he transferred to the University of Berlin . After his first few years as a student , during which he spent much time " drinking beer and fencing " , Weber would increasingly take his mother 's side in family arguments and grew estranged from his father . Simultaneously with his studies , he worked as a junior lawyer . In 1886 Weber passed the examination for <unk> , comparable to the bar association examination in the British and American legal systems . Throughout the late 1880s , Weber continued his study of law and history . He earned his law doctorate in 1889 by writing a dissertation on legal history titled Development of the Principle of Joint Liability and the Separate Fund in the Public Trading Company out of Household and Trade Communities in Italian Cities . This work was used as part of a longer work On the History of Trading Companies in the Middle Ages , based on South @-@ European Sources , published in the same year . Two years later , Weber completed his <unk> , Roman Agrarian History and its Significance for Public and Private Law , working with August <unk> . Having thus become a Privatdozent , Weber joined the University of Berlin 's faculty , lecturing and consulting for the government . 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 In the years between the completion of his dissertation and habilitation , Weber took an interest in contemporary social policy . In 1888 he joined the Verein für <unk> , a new professional association of German economists affiliated with the historical school , who saw the role of economics primarily as finding solutions to the social problems of the age and who pioneered large scale statistical studies of economic issues . He also involved himself in politics , joining the left @-@ leaning Evangelical Social Congress . In 1890 the Verein established a research program to examine " the Polish question " or <unk> : the influx of Polish farm workers into eastern Germany as local labourers migrated to Germany 's rapidly industrialising cities . Weber was put in charge of the study and wrote a large part of the final report , which generated considerable attention and controversy and marked the beginning of Weber 's renown as a social scientist . From 1893 to 1899 Weber was a member of the <unk> Verband ( Pan @-@ German League ) , an organization that campaigned against the influx of the Polish workers ; the degree of Weber 's support for the Germanisation of Poles and similar nationalist policies is still debated by modern scholars . In some of his work , in particular his provocative lecture on " The Nation State and Economic Policy " delivered in 1895 , Weber criticises the immigration of Poles and blames the Junker class for perpetuating Slavic immigration to serve their selfish interests . 
 Also in 1893 he married his distant cousin Marianne Schnitger , later a feminist activist and author in her own right , who was instrumental in collecting and publishing Weber 's journal articles as books after his death , while her biography of him is an important source for understanding Weber 's life . They would have no children and it is usually acknowledged that their marriage was never consummated . The marriage granted long @-@ awaited financial independence to Weber , allowing him to finally leave his parents ' household . The couple moved to Freiburg in 1894 , where Weber was appointed professor of economics at the university , before accepting the same position at the University of Heidelberg in 1896 . There Weber became a central figure in the so @-@ called " Weber Circle " , composed of other intellectuals such as his wife Marianne , Georg Jellinek , Ernst Troeltsch , Werner Sombart , Marc Bloch , Robert Michels and György Lukács . Weber also remained active in the Verein and the Evangelical Social Congress . His research in that period was focused on economics and legal history . 
 In 1897 Max Weber Sr. died two months after a severe quarrel with his son that was never resolved . After this , Weber became increasingly prone to depression , nervousness and insomnia , making it difficult for him to fulfill his duties as a professor . His condition forced him to reduce his teaching and eventually leave his course unfinished in the autumn of 1899 . After spending months in a sanatorium during the summer and autumn of 1900 , Weber and his wife travelled to Italy at the end of the year and did not return to Heidelberg until April 1902 . He would again withdraw from teaching in 1903 and not return to it till 1919 . Weber 's ordeal with mental illness was carefully described in a personal chronology that was destroyed by his wife . This chronicle was supposedly destroyed because Marianne Weber feared that Max Weber 's work would be discredited by the Nazis if his experience with mental illness were widely known . 
 = = = Later work = = = 
 After Weber 's immense productivity in the early 1890s , he did not publish any papers between early 1898 and late 1902 , finally resigning his professorship in late 1903 . Freed from those obligations , in that year he accepted a position as associate editor of the Archives for Social Science and Social Welfare , where he worked with his colleagues Edgar Jaffé and Werner Sombart . His new interests would lie in more fundamental issues of social sciences ; his works from this latter period are of primary interest to modern scholars . In 1904 , Weber began to publish some of his most seminal papers in this journal , notably his essay The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism , which became his most famous work and laid the foundations for his later research on the impact of cultures and religions on the development of economic systems . This essay was the only one of his works from that period that was published as a book during his lifetime . Some other of his works written in the first one and a half decades of the 20th century – published posthumously and dedicated primarily from the fields of sociology of religion , economic and legal sociology – are also recognised as among his most important intellectual contributions . 
 Also in 1904 , he visited the United States and participated in the Congress of Arts and Sciences held in connection with the World 's Fair ( Louisiana Purchase Exposition ) in St. Louis . A monument to his visit was placed at the home of relatives whom Weber visited in Mt . Airy , North Carolina . 
 Despite his partial recovery evident in America , Weber felt that he was unable to resume regular teaching at that time and continued on as a private scholar , helped by an inheritance in 1907 . In 1909 , disappointed with the Verein , he co @-@ founded the German Sociological Association ( Deutsche Gesellschaft für Soziologie , or DGS ) and served as its first treasurer . He would , however , resign from the DGS in 1912 . In 1912 , Weber tried to organise a left @-@ wing political party to combine social @-@ democrats and liberals . This attempt was unsuccessful , in part because many liberals feared social @-@ democratic revolutionary ideals . 
 = = = Political involvements = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War I , Weber , aged 50 , volunteered for service and was appointed as a reserve officer and put in charge of organizing the army hospitals in Heidelberg , a role he fulfilled until the end of 1915 . Weber 's views on the war and the expansion of the German empire changed during the course of the conflict . Early on he supported the nationalist rhetoric and the war effort , though with some hesitation as he viewed the war as a necessity to fulfill German duty as a leading state power . In time , however , Weber became one of the most prominent critics of German expansionism and of the Kaiser 's war policies . He publicly attacked the Belgian annexation policy and unrestricted submarine warfare and later supported calls for constitutional reform , democratisation and universal suffrage . 
 Weber joined the worker and soldier council of Heidelberg in 1918 . He then served in the German delegation to the Paris Peace Conference and as advisor to the Confidential Committee for Constitutional Reform , which drafted the Weimar Constitution . Motivated by his understanding of the American model , he advocated a strong , popularly elected presidency as a constitutional counterbalance to the power of the professional bureaucracy . More controversially , he also defended the provisions for emergency presidential powers that became Article 48 of the Weimar Constitution . These provisions were later used by Adolf Hitler to subvert the rest of the constitution and institute rule by decree , allowing his regime to suppress opposition and gain dictatorial powers . 
 Weber also ran , unsuccessfully , for a parliamentary seat , as a member of the liberal German Democratic Party , which he had co @-@ founded . He opposed both the leftist German Revolution of 1918 – 1919 and the ratification of the Treaty of Versailles , principled positions that defied the political alignments in Germany at that time , and which may have prevented Friedrich Ebert , the new social @-@ democratic President of Germany , from appointing Weber as minister or ambassador . Weber commanded widespread respect but relatively little influence . Weber 's role in German politics remains controversial to this day . 
 In the case of Weber 's critique of the left , he complained that the leaders of the leftist Spartacus League which was led by Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg and controlled the city government of Berlin while Weber was campaigning for his party : " We have this [ German ] revolution to thank for the fact that we cannot send a single division against the Poles . All we see is dirt , muck , dung , and horse @-@ play — nothing else . Liebknecht belongs in the madhouse and Rosa Luxemburg in the zoological gardens . ” Weber was at the same time critical of the Versailles Treaty which he believed unjustly assigned " war guilt " to Germany when it came to World War I. Weber believed that many countries were guilty of starting World War I , not just Germany . In making this case , Weber argued that “ In the case of this war there is one , and only one power that desired it under all circumstances through its own will and , according to their political goals required : Russia . . . . It never crossed [ my ] mind that a German invasion of Belgium [ in 1914 ] was nothing but an innocent act on the part of the Germans . " 
 Later that same month , in January 1919 , after Weber and Weber 's party were defeated for election , Weber delivered one of his greatest academic lectures Politics as a Vocation which was a reflection on the inherent violence and dishonesty found among the politicians , a profession in which only recently Weber was so personally active . About the nature of politicians , he concluded that " In nine out of ten cases they are <unk> puffed up with hot air about themselves . They are not in touch with reality , and they do not feel the burden they need to shoulder ; they just intoxicate themselves with romantic sensations . " 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 Frustrated with politics , Weber resumed teaching during this time , first at the University of Vienna , then , after 1919 , at the University of Munich . His lectures from that period were collected into major works , such as the General Economic History , Science as a Vocation and Politics as a Vocation . In Munich , he headed the first German university institute of sociology , but never held a professorial position in sociology . Many colleagues and students in Munich attacked his response to the German Revolution and some right @-@ wing students held protests in front of his home . Max Weber contracted the Spanish flu and died of pneumonia in Munich on 14 June 1920 . At the time of his death , Weber had not finished writing his magnum opus on sociological theory : Economy and Society . His widow Marianne helped prepare it for its publication in 1921 – 22 . 
 = = Max Weber 's thought = = 
 Max Weber 's bureaucratic theory or model is sometimes also known as the " Legal @-@ Rational " model . The model tries to explain bureaucracy from a rational point of view via nine main characteristics or principles ; these are as follows : 
 = = = Max Weber 's Bureaucratic Model ( Legal @-@ Rational Model ) = = = 
 Weber wrote that the modern bureaucracy in both the public and private sector relies on the following principles . 
 " First , it is based on the general principle of precisely defined and organized across @-@ the @-@ board competencies of the various offices . These competencies are underpinned by rules , laws , or administrative regulations . " For Weber , this means 
 A rigid division of labor is established which clearly identifies the regular tasks and duties of the particular bureaucratic system . 
 There are firmly established chains of command , and the duties and capacity to coerce others to comply is described by regulation . 
 Regular and continuous execution of the assigned duties is undertaken by hiring people with particular qualifications which are certified . 
 Weber notes that these three aspects " constitute the essence of bureaucratic administration ... in the public sector . In the private sector , these three aspects constitute the essence of a bureaucratic management of a private company . " 
 Main Principles ( Characteristics ) : 
 Specialized roles . 
 Recruitment based on merit ( e.g. tested through open competition ) . 
 Uniform principles of placement , promotion , and transfer in an administrative system . 
 <unk> with systematic salary structure . 
 Hierarchy , responsibility and accountability . 
 Subjection of official conduct to strict rules of discipline and control . 
 Supremacy of abstract rules . 
 Impersonal authority . ( e.g. Office bearer does not bring the office with him ) . 
 Political neutrality . 
 Merits : Max Weber himself noted , real bureaucracy will be less optimal and effective than his ideal type model . Each of Weber 's principles can degenerate , more so , when it is utilized to analyze the individual level in the organization . But when implemented in a group setting in an organization , some form of efficiency and effectiveness can be achieved , especially with regards to better output . This is especially true when the Bureaucratic model emphasizes qualification ( merits ) , specialization of job @-@ scope ( labour ) , hierarchy of power , rules and discipline . 
 <unk> : However , competencies , efficiency and effectiveness can be unclear and contradictory especially when dealing with oversimplified matters . In a dehumanized bureaucracy , inflexible in distributing the job @-@ scope , with every worker having to specialize from day one without rotating tasks for fear of decreasing output , tasks are often routine and can contribute to boredom . Thus , employees can sometimes feel that they are not part of the organization 's work vision and missions . Consequently , they do not have any sense of belonging in the long term . Furthermore , this type of organization tends to invite exploitation and underestimate the potential of the employees , as creativity of the workers is brushed aside in favour of strict adherence to rules , regulations and procedures . 
 = = = Inspirations = = = 
 Weber 's thinking was strongly influenced by German idealism and particularly by neo @-@ Kantianism , to which he had been exposed through Heinrich Rickert , his professorial colleague at the University of Freiburg . Especially important to Weber 's work is the neo @-@ Kantian belief that reality is essentially chaotic and incomprehensible , with all rational order deriving from the way in which the human mind focuses its attention on certain aspects of reality and organises the resulting perceptions . Weber 's opinions regarding the methodology of the social sciences show parallels with the work of contemporary neo @-@ Kantian philosopher and pioneering sociologist Georg Simmel . 
 Weber was also influenced by Kantian ethics , which he nonetheless came to think of as obsolete in a modern age lacking in religious certainties . In this last respect , the influence of Friedrich Nietzsche 's philosophy is evident . According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , the " deep tension between the Kantian moral imperatives and a Nietzschean diagnosis of the modern cultural world is apparently what gives such a darkly tragic and agnostic shade to Weber 's ethical worldview " . Another major influence in Weber 's life was the writings of Karl Marx and the workings of socialist thought in academia and active politics . While Weber shares some of Marx 's consternation with bureaucratic systems and <unk> them as being capable of advancing their own logic to the detriment of human freedom and autonomy , Weber views conflict as perpetual and inevitable and does not host the spirit of a materially available utopia . Though the influence of his mother 's Calvinist religiosity is evident throughout Weber 's life and work , and though he maintained a deep , lifelong interest in the study of religions , Weber was open about the fact that he was personally irreligious . 
 As a political economist and economic historian , Weber belonged to the " youngest " German historical school of economics , represented by academics such as Gustav von Schmoller and his student Werner Sombart . But , even though Weber 's research interests were very much in line with that school , his views on methodology and the theory of value diverged significantly from those of other German historicists and were closer , in fact , to those of Carl Menger and the Austrian School , the traditional rivals of the historical school . ( See section on Economics . ) 
 = = = Methodology = = = 
 Unlike some other classical figures ( Comte , Durkheim ) Weber did not attempt , consciously , to create any specific set of rules governing social sciences in general , or sociology in particular . In comparison with Durkheim and Marx , Weber was more focused on individuals and culture and this is clear in his methodology . Whereas Durkheim focused on the society , Weber concentrated on the individuals and their actions ( see structure and action discussion ) and whereas Marx argued for the primacy of the material world over the world of ideas , Weber valued ideas as motivating actions of individuals , at least in the big picture . 
 Sociology , for Max Weber , is : 
 ... a science which attempts the interpretive understanding of social action in order thereby to arrive at a causal explanation of its course and effects . 
 Weber was concerned with the question of objectivity and subjectivity . Weber distinguished social action from social behavior , noting that social action must be understood through how individuals subjectively relate to one another . Study of social action through interpretive means ( Verstehen ) must be based upon understanding the subjective meaning and purpose that individuals attach to their actions . Social actions may have easily identifiable and objective means , but much more subjective ends and the understanding of those ends by a scientist is subject to yet another layer of subjective understanding ( that of the scientist ) . Weber noted that the importance of subjectivity in social sciences makes creation of fool @-@ proof , universal laws much more difficult than in natural sciences and that the amount of objective knowledge that social sciences may achieve is precariously limited . Overall , Weber supported the goal of objective science , but he noted that it is an unreachable goal – although one definitely worth striving for . 
 There is no absolutely " objective " scientific analysis of culture .... All knowledge of cultural reality ... is always knowledge from particular points of view .... an " objective " analysis of cultural events , which proceeds according to the thesis that the ideal of science is the reduction of empirical reality to " laws " , is meaningless ... [ because ] ... the knowledge of social laws is not knowledge of social reality but is rather one of the various aids used by our minds for attaining this end . 
 The principle of " methodological individualism " , which holds that social scientists should seek to understand <unk> ( such as nations , cultures , governments , churches , corporations , etc . ) solely as the result and the context of the actions of individual persons , can be traced to Weber , particularly to the first chapter of Economy and Society , in which he argues that only individuals " can be treated as agents in a course of subjectively understandable action " . In other words , Weber argued that social phenomena can be understood scientifically only to the extent that they are captured by models of the behaviour of purposeful individuals , models that Weber called " ideal types " , from which actual historical events will necessarily deviate due to accidental and irrational factors . The analytical constructs of an ideal type never exist in reality , but provide objective benchmarks against which real @-@ life constructs can be measured . 
 We know of no scientifically <unk> ideals . To be sure , that makes our efforts more arduous than in the past , since we are expected to create our ideals from within our breast in the very age of subjectivist culture . 
 Weber 's methodology was developed in the context of a wider debate about methodology of social sciences , the Methodenstreit . Weber 's position was close to historicism , as he understood social actions as being heavily tied to particular historical contexts and its analysis required the understanding of subjective motivations of individuals ( social actors ) . Thus Weber 's methodology emphasises the use of comparative historical analysis . Therefore , Weber was more interested in explaining how a certain outcome was the result of various historical processes rather than predicting an outcome of those processes in the future . 
 = = = Rationalisation = = = 
 Many scholars have described rationalisation and the question of individual freedom in an increasingly rational society , as the main theme of Weber 's work . This theme was situated in the larger context of the relationship between psychological motivations , cultural values and beliefs ( primarily , religion ) and the structure of the society ( usually determined by the economy ) . 
 By rationalisation , Weber understood first , the individual cost @-@ benefit calculation , second , the wider , bureaucratic organisation of the organisations and finally , in the more general sense as the opposite of understanding the reality through mystery and magic ( disenchantment ) . 
 The fate of our times is characterised by rationalisation and <unk> and , above all , by the " disenchantment of the world " 
 Weber began his studies of the subject in The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism , in which he argued that the redefinition of the connection between work and piety in Protestantism and especially in ascetic Protestant denominations , particularly Calvinism , shifted human effort towards rational efforts aimed at achieving economic gain . In Protestant religion , Christian piety towards God was expressed through one 's secular vocation ( secularisation of calling ) . The rational roots of this doctrine , he argued , soon grew incompatible with and larger than the religious and so the latter were eventually discarded . 
 Weber continued his investigation into this matter in later works , notably in his studies on bureaucracy and on the classification of legitimate authority into three types – Rational @-@ legal , traditional and charismatic – of which the rational @-@ legal ( through bureaucracy ) is the dominant one in the modern world . In these works Weber described what he saw as society 's movement towards rationalisation . Similarly , rationalisation could be seen in the economy , with the development of highly rational and calculating capitalism . Weber also saw rationalisation as one of the main factors setting the European West apart from the rest of the world . Rationalisation relied on deep changes in ethics , religion , psychology and culture ; changes that first took place in the Western civilisation . 
 What Weber depicted was not only the secularisation of Western culture , but also and especially the development of modern societies from the viewpoint of rationalisation . The new structures of society were marked by the differentiation of the two functionally intermeshing systems that had taken shape around the organisational cores of the capitalist enterprise and the bureaucratic state apparatus . Weber understood this process as the institutionalisation of purposive @-@ rational economic and administrative action . To the degree that everyday life was affected by this cultural and societal rationalisation , traditional forms of life – which in the early modern period were differentiated primarily according to one 's trade – were dissolved . 
 Features of rationalisation include increasing knowledge , growing impersonality and enhanced control of social and material life . Weber was ambivalent towards rationalisation ; while admitting it was responsible for many advances , in particular , freeing humans from traditional , restrictive and illogical social guidelines , he also criticised it for dehumanising individuals as " cogs in the machine " and curtailing their freedom , trapping them in the bureaucratic iron cage of rationality and bureaucracy . Related to rationalisation is the process of disenchantment , in which the world is becoming more explained and less mystical , moving from polytheistic religions to monotheistic ones and finally to the Godless science of modernity . Those processes affect all of society , removing " sublime values ... from public life " and making art less creative . 
 In a dystopian critique of rationalisation , Weber notes that modern society is a product of an individualistic drive of the Reformation , yet at the same time , the society created in this process is less and less welcoming of individualism . 
 How is it at all possible to salvage any remnants of " individual " freedom of movement in any sense given this all @-@ powerful trend ? 
 = = = Sociology of religion = = = 
 Weber 's work in the field of sociology of religion started with the essay The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism and continued with the analysis of The Religion of China : Confucianism and Taoism , The Religion of India : The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism and Ancient Judaism . His work on other religions was interrupted by his sudden death in 1920 , which prevented him from following Ancient Judaism with studies of early Christianity and Islam . His three main themes in the essays were the effect of religious ideas on economic activities , the relation between social stratification and religious ideas and the distinguishable characteristics of Western civilisation . 
 Weber saw religion as one of the core forces in society . His goal was to find reasons for the different development paths of the cultures of the Occident and the Orient , although without judging or valuing them , like some of the contemporary thinkers who followed the social Darwinist paradigm ; Weber wanted primarily to explain the distinctive elements of the Western civilisation . In the analysis of his findings , Weber maintained that Calvinist ( and more widely , Protestant ) religious ideas had had a major impact on the social innovation and development of the economic system of the West , but noted that they were not the only factors in this development . Other notable factors mentioned by Weber included the rationalism of scientific pursuit , merging observation with mathematics , science of scholarship and jurisprudence , rational systematisation and bureaucratisation of government administration and economic enterprise . In the end , the study of the sociology of religion , according to Weber , focused on one distinguishing part of the Western culture , the decline of beliefs in magic , or what he referred to as " disenchantment of the world " . 
 Weber also proposed a socioevolutionary model of religious change , showing that in general , societies have moved from magic to polytheism , then to pantheism , monotheism and finally , ethical monotheism . According to Weber , this evolution occurred as the growing economic stability allowed professionalisation and the evolution of ever more sophisticated priesthood . As societies grew more complex and encompassed different groups , a hierarchy of gods developed and as power in the society became more centralised , the concept of a single , universal God became more popular and desirable . 
 = = = = The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism = = = = 
 Weber 's essay The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism is his most famous work . It is argued that this work should not be viewed as a detailed study of Protestantism , but rather as an introduction into Weber 's later works , especially his studies of interaction between various religious ideas and economic behaviour as part of the rationalisation of the economic system . In The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism , Weber put forward the thesis that Calvinist ethic and ideas influenced the development of capitalism . He noted the post @-@ Reformation shift of Europe 's economic centre away from Catholic countries such as France , Spain and Italy , and toward Protestant countries such as the Netherlands , England , Scotland and Germany . Weber also noted that societies having more Protestants were those with a more highly developed capitalist economy . Similarly , in societies with different religions , most successful business leaders were Protestant . Weber thus argued that Roman Catholicism impeded the development of the capitalist economy in the West , as did other religions such as Confucianism and Buddhism elsewhere in the world . 
 The development of the concept of the calling quickly gave to the modern entrepreneur a fabulously clear conscience – and also industrious workers ; he gave to his employees as the wages of their ascetic devotion to the calling and of co @-@ operation in his ruthless exploitation of them through capitalism the prospect of eternal salvation . 
 Christian religious devotion had historically been accompanied by rejection of mundane affairs , including economic pursuit . Weber showed that certain types of Protestantism – notably Calvinism – were supportive of rational pursuit of economic gain and worldly activities dedicated to it , seeing them as endowed with moral and spiritual significance . Weber argued that there were many reasons to look for the origins of modern capitalism in the religious ideas of the Reformation . In particular , the Protestant ethic ( or more specifically , Calvinist ethic ) motivated the believers to work hard , be successful in business and reinvest their profits in further development rather than frivolous pleasures . The notion of calling meant that each individual had to take action as an indication of their salvation ; just being a member of the Church was not enough . Predestination also reduced agonising over economic inequality and further , it meant that a material wealth could be taken as a sign of salvation in the afterlife . The believers thus justified pursuit of profit with religion , as instead of being fuelled by morally suspect greed or ambition , their actions were motivated by a highly moral and respected philosophy . This Weber called the " spirit of capitalism " : it was the Protestant religious ideology that was behind – and inevitably led to – the capitalist economic system . This theory is often viewed as a reversal of Marx 's thesis that the economic " base " of society determines all other aspects of it . 
 Weber abandoned research into Protestantism because his colleague Ernst Troeltsch , a professional theologian , had begun work on the book The Social Teachings of the Christian Churches and Sects . Another reason for Weber 's decision was that Troeltsch 's work already achieved what he desired in that area : laying the groundwork for a comparative analysis of religion and society . 
 The phrase " work ethic " used in modern commentary is a derivative of the " Protestant ethic " discussed by Weber . It was adopted when the idea of the Protestant ethic was generalised to apply to the Japanese people , Jews and other non @-@ Christians and thus lost its religious connotations . 
 = = = = The Religion of China : Confucianism and Taoism = = = = 
 The Religion of China : Confucianism and Taoism was Weber 's second major work on the sociology of religion . Hans H. Gerth edited and translated this text into English , with an introduction by C. K. Wang . Weber focused on those aspects of Chinese society that were different from those of Western Europe , especially those aspects that contrasted with Puritanism . His work also questioned why capitalism did not develop in China . He focused on the issues of Chinese urban development , Chinese patrimonialism and officialdom and Chinese religion and philosophy ( primarily , Confucianism and Taoism ) , as the areas in which Chinese development differed most distinctively from the European route . 
 According to Weber , Confucianism and Puritanism are mutually exclusive types of rational thought , each attempting to prescribe a way of life based on religious dogma . Notably , they both valued self @-@ control and restraint and did not oppose accumulation of wealth . However , to both those qualities were just means to the final goal and here they were divided by a key difference . Confucianism 's goal was " a cultured status position " , while Puritanism 's goal was to create individuals who are " tools of God " . The intensity of belief and enthusiasm for action were rare in Confucianism , but common in Protestantism . Actively working for wealth was unbecoming a proper Confucian . Therefore , Weber states that it was this difference in social attitudes and mentality , shaped by the respective , dominant religions , that contributed to the development of capitalism in the West and the absence of it in China . 
 = = = = The Religion of India : The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism = = = = 
 The Religion of India : The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism was Weber 's third major work on the sociology of religion . In this work he deals with the structure of Indian society , with the orthodox doctrines of Hinduism and the heterodox doctrines of Buddhism , with modifications brought by the influence of popular religiosity and finally with the impact of religious beliefs on the secular ethic of Indian society . In Weber 's view , Hinduism in India , like Confucianism in China , was a barrier for capitalism . The Indian caste system made it very difficult for individuals to advance in the society beyond their caste . Activity , including economic activity , was seen as unimportant in the context of the advancement of the soul . 
 Weber ended his research of society and religion in India by bringing in insights from his previous work on China to discuss similarities of the Asian belief systems . He notes that the beliefs saw the meaning of life as otherworldly mystical experience . The social world is fundamentally divided between the educated elite , following the guidance of a prophet or wise man and the uneducated masses whose beliefs are centered on magic . In Asia , there was no Messianic prophecy to give plan and meaning to the everyday life of educated and uneducated alike . Weber juxtaposed such Messianic prophecies ( also called ethical prophecies ) , notably from the Near East region to the exemplary prophecies found on the Asiatic mainland , focused more on reaching to the educated elites and enlightening them on the proper ways to live one 's life , usually with little emphasis on hard work and the material world . It was those differences that prevented the countries of the Occident from following the paths of the earlier Chinese and Indian civilisations . His next work , Ancient Judaism was an attempt to prove this theory . 
 = = = = Ancient Judaism = = = = 
 In Ancient Judaism , his fourth major work on the sociology of religion , Weber attempted to explain the factors that resulted in the early differences between Oriental and Occidental religiosity . He contrasted the <unk> asceticism developed by Western Christianity with mystical contemplation of the kind developed in India . Weber noted that some aspects of Christianity sought to conquer and change the world , rather than withdraw from its imperfections . This fundamental characteristic of Christianity ( when compared to Far Eastern religions ) stems originally from ancient Jewish prophecy . 
 Weber claimed that Judaism not only fathered Christianity and Islam , but was crucial to the rise of the modern Occidental state ; Judaism 's influence was as important as Hellenistic and Roman cultures . 
 Weber 's premature death in 1920 prevented him from following his planned analysis of Psalms , the Book of Job , Talmudic Jewry , early Christianity and Islam . 
 = = = = Economy and Society = = = = 
