 Weber 's magnum opus Economy and Society is a collection of his essays which he was working on at the time of his death in 1920 . After his death , the final organization and editing of the book fell to his widow Marianne Weber . The final German form published in 1921 reflected very much Marianne Weber 's work and intellectual commitment . Beginning in 1956 , the German jurist Johannes <unk> began editing and organizing the German edition of Economy and Society based on his study of the papers that Weber left at his death . 
 English versions of Economy and Society were published as a collected volume in 1968 as edited by Gunther Roth and Claus <unk> . As a result of the various editions in German and English , there are differences between the organization of the different volumes . 
 Economy and Society includes a wide range of essays dealing with Weber 's views regarding Sociology , Social Philosophy , Politics , Social Stratification , World Religion , Diplomacy , and other subjects . The book is typically published in a two volume set in both German and English , and is more than 1000 pages long . 
 = = = = Theodicy of Fortune and Misfortune = = = = 
 The Theodicy of fortune and misfortune within sociology is the theory , as Weber suggested , of how " members of different social classes adopt different belief systems , or theodices , to explain their social situation " . 
 The concept of theodicy was expanded mainly with the thought of Weber and his addition of ethical considerations to the subject of religion . There is this ethical part of religion , including " ( 1 ) soteriology and ( 2 ) theodicy . These mean , respectively , how people understand themselves to be able to be in a correct relationship with supernatural powers , and how to explain evil – or why bad things seem to happen to those who seem to be good people " . There is a separation of different theodicies with regard to class . " <unk> of misfortune tend to the belief that wealth and other manifestations of privilege are indications or signs of evil .... In contrast , theodicies of fortune emphasise the notion that privileges are a blessing and are deserved . " Weber also writes that " the affluent embrace good fortune theodicies , which emphasise that prosperity is a blessing of God ... [ while ] theodices of misfortune emphasise that affluence is a sign of evil and that suffering in this world will be rewarded in the next . " Thus these two distinctions can be applied not only to class structure within society but denomination and racial segregation within religion . 
 Weber defines the importance of societal class within religion by examining the difference between the two theodicies and to what class structures they apply . The concept of " work ethic " is attached to the theodicy of fortune ; thus , because of the Protestant " work ethic " , there was a contribution of higher class outcomes and more education among Protestants . Those without the work ethic clung to the theodicy of misfortune , believing wealth and happiness were granted in the afterlife . Another example of how this belief of religious theodicy influences class , is that those of lower status , the poor , cling to deep religiousness and faith as a way to comfort themselves and provide hope for a more prosperous future , while those of higher status cling to the sacraments or actions that prove their right of possessing greater wealth . 
 These two theodicies can be found in the denominational segregation within the religious community . The main division can be seen between the mainline Protestant and evangelical denominations and their relation to the class into which their particular theodicy pertains . For example , mainline churches , with their upper class congregations , " promote [ d ] order , stability , and conservatism , and in so doing proved to be a powerful source of legitimation of the status quo and of existing disparities in the distribution of wealth and power " because much of the wealth of the church comes from the congregation . In contrast , Pentecostal churches adopted the theodicy of misfortune . They instead " advocated change intended to advance the cause of justice and fairness " . Thus the learned and upper class religious churches who preach the theodicy of fortune , ultimately support capitalism and corporation , while the churches who adopted the theodicy of misfortune , instead preached equality and fairness . 
 = = = Politics and government = = = 
 In political sociology , one of Weber 's most influential contributions is his " Politics as a Vocation " ( Politik als Beruf ) essay . Therein , Weber unveils the definition of the state as that entity that possesses a monopoly on the legitimate use of physical force . , Weber wrote that politics is the sharing of state 's power between various groups , and political leaders are those who wield this power . A politician must not be a man of the " true Christian ethic " , understood by Weber as being the ethic of the Sermon on the Mount , that is to say , the injunction to turn the other cheek . An adherent of such an ethic ought rather to be understood to be a saint , for it is only saints , according to Weber , that can appropriately follow it . The political realm is no realm for saints ; a politician ought to marry the ethic of attitude and the ethic of responsibility ( " <unk> vs <unk> " ) and must possess both a passion for his vocation and the capacity to distance himself from the subject of his exertions ( the governed ) . 
 Weber distinguished three ideal types of political leadership ( alternatively referred to as three types of domination , legitimisation or authority ) : 
 charismatic domination ( familial and religious ) , 
 traditional domination ( patriarchs , patrimonialism , feudalism ) and 
 legal domination ( modern law and state , bureaucracy ) . 
 In his view , every historical relation between rulers and ruled contained such elements and they can be analysed on the basis of this tripartite distinction . He notes that the instability of charismatic authority forces it to " <unk> " into a more structured form of authority . In a pure type of traditional rule , sufficient resistance to a ruler can lead to a " traditional revolution " . The move towards a rational @-@ legal structure of authority , utilising a bureaucratic structure , is inevitable in the end . Thus this theory can be sometimes viewed as part of the social evolutionism theory . This ties to his broader concept of rationalisation by suggesting the inevitability of a move in this direction . 
 Bureaucratic administration means fundamentally domination through knowledge . 
 Weber described many ideal types of public administration and government in his masterpiece Economy and Society ( 1922 ) . His critical study of the bureaucratisation of society became one of the most enduring parts of his work . It was Weber who began the studies of bureaucracy and whose works led to the popularisation of this term . Many aspects of modern public administration go back to him and a classic , hierarchically organised civil service of the Continental type is called " Weberian civil service " . As the most efficient and rational way of organising , bureaucratisation for Weber was the key part of the rational @-@ legal authority and furthermore , he saw it as the key process in the ongoing rationalisation of the Western society . 
 Weber listed several preconditions for the emergence of the bureaucracy : The growth in space and population being administered , the growth in complexity of the administrative tasks being carried out and the existence of a monetary economy – these resulted in a need for a more efficient administrative system . Development of communication and transportation technologies made more efficient administration possible ( and popularly requested ) and democratisation and rationalisation of culture resulted in demands that the new system treat everybody equally . 
 Weber 's ideal bureaucracy is characterised by hierarchical organisation , by delineated lines of authority in a fixed area of activity , by action taken ( and recorded ) on the basis of written rules , by bureaucratic officials needing expert training , by rules being implemented neutrally and by career advancement depending on technical qualifications judged by organisations , not by individuals . 
 The decisive reason for the advance of the bureaucratic organisation has always been its purely technical superiority over any other form of organisation . 
 While recognising bureaucracy as the most efficient form of organisation and even indispensable for the modern state , Weber also saw it as a threat to individual freedoms and the ongoing bureaucratisation as leading to a " polar night of icy darkness " , in which increasing rationalisation of human life traps individuals in the aforementioned " iron cage " of bureaucratic , rule @-@ based , rational control . In order to counteract bureaucrats , the system needs entrepreneurs and politicians . 
 = = = = Social stratification = = = = 
 Weber also formulated a three @-@ component theory of stratification , with social class , social status and political party as conceptually distinct elements . The three @-@ component theory of stratification is in contrast to Karl Marx simpler theory of social class which ties all social stratification to what people own . In Weber 's theory , issues of honor and prestige are important . This distinction is most clearly described in Weber 's essay " Classes , <unk> , Parties " which was first published in his book Economy and Society . The three components of Weber 's theory are : 
 Social Class which is based on economically determined relationship to the market ( owner , renter , employee etc . ) . 
 Status ( or in German Stand ) which is based on non @-@ economic qualities like honour , prestige and religion . 
 Party which refers to affiliations in the political domain . 
 All three dimensions have consequences for what Weber called " life chances " ( opportunities to improve one 's life ) . 
 Weber scholars recognize that it is important to maintain a sharp distinction between the terms " status " and " class , " even though they tend to be used interchangeably in popular usage . 
 = = = Study of the city = = = 
 As part of his overarching effort to understand the unique development of the Western world , Weber produced a detailed general study of the city as the characteristic locus of the social and economic relations , political arrangements , and ideas that eventually came to define the West . This resulted in a monograph titled The City , which was probably compiled from research conducted in 1911 – 1913 , and which was published posthumously in 1921 . In 1924 it was incorporated into the second part of his Economy and Society , as chapter XVI , " The City ( Non @-@ legitimate Domination ) " . 
 According to Weber , the city as a politically autonomous organisation of people living in close proximity , employed in a variety of specialised trades , and physically separated from the surrounding countryside , only fully developed in the West and to a great extent shaped its cultural evolution : 
 The origin of a rational and inner @-@ worldly ethic is associated in the Occident with the appearance of thinkers and prophets [ ... ] who developed in a social context that was alien to the Asiatic cultures . This context consisted of the political problems engendered by the bourgeois status @-@ group of the city , without which neither Judaism , nor Christianity , nor the development of Hellenistic thinking are conceivable . 
 Weber argued that Judaism , early Christianity , theology , and later the political party and modern science , were only possible in the urban context that reached a full development in the West alone . He also saw in the history of medieval European cities the rise of a unique form of " non @-@ legitimate domination " that successfully challenged the existing forms of legitimate domination ( traditional , charismatic , and rational @-@ legal ) that had prevailed until then in the Medieval world . This new domination was based on the great economic and military power wielded by the organised community of city @-@ dwellers ( " citizens " ) . 
 = = = Economics = = = 
 Weber regarded himself primarily as a " political economist " , and all of his professorial appointments were in economics , though today his contributions in that field are largely overshadowed by his role as a founder of modern sociology . As an economist , Weber belonged to the " youngest " German historical school of economics . The great differences between that school 's interests and methods on the one hand and those of the neoclassical school ( from which modern mainstream economics largely derives ) on the other , explain why Weber 's influence on economics today is hard to discern . 
 Max Weber was a pioneer in delineating a connection between capitalism and exceptionalism . In earlier texts , Maximiliano Korstanje explores the American exceptionalism and its effects on the current means of productions . This contribution to the existent literature is of paramount importance because of two main reasons . The first and most important , he relates capitalism to Protestantism . This is of course nothing new , since Max Weber did it in the past . However , Korstanje adds , though Weber was in the correct side by confirming the connection of Reform and Capitalism , the key role played by Norse Mythology was left behind . In effect , the concept of predestination as it has been discussed by Weber did not come from Luther alone . It was rather <unk> in the core of Norse Culture . Secondly , this impossibility to understand the future led to English speaking societies to construct a risk @-@ prone culture , which resulted in what Ulrich Beck dubbed the “ Risk Society ” . The criticism exerted in the uneven distribution of Capitalism should be explained by the “ economy of salved peoples ” formulated by Weber . 
 = = = = <unk> individualism = = = = 
 Though his research interests were always in line with those of the German historicists , with a strong emphasis on interpreting economic history , Weber 's defence of " methodological individualism " in the social sciences represented an important break with that school and an embracing of many of the arguments that had been made against the historicists by Carl Menger , the founder of the Austrian School of economics , in the context of the academic Methodenstreit ( " debate over methods " ) of the late 19th century . The phrase " methodological individualism " , which has come into common usage in modern debates about the connection between microeconomics and macroeconomics , was coined by the Austrian @-@ American economist Joseph Schumpeter in 1908 as a way of referring to the views of Weber . According to Weber 's theses , social research cannot be fully inductive or descriptive , because understanding some phenomenon implies that the researcher must go beyond mere description and interpret it ; interpretation requires classification according to abstract " ideal ( pure ) types " . This , together with his <unk> argumentation ( see Verstehen ) , can be taken as a methodological justification for the model of the " rational economic man " ( homo economicus ) , which is at the heart of modern mainstream economics . 
 = = = = <unk> and psychophysics = = = = 
 Unlike other historicists , Weber also accepted the marginal theory of value ( also called " <unk> " ) and taught it to his students . In 1908 , Weber published an article in which he drew a sharp methodological distinction between psychology and economics and attacked the claims that the marginal theory of value in economics reflected the form of the psychological response to stimuli as described by the Weber @-@ Fechner law . Max Weber 's article has been cited as a definitive refutation of the dependence of the economic theory of value on the laws of psychophysics by Lionel Robbins , George Stigler , and Friedrich Hayek , though the broader issue of the relation between economics and psychology has come back into the academic debate with the development of " behavioral economics " . 
 = = = = Economic history = = = = 
 Weber 's best known work in economics concerned the preconditions for capitalist development , particularly the relations between religion and capitalism , which he explored in The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism as well as in his other works on the sociology of religion . He argued that bureaucratic political and economic systems emerging in the Middle Ages were essential in the rise of modern capitalism ( including rational book @-@ keeping and organisation of formally free labour ) , while they were a hindrance in the case of ancient capitalism , which had a different social and political structure based on conquest , slavery , and the coastal city @-@ state . Other contributions include his early work on the economic history of Roman agrarian society ( 1891 ) and on the labour relations in Eastern Germany ( 1892 ) , his analysis of the history of commercial partnerships in the Middle Ages ( 1889 ) , his critique of Marxism , the discussion of the roles of idealism and materialism in the history of capitalism in his Economy and Society ( 1922 ) and his General Economic History ( 1923 ) , a notable example of the kind of empirical work associated with the German Historical School . 
 Although today Weber is primarily read by sociologists and social philosophers , Weber 's work did have a significant influence on Frank Knight , one of the founders of the neoclassical Chicago school of economics , who translated Weber 's General Economic History into English in 1927 . Knight also wrote in 1956 that Max Weber was the only economist who dealt with the problem of understanding the emergence of modern capitalism " from the angle which alone can yield an answer to such questions , that is , the angle of comparative history in the broad sense " . 
 = = = = Economic calculation = = = = 
 Weber , like his colleague Werner Sombart , regarded economic calculation and especially the double @-@ entry bookkeeping method of business accounting , as one of the most important forms of rationalisation associated with the development of modern capitalism . Weber 's preoccupation with the importance of economic calculation led him to develop a critique of socialism as a system that lacked a mechanism for allocating resources efficiently in order to satisfy human needs . Socialist intellectuals like Otto Neurath had realised that in a completely socialised economy , prices would not exist and central planners would have to resort to in @-@ kind ( rather than monetary ) economic calculation . According to Weber , this type of coordination would be inefficient , especially because it would be incapable of solving the problem of imputation ( i.e. of accurately determining the relative values of capital goods ) . Weber wrote that , under full socialism , 
 In order to make possible a rational utilisation of the means of production , a system of in @-@ kind accounting would have to determine " value " – indicators of some kind for the individual capital goods which could take over the role of the " prices " used in book valuation in modern business accounting . But it is not at all clear how such indicators could be established and in particular , verified ; whether , for instance , they should vary from one production unit to the next ( on the basis of economic location ) , or whether they should be uniform for the entire economy , on the basis of " social utility " , that is , of ( present and future ) consumption requirements [ ... ] Nothing is gained by assuming that , if only the problem of a non @-@ monetary economy were seriously enough attacked , a suitable accounting method would be discovered or invented . The problem is fundamental to any kind of complete socialisation . We cannot speak of a rational " planned economy " so long as in this decisive respect we have no instrument for elaborating a rational " plan " . 
 This argument against socialism was made independently , at about the same time , by Ludwig von Mises . Weber himself had a significant influence on Mises , whom he had befriended when they were both at the University of Vienna in the spring of 1918 , and , through Mises , on several other economists associated with the Austrian School in the 20th century . Friedrich Hayek in particular elaborated the arguments of Weber and Mises about economic calculation into a central part of free market economics 's intellectual assault on socialism , as well as into a model for the spontaneous coordination of " dispersed knowledge " in markets . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The prestige of Max Weber among European social scientists would be difficult to over @-@ estimate . He is widely considered the greatest of German sociologists and ... has become a leading influence in European and American thought . 
 Weber 's most influential work was on economic sociology , political sociology , and the sociology of religion . Along with Karl Marx and Émile Durkheim , he is commonly regarded as one of the founders of modern sociology . But whereas Durkheim , following Comte , worked in the positivist tradition , Weber was instrumental in developing an antipositivist , hermeneutic , tradition in the social sciences . In this regard he belongs to a similar tradition as his German colleagues Werner Sombart , Georg Simmel , and Wilhelm Dilthey , who stressed the differences between the methodologies appropriate to the social and the natural sciences . 
 Weber presented sociology as the science of human social action ; action that he separated into traditional , <unk> , value @-@ rational and instrumental . 
 [ Sociology is ] the science whose object is to interpret the meaning of social action and thereby give a causal explanation of the way in which the action proceeds and the effects which it produces . By " action " in this definition is meant the human behaviour when and to the extent that the agent or agents see it as subjectively meaningful [ ... ] the meaning to which we refer may be either ( a ) the meaning actually intended either by an individual agent on a particular historical occasion or by a number of agents on an approximate average in a given set of cases , or ( b ) the meaning attributed to the agent or agents , as types , in a pure type constructed in the abstract . In neither case is the " meaning " to be thought of as somehow objectively " correct " or " true " by some metaphysical criterion . This is the difference between the empirical sciences of action , such as sociology and history and any kind of a priori discipline , such as jurisprudence , logic , ethics , or aesthetics whose aim is to extract from their subject @-@ matter " correct " or " valid " meaning . 
 In his own time , however , Weber was viewed primarily as a historian and an economist . The breadth of Weber 's topical interests is apparent in the depth of his social theory : 
 The affinity between capitalism and Protestantism , the religious origins of the Western world , the force of charisma in religion as well as in politics , the all @-@ embracing process of rationalisation and the bureaucratic price of progress , the role of legitimacy and of violence as the offspring of leadership , the " disenchantment " of the modern world together with the never @-@ ending power of religion , the antagonistic relation between intellectualism and eroticism : all these are key concepts which attest to the enduring fascination of Weber 's thinking . 
 Many of Weber 's works famous today were collected , revised and published posthumously . Significant interpretations of his writings were produced by such sociological luminaries as Talcott Parsons and C. Wright Mills . Parsons in particular imparted to Weber 's works a functionalist , teleological perspective ; this personal interpretation has been criticised for a latent conservatism . 
 Weber has influenced many later social theorists , such as Theodor Adorno , Max Horkheimer , György Lukács and Jürgen Habermas . Different elements of his thought were emphasised by Carl Schmitt , Joseph Schumpeter , Ludwig Lachmann , Leo Strauss , Hans Morgenthau , and Raymond Aron . According to Austrian economist Ludwig von Mises , who had met Weber during his time at the University of Vienna , 
 The early death of this genius was a great disaster for Germany . Had Weber lived longer , the German people of today would be able to look to this example of an " Aryan " who would not be broken by National Socialism . 
 Weber 's friend , the psychiatrist and existentialist philosopher Karl Jaspers , described him as " the greatest German of our era " . Weber 's untimely death felt to Jaspers " as if the German world had lost its heart " . 
 = = Critical responses to Weber = = 
 Weber 's explanations are highly specific to the historical periods he analysed . Others though disagree , pointing out that despite the fact that Weber did write in the early twentieth century , his ideas remain alive and relevant for understanding issues like politics , bureaucracy , and social stratification today . 
 Many scholars , however , have disagreed with specific claims Weber makes in his historical analysis . For example , the economist Joseph Schumpeter argued that capitalism did not begin with the Industrial Revolution but in 14th century Italy . In Milan , Venice and Florence the small city @-@ state governments led to the development of the earliest forms of capitalism . In the 16th century Antwerp was a commercial centre of Europe . Also , the predominantly Calvinist country of Scotland did not enjoy the same economic growth as the Netherlands , England and New England . It has been pointed out that the Netherlands , which had a Calvinist majority , industrialised much later in the 19th century than predominantly Catholic Belgium , which was one of the centres of the Industrial Revolution on the European mainland . Emil Kauder expanded Schumpeter 's argument by arguing the hypothesis that Calvinism hurt the development of capitalism by leading to the development of the labour theory of value . 
 = Normal Is the Watchword = 
 " Normal Is the Watchword " is the season premiere of the second season of the American mystery television series Veronica Mars , and the twenty @-@ third episode overall . Written by series creator Rob Thomas and directed by John Kretchmer , the episode premiered on UPN on September 28 , 2005 . 
 The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars ( Kristen Bell ) as she deals with life as a high school student while moonlighting as a private detective . In this episode , Veronica reveals the events that transpired over the summer after the resolution of the murder of Lilly Kane ( Amanda Seyfried ) . Meanwhile , Veronica investigates a scam involving students ' forged drug tests , and a school bus mysteriously goes off a cliff . 
 " Normal Is the Watchword " featured several casting changes to the show , including the introduction of Kendall ( Charisma Carpenter ) and Gia ( Krysten Ritter ) , as well as the promotion of three actors to series regular status . The episode received mostly positive reviews , and Thomas was nominated for a Writers Guild of America Award for his writing . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 One day before senior year , Veronica is working a job at a restaurant . Soon , a boy named Kelvin ( Charles Duckworth ) comes into the restaurant and says that he failed his drug test , even though he has been clean for ten months . Veronica sees an interview with her father , Keith ( Enrico Colantoni ) , on TV , and it is revealed that he wrote a book about the Lilly Kane case . The episode then flashes back to the romantic cliffhanger at the end of season one , and it is revealed that Logan was at the door . Logan reveals that the biker gang beat him up after he kicked Weevil ( Francis Capra ) in the face . Although he woke up with a knife and found of the gang members was stabbed , Logan tells Veronica that he did not stab the gang member , and Veronica believes him . However , Leo ( Max Greenfield ) comes and arrests Logan . Wallace ( Percy Daggs III ) says that he and Meg ( Alona Tal ) also failed their drug test . Wallace informs Veronica about the details of the drug test , and the episode flashes back to show the details of Veronica and Logan starting to date over the summer . Veronica talks to all the students who were framed in the drug test , and they all say some people might want to harm them . Veronica has become estranged from Meg , and Veronica reveals that Logan was released from prison soon after he was arrested . 
 Veronica connects the five people who were framed to an incident where a student was publicly harassed in gym class . Keith is still dating Alicia Fennel ( Erica Gimpel ) . Veronica and Wallace spend the night investigating students , and Veronica eventually deduces that Wallace ingested a small amount of an illegal substance , most likely in a gift basket earlier that year . In a flashback , Veronica and Logan make out in the car until the PCH bikers shoot out the car 's windows . Veronica asks Keith for help in finding out the names of a company 's shareholders . Veronica believes that one of the lab assistants was paid off to forge the results . The previous summer , Logan was involved with an arson crime . Logan sunbathes with Dick ( Ryan Hansen ) and Beaver ( Kyle Gallner ) poolside , and they ogle at the brothers 's stepmother , Kendall Casablancas ( Charisma Carpenter ) . Veronica sets up the parents and has Principal Clemmons listen in , and it is revealed that Duncan is now dating Veronica . In a flashback , Veronica breaks up with Logan . When Logan starts to get angry , Keith barges in and makes him leave . Logan is carrying on a relationship with Kendall . 
 On a field trip , Veronica meets Gia ( Krysten Ritter ) . On the bus home , Veronica talks to Meg one more time , but she is still passive @-@ aggressive . Veronica explains to the audience that she and Duncan are dating . At a rest stop , Veronica sees Weevil and they debate about the stabbed gang member . Meanwhile , Veronica 's bus drives away without her . Instead , Weevil takes Veronica on his motorcycle before they run across the limo with Duncan , Gia , and the others in it . They tell Veronica that the bus full of students drove off the cliff and into the sea , and they look over at the crashed bus . 
 = = Production = = 
 When it was renewed for a second season , Veronica Mars became the lowest @-@ rated show in network history to be renewed and the only UPN drama from the 2004 @-@ 05 television season to be renewed . Starting in the second season , Veronica Mars was moved to Wednesday nights , placing it in direct competition with ABC 's popular Lost . Rob Thomas said that , " I wish the juggernaut that is Lost wasn 't our direct competition . " At the same time , Veronica Mars was placed after UPN 's America 's Next Top Model . On the date of the airing of this episode , Bell and Thomas talked to The New York Times , where Thomas commented , " We let Veronica say things that , if you get all day to think about it , would be the perfect retort . " 
 The episode was originally titled " Urine Trouble " , a joking pun on " You 're in trouble . " The episode 's title refers to a phrase said by both Veronica and Wallace , indicating that things are supposedly " normal , " though they are not . The episode was written by series creator Rob Thomas and directed by John T. Kretchmer . This episode marks Thomas 's fourth writing credit for the series ( after " Pilot " , " Credit Where Credit 's Due " , and " Leave It to Beaver " ) and Kretchmer 's fourth directing credit for the series . In the episode , Logan mentions that producers wanted Tara Reid to play Trina Echolls ( Alyson Hannigan ) in casting for the film adaptation of the Echolls ' story . During casting of the role of Trina , Reid was actually almost cast in the part . 
 In the episode , Logan makes an obscene hand gesture known as the shocker , something that the UPN censors did not notice . Before the filming of " Normal Is the Watchword " , Rob Thomas informed actor Teddy Dunn , who played Duncan Kane , that he was planning remove the character from the show . Dunn has said that he was not too upset by the news , as he almost did not return for the season at all . On his role in the season , Dunn stated , " And so I knew going in that I had a finite amount of episodes , so it was like any other job . It was week @-@ to @-@ week and then I went on my merry way . " 
 The episode features a brief cameo by Julie Chen , wife of UPN executive Leslie Moonves . The cast members did not know important plot information before they received the script for the episode , including who was at Veronica 's door and that Veronica and Duncan would resume dating . " Ashes " by Embrace plays during the bus crash scene . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 " Normal Is the Watchword " introduces several new characters and series regulars to the show . On casting the new season , Thomas explained that he " conceive [ d ] the show as a one @-@ year mystery " and decided that he needed to introduce and eliminate several characters to be able to create an " equally fascinating mystery " for the series ' second season . Thomas felt that he could not bring back the Kanes and the Echolls and " have them all involved in a new mystery " ; he needed " new blood " . In the opening credits , three new actors are given star billing . Two of these actors , Ryan Hansen as Dick Casablancas and Kyle Gallner as Cassidy " Beaver " Casablancas , served as recurring characters in the show 's first season . In addition , this episode marks the first credit of Jackie Cook , played by Tessa Thompson , despite the fact that she does not appear in the episode . 
 Several important recurring characters of the show 's second season are also introduced in " Normal Is the Watchword . " Kendall Casablancas , portrayed by Charisma Carpenter , best known for her role as Cordelia Chase on Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Angel makes her first appearance in the episode . During casting , Heather Graham was considered for the role . However , Graham was filming Emily 's Reasons Why Not . Carpenter said that she wanted to play the role because " the name is really spectacular . " The episode also introduces the character of Gia Goodman , played by Krysten Ritter , who would later become known for her roles in Breaking Bad , Don 't Trust the <unk> in Apartment 23 , and Jessica Jones . Ritter would reprise her role in the film continuation of Veronica Mars and called her role on the series " her first big acting job . " Ritter was a fan of Veronica Mars before her role on the show , and she unsuccessfully auditioned for a guest role in the first season . However , the producers enjoyed Ritter 's performance , so they told her that she " would be on the show at some point . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Normal Is the Watchword " garnered 3 @.@ 29 million viewers and ranked 97th out of 112 in the weekly rankings . This was an increase over both the previous season 's finale , " Leave It to Beaver " , which received 2 @.@ 99 million viewers , and the previous season premiere ( the pilot episode ) , which garnered 2 @.@ 49 million viewers . At the time , the episode was the highest @-@ rated episode of Veronica Mars in the show 's history . However , this ratings high would be surpassed by " One Angry Veronica " . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received positive reviews . Rowan Kaiser , writing for The A.V. Club , gave a glowing review , saying that it had all the components that a season premiere should have . After praising many aspects of the episode , the reviewer wrote , " What ties it all together , though , is a storytelling form that indicates complete confidence from the show about what its viewers can deal with . It 's half present @-@ day , half @-@ flashback . But the two different halves , combined with Veronica 's voiceover , combine to present the information in pleasantly deceptive fashion . " 
 Price Peterson of TV.com also gave a positive review , writing in his episode verdict that " It 's frankly amazing how much information this episode packed into 42 minutes while still feeling breezy and funny … The episode also ended with that breathtakingly horrifying ending , a multiple @-@ death shocker that served to remind me just how murder @-@ lute Season 1 was . " Television Without Pity gave the episode a " B + " . Alan Sepinwall wrote that the season premiere was " a little heavy on the exposition " while also commenting that the same could be said about the pilot episode . Sepinwall went on to state , " I 'm really enjoying all the new storylines and characters . " 
 Cynthia Fuchs of PopMatters , gave a positive review , noting the various new storylines and how the characters , especially Veronica , handled this new set of events . " Like most adolescents , Veronica understands and anticipates this mix , even if she doesn 't always deal with it in the most effective way . Even if you don 't want to pick sides , you 're bound to be assessed as having done so . And once you 're labeled — 09er or not — you can either spend your time fighting rumors or finding alternative measures . Veronica , so precociously and brilliantly aware of alternatives , makes this familiar process seem worth pondering one more time . " 
 BuzzFeed ranked the episode 23rd on its ranking of Veronica Mars episodes , writing " take a close look at this episode ; all the answers are right there . " On a similar list , TVLine ranked the episode 18th , writing that it was notable for its introduction of characters and the bus crash plot line . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 For his work on the episode , Rob Thomas received a Writers Guild of America Award nomination for Best Episodic Drama . However , Thomas lost at the Writers Guild of America Awards 2005 to Lawrence Kaplow for the House episode " Autopsy " . 
 = Arizona State Route 92 = 
 State Route 92 ( SR 92 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Arizona . Running roughly in an " L " -shaped pattern , SR 92 begins at SR 90 in Sierra Vista and ends at a traffic circle in Bisbee along SR 80 , running entirely within Cochise County . The route was constructed and numbered as SR 92 in the late 1930s with a route that traveled further north past Sierra Vista than it does today . The routing was corrected in the 1960s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 92 begins at an intersection with Fry Boulevard in Sierra Vista . SR 90 is the designation along the roads heading north and east from the intersection . From here , SR 92 heads south through Sierra Vista , passing by residential areas in a desert terrain . The road then passes through the town of <unk> while the west side of the route is flanked by the Coronado National Forest , in which Huachuca Mountains are located . SR 92 then turns eastward , passing within several miles within the Mexico – United States border . The route passes the town of <unk> before turning northeast . The roadway enters the town of Bisbee , meeting its terminus at a traffic circle in the city . 
 The highway is maintained by the Arizona Department of Transportation ( ADOT ) , which is responsible for maintaining SR 92 like all other highways around the state . As part of this role , ADOT periodically surveys traffic along its routes . These surveys are most often presented in the form of average annual daily traffic , which is the number of vehicles who use the route on any average day during the year . In 2009 , ADOT calculated that around as few as 3 @,@ 700 vehicles used the route daily near <unk> and as many as 31 @,@ 000 daily near the northern terminus at Sierra Vista . No part of the highway has been listed in the National Highway System , a system of roads in the United States important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 The highway was constructed between 1935 and 1938 , originating at SR 82 in Whetstone and heading south into Sierra Vista . From there , it turned east for a stretch and then turned south following its current route to Bisbee . At this time , the section of the route corresponding to the current routing was paved , while the northern section was still a gravel road . The northern section was improved in 1942 . Between 1961 and 1963 , SR 90 took over the segment of SR 92 north of Sierra Vista , leaving SR 92 to the section south of the city and east to Bisbee . Since then , the routing has not been modified . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in Cochise County . 
 = Joan McCracken = 
 Joan Hume McCracken ( December 31 , 1917 – November 1 , 1961 ) was an American dancer , actress , and comedian who became famous for her role as Sylvie ( " The Girl Who Falls Down " ) in the original 1943 production of Oklahoma ! She also was noted for her performances in the Broadway shows Bloomer Girl ( 1944 ) , Billion Dollar Baby ( 1945 ) and Dance Me a Song ( 1950 ) , and the films Hollywood Canteen ( 1945 ) and Good News ( 1947 ) . 
 Though not widely remembered today , McCracken was a trend @-@ setter in musical comedy dance . In her Oklahoma ! role , McCracken became an instant sensation for a carefully choreographed pratfall during the " Many a New Day " dance number . She was considered an innovator in combining dance with comedy , and branched into dramatic roles on Broadway and early television , but her career was ultimately cut short , ending several years before her death at age 43 , as she suffered complications from diabetes . 
 McCracken was generous in promoting the careers of other dancers , including Shirley MacLaine , and was a strong influence on her second husband , Bob Fosse , encouraging him to become a choreographer . She was noted for unconventional behavior and was one of the real @-@ life person counterparts of Holly Golightly in Truman Capote 's novella Breakfast at Tiffany 's . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Joan Hume McCracken was born in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , on December 31 , 1917 , the daughter of Mary Humes and Franklin T. McCracken , a prominent sportswriter at the Philadelphia Public Ledger who was an authority on golf and boxing . 
 By age 11 , she was awarded a scholarship for acrobatic work at a Philadelphia gymnasium , and later studied dance with Catherine Littlefield . She dropped out of West Philadelphia High School in the tenth grade to study dance in New York with choreographer George Balanchine at the opening of the School of American Ballet in 1934 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 In 1935 , McCracken returned to Philadelphia to join Littlefield 's new ballet company , the Littlefield Ballet ( later known as the Philadelphia Ballet ) . When the ballet company made its official debut in November 1935 , McCracken was one of its principal soloists . In 1937 , she went on a European tour with the company , in what was the first tour of an American ballet company in Europe . This put a strain on her health . McCracken was recently diagnosed with type I diabetes ( then known as " juvenile diabetes " ) , which was difficult to treat with the medical technology at the time , and the European tour made it even harder for her to stay in compliance with her treatment regimen . McCracken kept her diabetes a secret throughout her life to prevent damage to her career . The disease made her prone to fainting spells , sometimes during performances , and led to medical complications later in her life . 
 In 1940 , McCracken and her new husband Jack Dunphy , also a dancer , moved to New York City . At first , neither failed to obtain employment , and McCracken danced in Radio City Music Hall 's ballet company . In 1941 , she danced with the ballet company at Jacob 's Pillow in the Berkshire Mountains of Massachusetts , and later that year joined the Dance Players , formed by choreographer Eugene Loring , with Michael Kidd as Loring 's assistant and leading male dancer . 
 = = = Oklahoma ! and Hollywood = = = 
 In 1942 , McCracken and Dunphy both successfully auditioned for roles in the dance ensemble of the new Rodgers and Hammerstein musical Away We Go . Agnes de Mille , who had just staged Aaron Copland 's Rodeo for the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo , was staging the production . The show went into rehearsals in early 1943 . Like her husband , McCracken was cast in an anonymous dance role in the chorus . Early in out @-@ of @-@ town tryouts , she began to distinguish herself , and her dancing was noticed by reviewers . By the time of the Broadway opening of the show , now named Oklahoma ! , de Mille a she had developed her comic performance in the role of Sylvie , with McCracken taking a comic pratfall in the " Many a New Day " dance number . She became known as " The Girl Who Fell Down " . Sources differ as to whether the role 's distinctive fall was devised by McCracken or de Mille . McCracken has said the ideas was hers , while de Mille and others recall it as being the choreographer 's . Celeste Holm , a member of the original cast , attributed the idea to composer Richard Rodgers . 
 McCracken 's performance in Oklahoma ! led to a contract with Warner Brothers . The studio cast her in Hollywood Canteen ( 1944 ) , an all @-@ star extravaganza in which Warner contract players portrayed themselves . McCracken appeared in a specialty dance routine called " Ballet in Jive " . The dance number received favorable critical attention . McCracken was initially enthusiastic about working in films , but she was discouraged by her experiences working on Hollywood Canteen . Her husband and brother were both serving in the military , and she disliked the film 's patronizing tone , which treated servicemen as naive bumpkins who are starstruck by the movie stars they encounter . McCracken also was dismayed by the unprofessionalism she witnessed at Warner Brothers , and the lack of guidance she received from the choreographer , LeRoy Prinz . 
 McCracken broke her Warner Brothers contract and went back to Broadway to appear in the musical Bloomer Girl ( 1944 ) , set during the U.S. Civil War , which is widely considered to be the first Broadway musical about feminism . She received rave reviews for her performance , which combined comedy acting with dance . While not the highest @-@ billed star in that show , her performance , especially of the satiric striptease " T <unk> , T <unk> , " enhanced her reputation as a comic performer . 
 = = = Broadway and television = = = 
 She subsequently starred in Billion Dollar Baby , which opened on Broadway in December 1945 , winning positive reviews for her performance . Her starring role in the play failed to further her career , for the show received only lukewarm reviews . After Billion Dollar Baby , she was hired by Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer to appear in the 1947 college musical Good News , starring Peter Lawford and June Allyson . She received good reviews playing the vivacious Babe Doolittle . Her song @-@ and @-@ dance number , " Pass That Peace Pipe " , was a standout , but MGM did not renew her contract and her movie career never took off . Reviewing Good Times for The Nation , critic and novelist James Agee wrote in that McCracken " makes me think of a libidinous peanut . " I 
 In her study of MGM , The Star Machine , film historian Jeanine Basinger compared Debbie Reynolds with McCracken . Basinger noted a contrast between the two actresses , noting that unlike Reynolds , who was groomed for stardom by MGM and was a show business novice , McCracken was " faux @-@ fresh " , a Broadway veteran who lacked " close @-@ up appeal " and delivered her lines in the hard @-@ edged , Broadway style , " reaching for that little old lady in the balcony . " 
 McCracken had limited range as a singer , which prevented her from getting some Broadway parts . Shirley MacLaine described her as a " small , yet powerful woman with a foghorn voice . " She long yearned to become a serious actress , and in 1947 she began studying acting with Bobby Lewis , Group Theatre alumnus , who would soon co @-@ found the Actors Studio with Elia Kazan and Cheryl Crawford . That fall , at Lewis ' invitation , McCracken became one of the Studio 's charter members . 
 The turning point in her acting career came in December 1947 , when she appeared as Galileo 's daughter Virginia in the New York production of Bertolt Brecht 's play Galileo , starring Charles Laughton in the title role and directed by Joseph Losey . Unlike her previous roles , Galileo was a straight dramatic role with no dancing . The play helped establish her reputation as a legitimate actress . She also studied acting with Sanford Meisner and Herbert Berghof at the Neighborhood Playhouse . 
 In 1949 , she appeared in the Broadway production of the Clifford Odets play The Big Knife , a fierce indictment of Hollywood . The play was directed by Lee Strasberg and starred John Garfield as a film star who is being blackmailed by a studio boss for killing a child during a car accident some years earlier . At the time of the accident , the studio covered it up , and now uses it as leverage on the Garfield character . McCracken plays a call girl , Dixie Evans , who was involved in the incident and threatens to talk about it . Her acting in the <unk> role was praised by critics , with Brooks Atkinson of The New York Times calling it an " inventive performance of real quality . " 
 Her next role was not as helpful to her career . She appeared in the 1950 musical comedy Dance Me a Song , which turned out to be a flop , though it was choreographed by Agnes de Mille , who had won acclaim for Oklahoma ! a few years earlier . As one of the play 's principal stars , she appeared in several scenes , but the choreography was ravaged by critics , as was the play , and reviews of her performance were mixed . 
 McCracken starred with Eddie Dowling , a veteran Broadway actor , in the play Angel in the Pawnshop , in a 1950 tour and on Broadway in 1951 . She played a young woman seeking to escape her marriage from a homicidal thief , in a pawnshop owned by Dowling 's character . While in the pawnshop , she puts on old clothing and fantasizes that she is living in happier times . Although she engaged in some choreographed dancing during the play , it was a straight dramatic role . While the play was being prepared for Broadway , in October 1950 , she appeared on television in the premiere of the Pulitzer Prize Playhouse , playing Essie in You Can 't Take It with You . At that time , McCracken gave an interview disparaging what she described as the " over @-@ commercialization " of television , which might have hurt her career in the new medium . Reviews for Angel in the Pawnshop were negative , and she received mixed reviews for her performance . 
 She went on to appear in Peter Pan , a 1951 Broadway revival adapted from the 1904 J.M. Barrie play . She starred in the title role in a touring company production in 1951 , succeeding Jean Arthur . The play was not a musical , and was different from the subsequent version starring Mary Martin a few years later , but had five songs by Leonard Bernstein . Captain Hook was played by Boris Karloff . Her performance in Peter Pan was praised by critics , and it was her favorite acting role . 
 In 1952 , she appeared in one of the first television situation comedies , Claudia : The Story of a Marriage , based on a film series in which the title role was played by Dorothy McGuire . McCracken played opposite Broadway actor Hugh Reilly . 
 McCracken next appeared on Broadway in the 1953 Rodgers and Hammerstein musical Me and Juliet . The choreography was by Robert Alton , who had worked with McCracken on Good News . The play was meant to show what it was like to be backstage during the run of a hit Broadway show , and she performed opposite Ray Walston in the " show within a show . " Although her performance received good reviews , the play did not , and it did little to help her career . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 Despite favorable reviews of her performances in The Big Knife and Peter Pan , her worsening health and the failure of her most recent Broadway plays took a toll on her career . As her health declined , she found that her dancing ability was affected . She suffered a severe heart attack in 1955 , followed by a possible second attack , and then developed pneumonia which required an extended stay in the hospital . She hid the severity of her health problems , but some details became public . Upon release from the hospital , McCracken was told by her doctors that she could no longer dance . The news was devastating to her . 
 Although she appeared on television and in dramatic roles , her career petered out in the late 1950s , as complications from her diabetes made it increasingly difficult for her to work . Her final stage appearance was in a 1958 off @-@ Broadway production of Jean Cocteau 's 1934 play , The Infernal Machine , appearing alongside John Kerr and June Havoc . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 McCracken was noted for her eccentric behavior . She was uninhibited , and at times seemed to enjoy behaving outrageously . In one meeting with MGM vocal coach Kay Thompson , she removed her blouse and bra to become " more comfortable . " 
 She met Jack Dunphy , then a dancer with the Littlefield company , in 1937 . They married in 1939 and separated after Dunphy 's service during World War II , during which McCracken had an affair with French composer Rudi <unk> . Dunphy adopted a gay lifestyle , became romantically involved with Truman Capote , and McCracken and he were divorced in 1951 . Dunphy remained Capote 's partner until his death in 1984 . 
 McCracken met dancer and choreographer Bob Fosse while both were appearing in Dance Me a Song , in which she had a starring role and he was a specialty dancer . She was married to him from December 1952 to 1959 . She worked actively to advance his career and encouraged his work as a choreographer . Her intervention with producer George Abbott led to his first major job as a choreographer , in The Pajama Game . They divorced as her health worsened , and as Fosse , who was serially unfaithful during their marriage , left McCracken for Gwen Verdon . 
 Later in life , she was in a relationship with actor Marc Adams , and spent many of her final years at a beach house in what was then an isolated section of The Pines on Fire Island , New York . 
 McCracken died in her sleep , from a heart attack brought on by her diabetes , on November 1 , 1961 . She was cremated at her request . Her ashes , which were given to her mother , were subsequently lost . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 McCracken was known for her <unk> stage and screen persona , and for what The New York Times described as her " overnight " success as a comic dancer in Oklahoma ! The Times described her as " an enchanting new talent with a flair for <unk> comedy . " Her influence on musical comedy and other performers was considerable . Shirley MacLaine said that McCracken had " a sense of ' in your face ' comedy years before it was fashionable ... and she possessed a generosity about other people 's talent . " 
 In her biography of McCracken , The Girl Who Fell Down , dance critic Mary Jo <unk> says that McCracken is little remembered today , and not widely appreciated for her influence on Fosse , and for her efforts to encourage him to move from dance to choreography . Though her career went into a sharp decline in the 1950s due to her diabetes , she directly influenced the career of MacLaine , as well as Fosse , and was a pioneer in combining comedy and dance . 
 McCracken was one of the real @-@ life counterparts of Holly Golightly in Truman Capote 's popular novella Breakfast at Tiffany 's . While playing in Bloomer Girl in October 1944 , she received a War Department telegram telling her of the death of her brother , Buddy McCracken , a month earlier during particularly vicious combat on the Pacific island of Peleliu . She reacted violently when she heard the news , tearing up her dressing room . McCracken told Capote of the incident , and he used it in the novella . In the book , Holly Golightly has a violent outburst in reaction to her brother 's death during Army service overseas . Golightly is shown singing songs from Oklahoma ! , accompanying herself on a guitar , and owning The Baseball Guide , which was edited by McCracken 's uncle James <unk> . 
 In Bob Fosse 's autobiographical film All That Jazz ( 1979 ) , the character of Angelique , a death angel , is played by Jessica Lange . Angelique 's personality traits resemble McCracken 's and she appears dressed just as McCracken was in The Infernal Machine , her final stage appearance . 
 = = Credits = = 
 = = = Broadway = = = 
 Oklahoma ! ( 1943 – 44 ) 
 Bloomer Girl ( 1944 – 45 ) 
 Billion Dollar Baby ( 1945 – 46 ) 
 The Big Knife ( 1949 ) 
 Dance Me a Song ( 1950 ) 
 Peter Pan ( 1950 ) 
 Angel in the Pawnshop ( 1951 ) 
 Me and Juliet ( 1953 – 54 ) 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Hollywood Canteen ( 1944 ) 
 Good News ( 1947 ) 
 That 's Dancing ! ( 1985 ) 
 That 's Entertainment ! III ( 1994 ) 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Actor 's Studio ( " Night Club " , 1948 ) 
 Great Catherine ( 1948 ) 
 Pulitzer Prize Playhouse ( " You Can 't Take It with You , " 1950 ) 
 Claudia : The Story of a Marriage ( 1952 ) 
 The Revlon Mirror Theater ( " White Night " ; 1953 ) 
 Toast of the Town , Episode # 6 @.@ 46 ( 1953 ) 
 = = = Off @-@ Broadway = = = 
 The Infernal Machine ( 1958 ) 
 = Crinipellis zonata = 
 Crinipellis zonata , commonly known as the zoned Crinipellis or the zoned @-@ cap Collybia , is a species of gilled mushroom in the Marasmiaceae family . Though considered a little brown mushroom of unknown edibility , it is distinctive because of its thick covering of coarse hairs , and differentiated from other members of Crinipellis by its slightly larger cap size , which reaches up to 25 mm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter . The white gills on the underside of the cap are crowded closely together , and are free from attachment to the stem . <unk> , it grows on the dead wood of deciduous trees from late summer to autumn . The fungus is found commonly in eastern North America , but has also been collected in Portugal and Korea . The variety C. zonata var. cremoricolor , found in eastern North America , may be distinguished microscopically by its longer spores . 
 = = Taxonomy and classification = = 
 The species was first named as Agaricus <unk> by American mycologist Charles Horton Peck in 1872 , based on specimens found near Albany , New York . He later transferred it to the genus Collybia in 1896 . It was given its current name by the Italian botanist Pier Andrea Saccardo . 
 Crinipellis zonata is classified in subsection Crinipellis of section Crinipellis in the genus Crinipellis , according to Rolf Singer 's 1986 arrangement of the Agaricales . Species in this subsection have elongated spores , and typically lack cystidia on the sides of gills . A 2009 phylogenetic analysis of several Crinipellis and <unk> species ( <unk> are anamorphic fungi parasitic on cocoa and previously included in Crinipellis ) demonstrated that C. zonata formed a clade with C. <unk> , C. <unk> , and C. <unk> . The conclusions of this analysis , based on the DNA sequences of ribosomal DNA coding for internal transcribed spacers , are inconsistent with the morphology @-@ based classification given by Singer . 
 The mushroom is commonly known as the " zoned Crinipellis " or the " zoned @-@ cap Collybia " . 
 = = Description = = 
 Crinipellis zonata is a little brown mushroom with a cap of 1 to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter , which is convex ( sometimes approaching flat ) in shape . Typically , it has a small , distinctive depression in the centre , while the whole cap is densely hairy and dry . There are often concentric zones of both color and texture . The cap is tawny or cream , while the hairs ( which are set in lines ) are tawny . The white gills are close and narrow , and free or nearly free from the stem . The gills do not discolor . The stem is between 25 and 50 mm ( 1 @.@ 0 and 2 @.@ 0 in ) in height , by 1 to 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 04 to 0 @.@ 08 in ) thick . Like the cap , it is densely covered in tawny hairs . Although the stem is hollow , the cap has an insubstantial layer of white flesh . 
 The spore print is white , and the smooth , elliptical spores are 4 – 6 by 3 – 5 µm in size . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored , club @-@ shaped , and measure 25 – 30 by 6 @.@ 0 – 6 @.@ 5 µm . C. zonata has basidioles — basidium @-@ like cells in the hymenium that lack the slender projections known as sterigmata that attach to spores . The basidioles are 15 – 28 by 3 @.@ 0 – 8 @.@ 0 µm , and range in shape from club @-@ shaped to cylindrical to fusoid ( fuse @-@ like ) . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia found on the edges of gills ) are 20 – 45 by 5 @.@ 0 – 9 @.@ 0 µm , cylindrical , club @-@ shaped or fusoid , irregular , and branched or coral @-@ like . Pleurocystidia ( cystidia found on the gill face ) are absent . The " hairs " on the cap surface are about 50 – 800 by 4 @.@ 0 – 10 µm , and roughly cylindrical with an irregular base ; the hairs on the stem are similar to the cap hairs . The cap and stem hairs are dextrinoid , meaning that they are stained yellowish @-@ brown or reddish @-@ brown by the iodine of Melzer 's reagent . Clamp connections are present in all tissues . 
 = = = Variety cremoricolor = = = 
 In 1989 , Scott Redhead reduced the species Crinipellis cremoricolor ( originally described by Shaffer and Weaver in 1965 , based on specimens found near the University of Michigan Biological Station ) to a variety of C. <unk> . The variety cremoricolor is found in eastern North America and has longer spores than the nominate variety , measuring 7 – 12 by 3 @.@ 8 – 5 µm . According to Shaffer and Weaver , it differs macroscopically from the typical variety in having cream- to buff @-@ colored cap and stem , and pale pinkish @-@ cinnamon gills . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Fruit bodies of Crinipellis zonata have no distinct odor , and a mild to slightly mealy taste . Though the edibility is not known with certainty , author Roger Phillips lists the species as " Poisonous / Suspect " . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Though similar in appearance to other members of Crinipellis , such as C. <unk> and C. <unk> , C. zonata has a slightly larger cap . The Ghanaian species Crinipellis <unk> is also similar , but may be distinguished by its lighter @-@ colored cap without a " corrugated appearance " , and its distribution . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Crinipellis zonata is saprobic , living on the debris or roots of hardwoods ; it contains wood @-@ decaying enzymes that can break down the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon pyrene . The mushrooms grow individually or in small clusters , and can be found between August and September . In North America , it is distributed east of the Rocky Mountains , and has been recorded as far west as Indiana and Texas . In Europe , it has been collected in Portugal . It has also been collected in South Korea . 
 = Songs from the Black Hole = 
 Songs from the Black Hole is an unfinished , unreleased album by the American alternative rock band Weezer , once intended to follow their 1994 self @-@ titled debut album . It was to be a science fiction rock opera that expressed songwriter Rivers Cuomo 's mixed feelings about rock and roll success . Its six characters were to be voiced by Cuomo , guitarist Brian Bell and bassist Matt Sharp of Weezer , Rachel Haden of That Dog and the Rentals , Joan Wasser of the <unk> , and Weezer collaborator Karl Koch . 
 Cuomo recorded demos for Songs from the Black Hole over Christmas 1994 , and Weezer worked on the album in recording sessions over the following year . At the end of 1995 , Cuomo enrolled at Harvard University , where his songwriting became darker and more confessional . Feeling the Black Hole concept was " too whimsical " , he abandoned it and Weezer 's second album became Pinkerton ( 1996 ) , featuring songs once intended for Songs from the Black Hole and new songs written at Harvard . 
 Two Songs from the Black Hole tracks , " I Just Threw Out the Love of My Dreams " ( with Haden on vocals ) and " Devotion " , were released as B @-@ sides for the Pinkerton singles " El Scorcho " and " The Good Life " respectively . Many of Cuomo 's demos were eventually released across the compilation albums Alone - The Home Recordings of Rivers Cuomo ( 2007 ) , Alone II : The Home Recordings of Rivers Cuomo ( 2008 ) and Alone III : The Pinkerton Years ( 2011 ) , and on the 2010 " deluxe " reissue of Pinkerton . Lyrics and sheet music were included with The Pinkerton Diaries , a book collecting Cuomo 's writings from the era . In 2007 , Rolling Stone named Songs from the Black Hole one of rock music 's " mythical lost masterpieces " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Weezer 's self @-@ titled debut album , also known as the Blue album , was released in May 1994 and became a commercial success ; it was certified gold on December 1 and platinum on January 1 , 1995 , with sales of over one million . Songwriter Rivers Cuomo wrote that success had " stirred up a lot of mixed feelings in me – ' Yay , I 'm happy ' as well as ' I 'm not sure this is the life I want to lead . ' " He had also developed a " huge inferiority complex " about rock music , saying : " I thought my songs were really simplistic and silly , and I wanted to write complex , intense , beautiful music . " Touring with Weezer , he listened to the operas Aida ( 1871 ) and Madama Butterfly ( 1904 ) , the rock opera Jesus Christ Superstar ( 1970 ) , and the musical Les Misérables ( 1980 ) . Inspired by how these works married music and narrative , he decided to write a rock opera to explore his feelings about relationships , fame , and his life as a touring musician . 
 = = Concept = = 
 Songs From the Black Hole was to be a science fiction rock opera with tracks that segued seamlessly , ending with a coda that revisited the album 's major musical themes . 
 In 2126 , the spaceship Betsy II embarks on a galaxy @-@ wide mission . Crew members <unk> ( to be voiced by Weezer guitarist Brian Bell ) and <unk> ( bassist Matt Sharp ) are in high spirits , but the ship 's captain , Jonas ( Cuomo ) , has mixed feelings . The ship 's robot , M1 ( Weezer collaborator Karl Koch ) , urges the crew to stay focused on their objective . Jonas becomes involved in a love triangle with " good girl " Laurel ( Rachel Haden of That Dog and the Rentals ) , and the ship 's cook , " bad girl " Maria ( Joan Wasser of the <unk> ) , with whom he fathers a child . When the Betsy II reaches its destination , Jonas is disillusioned and longs to return to a simpler life . 
 Cuomo said the story was a metaphor for his conflicted feelings about " heading out on tour and up the charts with a rock band . " The ship 's name Betsy II is taken from Weezer 's first tour bus , nicknamed Betsy ; M1 represents Weezer 's management and record label ; <unk> and <unk> represent the part of Cuomo that was excited about rock and roll success ; Jonas represents his doubts and longing ; Laurel and Maria represent his relationships with women . 
 = = Recording and abandonment = = 
 Cuomo recorded demos for Songs from the Black Hole on an 8 @-@ track recorder at his family home in Connecticut over Christmas 1994 . Most of the songs already existed and were rewritten to fit the Songs for the Black Hole concept . Cuomo performed every part himself , pitch @-@ shifting his voice for the female characters . Wanting to add a " sci @-@ fi " element to Weezer 's guitar rock sound , he used synthesizers including a <unk> 101 monophonic synthesizer he had recently purchased from a pawn shop in rural Connecticut . By February , he had completed an initial track list . While Weezer was on tour in Europe later that month , Sharp returned to America because of a family emergency , leaving the band stranded in Hamburg for a week . Cuomo rented a recording studio and recorded additional demos , including a version of " Blast Off ! " using a vocoder for the robot character of M1 . 
 In March 1995 , Cuomo , who was born with one leg shorter than the other , had extensive surgery to lengthen his leg followed by months of painful physiotherapy sessions . This affected his songwriting , as he would spend long periods hospitalized under the influence of painkillers . According to Cuomo , around this time the rock opera concept " started to feel too whimsical for where I was emotionally , going through the pain of the procedure ... I went to a more serious and dark place . " 
 Recording began in August 1995 in New York City 's Electric Lady Studios , where Weezer had recorded their debut album , but the new sessions were not productive . Further sessions were held in September and October , and Weezer recorded versions of " Blast Off ! " , " Longtime Sunshine " , " I Just Threw Out the Love of My Dreams " , " Tired of Sex " and " Getchoo " . Weezer had not yet abandoned Songs from the Black Hole , but the songs were recorded , according to Koch , with " no story , no theatrics , no characters . " 
 At the end of 1995 , wanting to " escape the limelight " , Cuomo enrolled at Harvard University to study classical composition . Becoming socially isolated , and still recovering from surgery , Cuomo 's songwriting became , according to Koch , " darker , more visceral and exposed , less playful . " In January 1996 , Weezer restarted recording in Los Angeles at Sound City Studios with new material . The Songs from the Black Hole tracks " <unk> " , " She 's Had a Girl " and " Dude , We 're Finally Landing " were recorded , but shelved . By May 1996 , Cuomo had settled on a new direction for Weezer 's second album , expressing his loneliness and frustration at Harvard , and Songs from the Black Hole was abandoned . The decision was influenced by that year 's release of Return of the Rentals , the debut album by Sharp 's band the Rentals , as Cuomo felt it shared many musical and lyrical themes . 
 Weezer 's second album became Pinkerton , released on September 24 , 1996 . It includes " Tired of Sex " , " Getchoo " and " No Other One " : songs written before Songs from the Black Hole was conceived , rewritten to fit the Black Hole concept , and finally rewritten again for Pinkerton . In June 1996 , after Pinkerton 's completion , Weezer recorded the Songs from the Black Hole tracks " I Just Threw Out the Love of My Dreams " ( with Rachel Haden on vocals ) and " Devotion " as B @-@ sides for the singles " El Scorcho " and " The Good Life " respectively . 
 = = Demo releases = = 
 In 1998 , Cuomo discussed releasing a compilation of his demos with Weezer 's record label Geffen Records , including Songs from the Black Hole tracks , but the label feared it would " dilute " the Weezer brand . Fans petitioned to have Songs from the Black Hole released . On December 18 , 2007 , after further negotiation with Geffen , Cuomo released Alone - The Home Recordings of Rivers Cuomo , a compilation of his demos recorded from 1992 to 2007 . The album includes five Songs From the Black Hole demos : " Longtime Sunshine " , " Blast Off ! " , " Who You Callin ' Bitch ? " , " Dude , We 're Finally Landing " , and " <unk> " . 
 On November 25 , 2008 , Cuomo released Alone II : The Home Recordings of Rivers Cuomo , including " Oh Jonas " , " Please Remember " and " Come to My Pod " . On November 2 , 2010 , Geffen released a " deluxe " reissue of Pinkerton , including a version of " Longtime Sunshine " recorded at Electric Lady Studios in August 1995 and Cuomo 's demo of " You Won 't Get With Me Tonight " . 
 On December 12 , 2011 , Cuomo released Alone III : The Pinkerton Years , including a " Suite from the Black Hole " comprising " Oh No , This Is Not For Me " , " Tired of Sex " , " She 's Had a Girl " , " What is This I Find ? " , " Now I Finally See " and " Longtime Sunshine " . The album was sold exclusively with a book , The Pinkerton Diaries , which collects Cuomo 's writings from the era , including Songs from the Black Hole lyrics and sheet music . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 2007 , Rolling Stone named Songs from the Black Hole one of rock music 's " mythical lost masterpieces . " In 2012 , Complex included the album on its list of " 50 Unreleased Albums We 'd Kill to Hear " , writing that " most of Weezer 's best material was recorded during the Blue Album to Pinkerton era . Naturally , we 'd love to see more Weezer records from the period . " In June 2014 , the NME included the album on its list of " 25 Unreleased Albums We 'd Really Love To Hear " , but conceded that Pinkerton was " not exactly the worst second prize . " In a December 2014 article titled " Weezer 's ' lost ' science @-@ fiction rock opera is better than almost everything they 've released in the last fifteen years " , Vice wrote that Songs from the Black Hole " deserves to be ahead of most records in every Weezer fan 's collection . " 
 Reviewing Alone , Pitchfork writer Jason Crock felt that the Black Hole demo " Blast Off ! " was the album 's " crown jewel " , writing that " it is such a fleeting rush of distortion @-@ driven joy that the edges of the supposed dialogue are entirely blurred , and are hardly essential to enjoy it ... [ it is ] at least on par with Pinkerton 's stellar B @-@ sides ( many of which would have made up Songs from the Black Hole ) . " Reviewing Alone II , Crock found that its Songs from the Black Hole demos were " all goofy , off @-@ the @-@ cuff , and charming . " 
 The American band Tera Melos included a cover of " Blast Off ! " on their 2009 EP <unk> vol . I. In 2013 , the Weezer tribute act Operation Space Opera released an album recreating Songs from the Black Hole from Cuomo 's demos and writing . 
 = = Track lists = = 
 Cuomo compiled track list 1 in February 1995 and track list 2 in late 1995 . 
 = = = Track list 1 = = = 
 = = = Track list 2 = = = 
 = Turn Up the Radio ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Turn Up the Radio " is a song recorded by American recording artist Madonna for her twelfth studio album , MDNA ( 2012 ) . It was written by Madonna , Martin Solveig , Michael Tordjman and Jade Williams , and produced by Madonna and Solveig . The song was released as the fourth and final single from the album on June 29 , 2012 . The single was also released as a digital EP , and included a remix featuring the group Far East Movement . A dance song with French house composition , " Turn Up the Radio " is an energetic song where Madonna asks the listener and herself to stop for a moment and escape the realities of life . 
 " Turn Up the Radio " received generally positive reviews from music critics , most of whom deemed it as an album standout and complimented its production . Some reviewers believed that the song should have been the lead single from the album . In the United States , the song became Madonna 's 43rd number @-@ one hit on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart . However , " Turn Up the Radio " had minor placements in other nations , peaking at number 175 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 An accompanying music video was shot in Italy , and directed by Tom Munro . It shows Madonna escaping the paparazzi on the back of a convertible . She travels throughout the city and the Italian countryside , while picking up men from the roadside and having a party on the car . The video received general acclaim from critics , who commended the simplicity of the video and labeled it as Madonna 's most fun video in years . The song was included on the setlist of The MDNA Tour where she performed it while playing a guitar . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 In December 2010 , Madonna posted a message on her Facebook page , expressing willingness to record new music . She also stated that she was " on the <unk> for the maddest , sickest , most badass people to collaborate with . " One of the collaborators was French DJ and producer Martin Solveig , who was invited to a writing session by Madonna in London in July 2011 . Originally , Madonna wanted to work with Solveig on one song , but eventually it turned into three tracks — " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " , " I Don 't Give A " and " Turn Up the Radio " . In an interview with Billboard , Solveig explained that Madonna had ample amount of time to delve into the project , hence after working on one song , they continued recording . Solveig described the sessions as fun and labeled them a " privileged time " . 
 " Turn Up the Radio " was written by Madonna , Solveig , Michael Tordjman and British singer Jade Williams , best known as Sunday Girl . The existence of the song was first reported by a Madonna fan website in December 2011 . It was originally recorded for Solveig 's fifth studio album , Smash ( 2011 ) , featuring lead vocals by Williams . However , the song was shelved in favor of their other collaboration called " Let 's Not Play Games " . Despite the track not appearing on Solveig 's album , he still played the song live . 
 On April 11 , 2012 , Madonna 's manager Guy Oseary responded to a Madonna fan on Twitter , who was asking for the song to be a single from MDNA . He replied saying the song " is feeling like the next single . " The cover art was released on Madonna 's official website on July 13 , 2012 . Before the single was released , Smirnoff released a seven @-@ track digital remix EP titled MDNA : Nightlife Edition Remix EP in the UK to promote the album . It included three remixes of " Turn Up the Radio " by Leo Zero , Richard Vission and Marco V. The mixes by Zero and Vission were also included on the MDNA : Nightlife Edition of the album which was exclusively sold in the US . The single remix EP was released on August 3 , 2012 in Australia and New Zealand , and August 5 , 2012 in the United Kingdom . The EP included remixes by Offer Nissim , Martin Solveig and R3hab . Madonna also collaborated with group Far East Movement , who featured on the Laidback Luke remix of the single . The song was serviced to contemporary hit radio in the United States by Interscope , on September 25 , 2012 . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Turn Up the Radio " was recorded at MSR Studios , New York City and Sarm West Studios , Notting Hill , London . It was produced by both Madonna and Solveig , the latter also working on the synth arrangement , the drums and the instrumentation for the song . Tordjman assisted Solveig on the synth arrangement . Demacio " Demo " Castellon , who represented The Demolition Crew group , was responsible for recording and mixing the track . Philippe Weiss and Graham Archer assisted Castellon on the recording , while Angie Teo assisted on the mixing . Lastly Jason " Metal " Donkersgoed did the additional editing of the song . According to Solveig , " Turn Up the Radio " was his first composition which Madonna approved for the album . On the first day of recording , the singer prepared all the things she wanted to change in the song and how she wanted to have the final version . She wanted to change the top lines and the melodies from the demo sung by Williams . During recording , Solveig muted the vocals and just played the instrumentals , then Madonna sang the song . The producer added that among all the songs they recorded , " Turn Up the Radio " was the most characteristic of a Madonna track . 
 The song begins with a keyboard before turning into an ' 80s @-@ inspired dance @-@ pop number . Reminiscent of Solveig 's hit single " Hello " , the song has a " pulsating " French house composition , and a " catchy " hook and chorus , inline with Madonna 's 2006 single , " Get Together " . According to Brad O 'Mancey from Popjustice , following the introduction on the keyboard , the music continues to grow as Madonna sings the line , " you feel the wind on your face and your skin and it 's here that I begin my story " , and crashes following it . John Mitchell from MTV News described that there was a " propulsive " energy in the track that felt " authentic and alive " . He went on to add that " the calculated perfectionism " of other club tracks by Madonna might appear to be chilly , but the composition of " Turn Up the Radio " instead was " effervescent " and " happy " . According to the sheet music of the song published by Guitar Tabs , " Turn Up the Radio " is set in the time signature of common time , with a moderate tempo of 127 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of D major with Madonna 's vocals ranging from C ♭ to A ♭ . The song follows a sequence of D ♭ – B – A ♭ min – G ♭ in the verses and D ♭ – G ♭ – B – E ♭ min during the chorus . 
 Lyrically , Madonna pleads the listener to stop for a moment , to get away from the world through music , with the lines going as : " I don 't know how I got to this stage / Let me out of my cage cause I 'm dying / Turn up the radio , turn up the radio / Don 't ask me where I wanna go , we gotta turn up the radio . " During the intermediate verses , Madonna sings about making speakers blow , which is accompanied by a subtle sound of an actual speaker blowing up . It also talks about the need to relax as well as the need to have fun . According to NME 's Priya Elan , " the song continues [ Madonna 's ] career @-@ spanning themes of getting into the groove , of uniting the bourgeoisie and rebelling . " O 'Mancey gave a detailed analysis of the lyrics : 
 This is an escapist anthem about leaving wherever you 're stuck , getting in a car , whacking some amazing music on the stereo and putting your foot down . In other words , it 's still only when she 's dancing that she feels this free , and it 's still music making the people come together . It captures a brilliantly teenage sensation ( " only music can save me from my shit life " ) but makes sense of it in a song that doesn 't sound like she 's trying too hard to be down with the kids ... Real life is sometimes a bit more complicated than that , and sometimes freedom is about being able to leave the cunts behind to get on with their useless lives . And that 's what this song is about . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The song received generally positive reviews from music critics , who believed that it would have been a stronger choice as the lead single from MDNA . In a pre @-@ release screening of MDNA , Matthew Todd from Attitude magazine praised the track , writing : " It may sound trite but there 's urgency in its simplicity . It transforms into the album 's most pounding moment , reaching a climax that threatens to blow the speakers . " Todd added that although some listeners might find the track " generic " , the song has characteristic elements of a Madonna release , and would be embraced by fans as a " dancefloor filler that will shake the clubs and would happily find a slot on the next series of Glee . " Mitchell called it " a big , anthemic dance @-@ pop wonder with glittery synths and fun lyrics . " He also referred to the song as " the best thing [ Madonna has ] done since ' Hung Up ' " , and the most " mass accessible " track on MDNA . Brad O 'Mancey from Popjustice shared Mitchell 's sentiments , adding that although it has cliche lyric , " Turn Up the Radio " was comparable to Madonna 's work during her Ray of Light era ( 1998 ) , and had Daft Punk influenced bits in it . Enio Chiola from PopMatters found the song to be " complimenting " the darker and edgier tracks on MDNA , but concluded that such tracks were few on the album . Chicago Tribune journalist Greg Kot found the song to be the one excelling in the first half of MDNA . According to Melinda Newman of HitFix , the song is a " sweet , Bangles @-@ like , slab of ear pop candy that recalls [ Madonna 's ] earliest singles , ' Holiday ' and ' Borderline ' . " Bernard Zuel of The Sydney Morning Herald called it a " compelling piece of hands @-@ in @-@ the @-@ air dance " song , but wished Madonna would have included more of such tracks in MDNA . Michael Cragg from The Guardian appreciated the opening composition of the song , describing it as " a timely breather from the throbbing bass and feels more carefree and instinctive than what has gone before " . 
 A writer for Virgin Media gave the song 4 out of 5 stars , writing : " It is that precious entity that [ Madonna ] still produces every now and then : a brilliant ' Holiday ' -style summer @-@ friendly pop song . " Keith Caulfield from Billboard called it one of the best tracks of the album , and said that " while the lyrics aren 't provocative or necessarily new , it 's still a peppy little tune that would sound great " on the radio . " Laurence Green from musicOMH , also praised the track , writing that " the song repositions Madonna as the American Queen triumphant with the aid of a properly classic ' Madge melody ' that echoes her ' 80s greats . " Nick Levine , writing for The National , praised the composition and its similarity to " Get Together " . In another review of the album for BBC News , Levine listed " Turn Up the Radio " as one of the thrilling tracks of MDNA , saying that the drop was like " an open manhole " . Robert Copsey from Digital Spy noted that although there were few cliches with the lyrics , the production of the song was strong , and reminiscent of Daft Punk 's music . <unk> Abebe from New York magazine called the song as one of the standouts on MDNA , along with " I 'm a Sinner " and " I 'm Addicted " . Gareth Grundy from The Guardian praised the " more relaxed , less stentorian " vibe of the track , adding that the song " is the kind of giddy , live @-@ for @-@ the @-@ moment tune that made everyone fall for her in the first place . Think ' Into the Groove ' or ' Open Your Heart ' , at least in spirit . " Genevieve Koski from The A.V. Club felt that the lyrics were lazy and although the song had a " great hook " , it is pulled down " by a pile of clichés [ of ] what could have been one of the album ’ s strongest tracks . " 
 In a review of MDNA , Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph gave a mixed to positive review , praising its dance @-@ friendly nature , but calling the lyrics banal . Aidin Vaziri of the San Francisco Chronicle also gave a mixed review , stating , " Madonna might actually be turning reflective ... on the head @-@ hammering ' Turn Up the Radio ' , when she sings , ' It was time I opened my eyes / I 'm leaving the past behind . ' Is it about her doomed relationship with Guy Ritchie ? Who knows ? Who cares ? " . Matthew Parpetua from Pitchfork Media criticized Solveig 's " unimaginative arrangements " . Sian Rowe from NME found the track to be " flat " , this view was also shared by Alex Macpherson from Fact magazine . Robert Leedham from Drowned in Sound website called the song " mediocre " , describing it as " synth @-@ flavoured filler of the garden variety " . Jon Pareles from The New York Times called it shallow , effective club fodder , describing it as containing " blippy stereo @-@ hopping synthesizers and generic title " . This was shared by Emily Mackay of The Quietus , feeling that the song would have been better off for other artist and was below Madonna 's level . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Turn Up the Radio " debuted at number 39 on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart , and reached number 19 the following week , earning the title of " Greatest Gainer " . In its third week , the song once again earned the title of " Greatest Gainer " and reached number eight . It was Madonna 's 57th top @-@ ten song on the chart , and her 28th top @-@ ten in a row , starting from " Beautiful Stranger " in 1999 . It was the sixth song in the history of Hot Dance Club Songs to jump into the chart 's top @-@ ten in its third week ; others being two songs by Madonna ( " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " and " Girl Gone Wild " ) and three songs by Lady Gaga ( " Marry the Night " , " You and I " and " Alejandro " ) . 
 For the week ending August 30 , 2012 , the song jumped to the top position , earning Madonna her record @-@ extending 43rd number @-@ one single on the chart . With this feat , Madonna pulled further away from runner @-@ up Janet Jackson , who has 19 number @-@ one songs . Keith Caulfield from Billboard noted that with one more number one on Hot Dance Club Songs , Madonna would be able to claim another honor , that of having the most number ones on any single Billboard chart . Madonna broke this record in 2015 , her single " Ghosttown " reached number one on this chart , giving her 45 number ones . With " Turn Up the Radio " reaching the top , Madonna also had her 156th overall number @-@ one song on an active and current tabulated charts for Billboard , the most for any artist . Along with Hot Dance Club Songs , the song also debuted and peaked at number two on the Hot Dance Singles Sales and number three on the Hot Singles Sales charts . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and synopsis = = = 
 The music video for " Turn Up the Radio " was shot in Florence , Italy on June 18 and 19 , 2012 . The director was Tom Munro , who previously directed Madonna 's music video for " Give It 2 Me " ( 2008 ) . Madonna was on The MDNA Tour , which supported the album , and decided to shoot the video at Florence , where she had a performance at the Stadio Artemio Franchi . According to the Daily Mail , the singer was seen at the back of an old convertible , wearing a bouffant hair with a black band . Fashion house Balmain provided the costumes for the video . It was released on July 16 , 2012 , with a preview having been released on July 13 , 2012 . 
 The video begins with Madonna getting picked up by her chauffeur amidst a crowd of paparazzi . She appears to be irritated and exhausted . The chauffeur turns on the radio and she gradually calms down . Along the drive , the singer picks up several men who are scantily dressed with whom she sets off on a long ride through the town and country as the crowd continue to chase her . Madonna also picks up street dancers and exotic women in her car as the journey continues . By the end of the video , Madonna has a whole group of people with whom she parties on the car , and throws out her chauffeur on the street , with his pants down . Interspersed throughout are scenes of Madonna actually filming the music video , with the crew seen in front of the convertible . The ending features an exhausted Madonna laying down in the backseat of the convertible as the chauffeur says in Italian : " La festa è <unk> , <unk> <unk> la <unk> <unk> ! , " which means in English : " The party is over , now fasten the seat @-@ belt , bitch ! " . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The music video received favorable response from critics , who praised its simplicity . According to Crystal Bell of The Huffington Post , Madonna was able to portray a rich life like that in the 1960 film , La Dolce Vita . Amanda Dobbins of New York gave props to Madonna for looking good in a leotard and for giving break to the young actors accompanying her in the video . Brett Warner of the website Ology appreciated the vintage feel of the video writing : " Heavy sigh . Remember a time when pop videos didn 't have to shimmer and sparkle , when you didn 't need choreographed dance routines or outlandish costumes ? Remember when cars and cleavage was enough ? Madonna clearly does . " Robbie Daw of Idolator agreed , writing that the video is " the most fun visual [ Madonna has ] offered up in years ... All in all , a fantastic video for one of the more mediocre tracks off MDNA . " Mark Hogan from Spin noted that the video appeared a literal take on the song 's lyrics but the change of scenery to the Italian countryside and the party scenes made it endearing . Melinda Newman from HitFix said that although the video did not live up to Madonna 's other endeavors , it fit the " carefree " theme of the song . She found influences of Italian film director Federico Fellini 's works , especially his 1957 release Nights of Cabiria , in the scene showing Madonna picking up prostitutes in her car . 
 A writer for Rolling Stone noticed how Madonna 's fans also make an appearance in the " simple " video . Brennan Carly from Billboard wrote that Madonna seemed " down @-@ to @-@ earth and affable " in the video . Bradley Stern from MuuMuse called the video as La Dolce Vita " through Instagram filters " and found elements of the music video for Madonna 's 1998 single , " Drowned World / Substitute for Love " , with the paparazzi shots . He declared the scenes showing Madonna 's then @-@ boyfriend Brahim <unk> , the singer 's cleavage and booty slaps as highlights of the video . Stern concluded by saying that he " thought this would be much worse because the concept is so flimsy , but I have to say : It 's kind of a treat to see Madonna letting loose and having some fun . " Belinda White from The Daily Telegraph wrote that Madonna refused to act " her age " in the video but " she has us more than a little envious of all the fun she 's having , not to mention how incredible she looks . " Leslie Price from Pop Dust website found Madonna 's getup as similar to actress Brigitte Bardot . 
 Erick Strecker from Entertainment Weekly was critical in his review since he felt that " nothing " worthwhile happened in the video and the party never achieved its full potential . Leslie Gornstein from E ! found that the shots of Madonna being irritated by the paparazzi is " classic love @-@ me @-@ pity @-@ me game that celebrities have been playing since Marilyn Monroe , and the original pop princess manipulates it to full effect in her latest video " . She concluded by saying that the whole setup of the video was " laughable " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Madonna performed " Turn Up the Radio " on The MDNA Tour as the third song of the second segment of the concert , titled Prophecy , where a mix of joyful songs that " bring people together " were performed . The wardrobe during the performance included an all @-@ leather look , a custom design by Hervé Léger and Max Azria , with knee @-@ high boots and a mini fur bolero . After " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " , she left the stage early for a costume change . A video interlude called " Turning Up the Hits " started , where excerpts of " Holiday " , " Into the Groove " , " Lucky Star " , " Like A Virgin " , " 4 Minutes " , " Ray of Light " and " Music " were played . Madonna appeared on the stage with a guitar and started singing the song . She was accompanied by two guitarists on the steps , which moved up @-@ and @-@ down . In the middle of the track , she invited the audience to sing @-@ along with her . 
 Jordan Levin from The Miami Herald called the performance " gutsy " , and labeled it as " an anthem for [ Madonna ] and pop music " . Glenn Gamboa from Newsday said that the " aggressively peppy " performances of the song , along with " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " was one of the most joyous moments of the show , and it could have been extended more . " Turn Up the Radio " was also the opening song for Madonna 's one @-@ stop performance for 45 minutes at Paris ' Olympia music hall . The performance of the song at the November 19 – 20 , 2012 , shows in Miami , at the American Airlines Arena were recorded and released in Madonna 's fourth live album , MDNA World Tour . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 Digital Remixes EP 
 " Turn Up the Radio " ( Offer Nissim Remix ) – 7 : 28 
 " Turn Up the Radio " ( Martin Solveig Club Mix ) – 5 : 31 
 " Turn Up the Radio " ( R3hab Remix ) – 5 : 41 
 " Turn Up the Radio " ( Madonna vs. Laidback Luke ) featuring Far East Movement – 3 : 23 
 Beatport Digital Remixes 
 " Turn Up the Radio " ( Offer Nissim Remix ) – 7 : 28 
 " Turn Up the Radio " ( Martin Solveig Club Mix ) – 5 : 31 
 " Turn Up the Radio " ( R3hab Remix ) – 5 : 41 
 " Turn Up the Radio " ( Madonna vs. Laidback Luke Alternative Remix ) featuring Far East Movement – 6 : 02 
 " Turn Up the Radio " ( Album Version ) – 3 : 46 
 " Turn Up the Radio " ( Instrumental ) – 3 : 46 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Recorded at MSR Studios , New York City and Sarm West Studios , Notting Hill , London 
 Webo Girl Publishing , Inc . ( ASCAP ) , EMI Music Publishing France ( SACEM ) 
 Personnel 
 Madonna – lead vocals , songwriter , producer 
 Martin Solveig – songwriter , producer , synths , drums , instruments 
 Jade Williams – songwriter 
 Michael Tordjman – songwriter , synths 
 Demacio " Demo " Castellon – recording , mixing for The Demolition Crew 
 Philippe Weiss – recording 
 Graham Archer – recording 
 Jason " Metal " Donkersgoed – additional editing for The Demolition Crew 
 Angie Teo – mixing assistant 
 Credits and personnel adapted from MDNA album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Twinkle Khanna = 
 Twinkle Khanna ( also known as Tina Jatin Khanna ; born on 29 December 1974 ) is an Indian interior designer , newspaper columnist , film producer , author and former film actress . She won the Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut for her role in the romance film Barsaat ( 1995 ) . She has also played the lead character in the Telugu film Seenu ( 1999 ) . She is the daughter of established actors Dimple Kapadia and Rajesh Khanna . Her last film appearance in a lead role was in Love Ke Liye Kuch Bhi Karega ( 2001 ) . Khanna has acted opposite actors like Bobby Deol , Ajay Devgan , Saif Ali Khan , Aamir Khan , Salman Khan , Shah Rukh Khan , Daggubati Venkatesh , Govinda and Akshay Kumar . 
 Khanna married Kumar in 2001 . After leaving the acting profession in the same year , she ventured into interior designing and is the co @-@ owner of The White Window , a chain of interior designing stores which operates in Mumbai . She does not have a professional degree and learned the skills by working with an architect for two years . She is the co @-@ founder of the production company Grazing Goat Pictures and has co @-@ produced 6 features including the Marathi language drama 72 Miles . She has also done a special appearance in Tees Maar Khan ( 2010 ) . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Acting career = = = 
 Khanna made her screen debut opposite Bobby Deol in Rajkumar Santoshi 's romance Barsaat ( 1995 ) . She was cast by Dharmendra and before the film 's release Khanna signed for two more projects . It performed well at the box office and became the sixth @-@ highest grossing film of the year , and she received the Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut for her performance . The following year she played lead roles in Raj Kanwar 's action film Jaan and Lawrence D 'Souza 's romance Dil Tera <unk> opposite Ajay Devgan and Saif Ali Khan respectively . <unk> <unk> of the New Straits Times ' wrote that " Khanna does not look like a typical Hindi actress " . While reviewing Dil Tera <unk> , <unk> wrote about Khanna , " Unlike her previous movies , she looks really good in all her scenes and she can act well . " In 1997 two films featuring her ; <unk> ! Yeh <unk> and <unk> were released . Both of these films were poor box @-@ office performers . Her only release in 1998 was Jab Pyaar <unk> Hota Hai which featured her as Salman Khan 's love interest . 
 Khanna acted opposite Akshay Kumar in two action films : International Khiladi and <unk> ( both 1999 ) . In the former she played a news reporter who falls in love with a criminal whom she interviews . Both performed poorly at the box @-@ office . She was paired with Daggubati Venkatesh in a Telugu film , Seenu ( 1999 ) . Khanna played the lead role in Baadshah ( 1999 ) , featuring Shah Rukh Khan as a detective . In the same year she acted opposite Saif Ali Khan in Yeh Hai Mumbai Meri Jaan , a romantic comedy directed by Mahesh Bhatt . She was paired opposite Aamir Khan in Dharmesh Darshan 's Mela ( 2000 ) . Similar to The Seven Samurai in story , it was an average grosser at the box @-@ office . In October 1999 , along with Juhi Chawla , Shah Rukh and Salman Khan , she performed at Awesome Foursome concert held as Shah Alam Outdoor Stadium , Malaysia . Chal Mere Bhai ( 2000 ) featured her in a special appearance beside a leading role in the comedy <unk> Ka Ghulam opposite Govinda . She also acted in the David Dhawan @-@ directed comedy Jodi No.1 ( 2001 ) . Her acting in the film met with poor reviews . Film director Karan Johar admitted in an interview that Khanna was in his mind for the role of Tina in Kuch Kuch Hota Hai , but she refused it and thus Rani Mukerji was signed . She left the industry after her marriage to Kumar in 2001 , citing that she did not enjoy the acting profession anymore . Her last film was Love Ke Liye Kuch Bhi Karega ( 2001 ) , remake of Telugu movie Money ( 1993 ) . It featured her opposite Fardeen Khan and was an average grosser at the box office . 
 = = = Off @-@ screen work = = = 
 In 1996 , Khanna campaigned for her father 's election in New Delhi ( Lok Sabha constituency ) . In 2000 , she was part of the judges panel at Femina Miss India . In 2002 , Khanna opened her own interior design store in Crawford Market , Mumbai called The White Window , in partnership with her longtime friend <unk> <unk> . Since then , the store has received Elle <unk> International Design Award . She has opened up another branch of the store elsewhere in Mumbai . She does not hold a professional degree and worked with an architect for two years to learn the procedures . During her pregnancy , she practised maps and designs using CAD . Khanna did the interiors for Rani Mukerji 's , Reemma Sen 's and Tabu 's houses , Kareena Kapoor Khan 's Bandra flat in 2008 and Poonam Bajaj 's design studio . On the request of one of her clients , she ordered a company to make a golden toilet seat . 
 Khanna has also endorsed for and designed <unk> 's <unk> project in Noida and another residential project in Pune . However , Khanna filed a case against <unk> for failing to pay ₹ 1 @.@ 04 crore ( US $ 150 @,@ 000 ) as endorsement fees . She also mentors International Institute of Fashion Designing 's Academy of Interiors . Khanna is the co @-@ founder of Grazing Goat Pictures and has co @-@ produced the films Tees Maar Khan ( 2010 ) and Patiala House ( 2011 ) . She also did a cameo appearance in the former film . Khanna has also co @-@ produced Thank You ( 2011 ) , Khiladi 786 ( 2012 ) , 72 Miles ( 2013 ) and Holiday : A Soldier Is Never Off Duty ( 2014 ) . She has also been the brand ambassador for the watch brand <unk> and endorsed Coca @-@ Cola and Micromax Mobile . In 2014 , Khanna and her sister sold their father 's house for ₹ 85 crore ( US $ 13 million ) . Twinkle Khanna is a popular columnist at Daily News and Analysis after hours and the The Times of India . Penguin Random House have announced that Twinkle Khanna 's book Mrs <unk> hit the Nielsen bestseller list at number 2 in its first week of sales . Launched in Mumbai on 18 August , the book has already reached number 1 on the bestseller chart of Crossword 's Kemps Corner store and has been receiving praise from readers and press . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Twinkle Khanna is the daughter of Dimple Kapadia and Rajesh Khanna . Her sister Rinke Khanna is also an actress . Her aunt was Simple Kapadia . She met Akshay Kumar for the first time during a photo session for Filmfare magazine and married him on 17 January 2001 . Together they have a son , <unk> and a daughter , <unk> . Kumar often credits Khanna for his success . In 2009 , People magazine listed her as the 4th best dressed celebrity in India . In February 2014 , she was operated at the Breach Candy hospital for the removal of a kidney stone . She has maintained a Twitter account since November 2014 . 
 In 2009 , during Lakme Fashion Week , she unbuttoned Akshay Kumar 's jeans . This incident created a controversy . A social worker filed a complaint against the couple and the event organisers for obscenity . Khanna surrendered at the <unk> police station and was released on bail . In July 2013 , the Bombay High Court ordered the police to prosecute Khanna and her husband . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = Books = = 
 Khanna , Twinkle ( 18 August 2015 ) . Mrs <unk> . Penguin India . ISBN <unk> . OCLC <unk> . 
 = Quién = 
 " Quién " is a latin pop song by Guatemalan recording artist Ricardo Arjona , released on 19 June 2007 as the lead single from his compilation album , Quién Dijo Ayer ( 2007 ) . The song 's lyrics were written by Arjona , and its music was composed by Puerto Rican singer @-@ songwriter Tommy Torres , who also worked with Arjona on his tenth studio album , Adentro ( 2005 ) . Performed with additional background vocals by Torres , " Quien " was produced by Arjona with longtime collaborators Dan Warner and Lee Levin under their stage name Los Gringos , and was recorded between several studios in Miami and Mexico City . 
 Described by Arjona as " the world out of the window and the prison built by ourselves " , " Quién " became a moderate commercial success , reaching number 21 on the US Billboard Top Latin Songs chart , and number four at the Latin Pop Songs chart . Its accompanying music video , directed by Simon Brand , was filmed in Las Vegas , and features Arjona singing while walking around the city 's nighttime lights . A " jewel of elegance " , according to Mexican website Terra , the music video has received 1 @.@ 3 million views on YouTube . 
 = = Background = = 
 In a press conference held in November 2007 , Arjona stated , in relation to Quién Dijo Ayer 's themes , that " yesterday is the cumulus of this that put us here , which raised us and made us what we are , for good or bad . " He also said that the album was more than a compilation , and that " it 's an album with all the features of the typical greatest hits disc . " After spending the majority of his career signed to Sony , and later , Sony BMG , Arjona signed a long @-@ term recording deal with Warner Music Latina in September 2008 . This departure made Quien Dijo Ayer the last album the artist directly released on his former label . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Quién " is a Latin pop song with a duration of four minutes and sixteen seconds . The song 's lyrics were written by Ricardo Arjona and the music was composed by Tommy Torres , who also worked with Arjona on his tenth studio album , Adentro . The song was produced by Lee Levin , Dan Warner and Torres with additional help from Arjona . Warner also played the electric and acoustic guitars and the bass ; Levin handled the drum and percussion instruments , and Matt Rollings played the piano . " Quién " is performed by Arjona with additional background vocals from Tommy Torres . The song was recorded between five studios in Miami : The Tiki Room , Picks & Hammers , Jet Wash Studio , The Hit Factory Criteria and Hit Masters ; and in Jocoteco Studios in Mexico City . " Quién " was mixed in Barking Doctor Studios in New York City by Mick Guzauski , and mastered by Vlado Meller at the Sony Music Studios on that city . Arjona commented that " ' Quién ' is the world out of the window and the prison built by ourselves . It 's the freedom to choose the path or to prefer loneliness as an argument of nostalgia . ' Quién ' is a story with the hurry of the desperate , is the flashback of those who end up loving alone . " 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The music video for " Quién " was filmed in Las Vegas , Nevada . It was directed by Simon Brand , who also directed the music video for Arjona 's past single " Mojado " , from his album Adentro . In the video , Arjona is seen walking the streets of the city , as well as imagery of the city 's buildings and lights alone , while singing the lyrics of the song . Mexican website Terra categorized the video as a " jewel of elegance and simplicity of the Guatemalan singer in all its creative glory . " As of 9 December 2012 , the video has reached 1 @.@ 3 million views on YouTube . 
 = = Trackslisting = = 
 Digital download 
 " Quien " – 4 : 16 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Taken from the album booklet . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Scottish Labour Party leadership election , 2014 = 
 The 2014 Scottish Labour Party leadership election was an internal party election to choose a new leader and deputy leader of the Scottish Labour Party , following the resignations of Johann Lamont as leader and Anas Sarwar as deputy . Lamont announced her decision in an interview with the Daily Record on 24 October , saying that she was stepping down effective immediately because the UK Labour Party treated the Scottish party as a " branch office of London " . Lamont , who had won the 2011 leadership contest , thus becoming the first Scottish leader to have authority over Labour 's Scottish MPs in the House of Commons as well as in the Scottish Parliament , was the second leader of a Scottish political party to resign in the wake of the 2014 independence referendum . Before her resignation , Alex Salmond announced his intention to relinquish the role of Scottish National Party ( SNP ) leader and First Minister . Sarwar announced his own resignation on 30 October , saying he felt it was right for the party to elect a new leadership team . 
 Sarwar became interim leader following Lamont 's resignation , and announced plans for the party to hold a leadership contest , with the winner to be announced on 13 December . Sarah Boyack became the first person to confirm that she would be standing as a candidate for party leader ; she was subsequently joined by Neil Findlay and Jim Murphy . Katy Clark and Kezia Dugdale entered the deputy leadership race . Findlay was among those to call on former British Prime Minister Gordon Brown to enter the contest , but he ruled out doing so . Other senior Labour figures who decided not to put their names forward included Sarwar , Jackie Baillie , and Jenny Marra . 
 Voting took place between 17 November and 10 December using the three @-@ tier electoral college system , which gives parliamentarians , individual members , and affiliated bodies such as trade unions an equal say in the outcome . During this time , the candidates toured Scotland for a number of hustings meetings , at which they set out their direction for the party if elected . Policy options raised were centred on issues such as health , education , employment , and the prospect of further devolution to Scotland . The three leadership candidates were from different wings of the party – Murphy from the Labour right , Boyack from the centre , and Findlay from the left . Controversy ensued when the Unite trade union issued a mock ballot paper instructing members on which candidates to elect , and when two prominent Labour figures engaged in an argument about the contest on social media . On 13 December , Murphy was elected to lead the party , while Dugdale was chosen to become his deputy . In his victory speech , Murphy said that his election was a " fresh start " for Scottish Labour . 
 The 2014 referendum had seen a 55 percent vote in favour of keeping Scotland in the United Kingdom , but Labour 's decision to campaign alongside the Conservatives for a ' No ' vote led traditional supporters to accuse the party of betrayal . Opinion polls in the weeks following the referendum suggested an increased support for the SNP at Labour 's expense , while SNP membership quadrupled . After his election as its leader Murphy led Labour into the 2015 UK general election , which saw the party 's worst @-@ ever election result in Scotland and a landslide victory for the SNP . Labour lost all but one of its 41 Scottish Westminster seats , including Murphy 's own East Renfrewshire constituency , while the SNP won 56 of the 59 seats in Scotland . Although Murphy subsequently said that he wished to remain as Scottish Labour leader , the poor result prompted senior party figures and trade unionists to question the viability of his future in the post . After narrowly surviving a vote of no confidence on 16 May , Murphy announced his intention to relinquish the role , triggering a fresh leadership contest . Dugdale was elected to succeed Murphy on 15 August . 
 = = Background = = 
 Lamont was elected to lead the Scottish Labour Party in December 2011 following the resignation of Iain Gray , who stepped down in the wake of the party 's second consecutive defeat by Alex Salmond 's Scottish National Party in the 2011 Scottish Parliament general election . She was the first leader to take charge of the entire Scottish Labour Party , previous leaders having only had responsibility for Labour 's MSPs at Holyrood , and she initiated a review of Labour policy on issues such as devolution and the party 's commitment to free universal public services . The Scotsman 's Euan McColm wrote that although Lamont was given greater autonomy over Labour in Scotland , her Westminster colleagues " restrained " her attempts to develop a devolution policy , and her debate on universal benefits resulted in the SNP portraying her as " a politician dedicated to seizing from the people that which was rightfully theirs " . Her leadership was further harmed by a controversy over the 2013 Falkirk candidate selection , in which the trade union Unite allegedly tried to engineer the selection process in the Falkirk constituency ; an investigation into the matter was led from London rather than Edinburgh . Lamont also led the party through the 2014 referendum on Scottish independence , during which Labour joined the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats in the Better Together campaign , an alliance of parties that campaigned for a " No " vote . Lamont herself had a relatively low profile during the period prior to the poll , while Labour 's association with the Conservatives was viewed as a betrayal among its traditional supporters . 
 The referendum was held on 18 September 2014 , and saw a turnout of 3 @,@ 619 @,@ 915 , or 85 percent of those eligible to vote . Scotland rejected independence , with a 55 percent vote in favour of staying part of the United Kingdom . Salmond announced his resignation as SNP leader and First Minister the day after the referendum . In the subsequent leadership election , the SNP selected Nicola Sturgeon as its leader . Also on 19 September , UK Prime Minister David Cameron established the Smith Commission to look at the prospect of devolving further powers to Scotland . Chaired by Lord Smith of Kelvin , the cross @-@ party Commission published its findings on 27 November . Among its recommendations were proposals to give the Scottish Parliament responsibility for some welfare payments and for setting income tax levels . Although it had previously been opposed to giving Holyrood greater tax powers amid concerns it could diminish the role of Scottish MPs at Westminster and lead to " independence by the back door " , Labour confirmed its intention to support income tax devolution shortly before details of the Commission 's report were made public . 
 Although Scotland had voted to remain part of the UK , the independence referendum had returned " Yes " votes in some traditional Labour strongholds , particularly Glasgow and North Lanarkshire , prompting media speculation about Lamont 's future as the party 's leader . Shortly after the referendum , a Daily Mail article claimed that Shadow International Development Secretary Jim Murphy was being lined up to take over party leadership ; The Herald reported that party delegates concerned about the referendum results had started to view Murphy as a possible successor . Lamont had attempted to quash rumours of a leadership challenge at the 25 September 2014 session of First Minister 's Questions , the first of the post @-@ referendum era : " When the First Minister is long gone I will still be doing my job on behalf of the people of Scotland . " Her position remained uncertain . The Daily Telegraph 's Alan Cochrane wrote that many Labour MPs in Scotland feared losing their seats in the 2015 UK general election without a change of leadership . In the weeks following the referendum , SNP membership increased fourfold , reaching more than 100 @,@ 000 by mid @-@ December . Labour 's membership over the same period was less clear . Paul Hutcheon noted in the 9 November edition of the Sunday Herald that Labour had " consistently declined " to confirm the number of its members in Scotland , but quoted an " informed source " suggesting the figure was slightly short of 13 @,@ 500 . However , Peter Jones of The Scotsman subsequently quoted a less favourable figure of fewer than 10 @,@ 000 , with " most of the existing constituency membership [ comprising ] the relatives and friends of councillors / MSPs / MPs [ who ] would not welcome ... an influx of new members who might try to oust second @-@ rate post @-@ holders in favour of somebody new and better " . 
 In October , two former first ministers voiced their concern about the direction of the party . Jack McConnell expressed fears that Labour would experience increased difficulty in regaining the confidence of Scottish voters following the election of Nicola Sturgeon as SNP leader , and described Labour as " a political machine that is angry about what has happened in Scotland in the recent past " . Shortly afterwards , his predecessor , Henry McLeish suggested Labour had ceded " enormous ground to the SNP unnecessarily " because its supporters no longer understood " what the party stands for " . Margaret Curran , the Shadow Secretary of State for Scotland , said that although the party was changing , it needed to reconnect with its " socialist principles " . Lamont 's deputy , Anas Sarwar , later suggested that during the referendum campaign , Labour " had stopped being a movement for change and fell into a trap of being defenders of the past and defenders of the establishment " . The New Statesman claimed that Labour had spent " decades treating Scotland as little more than a one @-@ party state " and needed to " [ make ] itself relevant again for the people whom it was established to represent " . Stephen Daisley , political editor of STV News , suggested that Labour had " responded to the Nationalist advance by electing a succession of decent but ineffectual Holyrood leaders who were dominated by the Westminster party machine " . 
 = = Resignations = = 
 Lamont announced her resignation in an interview with the Daily Record on 24 October 2014 , saying that it was her intention to step down immediately . She told the newspaper that she was resigning because Labour 's Westminster leadership had undermined her attempts to reform the party in Scotland , and had treated Scottish Labour " like a branch office of London " . In her letter of resignation , submitted to Scottish Labour Party Chairman Jamie Glackin , Lamont accused " senior members of the party " of questioning her role and said that she was taking herself " out of the equation " to allow Scottish Labour to have a discussion about the best way forward . Anas Sarwar became Labour 's acting leader . On 26 October , following a meeting of the party 's executive committee , he outlined the details of the leadership election . It was confirmed the next day that Jackie Baillie would represent Labour in the Scottish Parliament at the following session of First Minister 's Questions . 
 On 30 October , an <unk> / Mori poll conducted for STV indicated that the SNP had much greater support among Scottish voters than Labour , putting the SNP at 52 percent , compared to 23 percent for Labour . On the same day , a YouGov poll conducted for The Times gave the two parties 43 and 27 percent respectively . The BBC 's Mark <unk> later noted that a total of four polls in October and November gave the SNP an average 20 @-@ percentage @-@ point lead over Labour , which he suggested could allow the SNP to win as many as 30 Westminster seats from Labour in the next election . Also on 30 October , Anas Sarwar announced his resignation as deputy leader at a Scottish Labour fundraising dinner in Glasgow , triggering a deputy leadership election . Sarwar said that he disagreed with Lamont 's assessment of UK Labour , and that he was stepping down because he felt that it was " right that we have a concurrent leadership and deputy leadership election . This will allow a Scottish Labour party , its members and affiliates the opportunity to not only elect a leader , but a new leadership team focused on winning in 2016 . " 
 = = Election details = = 
 Anas Sarwar announced details of the timetable for the contest on 26 October 2014 , following a meeting of Scottish Labour 's executive committee . Potential candidates would be invited to declare their interest from the following day , with nominations open from 31 October to 4 November . Balloting would begin on 17 November , and the announcement of the new leader would occur on 13 December . Sarwar said that voting would be held using the three @-@ tier electoral college , in which individual party members , parliamentarians , and affiliated bodies such as trade unions each make up a third of the electorate . Plans to change Scottish Labour 's electoral system to a one @-@ person , one @-@ vote ballot like that of the UK Labour Party were under review at the time of the leadership contest , but as forging ahead with these changes before the election of a new Scottish leader would delay the process , the decision was taken to use the existing method instead . Explaining this decision on the day the contest was announced , Sarwar told BBC News , " We have had unanimous agreement to get the balance right between moving quickly to elect a new leader and also allowing a period of time to have an open , frank and honest debate about the future direction of the Scottish Labour party . " The deputy leadership contest followed the same timetable after Sarwar relinquished that role . 
 After nominations closed on 4 November , the candidates took part in a series of hustings meetings at locations around Scotland . Venues for the events were announced on 13 November , with the first set to take place in Dundee on 20 November . This would be followed by meetings in Glasgow , Dumfries , Edinburgh , Inverness , Aberdeen , and Cumbernauld . In addition , the candidates would also address the Scottish Women 's Conference , the Youth and Student Conference , and the Councillors ' Conference . The candidates also took part in a televised debate on a special edition of BBC Two Scotland 's political programme , Scotland 2014 , on 18 November . Voting closed at midday on 10 December . 
 = = Declarations = = 
 On 28 October , MSP and Shadow Local Government Minister Sarah Boyack became the first person to announce her candidacy for party leader . MSP and Shadow Health Minister Neil Findlay , and then MP and Shadow Secretary of State for International Development Jim Murphy , were the second and third candidates to declare their candidacies , on 29 October . On 1 November , Katy Clark , the MP for North Ayrshire and Arran , became the first person to join the deputy leadership race . Kezia Dugdale , an MSP for Lothian and Labour 's Shadow Education Secretary at Holyrood , announced on 2 November that she would also be a deputy leadership candidate . Each candidate was required to secure ten nominations from among the 80 Scottish Labour members of the House of Commons , Scottish Parliament , and European Parliament . Of those standing in the contest , Murphy received the support of 43 parliamentarians , and Findlay and Boyack secured 12 and 10 nominations , respectively . Dugdale was backed by 51 of her colleagues and Clark had 11 nominations . 
 Several other prominent Labour figures declined to stand . Neil Findlay and Michael Connarty , the MP for Linlithgow and East Falkirk , both urged former Prime Minister Gordon Brown to enter the race , but he declined . Other potential candidates who decided not to run were Sarwar , who wished to concentrate on plans for the next general election , and Baillie , Holyrood 's Shadow Health Secretary , who said she wanted a " supporting role " rather than to be Labour leader . Jenny Marra , Labour 's deputy finance and youth employment spokeswoman , also decided not to stand . Marra was subsequently appointed to lead Murphy 's campaign alongside James Kelly , MSP for Rutherglen . 
 = = Candidates and campaigns = = 
 = = = Leadership = = = 
 = = = = Jim Murphy = = = = 
 Murphy , a former President of the National Union of Students , was first elected to the House of Commons as the MP for Eastwood in the 1997 general election . Having spent nine years at university without graduating , he worked for the Labour Party before becoming an MP . After serving in junior roles in the post @-@ 1997 Labour government , he was appointed as Secretary of State for Scotland in 2008 , where he led a Scottish business mission to Shanghai and played a key role in organising the Scotland leg of Pope Benedict XVI 's visit to the United Kingdom . He took charge of Labour 's Scottish campaign for the 2010 general election , securing a three @-@ percent swing to Labour in Scotland amid a defeat for the party at UK level . He became Shadow Defence Secretary after the election before moving to the post of Shadow International Development Secretary in 2013 . In 2011 , he co @-@ chaired the Murphy – Boyack review into the structure of the Scottish Labour Party , and was a prominent figure in the Better Together campaign during the 2014 referendum , when he toured 100 towns in 100 days to campaign for a No vote . Commentators , such as the BBC 's Aiden James and The Guardian 's Severin Carrell , have described Murphy as being from the Blairite right wing of the party . Murphy launched his leadership campaign in Edinburgh on 1 November , and subsequently stepped down from the role of Shadow International Development Secretary in order to concentrate on his leadership campaign . His bid to lead the party was backed by the Community and <unk> trade unions . He was also endorsed by Neil Kinnock , a former leader of the UK Labour Party , who donated an undisclosed sum of money to his campaign , and by Shadow Scottish Secretary Margaret Curran . 
 Murphy spoke of uniting Scottish Labour and Scotland after the referendum , and said that , if chosen to lead the party , he would stand for election to the Scottish Parliament at the 2016 election , " if not before " . He claimed that a " lack of vision " and a failure to listen to Scottish voters had led to them deserting Labour . He suggested that it was " compulsory " that an MSP should be his deputy , and expressed support for greater devolution for Scotland . Murphy said that Scottish Labour should take greater responsibility in areas such as policy making , fundraising , and campaigning , and that funds paid to UK Labour by Scottish Labour councillors should be used exclusively for Scotland . Murphy also wanted to spend £ 5 @,@ 000 in every Labour @-@ held Scottish constituency at Holyrood and Westminster , as well as seats the party planned to target at future elections , and pledged a " radical change " in Labour 's campaign strategy . He promised to introduce gender equality legislation requiring an equal male / female representation in the Scottish Cabinet and on the boards of Scottish @-@ based companies , and planned to appoint a Cabinet Minister for Women . He announced plans to invite the leaders of Scotland 's other political parties to talks aimed at developing a strategy for the provision of services for the elderly , which were coming under increasing pressure from an aging population . He urged Scottish Labour to support the full devolution of tax @-@ raising powers , stating it was " as important a change for the Scottish Labour Party as the rewriting of Clause Four was for the UK Labour Party " . He further said that he would introduce a 50 percent top income tax rate for earners above £ 150 @,@ 000 and devolve some welfare responsibilities handed to Holyrood by the Smith Commission , such as the Work Programme , to local authorities . On education , he pledged to create a facility to promote good teaching practice , introduce chartered status for teachers , and identify and provide support to secondary schools that were deemed to be failing in order to help improve the education of their students . Unlike his two opponents , Murphy supported the continuation of the UK Trident programme , due for renewal in 2016 . 
 = = = = Sarah Boyack = = = = 
 Boyack , a former planning officer and lecturer who served as chair of Scottish Labour Students and its UK @-@ wide counterpart , Labour Students , was elected as the MSP for Edinburgh Central at the Scottish Parliament 's inaugural election of 1999 . She served in both the Dewar and McLeish governments , where she was Environment Minister and later Transport Minister . When McConnell succeeded McLeish in 2001 , Boyack lost the Transport brief in a cabinet reshuffle and became a backbencher . After subsequently chairing the Parliament 's Environmental and Rural Affairs Committee , she briefly returned to government prior to Labour 's defeat in the 2007 election . She lost her Edinburgh seat in 2011 but was elected as a list MSP for the Lothian region in the same election . As well as co @-@ chairing the Murphy – Boyack review , she served as a member of Labour 's Devolution Commission in 2013 . The Guardian reported that she would stand as a centrist candidate ; Lesley Riddoch of The Scotsman suggested that Boyack had " an instinct for co @-@ operation and consensus building " . Boyack describes herself as a socialist . Her campaign was launched in Edinburgh on 7 November , and supported by the Scottish Co @-@ Operative Party . 
 Boyack said that she would be a " listening leader " who would tackle funding shortfalls in the National Health Service ( NHS ) and local government . She also said that she would publish 100 new ideas aimed at improving lives after meeting people during her campaign . Positioning herself as a unifying candidate who would make the party " fit for purpose " , she called for " bold and radical " new approaches to policy , which would require Labour to be honest about funding crises in local government and health . She pledged that , if elected , she would work with the SNP government when she felt it was in the best interest of Scotland to do so , but said Labour would also be an effective opposition , holding the government to account when necessary . Boyack said that as leader , she would campaign on better funding for healthcare , improvements to childcare , education and youth employment opportunities , and the <unk> of power to local government . She backed the scrapping of the Trident programme . She wanted to reform Council tax , which had been frozen since the SNP came to power in 2007 , and suggested the existing eight tax bands should be redrawn . She would allow local authorities to raise a tourism tax , while environmentally friendly power firms and bus companies would be created to raise public funds . She supported establishing a consensus on whether or not to have full tax devolution , but had " reservations " about the prospect of devolving further taxes to Holyrood . She favoured devolving welfare benefits to Scotland . She told STV 's Stephen Daisley that she wished " to make Scottish Labour a force in Scottish politics again " . After publishing a list of social justice @-@ themed policies , she announced plans to establish a commission similar to the Social Justice Commission created by UK Labour leader John Smith in 1994 , which had helped shape Labour policy in areas such as employment and welfare . 
 = = = = Neil Findlay = = = = 
 Findlay , a former bricklayer and teacher , was elected to Holyrood as a list MSP for Lothian in 2011 , having previously been a councillor in West Lothian . Subsequently appointed as Shadow Health Minister , he was also a member of the Red Paper Collective , a group of politicians who called on Labour to support the full devolution of income tax powers to Scotland . A BBC profile said that Findlay was " widely described as being on the left wing of his party [ and ] happy to describe himself as a socialist " . His campaign was launched on 8 November at the Miners ' Welfare Club in <unk> , West Lothian , his home village , and endorsed by the trade unions ASLEF , CWU , GMB , Musicians ' Union , NUM , RMT , <unk> , <unk> , UNISON , and Unite . 
 Policy options raised by Findlay included increasing the minimum wage , reintroduction of council house building , reduction in the use of the private sector in NHS Scotland , and allowing councils to set their own taxes to help reverse job losses within local government . He described himself as " no machine politician " , and called for a return to the " timeless Labour values of community , solidarity , fairness and justice " . He said that if elected as leader , his 2016 election campaign would focus on tackling youth unemployment , the introduction of a living wage , and improvements to health and social care . He said that he wanted to make the party more " autonomous " by involving its members and trade unions to create a party that was " more collective and co @-@ operative in nature " . He also expressed the desire to establish a public inquiry into the practice of trade union blacklisting . Among his plans for devolution was for Holyrood to have power over employment regulations to enable the creation of a Scottish Health and Safety Executive and the introduction of corporate culpable homicide legislation . On gender equality , Findlay announced plans for legislation to address the gender pay gap , as well as increasing the number of women MSPs and the number of women on " the bodies that take decisions for our country " . He said that he would lobby the UK government to scrap the UK Trident programme if UK Labour leader Ed Miliband became prime minister in the next election and that he wanted to <unk> the railways in Scotland , bring an end to public @-@ private partnerships , and commit the party to full employment . He supported introducing a 50 percent tax band " to tackle poverty and youth unemployment " , but urged caution on tax <unk> to ensure Scotland did not end up " worse off " . He said there would be " no privatisation of the NHS under my leadership " . If elected he promised to " hit the ground running " , and said he would be ready to take on SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon at the next session of First Minister 's Questions . 
 = = = Deputy leadership = = = 
 = = = = Kezia Dugdale = = = = 
 Dugdale , who had joined the Labour Party in 2004 after graduating from the University of Aberdeen , was elected as an MSP for the Lothian region in 2011 and later appointed to the Shadow Cabinet as Shadow Health Minister . She quickly ruled herself out of running for the leadership , but told the Edinburgh Evening News that she would consider entering a deputy leadership contest , describing herself as a " sidekick , not a superhero " . She also spoke of her intention to serve no more than three terms in Parliament . Along with Murphy , she secured the backing of the Community trade union . She was also endorsed by the Scottish Co @-@ Operative Party . 
 Dugdale talked of improving employment , wages , education , and childcare , saying that she stood for " tomorrow 's Scotland – a country free from poverty and injustice , with opportunity for everyone " . Many of the parliamentarians who nominated Dugdale for deputy leader also endorsed Murphy 's leadership bid , but she ruled out standing with Murphy on a joint ticket . She suggested taxing bankers in order to pay for jobs . 
 = = = = Katy Clark = = = = 
 Clark , a former solicitor with UNISON , joined the Labour Party at the age of 17 . She was elected to the House of Commons as the MP for North Ayrshire and Arran in the 2005 general election . The Ardrossan and Saltcoats Herald reported that as a parliamentarian , she developed a reputation as a party rebel who , at the time of the leadership contest , had most recently voted against British participation in the 2014 military intervention against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant . She won the support of UNISON after announcing her intention to enter the deputy leadership contest , and was also backed by the Communication Workers ' Union , Unite , the GMB , and the Musicians ' Union . 
 Clark spoke of a need to recognise " that Scottish politics has changed and it can 't be business as usual . Policy areas she intended to focus on included improvements in employment , housing , and public services , which she said were " prevented for too many by wealth being held in the hands of a minority . " She also spoke of reaching out to people she claimed had " abandoned hope in Labour " or voted for independence , and said that the party needed to " take a new path " because people wanted social and economic change , which previous Labour governments had not delivered . Among the policies she supported were <unk> of the railways , introducing free childcare for children over the age of twelve months , introducing a living wage , and the abolition of both the Trident programme and student tuition fees . She also claimed that Labour in Scotland had " been taken to the political abyss " by " New Labour and its architects " . She claimed that Labour would find it harder to be re @-@ elected unless she was chosen as its deputy leader . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 While Labour distributed ballot packs to its members , the trade unions were responsible for sending out literature relating to the contest to their members , leading to concerns from each side about the content of the other 's election material . After Labour included only the endorsements of parliamentarians in an information booklet sent to individual members , the Unite union wrote to Iain <unk> , the party 's general secretary , to ask why details of support from organisations , such as trade unions , was omitted . Unite said that the decision unfairly favoured Murphy , and the union suggested that it and other unions would make a formal complaint , if necessary . Pat Rafferty , secretary of Unite 's Scottish branch , described the incident as " a gross error of judgment " . On 30 November , Sunday Herald journalist Paul Hutcheon reported that along with voting packs , Unite had also sent its members a " mock ballot paper " instructing them to vote for Findlay and Clark , while the GMB union had also included material endorsing Findlay and Clark as their preferred candidates . Hutcheon quoted an unnamed senior Labour Party source , who described the actions as " absolutely desperate stuff from Unite " . 
 Following a Sunday Herald article in which the Labour MP Tom Watson suggested Murphy 's election would be " disastrous " for the party , he and Ivan Lewis , the Shadow Secretary of State for Northern Ireland , engaged in a heated exchange on Twitter during which Lewis accused Watson of manipulating past UK Labour leadership contests and of wanting to influence the election of the party 's next Scottish leader . Watson , who had resigned as a defence minister in 2006 after suggesting that Tony Blair should step down as Prime Minister , rejected claims that he had sought to manipulate previous Labour leadership contests . 
 On 10 December , David Robertson , the moderator @-@ elect of the Free Church of Scotland , expressed concerns that Murphy had been subject to religious discrimination after Gary Otton , leader of the Scottish Secular Society , posted several threads on Facebook commenting on the leadership candidate 's Roman Catholic faith and his support for denominational schools . The posts described Murphy as a " Catholic fanatic " and a " Pope Benedict fan " . Robertson said that Murphy " should be judged on his political views and abilities , not what church he belongs to " . Otton rejected claims of sectarianism , but said that the Society was concerned that Murphy 's beliefs would " influence his political decisions " . Murphy described the practice of religious intolerance as " stupid " and " sickening " . 
 = = Outcome and aftermath = = 
 = = = Results = = = 
 The result of the election was announced on 13 December 2014 at Glasgow 's Emirates Arena ; Murphy secured an overall majority with 55 @.@ 8 percent of the vote in the first round . His closest rival was Findlay with 35 @.@ 0 percent , while Boyack was third with 9 @.@ 2 percent . Murphy also won majorities in two groups of Labour 's three @-@ tier electoral college system , securing the support of parliamentarians and individual members . Findlay was backed by the majority of party affiliates . In the first round of the deputy leadership race , Dugdale secured 62 @.@ 9 percent of the vote compared to 37 @.@ 1 percent for Clark . Dugdale was also backed by parliamentarians and individual party members , while affiliates gave their majority support to Clark . In his victory speech , Murphy said that his election marked a " fresh start " for Scottish Labour : " Scotland is changing and so too is Scottish Labour . I 'm ambitious for our party because I 'm ambitious for our country " . He also said that he planned to defeat the SNP in 2016 , and that he would use the increased powers being devolved to Holyrood to end poverty and inequality . Urging Labour voters who had backed independence to support his vision for the party , he claimed Labour had " so much more in common with [ those who ] voted ' Yes ' in the referendum than we do with many of the political leaders who campaigned for ' No ' on the 18th of September " . In her speech , Dugdale said that the party 's " focus has to be on the future – a Scottish Labour party that 's fighting fit and fighting for our future " . 
 Murphy was congratulated on his leadership victory by Miliband , who said he would be " standing shoulder to shoulder with Jim in the campaign to get David Cameron out at the general election . " Sturgeon also welcomed his election , and spoke of her hope that they could " find common ground and work together in the best interests of people in Scotland " . Scottish Conservative Party leader Ruth Davidson also congratulated Murphy on his election , but claimed he would " have his hands full " when it came to getting Labour elected , and that it would " take more than a 100 @-@ town tour to persuade people in Scotland to put Ed Miliband in Downing Street . " 
 In what a Scottish Labour spokesman described as a bid to " encourage transparency " , the party took the decision to publish details of how its parliamentarians had voted during the ballot , a process that had previously been kept private . Those results showed that the parliamentarians who chose Murphy as their first candidate included Baillie , Brown , Curran , Dugdale , Gray , Kelly , Marra , and Sarwar . The MSPs Claudia Beamish , Rhoda Grant , and Lewis Macdonald were among those to vote for Boyack , while Findlay was backed by Clark , Ian Davidson , and Lamont . In the deputy leadership contest , Baillie , Boyack , Brown , Connarty , Curran , Gray , Kelly , Marra , Murphy , and Sarwar were among those to vote for Dugdale , while Clark 's first preference voters included Connarty , Ian Davidson , Findlay , and Lamont . Having chosen Findlay and Boyack as first and second preferences , Lamont did not vote for a third , while Sarwar chose only first preferences in both elections . Murphy and Dugdale also chose no alternative preferences , Murphy voting for himself and Dugdale , and she doing likewise . The full results of the leadership contest were as follows : 
 Leadership 
 Deputy leadership 
 = = = Party direction and shadow cabinet appointments = = = 
 Speaking to BBC Radio Five Live following his election , Murphy said that while he disagreed with the " branch office " theory , he would not be consulting London on policy : " [ t ] he days in which anyone needed permission from the Labour Party anywhere else in the United Kingdom to make a decision about what happens in Scotland are gone and they 're gone for good . " On the 14 December edition of BBC One 's Sunday Politics Scotland , he repeated his pledge to seek election to the Scottish Parliament , and said that he was " determined " to retain every Westminster seat held by Labour . The following day , he announced plans to rewrite Scottish Labour 's constitution to give the party greater autonomy over its affairs and bring it " closer to the centre of Scottish life . " On 17 December , Murphy announced that he had been given a Holyrood security pass and would be establishing a presence in the Scottish Parliament Building . 
 On 16 December , Murphy announced the lineup of his Shadow Cabinet , which included posts for the two people who had stood against him in the leadership contest . Findlay was appointed to the Fair Work , Skills and Training portfolio , while Boyack became Shadow Minister for Rural Affairs , Food and Environment . Baillie was handed the post of Shadow Minister for Finance , Constitution and Economy , while Marra took on Health , Wellbeing and Sport . Other appointments to Labour 's frontbench team were Mary Fee ( Infrastructure , Investment and Cities ) , Gray ( Education and Lifelong Learning ) , Ken Macintosh ( Social Justice , Communities and Pensioners ' Rights ) , Hugh Henry ( Justice ) , Claire Baker ( Culture , Europe and External Affairs ) , Kelly ( Parliamentary Business Manager ) , Neil Bibby ( Chief Whip ) , and Graeme Pearson ( Enterprise ) . It was also announced that Dugdale would speak for Labour at First Minister 's Questions . Lamont did not have a place in the new cabinet , but Murphy stated that she had not wanted one : " Johann and I have been in touch with one another ; she has wished me well . I 'm looking forward to getting together with her , but Johann wasn 't looking for a job in today 's reshuffle . I think Johann will be a big part of the Scottish Labour Party for years to come " . 
 = = = 2015 general election and resignation of Murphy = = = 
 Murphy took the party into the 2015 United Kingdom general election , which saw a majority win for the Conservatives , and Labour 's worst @-@ ever election result in Scotland . There was a landslide shift towards the SNP , which took 56 of the 59 Scottish seats at Westminster , while Labour lost 40 of the 41 Westminster seats it was defending . Notable losses included Murphy 's constituency of East Renfrewshire and Brown 's former constituency of Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath , previously Labour 's safest seat in Scotland . Other high @-@ profile figures such as Sarwar , Clark , Curran , Ian Davidson , and Shadow Foreign Secretary Douglas Alexander also lost their seats . Following his defeat , Murphy spoke of his intention to stand for a Holyrood seat in 2016 . However , the result prompted Labour figures and those in the trade union movement to question the future of his leadership . Ian Davidson suggested that it would be difficult for Murphy to remain as Scottish Labour leader without a parliamentary seat and in the wake of such a heavy defeat . Rafferty , and Kevin Lindsay of ASLEF , called for his resignation , while Findlay , and Labour 's local government spokesman Alex Rowley , expressed their concerns about the party 's future under Murphy 's leadership and resigned from his shadow cabinet . 
 After narrowly surviving a vote of no confidence by 17 votes to 14 at a meeting of the party 's Executive Committee in Glasgow on 16 May 2015 , Murphy announced that he would step down as Leader of the Scottish Labour Party in June . Stating that he wanted to have a successor in place by the summer , he confirmed that he would no longer be standing for a seat in the Scottish Parliament . Before relinquishing the leadership role , Murphy drew up proposals for a number of party reforms , including the adoption of a one @-@ member , one @-@ vote ballot for future leadership contests . His resignation took effect on 13 June after his reforms had been provisionally accepted by Labour 's executive committee . A timetable was also set out that would see a new leader elected on 15 August , while Gray was appointed as acting leader . Dugdale and Macintosh stood in the contest to choose Murphy 's successor ; Dugdale was subsequently elected as Scottish Labour 's new leader with a 72 % share of the vote . At the same time Rowley became her deputy . 
 = M @-@ 116 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 116 is a 7 @.@ 018 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 11 @.@ 294 km ) state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan that begins in Ludington at an intersection with US Highway 10 ( US 10 ) at James Street and Ludington Avenue . The road travels northward , much of it along the shore of Lake Michigan before reaching its terminus at the entrance to Ludington State Park . The roadway has been in the state highway system since the late 1920s . It has been realigned a few times , most recently in the late 1990s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 116 begins in Ludington at the intersection of James Street and Ludington Avenue . It is at this intersection where US 10 turns southward and heads to the Ludington – Manitowoc ferry docks . From here , M @-@ 116 continues westward along Ludington Avenue through a mixed commercial area for about one @-@ half mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) before turning north on Lakeshore Drive . The road continues as North Lakeshore Drive through resident areas and passes the Lakeview Cemetery . Before passing the Lincoln Hills Golf Club , M @-@ 116 crosses a narrow section of Lincoln Lake and then curves westward towards the shore of Lake Michigan as it approaches the state park . The route runs along the coast of Lake Michigan for the remainder of its route , through an area of sand dunes , until reaching its northern terminus at the entrance to Ludington State Park . 
 Ludington State Park is bound to the west by Lake Michigan , the north by sand dunes and to the east by Hamlin Lake . As such , M @-@ 116 provides the only road access to the park from the south . The park encompasses 5 @,@ 300 acres ( 2 @,@ 100 ha ) offering biking , hiking , fishing , tubing , boating and ice skating in the winter . The park is also home to the 112 @-@ foot ( 34 m ) tall Big Sable Point Lighthouse , built in 1867 , which is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 The highway is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) , which is responsible for maintaining and constructing transportation infrastructure in the state , including highways . As part of this role , the department periodically conducts surveys on their highways to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2009 , MDOT calculated that 7 @,@ 377 vehicles used the southern section of M @-@ 116 daily near the US 10 junction . On the north end , only 859 vehicles used the roadway near the state park entrance each day . The highway has not been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 In December 2014 , Michigan Governor Rick Snyder authorized a portion of the highway in Ludington State Park between Little River and Big Sable in Mason County to be named " The Paul K. Butterfield II Memorial Highway " , in honor of that Michigan State Police Trooper who was murdered during a traffic stop there in 2013 . The ceremony to do so took place in early February 2015 . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 116 was first designated in May or June 1928 from the north city limit of Ludington north to the Sable River , but not all of it was built and open to traffic . It was extended southerly in 1931 into the city of Ludington to US 10 . There was a new alignment closer to the lakeshore opened in early 1933 . The northern end was extended in late 1935 to encompass the Big Sable River bridge . The last change to the routing was made in 1998 when US 10 was shifted to follow James Street instead of William Street to the car ferry docks . At that time , M @-@ 116 was extended east along Ludington Avenue to end at James Street . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Mason County . 
 = German aircraft carrier Graf Zeppelin = 
 The German aircraft carrier Graf Zeppelin was the lead ship in a class of two carriers of the same name ordered by the Kriegsmarine . She was the only aircraft carrier launched by Germany and represented part of the Kriegsmarine 's attempt to create a well @-@ balanced oceangoing fleet , capable of projecting German naval power far beyond the narrow confines of the Baltic and North Seas . The carrier would have had a complement of 42 fighters and dive bombers . 
 Construction on Graf Zeppelin began on 28 December 1936 , when her keel was laid down at the Deutsche Werke shipyard in Kiel . Named in honor of Graf ( Count ) Ferdinand von Zeppelin , the ship was launched on 8 December 1938 , and was 85 % complete by the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 . Graf Zeppelin was not completed and was never operational due to shifting construction priorities necessitated by the war . She remained in the Baltic for the duration of the war ; with Germany 's defeat imminent , the ship 's custodian crew scuttled her just outside Stettin in March 1945 . The Soviet Union raised the ship in March 1946 , and she was ultimately sunk in weapons tests north of Poland 17 months later . The wreck was discovered by a Polish survey ship in July 2006 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Graf Zeppelin was 262 @.@ 5 meters ( 861 @.@ 2 ft ) long overall ; she had a beam of 36 @.@ 2 m ( 118 @.@ 8 ft ) and a maximum draft of 8 @.@ 5 m ( 27 @.@ 9 ft ) . At full combat load , she would have displaced 33 @,@ 550 long tons ( 34 @,@ 088 @.@ 4 t ) . The ship 's propulsion system consisted of four Brown , Boveri & Cie geared turbines with sixteen oil @-@ fired , ultra @-@ high @-@ pressure <unk> boilers . The power plant was rated at 200 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 149 @,@ 140 @.@ 0 kW ) and a top speed of 33 @.@ 8 knots ( 62 @.@ 6 km / h ; 38 @.@ 9 mph ) . Graf Zeppelin had a projected cruising radius of 8 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 14 @,@ 816 @.@ 0 km ; 9 @,@ 206 @.@ 2 mi ) at a speed of 19 kn ( 35 @.@ 2 km / h ; 21 @.@ 9 mph ) . She would have had a crew of 1760 officers and enlisted men , plus flight crews . 
 The ship 's primary offensive power would have been its aircraft complement . Graf Zeppelin would have carried 42 aircraft as designed : 12 navalized Junkers Ju 87 " Stuka " dive bombers , 10 Messerschmitt Bf 109 fighters , and 20 Fieseler Fi 167 torpedo bombers . Later during the construction process , the aerial complement was reworked to consist of thirty Ju 87s and twelve Bf 109s , and the Fi <unk> were removed altogether . As designed , Graf Zeppelin was to be fitted with eight 15 cm SK C / 28 guns for defense against surface warships . This number was later increased to sixteen . Her anti @-@ aircraft battery consisted of ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK C / 33 guns — later increased to twelve — twenty @-@ two 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 30 guns , and twenty @-@ eight 2 cm guns . The ship 's flight deck was protected with up to 45 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) of Wotan Weich steel armor . A 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick armored deck was located under the deck to protect the ship 's vitals from aerial attacks . Graf Zeppelin had a waterline armor belt that was 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick in the central area of the ship . 
 = = Construction and cancellation = = 
 On 16 November 1935 , the contract for <unk> A ( Aircraft carrier A ) — later christened Graf Zeppelin — was awarded to the Deutsche Werke shipyard in Kiel . Construction of the ship was delayed since Deutsche Werke was working at capacity , and the slipway needed for Graf Zeppelin was occupied by the new battleship Gneisenau , which was launched on 8 December 1936 . Work started on Graf Zeppelin on 28 December , when her keel was laid down . She was launched on 8 December 1938 , the 24th anniversary of the Battle of the Falkland Islands , and she was christened by Helene von Zeppelin , the daughter of the ship 's namesake . At the launching ceremony , Hermann Göring gave a speech . By the end of 1939 , she was 85 % complete , with a projected completion by the middle of 1940 . By September 1939 , one carrier @-@ borne wing , <unk> 186 , had been formed by the Luftwaffe at Kiel Holtenau , composed of three squadrons equipped with Bf 109s and Ju @-@ 87s . 
 Meanwhile , the German conquest of Norway in April 1940 further eroded any chance of completing Graf Zeppelin . Now responsible for defending Norway 's long coastline and numerous port facilities , the Kriegsmarine urgently needed large numbers of coastal guns and anti @-@ aircraft batteries . During a naval conference with Hitler on 28 April 1940 , Admiral Erich Raeder proposed halting all work on Graf Zeppelin , arguing that even if she was commissioned by the end of 1940 , final installation of her guns would need another ten months or more ( her original fire control system had been sold to the Soviet Union under an earlier trade agreement ) . Hitler consented to the stop work order , allowing Raeder to have Graf Zeppelin 's 15 cm guns removed and transferred to Norway . The carrier 's heavy flak armament of twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm guns had already been diverted elsewhere . 
 In July 1940 , Graf Zeppelin was towed from Kiel to Gotenhafen ( Gdynia ) and remained there for nearly a year . While there , she was used as a storage depot for Germany 's hardwood supply . Just before Germany invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941 , the carrier was again moved , this time to Stettin , to safeguard her from Soviet air attacks . By November , the German army had pushed deep enough into Russian territory to remove any further threat of air attack and Graf Zeppelin was returned to Gotenhafen . There , she was used as a store ship for timber . 
 By the time Raeder met with Hitler for a detailed discussion of naval strategy in April 1942 , the usefulness of aircraft carriers in modern naval warfare had been amply demonstrated . British carriers had crippled the Italian fleet at Taranto in November 1940 , critically damaged the German battleship Bismarck in May 1941 and prevented battleship Tirpitz from attacking two convoys bound for Russia in March 1942 . In addition , a Japanese carrier raid on Pearl Harbor had devastated the American battle fleet in December 1941 . Raeder , anxious to secure air protection for the Kriegsmarine 's heavier surface units , informed Hitler that Graf Zeppelin could be finished in about a year , with another six months required for sea trials and flight training . On 13 May 1942 , with Hitler 's authorization , the German Naval Supreme Command ordered work resumed on the carrier . 
 But daunting technical problems remained . Raeder wanted newer planes , specifically designed for carrier use . <unk> Hermann Göring , head of the Luftwaffe , replied that the already overburdened German aircraft industry could not possibly complete the design , testing and mass production of such aircraft before 1946 . Instead , he proposed converting existing aircraft ( again the Junkers Ju 87 and Messerschmitt Bf 109 ) as a temporary solution until newer types could be developed . Training of carrier pilots at Travemünde would also resume . 
 The converted carrier aircraft were heavier versions of their land @-@ based predecessors and this required a host of changes to Graf Zeppelin 's original design : the existing catapults needed modernization ; stronger winches were necessary for the arresting gear ; the flight deck , elevators and hangar floors also required reinforcement . Changes in naval technology dictated other alterations as well : installation of air search radar sets and antennas ; upgraded radio equipment ; an armored fighter director cabin mounted on the main mast ( which in turn meant a heavier , sturdier mast to accommodate the cabin 's added weight ) ; extra armoring for the bridge and fire control center ; a new curved funnel cap to shield the fighter director cabin from smoke ; replacing the single @-@ mount 20mm AA guns with quadruple Flakvierling 38 guns ( with a corresponding increase in ammunition supply ) to improve overall AA defense ; and additional bulges on either side of the hull to preserve the ship 's stability under all this added weight . 
 The German naval staff hoped all these changes could be accomplished by April 1943 , with the carrier 's first sea trials taking place in August that year . Towards that end , Chief Engineer Wilhelm <unk> was reassigned to oversee Graf Zeppelin 's completion . <unk> planned on getting the two inner shafts and their respective propulsion systems operational first , giving the ship an initial speed of 25 – 26 knots , fast enough for sea trials to commence and for conducting air training exercises . By the winter of 1943 – 1944 she was expected to be combat @-@ ready . 
 On the night of 27 – 28 August 1942 , while still moored at Gotenhafen , Graf Zeppelin was the target of the only Allied air attack aimed at her during the war . Three Royal Air Force Avro Lancaster heavy bombers from 106 Squadron were dispatched against the German aircraft carrier , each one carrying a single " Capital Ship " bomb , a 5 @,@ 600 lb ( 2 @,@ 540 kg ) device with a shaped charge warhead intended for armored targets . One pilot , who was unable to see the carrier due to haze , dropped his bomb instead on the estimated position of the German battleship Gneisenau . Another believed he had scored a direct hit on Graf Zeppelin , but there is no known record of the ship suffering any damage from a bomb strike that night . 
 On 5 December 1942 , Graf Zeppelin was towed back to Kiel and placed in a floating drydock . It seemed she might well see completion after all , but by late January 1943 Hitler had become so disenchanted with the Kriegsmarine , especially with what he perceived as the poor performance of its surface fleet , that he ordered all of its larger ships taken out of service and scrapped . Raeder was shortly relieved of command and replaced with the Commander of Submarines Karl Dönitz . Though Admiral Dönitz eventually persuaded Hitler to void most of the order , work on all new surface ships and even those nearing completion was halted , including Graf Zeppelin . On 30 January 1943 , all major work on the ship ceased , though some limited , temporary work continued until March . 
 In April 1943 Graf Zeppelin was again towed eastward , first to Gotenhafen , then to the roadstead at Swinemünde and finally berthed at a back @-@ water wharf in the <unk> River , two miles ( 3 km ) from Stettin , where she had been briefly docked in 1941 . There she languished for the next two years with only a 40 @-@ man custodial crew in attendance . When Red Army forces neared the city in April 1945 , the ship 's Kingston valves were opened , flooding her lower spaces and settling her firmly into the mud in shallow water . A ten @-@ man engineering squad then rigged the vessel 's interior with demolition and depth charges in order to hole the hull and destroy vital machinery . At 6pm on 25 April 1945 , just as the Soviets entered Stettin , commander Wolfgang <unk> radioed the squad to detonate the explosives . Smoke billowing from the carrier 's funnel confirmed the charges had gone off , rendering the ship useless to her new owners for many months to come . 
 = = Fate after the war = = 
 The carrier 's history and fate after Germany 's surrender was unknown outside the Soviet Union for decades after the war . The Soviets could not repair the ship in the length of time specified by the terms of the Allied Tripartite Commission , so she was designated a " Category C " ship . This classification required that she would be destroyed or sunk in deep water by 15 August 1946 . Instead , the Soviets decided to salvage the damaged ship and it was refloated in March 1946 . A number of speculations from Western historians about the ship 's fate arose in the decades after the end of the war . According to German historian Erich Gröner , after the Soviets raised the scuttled ship , they towed her to Leningrad . While en route , she reportedly struck a mine off Finland during a storm . After arriving in Leningrad , Graf Zeppelin was broken up for scrap in 1948 – 1949 . Naval historians Robert Gardiner and Roger Chesneau state that the ship was towed out of Stettin in September 1947 , but she never arrived in Leningrad ; they speculated that a mine sank the ship while she was under tow . 
 According to Soviet records , on 19 March 1947 , the Council of Ministers decreed the destruction of former German ships . The first ship to be sunk , Lützow , was sunk off <unk> on 22 July 1947 . On 14 August Graf Zeppelin was towed into the harbor , and two days later to its final resting place . It was subjected to five series of controlled explosions of 180 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) shells and FAB series bombs . The first test imitated a FAB @-@ 1000 detonation in the exhaust funnel and lesser bombs below the flight deck . The second in the series was a single FAB @-@ 1000 explosion above the flight deck . The third , the fourth and the fifth series imitated penetration of FAB @-@ 100 , FAB @-@ 250 and FAB @-@ 500 bombs at flight deck , hangar deck and gun battery deck levels . These bombs were placed in cutouts in their target decks to imitate the effects of dive bombing . Graf Zeppelin remained afloat , and Admiral Yury Rall ordered a torpedo strike . A torpedo fired from an Elco PT boat exploded in the anti @-@ torpedo bulge but did not penetrate the belt armor . A torpedo fired by the destroyer <unk> penetrated the unprotected hull section below the bow elevator ; Graf Zeppelin sank 25 minutes later . 
 = = = Discovery in 2006 = = = 
 The exact position of the wreck was unknown for decades . On 12 July 2006 , the research vessel RV St. Barbara , a ship belonging to the Polish oil company <unk> , found a 265 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 869 ft ) wreck 55 km ( 34 mi ) north of Władysławowo , which they thought was most likely Graf Zeppelin . The wreck rests at a depth of more than 80 m ( 260 ft ) below the surface . After the wreck was located , the Polish Navy began a two @-@ day survey of the wreckage to confirm its identity . Using remote @-@ controlled underwater robots , they concluded that they were " 99 % certain " it was Graf Zeppelin . 
 = Adam de Stratton = 
 Adam de Stratton ( died 1292 – 94 ) was a royal moneylender , administrator and clergyman under Edward I of England . He advanced professionally through the patronage of the earls of Devon , and became Chamberlain of the Exchequer and steward of Isabella , Countess of Devon . At the same time he made himself an enormous fortune through moneylending , primarily by acquiring debts from Jewish moneylenders . His business methods were dubious , and often involved various illegal activities . In 1290 he fell victim to an investigation of corruption in the royal administration , and from 1292 until his death — no later than 1294 — he was held in prison . Stratton has been called by a modern historian " the greatest and probably the most unscrupulous of thirteenth @-@ century money lenders , who eventually met the fate he deserved . " 
 = = Early career = = 
 Adam Stratton was the son of Thomas de <unk> , or <unk> , of Stratton St Margaret in Wiltshire . Adam himself used the name " de <unk> " until 1264 , when he appears as " de Stratton " ; a change which probably reflects his emergence as a major landowner in that area . Nothing is known of Adam 's early life ; the first mention of him dates from 1256 , when he was a royal clerk at the Exchequer . It is likely that he procured this position from the Redvers earls of Devon , with whom he had a strong connection throughout his career . The earls of Devon were hereditary chamberlains of the Exchequer . Through the Devon patronage he rose quickly through the ranks ; in 1263 he became master of the king 's works at Westminster , and Isabella , Countess of Devon 's deputy as the chamberlain of the Exchequer . In 1276 Countess Isabella enfeoffed him with the <unk> , a position that was accompanied by several manors in Wiltshire . As a clergyman he was also a notorious pluralist , and in 1280 held 23 benefices . 
 The majority of his fortune , however , came from moneylending . Up until their expulsion in 1290 , the major moneylenders in England were Jews , who were not covered by Christian bans on usury . During the reign of Henry III , however , the Jews were taxed at extortionate rates , and many were forced to sell acquired debts at reduced prices . These debts were lucrative , because the buyers were not bound by the existing contract . They could demand higher rates , or sometimes even take forfeit in land . Stratton was one of the greater beneficiaries of the opportunities offered by trading in Jewish debts . From at least 1271 he was also associated with the Riccardi , a major Italian financier family . 
 = = Illegal activities and downfall = = 
 From 1277 , Stratton acted in the capacity as Countess Isabella 's steward , though he never officially used that title . It was in this post that he committed some of his most grievous offences . In 1278 he was accused of cutting off the seal of a charter from Quarr Abbey , thereby invalidating its authenticity . As a result , several other similar cases were brought to light , but none led to conviction . It was widely believed that he had bought himself off with bribes . Stratton 's transgressions continued however , and by the late 1280s the complaints reached King Edward I. Edward returned from a prolonged stay in Gascony in late 1289 , and immediately started a purge of corruption in the royal administration , including proceedings against Ralph de <unk> , Chief Justice of the King 's Bench . Stratton was relieved of his office of chamberlain , along with his temporal possessions , on 17 January 1290 . On his arrest , £ 12 @,@ 666 17s 7d was found in his possession , a vast sum at the time , equivalent to about £ 11 million in present @-@ day terms . According to the chronicle of Bartholomew Cotton , a silk @-@ lined chest was also discovered , containing fingernail and toenail clippings , women 's pubic hair , and feet of toads and moles . These were considered the ingredients of witchcraft , and the box was sealed up by officials , but Stratton managed to break the seal and throw the contents down a latrine . 
 His friends procured a pardon for 500 marks by 12 June 1291 , and Stratton was released . He retained his ecclesiastical rents of £ 1 @,@ 000 , which still made him a wealthy man . Still , the sum was insignificant compared to his previous holdings in land , which Cotton estimated at £ 50 @,@ 000 . His eventual downfall , however , resulted from an ongoing conflict with the Cluniac priory of Bermondsey . Stratton was convicted of forging a grant , and by Midsummer 1292 he was imprisoned in the Tower . By the end of the year he was condemned , and he is referred to as a felon in the years 1292 – 94 . By 14 August 1294 he was dead , though it is not known whether he was executed or died from natural causes . According to F. M. Powicke , " the career of Adam de Stratton deserves our attention as a striking example of the interplay of public and private , local and central , royal and baronial , financial and administrative activities in social life . " 
 = 1996 – 97 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 1996 – 97 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season was the longest on record , with both an unusually early start and unusually late ending . Most activity was from November through February . According to the Météo @-@ France office ( MFR ) at Réunion , there were 21 tropical disturbances , 14 of which intensified into tropical depressions . There were 12 named storms , beginning with Antoinette and proceeding sequentially until Lisette . In addition , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center also warned on storms in the region , which identified five other tropical storms . Five of the storms attained tropical cyclone status , or with 10 – minute maximum sustained winds of at least 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) ; of these , three strengthened further into intense tropical cyclones , with Daniella and Helinda tied for strongest storm of the season . 
 In August , a tropical depression developed in the south @-@ west Indian Ocean for the first time 27 years , and a month later , a rare September tropical disturbance formed . The first named storm , Antoinette , was the first of several to originate in the neighboring Australian basin , or east of 90 ° E ; the subsequent two named storms also formed in the Australian region . In early December , Cyclone Daniella likely developed out of the remnants of previous Tropical Storm Chantelle . After reaching peak 10 – minute winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , Daniella weakened and passed just southwest of Mauritius ; there , the storm left heavy crop damage and indirectly caused three deaths . In early January , Tropical Storm Fabriola was the first in a succession of three storms to move over Madagascar . The next – Cyclone Gretelle – killed 152 people when it struck southeastern Madagascar . Between January and February , Cyclone Pancho @-@ Helinda lasted about 20 days between both the Australian and south @-@ west Indian basins . Also in February , Tropical Storm Josie killed 36 people in western Madagascar after causing severe flooding . The final named storm was Tropical Storm Lisette , which dissipated on March 3 after striking Mozambique , killing three people . Despite the early end to the named storms , there were two additional disturbances , one of which became the first July tropical depression in 25 years . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 During the season , the Météo @-@ France office ( MFR ) based on Réunion island issued warnings in tropical cyclones within the basin , as part of its role as a Regional Specialized Meteorological Center . The agency estimated intensities via the Dvorak technique , which uses images from two satellites by the American National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . On certain days , the satellites had limited coverage in the eastern portion of the region , which limited warning capability . At the time , the MFR issued warnings on tropical cyclones in the Indian Ocean from the coast of Africa to 90 ° E , south of the equator . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center – a joint United States Navy – United States Air Force task force – also issued tropical cyclone warnings for the region . Wind estimates from Météo @-@ France and most other basins throughout the world are sustained over 10 minutes , while estimates from the United States @-@ based Joint Typhoon Warning Center are sustained over 1 minute . 10 minute winds are about 1 @.@ 14 times the amount of 1 minute winds . 
 The MFR named storms from a sequential list provided by the nation of Seychelles , beginning with Antoinette . In addition to the named storms in the year , the list included Maryse , Nelda , <unk> , Phyllis , <unk> , Sheryl , Thelma , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 The season was active , about 50 % above normal , and was the fourth consecutive above @-@ normal season . There was a total of 100 days on which disturbances , depressions , storms , or cyclones were active , compared to the average of 68 . There were 12 named storms , above the normal of 9 . Five intensified into tropical cyclones , also above the normal of 4 . The season was the longest on record , with the first depression in August 1996 and the final depression in July 1997 . Despite the long season , there was minimal activity from March to May , which usually represents about 25 % of total activity . In addition , February was relatively quiet despite being the climatological peak . Majority of the storms developed in the northeast portion of the basin , and the storms took a variety of tracks during their durations . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Antoinette = = = 
 In the middle of October , the intertropical convergence zone ( ITCZ ) was active over the northeast portion of the basin and into the adjacent Australian region , spawning a low pressure area on October 15 northwest of the Cocos Islands . With a large ridge to the south , the system tracked southwestward , crossing into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean as a tropical depression on October 17 . Also on that day , the JTWC began issuing warnings on the system as Tropical Cyclone 4S . On October 18 , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Antoinette after developing a well @-@ defined central dense overcast , and began turning more to the west @-@ southwest . That day , Antoinette strengthened to a peak intensity of just below tropical cyclone status , or with 10 – minute winds just below 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Around that time , the storm developed an eye feature , but that quickly dissipated . Antoinette began weakening steadily on October 20 due to increasing wind shear , and by that time it was moving quickly westward . After the circulation became largely devoid of deep convection , the storm weakened into a tropical depression on October 21 . The next day , Antoinette passed about 200 km ( 120 mi ) north of the northern tip of Madagascar , and dissipated on October 24 in the Mozambique Channel . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Melanie @-@ Bellamine = = = 
 In late October , the ITCZ developed a persistent area of convection west of the Indonesian island of Sumatra . A tropical low formed on October 28 within the Australian region , which initially failed to develop much due to persistent wind shear . The Australian Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) named the system Melanie on October 31 to the north of the Cocos Islands . The newly upgraded storm tracked generally westward due to a ridge to the south , and entered the south @-@ west Indian Ocean on November 1 as a strong tropical storm . At that time , Melanie was renamed Bellamine . After the ridged moved farther away , the storm turned more to the southwest and began quickly intensifying . Early on November 3 , Bellamine attained tropical cyclone status , and the next day reached peak 10 – minute winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) ; this made it an intense tropical cyclone . 
 After reaching peak winds , Bellamine slowed its motion on November 4 while moving between two high pressure areas , and weakened slightly . After another ridge built , the cyclone resumed a steady west @-@ southwest track , although its 10 – minute winds decreased to 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) by November 6 . That day , Bellamine began restrengthening as the eye became increasingly well @-@ defined , 70 km ( 43 mi ) in diameter . On November 7 , the storm re @-@ attained intense tropical cyclone status , as well as its previous peak intensity according to MFR . This was a rare occurrence of an early November storm becoming an intense tropical cyclone on two occasions . Meanwhile , the JTWC estimated peak 1 – minute winds of 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) . A strong approaching trough turned Bellamine to the southeast on November 8 and incurred rapid weakening due to wind shear . After the trough passed the cyclone , Bellamine turned back to the southwest on November 10 as a weakening tropical depression . Two days later , the circulation dissipated without having affected land . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Chantelle = = = 
 Similar to previous storms Antoinette and Bellamine , Tropical Storm Chantelle originated from the ITCZ in the Australian region . On November 23 , the MFR began tracking the system as a tropical disturbance off the west coast of Sumatra . The system fluctuated in intensity while moving westward , entering the south @-@ west Indian as a tropical depression on November 24 . Around that time , the JTWC had begun classifying it as Tropical Cyclone <unk> . On November 26 , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Chantelle , and the convection continued to organize despite the presence of wind shear . That day , the JTWC estimated peak 1 – minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . On November 27 , the MFR estimated peak 10 – minute winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . An approaching trough imparted significant weakening , and Chantelle weakened to tropical depression status 18 hours after it was at peak intensity . A ridge behind the trough steered the weakening system to the northwest , causing Chantelle to reach the low latitude of 5 ° S. Widespread cloudiness made it difficult for MFR to continue tracking the circulation , and the agency issued the final advisory on November 30 northwest of Diego Garcia . The JTWC continued tracking the storm for several more days , and the remnants of Chantelle likely contributed to the formation of the subsequent Tropical Cyclone Daniella . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Daniella = = = 
 After the previous Tropical Storm Chantelle lost its circulation near Diego Garcia on November 30 , residual convection persisted and moved to the southwest due to a large ridge . A new tropical disturbance developed on December 2 after wind shear diminished . Because the remnants took longer than 48 hours to redevelop , the MFR policy at the time was to treat the disturbance as a new system . On December 3 , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Daniella , and an eye began to form the next day , indicative of further strengthening . The MFR upgraded Daniella to tropical cyclone status on December 5 . At 1800 UTC that day , both the MFR and JTWC estimated peak winds ; the former agency estimated 10 – minute winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , making Daniella an intense tropical cyclone , and the JTWC estimated 1 – minute winds of 220 km / h ( 140 mph ) . Around that time , the cyclone turned to the south due to an approaching trough . The eye , previously well @-@ defined and 40 km ( 25 mi ) in diameter at its peak , gradually became less organized due to decreasing water temperatures . Daniella turned more to the southeast on December 8 , bringing it between the islands of Réunion and Mauritius after weakening into a strong tropical storm . A sharp increase in wind shear removed the convection from the circulation on December 9 , weakening Daniella to tropical depression status . Two days later , the circulation dissipated . 
 Late in its duration , Daniella passed within 55 km ( 34 mi ) of Mauritius , producing wind gusts of 154 km / h ( 96 mph ) and about 300 mm ( 12 in ) of rainfall . Port Louis recorded a storm surge of 229 mm ( 9 @.@ 0 in ) during the passage . About half of the island lost power and many lost water service . Daniella also left heavy crop damage , due to the heavy rainfall . All flights were canceled during the storm 's passage . Three were three indirect deaths on Mauritius , including one from a road accident and another due to electrocution . After threatening to directly strike Réunion , the cyclone passed about 110 km ( 68 mi ) northeast of the island . As a result , winds were not as strong as on Mauritius . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Elvina = = = 
 In early December , the ITCZ spawned an area of convection near the boundary between the south @-@ west Indian and Australian regions . On December 8 , the MFR estimated that a disturbance formed just within the Australian region , which entered this basin on December 9 . After the convection developed into a central dense overcast , the system intensified into Tropical Storm Elvina on December 10 . Later that day , the MFR estimated peak 10 – minute winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) . On December 11 , the JTWC estimated peak 1 – minute winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) . By tha time , Elvina had been moving steadily west @-@ southwestward , although the storm slowed on December 12 . A polar trough caused the storm to accelerate to the southwest on December 14 while simultaneously increasing wind shear , causing weakening . On December 16 , Elvina dissipated well to the south of Diego Garcia . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Fabriola = = = 
 Toward the end of December , the ITCZ produced a widespread area of convection to the northeast of Madagascar . A circulation developed on January 2 about 150 km ( 93 mi ) of Tromelin Island , becoming a tropical disturbance . After the convection organized more , the system intensified into Tropical Storm Fabriola on January 3 . Moving southwestward , the storm strengthened somewhat , reaching 10 – minute winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) before making landfall on the Masoala Peninsula in eastern Madagascar . Around that time , the JTWC estimated peak 1 – minute winds of 1 – winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . Fabriola quickly weakened into a tropical depression over land and emerged into the Mozambique Channel on January 5 . Due to proximity to land , the system failed to re @-@ intensify initially despite warm waters . On January 6 , while turning to the south around western Madagascar , Fabriola again attained tropical storm status . The next day , the MFR estimated peak 10 – minute winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) , and after turning to the southeast , Fabriola struck southwestern Madagascar near Morombe late on January 7 . The storm again quickly weakened over land , emerging back into the Indian Ocean on January 8 as a tropical disturbance . After turning more to the south , Fabriola dissipated on January 10 when it was absorbed by a nearby trough . Fabriola spread rainfall across Madagascar , which proved beneficial for crops . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Gretelle = = = 
 The ITCZ spawned a tropical disturbance on January 19 just west of St. Brandon , and within a day intensified into Tropical Storm Gretelle . With a large ridge to the southeast , the storm moved southwestward and gradually intensified , becoming a tropical cyclone on January 22 . Around that time , the storm passed about 300 km ( 190 mi ) northwest of Réunion . Early on January 23 , the MFR estimated peak 10 – minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) , while JTWC estimated 1 – minute winds of 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) the next day . While near peak intensity , Gretelle made landfall on southeastern Madagascar near Farafangana , the first cyclone to hit the region in 41 years . Gretelle rapidly weakened into a tropical depression over land , but gradually re @-@ intensified into a moderate tropical storm in the Mozambique Channel . A trough turned the storm to the southeast on January 28 , and three days later the storm dissipated south @-@ southwest of Madagascar . 
 In Réunion , Gretelle dropped nearly 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) of rainfall in the mountainous center of the island . The cyclone produced wind gusts of over 220 km / h ( 140 mph ) at Farafangana , Madagascar , along with heavy rainfall that washed away the local meteorological station . Flooding up to 16 m ( 52 ft ) was reported in some areas , which washed away several boats and forced residents to hold onto trees to survive . Many houses were damaged or destroyed , leaving 80 @,@ 000 people homeless . The World Food Programme estimated that Gretelle destroyed 7 @,@ 000 tons of rice , 123 @,@ 500 tons of cassava , and 8 @,@ 000 tons of cash crops , mostly to coffee . Overall , about 200 people were killed or left missing in Madagascar , with 152 confirmed fatalities by two weeks after the storm , and damage was estimated at $ 50 million ( 1997 USD ) . Later , the storm caused power outages and knocked over trees in southeastern Mozambique . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Pancho @-@ Helinda = = = 
 The long @-@ lived Cyclone Pancho @-@ Helinda formed on January 18 in the Australian region from the monsoon trough to the north of the Cocos Islands . For several days , the system meandered in several directions before maintaining a southwest trajectory on January 21 . Around that time , the system had intensified into Tropical Cyclone Pancho , reaching 10 – minute winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) before weakening occurred . On January 23 , the cyclone entered the south @-@ west Indian Ocean , at which time Pancho was renamed Helinda . Around that time , the storm was located between two ridges , causing the motion to become nearly stationary , and by January 24 Helinda had re @-@ entered the Australian region . Around that time , the storm began undergoing a large loop to the east of 90 ° E , during which the winds decreased below tropical storm status . The influence of the monsoon trough turned the storm back to the south on January 29 , and a day later a building ridge turned the storm back to the west . On January 31 , Helinda again crossed into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean as an intensifying tropical storm . 
 With warm waters and favorable upper @-@ level conditions , Helinda attained cyclone status on February 1 , and the MFR estimated peak 10 – minute winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . Around the same time , the JTWC estimated peak 1 – minute winds of 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) , slightly below its estimate for the cyclone 's peak winds in the Australian region . Due to a powerful ridge near Île Amsterdam , Helinda turned to the southeast on February 2 , where cooler water temperatures induced weakening . Two days later , strong wind shear contributed to further weakening , and the storm deteriorated to tropical depression status . Turning back to the west , the circulation was declared dissipated by the MFR on February 7 , although the JTWC continued tracking Helinda until February 14 when the system was off the northeast coast of Madagascar . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Iletta = = = 
 On January 23 , the ITCZ spawned an area of convection to the southwest of Diego Garcia , west of Helinda and east of Gretelle . The system quickly developed an organized central dense overcast , but failed to become a tropical cyclone due to the lack of a circulation in the region . Late on January 24 , the system developed into a tropical depression , by which time the Mauritius Meteorological Services had named it Iletta . The depression quickly intensified into a tropical storm , but further development halted on January 25 . Due to a nearby trough , the storm tracked to the southeast . Iletta resumed intensification on January 26 , quickly reaching peak 10 – winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) ; the JTWC meanwhile estimated peak 1 – minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . Subsequently , increased wind shear weakened Iletta , and within 24 hours the storm had decreased from peak intensity to tropical depression status . After the trough passed the storm , Iletta turned to the north under the influence of a ridge to the south , dissipating on January 30 about 305 km ( 190 mi ) east @-@ southeast of where it initially formed . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Josie = = = 
 In late January into early February , the ITCZ produced areas of convection around the northern tip of Madagascar . One such convective system spawned a low pressure area between Tromelin island and Agaléga , which initially was still located within the ITCZ . On February 5 , the system developed into a tropical depression , and failed to intensify further while executing a clockwise loop off northeastern Madagascar . After the convection increased , the depression intensified into a tropical storm on February 8 and was named Josie by the Meteorological Services of Madagascar . Subsequently , the storm moved across northern Madagascar and emerged into the Mozambique Channel on February 9 as a tropical depression , its structure deteriorated . Josie turned to the southwest around western Madagascar , and despite warm waters it initially failed to re @-@ intensify much . On February 11 , Josie re @-@ attained tropical storm status , and subsequently turned to the south due to a broad area of low pressure in the region . The storm quickly intensified once moving far enough away from Madagascar , becoming a tropical cyclone on February 13 and soon after reaching peak 10 – winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) ; in contrast , the JTWC estimated peak 1 – minute winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) . While near peak intensity , the eyewall of Josie passed over Europa Island . An approaching cold front turned the cyclone to the southeast , bringing the storm over cooler waters and causing weakening due to increased wind shear . On February 16 , Josie became extratropical well to the south of Madagascar , and dissipated the next day . 
 In northwestern Madagascar , Josie dropped heavy rainfall and caused widespread flooding . Several towns were isolated , forcing residents to travel by boat . The storm heavily damaged crops in the region , particularly to vanilla . The rains caused rivers to exceed their banks , resulting in flooding up to 3 @.@ 6 m ( 12 ft ) deep . Nationwide , at least 36 people were killed due to Josie , although there were initial reports of 500 people missing . On Europa Island , Josie produced maximum sustained winds of 130 km / h ( 81 mph ) , with gusts to 222 km / h ( 138 mph ) , before blowing the anemometer away . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Karlette = = = 
 An area of convection formed in the northeast portion of the basin , developing into a tropical disturbance on February 14 . Despite the presence of easterly wind shear , the system slowly organized into Tropical Storm Karlette on February 16 . By that time , the storm had a large and disorganized area of convection , which quickly weakened due to an increase in wind shear . Early on February 17 , Karlette weakened to tropical depression status , although later that day re @-@ attained tropical storm status after the shear diminished . The storm had been moving generally to the west @-@ southwest due to a large ridge to the southeast . The storm 's restrengthening was short @-@ lived , as Karlette again weakened to tropical depression status on February 20 , only to re @-@ intensify into a tropical storm for the third time just six hours later . With the convection reorganizing , the storm developed an eye feature , indicative of the restrengthening . Late on February 21 , Karlette passed about 70 km ( 45 mi ) south of Rodrigues , where wind gusts remained below 110 km / h ( 68 mph ) ; also on the island , the storm dropped beneficial rainfall totaling around 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) . Subsequently , Karlette attained peak 10 – minute winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) on February 22 , while the JTWC estimated 1 – minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 km / h ) . Passing well to the southeast of Mauritius , the storm curved more to the south due to an approaching trough , dissipating on February 25 . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Lisette = = = 
 Toward the end of February , the ITCZ spawned a system along the Mozambique coast . With a circulation and warm water temperatures , the system developed into a tropical disturbance on February 24 just offshore northeastern Mozambique . The system slowly organized while drifting southward between two ridges . After an increase in convection , the system intensified into Tropical Storm Lisette on February 28 according to the MFR , although by that time the JTWC had upgraded the storm to the equivalent of tropical cyclone status . A building ridge turned the storm sharply westward . On March 1 , the MFR estimated peak 10 – minute winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) , making Lisette a severe tropical storm with an eye feature in the center . By comparison , the JTWC estimated peak 1 – minute winds of 130 km / h ( 85 mph ) . The storm failed to intensify further , making landfall at peak intensity just north of Beira , Mozambique early on March 2 . Lisette turned to the west @-@ northwest , dissipating over Zimbabwe on March 3 . 
 Lisette dropped heavy rainfall across the region it traversed , causing severe flooding in central and northern Mozambique . Most of the south @-@ central Mozambique was drenched with rainfall totals ranging from 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) to 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) , setting numerous records . Due to the precursor disturbance of Lisette , the Nampula Province in Mozambique was severely flooded by the storm , severely damaging several roads . Along the coast , the storm produced a wave height of about 4 m ( 13 ft ) near Beira . Lisette and its resultant flooding destroyed 17 @,@ 000 houses in Mozambique , affecting 300 @,@ 000 people . Throughout the country , the cyclone killed 87 people . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 In addition to the named storms , the MFR tracked seven tropical disturbances and two tropical depressions throughout the year . Most were short lived , often receiving few warnings . The first two systems developed before Tropical Storm Antoinette in October . 
 For several weeks in early August – the middle of winter in the southern hemisphere – an area of warm water temperatures of over 26 ° C ( 79 ° F ) persisted in the northeast portion of the basin . The region was unaffected by the progression of troughs that would usually decrease the water temperatures . On August 13 , an area of convection persisted east of the Chagos , in association with the near @-@ equatorial trough , later developing a low pressure area and well @-@ defined circulation . On August 16 , the system organized into a tropical disturbance , becoming Tropical Depression A1 the next day ; this made it the first such storm in the month of August since Tropical Depression Aline in August 1969 . Also on August 17 , the JTWC initiated advisories on Tropical Cyclone 2S . The depression moved southward , developing a well @-@ defined central dense overcast , despite the presence of northerly wind shear . On August 18 , an anticyclone turned the depression eastward ; that day , the JTWC estimated peak 1 – minute winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) , and the MFR estimated a peak 10 – minute intensity of 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) . The depression later began to weaken under the influence of an approaching trough , and was dissipating as it crossed into the Australian region on August 19 . The JTWC tracked the circulation for another two days , estimating that the system turned sharply to the west , and the circulation dissipated on August 23 . 
 Less than a month later , another area of convection developed within the near @-@ equatorial trough near the Chagos archipelago , due to persistent warm water temperatures . On September 6 , the MFR classified it as Tropical Disturbance A2 , and the next day , the JTWC initiated advisories on Tropical Cyclone 3S while the storm was over the northeastern portion of the basin . This was a fairly unusual event , as there is only an average of 0 @.@ 4 storms in the month of September across the southern hemisphere . Located along the northern side of a ridge , the storm tracked westward , but failed to intensity beyond 1 – minute winds of 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) due to wind shear . On September 10 , the storm dissipated to the west @-@ southwest of Diego Garcia . 
 On January 3 , the BoM and the JTWC ceased issuing advisories on Tropical Cyclone Phil in the Australian region , which previously moved over Western Australia . The system continued to the west , entering the south @-@ west Indian Ocean on January 5 . On January 8 , the remnants of Phil slowed and turned to the southeast . The next day , the JTWC began reissuing advisories on Phil . The storm meandered and executed a small loop , and in the process reached peak 1 – minute winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) . Phil turned back to the southwest , and the JTWC ceased issuing advisories on January 12 . Four days later , the circulation dissipated . Also in January , the JTWC briefly tracked Tropical Cyclone 18S from the Australian region , which entered the south @-@ west Indian Ocean on January 12 . At that time , the storm had peak 1 – minute winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) , although it quickly weakened and dissipated on January 13 . 
 A tropical disturbance developed in late November , and two disturbances formed in the first few weeks of January . In the duration between when Iletta developed on January 23 and when Tropical Cyclone Josie formed on February 9 , another two tropical disturbances formed , and the final two developed after Lisette originated in late February . The first , Tropical Disturbance M1 , formed on May 11 in the northeastern portion of the basin , and later crossed into the Australian region to intensify into Tropical Cyclone Rhonda . The final disturbance of the season originated from a persistent area of convection near the equator on July 19 , northeast of Diego Garcia . With warm enough water temperatures , the system developed further , becoming Tropical Depression M2 on July 20 , the first July depression since 1971 . That day , the JTWC classified the storm as Tropical Cyclone 01S . As the JTWC considers the tropical cyclone year to begin on July 1 , and the MFR considered it beginning on August 1 at the time , the storm was in different cyclone years in different agencies . Estimates from the Dvorak technique suggested that the system approached tropical storm status on July 21 after a central dense overcast formed , although the MFR only estimated peak 10 – minute winds of 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) . Moving southwestward and later to the west , the depression began weakening due to wind shear on July 23 , and dissipated two days later . At the time , July was within the annual tropical cyclone year , although a change in policy shifted the end of the tropical cyclone year to June 30 , beginning in 2002 . 
 = Spring of Life ( song ) = 
 " Spring of Life " is a song by Japanese girl group Perfume from their fourth studio album Level3 ( 2013 ) . The song was released as the album 's lead single on 11 April 2012 . It was written , composed and produced by Yasutaka Nakata . The song is a dance track , which features instrumentation from synthesizers and keyboards . " Spring of Life " is the group 's first offering after departing from Tokuma Japan Communications and signing with Universal Music Japan . 
 " Spring of Life " received positive reviews from music critics , whom complimented the song 's production and composition . Despite peaking at number two on the Oricon Singles Chart , it became the group 's third single to top the Billboard Japan Hot 100 . An album version of the track was re @-@ composed and re @-@ arranged by Nakata for the parent album . Yusuke Tanaka directed the accompanying music video for the single , which shows Perfume as robots and dancing with fairy lights around them . Perfume have performed the song in a number of live performances throughout Japan . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Japanese producer and Capsule musician Yasutaka Nakata had written , arranged and composed the song . Nakata has collaborated with all of Perfume 's records and songs from 2003 onwards . It was recorded in Tokyo , Japan and was mixed and mastered by Nakata . It is a dance song that fuses musical elements of techno , electronic music and pop music , and incorporates instrumentation from a drum machine , synthesizer and keyboards . This was Nataka 's first single to be produced within the label since Meg 's single " Passport / Paris " in 2010 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Spring of Life " received favorable reviews from most music critics . Writing for Land of Rising , Alex Shenmue favored the “ well @-@ done ” mix of the album version and felt it was a “ clear improvement that you ’ ll hardly come back to the single version after hearing this new mix . ” Patrick St. Michael , writing for The Japan Times , said the composition wasn 't an “ improvement ” but commented that it was " simple , catchy pop . " Selective Hearing 's writer Nia selected " Spring of Life " as an album stand out , favoring the bridge section of the song . Ian Martin , who had written their extended biography at Allmusic , had highlighted the song as an album and career standout . 
 The song only charted in Japan . Reaching number two on the Oricon Singles Chart , it became the group 's sixth consecutive single to stall at number two . The following singles " Spending All My Time " and " Mirai no Museum " peaked at two , while the fourth single " Magic of Love " reached number three . The track peaked at number one on the Japan Hot 100 , making it the group 's third single to reach the top spot and their first since their 2009 single " One Room Disco " . In April 2012 , " Spring of Life " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) in for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units in Japan . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Selected as the lead single of Level3 , the song was distributed digitally at Chaku @-@ Uta on February 29 , 2012 . Two CD singles were issued ; a standalone CD which included the b @-@ side " Communication " and a bonus DVD version . The title track had already been chosen as the CM song for ‘ Kirin Chu @-@ hai <unk> ‘ . The b @-@ side " Communication " was chosen as the CM song for ‘ <unk> Pure Gummy ‘ candy . 
 The official music video was directed by Japanese director Yusuke Tanaka . The video features Perfume as robots , controlled by an automated @-@ computer to perform human @-@ like interactions such as eating , dancing , smiling and crying . Some verses and the choruses feature the group dancing to the song . It ends with member Nocchi pulling the power @-@ plug from member A @-@ chan 's back , shutting down the computer and Perfume . The members stated that they found it interesting to try and imitate the image of themselves as robots and dolls and found the choreography to be the most powerful that they 've done so far . 
 Perfume had included the album version of the track to their Perfume 4th Tour in <unk> : <unk> tour , which features the members in blue dresses . It was featured on the DVD version of the concert and uploaded on their YouTube channel . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Yasutaka Nakata . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Details adapted from the liner notes of the " Spring of Life " CD single . 
 = = = Song credits = = = 
 Ayano Ōmoto ( Nocchi ) – vocals 
 Yuka Kashino ( Kashiyuka ) – vocals 
 Ayaka Nishiwaki ( A @-@ Chan ) – vocals 
 Yasutaka Nakata – producer , composer , arranger , mixing , mastering . 
 = = = Visual credits = = = 
 Yusuke Tanaka – director 
 Takahiko Kajima – video producer 
 Kazunali Tajima – camera 
 Mikiko – choreographer 
 = = Charts , peaks and positions = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Italian ironclad Andrea Doria = 
 Andrea Doria was an ironclad battleship built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1880s and 1890s . Named for the 16th @-@ century Genoese admiral Andrea Doria , she was the third and final ship of the Ruggiero di Lauria class . The ship was armed with a main battery of four 17 @-@ inch ( 432 mm ) guns , was protected with 17 @.@ 75 @-@ inch ( 451 mm ) thick belt armor , and was capable of a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . 
 The ship 's construction period was very lengthy , beginning in August 1881 and completing in February 1888 . She was quickly rendered obsolescent by the new pre @-@ dreadnought battleships being laid down , and as a result , her career was limited . She spent her career alternating between the Active and Reserve Squadrons , where she took part in training exercises each year with the rest of the fleet . Andrea Doria was stricken from the naval register in 1911 and used as a depot ship until Italy entered World War I in 1915 . The ship was renamed GR 104 and employed as a guard ship in Brindisi . She was converted into a floating oil tank after the war and was eventually broken up for scrap in 1929 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Andrea Doria was 105 @.@ 9 meters ( 347 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 19 @.@ 84 m ( 65 @.@ 1 ft ) and an average draft of 8 @.@ 29 m ( 27 @.@ 2 ft ) . She displaced 9 @,@ 886 metric tons ( 9 @,@ 730 long tons ) normally and up to 11 @,@ 027 t ( 10 @,@ 853 long tons ) at full load . Her propulsion system consisted of a pair of compound steam engines each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by eight coal @-@ fired , cylindrical fire @-@ tube boilers . Her engines produced a top speed of 16 @.@ 1 knots ( 29 @.@ 8 km / h ; 18 @.@ 5 mph ) at 10 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 800 kW ) . She could steam for 2 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 200 km ; 3 @,@ 200 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 507 – 509 officers and men . 
 Andrea Doria was armed with a main battery of four 17 in ( 432 mm ) 27 @-@ caliber guns , mounted in two pairs en echelon in a central barbette . She carried a secondary battery of two 6 in ( 152 mm ) 32 @-@ cal. guns , one at the bow and the other at the stern , and four 4 @.@ 7 in ( 119 mm ) 32 @-@ cal. guns . As was customary for capital ships of the period , she carried five 14 in ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes submerged in the hull . She was protected by steel armor ; her armored belt was 17 @.@ 75 in ( 451 mm ) thick , and her armored deck was 3 in ( 76 mm ) thick . Her conning tower was armored with 9 @.@ 8 in ( 249 mm ) of steel plate , and the barbette had 14 @.@ 2 in ( 361 mm ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Andrea Doria was under construction for nine @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years . She was laid down at La Spezia Navy Yard on 7 January 1882 and launched on 21 November 1885 . She was not completed for another five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years , her construction finally being finished on 16 May 1891 . Because of the rapid pace of naval technological development in the late 19th century , her lengthy construction period meant that she was an obsolete design by the time she entered service . The British Royal Navy had begun building the Royal Sovereign class , the first pre @-@ dreadnought battleships , two years before Andrea Doria entered service ; these ships marked a significant step forward in capital ship design . In addition , technological progress , particularly in armor production techniques — first Harvey armor and then Krupp armor — rapidly rendered older vessels like Andrea Doria obsolete . 
 Andrea Doria served with the 2nd Division of the Active Squadron during the 1893 fleet maneuvers , along with the ironclad Italia , which served as the divisional flagship , the torpedo cruiser Iride , and four torpedo boats . During the maneuvers , which lasted from 6 August to 5 September , the ships of the Active Squadron simulated a French attack on the Italian fleet . Andrea Doria joined the ironclads Ruggiero di Lauria , Re Umberto , and Sardegna and the cruisers Stromboli , Etruria , and Partenope for a visit to Spithead in the United Kingdom in July 1895 . Later that year , the squadron stopped in Germany for the celebration held to mark the opening of the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal . 
 In 1896 , Andrea Doria served in the 2nd Division for the summer maneuvers , held in July . The Division also included her sister Francesco Morosini and the protected cruiser Giovanni Bausan . The 1st and 2nd Divisions of the Active Squadron were tasked with defending against a hostile fleet , simulated by older ships in reserve . In 1899 , Andrea Doria , Ruggiero di Lauria , Sicilia , and Sardegna took part in a naval review in Cagliari for the Italian King Umberto I , which included a French and British squadron as well . That year , Andrea Doria and her two sisters served in the Active Squadron , which was kept in service for eight months of the year , with the remainder spent with reduced crews . The Squadron also included the ironclads Re Umberto , Sicilia , and Lepanto . In 1900 , Andrea Doria and her sisters were significantly modified and received a large number of small guns for defense against torpedo boats . These included a pair of 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns , ten 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 40 @-@ caliber guns , twelve 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns , five 37 mm revolver cannon , and two machine guns . 
 In 1905 , Ruggiero di Lauria and her two sisters were joined in the Reserve Squadron by the three Re Umberto @-@ class ironclads and Enrico Dandolo , three cruisers , and sixteen torpedo boats . This squadron only entered active service for two months of the year for training maneuvers , and the rest of the year was spent with reduced crews . By 1908 , the Italian Navy began to discard its ironclad battleships , including Andrea Doria 's two sister ships in 1909 . She lingered on in active service only briefly , before she too was stricken on 15 January 1911 . She was thereafter used as a depot ship in Taranto . Shortly before Italy entered World War I on the side of the Triple Entente , Andrea Doria was renamed GR 104 — a new dreadnought battleship of the same name had just been completed — and was transferred to Brindisi , where she served as a guard ship . Following the end of the war , she was converted into a floating oil tank ; she served in this capacity until 1929 , when she was broken up for scrap . 
 = Pokémon Gold and Silver = 
 Pokémon Gold Version and Silver Version ( ポケットモンスター 金 ・ <unk> , Poketto Monsutā Kin Gin , " Pocket Monsters : Gold & Silver " ) are the second installments of the Pokémon series of role @-@ playing video games , developed by Game Freak and published by Nintendo for the Game Boy Color . They were released in Japan in 1999 , Australia and North America in 2000 , and Europe in 2001 . Pokémon Crystal , a special edition , was released roughly a year later in each region . In 2009 , Nintendo remade Gold and Silver for the Nintendo DS as Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver . 
 The games introduce 100 new species of Pokémon , and follow the progress of the central character , whose name the player may choose , in his quest to master Pokémon battling . Both games are independent of each other but feature largely the same plot and , while both can be played separately , it is necessary to trade between them and their backward compatible predecessors in order to fully complete the games ' <unk> . The Johto Saga of the Pokémon anime is based on the new region introduced in the games . 
 Pokémon Gold and Silver were critically acclaimed upon release and they are considered by many to be the best games in the entire series , as well as some of the fifth generation console gaming 's most significant titles . They continued the enormous success of their predecessors as Pokémon began to form into a multi @-@ billion dollar franchise . The games almost matched the sales of Pokémon Red and Blue and went on to jointly sell millions of copies worldwide . By 2010 , the recorded sales of Gold and Silver were at 23 million units . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like Pokémon Red , Blue and Yellow , Pokémon Gold and Silver are played from a top @-@ down perspective , or third @-@ person , with players directly navigating the protagonist around the fictional universe , interacting with objects and people . As the player explores this world he or she will encounter different terrains , such as grassy fields , forests , caves , and seas in which different Pokémon species reside . As the player randomly encounters one of these creatures , the field switches to a turn @-@ based " battle scene " , where the Pokémon will fight . 
 There are two main goals within the games : following through the main storyline and defeating the Elite Four and Lance to become the new Champion , and completing the Pokédex by capturing , evolving , and trading to obtain all 251 creatures . A major aspect of this is developing and raising the player 's Pokémon by battling other Pokémon , which can be found in the wild or owned by other Trainers . This system of accumulating experience points ( EXP ) and leveling up , characteristic and integral to all Pokémon video games , controls the physical properties of the Pokémon , such as the battle statistics acquired , and the moves learned . 
 = = = New features = = = 
 While Pokémon Gold and Silver retain the basic mechanics of capturing , battling , and evolving introduced in Pokémon Red and Blue , new features were added . A time system was introduced using a real @-@ time internal clock that keeps track of the current time and day of the week . Certain events , including Pokémon appearances , are influenced by this feature . New items were added , with some designed to exploit a new mechanic : Pokémon being able to hold items . A new type of item able to be held was the berry , which comes in varieties and can restore health or cure status effects . Other held items can give boosts to the Pokémon during battle . More specialized Poké Balls were introduced , which make Pokémon catching easier in certain situations . A new item called the <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) was introduced , functioning as a watch , map , radio , and phone , allowing the player to call other characters who offer their phone number . Trainers will call for a rematch and others will call about rare Pokémon that can be caught in a certain area . 
 The games introduce Raikou , Entei , and Suicune , a new type of legendary Pokémon that wander around Johto , changing locations frequently . They can be tracked by the Pokédex once encountered , and will always attempt to flee , but will retain HP loss . In addition there is the possibility of encountering a shiny Pokémon , which have a different coloration than normal Pokémon of their species , and appear very rarely . Two new Pokémon types were added , the Steel @-@ type and the Dark @-@ type . Steel @-@ type Pokémon have very high defense and resistance to other types , while Dark @-@ type Pokémon are immune to Psychic @-@ type moves and are strong against Psychic @-@ type Pokémon , as well as having few weaknesses . In Gold and Silver , new moves were added , but Pokémon knowing these moves are not allowed to be traded to the first generation games . To solve this , a move <unk> was introduced , capable of erasing moves known by the Pokémon . Another major change was the splitting of the Special stat into Special Attack and Special Defense , which increased aspects of strategy . 
 With the introduction of Pokémon breeding , Pokémon are assigned to one or two breeding groups . When a male and female Pokémon that share at least one breeding group are left at a Pokémon Daycare , they may produce an egg , which will hatch into a young Pokémon . The young Pokémon will inherit the species of its mother , and moves from its father . However , legendary Pokémon , among certain other species , cannot breed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Pokémon Gold and Silver are set in the region of Johto , situated to the west of the Kanto region from the previous Red and Blue games , and three years after the conclusion of the previous games . The design of Johto was inspired by Japan 's Kansai and Tōkai regions , with many of the region 's temples and more traditional Japanese aesthetics finding their way into Johto . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 As with the previous games , the player character ( only a boy in Gold and Silver , the option to play as a girl player character was added in Crystal ) receives his first Pokémon , a choice between Chikorita , Cyndaquil , and <unk> , from the region 's local Pokémon scientist Professor Elm and then begins his journey to win the eight Gym Badges of the Johto region and then challenge the Elite Four and Champion to become the region 's new Pokémon Master . Opposing them is their mysterious rival , a boy who stole one of the other Pokémon from Professor Elm and regularly challenges the player to test his strengths . The player also encounters the villainous Team Rocket , having reunited to seek out their previous leader Giovanni to return the group to their former glory . After the player defeats Team Rocket once and for all and defeats the Elite Four and Champion of the Pokémon League on Indigo Plateau , the player can then travel to the Kanto region from the previous games and challenge the Gym Leaders there , discovering how much has changed in the three years following the events of Red and Blue . After defeating the Kanto region 's Gym Leaders , the player is allowed to enter the treacherous Mt . Silver area , home to very powerful Pokémon , and deep within Mt . Silver 's caves is hidden Red , the protagonist of Red and Blue , who the player can challenge for the most difficult battle in the game . 
 = = Development = = 
 Gold and Silver were first publicly showcased at the 1997 Nintendo SpaceWorld Expo in Japan , becoming the most popular exhibit at the program . Unlike the previous game in the series , Pokémon Yellow , the new titles were announced to be more than a small upgrade to Pokémon Red and Blue . Instead , they would feature a new storyline , a new world , and new species of Pokémon . Gold and Silver were designed for the Game Boy Color , allowing them full color support and more detailed sprites . Other additions that were shown included Pokémon breeding , held items , an in @-@ game gadget known as the <unk> , a real @-@ time internal clock , and backward compatibility with the previous games in the series . 
 During an ABC News interview , president of Creatures Inc . Tsunekazu Ishihara gave insight into the brainstorming process for developing new Pokémon species . He explained , " The ideas for each of these monsters came from the imagination of the software developers at Game Freak who get these ideas from their childhood experiences , including from reading Manga , the name for Japanese comic books . Ideas come from scary experiences they had as kids , catching insects , and so forth . So from these experiences in childhood , these ideas for Pokemon came out " . In the same vein as the Pokémon Mew of the Red and Blue versions , the exclusive Pokémon Celebi was implemented in the Gold and Silver games but is only accessible after attending a Nintendo promotional event . The first official event offering Celebi was Nintendo Space World 2000 in Japan , in which 100 @,@ 000 attendees would be awarded the rare Pokémon . In order to be selected , players had to send in a postcard to enter a lottery for one of 100 @,@ 000 certificates of Celebi , allowing them to enter the event and obtain it . 
 In an interview with Nintendo president Satoru Iwata , Ishihara stated that Gold and Silver started development right after Pokémon Red and Green were released in Japan . The original intention was to release the game in 1998 , even synchronizing with the supposed end of the anime 's first season . Development issues , worsened by Game Freak being sidetracked with Pokémon Stadium and the localization of the first generation , led the game to be postponed , and the original release slate was taken over by Pokémon Yellow . Programmer Shigeki Morimoto stated that part of why development took three and a half years was due to being a small team of only four programmers , " We were very greedy in terms of all the features we wanted to include in the games " . Ishihara declared that Gold and Silver were supposed to be the last in the series – " I didn ’ t intend to make any more Pokémon titles . I even thought that once we entered the twenty @-@ first century , it would be time for me to do something else entirely " – and most of the licensed merchandising , including the Pokémon Trading Card Game , were to " ensure Gold and Silver were successful " . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Junichi Masuda composed his music on an Amiga computer , presumably in a Music tracker format , converted to MIDI data and converted again to the Gameboy . 
 = = Release = = 
 The games were announced for release in Japan in November 1999 and at the same time a U.S. release date was estimated for September 2000 . Nintendo announced the release of the Pocket Pikachu Color , a full @-@ color portable digital pet similar to the one released the year before . The unit was made compatible with Gold and Silver , allowing the transfer of in @-@ game currency known as " watt points " . Pocket Pikachu Color was slated for release in Japan on November 21 , 1999 , the same day as the release of Gold and Silver . In addition , an officially @-@ licensed Pikachu @-@ themed Game Link Cable developed by Kemco was set for release in Japan on November 18 , 1999 . The product functions like a normal Game Link Cable and consists of a yellow cable with a figure of Pikachu on one end , and a Poké Ball on the other . 
 Anticipating high sales , Nintendo set its first production shipment for the games in Japan at three million , predicting that eventually more than eight million copies would be sold in the country alone . However , they were soon forced to cut the first shipment number in half following an earthquake in Taiwan , which Nintendo claimed had damaged their cartridge manufacturing facilities . Regardless , speculation arose that Nintendo was instead using the event as an excuse to limit shipment and keep the demand high . 
 As a precursor to the North American release , Gold and Silver were displayed for audiences to interact with at the 2000 American International Toy Fair in New York City . To further promote the games , Nintendo modified five Chrysler PT Cruisers to resemble the new Pokémon Lugia and had them driven around the U.S.A. The vehicles had fins and tails attached to them and were painted with logos and images of the Pokémon franchise . In addition , they were equipped with a television set hooked up to game consoles which allowed spectators to play Pokémon Puzzle League , Hey You , Pikachu ! , and Pokémon Gold and Silver . The television series Pokémon GS , based on the games , was announced to be a part of the fall lineup on Kids ' WB . The show would feature the same protagonist Ash Ketchum in a new region with different Pokémon species from the games . The Americanized names of the 100 new Pokémon were kept confidential by Nintendo , with the company releasing names periodically . The domain names ' <unk> ' and ' <unk> ' were registered for this very purpose , and such names released included Chikorita , Lugia , Ho @-@ Oh , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 In May 2000 Nintendo announced the official North American release date of Gold and Silver to be on October 16 of that year . Nintendo started accepting pre @-@ orders for the games in August , and announced that consumers who pre @-@ ordered one of the games would receive a free CD @-@ ROM with a Pokémon @-@ themed web browser developed by <unk> which featured floating Pokémon species and links to Pokémon sites . The application was available for download on the official Pokémon website . The games broke record sales as approximately 600 @,@ 000 copies of them were pre @-@ ordered in just two months , compared to Pokémon Yellow 's number of 150 @,@ 000 . As the release date neared , retailers such as Electronics Boutique reported receiving shipments of games earlier than October 16 , and opted to sell them immediately ; first giving them to pre @-@ orderers and then selling the leftover copies . The games were obtainable as early as October 11 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Pokémon Gold and Silver continued the enormous success of its predecessors , beginning the formation of Pokémon into a multi @-@ billion dollar franchise . As of April 2000 roughly 6 @.@ 5 million copies of the games had been sold in Japan . Silver proved to be the slightly more popular version , edging out Gold by approximately 100 @,@ 000 copies . By the first week of their release in the U.S.A. the games had eclipsed Pokémon Yellow 's previous record sales of a little over 600 @,@ 000 copies ; selling a combined total of 1 @.@ 4 million copies to become the fastest selling games ever . The commercial success was expected , as Peter Main , the executive vice president of sales and marketing , stated " There 's no question about it ; kids love to play Pokemon . [ sic ] So far in 2000 the best @-@ selling game in America for any home console is Pokemon Stadium for Nintendo 64 , and the best @-@ selling game for any handheld video game system is Pokemon [ sic ] Yellow for Game Boy Color , but Pokemon [ sic ] Gold and Silver will eclipse even those impressive sales totals . We project sales of 10 million units total of these two games in less than six months time " . By 2010 , the recorded sales of Gold and Silver were at 23 million units sold . 
 Reviews from critics were mostly strong , with many saying that the extended length of gameplay and the new features were valued additions that kept the sequels as interesting as the original games . Craig Harris of IGN gave the games a " masterful " 10 out of 10 rating , stating that : " As awesome as the original Pokémon edition was , Pokémon Gold and Silver blow it away in gameplay elements , features , and goodies . There are so many little additions to the design it 's impossible to list them all " . There was particular praise given to the innovative internal clock feature , with Frank <unk> of GameSpot , noting : " The first major addition to Pokémon GS is the presence of a time element ... Although it may sound like a gimmick , the addition of a clock adds quite a bit of variety to the game " . <unk> went on to give the games a " great " 8 @.@ 8 rating . Nintendo Power listed the Gold and Silver versions of it combined as the sixth best Game Boy / Game Boy Color video game , praising it for its new Pokémon , features , and full @-@ color graphics . 
 Overall , Gold and Silver were stated to be solid gaming additions that would please a large audience . " After playing the game dozens of hours , I really can 't think of a bad point to make about Pokémon Gold and Silver . Nintendo and Game Freak have tweaked the original and built a sequel that 's long , challenging and tremendous fun to play . There 's a reason why Pokémon is so popular , and Pokémon Gold and Silver is going to help the series move further into the 21st century " , said Harris . 
 = = Sequels and remakes = = 
 = = = Pokémon Crystal = = = 
 Pokémon Crystal Version ( ポケットモンスター <unk> , Poketto Monsutā Kurisutaru <unk> , " Pocket Monsters : Crystal Version " ) , for the Game Boy Color , is the seventh game in the Pokémon video game series in Japan , and the sixth in North America and Europe . The game is an updated version of the previous two versions , Pokémon Gold and Silver , and was released in Japan on December 14 , 2000 . It was released in North America on July 29 , 2001 and in Europe on November 2 , 2001 . Unlike its predecessors , it was developed specifically for the Game Boy Color , and is thus not compatible with the original Game Boy , its variants , and the Super Game Boy . 
 The plot and gameplay of Pokémon Crystal is largely the same as in Gold and Silver , although it holds new features . It is the first game to allow players to choose the sex of their character , while previously the character was always male . Pokémon have animated sprites ; for example , when a Cyndaquil enters battle , the flames on its back flicker . This feature was absent in Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire and Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen , but has appeared in all subsequent games . In addition , a couple of subplots were added , one involving the legendary Pokémon Suicune , featured on the front cover of the game , and the other involving the <unk> . The game 's biggest addition was the Battle Tower , a new building which allows players to participate in Pokémon Stadium @-@ like fights . The Japanese edition of the game was exclusively bundled with the Mobile Adapter GB ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> Jī Bī ) , a device that allowed for connecting with other players via mobile phone . 
 Pokémon Crystal was received very well by critics , obtaining an aggregate score of 80 % on Game Rankings , although many commented that there were just not enough new additions and features to significantly set it apart from Pokémon Gold and Silver . Craig Harris of IGN gave the game an " outstanding " 9 out of 10 stating , " The final ( hopefully ) Game Boy Color edition is definitely the version to get if you aren 't already one of the <unk> [ sic ] billion owners of the previous games , with Crystal 's slight updates to the design and graphics . But there 's not much in this edition that makes it a " must buy " for folks who already own a copy or two of the previous editions " . In Japan , Famitsu magazine scored the game a 34 out of 40 . 
 = = = Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver = = = 
 Pokémon HeartGold Version and SoulSilver Version ( ポケットモンスター ハートゴールド ・ ソウルシルバー , Poketto Monsutā Hātogōrudo Sōrushirubā , " Pocket Monsters : HeartGold & SoulSilver ) are enhanced remakes of Pokémon Gold and Silver . The games are part of the Pokémon series of role @-@ playing video games , and were developed by Game Freak and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo DS . First released in Japan on September 12 , 2009 , the games were later released to North America , Australia , and Europe during March 2010 . 
 Game director Shigeki Morimoto aimed to respect the feelings of those who played the previous games , while also ensuring that it felt like a new game to those that were introduced to the series in more recent years . Reception to the games was highly positive , the two being amongst the highest rated DS games of all time on Metacritic . Commercially , the two are among the best @-@ selling Nintendo DS games of all time , with combined sales of 10 million units as of July 29 , 2010 . 
 = Hurricane Virgil ( 1992 ) = 
 Hurricane Virgil was a late season hurricane of the 1992 Pacific hurricane season that struck southwestern Mexico in October 1992 . Forming from a tropical wave that left Africa on September 13 , it slowly developed into a tropical depression . It soon strengthened into Tropical Storm Virgil , and rapidly intensified into a hurricane on October 2 . Continuing to intensify , the hurricane attained major hurricane strength , and peaked as a Category 4 hurricane off the coast of Mexico . Shortly before landfall , it weakened to a Category 2 hurricane , and it dissipated on October 5 . Damage was generally minimal , though one person was reported missing . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Virgil originated from a tropical wave that moved off the coast of Africa on September 13 , 1992 , beginning a westward course through the Atlantic and Caribbean without much development , although there was an increase convection near the Lesser Antilles on the September 20 . However , this was disorganized and suppressed by an upper @-@ level trough during the wave 's passage through the Caribbean Sea . The wave crossed over Panama on September 25 , and convection began to increase when it reached the Eastern Pacific , although it was initially disorganized . The system later became better organized , and on October 1 , the wave organized into a tropical depression . Shortly thereafter , it was upgraded to a tropical storm and was named Virgil . 
 Upon becoming a tropical storm , the system was expect to move near the coast of Mexico , and forecasters noted that there was some potential for a landfall . The system became a little better organized and over warm water and low wind shear Virgil steadily intensified . Virgil was upgraded to a hurricane the next day ; an eye formed an hour later . During the period of strengthening , Virgil turned more towards the north . Continued strengthening occurred , and it attained major hurricane status on September 2 . At this time , the system was anticipated to make landfall in Mexico as a Category 4 hurricane . The storm had maximum winds of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) , but shortly thereafter the storm began to weaken . 
 By 0900 UTC October 2 , the eye started to become less defined . Based on this , the storm was downgraded into a category 3 hurricane . Although an eye was no longer visible on satellite imagery , the storms had displayed very deep convection , thus the NHC initially maintained the intensity at 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . Virgil 's eye continued to become less defined , and was downgraded to Category 2 intensity at the time of landfall on October 4 . It rapidly weakened over land , and was a dissipating tropical depression by the time it moved offshore . 
 = = Preparations and Impact = = 
 Prior to the arrival of the hurricane , several watches and warnings were issued . During the afternoon of October 2 , a hurricane watch was first issued for areas west of <unk> . The next day , the watch was upgraded into a hurricane warning . Fifteen hours later the area east of <unk> , a tropical storm warning was issued . The watches were gradually dropped over the next few days , and by October 4 . The NHC warned the possibility of mudslides and landslides and 15 in ( 380 mm ) of rain in the high terrain of Mexico . 
 Due to the sparsely populated area it struck , only minor damage was reported . Heavy rain and flooding were reported , peaking at over 10 inches ( 25 cm ) in one location . One person was reported missing in the state of Colima , and three people were injured in Guerrero . More than 1 @,@ 000 homes were damaged in Guerrero , Michoacán , and Colima , as was 7 @,@ 400 acres ( 30 km ² ) of farmland . A flood on the Atoyac River washed away 500 homes in Guerrero , which prompted the evacuation of 2 @,@ 500 people . A passenger train north of Lázaro Cárdenas , Michoacán , was derailed when it encountered washed @-@ out roadbeds . The storm also caused power outages . 
 = JC 's Girls = 
 JC 's Girls ( short for Jesus Christ 's Girls , also called the JC 's Girls Girls Girls Ministry ) is an Evangelical Christian women 's organization in the United States whose members evangelize to female workers in the sex industry . The organization supports women wishing to leave the industry , but does not try to persuade them to do so . The group does not focus upon conversion but rather on communicating its message that Christians exist who are not judging female sex workers and are willing to accept them . The organization also helps both women and men seeking to overcome pornography addiction . 
 The organization was founded by Heather Veitch , who worked as a stripper for four years before becoming a Christian and leaving the sex industry in 1999 . She founded JC 's Girls on Good Friday in March 2005 ; it was based at Sandals Church in Riverside , California , with the support of the California Southern Baptist Convention . In January 2006 , JC 's Girls went to Las Vegas to operate a booth at the AVN Adult Entertainment Expo that received much traffic and news coverage . By 2008 , Veitch had moved to Las Vegas and based the organization at Central Christian Church in nearby Henderson , Nevada . Former stripper and call girl Theresa Scher and social worker Sheri Brown founded the San Diego chapter of JC 's Girls at The Rock Church in 2007 . Veitch , Scher , and Brown resigned from JC 's Girls in 2011 , 2012 , and 2014 respectively , leaving the leadership of the organization to Laura Bonde . As of 2014 , the sole chapter of JC 's Girls is in San Diego . 
 Terry Barone , spokesman of the California Southern Baptist Convention , said that JC 's Girls members " are doing what Jesus did ... He ministered to prostitutes and tax collectors . " JC 's Girls members have been criticized for dressing like sex workers , a look that Veitch said is intended to help women in the sex industry identify with the group . A Baptist minister from San Bernardino , California criticized JC 's Girls for not explicitly encouraging women in the sex industry to quit , and quoted Matthew 6 : 24 , a Bible verse that states that a person cannot serve two masters . In response to the idea that strippers should quit their jobs before attending a church , Veitch said , " Do we ask gluttons to stop eating too much before they come to church ? " Philip Sherwell of the Calgary Herald called the evangelism of JC 's Girls " America 's most unusual Christian outreach operation " . 
 = = Ideology = = 
 JC 's Girls , also called the JC 's Girls Girls Girls Ministry , is an Evangelical organization that calls itself " a biblically @-@ based Christian ministry " . JC 's Girls is less focused on seeking conversions than on communicating the message to women in the sex industry that Christians exist who are willing to non @-@ <unk> accept them . Initially , the organization focused on evangelizing to strippers and erotic dancers , but later began to engage with women in other areas of the sex industry , such as softcore pornographic models and call girls . The organization also diversified to support people with pornography addiction . Members of the organization evangelize at adult entertainment conventions and strip clubs . 
 Out of a belief that many women in the sex industry have been spiritually abused by Christians trying to frighten them out of the sex industry with warnings of damnation , JC 's Girls focuses on telling these women that God loves them . JC 's Girls volunteers tell the women about the gospel but do not try to persuade them to leave the sex industry ; the organization recognizes that is often not financially viable for women in the sex industry to immediately sacrifice their employment . JC 's Girls connects female sex workers with churches the organization believes to be non @-@ judgmental , hoping that the women will experience the love of Christ through these churches and that they will thereby eventually have the support and strength they need to leave the industry . Prior to referring a woman to a church , JC 's Girls puts the church through a formal approval process to ensure that the church will not be judgmental . If women express a desire to leave the sex industry , JC 's Girls attempts to support them in doing so . 
 JC 's Girls aims to convey to women in the sex industry that Jesus loves them , that they are beautiful , and that they have dignity . Its volunteers often style themselves with eyelash extensions , stiletto heels , skinny jeans , skin @-@ tight T @-@ shirts , and backcombed hair to convey the message that such things are , in their view , not sinful . Founder Heather Veitch said , " Our desire is for people to see that Christianity is anything but boring and restrictive . In Christ , we are free to experience adventure , pleasure , forgiveness , hope and peace . " 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Veitch worked as a stripper for four years in the Las Vegas area and California . After she had appeared in four pornographic films in the softcore and fetish genres — trample fetish specifically — public discussion about the Year 2000 problem and the end of the world caused her to think that she might experience divine judgment for her lifestyle . She then became a Christian , married her boyfriend Jon , started and completed a course in cosmetology , left the sex industry , and became a hairdresser all by September 1999 . In 2003 , Veitch discovered that a friend of hers who was working as a stripper had died as a result of alcoholism . Veitch began to evangelize to strippers because she wished she had told her friend about the gospel before she died . 
 By 2005 , Veitch was working as a hairdresser in Riverside , California . One of her clients was Lori Albee , a housewife with two children and no experience with the sex industry . Veitch told Albee about her friend who had died and to whom she wished she had evangelized . Albee suggested that they start telling other strippers about Jesus . Matt Brown , Veitch 's pastor at Sandals Church , arrived for a haircut and Veitch asked him for help to start an organization to minister to sex workers . He was interested . Veitch and Brown started Matthew 's House , an organization they founded as " a ministry to help people working in or addicted to the sex industry " . They chose the name " Matthew 's House " in reference to the Calling of Matthew , a gospel episode in which Jesus eats with sinners at the home of Matthew the Apostle . 
 By 2011 , JC 's Girls chapters were based in Las Vegas , Nevada ; Riverside , California ; San Diego , California ; Austin , Texas ; and Sioux Falls , South Dakota . As of 2014 , the San Diego chapter is the sole chapter that remains . 
 = = = Riverside chapter = = = 
 On Good Friday in March 2005 , Veitch , Albee and six other women went to a strip club in Riverside and paid for lap dances . Instead of accepting the dances , they talked with the strippers , telling them that they were loved and accepted by God , that churches were composed entirely of sinners , and that they would be welcome there . One of the lap dancers cried and told Albee she had often wanted to go to a church but had never done so because she had thought that she would be rejected . The woman accepted a prayer from Albee and hugged her . Albee would later say that talking with women at the strip club that first day changed her life . Because the volunteers received more positive responses than they had expected , they decided to continue to evangelize at strip clubs . To organize these activities , Veitch and Albee founded JC 's Girls , with " JC " standing for Jesus Christ . They made Matthew 's House the parent organization , but decided to operate primarily under the name " JC 's Girls " because Veitch believed that strippers would not understand the meaning of the name " Matthew 's House " . 
 Veitch became the head of JC 's Girls and the 17 @,@ 000 @-@ member Sandals Church became the organization 's base of operations . The church is part of the California Southern Baptist Convention , which supports JC 's Girls . The church gave JC 's Girls a $ 10 @,@ 000 budget in its first year . The organization 's members continued visiting strip clubs across California , paying for private dances and then evangelizing the strippers . Within six months of its founding , the organization 's members had persuaded several strippers to start attending a church and were only once asked to stop . One of these women was fired from a strip club because she started attending Sandals Church , but she continued attending the church , saying that Brown 's preaching helped her get through the week . 
 By December 2005 , Veitch , Albee , and teacher Tanya Huerter had become the organization 's leaders . Two months later , Huerter , who also had no experience with the sex industry , said , " I have a heart for these girls . I believe God created sex for marriage . But God will meet these girls where they are . " Veitch , Albee , and Huerter invited Christian women from other churches in the area to volunteer with JC 's Girls and approximately 90 churches responded with interest . JC 's Girls received public attention in December 2005 , when UK newspaper The Daily Telegraph published an article about the organization 's activities . The article prompted additional media coverage from other newspapers , television programs , and radio stations both across the United States and internationally , including news outlets as far away as France and India . Veitch began dividing her time between managing JC 's Girls , appearing in the media , and serving as a caregiver for her terminally @-@ ill husband , who had brain cancer . 
 In January 2006 , JC 's Girls went to Las Vegas to operate a booth at the AVN Adult Entertainment Expo — the largest trade fair for pornography in the United States . The booth was decorated in the style of the booths advertising strip clubs ; the women wore sleeveless shirts with the organization 's name in sequins . When men attending the convention visited the booth thinking that JC 's Girls was a strip club , the women asked them to guess what " JC " meant and gave attendees a sticker reading : " I 've been booby @-@ trapped by JC 's Girls . " JC 's Girls told thousands of male attendees about the gospel , distributed more than 200 Bibles wrapped in T @-@ shirts reading " Holy Hottie " , and gave out DVDs of a sermon by Brown about pornography addiction . Jesse Jane was one of the women who accepted a Bible . Many convention attendees wished to take pictures with the JC 's Girls volunteers . Veitch was interviewed for a variety of media , including a CNN news broadcast and a documentary film by Bill Day , who had previously made the film Missionary Positions about XXXchurch.com , another Christian organization that was operating a booth at the trade fair . 
 Also in January 2006 , Brown approved a $ 50 @,@ 000 budget for JC 's Girls for the year . By April , seven strippers had attended Sandals Church because of JC 's Girls and strippers from across the United States had contacted the organization looking for local churches . In an attempt to dispel accusations that the JC 's Girls message might be motivated by jealousy , Veitch lost weight and became more physically fit . She said that she wanted strippers " to know that if I wanted to , I could be a stripper again , but I choose to live my life for the Lord . " 
 = = = Original website = = = 
 Within the first few months of founding JC 's Girls , Veitch and Albee launched the organization 's first official website , which initially received little traffic . Three months later , it had received 40 @,@ 000 hits . By December 2005 , the organization had received messages through its website from pornographic film actors and men with pornography addiction who said that JC 's Girls had changed their lives . A slogan on the main page of the website read , " If you are a CHRISTIAN ... See us in ACTION ... " . Without asking for payment , Veitch 's friend , pornographic film director James DiGiorgio , took glamour photographs of Veitch , Albee , and Huerter for the JC 's Girls website . DiGiorgio was not a Christian , but said that he was helping these organizations in order to support their freedom of speech ; he said that the sex industry is " always trying to preach freedom of speech [ so ] anyone in this industry who has a problem with [ JC 's Girls ' ] message is a fucking hypocrite . You can 't have it both ways . " Within a year of the organization 's founding , Veitch , Albee , and Huerter were maintaining Myspace pages that they used to offer support , counsel , and advice . By 2008 , the JC 's Girls website , which included a blog , was receiving around 15 @,@ 000 hits per day . 
 = = = Las Vegas chapter = = = 
 In 2008 , Veitch told Brown that she believed that the JC 's Girls ministry needed to move to Las Vegas , and he responded supportively . By 2008 , Veitch had moved to Las Vegas and based the new chapter of JC 's Girls at Central Christian Church in nearby Henderson , Nevada , leaving the leadership of the Riverside chapter to Albee . That year , Veitch collaborated with Annie Lobert , a former call girl working with Hookers for Jesus , an organization similar to JC 's Girls . The organizations were both represented at that year 's AVN Adult Entertainment Expo . The <unk> Preacher , a documentary film about Veitch 's experiences starting JC 's Girls , was released that February . The following month , pornographic film actor Sophia Lynn left the sex industry after becoming a Christian ; she underwent more than a year of counselling with Veitch through JC 's Girls . Veitch had flown to Sioux Falls , South Dakota , to spend a weekend educating Celebrate Community Church about the sex industry . The church soon gave Lynn a job in its office , a scholarship to go to college , and a place to live . Lynn said , " I hope I don 't have to wake up from this . I feel like my life has been saved . " 
 = = = San Diego chapter = = = 
 In San Diego , Theresa Scher , a stripper and call girl , was looking for a way out of the sex industry when she watched a CNN interview with Albee about her work with JC 's Girls in Riverside . Scher contacted Albee , who allowed Scher to establish a new chapter of JC 's Girls in San Diego . Scher founded the chapter in 2007 with Sheri Brown , a former social worker . Brown had previously hated strippers , but , once she had accepted a job helping teenage mothers finish high school and the first four teens she worked with were strippers , she said that she developed " an overwhelming passion to reach out to these precious women in love and without condemnation . " She has described being sexually abused as a child and later being a teenage mother ; Brown found that both of these experiences helped her to relate to strippers , as many of the strippers she encountered also had those experiences . 
 The San Diego chapter of JC 's Girls is based at The Rock Church , a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ member church with a majority of members under the age of 30 . In the first year , several strippers left the sex industry and began volunteering with the chapter . Many of the chapter 's members do not personally visit strip clubs but help in other ways . Scher said the former strippers were the most effective JC 's Girls volunteers because they understand from personal experience the situations of the women they are trying to help . By 2011 , members of the San Diego chapter of JC 's Girls were visiting strip clubs twice each month . They pray before , during , and after each visit and a team of other members pray for them from another location . 
 Carrie Prejean started volunteering with the San Diego chapter of JC 's Girls in 2008 and became Miss California USA the following year . At the Miss USA 2009 competition , Prejean became the subject of a controversy because of her response to a question about same @-@ sex marriage . Scher said that the controversy would not affect Prejean 's involvement with the organization and that the issue of same @-@ sex marriage was not relevant to the group 's activities . Prejean said that in volunteering with JC 's Girls , she encountered pornographic models who , through exploitation and abuse , had developed very low self @-@ esteem but who had regained a sense of their own dignity because of their interaction with JC 's Girls volunteers . 
 By 2009 , approximately 40 women were on the chapter 's active evangelism team , and they had given pink Bibles to most of the strippers in San Diego County . They paired these Bibles with other gifts including lip gloss , necklaces , and lotions in order to pique the strippers ' interest . In August 2010 , Brown went to Warsaw , Ohio , to briefly join forces with Anny Donewald , a former stripper and founder of Eve 's Angels , an organization similar to JC 's Girls . Together , Brown and Donewald negotiated a peace accord between women working at a strip club and members of a local church who had been picketing the club for four years . The strippers had been counter @-@ protesting by dancing in bikinis in front of the church during Sunday services while Tommy George , the club 's owner , played music from his car . Brown and Donewald spoke at the church , urging them to stop protesting at the strip club and saying , " It 's not our job to tell these women that it 's time to get out of there ... Just love them . Let the Holy Spirit draw them out . " Brown and Donewald also visited the strip club and spoke with the strippers , two of whom became Christians while continuing to work at the club . The peace accord received much publicity , but the church 's members , led by their pastor Bill Dunfee , resumed picketing once Brown had returned to San Diego . George and his club 's strippers returned to their counter @-@ protesting . 
 By 2011 , several of the strippers JC 's Girls members had spoken with in San Diego had begun attending a Bible study hosted by the organization and the chapter had helped one stripper leave the sex industry and gain unrelated employment . In March 2011 , the chapter sent a delegation to <unk> at the Los Angeles Convention Center , where Scher and Brown spoke with conference attendees and offered them prayer . That July , Veitch resigned from JC 's Girls so she could spend more time with her family , handing the leadership of the organization to Scher and Brown . In June 2012 , Scher gave up her co @-@ leadership of the organization to focus on her family , leaving the leadership to Brown . By 2013 , the organization had established guidelines regulating the transition of women from the sex industry into participation in the evangelistic activities of JC 's Girls . The woman must consistently attend a Bible study for four months , read Francine Rivers ' book Redeeming Love , and be interviewed by the chapter 's leaders , who then decide whether the woman should join the organization 's outreach team . These guidelines were established because some women who had quickly gone from working in the sex industry to evangelizing with JC 's Girls soon left the organization and returned to the sex industry . Brown left JC 's Girls in April 2014 and Laura Bonde took over leadership of the organization . 
 = = Reception = = 
 When JC 's Girls first started receiving funds from Sandals Church in 2005 , some of the church 's members were displeased that their tithes and offerings were being given to strip clubs . In 2006 , Brown said that funding the activities of JC 's Girls was worthwhile because the sex industry " has been largely ignored by the evangelical church " and the budget allotted to JC 's Girls is small compared to the money made by the sex industry . Sandals Church members were also concerned that ministering to strippers would be ineffective . Brown responded by referring to Veitch 's conversion , suggesting that other strippers could have similar experiences . Terry Barone of the California Southern Baptist Convention asserted that JC 's Girls members " are doing what Jesus did ... He ministered to prostitutes and tax collectors . " 
 Brown said that the most common complaint that he received about JC 's Girls was " the way Heather Veitch looks ... her breasts are too big and she looks too much like a stripper " , a complaint to which he responded that " God can use any individual to change the world " . Veitch said in 2008 that Christians commonly say that JC 's Girls dress like sex workers , but she said that the look is intended to help women in the sex industry identify with the group . Annie Lobert of Hookers for Jesus , a similar group that collaborates with JC 's Girls , said around the same time that Christians make the same kind of comments about her and her ministry — " They say my T @-@ shirt is too tight " , said Lobert , " but , hey , when in Vegas , do as Vegas does " . 
 Controversy regarding his involvement with JC 's Girls threatened to lose Brown his church facility on the California Baptist University campus , but the church united in support of JC 's Girls and remained in the same location . Barone said that Baptists might find viewing the JC 's Girls website awkward , but that it was not intended for them . Stephen Clark of the Los Angeles Times called it " an edgy website [ with ] provocative appeals . " Sarah Sumner , author of Men and Women in the Church , said in Bill Day 's 2008 documentary film The Pussycat Preacher that some Christians might oppose the female @-@ led JC 's Girls because of 1 Timothy 2 : 12 , a Bible verse that can be interpreted as restricting positions of authority in church to men . Brown said elsewhere in the film that it made more sense for women to lead JC 's Girls " because a woman would be the most welcome in the industry " . 
 In its first year , JC 's Girls was criticized for allowing DiGiorgio to take glamour photographs of Veitch , Albee , and Huerter for their website . Veitch responded to this criticism with the assertion that " it is not a sin to be attractive or dress cute , " and that the photographs were intended to persuade women in the sex industry to dismiss the idea that Christianity is about " being locked up in a house with a Bible . " DiGiorgio said that JC 's Girls is correct in believing that many women in the sex industry need to be rescued from self @-@ destructive behavior , but he did not think that encouraging the women to become Christians would necessarily help them . 
 The Family Research Council , an American Christian lobbying organization , has endorsed JC 's Girls . Documentary filmmaker Bill Daly said that members of JC 's Girls are " fighting false glamour with real spiritual beauty . " In his 2013 book Evangelicals and the Arts in Fiction , writer John Weaver writes that science fiction writer Robert A. Heinlein wrote about Evangelicals as being sexually repressed and eventually undergoing a sexual revolution . Weaver offers JC 's Girls and XXXchurch.com as evidence that Heinlein 's fiction is becoming a reality . By 2007 , adherents of UFO religion Raëlism had responded to JC 's Girls by forming " Raël 's Girls " , an organization with a similar outreach program but a very different message , encouraging sex workers to try to maximise their own sexual pleasure while serving clients . 
 In 2006 , a Baptist minister from San Bernardino , California criticized JC 's Girls for not explicitly encouraging women in the sex industry to quit . He commended Veitch " for her zeal and desire to reach the lost for Christ " , but asked , " How can you stay in the industry and have a relationship with God ? " , and quoted Matthew 6 : 24 , a Bible verse that states that a person cannot serve two masters . In response to the idea that strippers should quit their jobs before attending a church , Veitch said , " Do we ask gluttons to stop eating too much before they come to church ? " At the 2006 AVN Adult Entertainment Expo , photographer Michael Grecco photographed Veitch , Albee , and Huerter and included the image in his 2007 book Naked Ambition : An R Rated Look at an X Rated Industry . In the image caption , he called the trio a " devout Christian trinity " . Philip Sherwell of the Calgary Herald called the organization 's evangelism " America 's most unusual Christian outreach operation " . A journalist for UK newspaper The Observer compared JC 's Girls to XXXchurch.com , writing in 2006 that both of " these ministries are in some way reforming the church as well as their would @-@ be followers . " 
 = Laugh , Laugh = 
 " Laugh , Laugh " is a song by American rock group The Beau Brummels , written by guitarist Ron Elliott and produced by Sylvester Stewart , later known as Sly Stone . Released in December 1964 as the band 's debut single , the song reached number 15 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart the following February . " Laugh , Laugh " was the first hit single to come out of the emerging San Francisco music scene in response to the British Invasion . The song was later included on the band 's first full @-@ length album , Introducing the Beau Brummels , released in April 1965 . 
 The Beau Brummels promoted the single by appearing on several television shows , including a 1965 episode of The Flintstones in which the band gave an animated performance as the Beau <unk> . In 1994 , " Laugh , Laugh " was selected to The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll exhibit . Lead singer Sal Valentino reworked the song for his 2008 solo album , Every Now and Then . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 In 1964 , San Francisco disc jockeys Tom Donahue and Bobby Mitchell were looking for new acts to bring to their Autumn Records label . They discovered the Beau Brummels performing at the Morocco Room , a club in nearby San Mateo , and signed the band shortly thereafter . Donahue and Mitchell were eager to capitalize on Beatlemania , a phenomenon surrounding The Beatles that originated several years before in Germany and was spreading across the U.S. by this time . The Beau Brummels had taken their name from a term for an excessively well @-@ dressed person . The group liked that the name sounded British , and knew that following the Beatles so closely in the alphabet would likely result in the bands ' records being placed next to each other on record store shelves . Even the harmonies of " Laugh , Laugh " were reminiscent of popular British acts of the time , such as the Beatles and The Zombies . However , songwriter @-@ guitarist Ron Elliott said the song was directly influenced not by UK bands , but by U.S. pop group The Four Seasons . 
 Elliott grew up writing music inspired by theatrical composers such as George Gershwin and Jerome Kern , as well as country music artist Lefty Frizzell . After forming the Beau Brummels with lead vocalist Sal Valentino , Elliott wanted to create simplified music that had mainstream appeal . He noted that " Laugh , Laugh " had a " very complex chord structure , but instead of using the major seventh chords and the passing chords that I prefer , I wrote the song in flat major and minor keys using a simplified tonal structure . " Elliott said he liked using minor keys as he believed they added an element of mystery to the music , similar to that of James Bond films . Lyrically , " Laugh , Laugh " describes a rejected lover who takes pleasure in revenge when someone rejects the one who had rejected him . 
 The song features a harmonica , played by Declan Mulligan , throughout the tune . 
 The single version of " Laugh Laugh , " universally heard in 1965 when it was a hit , fades out during the second iteration of the line " Lonely / Oh so lonely . " The full version does not fade out , but rather ends " cold " on an E chord . As most oldies radio stations today play songs provided by a music service rather than actual records , the version with the cold ending is heard almost universally now . This version also features a " yeah " uttered by Sal Valentino between the two iterations of " lonely " that was edited out of the single release 
 The song was produced by Autumn house producer Sylvester Stewart , who later gained fame as Sly Stone of Sly & the Family Stone . Valentino recalled the band 's recording sessions with Stone : " He was only about nineteen or twenty when we worked with him . It was before all of his reputation came to be , that everybody knows him for now . " Valentino added , " He was a cheerleader . He could play everything if we needed him to . He was great . He was the guy in San Francisco who knew how to make a record in the studio . There was nobody before him . " Elliott agreed , saying Stone was a positive influence on the band because of his talent , intelligence and experience . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Laugh , Laugh " was released in December 1964 , seven months after the band 's formation . In January 1965 , the song entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 96 . The song remained in the top 40 portion of the chart for eight weeks , peaking at number 15 in February . Donahue believed the single would have peaked at number one if the band was on a label with stronger distribution . In Canada , the song reached number two on RPM magazine 's singles chart . As the song climbed the charts , many listeners assumed the Beau Brummels were British , due to the band 's name and musical style . For their part , Donahue and Mitchell spread rumors that the band was indeed from the UK , and had the band dress in Beatlesque suits . 
 " Laugh , Laugh " was the first hit single from a burgeoning San Francisco music scene — including such bands as Jefferson Airplane , the Grateful Dead , We Five , Moby Grape , Quicksilver Messenger Service and Country Joe and the Fish — to respond to the British Invasion . The song is credited as one of the earliest tracks to blend beat music with folk rock , even before The Byrds recorded " Mr. Tambourine Man . " Chris Hillman , who played bass guitar with the Byrds , saw the Beau Brummels at a Los Angeles concert , and later remarked : " I remember them doing the hit they had , ' Laugh , Laugh . ' They really sort of answered the Beatles before we did , in that sense . " However , Byrds singer @-@ guitarist Roger McGuinn claimed " they had a little trouble singing in tune . " The song was one of 10 pop singles named in a January 1966 issue of Billboard which credited the use of harmonica in folk , pop , and rhythm and blues ( R & B ) music for sparking a harmonica sales boom at record retailers in 1964 and 1965 . 
 Music critic Dave Marsh selected the song for his 1989 book , The Heart of Rock & Soul : The 1001 Greatest Singles Ever Made . William Ruhlmann of Allmusic called it a " pivotal " song with " cleverly arranged harmonies . " On the other hand , Chris Smith of Stylus Magazine described it as a " mostly colorless , indistinct Beatles rip @-@ off " and " pretty unmemorable . " In 1994 , the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's curatorial staff , along with rock critics and historians , selected " Laugh , Laugh " for a Hall of Fame exhibit featuring The 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll . " 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The Beau Brummels performed " Laugh , Laugh " on several television music variety shows of the mid @-@ 1960s , including NBC 's Hullabaloo on February 23 , 1965 , ABC 's Shindig ! on March 10 , 1965 and American Bandstand on April 9 , 1966 . In September 1965 , the Beatles ' self @-@ titled animated television series debuted and became an immediate ratings success . As a result , animation studios moved quickly to incorporate cartoon rock bands into other programs . An early effort by Hanna @-@ Barbera showcased the Beau Brummels as animated guests on The Flintstones sitcom in the season six episode " <unk> A Go @-@ Go , " which originally aired on December 3 , 1965 . Appearing as The Beau <unk> , the band performed " Laugh , Laugh " on Bedrock 's TV teen dance show , <unk> — a takeoff of the Shindig ! program . 
 " Laugh , Laugh " was included on the 1998 four @-@ CD expanded edition of Nuggets : Original Artyfacts from the First Psychedelic Era , 1965 – 1968 , a collection of American garage rock singles that helped influence the development of 1970s punk rock . The song was also featured in the 1989 John Candy comedy @-@ drama film Uncle Buck . 
 = = Other versions = = 
 An alternate take appears on the Beau Brummels ' 1996 three @-@ disc box set San Fran Sessions , a collection of rarities , demos and outtakes . The band 's Live ! album , released in 2000 , contains a 1974 performance of " Laugh , Laugh " recorded during a concert in Fair Oaks Village near Sacramento , California . Sal Valentino revisited the song on his 2008 solo album , Every Now and Then , on which he offers a darker interpretation of the track . Surf rock group The Astronauts performed a cover version of " Laugh , Laugh " on their 1967 album , Travelin ' Man . The song was also covered by California garage rock band The E @-@ Types , whose live rendition is part of the Live at the Rainbow Ballroom 1966 album , released in 1998 . Experimental musician R. Stevie Moore recorded a version of the song on his 1983 album , Crises . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 7 " Vinyl 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Sal Valentino – lead vocals , tambourine 
 Ron Elliott – lead guitar , vocals 
 Ron Meagher – bass guitar , vocals 
 Declan Mulligan – rhythm guitar , harmonica , vocals 
 John Petersen – drums 
 Sylvester Stewart – producer 
 Leo de Gar Kulka – engineer 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Caesars Palace = 
 Caesars Palace is a AAA Four Diamond luxury hotel and casino in Paradise , Nevada , United States , situated on the west side of the Las Vegas Strip , between Bellagio and the Mirage . It is one of the most prestigious casino hotels in the world and one of Las Vegas 's largest and best known landmarks . 
 Caesars Palace was established in 1966 by Jay Sarno , who sought to create an opulent facility that gave guests a sense of life during the Roman Empire . It contains many statues , columns and iconography typical of Hollywood Roman period productions , including a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) statue of Julius Caesar near the entrance . Caesars Palace is now owned and operated by Caesars Entertainment . As of 2015 , the hotel has 3 @,@ 960 rooms and suites in six towers and a convention facility of over 300 @,@ 000 square feet ( 28 @,@ 000 m2 ) . The hotel has a large range of restaurants , including several serving authentic Chinese cuisine to cater to wealthy East Asian gamblers . From the outset , Caesars Palace has been oriented towards attracting high rollers . The modern casino facilities include table games such as blackjack , craps , roulette , baccarat , Spanish 21 , mini @-@ baccarat , Pai Gow and Pai Gow poker ; a 4 @,@ 500 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 420 m2 ) 24 @-@ hour poker room ; and a large number of slot machines and video poker machines . 
 The hotel is closely associated with the entertainment industry and has served as a venue for boxing since the late 1970s , and hosted the Caesars Palace Grand Prix from 1981 to 1982 . Notable entertainers who have performed at Caesars Palace include Frank Sinatra , Sammy Davis Jr . , Rod Stewart , Celine Dion , Shania Twain , Bette Midler , Cher , Elton John , Liberace , Liza Minnelli , Julio Iglesias , Judy Garland , David Copperfield , Tony Bennett , Gloria Estefan , Luis Miguel , Janet Jackson , Jerry Seinfeld , Mariah Carey , Matt Goss and Deana Martin . The main performance venue is The Colosseum , a 4 @,@ 296 @-@ seat stadium with a 22 @,@ 450 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 086 m2 ) stage , which was originally built at a cost of $ 95 million for Celine Dion 's show , A New Day ... , in 2003 . After departing in 2007 , Dion returned to the Colosseum with her new show entitled " Celine " in March 2011 , which is under contract through 2017 for 70 shows per year . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 In 1962 , cabana motel owners Jay Sarno and Stanley <unk> applied for a $ 10 @.@ 6 million loan from the Teamsters Central States Pension Fund . He began plans to build a hotel on land owned by Kirk Kerkorian . Sarno would later act as designer of the hotel he planned to construct . He wanted to emulate life under the Roman Empire , to literally come up with a palace in which everybody staying at the hotel would feel like a Caesar . Caesars Palace was instrumental in beginning a new era of lavish casinos from the late 1960s onward . Architectural writer Alan Hess stated : " Caesars Palace needed only a sumptuous array of Classical statuary and a host of marble @-@ white columns to establish its theme . The visitor 's imagination , in league with well @-@ placed publicity , filled in the opulence " . Jefferson Graham wrote that the result was " the gaudiest , weirdest , most elaborate , and most talked about resort Vegas had ever seen . [ Its ] emblem was a chesty female dipping grapes into the waiting mouth of a recumbent Roman , fitted out in toga , laurel wreath , and phallic dagger " . 
 At the inauguration ceremony of the hotel on August 5 , 1966 , Sarno and his partner Nate Jacobsen spent one million dollars , with the " largest order of Ukrainian caviar ever placed by a private organization " , with two tons of filet mignon , 300 pounds ( 140 kg ) of Maryland crabmeat and 50 @,@ 000 glasses of champagne . Cocktail waitresses in Greco @-@ Roman wigs would greet guests and say " Welcome to Caesars Palace , I am your slave " . Among the performers at the opening were Andy Williams and Phil Richards . According to author Ovid <unk> , Caesars Palace was " a mob @-@ controlled casino from the day it opened its doors " . By the time it opened , the significant publicity of the new hotel had generated $ 42 million in advanced bookings . 
 On December 31 , 1967 , stunt performer Evel Knievel arrived at the hotel to watch a boxing match and convinced Sarno that he could jump over the distance of 140 feet ( 43 m ) over the fountains . ABC came in to film the jump , in which Knievel hit the top of the safety ramp after the jump and flew over his handlebars into the parking lot of neighbouring Dunes . <unk> his pelvis , several bones and suffering a concussion , he lay in a hospital unconscious for 29 days in a coma before recovering . On April 14 , 1989 , Knievel 's son Robbie successfully completed the jump . 
 The first casino at the hotel was named Circus Circus . It was intended to be the world 's liveliest and most expensive casino , attracting elite gamblers from around the world . In 1969 , a Federal Organized Crime Task Force accused the casino 's financial manager , Jerome <unk> , of having ties with organized @-@ crime figures in New York and New England . Although <unk> was never tried , the task force pressured Sarno and his other investors to sell the casino , which led to it being acquired by Lum 's restaurant chain owners Stuart and Clifford S. Perlman for $ 60 million . The company soon shed its restaurant operations and changed its name to Caesars World . On July 15 of that year , executives lay ground on an expansion area of the hotel , and they buried a time capsule in the area . 
 Frank Sinatra began performing at Caesars Palace in 1967 , after a fallout with Howard Hughes and Carl Cohen at The Sands . He signed a three @-@ year contract . In the early morning hours of September 6 , 1970 , Sinatra was playing a high stakes baccarat at the casino , where he was performing at the time . Normal limits for the game are US $ 2 @,@ 000 per hand ; Sinatra had been playing for US $ 8 @,@ 000 and wanted the stakes to be raised to US $ 16 @,@ 000 . When Sinatra began shouting after his request was denied , hotel executive Sanford Waterman came to talk with him . Witnesses to the incident said the two men both made threats , with Waterman producing a gun and pointing it at Sinatra . Sinatra walked out of the casino and returned to his Palm Springs home without fulfilling the rest of his three @-@ week engagement there . Waterman was booked on a charge of assault with a deadly weapon , but was released without bail . The local district attorney 's office declined to file charges against Waterman for pulling the gun , stating that Sinatra had refused to make a statement regarding the incident . Despite swearing to never perform at Caesars again , Sinatra returned after his retirement in January 1974 , and became a frequent performer at Caesars Palace throughout the decade . He was performing at Caesars when his mother Dolly died in a plane crash in January 1977 , and in 1979 he was awarded the Grammy Trustees Award in a party at the hotel , while celebrating 40 years in show business and his 64th birthday . When Sinatra was given back his gaming license by the Nevada Gaming Commission in 1981 , he became an entertainment @-@ public relations consultant at the casino for $ 20 @,@ 000 a week . 
 In 1971 , some 1500 African American rights activists stormed the hotel in a protest . The National Welfare Rights Organization was involved with a " coalition of welfare mothers , Legal Services lawyers , radical priests and nuns , civil rights leaders , movie stars and housewives " . Five years later in the spring of 1976 , hundreds of African American workers went on strike at the hotel in the first major strike in Las Vegas history . The entrances to the hotel and casino were blocked , and the hotel lost several million dollars from the strike , including one cancellation worth $ 500 @,@ 000 . In 1973 , the Del Webb corporation was contracted to build a $ 8 million 16 @-@ story building adjacent to the Palace . 
 In 1981 , a fire broke out at the hotel , hospitalizing 16 people . The <unk> sold their shares in Caesars World that year after trying to get a gaming license for a casino in Atlantic City , New Jersey . The New Jersey Casino Control Commission accused the brothers of doing business with people who had organized @-@ crime connections . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 In the 1986 , the annual Teamsters convention was held at Caesars with a $ 650 @,@ 000 party . The lavish feast included caviar , crab claws , roast beef and a range of 15 different desserts . In 1991 , Sheila King won a $ 250 @,@ 000 jackpot in the casino at Caesars Palace on a $ 500 machine , and won $ 50 @,@ 000 twice soon afterwards . Over three years she won $ 200 million on the machines but kept pumping the money back into the machines . Despite her luck , in 1994 her winnings fell to $ 500 @,@ 000 , and she spent much of her time over the next four years in the law courts claiming that the casino operators had tampered with her machines and deceived her to keep her winning . 
 In the 1990s , the hotel 's management sought to create more elaborate features to compete with the other modern Las Vegas developments . The Forum Shops at Caesars opened in 1992 ; it was one of the first venues in the city where shopping , particularly at high @-@ end fashion house stores , was an attraction in itself . A new redevelopment opened on October 22 , 2004 . 
 In June 2005 , Harrah 's Entertainment acquired Caesars Entertainment , Inc. and became the owner of Caesars Palace . In 2010 , Caesars Palace was fined $ 250 @,@ 000 by the Nevada Gaming Commission for permitting a high @-@ limit baccarat player to dance on the card table while the game was underway . In 2013 , Forbes Travel Guide named The Laurel Collection by Caesars Palace and Restaurant Guy Savoy on its " 55th annual listing of Star Award @-@ winning hospitality establishments worldwide " . In September 2015 , Caesars Palace agreed to pay the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network an $ 8 million civil money penalty for violating the Bank Secrecy Act . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Jeff Campbell of Lonely Planet refers to the hotel as " quintessentially Las Vegas " , a " Greco @-@ Roman <unk> featuring marble reproductions of classical statuary " . The art deco style fused with clear influences from Hollywood epic productions dominate . Construction of the 14 @-@ story Caesars Palace hotel on the 34 @-@ acre ( 14 ha ) site began in 1962 , and it opened in 1966 . It lay next to Dunes Hotel and opposite the Desert Inn . The original hotel featured lanes of cypresses and marble columns as part of a 900 feet ( 270 m ) frontage , with the hotel set back 475 feet ( 145 m ) feet . The car park could accommodate up to 1300 cars . 
 Water is heavily used for at least 18 fountains throughout — the casino resort uses over 240 million gallons a year . A 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) high statue of Julius Caesar hailing a taxi lies in the driveway leading to the entrance , and there are replicas of Rape of the Sabine Women and statues of Venus and David which greet guests as they arrive . Near the entrance is a four @-@ faced , eight @-@ handed Brahma shrine which weighs four tons , It was made in Bangkok , Thailand , with a casting ceremony on November 25 , 1983 , according to the inscription on it . 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 = = = = Julius Tower ( formerly Roman Tower ) = = = = 
 A $ 75 million renovation of the hotel 's original Roman Tower , built in 1966 and extended in 1974 , is slated for completion in January 2016 . The 14 @-@ story Tower , last renovated in 2001 , will have 20 rooms added for a total of 587 rooms and suites , and will be renamed the Julius Tower . Entertainment Close @-@ Up wrote that the Julius Tower is the " latest piece of a $ 1 billion investment to cement Caesars Palace as the premier resort at the center of the Las Vegas Strip " . 
 = = = = Palace Tower = = = = 
