 Fort Defiance was also being constructed at this time , located further southwest , past Fort Box , near present @-@ day Red Hook . In addition to these new forts , a mounted battery was established on Governors Island , cannons were placed at Fort George facing Bowling Green and more cannons placed at the Whitehall Dock , which sat on the East River . <unk> were sunk at strategic locations to deter the British from entering the East River and other waterways . 
 Washington had been authorized by Congress to recruit an army of up to 28 @,@ 501 troops ; he had only 19 @,@ 000 troops when he reached New York . Military discipline was inadequate : routine orders were not carried out , muskets were fired in camp , flints were ruined , bayonets were used as knives to cut food , and firearm readiness was lax . Petty internal conflict was common under the strain of so many people from different environments and temperaments in relative closeness . 
 The commander of the artillery , Henry Knox , persuaded Washington to transfer 400 to 500 soldiers , who lacked muskets or guns , to crew the artillery . In early June , Knox and Greene inspected the land at the north end of Manhattan and decided to establish Fort Washington . Another fort , Fort Constitution , later renamed Fort Lee , was planned for opposite Fort Washington on the Hudson River . The forts were hoped to discourage the British ships from sailing up the Hudson River . 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 July 12 , 1776 , two months before the Battle of Brooklyn , the New York Provincial Army began recruiting men . However , the contribution of manpower in New York was low because many New Yorkers were uninterested in the revolution or sided with the Crown . This caused for most of the volunteers seen at the battle to come from the New England area , upstate New York , New Jersey , Pennsylvania , Delaware and Maryland . These men were a part of the colonial militia , which more or less meant that white male volunteers between the ages of 16 to 70 years old . Unlike the trained British soldiers , these men were citizen soldiers , an unorganized and untrained source of immediate manpower . The colonial militia was composed of eight different states under thirteen different authorities , meaning that each regiment reflected different terms of service , regulations , training experiences , and equipment . The majority of the militia was composed of untrained men with no form of standardized weapons , uniform or ammunition . 
 Meanwhile , across the river , on Staten Island , the British army was growing by the day . By the time of the battle the Continental Army was compiled of about 10 @,@ 000 troops and faced the British mass of nearly twice its size . 
 = = = British arrival = = = 
 On June 28 , Washington learned that the British fleet had set sail from Halifax on June 9 and were heading toward New York . On June 29 , signals were sent from men stationed on Staten Island , indicating that the British fleet had appeared . Within a few hours , 45 British ships dropped anchor in Lower New York Bay . Less than a week later , there were 130 ships off Staten Island under the command of Richard Howe , the brother of the general . The population of New York went into panic at the sight of the British ships , alarms went off and troops immediately rushed to their posts . On July 2 , British troops began to land on Staten Island . The continental regulars on the island took a few shots at the British before fleeing and the citizens ' militia switched over to the British side . 
 On July 6 , news reached New York that Congress had voted for independence four days earlier . On Tuesday , July 9 , at 18 : 00 , Washington had several brigades march onto the commons of the city to hear the Declaration of Independence read . After the end of the reading , a mob ran down to Bowling Green , where , with ropes and bars , they tore down the gilded lead equestrian statue of George III of Great Britain . In their fury , the crowd cut off the statue 's head , severed the nose , and mounted what remained of the head on a spike outside a tavern , and the rest of the statue was dragged to Connecticut and melted down into musket balls . 
 On July 12 , two British ships , the Phoenix and the Rose , sailed up the harbor toward the mouth of the Hudson . The American batteries stationed at Fort George , Red Hook and Governors Island opened fire , and the British returned fire into the city . The ships sailed along the New Jersey shore and continued up the Hudson , sailing past Fort Washington and arrived by nightfall at Tarrytown , the widest part of the Hudson . The goals of the British ships were to cut off American supplies and encourage Loyalist support . The only casualties of the day were six Americans who were killed when their own cannon blew up . 
 The next day , July 13 , Howe attempted to open negotiations with the Americans . Howe sent a letter to Washington delivered by Lieutenant Philip Brown , who arrived under a flag of truce . The letter was addressed " George Washington , Esq . " Brown was met by Joseph Reed , who , on Washington 's orders , had hurried to the waterfront accompanied by Henry Knox and Samuel Webb . Washington asked his officers whether it should be received or not , as it did not recognize his rank as general , and they unanimously said no . Brown was told by Reed that there was no one in the army with that address . On July 16 , Howe tried again , this time with the address " George Washington , Esq . , etc . , etc . " , but it was again declined . The next day , Howe sent Captain Nisbet Balfour to ask if Washington would meet with Howe 's adjutant face to face , and a meeting was scheduled for July 20 . Howe 's adjutant was Colonel James Patterson . Patterson told Washington that Howe had come with powers to grant pardons , but Washington said , " Those who have committed no fault want no pardon . " Patterson departed soon after . Washington 's performance during the meeting was praised in parts of the colonies . 
 Meanwhile , British ships continued to arrive . On August 1 , 45 ships with generals Henry Clinton and Charles Cornwallis arrived , along with 3 @,@ 000 troops . By August 12 , 3 @,@ 000 more British troops and another 8 @,@ 000 Hessians had arrived . At this point the British fleet numbered over 400 ships , including 73 war ships , and 32 @,@ 000 troops were camped on Staten Island . Faced with this large force , Washington was unsure as to where the British would attack . Both Greene and Reed thought that the British would attack Long Island , but Washington felt that a British attack on Long Island might be a diversion for the main attack on Manhattan . Washington broke his army in half , stationing half of it on Manhattan , and the other half on Long Island ; the army on Long Island was commanded by Greene . On August 20 , Greene became ill and was forced to move to a house in Manhattan where he rested to recover . John Sullivan was placed in command until Greene was well enough to resume command . 
 = = = Invasion of Long Island = = = 
 At 05 : 10 , on August 22 , an advance guard of 4 @,@ 000 British troops , under the command of Clinton and Cornwallis , left Staten Island to land on Long Island . At 08 : 00 , all 4 @,@ 000 troops landed on the shore of Gravesend Bay , unopposed . Colonel Edward Hand 's Pennsylvanian riflemen had been stationed on the shore , but they did not oppose the landings and fell back , killing cattle and burning farmhouses on the way . By noon , 15 @,@ 000 troops had landed on shore along with 40 pieces of artillery . As hundreds of Loyalists came to greet the British troops , Cornwallis pushed on with the advance guard , advancing six miles onto the island and establishing a camp at the village of Flatbush ; Cornwallis was given orders to advance no further . 
 Washington received word of the landings the same day they occurred , but was informed that the number was 8 @,@ 000 to 9 @,@ 000 troops . This convinced Washington that it was the feint he had predicted and therefore he only sent 1 @,@ 500 more troops to Brooklyn , bringing the total number of troops on Long Island to 6 @,@ 000 . On August 24 , Washington replaced Sullivan with Israel Putnam who commanded the troops on Long Island . Putnam arrived on Long Island the next day along with six battalions . Also that day the British troops on Long Island received 5 @,@ 000 Hessian reinforcements , bringing their total to 20 @,@ 000 . Although there was little fighting on the days immediately after the landing , some small skirmishes did take place with American marksmen armed with rifles picking off British troops from time to time . 
 The American plan was that Putnam would direct the defenses from Brooklyn Heights while Sullivan and Stirling and their troops would be stationed on the Guan Heights . The Guan were up to 150 feet high and blocked the most direct route to Brooklyn Heights . Washington believed that by stationing men on the heights that heavy casualties could be inflicted on the British before the troops fell back to the main defenses at Brooklyn Heights . There were three main passes through the heights ; the Gowanus Road furthest to the west , the Flatbush Road slightly farther to the east , in the center of the American line where it was expected the British would attack , and the Bedford Road farthest to the east . Stirling was responsible for defending the Gowanus Road with 500 men , and Sullivan was to defend the Flatbush and Bedford roads where there were 1 @,@ 000 and 800 men respectively . Six @-@ thousand troops were to remain behind at Brooklyn Heights . There was one lesser @-@ known pass through the heights farther to the east called the Jamaica Pass . This pass was defended by just five militia officers on horses . 
 On the British side , General Clinton learned of the almost undefended Jamaica Pass from local Loyalists . Clinton drew up a plan and gave it to William Erskine to propose to Howe . Clinton 's plan had the main army making a night march and going through the Jamaica Pass to turn the American flank while other troops would keep the Americans busy in front . On August 26 , Clinton received word from Howe that the plan would be used , and that Clinton was to command the advance guard of the main army of 10 @,@ 000 men on the march through the Jamaica Pass . While they made the night march , General James Grant 's British troops along with some Hessians , a total of 4 @,@ 000 men , were to attack the Americans in front to distract them from the main army coming on their flank . Howe told Clinton to be ready to move out that night , August 26 . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Night march = = = 
 At 21 : 00 , the British moved out . No one except the commanders knew of the plan . Clinton led a crack brigade of light infantry with fixed bayonets in front , followed by Cornwallis who had eight battalions and 14 artillery pieces . Cornwallis was , in turn , followed by Howe and Hugh Percy with six battalions , more artillery , and baggage . The column consisted of 10 @,@ 000 men who stretched out over two miles . Three Loyalist farmers led the column toward the Jamaica Pass . The British had left their campfires burning to deceive the Americans into thinking that nothing was happening . The column headed northeast until it reached what later became the village of New Lots when it headed directly north , toward the heights . 
 The column had yet to run into any American troops when they reached Howard 's Tavern ( also known as Howard 's Half @-@ Way House ) , just a few hundred yards from the Jamaica Pass . The tavern keeper , William Howard , and his son William Jr. were forced to act as guides to show the British the way to the Rockaway Foot Path , an old Indian trail that skirted the Jamaica Pass to the west ( located today in the Cemetery of the Evergreens ) . Five minutes after leaving the tavern , the five American militia officers stationed at the pass were captured without a shot fired , as they thought the British were Americans . Clinton interrogated the men and they informed him that they were the only troops guarding the pass . By dawn the British were through the pass and stopped so that the troops could rest . At 09 : 00 , they fired two heavy cannons to signal the Hessian troops below Battle Pass to begin their frontal assault against Sullivan 's men deployed on the two hills flanking the pass , while Clinton 's troops simultaneously flanked the American positions from the east . 
 = = = Grant 's diversionary attack = = = 
 At about 23 : 00 on August 26 , the first shots of the Battle of Long Island were fired , near the Red Lion Inn ( near present @-@ day 39th Street and 4th Avenue ) . American pickets - part of Samuel John Atlee 's Pennsylvania regiment - fired upon two British soldiers who were foraging in a watermelon patch near the inn . 
 Around 01 : 00 on August 27 , the British approached the vicinity of the Red Lion with between 200 – 300 troops . The American troops fired upon the British and after approximately two fusillades , fled up the Gowanus Road toward the Vechte @-@ Cortelyou House . Major Edward Burd , who had been in command , was captured along with a lieutenant and 15 privates . This first engagement was fought in the vicinity of 38th and 39th streets between 2nd and 3rd avenues near a swamp located adjacent to the Gowanus Road . 
 Newly promoted brigadier general , Samuel Holden Parsons , a lawyer from Connecticut who had recently secured a commission in the Continental Army , and Colonel Atlee , in command of the First Regiment of Pennsylvania Musketry - a veteran of the French and Indian War - were stationed further north on the Gowanus Road . Putnam had been awakened by a guard at 03 : 00 and told that the British were attacking through the Gowanus Pass . Putnam lit signals to Washington who was on Manhattan and then rode south to warn Stirling of the attack . 
 Stirling led two units of Colonel John Haslet 's , 1st Delaware Regiment under the immediate command of Major Thomas Macdonough , and Colonel William Smallwood 's 1st Maryland Infantry under the immediate command of Major Mordecai Gist - both Haslet and Smallwood were on courts @-@ martial duty in Manhattan . Following close behind was Parson 's Connecticut regiment with 251 men . Stirling led this combined force to reinforce Parsons and Atlee and stop the British advance . Stirling had a total of 1 @,@ 600 troops at his command . 
 Stirling placed Atlee 's men in an apple @-@ orchard owned by <unk> Bennett on the south side of the Gowanus Road near present @-@ day 3rd Avenue and 18th Street . Upon the approach of the British the Americans ... 
 took possession of a hill about two miles from camp , and detached Colonel Atlee to meet them further on the road ; in about sixty rods he drew up and received the enemy 's fire and gave them a well @-@ directed fire from his regiment , which did great execution , and then retreated to the hill . - General Parsons 
 Stirling , along with the Delaware and Maryland regiments , took up positions just to the north of Atlee 's men on the slopes of a rise of land between 18th and 20th streets . Some of the Maryland troops were positioned on a small hill - called " <unk> Berg " ( Dutch : cube or block hill ) by the local Dutch – near 23rd Street . At the base of this hill the Gowanus Road crossed a small bridge over a ditch which drained a marshy area . When the British advanced up the Gowanus Road the American troops fired upon them from positions on the north side of the ditch . To the left was Colonel Peter <unk> 's Pennsylvania regiment . 
 Just to the southeast of <unk> Berg were a few hills , amongst them was a hill which is the highest point in King 's County at 220 feet which came to be known as " Battle Hill " – in what is today Greenwood Cemetery by the cemetery 's boundary of 23rd Street and 7th Avenue . The British attempted to outflank the American positions by taking this hill . The Americans , trying to prevent the British move , also sent troops under Parsons and Atlee to take the hill . The British got there first but the Americans were able to dislodge them in fierce fighting . 
 Battle Hill was the site of especially brutal fighting , with the Americans inflicting the highest number of casualties against the British troops during the entire Battle of Long Island . Among those killed was a British colonel , James Grant , which led the Americans to erroneously believe that they had killed General James Grant . He was alleged to have been shot by a Pennsylvanian rifleman who had been sniping at the British from up in a tree . Amongst the American dead was a Pennsylvanian colonel , Caleb Parry , who was killed while rallying his troops . 
 In part due to the ferocity of the fighting and the number of British troops engaged , the Americans were still unaware that this was not the main British attack . 
 = = = Battle Pass = = = 
 The Hessians , in the center under the command of General von Heister , began to bombard the American lines stationed at Battle Pass under the command of General John Sullivan . The Hessian brigades , waiting for the pre @-@ arranged signal from the British , who at that time were in the process of outflanking the American lines , did not attack . The Americans , still under the assumption that Grant 's attack up the Gowanus Road was the main thrust had Sullivan send four @-@ hundred of his men to reinforce Stirling . 
 Howe fired his signal guns at 09 : 00 and the Hessians began to attack up Battle Pass while the main army came at Sullivan from the rear . Sullivan left his advance guard to hold off the Hessians while he turned the rest of his force around to fight the British . Heavy casualties mounted between the Americans and the British and men on both sides fled out of fear . Sullivan attempted to calm his men and tried to lead a retreat . By this point the Hessians had overrun the advance guard on the heights and the American left had completely collapsed . Hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting followed with the Americans swinging their muskets and rifles like clubs to save their own lives . Many of the Americans who surrendered were bayoneted by the Hessians . Sullivan , despite the chaos , managed to evacuate most of his men to Brooklyn Heights though he himself was captured . 
 = = = Vechte @-@ Cortelyou House = = = 
 At 09 : 00 , Washington arrived from Manhattan . Washington realized that he had been wrong about a feint on Long Island and he ordered more troops to Brooklyn from Manhattan . Washington 's location on the battlefield is not known , because accounts differ , but most likely he was at Brooklyn Heights , where he could view the battle . 
 On the American right , to the west , Stirling still held the line against Grant . Stirling held on for four hours , still unaware of the British flanking maneuver , and some of his own troops thought they were winning the day because the British had been unable to take their position . However , by 11 : 00 , Grant , reinforced by 2 @,@ 000 marines , hit Stirling 's center and Stirling was attacked on his left by the Hessians . Stirling pulled back but British troops were , at this point , coming at him in his rear south down the Gowanus Road . The only escape route left was across a Brouwer 's millpond on the Gowanus Creek which was 80 yards wide , on the other side of Brooklyn Heights . 
 = = = = Maryland 400 = = = = 
 Stirling ordered all of his troops , except a contingent of Maryland troops under the command of Gist , to cross the creek . This group of Maryland troops became known to history as the " Maryland 400 " , although they numbered about 260 – 270 men . Stirling and Gist led the troops in a rear @-@ guard action against the overwhelming numbers of British troops which surpassed 2 @,@ 000 supported by two cannons . Stirling and Gist led the Marylanders in two attacks against the British who were in fixed positions in and in front of the Vechte @-@ Cortelyou House ( known today as the Old Stone House ) . After the last assault , the remaining troops retreated across the Gowanus Creek . Some of the men who tried to cross the marsh were bogged down in the mud and under musket fire and others who could not swim were captured . Stirling was surrounded and , unwilling to surrender , broke through the British lines to von Heister 's Hessians and surrendered to them . Two hundred fifty six Maryland troops were killed in the assaults in front of the Old Stone House , and fewer than a dozen made it back to the American lines . Washington , watching from a redoubt on nearby Cobble Hill ( intersection of today 's Court Street and Atlantic Avenue ) , reportedly said , " Good God , what brave fellows I must this day lose . " 
 = = = Disengagement = = = 
 After those American troops not killed or captured escaped behind the fortified American positions centered on Brooklyn Heights , Howe , in a move considered controversial to this day , ordered all of his troops to halt the attack , despite the protestations of many of the officers in his command who believed that they should push on to Brooklyn Heights . Howe had decided against a direct frontal assault against the entrenched American positions choosing instead to begin a siege and setting up lines of circumvallation around the American positions , which he believed to be essentially trapped , with his troops blocking escape by land and the Royal Navy in control of the East River , which they would have to cross to reach Manhattan Island . 
 Howe 's failure to press the attack , and the reasons for it , have been disputed . He may have wished to avoid the casualties his army suffered when attacking the <unk> under similar circumstances at the Battle of Bunker Hill . He may also , in the European gentleman @-@ officer tradition , have been giving Washington an opportunity to conclude that his position was hopeless and surrender . Howe told Parliament in 1779 that his essential duty was to avoid excessive British casualties for insufficient purpose , and capturing Brooklyn Heights would likely not have meant capturing the entire American army . " The loss of 1 @,@ 000 , or perhaps 1 @,@ 500 British troops , in carrying those lines , would have been but ill repaid by double that number of the enemy , could it have been supposed they would have suffered in that proportion . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Retreat to Manhattan = = = 
 Washington and the army were surrounded on Brooklyn Heights with the East River to their backs . As the day went on , the British began to dig trenches , slowly coming closer to the American defenses . By doing this , the British would not have to cross over open ground to assault the American defenses as they did in Boston the year before . Despite this perilous situation , Washington ordered 1 @,@ 200 more men from Manhattan to Brooklyn on August 28 . The men that came over were two Pennsylvania regiments and Colonel John Glover 's regiment from Marblehead , Massachusetts . In command of the Pennsylvanian troops was Thomas Mifflin who , after arriving , volunteered to inspect the outer defenses and report back to Washington . In these outer defenses , small skirmishes were still taking place . On the afternoon of August 28 , it began to rain and Washington had his cannons bombard the British well into the night . 
 As the rain continued , Washington sent a letter instructing General William Heath , who was at Kings Bridge between Manhattan and what is now the Bronx , to send every flat @-@ bottomed boat and sloop without delay , in case battalions of infantry from New Jersey came to reinforce their position . At 16 : 00 , on August 29 , Washington held a meeting with his generals . Mifflin advised Washington to retreat to Manhattan while Mifflin and his Pennsylvania regiments made up the rear guard , holding the line until the rest of the army had withdrawn . The generals agreed unanimously with Mifflin that retreat was the best option and Washington had orders go out by the evening . 
 The troops were told that they were to gather up all their ammunition and baggage and prepare for a night attack . By 21 : 00 , the sick and wounded began to move to the Brooklyn Ferry in preparation for evacuation . At 23 : 00 , Glover and his Massachusetts men , who were sailors and fishermen , began to evacuate the troops . 
 As more troops were evacuated , more were ordered to withdraw from the lines and march to the ferry landing . Wagon wheels were muffled , and men were forbidden to talk . Mifflin 's rear guard was tending campfires to deceive the British and convince them that nothing was going on . At 04 : 00 , on August 30 , Mifflin was informed that it was his unit 's turn to evacuate . Mifflin told the man who had been sent to order him to leave , Major Alexander Scammell , that he must be mistaken , but Scammell insisted that he was not and Mifflin ordered his troops to move out . When Mifflin 's troops were within a half mile of the ferry landing , Washington rode up and demanded to know why they were not at their defenses . Edward Hand , who was leading the troops , tried to explain what had happened , but Mifflin arrived shortly . Washington exclaimed " Good God . General Mifflin , I am afraid you have ruined us . " Mifflin explained that he had been told that it was his turn to evacuate by Scammell ; Washington told him it had been a mistake . Mifflin then led his troops back to the outer defenses . 
 Artillery , supplies , and troops were all being evacuated across the river at this time but it was not going as fast as Washington had anticipated and daybreak soon came . A fog settled in and concealed the evacuation from the British . British patrols noticed that there did not seem to be any American pickets and thus began to search the area . While they were doing this , Washington , the last man left , stepped onto the last boat . At 07 : 00 , the last American troops landed in Manhattan . All 9 @,@ 000 troops had been evacuated with no loss of life . 
 = = = Conclusion of the campaign = = = 
 The British were stunned to find that Washington and the army had escaped . Later in the day , August 30 , the British troops occupied the American fortifications . When news of the battle reached London , it caused many festivities to take place . Bells were rung across the city , candles were lit in windows and King George III gave Howe the Order of the Bath . 
 Washington 's defeat revealed his deficiencies as a strategist who split his forces , his inexperienced generals who misunderstood the situation , and his raw troops that fled in disorder at the first shots . However , his daring nighttime retreat has been seen by some historians as one of his greatest military feats . Other historians concentrate on the failure of British naval forces to prevent the withdrawal . 
 Howe remained inactive for the next half month , not attacking until September 15 when he landed a force at Kip 's Bay . The British quickly occupied the city . On September 21 , a fire of uncertain origin destroyed a quarter of New York City . In the immediate aftermath of the fire Nathan Hale was executed for spying . Although American troops delivered an unexpected check to the British at Harlem Heights in mid @-@ September , Howe defeated Washington in battle again at White Plains and then again at Fort Washington . Because of these defeats , Washington and the army retreated across New Jersey and into Pennsylvania . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 At the time , it was by far the largest battle ever fought in North America . If the Royal Navy is included , over 40 @,@ 000 men took part in the battle . Howe reported his losses as 59 killed , 268 wounded and 31 missing . The Hessian casualties were 5 killed and 26 wounded . The Americans suffered much heavier losses . About 300 had been killed and over 1 @,@ 000 captured . As few as half of the prisoners survived . Kept on prison ships , then transferred to locations such as the Middle Dutch Church , they were starved and denied medical attention . In their weakened condition , many succumbed to smallpox . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The most significant legacy of the Battle of Long Island was that it showed there would be no easy victory , and that the war would be long and bloody . 
 Commemorations of the battle include : 
 The Altar to Liberty : Minerva monument : The battle is commemorated with a monument , which includes a bronze statue of Minerva near the top of Battle Hill , the highest point of Brooklyn , in Green @-@ Wood Cemetery . The statue was sculpted by Frederick <unk> and unveiled in 1920 . The statue stands in the northwest corner of the cemetery and gazes directly at the Statue of Liberty in New York Harbor . In 2006 , the Minerva statue was invoked in a successful defense to prevent a building from blocking the line of sight from the cemetery to the Statue of Liberty in the harbor . The annual Battle of Long Island commemoration is held inside the main Gothic arch entrance to Green @-@ Wood Cemetery . 
 The Prison Ship Martyrs ' Monument : A freestanding Doric column in Fort Greene memorializing all those who died while kept prisoner on the British ships just off the shore of Brooklyn , in <unk> Bay . 
 Soldiers ' Monument - Milford , Connecticut . <unk> the 200 seriously ill prisoners of the Battle of Long Island who were dumped on the beach at Milford the night of January 3 , 1777 . 
 The Old Stone House : A re @-@ constructed farmhouse ( <unk> ) that was at the center of the Marylanders ' delaying actions serves as a museum of the battle . It is located in J.J. Byrne Park , at Third Street and Fifth Avenue , Brooklyn , and features models and maps . 
 Prospect Park , Brooklyn , Battle Pass : along the eastern side of Center Drive in Prospect Park , Brooklyn , is a large granite boulder with a brass plaque affixed , and another marker lies near the road for the Dongan Oak , a very large and old tree felled to block the pass from the British advance . In addition , in the park resides the Line of Defense marker erected by the Sons of the American Revolution and , near the eastern edge of Long Meadow , the Maryland Monument & Maryland Memorial corinthian column . 
 There are only thirty currently existing units in the U.S. Army with lineages that go back to the colonial and revolutionary eras . Five Army National Guard units ( 101st Eng Bn , 125th MP Co , 175th Inf , 181st Inf and 198th Sig Bn ) and one Regular Army Field Artillery battalion ( 1 @-@ 5th FA ) are derived from American units that participated in the Battle of Long Island . 
 = Alimuddin ( cricketer ) = 
 Alimuddin ( Urdu : <unk> <unk> ; 15 December 1930 – 12 July 2012 ) was a Pakistani cricketer who played 25 Tests for Pakistan between 1954 and 1962 . A fast @-@ scoring , right @-@ handed opening batsman and occasional right @-@ arm leg break bowler , he was the youngest player ever to appear in first @-@ class cricket , aged 12 years and 73 days . In international cricket , he scored 1 @,@ 091 runs at the average of 25 @.@ 37 , including two centuries and seven fifties . In 1954 , he was a member of the Pakistani squad which toured England and recorded Pakistan 's first Test match win . Former Pakistani captain Mushtaq Mohammad said about him that he was " a thorough gentleman as well as a great cricketer for Pakistan " . 
 = = First @-@ class career = = 
 During his career Alimuddin played 140 first @-@ class matches and scored 7 @,@ 275 runs , with the average of 32 @.@ 77 , including 14 centuries and 38 fifties ; he also took 40 wickets . Critics considered him to be an excellent fielder . He made his debut for Rajasthan aged only 12 years 73 days , becoming the youngest player to have played first @-@ class cricket . In 1942 – 43 , he played his maiden match in the Ranji Trophy , scoring 13 and 27 runs in his two innings . His highest score in first @-@ class cricket was 142 , against Worcestershire in 1954 . Domestically , Alimuddin represented Sindh , Rajasthan , Karachi , Bahawalpur and Gujarat , and became the first Pakistani batsman to face a ball bowled by an international bowler on Pakistani soil , in a match between the Sindh and West Indians in 1948 . During Pakistan 's 1954 tour of England , Alimuddin scored more than 700 runs , including two centuries in the first two matches . He was most successful during 1961 – 62 , scoring 1 @,@ 020 runs in 12 matches at an average of 51 @.@ 00 . In the same season he captained Karachi , leading the team to victories in the Quaid @-@ e @-@ Azam Trophy and Ayub Zonal Trophy . His final season in first @-@ class cricket was 1967 – 68 . 
 = = International career = = 
 Alimuddin played 25 Test matches for Pakistan during his career and scored 1 @,@ 091 runs in international cricket at the average of 25 @.@ 37 . He made two centuries and seven fifties . Cricket critics believed that he possessed a sound technique . In Test matches , Alimuddin established an effective opening partnership with Hanif Mohammad . 
 Alimuddin started his international career against England in June 1954 , at the Lord 's Cricket Ground , in a match in which he scored 19 runs . In the fourth Test of the same series Pakistan beat England by 24 runs , recording their first Test win over them to become the first team to defeat England during their maiden tour . Alimuddin managed to score 10 runs in the match . In 1954 – 55 , he played , against India , in Pakistan 's first home Tests , finishing the series as the leading run scorer with 332 ; he made three fifties and in the fifth match scored 103 not out at the National Stadium , Karachi , his first international century . He was the first batsman ever to make an international century on the Ground . 
 Alimuddin also toured West Indies as a part of Pakistan cricket team in 1957 – 58 . He was not successful in the series and his highest score remained 41 runs which he made in the fourth Test at the Bourda , Georgetown , Guyana . In 1962 , under the captaincy of Javed Burki , Pakistan visited England where they played a five Test match series . In the fifth Test at Headingley , a low scoring match for Pakistan , Alimuddin 's scores of 50 and 60 made him the team 's highest scorer of the match . In the fifth Test of the home series against England in 1962 , he scored his career best 109 runs at the National Stadium . He played his last match against England in Trent Bridge , Nottingham in 1962 . 
 Former West Indian all @-@ rounder Collie Smith was his only wicket in international cricket . 
 Many reference works , including Wisden , refer to him as " Alim @-@ ud @-@ Din " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Alimuddin was born in Ajmer , a city in British India , on 15 December 1930 . After the independence of Pakistan in 1947 , he moved to Karachi along with his family . He lived in London and never married , instead providing for his family . Pakistan International Airlines ( PIA ) had given him an opportunity to work at London Heathrow Airport . Two of his brothers , <unk> and <unk> , both also played first @-@ class cricket . His nephew , James Uddin , the son of <unk> , is also a cricketer and currently plays semi @-@ professional cricket in England . 
 = = Death = = 
 On 12 July 2012 , Alimuddin died in Northwick Park Hospital , Harrow , London . He suffered from heart and lung diseases . He also had kidney failure and was on dialysis . The Pakistan Cricket Board ( PCB ) released a press statement expressing sorrow and conveying condolences to Alimuddin 's family . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Records against opponents = = = 
 Key 
 = = = Test centuries = = = 
 = Digger T. Rock = 
 Digger T. Rock : Legend of the Lost City is a platform video game developed by Rare and published by the Milton Bradley Company for the Nintendo Entertainment System . It was first released in North America in December 1990 and in Europe in 1991 . The game centres around the miner Digger T. Rock , as he <unk> various caves and catacombs whilst searching for the mythical Lost City . 
 The game was the first game to be developed by the newly re @-@ branded Rare , whereas the first game to be released under the company was Solar Jetman , earlier in 1990 . Digger T. Rock is also the first Rare game released for a Nintendo console . The game received mixed reviews upon release , with praise directed at its playability but was criticised for its poor graphics and presentation . It was later included in Rare 's 2015 Xbox One retrospective compilation , Rare Replay . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is divided into eight caverns , which must be explored whilst avoiding death from enemy attacks , cave @-@ in 's , and fatal falls . The player @-@ character , Digger T. Rock , can utilise multiple tools such as ladders , shovels , armour , and explosives , which can be used to explore and discover new areas . Monsters such as moles , mosquitoes , and dragons seek to kill the player @-@ character . Digger 's only defence is his shovel , which can be used to attack enemies as well as mining stone . The player starts the game with three lives . 
 The goal in each cavern is to locate both the end of level door and the special pillar which unlocks it . When stepped on , the pillar activates a countdown timer , during which the door is open . Once the timer is active , the player must get to the door before the timer ends and the door re @-@ closes . There are multiple bonus games in between levels where the player can amass more treasure . Later levels include caveman villages where the player can purchase new tools with collected treasure as a currency . 
 = = Development = = 
 Ashby Computers and Graphics was founded by brothers Tim and Chris Stamper , along with Tim 's wife , Carol , from their headquarters in Ashby @-@ de @-@ la @-@ Zouch in 1982 . Under the trading name of Ultimate Play The Game , they began producing multiple video games for the ZX Spectrum throughout the early 1980s . The company were known for their reluctance to reveal details about their operations and upcoming projects . Little was known about their development process except that they used to work in " separate teams " ; one team would work on graphics whilst the other would concentrate on other aspects such as sound or graphics . 
 Digger T. Rock was the first game to be developed by the newly re @-@ branded Rare . During the late 1980s , the Stamper brothers sold the rights of Ultimate Play The Game to U.S. Gold and shifted their focus from the British home computing market to broader home console gaming . Rare became one of the first western developers to be granted a licence by Nintendo to produce games for the Nintendo Entertainment System , during which Rare began employing more staff and expanding their operations in order to develop more games for home consoles . Digger T. Rock and Solar Jetman were the first games by Rare to be released on a Nintendo console , both in 1990 . They were both later included in Rare 's 2015 Xbox One retrospective compilation , Rare Replay . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received mixed reviews upon release . Julian Rignall of Mean Machines compared the game to <unk> , stating that Digger T. Rock offers superior gameplay and graphics . Steve Jarrett of Total ! criticised the graphics , stating that the dominant rocky landscapes were " too barren " . Ringall , on the other hand , stated that the graphics were well @-@ animated and the sprites to be " neatly @-@ defined " . However , Ringall criticised the game 's presentation , noting that the introduction and options of the game were " sparse " . 
 The playability and " life @-@ span " of the game also gained mixed views . Ringall praised the game 's playability and " <unk> " , stating that the game is " easy to get into " and was addictive . Regarding its replay value , Ringall asserted that the large number of levels in the game would keep the player occupied and provided an " enjoyable challenge " . Jarrett stated the game requires " a lot of patience " and found certain aspects of it frustrating at times , especially the time limit required to progress to the next level . Jarrett also noted the number of levels to be " excessive " , and stated that he suspected " players may not want to dig that deep " . 
 = Metroid Prime Hunters = 
 Metroid Prime Hunters is a first @-@ person action @-@ adventure video game published by Nintendo and developed by its Redmond @-@ based subsidiary Nintendo Software Technology for the Nintendo DS handheld game console . A part of the Metroid series , it was released in North America in March 2006 ; in Europe and Australia in May 2006 ; and in Japan in June 2006 . The game features a single @-@ player campaign in which is set between the events of Metroid Prime and Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes . There , players assume the role of bounty hunter Samus Aran as she investigates a mysterious message that originated from the Alimbic solar system . 
 Hunters contains more first @-@ person shooter aspects than the previous titles in the Metroid Prime series , with removal of assisted aiming , more action @-@ oriented gameplay , and various multiplayer modes . The game was created to utilize the Nintendo DS hardware , such as Wi @-@ Fi and voice chat capabilities , and introduced other bounty hunters with unique weapons and alternative forms . Metroid Prime Hunters was announced by Nintendo at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2004 . A pack @-@ in demo version of the game , titled Metroid Prime Hunters : First Hunt , was included with the Nintendo DS when it launched in 2004 . 
 Reviews were generally favorable towards Hunters , with much praise to its gameplay and graphics , although it faced criticism to its control scheme . Metroid Prime Hunters received several honors ; including an " Editors ' Choice " award from IGN , which also named the game the " Best DS Action Game " of 2006 , while Nintendo Power gave it awards for " Best Graphics " , " Best Shooter / Action Game " , and " Best Wi @-@ Fi Functionality " . Over 410 @,@ 000 copies of the game were sold in North America in its first month of release , and it was the fourth best @-@ selling game during its debut month in Japan . Metroid Prime Hunters was re @-@ released on the Wii U 's Virtual Console service on September 30 , 2015 in Japan , and on June 2 , 2016 in North America . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like the previous titles in the Prime series , Metroid Prime Hunters is generally classified as a first @-@ person adventure to highlight the focus on navigation and discovery . However , the game differs from its predecessors with the removal of assisted aiming , more action @-@ oriented gameplay , and the inclusion of an online multiplayer mode . The player controls Samus Aran , who is equipped with a Power Suit that allows her to access her gunship from anywhere . She can scan almost any object in the game ; the gunship will return relevant information retrieved from its database . An Arm Cannon is attached to the Power Suit , which she uses to attack enemies . To enter small tunnels , Samus can roll into a Morph Ball , an alternative form of the Power Suit that decreases her size substantially . In this form , she is given an unlimited supply of bombs but is only allowed to use three at a time . She can use the bombs to defend herself and destroy small objects . 
 In Metroid Prime Hunters , the Nintendo DS 's top screen shows Samus 's HUD as seen from her visor , which displays the amount of remaining ammunition for the currently selected weapon along with her health ; in multiplayer games , the number of kills and time remaining in the round are also shown . The bottom touchscreen displays the radar . When using the default control scheme , movement is controlled using the D @-@ pad , and aiming is controlled by dragging the stylus along the touchscreen . 
 Metroid Prime Hunters features a multiplayer mode that supports up to four players and includes voice chat capability . In it , the player is able to control Samus or one of six other bounty hunters featured in the single @-@ player mode . Each bounty hunter has a unique alternative form , such as Samus 's Morph Ball , and a special weapon . The game host can set options for point and time limits , and restrict the use of radar . Computer @-@ controlled players of varying skill levels can be added to games if the minimum of four players is not met . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Metroid Prime Hunters takes place between Metroid Prime and Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes , and is set within the Alimbic Cluster in the Tetra Galaxy , where it was once ruled by the Alimbic race . One day , the Alimbic race disappeared without warning , leaving artifacts scattered throughout the solar system . In the present , the dormant Alimbic race telepathically broadcasts a message to bounty hunters and other intelligent species , stating the key to the " ultimate power " resides in the Alimbic solar system . The solar system consists of two planets ( <unk> and <unk> ) and two space stations ( the Celestial Archives and the Vesper Defense Outpost ) . 
 The protagonist of the single @-@ player " adventure mode " is bounty hunter Samus Aran , who investigates the Alimbic Cluster after the Galactic Federation receives a telepathic message . During the investigation , Samus is confronted by six other bounty hunters : Sylux , a deadly sharpshooter who harbors a strong hatred for the Federation and Samus by association ; <unk> , a cybernetic Space Pirate warrior who was injured in a battle with Samus ; Trace , a feared member of the <unk> Empire ; <unk> , a lab experiment and a supersoldier that was invincible ; <unk> , a bounty hunter of the proud and reclusive <unk> race ; and Spire , the last of the silicon @-@ based <unk> . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The governing body of the galaxy , the Galactic Federation , receives a strange telepathic message . The Federation broadcasts a message to bounty hunter Samus Aran , asking her to investigate and retrieve the " ultimate power " , and should it prove irretrievable , to keep it secret or destroy it outright . Six other bounty hunters intercept the transmission and proceed to the Alimbic solar system to claim the power for themselves . 
 Through investigation of the planets and space stations that orbit the Alimbic sun , Samus gradually pieces together the history of the Alimbic race . She discovers that they were a peaceful , spiritual , highly evolved society . The Alimbic utopia was shattered when a comet struck the planet ( <unk> ) , and out of it emerged a monstrous creature named Gorea . The creature copied the cellular structure of the <unk> , physically mimicking them and their weapons , and destroyed their civilization . Unable to stop Gorea 's rampage , the last of their race transformed themselves into focused telepathic energy , then confined Gorea into a " Seal Sphere " , which they placed in a starship called the Oubliette . The ship was launched into a dimensional rift called the Infinity Void , to be released only when eight keys called " <unk> " were assembled . 
 After warding off the other bounty hunters , Samus retrieves the eight <unk> and opens the Infinity Void . Here , she and the other six hunters confront Gorea , who originated the telepathic message in an attempt to free itself . After the beast absorbs the powers of Samus ' rivals , she defeats Gorea using the Alimbic weapon called the " Omega Cannon " . As Samus and the other hunters evacuate the exploding Oubliette on their respective ships , three Alimbic spirits appear before an <unk> Samus , and honor her with a salute . 
 = = Development = = 
 The development team for Metroid Prime Hunters at Nintendo Software Technology ( NST ) was led by the game 's director , Masamichi Abe and the lead technical engineer , Colin Reed , who had both previously worked together on several games , including the Nintendo games Pikmin and 1080 ° Snowboarding . The team for Hunters was composed of thirty people , which Abe noted was larger than the development team of most other Nintendo DS games . Kensuke Tanabe of Nintendo came up with the original idea for the game . Retro Studios , which developed previous Metroid Prime games , was unable to develop Metroid Prime Hunters because it was already working on a game . Therefore , Tanabe contacted NST with the idea , and let them develop it instead . NST developed the game instead of Nintendo themselves because Nintendo wanted the division to influence Metroid Prime Hunters with western ideals , styles , and presentation . 
 While developing the game , most of NST 's efforts were focused on its multiplayer aspect because of its first @-@ person shooter gameplay , and to take advantage of the Wi @-@ Fi and voice chat capabilities of the Nintendo DS . One of the game 's designers , Richard <unk> , noted that " the hardware kinda dictated [ their focus onto the game 's multiplayer mode ] . " Wanting to introduce a new element to the Metroid series , Abe created several new bounty hunters after he realized that the game 's multiplayer mode and the new bounty hunters could both be implemented seamlessly into the game : " We had this idea early on and thought that would be a good way to introduce [ Metroid Prime Hunters ] and [ the new bounty hunters ] to the gameplay and take advantage of that in the multiplayer . " Metroid Prime Hunters includes several references to previous games in the Metroid Prime series . Samus ' ship is from the original Metroid Prime , and her suit is the same one that appears in Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes . The developers decided to add them because they wanted to show that the technology has evolved , and they also wanted to include something that was instantly recognizable to those who had played previous games in the series . On level design , Abe said that as the game 's controls shifted from an analog stick method to touchscreen aiming , " our real focus in designing the levels was just to make sure that the actual gameplay didn 't get more difficult or the actual control didn 't get more difficult . " 
 Metroid Prime Hunters was first revealed at the Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) 2004 , with IGN gave the game their Best Nintendo DS Game of E3 award . When Nintendo received negative feedback at E3 2005 about the game 's lack of an online feature , the company announced in August 2005 that the game 's release would be delayed to give the developers time to implement Nintendo WFC support . After the game 's release was delayed to give NST time to implement the multiplayer feature , the developers took the time to make more changes . They worked on the game 's framerate to make the graphics move more smoothly . The game 's visuals were improved ; a developer added reflections to the Morph Ball . The other developers admired the effect , and added it to other parts of the game . NST collaborated with Retro Studios , the company behind several Metroid games , to design the game 's art and characters to make sure that they fit into the overall Metroid series . When asked why Metroid Prime Hunters was placed between Metroid Prime and Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes chronologically , Reed noted that the game was not influenced by the story of either game , so there were no continuity issues . He described Hunters as a side story to the Metroid Prime series . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 A preview of Metroid Prime Hunters was featured at E3 2004 , which players control different colored variations of Samus in a deathmatch . A demo version , titled Metroid Prime Hunters : First Hunt , was included as a pack @-@ in game with the Nintendo DS when it launched in North America on November 21 , 2004 . As a single @-@ player game , it consisted of training scenarios with no specific plot , while the multiplayer portion allowed up to four players to compete via the Nintendo DS ' local wireless communications . GamesRadar wrote a positive review for the demo , citing it as " a fine showcase for demonstrating what the [ Nintendo DS ] hardware is capable of " . In early 2006 , a preview video for Hunters was made available for download through the DS Download Station . A playable demo was also available from the Download Station in North America . 
 Nintendo promoted the release of Metroid Prime Hunters in the United States with a television commercial , featuring a gravedigger burying dead bounty hunters in a futuristic setting . It was directed by Len Wiseman , known for his work on the Underworld series , and was produced by the Leo Burnett Worldwide , while the special effects were handled by <unk> . According to Wiseman , the commercial intends to " give the players a sense of how high the body count is going to be in this game , the amount of mayhem , and just how vicious Samus can be . " On May 20 , 2006 , Nintendo of Europe and HMV held the " Hunt Is On Tournament " tournament in several locations throughout the United Kingdom , with BT <unk> provided a video link . 
 Metroid Prime Hunters was released on March 20 , 2006 in North America . This was followed by the release in Europe on May 5 , 2006 ; in Australia on May 23 , 2006 ; in Japan on June 1 , 2006 ; and in South Korea on December 6 , 2007 . The game was later re @-@ released on the Wii U 's Virtual Console service , in Japan on September 30 , 2015 , and in North America on June 2 , 2016 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Metroid Prime Hunters was given " generally favorable " reviews , according to Metacritic . Several reviews praised the amount of value that Metroid Prime Hunters offered on the Nintendo DS handheld video game console . GameZone considered the game phenomenal , and believed that it used the DS to its maximum potential regarding graphical ability and innovation . The Toronto Sun remarked that the graphics were big enough selling points on their own for the game , and The Press called Metroid Prime Hunters the best @-@ looking game for the Nintendo DS . The Australian agreed that the graphics are " outstanding " and push the Nintendo DS to its limits , and The Independent asserted that Metroid Prime Hunters was perhaps the best first @-@ person shooter ever for a handheld console . GamePro 's review stated that " it 's hard to imagine how Nintendo squeezed Hunters into a tiny DS cartridge . " Despite a few " small quirks " , the magazine noted that Hunters " is a very polished game " . The Times concurred with these claims , remarking , " A lot of thought has clearly gone into making the most of the DS 's touch @-@ screen capability here , and it works gloriously . " 
 Game Revolution admired the " high @-@ quality work " found in the game 's production design and smooth online play . 1UP.com asserted that fans of the Metroid series should recognize the technical achievements that the game showcases . GamesRadar lauded Metroid Prime Hunters ' gameplay , and believed that the game was strictly for hardcore gamers " who live for <unk> " . Convinced that making a Metroid game different from its slow @-@ paced adventure predecessors into a " nail @-@ biting wrecking ball " was a " risky trick " , they appreciated the results , stating , " Damn did it ever work . " Both GameSpot and Game Informer enjoyed the game 's " worthwhile " and " electrifying " multiplayer mode . Nintendo Power praised the game as a " new @-@ school , action @-@ packed " game that makes a " great addition to the growing collection of Wi @-@ Fi titles " , and The Guardian claimed the game 's multiplayer aspect as their favorite feature . The Sunday Times wrote that Metroid Prime Hunters does a " staggering job " of replicating the style of previous Metroid Prime games . 
 Complaints about the game stemmed primarily from its control scheme . IGN found that the high learning curve and " cramp @-@ inducing " control scheme made it difficult to play . This sentiment was shared by Electronic Gaming Monthly , which claimed that placing the interface used to switch visors and weapons on the touchscreen made the process unnecessarily complex . The magazine was also disappointed with the game 's single @-@ player mode , claiming that it does not live up to the experience offered in previous games in the Metroid Prime series . They criticized the levels as " contrived and predictable " , and noted that the designs felt too formulaic " after a few worlds of hunting for keys , fighting repeat bosses , and escaping before the bomb blows " . The Washington Times agreed that the game 's repetitiveness eventually grew tiring , and that " manipulating the DS controls will be a painfully cramped endeavor " . 
 Concurring with this sentiment , GameSpy noted that using the stylus to play the game felt a bit strange . Eurogamer also expressed their disapproval of the control scheme , predicting it would lead to " the coming years of physiotherapy on [ their ] arms " . They were also unhappy with the game 's " flimsy " multiplayer experience , noting that it is best used when played locally with friends who also have the game . X @-@ Play had particularly negative sentiments about the game , stating , " This feels like yet another genre shoehorned poorly onto hardware that just isn ’ t equipped to handle it . " 
 Metroid Prime Hunters was the fourth best @-@ selling game in its debut month in Japan , selling 32 @,@ 467 units , and has since sold over 90 @,@ 000 units there . Over 410 @,@ 000 units of the game were sold in North America in its first month . Hunters received several awards and honors . IGN gave it an " Editors ' Choice " award , and named it the " Best DS Action Game " of 2006 . The game also received the awards for " Best Graphics " , " Best Shooter / Action Game " , and " Best Wi @-@ Fi Functionality " from Nintendo Power for 2006 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Sylux made a minor appearance in Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption , where he follows Samus in the game 's ending . Tanabe said in E3 2015 that he wanted to create a story that centers around Samus and Sylux , noting that " [ t ] here 's something going on between them . I want to make a game that touches upon [ it ] . " With the upcoming Nintendo 3DS game , Metroid Prime : Federation Force , Tanabe hopes that Federation Force 's plot will lead to future Metroid Prime games based on the relationship between Samus and Sylux , with additional involvement from the Galactic Federation marines . 
 = Gods ' Man = 
 Gods ' Man is a wordless novel by American artist Lynd Ward ( 1905 – 1985 ) published in 1929 . In 139 captionless woodblock prints it tells the Faustian story of an artist who signs away his soul for a magic paintbrush . Gods ' Man was the first American wordless novel , and is seen as a precursor of , and influence on , the development of the graphic novel . 
 Ward first encountered the wordless novel with Frans Masereel 's The Sun ( 1919 ) while studying art in Germany in 1926 . He returned to the United States in 1927 and established a career for himself as an illustrator . He found Otto Nückel 's wordless novel Destiny ( 1926 ) in New York City in 1929 , and it inspired him to create such a work of his own . Gods ' Man appeared a week before the Wall Street Crash of 1929 ; it nevertheless enjoyed strong sales and remains the best @-@ selling American wordless novel . Its success inspired other Americans to experiment with the medium , including cartoonist Milt Gross , who parodied Gods ' Man in He Done Her Wrong ( 1930 ) . In the 1970s Ward 's example inspired cartoonists Art Spiegelman and Will Eisner to create their first graphic novels . 
 = = Content = = 
 The wordless novel Gods ' Man is a silent narrative made up of prints of 139 engraved woodblocks . Each image moves the story forward by an interval Ward chooses to maintain story flow . Ward wrote in Storyteller Without Words ( 1974 ) that too great an interval would put too much interpretational burden on the reader , while too little would make the story tedious . Wordless novel historian David A. Beronä likens these concerns with the storytelling methods of comics . 
 The artwork is executed in black and white ; the images vary in size and dimension , up to 6 by 4 inches ( 15 cm × 10 cm ) , the size of the opening and closing images of each chapter . Ward uses symbolic contrast of dark and light to emphasize the corruption of the city , where even in daylight the buildings darken the skies ; in the countryside , the scenes are bathed in natural light . Ward exaggerates facial expression to convey emotion without resorting to words . Composition also conveys emotion : in the midst of his fame , an image has the artist framed by raised <unk> ; the faces of those holding the glasses are not depicted , highlighting the isolation the artist feels . The story parallels the Faust theme , and the artwork and execution show the influence of film , in particular those of German studio Ufa . 
 The placement of the apostrophe in the title Gods ' Man implies a plurality of gods , rather than Christianity 's monotheistic God . It alludes to a line from the play <unk> by ancient Roman playwright Plautus : " He whom the gods favor , dies young . " 
 = = = Plot synopsis = = = 
 A poor artist signs a contract with a masked stranger , who gives him a magic brush , with which the artist rapidly rises in the art world . He is disillusioned when he discovers the world is corrupted by money , personified by his mistress . He wanders around the city , seeing his auctioneer and mistress in everyone he sees . Enraged by the hallucinations , he attacks one of them , who turns out to be a police officer . The artist is jailed for it , but he escapes , and a mob chases him from the city . He is injured when he jumps into a ravine to avoid recapture . A woman who lives in the woods discovers him and brings him back to health . They have a child , and live a simple , happy life together , until the mysterious stranger returns and beckons the artist to the edge of a cliff . The artist prepares to paint a portrait of the stranger but fatally falls from the cliff with fright when the stranger reveals a skull @-@ like head behind the mask . 
 = = Background = = 
 Chicago @-@ born Lynd Ward ( 1905 – 1985 ) was a son of Methodist minister Harry F. Ward ( 1873 – 1966 ) , a social activist and the first chairman of the American Civil Liberties Union . Throughout his career , Ward displayed in his work the influence of his father 's interest in social injustice . He was early drawn to art , and decided to become an artist when his first @-@ grade teacher told him that " Ward " spelled backward was " draw " . He excelled as a student , and contributed art and text to high school and college newspapers . 
 In 1926 Ward married writer May McNeer and the couple left for an extended honeymoon in Europe after graduating from Teachers College , Columbia University . After four months in eastern Europe , the couple settled in Leipzig in Germany for a year , where Ward studied as a special one @-@ year student at the National Academy of Graphic Arts and <unk> , where Ward studied wood engraving . There he encountered German Expressionist art , and read the wordless novel The Sun ( 1919 ) by Flemish woodcut artist Frans Masereel ( 1889 – 1972 ) . The Sun was a modernized version of the story of Icarus , told in sixty @-@ three wordless woodcut prints . 
 Ward returned to the United States in 1927 , and freelanced his illustrations . In 1929 , he came across German artist Otto Nückel 's wordless novel Destiny ( 1926 ) in New York City . Nückel 's only work in the genre , Destiny told of the life and death of a prostitute in a style inspired by Masereel 's , but with a greater cinematic flow . The work inspired Ward to create a wordless novel of his own , whose story sprang from his " youthful brooding " on the short , tragic lives of artists such as Van Gogh , Toulouse @-@ Lautrec , Keats , and Shelley ; Ward 's argument in the work was " that creative talent is the result of a bargain in which the chance to create is exchanged for the blind promise of an early grave " . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 In March 1929 Ward showed the first thirty blocks to Harrison Smith ( 1888 – 1971 ) of the publisher Cape & Smith . Smith offered him a contract and told him the work would be the lead title in the company 's first catalog if Ward could finish it by the summer 's end . The first printing appeared that October ; it had trade and deluxe editions . The trade edition was printed from electrotype plates made from molds of the original boxwood woodblocks ; the deluxe edition was printed from the original woodblocks themselves , and was a signed edition limited to 409 copies , printed on acid @-@ free paper , bound in black cloth , and sheathed in a slipcase . The pages were printed on the recto face of the page ; the verso was left blank . It was dedicated to three of Ward 's teachers : his wood engraving teacher in Leipzig , Hans Alexander " Theodore " Mueller ( 1888 – 1962 ) , and Teachers College , Columbia University art instructors John P. Heins ( 1896 – 1969 ) and Albert C. Heckman ( 1893 – 1971 ) . 
 The book has been reprinted and anthologized in a variety of editions . In 1974 , it appeared in Storyteller Without Words , a collected edition with Madman 's Drum ( 1930 ) and Wild Pilgrimage ( 1932 ) prefaced with essays by Ward . The stories appeared in a compact fashion , sometimes four images to a page . In 2010 , it was collected with Ward 's other five wordless novels in a two @-@ volume Library of America edition edited by cartoonist Art Spiegelman . 
 The book 's original woodblocks are kept in the Lynd Ward Collection in the Joseph Mark Lauinger Memorial Library at Georgetown University in Washington , DC . , bequeathed by Ward 's daughters Nanda and Robin . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Gods ' Man was the first American wordless novel , and no such European work had yet been published in the US . Gods ' Man proved to be the best selling . Though it was released the week before the Wall Street Crash of 1929 and the Great Depression that ensued , it went through three printings by January 1930 , and sold more than 20 @,@ 000 copies in six printings over its first four years . During the same period , the young Ward saw his career as an in @-@ demand book illustrator bloom , and found acceptance as an authority on children 's book illustration . 
 The success of Gods ' Man led to the American publication of Nückel 's Destiny in 1930 . In 1930 cartoonist Milt Gross parodied Gods ' Man and silent melodrama films in a wordless novel of his own , He Done Her Wrong , subtitled " The Great American Novel , and not a word in it — no music too " . The protagonist is a lumberjack , a commentary on Ward as a woodcut artist . 
 The Ballet Theatre of New York considered an adaptation of Gods ' Man , and a board member approached Felix R. Labunski to compose it . Financial difficulties moved Labunski to abandon it and his other creative work . Despite several proposals made through the 1960s , no film adaptation has been made of Gods ' Man . 
 Left @-@ leaning artists and writers admired the book , and Ward frequently received poetry based on it . Allen Ginsberg used imagery from Gods ' Man in his poem Howl ( 1956 ) , and referred to the images of the city and jail in Ward 's book in the poem 's annotations . Abstract expressionist painter Paul Jenkins wrote Ward in 1981 of the influence the book 's " energy and unprecedented originality " had on his own art . In 1973 Art Spiegelman created the four @-@ page comic strip " Prisoner on the Hell Planet " about his mother 's suicide , executed in an Expressionist woodcut style inspired by Ward 's work . Spiegelman later incorporated the strip into his graphic novel Maus . My Morning Jacket frontman Jim James released a solo album Regions of Light and Sound of God in 2013 inspired by Gods ' Man , which he had at first conceived as a soundtrack to a film adaptation of the book . 
 Gods ' Man remains Ward 's best known and most widely read wordless novel . Spiegelman considered this due less to the qualities of the book per se in relation to Ward 's other wordless novels as to the book 's novelty as the first wordless novel published in the US . Irwin Haas praised the artwork but found the storytelling uneven , and thought that only with his third wordless novel Wild Pilgrimage did Ward came to master the medium . 
 The artwork has drawn some unintended mirth : American writer Susan Sontag included it on her " canon of Camp " in her 1964 essay " Notes on ' Camp ' " , and Spiegelman admitted that the scenes of " the depiction of Our Hero <unk> skipping through the glen with the Wife and their child makes [ him ] snicker " . 
 Psychiatrist M. Scott Peck objected strongly to the content of the book : he believed it had a destructive effect on children , and called it " the darkest , ugliest book [ he ] had ever seen " . To Peck , the mysterious stranger represented Satan and the spirit of death . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Journals and magazines = = = = 
 = = = = Web = = = = 
 = Ice trade = 
 The ice trade , also known as the frozen water trade , was a 19th @-@ century industry , centering on the east coast of the United States and Norway , involving the large @-@ scale harvesting , transport and sale of natural ice for domestic consumption and commercial purposes . Ice was cut from the surface of ponds and streams , then stored in ice houses , before being sent on by ship , barge or railroad to its final destination around the world . Networks of ice wagons were typically used to distribute the product to the final domestic and smaller commercial customers . The ice trade revolutionized the U.S. meat , vegetable and fruit industries , enabled significant growth in the fishing industry , and encouraged the introduction of a range of new drinks and foods . 
 The trade was started by the New England businessman Frederic Tudor in 1806 . Tudor shipped ice to the Caribbean island of Martinique , hoping to sell it to wealthy members of the European elite there , using an ice house he had built specially for the purpose . Over the coming years the trade widened to Cuba and Southern United States , with other merchants joining Tudor in harvesting and shipping ice from New England . During the 1830s and 1840s the ice trade expanded further , with shipments reaching England , India , South America , China and Australia . Tudor made a fortune from the Indian trade , while brand names such as Wenham Ice became famous in London . 
 Increasingly , however , the ice trade began to focus on supplying the growing cities on the east coast of the U.S. and the needs of businesses across the Midwest . The citizens of New York and Philadelphia became huge consumers of ice during their long , hot summers , and additional ice was harvested from the Hudson River and Maine to fulfil the demand . Ice began to be used in refrigerator cars by the railroad industry , allowing the meat packing industry around Chicago and Cincinnati to slaughter cattle locally , sending dressed meat east for either the internal or overseas markets . Chilled refrigerator cars and ships created a national industry in vegetables and fruit that could previously only have been consumed locally . American and British fishermen began to preserve their catches in ice , allowing longer voyages and bigger catches , and the brewing industry became operational all @-@ year around . As U.S. ice exports diminished after 1870 , Norway became a major player in the international market , shipping large quantities of ice to England and Germany . 
 At its peak at the end of the 19th century , the U.S. ice trade employed an estimated 90 @,@ 000 people in an industry capitalised at $ 28 million ( $ 660 million in 2010 terms ) , using ice houses capable of storing up to 250 @,@ 000 tons ( 220 million kg ) each ; Norway exported a million tons ( 910 million kg ) of ice a year , drawing on a network of artificial lakes . Competition had slowly been growing , however , in the form of artificially produced plant ice and mechanically chilled facilities . Unreliable and expensive at first , plant ice began to successfully compete with natural ice in Australia and India during the 1850s and 1870s respectively , until , by the outbreak of World War I in 1914 , more plant ice was being produced in the U.S. each year than naturally harvested ice . Despite a temporary increase in production in the U.S. during the war , the inter @-@ war years saw the total collapse of the ice trade around the world . Today , ice is occasionally harvested for ice carving and ice festivals , but little remains of the 19th @-@ century industrial network of ice houses and transport facilities . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ 19th century methods = = = 
 Prior to the emergence of the ice trade of the 19th century , snow and ice had been collected and stored to use in the summer months in various parts of the world , but never on a large scale . In the Mediterranean and in South America , for example , there was a long history of collecting ice from the upper slopes of the Alps and the Andes during the summer months and traders transporting this down into the cities . Similar trading practices had grown up in Mexico during the colonial period . The Russians collected ice along the Neva River during the winter months for consumption in Saint Petersburg for many years . Wealthy Europeans began to build ice houses to store ice gathered on their local estates during the winter from the 16th century onwards ; the ice was used to cool drinks or food for the wealthiest elites . 
 Some techniques were also invented to produce ice or chilled drinks through more artificial means . In India , ice was imported from the Himalayas in the 17th century , but the expense of this meant that by the 19th century ice was instead manufactured in small quantities during the winter further south . <unk> clay pots containing boiled , cooled water were laid out on top of straw in shallow trenches ; under favourable circumstances , thin ice would form on the surface during winter nights which could be harvested and combined for sale . There were production sites at <unk> @-@ <unk> and Allahabad , but this " <unk> ice " was only available in limited amounts and considered of poor quality because it often resembled soft slush rather than hard crystals . <unk> and water were mixed together in India to cool drinks , taking advantage of local supplies of the chemical . In Europe , various chemical means for cooling drinks were created by the 19th century ; these typically used sulphuric acid to chill the liquid , but were not capable of producing actual ice . 
 = = = Opening up the trade , 1800 – 30 = = = 
 The ice trade began in 1806 as the result of the efforts of Frederic Tudor , a New England entrepreneur , to export ice on a commercial basis . In New England , ice was an expensive product , consumed only by the wealthy who could afford their own ice houses . Nonetheless , icehouses were relatively common amongst the wealthier members of society by 1800 , filled with ice cut , or harvested , from the frozen surface of ponds and streams on their local estates during the winter months . Around the neighbouring New York area , the hot summers and rapidly growing economy had begun to increase local demand for ice towards the end of the 18th century , creating a small @-@ scale market amongst farmers who sold ice from their ponds and streams to local city institutions and families . Some ships occasionally transported ice from New York and Philadelphia for sale to the southern U.S. states , in particular Charleston in South Carolina , laying it down as ballast on the trip . 
 Tudor 's plan was to export ice as a luxury good to wealthy members of West Indies and the southern US states , where he hoped they would relish the product during their sweltering summers ; conscious of the risk that others might follow suit , Tudor hoped to acquire local monopoly rights in his new markets in order to maintain high prices and profits . He started by attempting to establish a monopoly on the potential ice trade in the Caribbean and invested in a brigantine ship to transport ice bought from farmers around Boston . At the time , Tudor was regarded by the business community at best as something of an eccentric , and at worst a fool . 
 The first shipments took place in 1806 when Tudor transported an initial trial cargo of ice , probably harvested from his family estate at Rockwood , to the Caribbean island of Martinique . Sales were hampered , however , by the lack of local storage facilities , both for Tudor 's stock and any ice bought by domestic customers , and as a result the ice stocks quickly melted away . Learning from this experience , Tudor then built a functioning ice depot in Havana and , despite the U.S. trade embargo declared in 1807 , was trading successfully again by 1810 . He was unable to acquire exclusive legal rights to import ice into Cuba , but was nonetheless able to maintain an effective monopoly through his control of the ice houses . The 1812 war briefly disrupted trade , but over subsequent years Tudor began to export fruit back from Havana to the mainland on the return journey , kept fresh with part of the unsold ice cargo . Trade to Charleston and to Savannah in Georgia followed , while Tudor 's competitors began to supply South Carolina and Georgia by ship from New York or using barges sent downstream from Kentucky . 
 The price of the imported ice varied according to the amount of economic competition ; in Havana , Tudor 's ice sold for 25 cents ( $ 3 @.@ 70 in 2010 terms ) per pound , while in Georgia it reached only six to eight cents ( $ 0 @.@ 90 – $ 1 @.@ 20 in 2010 terms ) . Where Tudor had a strong market share , he would respond to competition from passing traders by lowering his prices considerably , selling his ice at the unprofitable rate of one cent ( $ 0 @.@ 20 ) per pound ( 0 @.@ 5 kg ) ; at this price , competitors would typically be unable to sell their own stock at a profit : they would either be driven into debt or if they declined to sell , their ice would melt away in the heat . Tudor , relying on his local storage depots , could then increase his prices once again . By the middle of the 1820s , around 3 @,@ 000 tons ( 3 million kg ) of ice was being shipped from Boston annually , two thirds by Tudor . 
 At these lower prices , ice began to sell in considerable volumes , with the market moving beyond the wealthy elite to a wider range of consumers , to the point where supplies became overstretched . It was also being used by tradesmen to preserve perishable good , rather than for direct consumption . Tudor looked beyond his existing suppliers to Maine and even to harvesting from passing icebergs , but neither source proved practical . Instead , Tudor teamed up with Nathaniel Wyeth to exploit the ice supplies of Boston on a more industrial scale . Wyeth devised a new form of horse @-@ pulled ice @-@ cutter in 1825 that cut square blocks of ice more efficiently than previous methods . He agreed to supply Tudor from Fresh Pond in Cambridge , Massachusetts , reducing the cost of harvesting ice from 30 cents ( $ 7 @.@ 30 ) a ton ( 901 kg ) to only 10 cents ( $ 2 @.@ 40 ) . Sawdust to insulate the ice was brought from Maine , at $ 16 @,@ 000 ( $ 390 @,@ 000 ) a year . 
 = = = Globalization , 1830 – 50 = = = 
 The trade in New England ice expanded during the 1830s and 1840s across the eastern coast of the U.S. , while new trade routes were created across the world . The first and most profitable of these new routes was to India : in 1833 Tudor combined with the businessmen Samuel Austin and William Rogers to attempt to export ice to Calcutta using the brigantine ship the Tuscany . The Anglo @-@ Indian elite , concerned about the effects of the summer heat , quickly agreed to exempt the imports from the usual East India Company regulations and trade tariffs , and the initial net shipment of around a hundred tons ( 90 @,@ 000 kg ) sold successfully . With the ice fetching for three pence ( £ 0 @.@ 80 in 2010 terms ) per pound ( 0 @.@ 5 kg ) , the first shipment aboard the Tuscany produced profits of $ 9 @,@ 900 ( $ 253 @,@ 000 ) , and in 1835 Tudor commenced regular exports to Calcutta , Madras and Bombay . 
 Tudor 's competitors soon entered the market as well , shipping ice by sea to both Calcutta and Bombay , further increasing demand there and driving out most of the indigenous ice dealers . A grand ice house was built from stone in Calcutta by the local British community to store the ice imports . Small shipments of chilled fruit and dairy products began to be sent out with the ice , achieving high prices . Attempts were made by Italian traders to introduce ice from the Alps into Calcutta , but Tudor repeated his monopolistic techniques from the Caribbean , driving them and many others out of the market . Calcutta remained a particularly profitable market for ice for many years ; Tudor alone made more than $ 220 @,@ 000 ( $ 4 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 ) in profits between 1833 and 1850 . 
 Other new markets were to follow . In 1834 Tudor sent shipments of ice to Brazil along with chilled apples , beginning the ice trade with Rio de Janeiro . These ships typically returned to North America carrying cargos of sugar , fruit and , later , cotton . Ice from traders in New England reached Sydney , Australia , in 1839 , initially selling at three pence ( £ 0 @.@ 70 ) per pound ( 0 @.@ 5 kg ) , later rising to six pence ( £ 1 @.@ 40 ) . This trade was to prove less regular , and the next shipments arrived in the 1840s . The export of chilled vegetables , fish , butter and eggs to the Caribbean and to markets in the Pacific grew during the 1840s , with as many as 35 barrels being transported on a single ship , alongside a cargo of ice . Shipments of New England ice were sent as far as Hong Kong , South @-@ East Asia , the Philippines , the Persian Gulf , New Zealand , Argentina and Peru . 
 New England businessmen also tried to establish a market for ice in England during the 1840s . An abortive first attempt to export ice to England had occurred in 1822 under William Leftwich ; he had imported ice from Norway , but his cargo had melted before reaching London . Fresh attempts were made by Jacob <unk> who owned supplies at Fresh Pond , and Eric Landor , with assets at Wenham Lake , in 1842 and 1844 respectively . Of the two , Landor 's venture was more successful and he formed the Wenham Lake Ice Company to export to Britain , building an ice depot on the Strand . Wenham ice was marketed as being unusually pure , possessed of special cooling properties , successfully convincing British customers to avoid local British ice , which was condemned as polluted and unhealthy . After some initial success , the venture eventually failed , in part because the English chose not to adopt chilled drinks in the same way as North Americans , but also because of the long distances involved in the trade and the consequent costs of ice wastage through melting . Nonetheless , the trade allowed some refrigerated goods arrived in England from America along with ice cargos during the 1840s . 
 The east coast of the U.S. also began to consume more ice , particularly as more industrial and private customers found uses for refrigeration . Ice became increasingly used in the northeast of the U.S. to preserve dairy products and fresh fruit for market , the chilled goods being transported over the growing railroad lines . By the 1840s , ice was being used to transfer small quantities of goods further west across the continent . Eastern U.S. fishermen began to use ice to preserve their catches . Fewer businesses or individuals in the east harvested their own ice independently in winter , most preferring to rely on commercial providers . 
 With this growth in commerce , Tudor 's initial monopoly on the trade broke down , but he continued to make significant profits from the growing trade . Increased supplies of ice were also needed to keep up with demand . From 1842 onwards , Tudor and others invested at Walden Pond in New England for additional supplies . New companies began to spring up , such as the Philadelphia Ice Company , which made use of the new railroad lines to transport harvested ice , while the <unk> family introduced improved ice harvesting to the New York region . 
 = = = Growth westwards , 1850 – 60 = = = 
 The 1850s was a period of transition for the ice trade . The industry was already quite large : in 1855 around $ 6 – 7 million ( $ 118 – 138 million in 2010 terms ) was invested in the industry in the U.S. and an estimated two million tons ( two billion kg ) of ice was kept in storage at any one time in warehouses across the nation . Over the coming decade , however , the focus of the growing trade shifted away from relying upon the international export market in favour of supplying first the growing , eastern cities of the US , and then the rest of the rapidly expanding country . 
 In 1850 , California was in the midst of a gold rush ; backed by this sudden demand for luxuries , New England companies made the first shipments , by ship to San Francisco and Sacramento , in California , including a shipment of refrigerated apples . The market was proved , but shipping ice in this way was expensive and demand outstripped supply . Ice began to be ordered instead from the then Russian @-@ controlled Alaska in 1851 at $ 75 a ton ( 901 kg ) . The American @-@ Russian Commercial Company was subsequently formed in San Francisco in 1853 to work in partnership with the Russian @-@ American Company of Alaska to supply ice to the west coast of America . The Russian company trained Aleutian teams to harvest ice in Alaska , built saw @-@ mills to produce insulating saw @-@ dust and shipped the ice south along with supplies of chilled fish . The costs of this operation remained high and M. Tallman founded the rival Nevada Ice Company , which harvested ice on Pilot Creek and transported to Sacramento , bringing the west coast price for ice down to seven cents ( $ 2 ) a pound ( 0 @.@ 5 kg ) . 
 The U.S. was expanding westwards and , in Ohio , Hiram Joy began to exploit Crystal Lake , near Chicago , which was soon linked to the city by the Chicago , St Paul and Fond du Lac Railroad company . The ice was used to allow goods to be brought to market . Cincinnati and Chicago began to use ice to help the packing of pork in the summer , John L. Schooley developing the first refrigerated packing room . Fruit began to be stored in the central Illinois using refrigerators , for consumption in later seasons . By the 1860s , ice was being used to allow the brewing of the increasingly popular lager beer all year round . Improved railroad links helped the growth in business across the region and to the east . 
 Meanwhile , it had been known since 1748 that it was possible to artificially chill water with mechanical equipment and attempts were made in the late 1850s to produce artificial ice on a commercial scale . Various methods had been invented to do this , including Jacob Perkins 's diethyl ether vapor @-@ compression refrigeration engine , invented in 1834 ; engines that used pre @-@ compressed air ; John Gorrie 's air cycle engines ; and ammonia @-@ based approaches such as those championed by Ferdinand Carré and Charles Tellier . The resulting product was variously called plant or artificial ice , but there were numerous obstacles to manufacturing it commercially . Producing plant ice required large amounts of fuel , in the form of coal , and capital for machinery , so producing ice at a competitive price was challenging . The early technology was unreliable and for many decades ice plants faced the risk of explosions and consequent damage to the surrounding buildings . Ammonia based approaches potentially left hazardous ammonia in the ice from where it had leaked through the joints of machinery . For most of the 19th century , plant ice was not as clear as much natural ice , sometimes left white residue when it melted and was generally regarded as less suitable for human consumption than the natural product . 
 Nonetheless , Alexander Twining and James Harrison set up ice plants in Ohio and Melbourne respectively during the 1850s , both using Perkins engines . Twining found he could not compete with natural ice , but in Melbourne Harrison 's plant came to dominate the market . Australia 's distance from New England , where journeys could take 115 days , and the consequent high level of wastage – 150 tons of the first 400 @-@ ton shipment to Sydney melted on route – made it relatively easy for plant ice to compete with the natural product . Elsewhere , however , natural ice dominated the entire market . 
 = = = Expansion and competition , 1860 – 80 = = = 
 The international ice trade continued through the second half of the 19th century , but it increasingly moved away from its former , New England roots . Indeed , ice exports from US peaked around 1870 , when 65 @,@ 802 tons ( 59 @,@ 288 @,@ 000 kg ) , worth $ 267 @,@ 702 ( $ 4 @,@ 610 @,@ 000 in 2010 terms ) , were shipped out from the ports . One factor in this was the slow spread of plant ice into India . Exports from New England to India peaked in 1856 , when 146 @,@ 000 tons ( 132 million kg ) were shipped , and the Indian natural ice market faltered during the Indian Rebellion of 1857 , dipped again during the American Civil War , and imports of ice slowly declined through the 1860s . Spurred on by the introduction of artificial ice plants around the world by the British Royal Navy , the International Ice Company was founded in Madras in 1874 and the Bengal Ice Company in 1878 . Operating together as the Calcutta Ice Association , they rapidly drove natural ice out of the market . 
 An ice trade also developed in Europe . By the 1870s hundreds of men were employed to cut ice from the glaciers at Grindelwald in Switzerland , and Paris in France began to import ice from the rest of Europe in 1869 . Meanwhile , Norway entered the international ice trade , focusing on exports to England . The first shipments from Norway to England had occurred in 1822 , but larger scale exports did not occur until the 1850s . The ice harvesting was initially centred on the fjords of the west coast , but poor local transport links pushed the trade south and east to the main centres of the Norwegian timber and shipping industries , both essential for ice exporting . In the early 1860s , Lake <unk> in Norway was renamed " Wenham Lake " with the aim of confusing the product with New England exports , and exports to England increased . Initially these were run by British business interests , but eventually transitioned to Norwegian companies . Distribution of the Norwegian ice across Britain was helped by the growing railway networks , while the railway connection built between the fishing port of Grimsby and London in 1853 created a demand for ice to allow the transport of fresh fish to the capital . 
 The eastern market for ice in the U.S. was also changing . Cities like New York , Baltimore and Philadelphia saw their population boom in the second half of the century ; New York tripled in size between 1850 and 1890 , for example . This drove up the demand for ice considerably across the region . By 1879 , householders in the eastern cities were consuming two thirds of a ton ( 601 kg ) of ice a year , being charged 40 cents ( $ 9 @.@ 30 ) per 100 pounds ( 45 kg ) ; 1 @,@ 500 wagons were needed just to deliver ice to consumers in New York . 
 In supplying this demand , the ice trade increasingly shifted north , away from Massachusetts and towards Maine . Various factors contributed to this . New Englands ' winters became warmer during the 19th century , while industrialisation resulted in more of the natural ponds and rivers becoming contaminated . Less trade was brought through New England as other ways of reaching western US markets were opened up , making it less profitable to trade ice from Boston , while the cost of producing ships in the region increased due to deforestation . Finally , in 1860 there was the first of four ice famines along the Hudson @-@ warm winters that prevented the formation of ice in New England @-@ creating shortages and driving up prices . 
 The outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 between the northern and southern states also contributed to the trend . The war disrupted the sale of northern ice to the south , and Maine merchants instead turned to supplying the Union Army , whose forces used ice in their more southern campaigns . James L. Cheeseman had responded to the 1860 ice famine by moving his ice trading business from the Hudson northwards into Maine , bringing with him the latest technology and techniques ; Cheeseman went on to win valuable contracts with the Union Army during the war years . Carré ice machines were brought into New Orleans to make up the shortfall in the south , focusing in particular on supplying southern hospitals . In the post @-@ war years , the number of such plants increased , but once competition from the north recommenced , cheaper natural ice initially made it hard for the manufacturers to make a profit . By the late 1870s , however , efficiency improvements were allowing them to squeeze natural ice out of the marketplace in the south . 
 Another ice famine in 1870 then impacted both Boston and the Hudson , with a further famine following in 1880 ; as a result entrepreneurs descended on the Kennebec River in Maine as an alternative source . The Kennebec , along with the <unk> and Sheepscot , was widely opened up for the ice industry , becoming an important source , particularly in warm winters , for the rest of the 19th century . 
 By the 1860s , natural ice was also being increasingly to move western American products to the east , starting with chilled meat from Chicago . There was some initial opposition , both from the cattle @-@ car owners and from eastern butchers , who stood to lose out from the trade ; by the 1870s , however , multiple shipments were leaving for the east each day . Chilled butter from the mid @-@ West was then shipped onwards from New York to Europe , and by the 1870s 15 percent of the United Kingdom 's butter consumption was being met in this way . A chain of icing stations at Chicago , Omaha , Utah and Sierra Nevada allowed railroad refrigerator cars to cross the continent . The ability of ice companies to ship their product by rail from the east proved the final straw for the Alaskan ice trade , which collapsed during the 1870s and 1880s in the face of the competition , destroying the local saw @-@ mill industry in the process . 
 During the 1870s ice began to be used by Timothy Eastman , of the Bell Brothers firm , to transport American meat to Britain ; the first shipment successfully arrived in 1875 and by the following year 9 @,@ 888 tons ( 8 @,@ 909 @,@ 000 kg ) of meat was shipped . The chilled meat was retailed through special warehouses and stores . There was concern in Britain that chilled American meat might flood the market and harm domestic farmers , but the exports continued . The rival Chicago @-@ based meat firms of Armour and Swift entered the refrigerated meat transport market in the late 1870 , establishing their own fleet of refrigerator cars , network of icing stations and other infrastructure , increasing the sales of chilled Chicago beef to the eastern seaboard from 15 @,@ 680 tons ( 14 @,@ 128 @,@ 000 kg ) a year in 1880 , to 173 @,@ 067 tons ( 155 @,@ 933 @,@ 000 kg ) in 1884 . 
 = = = Peak of the trade , 1880 – 1900 = = = 
 Although the manufacture of artificial plant ice was still negligible in 1880 , it began to grow in volume towards the end of the century as technological improvements finally allowed the production of plant ice at a competitive price . Typically ice plants first took hold in more distant locations where natural ice was at a cost disadvantage . The Australian and Indian markets were already dominated by plant ice , and ice plants began to be built in Brazil during the 1880s and 1890s , slowly coming to replace imported ice . In the U.S. , plants began to become more numerous in the southern states . The long distance transportation companies continued to use cheap natural ice for the bulk of their refrigeration needs , but they now used purchased local plant ice at key points across the US , to allow for surge demand and to avoid the need to hold reserve stocks of natural ice . After 1898 the British fishing industry too began to turn to plant ice to refrigerate its catches . 
 Plant technology began to be turned to the problem of directly chilling rooms and containers , to replace the need to carry ice at all . Pressure began to grow for a replacement for ice bunkers on the trans @-@ Atlantic routes during the 1870s . Tellier produced a chilled storeroom for the steamship Le <unk> , using it to ship beef from Argentina to France , while the Glasgow @-@ based firm of Bells helped to sponsor a new , compressed @-@ air chiller for ships using the Gorrie approach , called the Bell @-@ Coleman design . These technologies soon became used on the trade to Australia , New Zealand and Argentina . The same approach began to be taken in other industries . Carl von Linde found ways of applying mechanical refrigeration to the brewing industry , removing its reliance on natural ice ; cold warehouses and meat packers began to rely on chilling plants . 
 Despite this emerging competition , natural ice remained vital to North American and European economies , with demand driven up by rising living standards . The huge demand for ice in the 1880s drove the natural ice trade to continue to expand . Around four million tons ( four billion kg ) of ice was routinely stored along the Hudson River and Maine alone , the Hudson having around 135 major warehouses along its banks and employing 20 @,@ 000 workers . Firms expanded along the Kennebec River in Maine to meet the demand , and 1 @,@ 735 vessels were required in 1880 to carry the ice south . Lakes in Wisconsin began to be put into production to supply the Midwest . 1890 saw another ice famine hit the east : the Hudson harvests failed entirely , causing a sudden rush by entrepreneurs to establish operations in Maine , where ice had successfully formed . Unfortunately for investors , the following summer was quite cool , suppressing demand for stocks and many businessmen were ruined . Across the U.S. , an estimated 90 @,@ 000 people and 25 @,@ 000 horses involved in a trade capitalised at $ 28 million ( $ 660 million in 2010 terms ) . 
 The Norwegian trade peaked during the 1890s , with a million tons ( 900 million kg ) of ice was being exported from Norway by 1900 ; the major Leftwich company in Britain , importing much of this , kept a thousand tons ( 900 @,@ 000 kg ) of ice in store at all times to meet demand . Austria entered the European ice market behind Norway , with the Vienna Ice Company exporting natural ice to Germany by the end of the century . 
 There was considerable conglomeration in the US ice trade towards the end of the century , and foreign competitors , such as Norway , complained of US collusion . Charles W. Morse was a businessman from Maine who by 1890 had used questionable financial processes to acquire control of the New York City Ice Company and the Consumers ' Ice Company of New York , merging them into the Consolidated Ice Company . In turn Morse bought out his major competitor the Knickerbocker Ice Company of New York in 1896 , giving him control of around four million tons ( four billion kg ) of the regional ice harvests each year . Morse incorporated his few remaining rivals into the American Ice Company in 1899 , giving him control of all of the natural and plant ice supplies and distribution in the north @-@ east of the US . On the west coast , Edward Hopkins formed the Union Ice Company in San Francisco , bringing together a range of regional ice companies to produce another huge ice company . In contrast , the competition in the British market remained harsh , keeping prices relatively low . 
 = = = End of the trade , 20th century = = = 
 The natural ice trade was rapidly supplanted by refrigeration cooling systems and plant ice during the early years of the 20th century . Plant ice production in New York doubled between 1900 and 1910 and , by 1914 , 26 million tons ( 23 billion kg ) of plant ice was being produced in the U.S. each year in comparison to the 24 million tons ( 22 billion kg ) of naturally harvested ice . There was a similar trend around the world – Britain had 103 ice plants by 1900 , for example – and this made it increasingly unprofitable to import ice from the U.S. ; annual imports of ice fell to less than 15 @,@ 000 tons ( 13 million kg ) by 1910 . This was reflected in trade publications changing their names : the Ice Trade Journal , for example , retitled itself the Refrigerating World . 
 The trend was hastened by the regular ice famines during the period , such as the 1898 British famine , which typically caused rapid price increases , fuelled demand for plant ice and encouraged investment in the new technologies . Concerns also grew over the safety of natural ice . Initial reports concerning ice being produced from polluted or unclean lakes and rivers had first emerged in the U.S. as early as the 1870s . The British public health authorities believed Norwegian ice was generally much purer and safer than American sourced ice , but reports in 1904 noted the risk of contamination in transit and recommended moving to the use of plant ice . In 1907 , New York specialists claimed ice from the Hudson River to be unsafe for consumption and potentially containing typhoid germs ; the report was successfully challenged by the natural ice industry , but public opinion was turning against natural ice on safety grounds . Major damage was also done to the industry by fire , including a famous blaze at the American Ice Company facilities at <unk> in 1910 , which destroyed the buildings and the adjacent schooners , causing around $ 130 @,@ 000 ( $ 2 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 in 2010 terms ) of damage and crippling the Maine ice industry . 
 In response to this increasing competition , natural ice companies examined various options . Some invested in plant ice themselves . New tools were brought in to speed up the harvesting of ice , but these efficiency improvements were outstripped by technical advances in plant ice manufacture . The Natural Ice Association of America was formed to promote the benefits of natural ice , and companies played on the erroneous belief amongst customers that natural ice melted less slowly than manufactured ice . Under pressure , some ice companies attempted to exploit their local monopolies on ice distribution networks to artificially raise prices for urban customers . One of the most prominent cases of this involved Charles Morse and his American Ice Company , which suddenly almost tripled wholesale and doubled the retail prices in New York in 1900 in the midst of a heat wave ; this created a scandal that caused Morse to sell up his assets in the ice trade altogether to escape prosecution , making a profit of $ 12 million ( $ 320 million ) in the process . 
 When the U.S. entered World War I in 1917 , the American ice trade received a temporary boost to production . Shipments of chilled food to Europe surged during the war , placing significant demands on the country 's existing refrigeration capabilities , while the need to produce munitions for the war effort meant that ammonia and coal for refrigeration plants were in short supply . The U.S. government worked together with the plant and natural ice industries to promote the use of natural ice to relieve the burden and maintain adequate supplies . For Britain and Norway , however , the war impacted badly on the natural ice trade ; the German attempt to blockade the North Sea with U @-@ boats made shipments difficult and Britain relied increasingly more heavily on its limited number of ice plants for supplies instead . 
 In the years after the war the natural ice industry collapsed into insignificance . Industry turned entirely to plant ice and mechanical cooling systems , while the introduction of cheap electric motors resulted in domestic , modern refrigerators becoming common in U.S. homes by the 1930s and more widely across Europe in the 1950s , allowing ice to be made in the home . The natural ice harvests shrunk dramatically and ice warehouses were abandoned or converted for other uses . The use of natural ice on a small scale lingered on in more remote areas for some years , and ice continued to be occasionally harvested for carving at artistic competitions and festivals , but by the end of the 20th century there were very few physical reminders of the trade . 
 = = Supply = = 
 In order for natural ice to reach its customers , it had to be harvested from ponds and rivers , then transported and stored at various sites before finally being used in domestic or commercial applications . Throughout these processes , traders faced the problem of keeping the ice from melting ; melted ice represented waste and lost profits . In the 1820s and 1830s only 10 percent of ice harvested was eventually sold to the end user due to wastage en route . By the end of the 19th century , however , the wastage in the ice trade was reduced to between 20 and 50 percent , depending on the efficiency of the company . 
 = = = Harvesting = = = 
 The ice trade started with the harvesting of ice from ponds and rivers during the winter , to be stored for the summer months ahead . Water freezes in this way once it falls to a temperature of 40 ° F ( 5 ° C ) and the surrounding air temperature drops to 32 ° F ( 0 ° C ) . Ice needed to be at least 18 inches ( 0 @.@ 46 m ) thick to be harvested , as it needed to support the weight of the workers and horses and be suitable for cutting into large blocks . In New England , ponds and rivers typically had deep enough ice to harvest between January and March , while in Norway harvesting occurred between December and February . Natural ice could occur with different qualities ; most prized was hard , clear crystal ice , typically consumed at the table ; more porous , white coloured ice was less valuable and used by industry . With a good thickness of ice , around 1 @,@ 000 tons ( 900 @,@ 000 kg ) could be harvested from an acre ( 0 @.@ 4 hectares ) of surface water . 
 Purely natural sources were insufficient in some areas and additional steps taken to increase supplies . In New England , holes were drilled in the ice to promote the thickening of the surface . Alternatively , artificial lakes were created in some areas , and guidance was published on how best to construct the dams that lay at the heart of these designs . Low @-@ lying , boggy land was dammed and flooded in Maine towards the end of the century to meet surge demands , while pre @-@ existing artificial mill ponds in Wisconsin turned out to be ideal for harvesting commercial ice . In Alaska , a large , shallow artificial lake covering around 40 acres ( 16 hectares ) was produced in order to assist in ice production and harvesting ; similar approaches were taken in the Aleutian islands ; in Norway this was taken further , with a number of artificial lakes up to half a mile long built on farmland to increase supplies , including some built out into the sea to collect fresh water for ice . 
 The ice @-@ cutting involved several stages and was typically carried out at night , when the ice was thickest . First the surface would be cleaned of snow with scrapers , the depth of the ice tested for suitability , then the surface would be marked out with cutters to produce the lines of the future ice blocks . The size of the blocks varied according to the destination , the largest being for the furthest locations , the smallest destined for the American east coast itself and being only 22 inches ( 0 @.@ 56 m ) square . The blocks could finally be cut out of the ice and floated to the shore . The speed of the operation might depend on the likelihood of warmer weather impacting on the ice . In both New England and Norway , harvesting occurred during an otherwise quiet season , providing valuable local employment . 
 The process required a range of equipment . Some of this was protective equipment to allow the workforce and horses to operate safely on ice , including cork shoes for the men and spiked horse shoes . Early in the 19th century only ad hoc , improvised tools such as pickaxes and chisels were used for the rest of the harvest , but in the 1840s Wyeth introduced various new designs to allow for a larger scale , more commercial harvesting process . These included a horse @-@ drawn ice cutter , resembling a plough with two parallel cutters to help in marking out the ice quickly and uniformly , and later a horse @-@ drawn plough with teeth to assist in the cutting process itself , replacing the hand saw . By the 1850s , specialist ice tool manufacturers were producing catalogues and selling products along the east coast . There were discussions over the desirability of a circular cutting saw for much of the 19th century , but it proved impractical to power them with horses and they were not introduced to ice harvesting until the start of the 20th century , when gasoline engines became available . 
 A warm winter could cripple an ice harvest , however , either resulting in no ice at all , or thin ice that formed smaller blocks or that could not be harvested safely . These winters were called " open winters " in North America , and could result in shortages of ice , called ice famines . Famous ice famines in the U.S. included those in 1880 and 1890 , while the mild winter of 1898 in Norway resulted in Britain having to seek additional supplies from Finland . Over time , the ice famines promoted the investment in plant ice production , ultimately undermining the ice trade . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Early in the ice trade , there were few restrictions on harvesting ice in the U.S. , as it had traditionally held little value and was seen as a free good . As the trade expanded , however , ice became valuable and the right to cut ice became important . Legally , different rules were held to apply to navigable water ways , where the right to harvest the ice belonged to the first to stake a claim , and areas of " public " water such as streams or small lakes , where the ice was considered to belong to the neighboring land owners . 
 Many lakes had several land owners , however , and following disagreements over Fresh Pond , the lawyer Simon Greenleaf was charged to adjudicate a solution in 1841 . Greenleaf decided that the right to harvest ice would be divided up in proportion with the amount of the shore line owned by the different claimants ; from then onwards , the rights to harvest ice could be bought and sold and the value of land adjacent to sites such as Fresh Pond increased rapidly , with one owner who purchased land at $ 130 ( $ 2 @,@ 500 in 2010 terms ) an acre ( 0 @.@ 4 hectares ) in the 1820s refusing an offer of $ 2 @,@ 000 ( $ 44 @,@ 000 ) an acre by the 1850s . 
 This judgement did not remove the potential for disputes , as ice could be washed downstream along rivers , resulting in arguments over the ownership of the displaced ice . In some states it was made illegal to damage the uncut ice belonging to another businessman , but arguments could still become nasty . In the winter of 1900 – 01 , for example , disputes between the Pike and North Lake Company and its rival the Wisconsin Lakes Ice and Cartage Company over the rights to harvest ice resulted in pitched battles between workers and the deployment of a steamship icebreaker to smash competing supplies . 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 Natural ice typically had to be moved several times between being harvested and used by the end customer . A wide range of methods were used , including wagons , railroads , ships and barges . Ships were particularly important to the ice trade , particularly in the early phase of the trade , when the focus of the trade was on international exports from the U.S. and railroad networks across the country were non @-@ existent . 
 Typically , ice traders hired vessels to ship ice as freight , although Frederic Tudor initially purchased his own vessel and the Tudor Company later bought three fast cargo ships of its own in 1877 . Ice was first transported in ships at the end of the 18th century , when it was occasionally used as ballast . Shipping ice as ballast , however , required it to be cleanly cut in order to avoid it shifting around as it melted , which was not easily done until Wyeth 's invention of the ice @-@ cutter in 1825 . The uniform blocks that Wyeth 's process produced also made it possible to pack more ice into the limited space of a ship 's hold , and significantly reduced the losses from melting . The ice was typically packed up tightly with sawdust , and the hold was then closed to prevent warmer air entering ; other forms of protective <unk> used to protect ice included hay and pine tree cuttings . This requirement for large quantities of sawdust coincided with the growth in the New England lumber industry in the 1830s ; sawdust had no other use at the time , and was in fact considered something of a problem , so its use in the ice trade proved very useful to the local timber industry . 
 Ships carrying ice needed to be particularly strong and there was a premium placed on recruiting good crews , able to move the cargo quickly to its location before it melted . By the end of the 19th century , the preferred choice was a wooden @-@ hulled vessel , to avoid rust corrosion from the melting ice , while windmill pumps were installed to remove the excess water from the hull using bilge pumps . Ice cargoes tended to cause damage to ships in the longer term , as the constant melting of the ice and the resulting water and steam encouraged dry rot . Shipment sizes varied ; depending on the ports and route . The typical late 19th century U.S. vessel was a schooner , carrying around 600 tons ( 500 @,@ 000 kg ) of ice ; a large shipment from Norway to England might include up to 900 tons ( 800 @,@ 000 kg ) . 
 It was important to keep track of the amount of ice being loaded onto a ship for both commercial and safety reasons , so ice blocks were each weighed before they went onto a ship , and a total tally of the weight of the ice was recorded . Initially a crude method of loading involving ice tongs and a whip was used to lower the separated blocks of ice into the hold , but an improved method was developed by the 1870s involving a levered platform , superseded by a <unk> platform device by 1890 . Ships were loaded quickly to prevent the ice from melting and , in U.S. ports , an average cargo could be loaded in just two days . Freight charges were paid on the intake , or departure , weight of the cargo , and conditions were laid down on the handling of the ice along the route . 
 Barges were also used to transport ice , particularly along the Hudson River , doubling on occasion as storage units as well . These barges could carry between 400 and 800 tons ( 400 @,@ 000 to 800 @,@ 000 kg ) of ice and , like ice carrying ships , windmills were typically installed to power the barge 's bilge pumps . Barges were believed to help preserve ice from melting , as the ice was stored beneath the deck and insulated by the river . Charlie Morse introduced larger , seagoing ice barges in the 1890s in order to supply New York ; these were pulled by schooners and could each carry up to 3 @,@ 000 tons ( three million kg ) of ice . 
 For much of the 19th century , it was particularly cheap to transport ice from New England and other key ice producing centres , helping to grow the industry . The region 's role as a gateway for trade with the interior of the U.S. meant that trading ships brought more cargoes to the ports than there were cargoes to take back ; unless they could find a return cargo , ships would need to carry rocks as ballast instead . Ice was the only profitable alternative to rocks and , as a result , the ice trade from New England could negotiate lower shipping rates than would have been possible from other international locations . Later in the century , the ice trade between Maine and New York took advantage of Maine 's emerging requirements for Philadelphia 's coal : the ice ships delivering ice from Maine would bring back the fuel , leading to the trade being termed the " ice and coaling " business . 
 Ice was also transported by railroad from 1841 onwards , the first use of the technique being on the track laid down between Fresh Pond and Charleston by the Charlestown Branch Railroad Company . A special railroad car was built to insulate the ice and equipment designed to allow the cars to be loaded . In 1842 a new railroad to Fitchburg was used to access the ice at Walden Pond . Ice was not a popular cargo with railway employees , however , as it had to be moved promptly to avoid melting and was generally awkward to transport . By the 1880s ice was being shipped by rail across the North American continent . 
 The final part of the supply chain for domestic and smaller commercial customers involved the delivery of ice , typically using an ice wagon . In the U.S. , ice was cut into 25 , 50 and 100 pound blocks ( 11 , 23 and 45 kg ) then distributed by horse @-@ drawn ice wagons . An iceman , driving the cart , would then deliver the ice to the household , using ice tongs to hold the cubes . Deliveries could occur either daily or twice daily . By the 1870s , various specialist distributors existed in the major cities , with local fuel dealers or other businesses selling and delivering ice in the smaller communities . In Britain , ice was rarely sold to domestic customers via specialist dealers during the 19th century , instead usually being sold through fishmongers , butchers and chemists , who kept ice on their premises for their own commercial use . 
 = = = Storage = = = 
 Ice had to be stored at multiple points between harvesting and its final use by a customer . One method for doing this was the construction of ice houses to hold the product , typically either shortly after the ice was first harvested or at regional depots after it had been shipped out . Early ice houses were relatively small , but later storage facilities were the size of large warehouses and contained much larger quantities of ice . 
 The understanding of thermodynamics was limited at the start of the 19th century , when it was believed that the key to the successful storage to ice was the construction of underground ice houses , where it was believed , incorrectly , that it would always be cool enough to store ice successfully . European ice houses were based on this theory , and used underground chambers , often built at considerable expense , to store the winter harvest . Some farmers in Virginia , however , had developed much cheaper icehouses , elevated off the ground , built from wood and insulated with hay . In addition to the temperature that ice was held at , there was also a need to efficiently drain off the melted water , as this water would further melt the remaining ice much faster than warm air would do . 
 Tudor investigated various ice houses in 1805 and came to conclude they could be constructed above ground as well . His early ice houses in Cuba had inner and outer timber walls , insulated with peat and sawdust , with some form of a ventilation system , and these formed the basic design for ice houses during the rest of the century . By 1819 , however , Tudor was also building ice houses from brick , able to hold more than 200 tons ( 200 @,@ 000 kg ) of ice , using charcoal within the walls for insulation . By the 1840s , warehouses by the Pond were up to 36 @,@ 000 square feet ( 3 @,@ 300 square metres ) in size , being built of brick to avoid the risk of fire from the new railroad line . The ice houses remained extremely flammable , however , and many caught fire , including Sydney 's first ice house which was completely destroyed in 1862 . 
 The size of the ice houses made it difficult to load ice into them ; in 1827 Wyeth invented a lever and horse @-@ drawn pulley system to raise blocks of ice through the roofs of the warehouses . Later improvements to loading included the use of lift systems to raise the blocks of ice to the top of the building , first using horse power , then steam power ; the largest warehouses later introduced conveyor belt systems to bring the ice into storage . Power houses containing the equipment to support these were built alongside the ice houses , and care was taken to avoid the risk of fire from this machinery . Warehouses were typically painted either white or yellow in order to reflect the sun during the summer . A typical Hudson River warehouse might be 400 feet ( 120 m ) long , 100 feet ( 30 m ) deep and three stories high , able to hold 50 @,@ 000 tons ( four million kg ) of ice . The later railroad ice houses could hold up to 250 @,@ 000 tons ( 220 million kg ) apiece . 
 In contrast , initially the ice trade in Norway made do without ice houses , taking the ice directly from the lakes to the ships for transport during the winter and spring ; between the 1850s and 1870s , however , numerous ice houses were constructed , allowing exports to take place during the rest of the year as well . 
 Ice houses were also built in the major ice consuming cities to hold the imported ice before final sale and consumption , where they were often termed depots . In London , the early ice depots were often circular and called wells or shades ; the New Cattle Market depot built in 1871 was 42 feet ( 13 m ) wide and 72 feet ( 22 m ) deep , able to hold 3 @,@ 000 short tons ( three million kg ) of ice . Later ice depots at Shadwell and Kings Cross in London were larger still , and , along with incoming barges , were used for storing Norwegian ice . The city of New York was unusual and did not build ice depots near the ports , instead using the incoming barges and , on occasion , ships that were delivering the ice as floating warehouses until the ice was needed . 
 In order for a domestic or commercial customer to use ice , however , it was typically necessary to be able to store it for a period away from an ice house . As a result , Ice boxes and domestic refrigerators were a critical final stage in the storage process : without them , most households could not use and consume ice . By 1816 , Tudor was selling Boston refrigerators called " Little Ice Houses " to households in Charleston ; these were made of wood , lined with iron and designed to hold three pounds ( 1 @.@ 4 kg ) of ice . Household refrigerators were manufactured in the 1840s on the east coast , most notably by Darius Eddy of Massachusetts and Winship of Boston ; many of these were shipped west . The degree to which natural ice was adopted by local communities in the 19th century heavily depended on the availability and up @-@ take of ice boxes . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Consumption = = = 
 The ice trade enabled the consumption of a wide range of new products during the 19th century . One simple use for natural ice was to chill drinks , either being directly added to the glass or barrel , or indirectly chilling it in a wine cooler or similar container . Iced drinks were a novelty and were initially viewed with concern by customers , worried about the health risks , although this rapidly vanished in the US . By mid @-@ 19th century , water was always chilled in America if possible . Iced milk also popular , and German lager , traditionally drunk chilled , also used ice . Drinks such as sherry @-@ cobblers and mint <unk> were created that could only be made using crushed ice . There were distinct differences in 19th @-@ century American and European attitudes to adding ice directly to drinks , with the Europeans regarding this as an unpleasant habit ; British visitors to India were surprised to see the Anglo @-@ Indian elite prepared to drink iced water . Some Hindus in India regarded ice as unclean for religious reasons , and as such an inappropriate food . 
 The large scale production of ice cream also resulted from the ice trade . Ice cream had been produced in small quantities since at least the 17th century , but this depended both on having large quantities of ice available , and substantial amounts of labour to manufacture it . This was because using ice to freeze ice cream relies both on the application of salt to an ice mixture to produce a cooling effect , and also on constantly agitating the mixture to produce the light texture associated with ice cream . By the 1820s and 1830s , the availability of ice in the cities of the U.S. east coast meant that ice cream was becoming increasingly popular , but still an essentially luxury product . In 1843 , however , a new ice cream maker was patented by Nancy Johnson which required far less physical effort and time ; similar designs were also produced in England and France . Combined with the growing ice trade , ice cream became much more widely available and consumed in greater quantities . In Britain , Norwegian ice was used by the growing Italian community in London from the 1850s onwards to popularise ice cream with the general public . 
 = = = Commercial applications = = = 
 The ice trade revolutionised the way that food was preserved and transported . Before the 19th century , preservation had depended upon techniques such as curing or smoking , but large supplies of natural ice allowed foods to be refrigerated or frozen instead . Although using ice to chill foods was a relatively simple process , it required considerable experimentation to produce efficient and reliable methods for controlling the flow of warm and cold air in different containers and transport systems . In the early stages of the ice trade there was also a tension between preserving the limited supply of ice , by limiting the flow of air over it , and preserving the food , which depended on circulating more air over the ice to create colder temperatures . 
 Early approaches to preserving food used variants of traditional cold boxes to solve the problem of how to take small quantities of products short distances to market . Thomas Moore , an engineer from Maryland , invented an early refrigerator which he patented in 1803 ; this involved a large , insulated wooden box , with a tin container of ice embedded in the top . This refrigerator primarily relied upon simple insulation , rather than ventilation , but the design was widely adopted by farmers and small traders , and illegal copies abounded . By the 1830s portable refrigerator chests became used in the meat trade , taking advantage of the growing supplies of ice to use ventilation to better preserve the food . By the 1840s , improved supplies and an understanding of the importance of circulating air was making a significant improvement to refrigeration in the U.S. 
 With the development of the U.S. railroad system , natural ice became used to transport larger quantities of goods much longer distances through the invention of the refrigerator car . The first refrigerator cars emerged in the late 1850s and early 1860s , and were crude constructions holding up to 3 @,@ 000 lbs ( 1 @,@ 360 kg ) of ice , on top of which the food was placed . It was quickly found that placing meat directly on top of blocks of ice in cars caused it to perish ; subsequent designs hung the meat from hooks , allowing the meat to breathe , while the swinging carcasses improved the circulation in the car . After the Civil War , J. B Sutherland , John Bate and William Davis all patented improved refrigerator cars , which used stacks of ice placed at either end and improved air circulation to keep their contents cool . This improved ventilation was essential to avoid warm air building up in the car and causing damage to the goods . Salt could be added to the ice to increase the cooling effect to produce an iced refrigerator car , which preserved foods even better . For much of the 19th century , the different gauges of train lines made it difficult and time consuming to move chilled cargoes between lines , which was a problem when the ice was continually melting ; by the 1860s , refrigerator cars with adjustable axles were being created to speed up this process . 
 Natural ice became essential to the transportation of perishable foods over the railroads ; slaughtering and dressing meat , then transporting it , was much more efficient in terms of freight costs and opened up the industries of the Mid @-@ West , while , as the industrialist Jonathan Armour argued , ice and refrigerator cars " changed the growing of fruits and berries from a gamble ... to a national industry " . 
 Refrigerated ships were also made possible through the ice trade , allowing perishable goods to be exported internationally , first from the U.S. and then from countries such as Argentina and Australia . Early ships had stored their chilled goods along with the main cargo of ice ; the first ships to transport chilled meat to Britain , designed by Bate , adapted the railroad refrigerator cars , using ice at either end of the hold and a ventilation fan to keep the meat cool . An improved version , invented by James Craven , piped a brine solution through the ice and then the hold to keep the meat cool , and created a drier atmosphere in the hold , preserving the meat better . Natural ice was also used in fishing industries to preserve catches , initially in the eastern American fisheries . In 1858 the Grimsby fishing fleet began to take ice out to sea with them to preserve their catches ; this allowed longer journeys and bigger catches , and the fishing industry became the biggest single user of ice in Britain . 
 Natural ice was put to many uses . The ice trade enabled its widespread use in medicine in attempts to treat diseases and to alleviate their symptoms , as well as making tropical hospitals more bearable . In Calcutta , for example , part of each ice shipment was specially reserved in the city 's ice house for the use of the local doctors . By the middle of the 19th century , the British Royal Navy was using imported ice to cool the interiors of its ships ' gun turrets . In 1864 , and after several attempts , salmon eggs were finally shipped successfully from Britain to Australia , using natural ice to keep them chilled on route , enabling the creation of the Tasmanian salmon fishery industry . 
 = Billy Bates ( baseball ) = 
 William Derrick Bates ( born December 7 , 1963 ) is a former Major League Baseball ( MLB ) second baseman and pinch runner who played for the Milwaukee Brewers and the 1990 World Series champion Cincinnati Reds . In 29 career games , Bates had a batting average of <unk> with six hits , two runs batted in ( RBI ) , 11 runs , ten strikeouts , and eight stolen bases . Though defensively he played as a second baseman , the Reds primarily used Bates as a pinch runner . After he scored the winning run in Game 2 of the 1990 World Series , Bates never played in MLB again . 
 Born in Houston , Bates attended the University of Texas and , in his freshman season , won the 1983 College World Series as a part of the Texas Longhorns baseball team . For the next two seasons , Bates was named to the College Baseball All @-@ America Team , a team composed of the best collegiate baseball athletes in America . Drafted by Milwaukee in the 4th round of the 1985 MLB draft , he rose through the Brewers ' farm system and teams that he played for won multiple minor league titles . He subsequently made his MLB debut in 1989 , after Milwaukee 's starting second baseman became injured . A trade sent Bates to Cincinnati in 1990 , where the Reds used him as a pinch runner at the end of the regular season and into the postseason . Facing the Oakland Athletics in the World Series , Bates reached base on a pinch hit single against Dennis Eckersley and later scored the winning run in Game 2 , as the Reds ultimately swept the Athletics , four games to none . Following the World Series championship , Bates spent two years in minor league baseball , one for the Reds and one for the Chicago Cubs , and last played exhibition baseball in 1995 . After retirement , he worked as an equipment supplier in the oil and gas industry in Houston and coached his daughter 's softball team . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bates was born on December 7 , 1963 , in Houston , Texas , and attended Aldine High School . When the Philadelphia Phillies selected him in the 8th round of the 1982 MLB draft , Bates became the second player ever to be drafted out of Aldine . Instead of signing a professional contract with the Phillies , Bates chose to attend the University of Texas at Austin . 
 = = = Collegiate career = = = 
 Bates enrolled at the University of Texas at Austin in 1983 , and played baseball in his first year there . The 1983 Longhorns finished with a 61 – 14 win – loss record and were ranked as the number one team in the nation by Collegiate Baseball Magazine . To determine which team would represent the Central Regional in the College World Series , the Longhorns played against the Mississippi State Bulldogs ; the Longhorns defeated the Bulldogs and advanced to the World Series . Though the World Series followed a double @-@ elimination format , the Longhorns never lost and defeated the Alabama Crimson Tide 4 – 3 to win the championship . After the Series , Bates was named to the World Series All @-@ Tournament team , composed of the best players from the series . Writers for Baseball America named him to their honorary Freshman All @-@ America team . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Rise to the majors = = = 
 Bates began playing professionally for the Class A @-@ Advanced Stockton Ports , a Brewers farm team which competed in the California League . Though the Ports only had two future MLB position players on their roster ( Bates ; and <unk> Freeman , who played in two games for the Brewers in 1989 ) , the team had seven future MLB pitchers . Under manager Tom Gamboa , the Ports finished with an 82 – 63 record and reached the California League playoffs , which consisted of four teams playing in a best @-@ of @-@ five game series ; the two winners advanced to play for the League championship . In the first series , the Ports defeated the Modesto A 's , three games to one . In the championship , Stockton faced the Fresno Giants , who defeated the Salinas Spurs to reach the finals . With a 2 – 1 series lead , Stockton lost the final two games , and the Giants won the California League title . Individually , Bates batted .298 and tied for fourth @-@ best on the team , with 18 stolen bases in 59 games played . 
 In 1986 , the Brewers promoted Bates to the Double @-@ A El Paso Diablos , a team that played in the Texas League . The eight home runs that Bates hit and his 75 RBI became the highest of his career at any professional level . The Diablos finished the regular season with an 85 – 50 record and made the Texas League playoffs , eventually winning the League title for the first time since 1974 . El Paso 's 85 wins were the most in the managerial career of Duffy Dyer , which lasted eleven years . Bates led the club with 23 stolen bases , but was caught stealing ten times , also a team high . 
 Before the 1987 season , Bates attempted to make the Brewers ' Opening Day roster by playing in Milwaukee 's spring training camp . A writer for the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel noted there was " a lot of recent publicity " around Bates , and another Journal Sentinel reporter said he " impressed many with his play " . Despite this , the Brewers sent Bates to their minor league camp in Peoria , Arizona , in March . He spent the entire season playing in Triple @-@ A for the Denver Zephyrs of the American Association ( AA ) and played in 130 games , the second most on the Zephyrs to Brad <unk> 's 135 . He was named the AA 's All @-@ Star second baseman , and finished the season batting .316 with 51 stolen bases , second most in the AA to Gary Thurman of the Omaha Royals , who stole 58 . His 117 runs scored also led a Denver club that won its final 11 games to finish 79 – 61 , one game ahead of the Louisville Redbirds for the best record in the AA . In the first round of the playoffs , Denver faced the Oklahoma City 89ers , defeated them , and advanced to the League championship series . In the match , the Indianapolis Indians defeated the Zephyrs four games to one to win the AA title for the second straight year . 
 In a Brewer 's spring training game in early March , Bates committed two errors against the Chicago Cubs in the top of the 11th inning , as the Cubs scored the winning run without recording a hit , but his 4th @-@ inning single scored two runs . He was again cut from the MLB roster prior to the start of the 1988 season , as Milwaukee manager Tom <unk> named Paul Molitor their starting second baseman . Now in Triple @-@ A , Bates had a five RBI game against the Iowa Cubs on April 12 in a Zephyrs ' victory . Hindered throughout the season by a leg injury , Bates hit .258 with 29 stolen bases , a loss of 22 from a season ago , as the Zephyrs finished 72 – 62 ; it was the first time in Bates ' professional career that a team he played for missed the playoffs . 
 = = = MLB debut = = = 
 After the 1988 season , the Brewers added Bates to their winter roster as the 1989 season approached . However , when 12 @-@ year Brewer second baseman Jim Gantner re @-@ signed with the club , Bates was demoted to Denver , and the Journal @-@ Sentinel predicted that he would remain there due to his limited defensive versatility . Bates began the season with the Zephyrs and in July was named to the Triple @-@ A All @-@ Star Game . On the MLB level , the Brewers suffered multiple injuries to starting players , having 9 athletes on the disabled list ( DL ) on August 22 and 14 total players on the DL up to that point . In a game against the New York Yankees on August 15 , Gantner played at second base as the Brewers tried to hold on to a 1 – 0 lead . With Marcus Lawton on first base , Yankees batter Wayne Tolleson hit a ground ball to shortstop Bill Spiers for a potential double play . Lawton ran into Gantner , who had trouble fielding a low throw from Spiers ; umpire Dave Phillips called both Lawton and Tolleson out due to Lawton 's illegal roll @-@ block , but Gantner tore the medial collateral ligament in his left knee and was placed on the DL . Bates was called up as his replacement . 
 After the injury , Milwaukee 's general manager Harry Dalton said that Bates " is expected to join [ the MLB team ] by game time [ August 16 ] " , adding " he won 't be in the starting lineup , but he could play if necessary " . Bates made his MLB debut on August 17 as a part of a double switch against the Boston Red Sox : when Dan <unk> replaced Tony Fossas as the pitcher , Bates entered the game for Gus <unk> . Wade Boggs hit a ground ball to Bates , but he committed an error that allowed Boggs to reach and Dwight Evans to advance to third base . No runs were scored in the inning and the Brewers won , 8 – 4 . Bates made his first career start two days later , and his first MLB hit came on August 20 when he reached base on an infield single . Bates then stole second base , and scored on a single by Robin Yount . While he was running out a base hit on August 22 , Bates slipped on wet grass and suffered a separated right shoulder . The Brewers placed him on the 15 @-@ day DL ; as a replacement , Milwaukee acquired Ed Romero from the Atlanta Braves . Bates returned to the team for three more games in September before the end of the season . Over seven MLB games , he batted .214 with three hits , three runs , and two steals . 
 In late March , <unk> projected that Bates would be Milwaukee 's starting second baseman for the 1990 MLB season , although Dale <unk> was bearing down on the starting spot . Bates started at second on Opening Day against the Chicago White Sox , and despite a 2 – 1 Brewers ' loss , Bates ' play was complimented . Facing the Red Sox on April 14 , Bates hit his only MLB extra base hit , a double , in the 8th inning but committed two errors on defense . He later scored the go @-@ ahead run on a Gary Sheffield double in a 9 – 5 Milwaukee victory . Previously , he stole second base and home plate in the 2nd . His second ( and final ) MLB RBI occurred on April 18 . Rob Deer scored on his single , after Bates entered the game in the 6th inning to replace <unk> , who had been hit by a pitch an inning earlier . By April 27 Bates was hitting <unk> over 29 at bats , as Molitor came off the DL and expected to take over at second : Seth Livingstone of The Telegraph called the switch " merciful " . Four days later , Bates was demoted to Denver , where he was the team 's all @-@ time leader in steals . For the Zephyrs , he batted .327 in 25 games before Milwaukee traded him to the Cincinnati Reds on June 9 . This occurred as part of a four @-@ player deal , in which Bates and outfielder Glenn Braggs were sent to Cincinnati for pitchers Ron Robinson and Bob <unk> . Reds general manager Bob Quinn said he made the trade because , while " we felt comfortable with our pitching staff , we didn 't feel comfortable with the right @-@ handed hitters off the bench " . Bates later said that he repeatedly asked the Brewers to trade him . 
 = = = Cincinnati Reds = = = 
 When he arrived with the Reds organization , Bates was assigned to the Triple @-@ A Nashville Sounds of the AA . In a play @-@ in game to determine the leader of the AA Eastern division , and thus the team that qualified for the playoffs , the Sounds played against the Buffalo Bisons . Nashville manager Pete Mackanin called the contest " the most absurd game I 've ever seen in my life " : the match , which lasted 18 innings , ended when Chris Jones hit a double that scored Bates . Nashville played another extra @-@ inning game , this time a 20 @-@ inning contest on September 7 , against the Western @-@ champion Omaha Royals in the playoffs and lost . Later , the Sounds lost the series three games to two ; Bates ' season , however , was not over , as the Reds added him to their MLB roster . In his Cincinnati debut on September 11 , Bates came into the game as a pinch runner and scored on a Billy Doran hit . Doran – a second baseman the Reds acquired from the Houston Astros in a " last @-@ minute " deal before the trade deadline – was hospitalized with back pain and spasms on September 29 . Doctors performed an operation on October 3 , which would hold him out of postseason play as Cincinnati won the National League West ; the Reds were the first team in National League history to lead a division for an entire 162 @-@ game season . In a move that surprised Bates , who already prepared to return to his Houston residence after the Reds ' last regular @-@ season game , the club added him to their postseason roster . 
 In the 1990 National League Championship Series , the Reds faced the Pittsburgh Pirates in a best @-@ of @-@ seven game series . In Game 1 , the Reds , the home team , opened up a 3 – 0 lead but trailed 4 – 3 as the game entered the bottom of the ninth inning . Todd Benzinger led off the inning with a pinch @-@ hit single against Bob Patterson . Patterson walked the next batter , Eric Davis , but forced an out at third base when Ron <unk> tried to sacrifice Davis over . Manager Lou Piniella put Bates into the game as a pinch runner for <unk> . Davis , at second , tried to steal third , and Bates followed ; while Davis was safe , Pirates catcher Mike LaValliere threw to second and Bates was out by three feet , which made the second out in the inning . Speaking about himself , Bates said he thought he " had a better jump than [ he ] did " , and added that he should not have attempted the steal . The Reds failed to score that inning and lost the game . Bates ' next postseason appearance came in Game 3 , when he pinch ran for Joe Oliver and scored a run as the Reds won 6 – 3 . Cincinnati ultimately defeated the Pirates and moved on to the World Series , where they would play the Oakland Athletics for the league championship . 
 In Game 1 , the Reds defeated the Athletics 7 – 0 in what Associated Press writer Jim Donaghy called " a stunning combination of power and pitching " : Cincinnati scored four runs off of Dave Stewart , who had a six @-@ game winning streak in the playoffs , while pitchers José Rijo , Rob Dibble , and Randy Myers combined for a nine @-@ hit shutout . The game ended the Athletics ' ten @-@ game postseason win streak . Bates did not play . Like Game 1 , Cincinnati was the home team for Game 2 , where Danny Jackson of the Reds faced Bob Welch of the Athletics . Oakland opened the scoring with a run in the top of the first inning , a ground ball by Jose Canseco that scored Rickey Henderson . The Reds responded for two runs in the bottom of the first . Oakland scored three more runs in the third , and Piniella removed Jackson from the game as the Athletics led the Reds 4 – 2 . Cincinnati added a run in the bottom of the fourth and managed to tie the game in the eighth as Billy Hatcher hit a triple and scored on a groundout . After nine innings , the game remained tied , 4 – 4 . Rob Dibble came into pitch in the ninth and held the Athletics scoreless for the two innings he pitched ; Oakland countered with future Hall of Fame inductee Dennis Eckersley for the bottom of the tenth . Leading off for the Reds was Davis , who grounded out to shortstop . The next batter was supposed to be the pitcher Dibble but Bates entered the game to pinch hit . Hitting coach Tony Pérez told him to " put the ball in play " and " run like Hell " . Eckersley pitched Bates to an 0 – 2 ball – strike count when he hit the ball weakly to the third baseman and beat out an infield single ; it was Bates ' first hit against a right @-@ handed pitcher in his MLB career . Chris Sabo advanced Bates to second on a single , and Oliver scored Bates on another single to win the game . Bates called the situation a " dream come true " . 
 The Reds won Game 3 after scoring seven runs in the top of the third inning off of Mike Moore . Pitcher Tom Browning earned the win for Cincinnati , as the game ended at a score of 8 – 3 . The Athletics took a lead in Game 4 , as Carney Lansford hit a single that scored Willie McGee from second base . In the eighth inning , however , the Reds loaded the bases after singles by Barry Larkin and Herm Winningham , and an error that allowed Paul O 'Neill to reach base . Larkin scored on a groundout and Winningham scored on a sacrifice fly to give Cincinnati the lead , 2 – 1 . The lead held , as Myers came in for Rijo after one out in the bottom of the ninth inning , and the Reds became World Series champions . Bates did not play in either game . As with all players on the World Series champion Reds , Bates received a World Series ring and visited the White House . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 In January , Bates signed a one @-@ year contract to stay with the Reds . In spring training , Cincinnati sent Bates to their minor league complex for reassignment to a team in the Reds ' farm system . He started the season in Triple @-@ A. Doran , still with a back injury , went on the DL in May , but Bates was not able take his spot due to a back injury of his own . He played the entire 1991 season for the Sounds , where he batted .242 over 49 games with one stolen base out of three attempts , as the team finished with a 65 – 78 record . The Reds did not re @-@ sign him . On May 7 , 1992 , Bates signed a contract with the Chicago Cubs and played for the Iowa Cubs , Chicago 's Triple @-@ A affiliate . Over 91 games played , he hit .241 with 62 hits and two stolen bases as Iowa finished 51 – 92 . From 1992 – 1994 , he worked for his father @-@ in @-@ law in a Houston pipe fabrication business . In February 1995 , the Brewers invited Bates to their spring training camp as a possible replacement player due to the 1994 – 1995 MLB strike . When the strike ended Bates returned to his wife and children in Houston , instead of continuing his career elsewhere , citing physical reasons for his retirement . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 When he played , Bates stood at 5 feet 7 inches ( 170 cm ) , something that teammates taunted him about : in Milwaukee spring training camp , players threw a cap on the ground and addressed it as if it were Bates . During the MLB off @-@ season , he worked as a substitute school teacher in Houston . Before the World Series , Bates raced against an unchained cheetah in a promotional event for the Cincinnati Zoo at Riverfront Stadium . The premise of the event was to show that a cheetah could defeat a human ( with a five @-@ second head start ) in a 100 @-@ yard race . The cheetah was supposed to chase a toy , but about halfway through the race , Bates ' hat fell off , and instead , it went after the hat ; Bates won the race . In 2000 , the University of Texas inducted him into their Men 's Athletics Hall of Honor . As of 2010 , Bates lives in Houston and works for an equipment supplier in the oil and gas industry . He also coaches his daughter 's softball team outside of work . 
 = Bob Marley = 
 Robert Nesta " Bob " Marley , OM ( 6 February 1945 – 11 May 1981 ) was a Jamaican reggae singer , songwriter , musician , and guitarist who achieved international fame and acclaim . Starting out in 1963 with the group The Wailers , he forged a distinctive songwriting and vocal style that would later resonate with audiences worldwide . The Wailers would go on to release some of the earliest reggae records with producer Lee " Scratch " Perry . 
 After the Wailers disbanded in 1974 , Marley pursued a solo career upon his relocation to England that culminated in the release of the album Exodus in 1977 , which established his worldwide reputation and produced his status as one of the world 's best @-@ selling artists of all time , with sales of more than 75 million records . Exodus stayed on the British album charts for fifty @-@ six consecutive weeks . It included four UK hit singles : " Exodus " , " Waiting in Vain " , " Jamming " , and " One Love " . In 1978 he released the album Kaya , which included the hit singles " Is This Love " and " Satisfy My Soul " . 
 Diagnosed with a type of malignant melanoma in 1977 , Marley died on 11 May 1981 in Miami at the age of 36 . He was a committed Rastafari who infused his music with a sense of spirituality . He is considered one of the most influential musicians of all time and credited with popularizing reggae music around the world , as well as serving as a symbol of Jamaican culture and identity . Marley has also evolved into a global symbol , which has been endlessly merchandised through a variety of mediums . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Robert Nesta Marley was born on the farm of his maternal grandfather in Nine Mile , Saint Ann Parish , Jamaica , to Norval Sinclair Marley ( 1885 – 1955 ) and Cedella Booker ( 1926 – 2008 ) . Norval Marley was a white Jamaican originally from Sussex , England , whose family claimed Syrian Jewish origins . Norval claimed to have been a captain in the Royal Marines ; at the time of his marriage to Cedella Booker , an Afro @-@ Jamaican then 18 years old , he was employed as a plantation overseer . Though Bob Marley was named Nesta Robert Marley , a Jamaican passport official would later reverse his first and middle names . Norval provided financial support for his wife and child but seldom saw them as he was often away . Bob Marley attended Stepney Primary and Junior High School which serves the catchment area of Saint Ann . In 1955 , when Bob Marley was 10 years old , his father died of a heart attack at the age of 70 . 
 Marley and Neville Livingston ( later known as Bunny Wailer ) had been childhood friends in Nine Mile . They had started to play music together while at Stepney Primary and Junior High School . Marley left Nine Mile with his mother when he was 12 and moved to Trenchtown , Kingston . Cedella Booker and <unk> Livingston ( Bunny Wailer 's father ) had a daughter together whom they named Pearl , who was a younger sister to both Bob and Bunny . Now that Marley and Livingston were living together in the same house in Trenchtown , their musical explorations deepened to include the latest R & B from American radio stations whose broadcasts reached Jamaica , and the new Ska music . The move to Trenchtown was proving to be fortuitous , and Marley soon found himself in a vocal group with Bunny Wailer , Peter Tosh , Beverley Kelso and Junior Braithwaite . Joe Higgs , who was part of the successful vocal act Higgs and Wilson , resided on 3rd St. , and his singing partner Roy Wilson had been raised by the grandmother of Junior Braithwaite . Higgs and Wilson would rehearse at the back of the houses between 2nd and 3rd Streets , and it wasn 't long before Marley ( now residing on 2nd St ) , Junior Braithwaite and the others were congregating around this successful duo . Marley and the others didn 't play any instruments at this time , and were more interested in being a vocal harmony group . Higgs was glad to help them develop their vocal harmonies , although more importantly , he had started to teach Marley how to play guitar — thereby creating the bedrock that would later allow Marley to construct some of the biggest @-@ selling reggae songs in the history of the genre . 
 = = Musical career = = 
 = = = 1962 – 72 : Early years = = = 
 In February 1962 , Marley recorded four songs , " Judge Not " , " One Cup of Coffee " , " Do You Still Love Me ? " and " Terror " , at Federal Studio for local music producer Leslie Kong . Three of the songs were released on Beverley 's with " One Cup of Coffee " being released under the pseudonym Bobby Martell . 
 In 1963 , Bob Marley , Bunny Wailer , Peter Tosh , Junior Braithwaite , Beverley Kelso , and Cherry Smith were called The Teenagers . They later changed the name to The Wailing <unk> , then to The Wailing Wailers , at which point they were discovered by record producer Coxsone Dodd , and finally to The Wailers . Their single " Simmer Down " for the Coxsone label became a Jamaican # 1 in February 1964 selling an estimated 70 @,@ 000 copies . The Wailers , now regularly recording for Studio One , found themselves working with established Jamaican musicians such as Ernest Ranglin ( arranger " It Hurts To Be Alone " ) , the keyboardist Jackie Mittoo and saxophonist Roland Alphonso . By 1966 , Braithwaite , Kelso , and Smith had left The Wailers , leaving the core trio of Bob Marley , Bunny Wailer , and Peter Tosh . 
 In 1966 , Marley married Rita Anderson , and moved near his mother 's residence in Wilmington , Delaware in the United States for a short time , during which he worked as a DuPont lab assistant and on the assembly line at a Chrysler plant , under the alias Donald Marley . 
 Though raised as a Catholic , Marley became interested in Rastafari beliefs in the 1960s , when away from his mother 's influence . After returning to Jamaica , Marley formally converted to Rastafari and began to grow dreadlocks . The Rastafari proscription against cutting hair is based on the biblical Samson , who as a <unk> , was expected to make certain religious vows , including the ritual treatment of his hair as described in Chapter Six of the Book of Numbers : 
 All the days of the vow of his separation there shall no razor come upon his head : until the days be fulfilled , in the which he <unk> himself unto the Lord , he shall be holy , and shall let the locks of the hair of his head grow . ( Numbers 6 : 5 KJV ) 
 After a financial disagreement with Dodd , Marley and his band teamed up with Lee " Scratch " Perry and his studio band , The Upsetters . Although the alliance lasted less than a year , they recorded what many consider The Wailers ' finest work . Marley and Perry split after a dispute regarding the assignment of recording rights , but they would remain friends and work together again . 
 Between 1968 and 1972 , Bob and Rita Marley , Peter Tosh and Bunny Wailer re @-@ cut some old tracks with <unk> Records in Kingston and London in an attempt to commercialise The Wailers ' sound . Bunny later asserted that these songs " should never be released on an album ... they were just demos for record companies to listen to " . In 1968 , Bob and Rita visited songwriter Jimmy Norman at his apartment in the Bronx . Norman had written the extended lyrics for Kai Winding 's " Time Is on My Side " ( covered by the Rolling Stones ) and had also written for Johnny Nash and Jimi Hendrix . A three @-@ day jam session with Norman and others , including Norman 's co @-@ writer Al Pyfrom , resulted in a 24 @-@ minute tape of Marley performing several of his own and Norman @-@ Pyfrom 's compositions . This tape is , according to Reggae archivist Roger Steffens , rare in that it was influenced by pop rather than reggae , as part of an effort to break Marley into the American charts . According to an article in The New York Times , Marley experimented on the tape with different sounds , adopting a doo @-@ wop style on " Stay With Me " and " the slow love song style of 1960 's artists " on " Splish for My Splash " . An artist yet to establish himself outside his native Jamaica , Marley lived in <unk> Gardens , Bloomsbury , during 1972 . 
 = = = 1972 – 74 : Move to Island Records = = = 
 In 1972 , Bob Marley signed with CBS Records in London and embarked on a UK tour with American soul singer Johnny Nash . While in London the Wailers asked their road manager Brent Clarke to introduce them to Chris Blackwell who had licensed some of their Coxsone releases for his Island Records . The Wailers intended to discuss the royalties associated with these releases ; instead the meeting resulted in the offer of an advance of £ 4 @,@ 000 to record an album . Since Jimmy Cliff , Island 's top reggae star , had recently left the label , Blackwell was primed for a replacement . In Marley , Blackwell recognized the elements needed to snare the rock audience : " I was dealing with rock music , which was really rebel music . I felt that would really be the way to break Jamaican music . But you needed someone who could be that image . When Bob walked in he really was that image . " The Wailers returned to Jamaica to record at Harry J 's in Kingston which resulted in the album Catch a Fire . 
 Primarily recorded on an eight @-@ track Catch a Fire marked the first time a reggae band had access to a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art studio and were accorded the same care as their rock ' n ' roll peers . Blackwell desired to create " more of a drifting , hypnotic @-@ type feel than a reggae rhythm " , and restructured Marley 's mixes and arrangements . Marley travelled to London to supervise Blackwell 's overdubbing of the album which included tempering the mix from the bass @-@ heavy sound of Jamaican music and omitting two tracks . 
 The Wailers ' first album for Island , Catch a Fire , was released worldwide in April 1973 , packaged like a rock record with a unique Zippo lighter lift @-@ top . Initially selling 14 @,@ 000 units , it didn 't make Marley a star , but received a positive critical reception . It was followed later that year by the album Burnin ' which included the song " I Shot the Sheriff " . Eric Clapton was given the album by his guitarist George Terry in the hope that he would enjoy it . Clapton was suitably impressed and chose to record a cover version of " I Shot the Sheriff " which became his first US hit since " Layla " two years earlier and reached # 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 on 14 September 1974 . Many Jamaicans were not keen on the new reggae sound on Catch a Fire , but the Trenchtown style of Burnin found fans across both reggae and rock audiences . 
 During this period , Blackwell gifted his Kingston residence and company headquarters at 56 Hope Road ( then known as Island House ) to Marley . Housing Tuff Gong Studios , the property became not only Marley 's office , but also his home . 
 The Wailers were scheduled to open seventeen shows in the US for Sly and the Family Stone . After four shows , the band was fired because they were more popular than the acts they were opening for . The Wailers broke up in 1974 with each of the three main members pursuing solo careers . The reason for the breakup is shrouded in conjecture ; some believe that there were disagreements amongst Bunny , Peter , and Bob concerning performances , while others claim that Bunny and Peter simply preferred solo work . 
 = = = 1974 – 76 : Line @-@ up changes and shooting = = = 
 Despite the break @-@ up , Marley continued recording as " Bob Marley & The Wailers " . His new backing band included brothers Carlton and Aston " Family Man " Barrett on drums and bass respectively , Junior Marvin and Al Anderson on lead guitar , Tyrone Downie and Earl " <unk> " Lindo on keyboards , and Alvin " <unk> " Patterson on percussion . The " I Threes " , consisting of Judy Mowatt , Marcia Griffiths , and Marley 's wife , Rita , provided backing vocals . In 1975 , Marley had his international breakthrough with his first hit outside Jamaica , " No Woman , No Cry " , from the Natty Dread album . This was followed by his breakthrough album in the United States , <unk> Vibration ( 1976 ) , which reached the Top 50 of the Billboard Soul Charts . 
 On 3 December 1976 , two days before " Smile Jamaica " , a free concert organised by the Jamaican Prime Minister Michael Manley in an attempt to ease tension between two warring political groups , Marley , his wife , and manager Don Taylor were wounded in an assault by unknown gunmen inside Marley 's home . Taylor and Marley 's wife sustained serious injuries , but later made full recoveries . Bob Marley received minor wounds in the chest and arm . The attempt on his life was thought to have been politically motivated , as many felt the concert was really a support rally for Manley . Nonetheless , the concert proceeded , and an injured Marley performed as scheduled , two days after the attempt . When asked why , Marley responded , " The people who are trying to make this world worse aren 't taking a day off . How can I ? " The members of the group Zap Pow played as Bob Marley 's backup band before a festival crowd of 80 @,@ 000 while members of The Wailers were still missing or in hiding . 
 = = = 1976 – 79 : Relocation to England = = = 
 Marley left Jamaica at the end of 1976 , and after a month @-@ long " recovery and writing " sojourn at the site of Chris Blackwell 's Compass Point Studios in Nassau , Bahamas , arrived in England , where he spent two years in self @-@ imposed exile . 
 Whilst in England , he recorded the albums Exodus and Kaya . Exodus stayed on the British album charts for fifty @-@ six consecutive weeks . It included four UK hit singles : " Exodus " , " Waiting in Vain " , " Jamming " , and " One Love " ( a rendition of Curtis Mayfield 's hit , " People Get Ready " ) . During his time in London , he was arrested and received a conviction for possession of a small quantity of cannabis . In 1978 , Marley returned to Jamaica and performed at another political concert , the One Love Peace Concert , again in an effort to calm warring parties . Near the end of the performance , by Marley 's request , Michael Manley ( leader of then @-@ ruling People 's National Party ) and his political rival Edward <unk> ( leader of the opposing Jamaica Labour Party ) , joined each other on stage and shook hands . 
 Under the name Bob Marley and the Wailers eleven albums were released , four live albums and seven studio albums . The releases included Babylon by Bus , a double live album with thirteen tracks , were released in 1978 and received critical acclaim . This album , and specifically the final track " Jamming " with the audience in a frenzy , captured the intensity of Marley 's live performances . 
 = = = 1979 – 81 : Later years = = = 
 Survival , a defiant and politically charged album , was released in 1979 . Tracks such as " Zimbabwe " , " Africa Unite " , " Wake Up and Live " , and " Survival " reflected Marley 's support for the struggles of Africans . His appearance at the <unk> Festival in Boston in July 1979 showed his strong opposition to South African apartheid , which he already had shown in his song " War " in 1976 . In early 1980 , he was invited to perform at 17 April celebration of Zimbabwe 's Independence Day . 
 Uprising ( 1980 ) was Bob Marley 's final studio album , and is one of his most religious productions ; it includes " Redemption Song " and " Forever Loving Jah " . Confrontation , released posthumously in 1983 , contained unreleased material recorded during Marley 's lifetime , including the hit " Buffalo Soldier " and new mixes of singles previously only available in Jamaica . 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 In July 1977 , Marley was found to have a type of malignant melanoma under the nail of a toe . Contrary to urban legend , this lesion was not primarily caused by an injury during a football match that year , but was instead a symptom of the already @-@ existing cancer . Marley turned down his doctors ' advice to have his toe amputated , citing his religious beliefs , and instead the nail and nail bed were removed and a skin graft taken from his thigh to cover the area . Despite his illness , he continued touring and was in the process of scheduling a world tour in 1980 . 
 The album Uprising was released in May 1980 . The band completed a major tour of Europe , where it played its biggest concert to 100 @,@ 000 people in Milan . After the tour Marley went to America , where he performed two shows at Madison Square Garden in New York City as part of the Uprising Tour . 
 Bob Marley appeared at the Stanley Theater ( now called The Benedum Center For The Performing Arts ) in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , on 23 September 1980 ; it would be his last concert . The only known photographs from the show were featured in Kevin Macdonald 's documentary film Marley . 
 Shortly afterwards , Marley 's health deteriorated as the cancer had spread throughout his body . The rest of the tour was cancelled and Marley sought treatment at the Bavarian clinic of Josef <unk> , where he received a controversial type of cancer therapy ( <unk> treatment ) partly based on avoidance of certain foods , drinks , and other substances . After fighting the cancer without success for eight months Marley boarded a plane for his home in Jamaica . 
 While Marley was flying home from Germany to Jamaica , his vital functions worsened . After landing in Miami , Florida , he was taken to the hospital for immediate medical attention . Bob Marley died on 11 May 1981 at Cedars of Lebanon Hospital in Miami ( now University of Miami Hospital ) at the age of 36 . The spread of melanoma to his lungs and brain caused his death . His final words to his son Ziggy were " Money can 't buy life . " 
 Marley received a state funeral in Jamaica on 21 May 1981 , which combined elements of Ethiopian Orthodoxy and Rastafari tradition . He was buried in a chapel near his birthplace with his red Gibson Les Paul ( some accounts say it was a Fender Stratocaster ) . 
 On 21 May 1981 , Jamaican Prime Minister Edward <unk> delivered the final funeral eulogy to Marley , declaring : 
 His voice was an omnipresent cry in our electronic world . His sharp features , majestic looks , and prancing style a vivid etching on the landscape of our minds . Bob Marley was never seen . He was an experience which left an indelible imprint with each encounter . Such a man cannot be erased from the mind . He is part of the collective consciousness of the nation . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Bob Marley was a member for some years of the Rastafari movement , whose culture was a key element in the development of reggae . Bob Marley became an ardent proponent of Rastafari , taking their music out of the socially deprived areas of Jamaica and onto the international music scene . He once gave the following response , which was typical , to a question put to him during a recorded interview : 
 Interviewer : " Can you tell the people what it means being a Rastafarian ? " Marley : " I would say to the people , Be still , and know that His Imperial Majesty , Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia is the Almighty . Now , the Bible seh so , Babylon newspaper seh so , and I and I the children seh so . <unk> ? So I don 't see how much more reveal our people want . Wha ' dem want ? a white God , well God come black . True true . " 
 According to Marley 's biographers , he affiliated with the Twelve Tribes Mansion , one of the Mansions of Rastafari . He was in the denomination known as " Tribe of Joseph " , because he was born in February ( each of the twelve sects being composed of members born in a different month ) . He signified this in his album liner notes , quoting the portion from Genesis that includes Jacob 's blessing to his son Joseph . 
 Archbishop <unk> <unk> baptized Marley into the Ethiopian Orthodox Church , on 4 November 1980 , shortly before his death . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Bob Marley married <unk> Constantia " Rita " Anderson in Kingston , Jamaica , on 10 February 1966 . Marley had a number of children : three with his wife Rita , two adopted from Rita 's previous relationships , and several others with different women . The Bob Marley official website acknowledges eleven children . 
 Those listed on the official site are : 
 Sharon , born 23 November 1964 , daughter of Rita from a previous relationship but then adopted by Marley after his marriage with Rita 
 Cedella born 23 August 1967 , to Rita 
 David " Ziggy " , born 17 October 1968 , to Rita 
 Stephen , born 20 April 1972 , to Rita 
 Robert " Robbie " , born 16 May 1972 , to Pat Williams 
 Rohan , born 19 May 1972 , to Janet Hunt 
 Karen , born 1973 to Janet Bowen 
 Stephanie , born 17 August 1974 ; according to Cedella Booker she was the daughter of Rita and a man called <unk> with whom Rita had an affair ; nonetheless she was acknowledged as Bob 's daughter 
 Julian , born 4 June 1975 , to Lucy Pounder 
 Ky @-@ Mani , born 26 February 1976 , to Anita <unk> 
 Damian , born 21 July 1978 , to Cindy <unk> 
 Other sites have noted additional individuals who claim to be family members , as noted below : 
 <unk> was born on 30 May 1981 , to Yvette Crichton , after Marley 's death . Meredith Dixon 's book lists her as Marley 's child , but she is not listed as such on the Bob Marley official website . 
 Various websites , for example , also list Imani Carole , born 22 May 1963 to Cheryl Murray ; but she does not appear on the official Bob Marley website . 
 = = = Football = = = 
 Aside from music , football played a major role throughout his life . As well as playing the game , in parking lots , fields , and even inside recording studios , growing up he followed the Brazilian club Santos and its star player Pelé . Marley surrounded himself with people from the sport , and in the 1970s made the Jamaican international footballer Allan “ Skill ” Cole his tour manager . He told a journalist , “ If you want to get to know me , you will have to play football against me and the Wailers . ” 
 = = = Personal views = = = 
 = = = = Pan @-@ Africanism = = = = 
 Marley was a Pan @-@ Africanist , and believed in the unity of African people worldwide . His beliefs in Pan @-@ Africanism were rooted in his Rastafari religious beliefs . He was substantially inspired by Marcus Garvey , and had anti @-@ imperialist and pan @-@ Africanist themes in many of his songs , such as " Zimbabwe " , " Exodus " , " Survival " , " Blackman Redemption " , and " Redemption Song " . " Redemption Song " draws influence from a speech given by Marcus Garvey in Nova Scotia , 1937 . Marley held that independence of African countries from European domination was a victory for all those in the African diaspora . In the song " Africa Unite " , he sings of a desire for all peoples of the African diaspora to come together and fight against " Babylon " ; similarly , in the song " Zimbabwe " , he marks the liberation of the whole continent of Africa , and evokes calls for unity between all Africans , both within and outside Africa . 
 = = = = Cannabis = = = = 
 Marley considered cannabis a healing herb , a " sacrament " , and an " aid to medication " ; he supported the legalization of the drug . He thought that marijuana use was prevalent in the Bible , reading passages such as Psalms 104 : 14 as showing approval of its usage . Marley began to use cannabis when he converted to the Rastafari faith from Catholicism in 1966 . He was arrested in 1968 after being caught with cannabis , but continued to use marijuana in accordance with his religious beliefs . Of his marijuana usage , he said , " When you smoke herb , herb reveal yourself to you . All the wickedness you do , the herb reveal itself to yourself , your conscience , show up yourself clear , because herb make you meditate . Is only a natural t 'ing and it grow like a tree . " Marley saw marijuana usage as a vital factor in religious growth and connection with Jah , and as a way to <unk> and become wiser . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Awards and honors = = = 
 1976 : Band of the Year ( Rolling Stone ) . 
 June 1978 : Awarded the Peace Medal of the Third World from the United Nations . 
 February 1981 : Awarded Jamaica 's third highest honour , the Jamaican Order of Merit . 
 March 1994 : Inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . 
 1999 : Album of the Century for Exodus by Time Magazine . 
 February 2001 : A star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . 
 February 2001 : Awarded Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award . 
 2004 : Rolling Stone ranked him No. 11 on their list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time . 
 " One Love " named song of the millennium by BBC . 
 Voted as one of the greatest lyricists of all time by a BBC poll . 
 2006 : An English Heritage blue plaque was unveiled at his first UK residence in <unk> Gardens , London , dedicated to him by Nubian Jak community trust and supported by Her Majesty 's Foreign Office . 
 2010 : Catch a Fire inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame ( Reggae Album ) . 
 = = = Other tributes = = = 
 A statue was inaugurated , next to the national stadium on Arthur Wint Drive in Kingston to commemorate him . In 2006 , the New York City Department of Education co @-@ named a portion of Church Avenue from Remsen Avenue to East 98th Street in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn as " Bob Marley Boulevard " . In 2008 , a statue of Marley was inaugurated in Banatski Sokolac , Serbia . 
 Internationally , Marley 's message also continues to reverberate among various indigenous communities . For instance , the Australian Aborigines continue to burn a sacred flame to honor his memory in Sydney 's Victoria Park , while members of the Amerindian Hopi and Havasupai tribe revere his work . There are also many tributes to Bob Marley throughout India , including restaurants , hotels , and cultural festivals . 
 Marley has also evolved into a global symbol , which has been endlessly merchandised through a variety of mediums . In light of this , author Dave Thompson in his book Reggae and Caribbean Music , laments what he perceives to be the commercialized pacification of Marley 's more militant edge , stating : 
 Bob Marley ranks among both the most popular and the most misunderstood figures in modern culture ... That the machine has utterly emasculated Marley is beyond doubt . Gone from the public record is the ghetto kid who dreamed of Che Guevara and the Black Panthers , and pinned their posters up in the Wailers Soul Shack record store ; who believed in freedom ; and the fighting which it necessitated , and dressed the part on an early album sleeve ; whose heroes were James Brown and Muhammad Ali ; whose God was Ras Tafari and whose sacrament was marijuana . Instead , the Bob Marley who surveys his kingdom today is smiling benevolence , a shining sun , a waving palm tree , and a string of hits which tumble out of polite radio like candy from a gumball machine . Of course it has assured his immortality . But it has also demeaned him beyond recognition . Bob Marley was worth far more . 
 Several film adaptations have evolved as well . For instance , a feature @-@ length documentary about his life , Rebel Music , won various awards at the Grammys . With contributions from Rita , The Wailers , and Marley 's lovers and children , it also tells much of the story in his own words . In February 2008 , director Martin Scorsese announced his intention to produce a documentary movie on Marley . The film was set to be released on 6 February 2010 , on what would have been Marley 's 65th birthday . However , Scorsese dropped out due to scheduling problems . He was replaced by Jonathan Demme , who dropped out due to creative differences with producer Steve Bing during the beginning of editing . Kevin Macdonald replaced Demme and the film , Marley , was released on 20 April 2012 . In March 2008 , The Weinstein Company announced its plans to produce a biopic of Bob Marley , based on the book No Woman No Cry : My Life With Bob Marley by Rita Marley . Rudy Langlais will produce the script by Lizzie Borden and Rita Marley will be executive producer . In 2011 , ex @-@ girlfriend and filmmaker Esther Anderson , along with Gian Godoy , made the documentary Bob Marley : The Making of a Legend , which premiered at the Edinburgh International Film Festival . 
 In October 2015 , Jamaican author Marlon James ' novel A Brief History of Seven Killings , a fictional account of the attempted assassination of Marley , won the 2015 Man Booker Prize at a ceremony in London . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 The Wailing Wailers ( 1965 ) 
 Soul Rebels ( 1970 ) 
 Soul Revolution ( 1971 ) 
 The Best of the Wailers ( 1971 ) 
 Catch a Fire ( 1973 ) 
 Burnin ' ( 1973 ) 
 Natty Dread ( 1974 ) 
 <unk> Vibration ( 1976 ) 
 Exodus ( 1977 ) 
 Kaya ( 1978 ) 
 Survival ( 1979 ) 
 Uprising ( 1980 ) 
 Confrontation ( 1983 ) 
 Live albums 
 Live ! ( 1975 ) 
 Babylon By Bus ( 1978 ) 
 = M @-@ 13 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 13 is a 73 @.@ 339 @-@ mile ( 118 @.@ 028 km ) north – south state trunkline highway that runs through the Saginaw Bay region of the US state of Michigan . It runs from Interstate 69 ( I @-@ 69 ) south of Lennon to US Highway 23 ( US 23 ) near Standish . The southern section of the trunkline runs along a pair of county lines in a rural area dominated by farm fields . The highway directly connects the downtown areas of both Saginaw and Bay City . North of the latter city , the Lake Huron Circle Tour follows M @-@ 13 along the Saginaw Bay . 
 The original 1919 version of M @-@ 13 ran along the west side of the state , roughly replaced by what is now US 131 in 1926 . The current highway was first designated by 1932 with the M @-@ 13 moniker . After a series of extensions in the 1930s , the highway ran from Lennon to Saginaw . Another set of expansions in the 1960s added roadways that previously carried US 23 all the way north to the Standish area . A related section of highway is numbered Connector M @-@ 13 , a connector route that was once part of US 23 in the Kawkawlin area . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 13 starts at its junction with I @-@ 69 near the village of Lennon along the Genesee – Shiawassee county line . The highway follows County Line Road north into the village where it follows Sheridan Avenue through town , including a crossing of the Huron and Eastern Railway North of Lennon , the trunkline intersects M @-@ 21 and continues along the county line through fields . Northeast of New Lothrop , M @-@ 13 moves from the Genesee – Shiawassee county line to the Genesee – Saginaw county line . Near Montrose , the highway intersects M @-@ 57 before passing into woodlands while crossing fully into Saginaw County . 
 M @-@ 13 angles to the northwest briefly before returning to a due north course along East Road . The highway crosses the Flint River in another area of farm fields . As the road approaches Saginaw , it crosses the Cass River and runs to the east of it as it merges with the Shiawassee River and the Tittabawassee River to form the Saginaw River . M @-@ 13 follows Washington Avenue in the city of Saginaw inland from , but parallel to , the Saginaw River through downtown . The trunkline intersects M @-@ 46 , which follows Rust Avenue , and passes Hoyt Park . Washington Avenue runs by the campus of St. Mary 's of Michigan Medical Center . As the highway passes out of downtown , it crosses or runs alongside lines of the Saginaw Bay Southern and Lake State railways . 
 Running immediately next to the river , M @-@ 13 meets I @-@ 75 / US 23 at that freeway 's exit 153 just southeast of the Zilwaukee Bridge . The highway runs along Bay City Road as it continues to follow the Saginaw River through the Crow Island State Game Area . On the south side of Bay City , the name changes to River Road . M @-@ 13 passes the James Clements Municipal Airport and transitions to follow Broadway Street into downtown . At Lafayette Street , M @-@ 13 turns west and merges with M @-@ 84 . The two highways run concurrently across the Saginaw River on the Lafayette Avenue Bridge . The structure 's two spans connect the riverbanks with the Middle Ground Island in the center . West of the bridge , M @-@ 13 / M @-@ 84 follows Salzburg Avenue to the intersection with Euclid Avenue . At that location , M @-@ 13 turns north along Euclid Avenue , which runs along the western city line . M @-@ 13 meets the 2 one @-@ way streets that carry M @-@ 25 and the I @-@ 75 business spur at the intersections with Thomas and Jenny streets . From this intersection on , M @-@ 13 forms a part of the Lake Huron Circle Tour . Farther north , the highway turns northwesterly on Huron Road ; Euclid Avenue continues north as M @-@ 247 . 
 As the trunkline heads away from Bay City , it runs parallel to the Lake State Railway again . M @-@ 13 intersects the northern end of its connector route before Huron Road crosses the Kawkawlin River . The highway runs through the community of the same name on the north side of the river . M @-@ 13 and Huron Road continue north across mixed agricultural and forest land as they pass through the communities of Linwood and Pinconning . South of Standish in Arenac County , M @-@ 13 meets the northern end of the US 23 freeway and terminates . 
 M @-@ 13 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2009 showed that the highest traffic levels along M @-@ 13 were the 28 @,@ 242 vehicles daily north of the M @-@ 25 junction in Bay City ; the lowest counts were the <unk> vehicles per day south of the I @-@ 75 / US 23 interchange near Saginaw . The only sections of M @-@ 13 that have been listed on the National Highway System ( NHS ) are along the M @-@ 84 concurrency and Euclid Avenue south of Wilder Road in the Bay City area . The NHS is a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous designation = = = 
 When the state highway system was first signed in 1919 , M @-@ 13 followed the general path of the modern US 131 . The highway specifically ran along what is now M @-@ 103 , US 12 , the pre @-@ freeway US 131 , M @-@ 113 , M @-@ 186 , US 131 , US 31 and M @-@ 119 between the Indiana state line south of Mottville to Harbor Springs . When the United States Numbered Highway System was created on November 11 , 1926 , US 131 replaced M @-@ 13 from the state line north to Fife Lake ; from Fife Lake north to Harbor Springs , the highway was redesignated M @-@ 131 . 
 = = = Current highway = = = 
 The Michigan State Highway Department ( MSHD ) used the M @-@ 13 designation for a highway at the end of 1932 that that connected M @-@ 78 and M @-@ 21 through Lennon . By the middle of 1936 , the highway had been extended northward to end at a junction with M @-@ 46 in Saginaw . The entire trunkline was paved in the middle of 1939 . Later the next year , the section in Saginaw was extended a bit farther along Washington Avenue to end at a junction with US 10 and US 23 . A section of the then @-@ M @-@ 78 freeway ( now I @-@ 69 ) opened between 1958 and 1960 ; when this freeway opened , M @-@ 13 was truncated northwards slightly in the Lennon area to end at the new highway . The first section of the US 23 freeway around Bay City opened in late 1960 or early 1961 . When it opened , MSHD extended M @-@ 13 along the former route of US 23 from the northside of Saginaw into Bay City to the end of the freeway at Kawkawlin . The I @-@ 75 / US 23 freeway north of the Kawkawlin area to Standish opened in 1967 , and M @-@ 13 is shown on maps following US 23 's former route through Linwood and Pinconning after the change . The routing of M @-@ 13 has stayed the same since . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Connector route = = 
 M @-@ 13 Connector ( CONN M @-@ 13 ) is a connector route running 2 @.@ 414 miles ( 3 @.@ 885 km ) connecting I @-@ 75 / US 23 to M @-@ 13 near the community of Kawkawlin , just north of Bay City . The short freeway was originally the northern end of the US 23 freeway in the area when it opened . The current designation was applied in 1967 . 
 = Horton Plains National Park = 
 Horton Plains National Park in Ohiya is a protected area in the central highlands of Sri Lanka and is covered by montane grassland and cloud forest . This plateau at an altitude of 2 @,@ 100 – 2 @,@ 300 metres ( 6 @,@ 900 – 7 @,@ 500 ft ) is rich in biodiversity and many species found here are endemic to the region . This region was designated a national park in 1988 . It is also a popular tourist destination and is situated 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) from Ohiya , 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) from the world famous Ohiya Gap / Dondra Watch and 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) from Nuwara Eliya . 
 The Horton Plains are the headwaters of three major Sri Lankan rivers , the Mahaweli , <unk> , and Walawe . In Sinhala the plains are known as Maha Eliya Plains . Stone tools dating back to Balangoda culture have been found here . The plains ' vegetation is grasslands interspersed with montane forest , and includes many endemic woody plants . Large herds of Sri Lankan sambar deer feature as typical mammals , and the park is also an Important Bird Area with many species not only endemic to Sri Lanka but restricted to the Horton Plains . Forest dieback is one of the major threats to the park and some studies suggest that it is caused by a natural phenomenon . 
 The sheer precipice of World 's End and Baker 's Falls are among the tourist attractions of the park . 
 = = Physical features = = 
 Horton Plains is located on the southern plateau of the central highlands of Sri Lanka . The peaks of <unk> ( 2 @,@ 389 metres ( 7 @,@ 838 ft ) ) and <unk> Kanda ( 2 @,@ 357 metres ( 7 @,@ 733 ft ) ) , the second and the third highest of Sri Lanka , are situated to the west and north respectively . The park 's elevation ranges from 2 @,@ 100 – 2 @,@ 300 metres ( 6 @,@ 900 – 7 @,@ 500 ft ) . The rocks found in the park belong to the Archaean age and belong to the high series of the Precambrian era and are made up of <unk> , <unk> and granitic gneisses . The soil type is of the red @-@ yellow <unk> group and the surface layer is covered with decayed organic matter . 
 The mean annual rainfall is greater than 2 @,@ 000 millimetres ( 79 in ) . Frequent cloudy cover limits the amount of sunlight that is available to plants . The mean annual temperature is 13 ° C ( 55 ° F ) but the temperature varies considerably during the course of a day , reaching as high as 27 ° C ( 81 ° F ) during the day time , and dipping as low as 5 ° C ( 41 ° F ) at night . During the southwest Monsoon season , the wind speed sometimes reaches gale force . Although some rain falls throughout the year , a dry season occurs from January – March . The ground frost is common in February . Mist can persist in the most of the day during the wet season . Many pools and waterfalls can be seen in the park , and Horton Plains is considered the most important watershed in Sri Lanka . The Horton Plains are the headwaters of important rivers such as the Mahaweli , <unk> , and Walawe . The plains also feeds <unk> Oya , Agra Oya , <unk> Oya , Uma Oya , and <unk> Oya . Due to its high elevation , fog and cloud deposit a considerable amount of moisture on the land . Slow moving streams , swamps , and waterfalls are the important wetland habitats of the park . 
 = = History = = 
 The original name of the area was Maha Eliya <unk> ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ් <unk> - " great open plain " ) . But in the British period the plains were renamed after Sir Robert Wilmot @-@ Horton , the British governor of Ceylon from 1831 to 1837 , who travelled to the area to meet the <unk> of <unk> in 1836 , in 1834 by Lt William Fisher of the 78th Regiment and Lt. Albert Watson of the 58th Regiment , who ' discovered ' the plateau . Stone tools dating back to Balangoda culture have been found here . The local population who resided in the lowlands ascended the mountains to mine gems , extract iron ore , construct an <unk> canal and fell trees for timber . A 6 @-@ metre ( 20 ft ) pollen core extracted from a mire revealed that in the late quaternary period the area had a semi @-@ arid climate and a species @-@ restricted plant community . 
 Sir Joseph Dalton Hooker had advised the British Government " to leave all Montane Forests above 5000 ft. undisturbed " and an administrative order to this effect had been issued in 1873 that prevented clearing and felling of forests in the region . Horton Plains was designated as a wildlife sanctuary on 5 December 1969 , and because of its biodiversity value , was elevated to a national park on 18 March 1988 . The Peak Wilderness Sanctuary which lies in west is contiguous with the park . The land area covered by Horton Plains is 3 @,@ 160 hectares ( 12 @.@ 2 sq mi ) . Horton Plains contains the most extensive area of cloud forest still existing in Sri Lanka . On July 2010 , the Central Highlands of Sri Lanka which incorporates Horton Plains National Park , Peak Wilderness Sanctuary and Knuckles Mountain Range was inscribed on the World Heritage List . 
 = = Flora = = 
 The vegetation of the park is classified into two distinctive groups , 2 @,@ 000 hectares ( 7 @.@ 7 sq mi ) of wet <unk> ( Sinhalese for " montane grasslands " ) and 1 @,@ 160 hectares ( 4 @.@ 5 sq mi ) of subtropical montane evergreen forests . Nearly 750 species of plants belonging to 20 families have been recorded from the park . The forest canopy reaches the height of 20 metres ( 66 ft ) and features Calophyllum walkeri , forming communities with varieties of Myrtaceae species such as Syzygium <unk> , and S. <unk> , and Lauraceae members including <unk> , Cinnamomum , and <unk> speciosa . The undergrowth layer is characterised by <unk> spp . The thickness of the <unk> vegetation hinders the development of a herb layer . Dwarf bamboo species such <unk> and <unk> also found in the undergrowth layer . <unk> tomentosa bushes specially grow in forest margin and near the mountain peaks . Species such as <unk> and Rhododendron <unk> have spread to Sri Lanka , along the Western Ghats of South India from the Himalayas and are now common . Nearly 54 woody plant species have been recorded from the park , of which 27 ( 50 % ) are endemic to Sri Lanka . 
 Frequent fire and grazing characterises <unk> communities of the grassland flora . Grasslands are dominated by <unk> villosa and Chrysopogon <unk> . <unk> swamps or slow moving streams are found in low @-@ lying areas , and macrophytes such as <unk> <unk> , sedge species <unk> fluitans and Utricularia spp. are found near the slow moving streams . The bamboo <unk> densifolia thrive along the banks of the streams , and near the swampy areas grass species such as Juncus <unk> , <unk> mutica , Eriocaulon spp. and <unk> trinervium are common . <unk> grasses such as Chrysopogon <unk> and Cymbopogon <unk> are found in the wet hollows . Herbaceous flora of the grasslands include temperate species including Ranunculus , Pedicularis , <unk> , Gentiana and Alchemilla and also tropical species such as Eriocaulon and <unk> speciosa ( a rare endemic daffodil orchid ) . The most widespread boreal herbaceous plants of the park are Viola , Lobelia , Gaultheria , <unk> , and Plantago . 
 Tree trunks and branches are ornamented with many species of ferns , Lycopodium , lichens , and orchids . Old man 's beard ( <unk> barbata ) hanging from branches adds to the beauty of the forests . About 16 of the orchid species being endemic . Other notable plants include shrubs such as <unk> tomentosa , Gaultheria <unk> , herbs , <unk> trinervium , E. walkeri , Drosera indica , and tree ferns Cyathea spp . <unk> , a foliose lichen genus belonging to <unk> family , which had not been recorded in Sri Lanka before , was discovered here in 2007 . There are conflicting views on how the grasslands of the park came into being , whether man @-@ made or natural . It is now believed that the grasslands on the dry slopes were created by forest clearance and fires while grasslands in low @-@ lying areas were naturally created by wet conditions , frost and soil erosion . 
 = = Fauna = = 
 The vertebrate fauna of the region includes 24 species of mammals , 87 species of birds , nine species of reptiles and eight species of amphibians . The Sri Lankan elephant disappeared from the region in the 1940s at the latest . At present , the largest and the most commonly seen mammal is the sambar deer . Some research findings estimate the population of sambar deer to be around 1500 to 2000 , possibly more than the carrying capacity of the plains . Other mammal species found in the park include <unk> 's long @-@ clawed shrews , toque macaques , purple @-@ faced langurs , rusty @-@ spotted cat , Sri Lankan leopards , wild boars , stripe @-@ necked mongooses , Sri Lankan spotted <unk> , Indian <unk> , and grizzled giant squirrels . Fishing cats and European otters visit the wetlands of the park to prey on aquatic animals . A subspecies of red slender loris , the Horton Plains slender loris ( Loris tardigradus nycticeboides formerly sometimes considered as Loris <unk> nycticeboides ) is found only in highlands of Sri Lanka and is considered one of the world 's most endangered primates . In July 2010 a group of researchers from the Zoological Society of London was able to photograph the mammal for the first time . 
 Along with Ohiya , <unk> and Ambewela , Horton Plains forms one of the Important Bird Areas ( IBAs ) in Sri Lanka . Together with the adjacent Peak Wilderness Sanctuary , Horton Plains contains 21 bird species which occur only on Sri Lanka . Four , Sri Lanka blue magpie , dull @-@ blue flycatcher , Sri Lanka white @-@ eye , and Sri Lanka wood pigeon , occur only in Horton plains , while other endemic species include Sri Lanka <unk> , Sri Lanka junglefowl , yellow @-@ fronted <unk> , orange @-@ billed babbler , Sri Lanka bush warbler , and Sri Lanka whistling @-@ thrush . Many birds migrate here in winter including swiftlets , and alpine swift . Crested serpent eagle , mountain hawk @-@ eagle , black @-@ winged kite , and peregrine falcon are among the birds of prey found in Horton Plains . Harriers are among the migratory raptors . This is a key wildlife area . All six highland endemic birds are found here , including dull @-@ blue flycatcher , Sri Lanka white @-@ eye , Sri Lanka wood pigeon , and Sri Lanka bush warbler . Yellow @-@ eared bulbul and black @-@ throated munia are widespread throughout the highlands . 
 Sri Lanka is considered a herpetological paradise in the world . Possibly about 15 amphibian species inhabit the park . Among them are <unk> <unk> , <unk> palmata , <unk> <unk> , Rana gracilis , Philautus alto , Philautus <unk> , Philautus <unk> , Philautus <unk> , Philautus <unk> , and <unk> eques . De Silva has observed six endemic reptiles from the plains . They are <unk> <unk> , rhino horn lizard , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , common rough @-@ sided snake , and rat snake . Two fish species found in the park , common carp and rainbow trout ; both are introduced species . Horton Plains is also home to many endemic crustaceans including Caridina <unk> and <unk> species . The endemic freshwater shrimp Caridina <unk> is found only in streams that have a temperature of less than 15 degrees C and is now restricted to only a stretch of 10 km of one stream . 
 = = Threats and conservation management = = 
 Horton Plains was a part of a large system of plains and forest cover that included Agra @-@ <unk> , Moon Plains and Elk Plains . Between 1831 and 1948 , it became a Sambar deer hunting ground . Elephants and Wild Boar were also hunted to a lesser extent . During this period lower slopes were cleared initially for coffee and then for tea plantations . As a result , Horton Plains and Peak Wilderness became isolated from other forest and grassland areas . Potatoes were cultivated in the grasslands but planting ceased in 1977 . After being declared a National Park , these areas were reinstated as grasslands . Tourism @-@ related issues such as plant removal , littering , fires and noise pollution are major conservation issues . Gem mining , timber logging , the collection of plants for ornamental and medicinal purposes , encroachment , poaching and vehicle traffic are the other threats . The spread of invasive alien species such as gorse ( Ulex europaeus ) , Mist Flower ( <unk> riparia ) , Crofton Weed ( <unk> <unk> ) , ( <unk> ) , Blue Stars ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> , and Pennisetum spp. threaten the native flora . The introduced rainbow trout may have affected endemic species of fish , <unk> and crustaceans . 
 Some sambar deer have died due to eating polythene litter that blocked their food passages , and visitors are banned from bringing polythene into the park . Sambar have benefited from the introduced Pennisetum grass species . 
 A recent threat , first reported in 1978 , is forest dieback . In some areas , especially in the peripheral region , this has been severe with nearly a 50 % in vegetation . Water deficiency has been attributed as the main cause of dieback as droughts are becoming more frequent . Regrowth of forest is hindered by frost which is increasingly severe . The forest dieback has affected 22 species of plants with Calophyllum walkeri being the most affected . A study has suggested that low calcium causes soil acidification and increased toxicity caused by metallic elements such as aluminium may be causing the dieback . Leaching of nutrients and the resulting imbalance in soil micronutrients may also be contributing to the dieback . 
 = = Tourist attractions = = 
 Horton Plains is a popular tourist destination , with World 's End being the key attraction . In the six months ending in August 2009 , Horton Plains National Park earned a revenue of Rs . 20 @.@ 1 million ( US $ 0 @.@ 17 million ) . The park is accessed by the Nuwara Eliya @-@ Ambewela @-@ <unk> and <unk> @-@ <unk> roads , and there are railway stations at Ohiya and Ambewela . 
 World 's End is a sheer precipice with a 870 m ( 2 @,@ 854 ft ) drop . It is situated at the southern boundary of the park . Another cliff known as the Lesser World 's End of 270 m ( 886 ft ) is located not far from World 's End . 
 Baker 's Falls , a waterfall formed by <unk> Oya , a tributary of the Walawe River is named after Sir Samuel Baker , a hunter and explorer who attempted to establish a European agricultural settlement at Nuwara Eliya . The falls are 20 metres ( 66 ft ) high . Slab Rock Falls is another well known waterfall in the plains . 
 = Billie Jenkins = 
 Billie Jenkins is a fictional character who appeared in the American television supernatural drama Charmed , which aired on the WB Television Network ( the WB ) from 1998 to 2006 . Charmed follows the supernatural adventures of the Halliwell sisters who are known as the Charmed Ones , or the most powerful witches of all time . The character was created by executive producer Brad Kern and was portrayed by Kaley Cuoco . Billie was developed in response to the WB 's request for a new character , and was originally intended to expand the show in a new direction for a possible ninth season or a spin @-@ off series . The opinions of media outlets were divided on whether the character should return for a Charmed reboot or a cast reunion . 
 The character was introduced as a novice witch seeking training from the series ' protagonists Piper Halliwell ( Holly Marie Combs ) , Phoebe Halliwell ( Alyssa Milano ) , and Paige Matthews ( Rose McGowan ) . Her storylines focus on her search for her missing sister Christy Jenkins ( Marnette Patterson ) and their eventual reunion . Billie was initially characterized as the " little sister " who is " naive " and " very , very confident " ; she gains the ability to warp reality through the power of projection and is revealed as the " Ultimate Power " . Christy and the demonic council known as the Triad manipulates Billie into believing the Charmed Ones are corrupted by their powers , but when the truth is revealed , she eventually reconnects with the Halliwells . The character also makes further canonical appearances in the comic books Charmed : Season 9 and Charmed : Season 10 as a friend to the sisters and is referenced in one of the novels . 
 After speculation about the character 's possible appearance in a spin @-@ off series , it was confirmed all future plans for the show were canceled following the WB 's closure to launch The CW . Kern later felt that focusing the final season on Billie and Christy changed the show from its original meaning , and Cuoco expressed dissatisfaction with working on a dramatic television series rather than a sitcom . Billie has received mostly negative feedback from critics , who cited Cuoco 's acting and Billie 's storyline with Christy as signs of the show 's declining quality . 
 = = Concept and development = = 
 The WB Television Network ( the WB ) renewed Charmed for an eighth season on condition that it incorporate new characters that could either sustain a ninth season or a spin @-@ off series because lead actors Alyssa Milano , Holly Marie Combs , and Rose McGowan did not want to renew their contracts for future seasons . Pam Shae , the executive @-@ in @-@ charge of talent , said the casting call focused on young , female actors who would be appealing to the WB . Brian Krause , who played Leo Wyatt , expressed confusion at the direction of the final season , stating " I don 't know if they were trying to groom talent to go on to something else " . In an interview with TVLine marking the ten year anniversary of the series finale , executive producer Brad Kern said Billie was not created for the sole purpose of a spin @-@ off but was introduced to " lighten the load , screen @-@ time wise " for the three principal actors and " bring new blood to an aging show " . Kern added that the character " keeps the show young and fresh by challenging the existing stars with a new perspective and new powers " , and that Kaley Cuoco 's presence and comedic timing worked well with those of Combs , Milano , and McGowan . Cuoco stated she felt comfortable working with the other actors and felt she was part of the show since its beginning and noted the warm reception of the cast and crew . 
 During the WB 's merge with United Paramount Network ( UPN ) to form the CW in 2006 , network executives said there was not enough room for a Charmed spin @-@ off . In an interview with E ! ' s Kristin Veitch , Cuoco confirmed a spin @-@ off involving her character would not be developed , saying " Charmed is done " and that she preferred to participate in other projects . Kern initially called the sisterhood between Billie and Christy Jenkins a " poetic " way to preserve the show 's focus on family . Patterson said she had " instant chemistry " with Cuoco and that their connection made acting out their storyline easier . 
 Billie was Cuoco 's first role in a television drama series . Following the show 's cancellation , Cuoco expressed a preference for working on sitcoms rather than dramas . She felt the " 18 @-@ hour days where you want to kill yourself " did not leave her with enough time to have a life outside of work and the demanding shooting schedule did not allow her enough time to work with Combs , Milano , and McGowan . Cuoco also said she only understood her performance on the show after watching the final cuts of the episodes with the special effects and animations ; she explained : " But when you are working , you are waiting and waiting , and then things are invisible , and things are being thrown , and nothing 's in your hand , and I 'm like so confused and always asking everyone , ' What 's happening ? ' " . She also voiced her contempt for the outfits given to her for the character 's magical transformations . She said she cried when she first saw her superhero costume for the season eight episode " Battle of the <unk> " , which originally included a cape . A writer from WE tv listed Billie 's superhero look as one of the show 's " sexiest and most bizarre outfits " . 
 On October 25 , 2013 , it was announced CBS , which owns Spelling Television 's properties , was developing a reboot of Charmed . Kate Ward of Bustle connected CBS 's decision to revisit the supernatural drama with Cuoco 's success as " one of the network 's most bankable stars " for her role on the sitcom The Big Bang Theory . On August 12 , 2014 , TVLine 's Michael Ausiello announced CBS would not proceed with the reboot . In an interview with Entertainment Tonight , Milano alluded to the possibility of a Charmed reunion and said ; " It seems like that 's going to happen any second " . Glenn Garner of Out magazine said Cuoco 's character should be excluded from the possible reunion . Bustle 's <unk> Bowman wrote the reunion should address Billie 's fate following the series finale , arguing the character 's future should be " more interesting than babysitting for the Halliwell brood " . While Shannon Doherty and McGowan publicly supported the idea of a reunion , Dan Avery of NewNowNext.com asked whether Cuoco had been asked to revisit her role as Billie . On March 5 , 2016 , Milano said there were no concrete plans for a reunion in development , but confirmed CBS was still in the process of producing a reboot without the original cast . 
 = = Characterization and powers = = 
 During her early appearances on the show , Billie Jenkins is identified as the Charmed Ones ' protégée . Billie has also been described as a " little sister " , who is " very naive and always getting in trouble " . Cuoco said she enjoyed Billie 's wardrobe because it was " cute and fun " , and matched her personal style . She said Billie 's initial characterization was based solely on her physical appearance , saying , " I think they just wanted a blonde on the show " . Co @-@ executive producer James L. Conway said Billie 's identity as a novice witch added a new dynamic to the show , while Shae called the character " demanding " , " spunky " , and " very , very confident " despite her inexperience with magic . Keri <unk> of New York Daily <unk> Billie developed into a " powerful witch in her own right " over the course of the season . 
 Billie is the youngest of Carl and Helen Jenkins 's two daughters . Both of her parents are mortal and her powers were inherited from her maternal grandmother , making Helen a carrier of the genes determining magical ability . Billie has the basic ability to cast spells , perform rituals , brew potions , scry for lost people or objects using of a crystal pendent , and communicate with the dead . She also has the power of telekinesis and later develops the ability to warp reality using a power known as projection . She is shown mastering her original powers very easily and adapting them using unconventional methods , such as attaching a large quartz crystal to her computer 's mouse to scry through a GPS system . Her telekinesis enables her to perform acrobatic moves , such as backflips . However , she experiences difficulty using her power of projection due to her fear of hurting others . Billie eventually masters this power , and by the series finale she can easily travel through time . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Billie first appears in the season eight premiere " Still Charmed & Kicking " as a college student who hunts and vanquishes demons while disguised in a black wig and a vinyl outfit . Billie subconsciously calls out to <unk> Paige Matthews ( Rose McGowan ) for help . Paige 's sisters Piper Halliwell ( Holly Marie Combs ) and Phoebe Halliwell ( Alyssa Milano ) initially discourage Paige from contacting Billie to prevent the discovery of their faked deaths and assumption of new identities , which they did so they could live free of magic . Billie later falls into an Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland @-@ themed trap set up by demons Paul Haas ( Mykel Shannon Jenkins ) and Black Heart ( Noa <unk> ) , who were attempting to lure the Charmed Ones out of hiding and prove they were still alive . The Halliwell sisters save Billie from the demons ' illusions and agree to train her ; they agree she will fight demons for them and keep their secret . Billie 's passion for using magic to save innocent people inspires the Halliwell sisters to reclaim their old identities and resume their responsibilities as the Charmed Ones . 
 On Halloween , Billie tells the Halliwells her older sister Christy Jenkins ( Marnette Patterson ) was kidnapped by a demon 15 years prior . Billie 's memories are rekindled when she is finding the location of a demon named Dogan ( Eric Steinberg ) and recognizes similarities between him and Christy 's kidnapper . After this revelation , Billie 's storylines focus on her search for her sister ; the Halliwells worry about Billie becoming obsessed with finding Christy as she takes more risks to get information , such as interrogating and torturing demons . Billie accuses her parents of choosing to forget Christy rather than trying to locate her . Billie 's mother Helen ( Barbara Niven ) gives her Christy 's diary , in which Billie finds a pentagram on the last page . The pentagram is a symbol for the demonic council known as Triad ( Steven J. Oliver , <unk> Oliver , and Leland Crooke ) . She eventually gains enough control over her powers to travel to the past , speak to Christy , and find her location . 
 Billie rescues Christy off @-@ screen between the episodes " 12 Angry Zen " and " The Last Temptation of Christy " . With the Halliwells ' help , she attempts to help Christy reintegrate into everyday life and gain control over her powers . Unbeknown to Billie , Christy has been brainwashed by the Triad and has been instructed to turn Billie against the Halliwell sisters . At this time , Billie is identified as the " Ultimate Power " foreshadowed in earlier episodes as the season 's " big bad " . The Triad arranges for Billie 's parents to be killed by demons ( John Rosenfeld and David S. Lee ) , believing Christy 's prolonged contact with them could sway her morality to the side of good . Billie feels betrayed by the Halliwell sisters when they interrogate the demons about the " Ultimate Power " rather than killing them to avenge her parents ' deaths . Billie and Christy vanquish the demons and the Halliwell sisters realize Billie is the " Ultimate Power " . 
 During this time , the Halliwell sisters and the Jenkins sisters turn against one another . Christy attempts to persuade Billie the Charmed Ones use their powers for personal gain rather than to support the greater good . Billie eventually agrees with Christy 's plans to kill the Halliwells . After turning the magical community against the Halliwells , Billie and Christy battle with the sisters . The confrontation ends with the destruction of Halliwell Manor and the deaths of Christy , Phoebe , and Paige . Billie uses her powers of projection to travel back in time to save Christy and discovers her manipulation by the Triad . Billie helps the sisters project themselves into the past to vanquish the Triad and unsuccessfully try to persuade Christy to return home with Billie . Christy throws a fireball at Billie and the Halliwell sisters , forcing Billie to telekinetically deflect it back at her and kill her . In the flashforward ending sequence , Billie is shown babysitting Phoebe 's two oldest daughters and is referenced as an " old friend " by Phoebe , implying that she regained the Halliwell sisters ' trust . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Billie also appears in a novel and a series of comic books based on the television series Charmed . The narrator of " <unk> Treat " , which takes place after the eighth season , describes Billie as " [ a ] n above @-@ average white witch " and the Halliwell sisters ' as " promising protégé and a good friend " . In Charmed : Season 9 # 5 ( " Unnatural Resources " ) , Paige collects magic from Billie in an effort to vanquish the Source of All Evil . Paige refers to Billie as the second line of defense if the sisters fail to kill the Source , and asks her to protect Darryl Morris ( Dorian Gregory ) and his family . The comic book issue is about Billie 's life after the ultimate battle ; she moves from San Francisco to Los Angeles to finish college . In issue 16 , Prue Halliwell reveals her bond to the Charmed Ones ' prophecy even after death restricts her sisters from achieving their true powers , which made them vulnerable to the Triad 's plot with Billie and Christy . In Charmed : Season 10 , Billie is said to have have called the sisters during their battle with a race of powerful , evil demons known as the Old Ones . Later , Phoebe attempts to call Billie for help after having a premonition of her husband Coop being attacked by Prue , but could not make contact with her . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Throughout her run on Charmed , Billie Jenkins received primarily negative critical feedback . A writer for the DVD review website <unk> said Cuoco was a " good addition to the cast " . Sheldon Wiebe of the entertainment website <unk> praised the Billie and Christy storyline for its " dark undercurrent " that was reminiscent of the show 's first and second seasons , but was slight critical of Cuoco 's acting , specifically in the series finale . Jeffrey Robinson of DVD Talk criticized Cuoco 's performance for not providing a strong representation of the character and being " a little too over @-@ the @-@ top " . He said Billie 's storyline with Christy was the strongest part of season eight but described her as a " weak character " . SpoilerTV 's Gavin Hetherington wrote that he enjoyed Billie as a character but that she and Christy were disappointing villains for the show 's final season in comparison to Gideon ( <unk> Jackson ) and Zankou ( Oded Fehr ) from season six and season seven respectively . 
 Jon Langmead of PopMatters described the familial relationship between Billie and Christy as weak in comparison to those from previous seasons . Digital Spy 's Hugh Armitage listed Billie and Christy as " the gruesome twosome " and one of the eight things that derailed the show . Langmead wrote that Cuoco was " painful to watch " and said her " awkward presence and acting call attention to the show ’ s weaknesses when in the past , the cast was able to distract from them ... " , exposed the declining quality of the show , and criticized her " inability to generate any kind of life with her character " . Armitage described Billie as an example of Cousin Oliver Syndrome , a phrase referring to the addition of a younger character to improve declining ratings . Ryan Keefer of DVD Verdict was critical of the addition of the character , writing : " If it hadn 't already been established that this was the last season , this event would have sealed the cancellation deal " . Demain of Television Without Pity criticized the inclusion of Cuoco as " that empty @-@ headed , simpering , talent @-@ free bimbo " , and mocked Billie by calling her " The Retarded Bimbo " throughout his recaps of the show 's eighth season . 
 = Miller Huggins = 
 Miller James Huggins ( March 27 , 1878 – September 25 , 1929 ) was an American professional baseball player and manager . Huggins played second base for the Cincinnati Reds ( 1904 – 1909 ) and St. Louis Cardinals ( 1910 – 1916 ) . He managed the Cardinals ( 1913 – 1917 ) and New York Yankees ( 1918 – 1929 ) , including the Murderers ' Row teams of the 1920s that won six American League ( AL ) pennants and three World Series championships . 
 Huggins was born in Cincinnati . He received a degree in law from the University of Cincinnati , where he was also captain on the baseball team . Rather than serve as a lawyer , Huggins chose to pursue a professional baseball career . He played semi @-@ professional and minor league baseball from 1898 through 1903 , at which time he signed with the Reds . 
 As a player , Huggins was adept at getting on base . He was also an excellent fielding second baseman , earning the nicknames " Rabbit " , " Little Everywhere " , and " Mighty Mite " for his defensive prowess and was later considered an intelligent manager who understood the fundamentals of the game . Despite fielding successful teams for the Yankees in the 1920s , he continued to make personnel changes in order to maintain his teams ' superiority in the AL . He was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame by the Veterans Committee in 1964 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Huggins was born in Cincinnati , where his father , an Englishman , worked as a grocer . His mother was a native of Cincinnati . He had two brothers and one sister . 
 Huggins attended Woodward High School , Walnut Hills High School , and later the University of Cincinnati . , where he studied law and played college baseball for the Cincinnati Bearcats baseball team . A shortstop , he was named team captain of the Bearcats in 1900 . Seeing him consumed with baseball , his law professors summoned him to justify why they should keep him in the law program . 
 Huggins ' father , a devout Methodist , objected to his son playing baseball on Sundays . But Huggins played semi @-@ professional baseball in 1898 for the Cincinnati Shamrocks , a team organized by Julius Fleischmann , where he played under the pseudonym " Proctor " due to his father 's opposition and his amateur status . In 1900 , he played for Fleischmann 's semiprofessional team based in the Catskill Mountains , the Mountain Tourists , leading the team with a .400 batting average . 
 After receiving his law degree from Cincinnati , Huggins realized that he could make even more money playing baseball , and as such William Howard Taft , one of Huggins ' law professors , advised him to play baseball . He was admitted to the bar , but never practiced law . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Early playing career ( 1899 – 1903 ) = = = 
 Huggins began his playing career in minor league baseball with the Mansfield Haymakers of the Class B Interstate League in 1899 . He continued his minor league apprenticeship with the St. Paul Saints of the American Association from 1901 through 1903 . After starting his career as an exclusively right @-@ handed hitter , he began to bat from the left side in 1902 in response to his offensive struggles in the 1901 season while also moving to second base during his time at St. Paul . 
 Huggins handled 19 fielding chances , 11 putouts and nine assists , without committing an error in a game with the Saints in 1902 ; the previous Major League Baseball ( MLB ) record being 18 , set by Fred Dunlap in 1882 . In 1903 , he pulled off the first delayed steal in recorded baseball history . 
 = = = Cincinnati Reds ( 1904 – 1909 ) = = = 
 Fleischmann , part @-@ owner of the Cincinnati Reds of the National League ( NL ) , kept an eye on Huggins while he played for St. Paul . The Reds duly purchased his contract from the Saints before the 1904 season . He made his MLB debut on April 15 , 1904 , and proved very adept at getting on base . He batted .264 with the Reds that season and improved in the 1906 season , finishing with a .292 batting average and 41 stolen bases , while spending considerable time developing his upper @-@ body strength . 
 Although Huggins hoped to be selected as Ned Hanlon 's successor as Cincinnati 's manager after the 1907 season , the Reds instead went with John Ganzel . In 1908 , He played with the Reds in the Cuban @-@ American Major League Clubs Series . Hampered by a broken ankle and torn ligaments in his shoulder , he slumped to .209 in 1909 . 
 = = = St. Louis Cardinals ( 1910 – 1917 ) = = = 
 Before the 1910 season , the Reds traded Huggins , along with Frank <unk> and Rebel Oakes , to the St. Louis Cardinals in return for Fred Beebe and Alan <unk> . He set an MLB record on June 1 , 1910 with six plate appearances but no at bats , with four walks and two sacrifice flies . In the same year , he batted .265 for the Cardinals and led the NL in walks . 
 On July 13 , 1911 , he tied the NL record for successful fielding chances in a game with 16 . At the end of the season , he finished sixth in the voting for the Chalmers Award for Most Valuable Player . In 1912 , he hit over .300 for the first time in his career . 
 Huggins became player @-@ manager for the Cardinals after the 1912 season , succeeding Roger Bresnahan , with team owner Helene Hathaway Britton preferring his " gentlemanly " manner over Bresnahan 's rougher personality . 
 With the acquisition of speed in a trade with the Pittsburgh Pirates , including Dots Miller , Art Butler , Cozy Dolan and Chief Wilson , the Cardinals contended for the NL pennant in 1914 . Finishing in third place , it was the Cardinals ' best finish since 1876 , but they fell back to sixth in 1915 and last in 1916 . When Britton sold the team after that season , she offered Huggins a chance to buy a part of the team . While he was attempting to raise money from the Fleischmann family , Britton sold the team to a group headed by Samuel Breadon , who hired Branch Rickey to run the team 's day @-@ to @-@ day operations in the front office . 
 Huggins had coached the young Rogers Hornsby , helping him to correct his batting stance , and Hornsby duly succeeded him as the team 's starting second baseman in 1917 as Huggins ended his playing career . He managed the team during 1917 , the last year of his contract , but was not retained . 
 = = = New York Yankees ( 1918 – 1929 ) = = = 
 With the New York Yankees of the American League ( AL ) not performing well , Yankees owners Jacob Ruppert and Tillinghast L 'Hommedieu Huston sought to replace " Wild " Bill Donovan as manager . Ban Johnson , AL president , suggested Huggins to Ruppert as a replacement for Donovan . Huston , who had been in Europe at the time that Ruppert had made the appointment , disliked Huggins and wanted to hire Wilbert Robinson , his drinking buddy . Ruppert himself had been put off by Huggins ' wool cap and practice of smoking pipes in public , which he felt was the mark of the working class . However , Ruppert interviewed Huggins upon Johnson 's recommendation , and agreed that Huggins knew much about baseball . Ruppert offered the job to Huggins , who initially did not want to take the position , as the Yankees were in no better a position than the Cardinals . J. G. Taylor Spink of The Sporting News eventually convinced Huggins to accept the offer , and he signed a two @-@ year contract . The hiring of Huggins drove a wedge between the two co @-@ owners that culminated in Huston selling his shares of the team to Ruppert in 1922 . 
 Having taken charge Huggins did not shy away from making personnel changes . Upon taking over the Yankees , he stressed fundamental baseball , drilling the Yankees in the art of the bunt . Huggins also made his first player transaction , acquiring Del Pratt and Eddie Plank from the St. Louis Browns trading Nick <unk> , Joe Gedeon , Fritz Maisel , Les <unk> , Urban Shocker and $ 15 @,@ 000 ( $ 235 @,@ 985 in current dollar terms ) , a move that led to criticism in the press . 
 In Huggins ' first season with the Yankees , the team finished fourth in the AL . After that season , he obtained Ernie Shore , Dutch Leonard and Duffy Lewis from the Boston Red Sox , for Ray Caldwell , Frank Gilhooley , Slim Love , and Roxy Walters . The following year he traded Pratt , Muddy Ruel , Hank <unk> and Sammy Vick to the Red Sox for Waite Hoyt , Harry Harper , Mike McNally and Wally Schang . Huggins signed a one @-@ year contract to remain with the Yankees for a reported $ 12 @,@ 000 . 
 Huston continually took the side of his players in any argument they had against Huggins , criticizing Huggins in the press when the Yankees lost the pennant in 1920 . Meanwhile , Ruppert was at best a lukewarm advocate of Huggins . Babe Ruth resisted Huggins ' discipline ; he did not respect Huggins due to his small stature , soft @-@ spoken nature , and inability to fight , and Huggins was unable to enforce punishments on Ruth . The Yankees finished third in the AL in 1919 and 1920 . Huggins signed a one @-@ year contract to remain with the team in 1921 . 
 Coming into the 1921 season , Huggins was still experiencing criticism in the press . Hugh Fullerton wrote that " in the past Huggins has not shone as a leader of men " . By that season , Huggins developed Aaron Ward , Wally Pipp , and Bob Shawkey . The Yankees won their first AL pennant in 1921 , reaching the World Series for the first time in franchise history , silencing his critics in the press . However , they lost the 1921 World Series to the New York Giants . In response , Huggins sought to add more pitching talent . 
 Before the 1922 season , Huggins acquired Johnny Mitchell from the Vernon Tigers of the Pacific Coast League and traded fan favorite Roger Peckinpaugh along with Rip Collins , Bill Piercy , and Jack Quinn to the Red Sox for Everett Scott , Bullet Joe Bush , and Sad Sam Jones . By this time , Ruppert hired Ed Barrow as the team 's business manager , and he aided Huggins in player transactions . The Yankees repeated as AL champions that season , but lost the 1922 World Series , again to the Giants . With the newly gained confidence of his owners , Huggins was retained as manager . 
 The Yankees won their first World Series in 1923 , preventing the Giants from repeating as champions for the third consecutive season . They were unable to retain their title the following season however , finishing second in the AL to the Washington Senators . 
 Huggins had come to regret his trade of Urban Shocker to the Browns . In St. Louis , the spitballer Shocker had come into his own as a starter , racking up four straight 20 @-@ win seasons in the years 1920 @-@ 23 and leading the American League with 27 wins in 1921 and strikeouts the following year , when he won 24 games . Shocker was reacquired for Bullet Joe Bush , Milt Gaston and Joe <unk> in December 1924 . 
 However , through 42 games of the 1925 season , the Yankees struggled , falling to seventh place in the eight @-@ team AL , 13 1 ⁄ 2 games out of first place . Huggins made wholesale changes to the Yankees ' lineup , as he replaced Ward at second base with Howard Shanks , catchers Steve O 'Neill and Wally Schang with Benny Bengough , and , most notably , Pipp with Lou Gehrig at first base , beginning Gehrig 's record consecutive games played streak . Among the team 's regulars , only Babe Ruth , Joe Dugan , and Bob Meusel remained in the lineup . However , the team continued to struggle ; amid rumors that he might replace Huggins , Ruppert stated that " Miller Huggins will be manager as long as he cares to be " . The Yankees fell to seventh place in the AL that season . 
 With Ruppert 's full support , Huggins ' duties with the Yankees included keeping Ruth in line . <unk> of his star player , Huggins and Ruth often clashed . Huggins suspended Ruth indefinitely on August 29 , 1925 for " misconduct off the playing field " , while also fining him $ 5 @,@ 000 ( $ 67 @,@ 467 in current dollar terms ) . Ruth responded by claiming Ruppert would rescind the fine and suspension , and that he would never play for Huggins again , believing that Ruppert would side with him over Huggins . However , Ruppert insisted that the fine would stand and that Ruth would be suspended for as long as Huggins desired . After apologizing to Huggins and Ruppert , Ruth was reinstated on September 5 . Ruth did not challenge Huggins ' authority again . 
 Huggins restructured the team for the 1926 season , giving starting jobs to Mark Koenig and Tony Lazzeri . That season , Huggins won his fourth pennant with the Yankees in 1926 , marking the first time that a team won a pennant after finishing seventh the year prior . However , the Yankees lost the 1926 World Series to the Cardinals in seven games . 
 Winning the pennant once again in the 1927 season , Huggins matched Cap Anson 's mark of five pennants in seven seasons . That year , the Yankees benefited from the development of George <unk> and <unk> Moore , and set an American League record with 110 regular season victories , winning the AL by 19 games . The Yankees swept the Pittsburgh Pirates in the 1927 World Series . This team became known as Murderers ' Row , and is considered the one of the greatest teams in baseball history . 
 Huggins remained confident in his team 's ability to repeat as AL champions in 1928 season . Huggins supplemented his team by acquiring Bill Dickey from the minor leagues . He acquired Stan Coveleski , who was attempting to return to his peak years , but released him in August when the former star continued to struggle . The Yankees reached the 1928 World Series , winning their sixth pennant in eight years , and defeated the Cardinals 4 games to 0 . This was the first time a team swept their opponents in consecutive World Series ' . 
 Huggins continued to tinker with his roster during the offseason . He traded Dugan , Mike Gazella , Rosy Ryan and Pat Collins , and acquired Lyn Lary from the Pacific Coast League . He tried Lary at third base and Leo Durocher at shortstop , while he attempted to acquire George Uhle and Ed Morris , but was unsuccessful in both cases . The Yankees fell behind the Philadelphia Athletics in the standings during the 1929 season and as it became clear that the Yankees would not win the AL pennant in 1929 , Huggins began consulting with coaches Art Fletcher and Bob Shawkey about the future of the team , including how to replace Bob Meusel in left field . However , by August 1929 Huggins began losing weight and complained of feeling ill . 
 = = Death = = 
 Huggins fell ill on September 20 , 1929 , and checked into Saint Vincent 's Catholic Medical Center for erysipelas . His condition was complicated by the development of influenza with high fever . The Yankees ' club physician , in consultation with other doctors , decided to administer blood transfusions . But despite their best efforts , Huggins died at the age of 51 on September 25 , 1929 of <unk> . The American League canceled its games for the following day out of respect , and the viewing of his casket at Yankee Stadium drew thousands of tearful fans . A moment of silence was held for Huggins before the start of Game 4 of the 1929 World Series ( at Philadelphia 's Shibe Park , after which the A 's overcame an 8 @-@ 0 Cub advantage with 10 runs in the last of the seventh for a spectacular 10 @-@ 8 come @-@ from @-@ behind victory and a 3 @-@ 1 Series advantage ) . He was interred in Spring Grove Cemetery in his native Cincinnati . 
 The Yankees found it difficult to replace Huggins . Art Fletcher managed the team for its final eleven games of the 1929 season , but he did not want to manage the team full @-@ time . After the season , Ruppert offered the job in turn to Fletcher , <unk> Bush and Eddie Collins , all of whom declined . Eventually , " Bob the Gob " Shawkey agreed to serve as the Yankees manager for the 1930 season , leading the team to a third @-@ place finish . 
 = = Playing and managing profile = = 
 Huggins was listed at 5 feet 5 inches ( 1 @.@ 65 m ) and 140 pounds ( 64 kg ) . His small stature inspired the nicknames " Mighty Mite " and the " Mite Manager " . He was also known as " Rabbit " and " Little Everywhere " for his ability to cover ground in the infield . An excellent leadoff batter and defensive second baseman , he ended his playing career with a .265 batting average and .956 fielding percentage . He led the league in walks four times and regularly posted an on @-@ base percentage near .400 . He scored 100 or more runs three times and regularly stole 30 or more bases for 324 lifetime steals . On the downside , in 1914 he set the single season caught @-@ stealing record in the National League , when he was thrown out 36 times ( as opposed to 32 successful steals ) . 
 Huggins finished his managerial career with a 1413 – 1134 record . His 1413 wins as a manager ranks 23rd all @-@ time ( as of the start of the 2012 season ) . He learned his managerial strategy by observing Hanlon and Bresnahan . His managerial style at first emphasized speed , base @-@ stealing , <unk> and @-@ run plays and " slap " ( i.e. , contact ) hitting , but the acquisition of superstar slugger Ruth dictated a change of emphasis towards power and not giving away outs . For the slugging Yankees of the 1920s , he recruited power hitters and consistent ( as opposed to brilliant ) pitchers . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1915 , umpire and sportswriter Billy Evans , writing about the scarcity of competent second basemen in baseball , listed Huggins , Collins , Pratt , Johnny Evers , and Nap Lajoie as the best in the game . He later wrote that Huggins was " one of the greatest managers I have ever met " . Bill James ranked Huggins as the 37th best second baseman of all time in 2001 in his The New Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract . 
 The Yankees dedicated a monument to Huggins on May 30 , 1932 , placing it in front of the flagpole in center field at Yankee Stadium . Huggins was the first of many Yankees legends granted this honor , which eventually became " Monument Park " , dedicated in 1976 . The monument calls Huggins " A splendid character who made priceless contributions to baseball . " The Yankees also named a field at Al Lang Stadium , their spring training home , after Huggins . 
 Huggins was included on the ballot for the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1937 , 1938 , 1939 , 1942 , 1945 , 1946 , 1948 , and 1950 , failing to receive the number of votes required for election on those occasions . The Veterans Committee elected Huggins to the Hall of Fame in February 1964 , and he was posthumously inducted that summer . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Huggins was a private man who kept to himself . He lived in Cincinnati during the winters while playing for the Reds and Cardinals , but began to make St. Petersburg , Florida his winter home while managing the Yankees . Huggins did not marry , and lived with his sister while in Cincinnati . 
 Huggins invested in real estate holdings in Florida , although he sold them in 1926 ( three years before the stock market crash , fortunately for him ) as they took too much of his time away from baseball . He enjoyed playing golf and billiards in his spare time . 
 = Dwyane Wade = 
 Dwyane Tyrone Wade Jr . ( born January 17 , 1982 ) is an American professional basketball player for the Chicago Bulls of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . He has established himself as one of the most well @-@ known and popular players in the league . Wade had the top selling jersey in the NBA for nearly two years , leading the league in jersey sales from the 2005 NBA Playoffs , until the midpoint of the 2006 – 07 season . His first name is pronounced the same as the more common spellings " Dwayne " and " Duane " . 
 After entering the league as the fifth pick in the 2003 NBA draft , Wade was named to the All @-@ Rookie team and the All @-@ Star team the following eleven seasons . In his third season , Wade led the Miami Heat to their first NBA championship in franchise history . He was named the 2006 NBA Finals MVP as the Heat won the series 4 – 2 over the Dallas Mavericks . At the 2008 Summer Olympics , Wade led the United States men 's basketball team , commonly known as the " Redeem Team " , in scoring , and helped them capture gold medal honors in Beijing , China . In the 2008 – 09 season , Wade led the league in scoring and earned his first NBA scoring title . 
 After LeBron James and Chris Bosh joined the Heat , Wade was part of Miami 's second championship win in the 2012 NBA Finals , when Miami defeated the Oklahoma City Thunder . He won his third NBA championship in 2013 , when the Heat defeated the San Antonio Spurs in the 2013 NBA Finals . In 2014 , the Heat reached the Finals for the fourth consecutive year , but lost in five games to the San Antonio Spurs . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dwyane Wade was born on the South Side of Chicago , Illinois , to JoLinda and Dwyane Wade Sr , whose name 's unusual spelling was decided by his own mother . In 1977 , JoLinda , at the age of 18 , already had two children . Wade has described his upbringing in Chicago as being very difficult . Wade stated that " [ his ] mom was on drugs and [ his ] family was in the gang environment , so it was a rough childhood . " At a very young age , Wade already witnessed police raids and found dead bodies several times in a nearby garbage can . When he was only 4 months old , his parents separated - and would later divorce . Jolinda was given custody of the two children , and she moved to her mother 's house with them . The family struggled financially , and it was around that time when Jolinda started dealing drugs . His mom was addicted to several substances including cigarettes , alcohol , heroin , and cocaine . JoLinda would get high with friends at her home , even in the presence of her children . In an interview with ESPN , Wade said " I 've seen the needles laying around the house . I 've seen my mother shoot up before . I 've seen a lot of things my mother didn 't even know I 'd seen as a kid . " At the age of 6 , he recalls police - with guns drawn - raiding his home as they searched for his mother . When Wade turned 8 years old , his older sister , <unk> , tricked him - by telling him they were going to the movies - into living with his father , a former Army sergeant , and stepmother in a nearby neighborhood . Wade would still occasionally visit his mom . A year later , his father moved the family to Robbins , Illinois . After moving to Robbins , Wade didn 't see his mother for two years . During this time , JoLinda was able to access a free supply of drugs by volunteering to be a tester - i.e. , someone who tests street drugs for impurities before the dealers try to sell them . JoLinda was hospitalized and nearly died after she mistakenly injected herself with LSD . In 1994 , JoLinda was arrested for possession of crack cocaine with intent to sell and locked up in Cook County Jail . Wade , at the age of 10 , reunited with his mom by talking with her at Cook County Jail through a glass panel over a telephone . JoLinda served 23 months in prison for her crimes , but while serving her second sentence in 1997 , she failed to report to prison while on work release . 
 Wade turned to sports , especially basketball and football , to avoid the temptations of participating in drug and gang @-@ related activities . Wade 's mom and dad would often take him to the park to play basketball . He cites one of his older sisters , <unk> , as the individual most responsible for his childhood upbringing and for steering him in the proper direction . As a child growing up in the Chicago area , Wade idolized Chicago Bulls star Michael Jordan , and has said he patterns his game after him . 
 Wade attended Harold L. Richards High School in Oak Lawn . Wade quickly found success as a wide receiver on the football team , but he needed to work extremely hard to earn playing time on the varsity basketball team during his junior year . While he did not acquire much playing time during his second year , his stepbrother , <unk> McDaniel , was the star of the team . Wade grew four inches in the summer before his junior year and saw an increase in playing time , averaging 20 @.@ 7 points and 7 @.@ 6 rebounds per game . The following year , Wade averaged 27 @.@ 0 points and 11 @.@ 0 rebounds per game while leading his team to a 24 – 5 record . It advanced to the title game of the Class AA Eisenhower Sectional . During this season he set school records for points ( 676 ) and steals ( 106 ) in a season . Wade has stated that his high school coach , Jack Fitzgerald , was one of the most positive influences in his life during this time . Wade was recruited by only three college basketball teams ( Marquette University , Illinois State , and DePaul University ) due to academic problems . 
 During most of Wade 's time at Marquette , his mother was either eluding the law or serving time in jail for selling crack cocaine . On October 14 , 2001 , JoLinda declared that she would change her life and get clean while attending a service at a Chicago church . Wade , then a sophomore at Marquette , went home for Christmas to be with his mom , whom he believed was clean and sober for the first time in his life . However , JoLinda admitted to him that she was actually going back to prison . Wade told ESPN , " I was hurt because I felt like I was just getting my mom back , and now she had to leave again . " On January 2 , 2002 , his mother went back to prison to serve her 14 @-@ month sentence . She says she has been clean since 2003 . 
 = = College career = = 
 Wade chose to play college basketball for Tom Crean at Marquette University in Milwaukee , Wisconsin . During Wade 's freshman year at Marquette , he was ineligible to play with the men 's team as he had fallen short of academic standards set by the NCAA 's Proposition 48 . Wade sought tutoring to improve his writing skills in order to regain eligibility . 
 = = = 2001 – 02 season = = = 
 Wade earned eligibility to play for the 2001 – 2002 season , and he led the Golden Eagles in scoring with 17 @.@ 8 ppg , led the conference in steals at 2 @.@ 47 per game , and averaged of 6 @.@ 6 rebounds and 3 @.@ 4 assists per game . Marquette finished with a 26 – 7 record , the school 's best record since the 1993 – 94 season . 
 = = = 2002 – 03 season = = = 
 In 2002 – 03 , Wade led Marquette in scoring again with 21 @.@ 5 ppg , and Marquette won the school 's first and only Conference USA championship with a 27 – 6 record . That season Wade led the Golden Eagles to the Final Four , the school 's first appearance in the Final Four since winning the 1977 national championship . After the season , he was named to the All @-@ America First Team by the Associated Press ; Wade is the first Marquette basketball player since 1978 to do so . 
 Wade 's performance during the Midwest Regional Final of the 2003 NCAA Tournament was highly publicized by the national press . Against heavily favored , top @-@ ranked and top @-@ seeded Kentucky Wildcats , Wade recorded a triple @-@ double with 29 points , 11 rebounds , and 11 assists . His triple double was the fourth in NCAA Tournament history . Wade 's exceptional play helped lead Marquette over the Wildcats 83 – 69 and into the Final Four ; Wade was named MVP of the Midwest Regional . Marquette finished the season ranked No.6 in the AP poll , the school 's highest ranking since the 1976 – 77 season . Wade 's strong tournament play resulted in increased visibility in the national media and , consequently , a high draft projection . As a result , he elected to forgo his senior year at Marquette and enter the 2003 NBA draft . On February 3 , 2007 , almost four years after Wade played in his final collegiate game , Marquette retired his jersey at halftime of a game against Providence . Although Marquette requires student @-@ athletes to graduate prior to receiving jersey retirement honors , the University made a special exception for Wade based on his accomplishments since leaving Marquette . 
 On March 5 , 2003 , JoLinda Wade was released from prison . Three days later she saw Dwyane play basketball for the first time in five years . She watched Marquette beat Cincinnati , 70 @-@ 61 , at the Bradley Center to win the Conference USA regular @-@ season championship . Dwyane had 26 points , 10 rebounds , and five assists . 
 = = NBA career = = 
 = = = Miami Heat ( 2003 – 2016 ) = = = 
 = = = = Rookie year ( 2003 – 04 ) = = = = 
 Selected 5th overall in the 2003 NBA draft by the Miami Heat , Wade quickly emerged as a productive player on a youthful Miami Heat team and averaged 16 @.@ 2 points on 46 @.@ 5 % shooting with averages of 4 @.@ 0 rebounds and 4 @.@ 5 assists per game . Wade is one of only four Marquette University players to be drafted in the first round ; his is the highest draft selection in school history . After a 5 – 15 start , the Heat would gradually improve and finish 42 – 40 to qualify for the NBA playoffs . He further distinguished himself with outstanding performances in the playoffs , particularly against the Indiana Pacers in the Eastern Conference Semi @-@ finals . In the end , however , Wade 's successful rookie season was somewhat overshadowed by the success of fellow rookies Carmelo Anthony and LeBron James . Wade did earn unanimous selection to the 2004 NBA All @-@ Rookie Team , and also finished third in rookie of the year voting ( behind James and Anthony ) . He was ranked in the top five among rookies in several major statistical categories , including second in field goal percentage , second in steals , third in scoring , fourth in assists , and fourth in minutes played . In the playoffs Wade hit a game winning shot in Game 1 of the Heat 's first round series against the New Orleans Hornets . The Heat won the series 4 – 3 and advanced to the second round to face the top @-@ seeded and best record team in the NBA , the Indiana Pacers , in a very entertaining series that almost pushed the 61 @-@ win Pacers to the edge , though Miami would eventually lose the series in six games . He became the fourth rookie since the shot clock era began to lead his team in scoring and assist average in the postseason . 
 = = = = Breakthrough year ( 2004 – 05 ) = = = = 
 Before the 2004 – 05 season , Shaquille O 'Neal was traded from the Los Angeles Lakers to the Heat . The following season , Miami improved by 17 games , from a 42 – 40 record in the 2003 – 04 season to an Eastern Conference @-@ best 59 – 23 record in the 2004 – 05 season . The league 's coaches selected Wade to be a reserve in the 2005 All @-@ Star Game . He scored 14 points in 24 minutes of play . 
 In the first round of the 2005 NBA Playoffs , Wade averaged 26 @.@ 3 points , 8 @.@ 8 assists , and 6 @.@ 0 rebounds while maintaining a 50 % field @-@ goal percentage as the Heat swept the New Jersey Nets . Wade continued his high level of play in the second round by averaging 31 points , 7 rebounds , and 8 assists per game as the Heat swept the Washington Wizards . The Heat 's playoff run was stopped by the Detroit Pistons , the previous season 's champions , in 7 games in the Eastern Conference Finals . Wade scored 42 and 36 points in Games 2 and 3 respectively despite playing with sinusitis , the flu , and a knee strain . He also suffered a strained rib muscle in Game 5 of the Conference Finals that prevented him from playing in the series ' sixth game and limited him in the seventh . The Heat lost the series in the seventh game despite leading three games to two after the fifth game and holding a lead with three minutes remaining in Game 7 . 
 = = = = NBA champion and Finals MVP ( 2005 – 06 ) = = = = 
 By the 2005 – 06 season Wade had developed into one of the most prominent players in the NBA and was elected to his second All @-@ Star Game , this time a starter . In the 2006 All @-@ Star Game , Wade made the game winning put @-@ back off of the Philadelphia 76ers ' Allen Iverson 's missed shot , to lead the East to a 122 – 120 victory over the West . He scored 20 points on 9 / 11 field goals in 30 minutes of play . He finished the 2005 – 06 regular season averaging 27 @.@ 2 points , 6 @.@ 7 assists , 5 @.@ 7 rebounds , and 1 @.@ 95 steals per game . 
 Against the Chicago Bulls in the first round of the 2006 NBA Playoffs , Wade shook off a few injuries that scared Heat fans , including a severely bruised hip in Game 5 . Returning late in the half , Wade resurrected his team by scoring 15 of his 28 points while suffering from intense pain , leading the Heat to the much @-@ needed 3 – 2 series lead . After this , Wade successfully led his team to the 2006 NBA Finals , despite suffering from flu @-@ like symptoms in game 6 of the Eastern Conference Finals against the Detroit Pistons . He put up a double @-@ double with 14 points and 10 assists in that game , including an 8 @-@ point flurry to close out the third quarter that put the game out of reach . 
 In his first trip to the NBA Finals , in which Miami faced off against the Dallas Mavericks , Wade had some especially memorable moments . His performance in games three , four , and five , in which he scored 42 , 36 , and 43 points , respectively , helped bring the Heat back from a 0 – 2 deficit to lead the series 3 @-@ 2 . In Game 3 Wade tied his career playoff high with 42 points and grabbed a career high 13 rebounds . Fifteen of his 42 points came in the fourth quarter , in which the Heat erased a 13 @-@ point deficit over the final 6 : 29 with a 22 – 7 run which included a go @-@ ahead jumper by NBA veteran Gary Payton that sealed the win . The Heat went on to win Game 6 behind Wade 's 36 points , taking the series 4 – 2 , and Wade was presented with the Finals MVP trophy . He became the fifth youngest player in NBA history to capture NBA Finals MVP honors and recorded the third highest scoring average by a player in his first NBA Finals with 34 @.@ 7 points per game . His 33 @.@ 8 PER in the NBA finals was ranked by ESPN 's John Hollinger as the greatest Finals performance since the NBA @-@ ABA merger . 
 = = = = Injuries and missing playoffs ( 2006 – 08 ) = = = = 
 In the 2006 – 07 season , Wade missed a total of 31 games due to injury . He was elected to his third straight All @-@ Star Game and received All @-@ NBA honors . He became the first guard to earn All @-@ NBA honors after missing at least 31 games in a season since Pete Maravich of the Utah Jazz earned Second Team honors during the 1977 – 78 season . Despite Wade 's play , the Heat struggled early in the season with injuries and were 20 – 25 on February 1 , 2007 . But with Shaquille O 'Neal healthy and Pat Riley returning to the bench after undergoing hip and knee surgeries respectively , the Heat seemed poised to surge into the second half of the season . However , during a game against the Houston Rockets on February 21 , 2007 , while attempting to steal the ball from Shane Battier , Wade dislocated his left shoulder and was assisted off the court in a wheelchair . After the injury he was left with the decision to either rehabilitate the shoulder or undergo season @-@ ending surgery . Wade later announced that he would put off the surgery and rehabilitate his shoulder with the intention of rejoining the team in time for the playoffs . After missing 23 games to recover from the injury , Wade returned to the active roster in a game against the Charlotte Bobcats . Sporting a black sleeve to help protect his dislocated left shoulder , Wade played 27 minutes and recorded 12 points and 8 assists , in a 111 – 103 overtime loss . For the season , Wade averaged 27 @.@ 4 points , 7 @.@ 5 assists , 4 @.@ 7 rebounds , and 2 @.@ 1 steals per game shooting 50 % from the field , and finished the season as the NBA 's leader in PER ( Player efficiency rating ) . 
 In the playoffs , Wade averaged 23 @.@ 5 points , 6 @.@ 3 assists , and 4 @.@ 8 rebounds per game , as the Heat were swept in the first round by the Chicago Bulls . Following the playoffs , Wade underwent a pair of successful surgeries to repair his dislocated left shoulder and left knee . The knee ailment , commonly called " jumper 's knee " , prevented Wade from joining USA Basketball in the Olympic Qualifying Tournament over the summer . 
 After missing the Tournament of Americas Olympic Qualifiers over the summer , Miami 's eight pre @-@ season games and first seven regular season games to recover from off @-@ season left knee and left shoulder surgeries , Wade made his first appearance of the 2007 – 08 season on November 14 , 2007 . Battling pain in his left knee throughout the season , Wade was elected to his fourth consecutive All @-@ Star Game appearance . However , with the Heat holding the worst record in the NBA and Wade still experiencing problems in his left knee , Heat coach Pat Riley announced Wade would miss the final 21 games of the season to undergo <unk> treatment on his left knee . Wade averaged 24 @.@ 6 points , 6 @.@ 9 assists , 4 @.@ 2 rebounds , and 1 @.@ 7 steals per game for the season . 
 = = = = Scoring champion and playoff defeats ( 2008 – 10 ) = = = = 
 After undergoing months of rehabilitation on his left knee and helping the U.S. Olympic team win a gold medal at the 2008 Olympics , in which he led the team in scoring , Wade returned to the starting lineup at the start of the 2008 – 09 season . Early in the season , Wade became the second player in NBA history to tally at least 40 points , 10 assists and five blocked shots in a game since Alvan Adams did so in the 1976 – 77 season . With a healthy Wade leading the league in scoring and the Heat making a push for a playoff position , Wade was elected to his fifth consecutive All @-@ Star game appearance . 
 Following the All @-@ Star game , Wade recorded 50 points on 56 @.@ 6 % shooting and added 5 rebounds and 5 assists in a blow @-@ out loss against the Orlando Magic . Wade became the fourth player in NBA history to score at least 50 points while his team lost by at least 20 in a game . The following game , Wade recorded a career @-@ high 16 assists and added 31 points and 7 rebounds in a 103 – 91 win against the Detroit Pistons . Wade became the second player to record 15 or more assists after scoring at least 50 points since Wilt Chamberlain did so in 1968 . Two games later , Wade tied a franchise record with 24 points in the fourth quarter , as he led the Heat back from a 15 @-@ point deficit in the final nine minutes of the quarter to secure a 120 – 115 win over the New York Knicks . For the game , Wade recorded 46 points on 55 % field goal shooting , 10 assists , 8 rebounds , 4 steals and 3 blocks . Wade followed the performance with a second @-@ consecutive 40 @-@ point game against the Cleveland Cavaliers . Playing against his Eastern Conference rival and good friend , LeBron James , Wade registered 41 points on 53 % shooting , 9 assists , 7 steals , 7 rebounds and one block as the Heat lost 107 – 100 . The following game , in former teammate Shaquille O 'Neal 's return to Miami since being traded , Wade tied a career @-@ high with 16 assists and added 35 points on 62 % shooting , 6 rebounds , a steal and a block , as the Heat defeated the Phoenix Suns 135 – 129 . Wade became the only player in Heat history to have multiple games with at least 30 points and 15 assists . Less than a week later , Wade tied his franchise record with his 78th consecutive game of scoring in double figures in a double overtime thriller against the Chicago Bulls , in which he scored the game @-@ winning three @-@ point basket to secure a 130 – 127 win . Wade finished with 48 points on 71 @.@ 4 % shooting , 12 assists , 6 rebounds , 4 steals and 3 blocks in 50 minutes . According to the Elias Sports Bureau , Wade joined Wilt Chamberlain as the only other player in NBA history to score that many points and have that many assists in a game , while having as high of a field goal percentage . Two games later , Wade surpassed Alonzo Mourning and became the Heat 's all @-@ time leading scorer in a triple overtime classic against the Utah Jazz . Wade finished with 50 points , 10 rebounds , 9 assists , 4 steals , and 2 blocks in a 140 – 129 win . 
 During the season , Wade became the first player in NBA history to accumulate at least 2 @,@ 000 points , 500 assists , 100 steals , and 100 blocks in a season and is the first player of 6 ft . 5 in. or shorter to register at least 100 blocks in a season . Wade also became just the fifth player in NBA history to reach 2 @,@ 000 points , 500 assists , and 150 steals in a season . After a 97 – 92 win against the Charlotte Bobcats , Wade helped the Heat clinch a playoff berth and become only the second team in NBA History to reach the postseason after winning 15 or fewer games the year before . In a 122 – 105 win against the New York Knicks , Wade recorded a career high 55 points on 63 % field goal shooting and added 9 rebounds and 4 assists . Wade recorded 50 points through three quarters and was pulled out of the game while he was one point shy of eclipsing the franchise record of 56 points set by Glen Rice . For the season , Wade averaged a league high 30 @.@ 2 points per game , earning his first NBA Scoring Title , and added 7 @.@ 5 assists , 5 @.@ 0 rebounds , 2 @.@ 2 steals , and 1 @.@ 3 blocks per game . Wade finished the season with higher point , assist , steal and block averages than LeBron James and Kobe Bryant , who both finished ahead of Wade in the MVP race . 
 On November 1 , in just his third game of the 2009 – 10 season Wade recorded his 10,000th career point in a 95 – 87 win against the Chicago Bulls . On November 12 against the Cleveland Cavaliers , Wade made a spectacular dunk over Anderson Varejão , considered by many to be one of the greatest of the season until then . LeBron James himself described the dunk as " great , probably top 10 all @-@ time " . Two days later against the New Jersey Nets , with the Heat down by two in the final seconds , Wade hit a clutch three @-@ point shot , giving the Heat the win by one point , 81 – 80 . On January 6 , Wade scored a season @-@ high 44 points in an overtime loss against the Boston Celtics , the most points scored by a player in a losing effort in the season until that point . On January 21 , Wade was selected to play for the East in the 2010 NBA All @-@ Star Game , which was his sixth overall All @-@ Star appearance . Wade was named the game 's MVP after recording 28 points , 11 assists , 5 steals and 6 rebounds . 
 In just his second game back from the All @-@ Star Game on February 17 , Wade strained his calf in the first quarter . He left the game with 8 points in 8 minutes of play , ending his personal and also Heat 's franchise record streak of 148 consecutive games with at least 10 points . On April 2 , Wade was named Eastern Conference Player of the Month and Player of the Week twice for his play in the month of March , leading the Heat to a 12 – 3 , the team 's best record since March 2006 . It was his first Player of the Month award of the season and 5th of his career . He averaged 26 @.@ 9 and 7 @.@ 5 assists per game , which both ranked third in the Eastern Conference , and 2 @.@ 3 steals per game , which ranked first . Wade recorded six 30 points games and had six double @-@ doubles in the month , including a season @-@ high 14 assists in an overtime win against the Los Angeles Lakers on March 4 . 
 For the season , Wade averaged 26 @.@ 6 points on 47 @.@ 6 % field goal shooting , 6 @.@ 5 assists , 4 @.@ 8 rebounds , 1 @.@ 8 steals and 1 @.@ 1 blocks per game , while leading his team to a 47 – 35 record , clinching the fifth seed in the NBA Playoffs . In the first round , with the Heat facing a sweep against the Boston Celtics , Wade recorded a career playoff @-@ high and also franchise record 46 points , outscoring the entire Celtics team in the 4th quarter with 19 points versus 15 by Boston . It was also Wade 's sixth career playoff game with at least 40 points scored . Despite averaging 33 @.@ 2 points on 56 @.@ 4 % shooting , 6 @.@ 8 assists , 5 @.@ 6 rebounds , 1 @.@ 6 steals and 1 @.@ 6 blocks , Wade and the Heat would lose to Boston in five games . 
 = = = = The Big 3 era and back @-@ to @-@ back championships ( 2010 – 14 ) = = = = 
 During the off @-@ season , Miami @-@ Dade County commissioners voted unanimously to rename the county " Miami @-@ Wade County " for one week from July 1 – 7 , 2010 in Wade 's honor and to try and convince Wade to stay in Miami and sign with the Heat . On July 7 , it was announced that Wade would be re @-@ signing with the Miami Heat , along with former Toronto Raptor Chris Bosh . The following day , LeBron James announced he would be joining the Heat to play with Wade and Bosh , causing a stir in the media and among fans . The deals were officially announced on July 10 ; Bosh and James arrived via sign @-@ and @-@ trade deals . The Heat finished with a 58 @-@ 24 record in the first year of the Big 3 Era and earned the second seed in the Eastern Conference . For the season , Wade averaged 25 @.@ 5 points , 6 @.@ 4 rebounds , 4 @.@ 6 assists , and 1 @.@ 5 steals per game , shooting 50 % from the field . After defeating the Philadelphia 76ers , Boston Celtics , and Chicago Bulls , the Heat reached the Finals , but lost to the Dallas Mavericks in six games . Wade averaged 26 @.@ 5 points , 7 rebounds and 5 @.@ 2 assists per game for the NBA Finals and 24 @.@ 5 points , 7 @.@ 1 rebounds and 4 @.@ 4 for the entire playoffs . Prior to the beginning of the 2011 – 12 NBA season , Bosh in 2012 opined Wade should take the last second shot instead of Bosh or James to win or lose a game based off Wade 's past success . 
 On February 26 , 2012 at the All @-@ Star Game Wade recorded what was only the third triple @-@ double in the history of the contest , posting 24 points , 10 rebounds and 10 assists , joining Michael Jordan and LeBron James as the only players ever to record the prestigious stat ( at the 1997 and 2011 games respectively ) . On March 10 , 2012 Wade made the game @-@ winning shot against the Indiana Pacers to give the Heat a 93 – 91 overtime win . Wade finished the season averaging 22 @.@ 1 points , 4 @.@ 8 assists , 4 @.@ 6 rebounds , and 1 @.@ 7 steals per game . In the playoffs , the Heat defeated the New York Knicks in 5 games in the first round , then defeated the Indiana Pacers in 6 games in the second round . Wade heated up in Game 6 of the second round , recording 41 points and 10 rebounds . The Celtics took the Heat to seven games in the Eastern Conference Finals , but the Heat prevailed and advanced to the NBA Finals . They lost to the Oklahoma City Thunder in Game 1 of the finals , but won the next four games , and Wade secured his second NBA title . Wade averaged 22 @.@ 6 points per game in the series . The Heat became the first team in NBA history to win a championship after trailing in three different playoff series . 
 Before the start of the 2012 – 13 NBA season , Wade underwent surgery due to a left knee injury . He missed the 2012 Summer Olympics . While Wade missed the Heat 's first pre @-@ season game against the Atlanta Hawks , he returned in time for the Heat 's second pre @-@ season game against the Los Angeles Clippers , which was held at the MasterCard Center in Beijing , China . Miami won the game 94 – 80 . On December 26 , 2012 , during an away game against the Charlotte Bobcats , Wade kicked guard Ramon Sessions in the groin . The following day , Wade was suspended by the NBA for one game . Wade finished the 2012 @-@ 2013 season with averages of 21 @.@ 2 points , 5 rebounds and 5 @.@ 1 assists per game . 
 In the playoffs , injuries limited Wade to a career low scoring average of 15 @.@ 9 points per game , but he upped his average to 19 @.@ 6 points a game during the NBA Finals against the San Antonio Spurs . After the teams split the first two games in Miami , the Spurs blew out the Heat in game 3 to take a 2 @-@ 1 series lead . In game 4 , Wade scored 32 points on 56 percent shooting to go with 6 steals as the Heat defeated the Spurs 109 @-@ 93 . The Spurs would bounce back in game 5 despite Wade 's 25 points and 10 assists . Wade scored 14 points in Miami 's overtime win in game 6 , followed by 23 points and 10 rebounds in game 7 as the Heat clinched their second straight championship and Wade 's third title . 
 In the 2013 – 14 season , Wade played in 54 games due to injury and the team 's decision to rest him during back @-@ to @-@ back games . Wade averaged 19 points per game and posted a career high 54 percent field goal percentage , and had notable games in victories against elite teams such as a 32 @-@ point outing against the Pacers on November 7 and 29 points against the Los Angeles Clippers on December 18 . In the playoffs , the team increased Wade 's minutes per game , noted by a 28 @-@ point performance in the closing game of Miami 's second round victory over the Brooklyn Nets and a 23 @-@ point outing in a crucial game 2 road victory against Indiana in the Eastern Finals . The Heat would go on to win the series in six games , advancing to their fourth straight NBA Finals . Wade averaged 19 @.@ 1 points a game during the playoffs on 52 percent shooting , his best percentage in a playoff run since 2010 . The Heat would once again face the San Antonio Spurs in the 2014 NBA Finals . However , they would lose in five games . 
 = = = = Post Big 3 era ( 2014 – 2016 ) = = = = 
 On June 28 , 2014 , Wade and teammates James and Bosh all opted @-@ out of their contracts in order to cut costs with the intention of all re @-@ signing . James announced on his website on July 11 that he was returning to Cleveland after four successful seasons with Wade in Miami . Four days later , Wade re @-@ signed with the Heat and was later joined by a returning Bosh , <unk> <unk> , Chris Andersen and Mario Chalmers as well as former rivals Danny Granger and <unk> Deng . 
 After playing in the Heat 's first eight games of the 2014 – 15 season , Wade missed seven consecutive games due to a hamstring injury . He returned to action on November 30 against the New York Knicks to score a then season @-@ high 27 points in an 88 @-@ 79 win . On December 17 , despite Wade 's season @-@ high 42 points , the Heat were defeated 105 @-@ 87 by the Utah Jazz . He was named an All @-@ Star for the 11th time , however on February 11 , he pulled out of the game due to another hamstring injury and was replaced by Kyle <unk> . The Heat finished the season with a 37 @-@ 45 win / loss record , as Wade missed the post @-@ season for just the second time in his career . 
 On June 29 , 2015 , Wade opted out of his contract with the Heat to become a free agent . On July 10 , 2015 , he re @-@ signed with the Heat once again to a one @-@ year , $ 20 million contract . Wade hit just seven shots from beyond the arc during the entire 2015 – 16 regular season . However , the 2016 postseason saw a change in Wade 's play . He converted on his first seven three @-@ point shot attempts before missing his first one during a Game 3 loss to the Toronto Raptors in the conference semi @-@ finals . According to Elias Sports Bureau , Wade had never made more than five three @-@ pointers in a row during his career . 
 = = = Chicago Bulls ( 2016 – present ) = = = 
 On July 6 , 2016 , Wade announced , in a letter to Miami , that he had agreed to join the Chicago Bulls on a two @-@ year deal worth $ 47 @.@ 5 million . Wade said he felt unwanted and under appreciated by Heat president Pat Riley , and noted that his relationship with Riley was in tatters by the end of negotiations . On July 15 , he officially signed with the Bulls . 
 = = United States national team = = 
 Wade was a member of the 2004 US Olympics team with fellow NBA All @-@ Stars LeBron James and Carmelo Anthony . The team competed in the 2006 FIBA World Championship in Japan , in which Wade averaged 19 @.@ 3 points per game . The team won a bronze medal , which disappointed many USA fans who had hoped for a return to the days of the original " Dream Team " . Wade was named to the USA Men 's Basketball National Team from 2006 to 2008 . He was named co @-@ captain of the 2006 team , along with James and Anthony . In 2007 , due to injury , Wade was unable to compete at the Tournament of Americas Olympic Qualifiers , where the United States compiled a 10 – 0 record and qualified for the 2008 Olympics in Beijing , China . 
 At the 2008 Olympics , the United States went unbeaten and earned gold medal honors , defeating the 2006 World Champion Spain in the final game . Wade led the team in scoring throughout the tournament and tallied a game high 27 points in 27 minutes on 75 % field goal shooting and added 4 steals , 2 assists and 2 rebounds in the game . For the tournament , he averaged a team high 16 points in 18 minutes on 67 % field goal shooting , 4 rebounds , 2 assists and 2 @.@ 3 steals , as the United States lived up to their Redeem Team moniker and captured gold medal honors for the first time since 2000 . 
 On June 28 , 2012 , it was reported that Wade would miss the 2012 Olympics in London because of knee surgery . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 Standing at 6 feet 4 inches tall ( 1 @.@ 93 m ) and weighing 220 pounds ( 100 kg ) , Wade is a shooting guard that is also capable of playing point guard as he did during his rookie season and in subsequent seasons with smaller lineups . On offense , he has established himself as one of the quickest and most difficult players to guard , as well as one of the best slashers in the NBA . Wade 's signature one @-@ two step allows him to dash past bigger defenders and occasionally get the extra foul shot . Wade is able to get to the free throw line consistently ; he ranked first in free @-@ throw attempts per 48 minutes in 2004 – 05 and again in the 2006 – 07 season . He has proven himself an unselfish player , averaging 6 @.@ 1 assists per game throughout his career . After winning the NBA Finals MVP Award in 2006 , Wade developed a reputation as one of the premier clutch players in the NBA . He has gained a reputation for being capable of hitting game winning baskets and potential game winning free throws . 
 David Thorpe , an athletic trainer who runs a training center for NBA players in the offseason , also cites Wade 's developing post up game as one of his strengths . " Watching Wade operate on the left block is literally like watching old footage of MJ ( Michael Jordan ) " , comments Thorpe . Thorpe goes on to say that Wade 's best moves from the post are his turnaround jump shot , double pivot , and what Thorpe terms as a " freeze fake " , a pump fake Wade uses to get his opponent to jump , so that he can then drive around him to the basket . The main weakness cited in Wade 's ability is his lack of three @-@ point range ; he has averaged .289 on three @-@ point field goal attempts for his career . 
 Wade is best known for his ability to convert difficult lay @-@ ups , even after hard mid @-@ air collisions with larger defenders . As crowd pleasing as his high @-@ flying style of basketball may be , some have expressed concerns over the dangers of playing in this manner , as Wade has already hurt his knees and wrists after mid @-@ air collisions with larger players . Wade has also established himself on defense for his ability to block shots and accumulate steals . He became the NBA 's all @-@ time leader in blocks for players listed 6 ' 4 " ( 193 cm ) and under , which he achieved in only 679 games , over 400 games less than the previous record holder : Dennis Johnson ( 1100 ) . 
 During the big three era , Wade has seen his overall offensive production decrease , a result of sharing the offense with LeBron James and Chris Bosh , but has succeeded at overall shooting a greater percentage despite taking less shots and playing more off the ball . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 3 × NBA champion : 2006 , 2012 , 2013 
 NBA Finals MVP : 2006 
 NBA scoring champion : 2009 
 NBA All @-@ Star Game MVP : 2010 
 12 × NBA All @-@ Star : 2005 , 2006 , 2007 , 2008 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 , 2015 , 2016 
 8 × All @-@ NBA : 
 First Team : 2009 , 2010 
 Second Team : 2005 , 2006 , 2011 
 Third Team : 2007 , 2012 , 2013 
 3 × All @-@ Defense : 
 Second Team : 2005 , 2009 , 2010 
 NBA All @-@ Rookie First Team : 2004 
 NBA All @-@ Star Skills Challenge champion : 2006 , 2007 
 Gold medal with Team USA : 2008 Summer Olympic Games 
 Bronze medal with Team USA : 2004 Summer Olympic Games 
 Bronze medal with Team USA : 2006 FIBA World Championship 
 Miami Heat all @-@ time leading scorer 
 Miami Heat all @-@ time assists leader 
 2005 Best Breakthrough Athlete ESPY Award 
 2006 Best NBA Player ESPY Award 
 2006 Sports Illustrated Sportsman of the Year 
 2006 Sporting News Sportsman of the Year 
 Wade won the 2012 @-@ 13 season @-@ long NBA Community Assist Award 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Wade married his high school girlfriend <unk> Funches in 2002 . He filed for a divorce in 2007 , which was granted in 2010 after a lengthy and acrimonious court battle . In 2011 , Wade was granted sole custody of his two sons with Funches , Zaire Blessing Dwyane Wade ( born February 4 , 2002 ) and Zion Malachi <unk> Wade ( born May 29 , 2007 ) . Wade also raises a nephew , <unk> ( born 2002 ) , who is the son of Wade 's sister Deanna . Wade began dating actress Gabrielle Union in 2009 . According to Wade , he and Union briefly split up at some point early in 2013 due to career demands . During that time , Wade and longtime friend Aja Metoyer conceived a son , Xavier Zechariah Wade ( born November 10 , 2013 ) . Wade and Union became engaged in December 2013 , and married on August 30 , 2014 in Miami . 
 Wade 's nicknames include D @-@ Wade and Flash , which was given to him by former teammate Shaquille O 'Neal who would sing , " He 's the greatest in the Universe " , in reference to the Queen song of the same name from the 1980 film Flash Gordon . The Heat 's 2005 NBA Playoff run and Wade 's performances with Shaquille O 'Neal hampered by injury , led to an explosion of media attention and rapid increase in Wade 's popularity . During those playoffs , Wade 's jersey became the top selling jersey in the league and remained so for nearly two years . After the Heat 's success and Wade 's memorable performances during the 2006 NBA Playoffs , Wade was further elevated into the public 's eye and appeared on several talk shows , including Late Show with David Letterman and Live with Regis and Kelly . He also made a guest star appearance on Disney Channel 's Austin & Ally as himself , who is an obsessed fan of Austin Moon . 
 Wade has been featured in a number of magazine articles and publications . In 2005 , he was featured on People 's 50 Most Beautiful People , and in 2006 he was named the NBA 's best dressed player by GQ Magazine . In 2007 , Esquire named him to their 4th annual Best Dressed Men in the World list for the second straight year . Wade has endorsement deals with companies such as Gatorade , Lincoln , Staples , Sean John , T @-@ Mobile ( his TV commercials feature him paired with NBA legend Charles Barkley ) , and Topps . He had his own line of shoes with Converse named " The Wade " and a series of Sidekick phones known as the D @-@ Wade Edition with T @-@ Mobile . During the 2009 – 10 season , Wade switched from Converse to Nike 's Jordan Brand . Wade noted that the partnership ended on good terms , stating , " When I came into the NBA , I didn 't have a lot of exposure and Converse gave me an opportunity to head a brand and be the face of a brand . I 'm really thankful for six long , good years . I 've gotten five shoes out of the deal and my dream came true at the Converse brand , because they put my name on a pair of sneakers . " Wade was hand @-@ chosen by Michael Jordan and debuted the Air Jordan 2010 during the 2010 NBA All @-@ Star break . During the 2011 NBA Playoffs , Wade debuted his first signature shoe for the Jordan Brand , joining fellow players Carmelo Anthony and Chris Paul , who have their own signature shoes for the brand . After his Jordan Brand contract expired in 2012 , Wade signed with the Chinese athletic brand Li @-@ Ning . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 Wade is well known for his philanthropic involvement in various organizations . In 2003 , he founded The Wade 's World Foundation , which provides support to community @-@ based organizations that promote education , health , and social skills for children in at @-@ risk situations . He hosts a variety of community outreach programs in Chicago and South Florida . In 2008 , he announced his partnership with former teammate Alonzo Mourning 's charitable foundation and co @-@ hosted <unk> 's Summer Groove , an annual summer event . On December 24 , 2008 , Wade purchased a new home for a South Florida woman whose nephew accidentally burned down the family home . In addition , Wade donated some furnishings , clothing , and gifts to the family for the holiday . 
 After breaking his own Miami Heat single @-@ season scoring record , Wade gave the jersey he wore in that night 's victory to 8 @-@ year @-@ old Michael Stolzenberg , an avid Heat fan that had his hands and feet removed surgically due to a bacterial infection . Wade stated that he knew Stolzenberg previously and wished to add to his collection of Heat memorabilia . Wade has been known for visiting other sick children , usually in private to avoid placing himself in the media spotlight . 
 In September 2009 , Wade donated money from his foundation to keep the Robbins , Illinois public library from having to shut down . He handed the library director Priscilla <unk> a $ 25 @,@ 000 check in order to resurrect the building , which brought <unk> to tears . He called the donation a " small contribution " , and reminisced about the difficult experiences he faced as a child , stating that he sometimes did not know how he would find his next meal . In January 2010 , Wade and Alonzo Mourning co @-@ founded The Athletes Relief Fund for Haiti " , which raised money to help the victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake . In the three days since the fund began soliciting donations from athletes , Wade announced that the " Athletes Relief Fund for Haiti " had already raised over $ 800 @,@ 000 . Wade stated , " I expected nothing less from my friends and colleagues in the sports community , our commitment to this cause knows no bounds , and we will continue to accept any and all donations throughout the days ahead . " Wade is also an avid supporter of St. Jude Children 's Research Hospital and has served as an Ambassador for their Hoops for St. Jude basketball initiative . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Wade is a devout Christian and chose the number 3 because it represents the Holy Trinity . He tithes 10 % of his salary to a church in Chicago . His mother , Jolinda , strengthened her ties with Christianity in 2001 after years of drug abuse and dealing . She served as a minister during her final prison sentence in 2002 and 2003 . She was ordained as a Baptist minister in January 2007 , and formed the non @-@ denominational Temple of Praise Binding and <unk> Ministry in Chicago . In May 2008 , Wade purchased a church building for his mother 's ministry . 
 = Brown Betty ( Fringe ) = 
 " Brown Betty " is the 20th episode of the second season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and is the only one of the series performed as a musical . The episode was written by co @-@ showrunners Jeff Pinkner and J. H. Wyman , and consulting producer Akiva Goldsman . It was directed by filmmaker Seith Mann . As the episode begins with Peter 's continued disappearance , Walter consoles himself by smoking a strain of marijuana called " Brown Betty . " Most of the episode is then told from his drug @-@ addled perspective , in which Olivia is a 1940s noir detective and Peter is a conman who ran away with Walter 's glass heart . 
 The episode first aired in the United States on April 29 , 2010 on the Fox Broadcasting Company and was seen by 5 @.@ 551 million viewers in the United States . The episode was part of the network 's " Fox Rocks " campaign , in which musical elements were incorporated into various shows in their lineup for a week , a concept that was panned by critics before the episode aired . Nevertheless , " Brown Betty " garnered mostly favorable reviews , with many noting the musical element as a strong point . Various cast members also stated that they enjoyed the musical aspect of the episode . It was ranked the fourth best episode of the entire series by Entertainment Weekly . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins with Dr. Walter Bishop ( John Noble ) smoking his own strain of marijuana called " Brown Betty " while Olivia Dunham ( Anna Torv ) attempts to find his son , Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) , who disappeared at the end of the previous episode after learning Walter stole him from a parallel universe . Because Dunham 's sister Rachel ( Ari Graynor ) is unavailable , she brings her niece Ella ( Lily Pilblad ) to the lab for Walter and Astrid Farnsworth ( Jasika Nicole ) to look after . To pass the time , Walter tells Ella a detective noir story in which Olivia is a private investigator . 
 In the story , Rachel approaches Olivia to find her boyfriend , Peter , who has gone missing . During the investigation , Detective Phillip Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) leads her to Massive Dynamic , where the CEO Nina Sharp ( Blair Brown ) informs her that Peter is a conman and industrial spy . Later , Rachel is found murdered , with her heart taken . Olivia finds a check signed by Walter Bishop , who in the story , is an inventor that has created " everything that is wonderful in the world " in order to benefit humanity ( hugs , rainbows , bubblegum , singing corpses ) . Questioning Walter , Olivia learns that Peter worked with Walter , who treated him like a son . One day , Walter made a glass heart but Peter later stole it . Were the heart not to be found , Walter and his ideas would die . To help find Peter , Olivia calls her assistant , " Esther <unk> " ( Farnsworth ) . 
 Later , Olivia follows Nina Sharp , only to find herself kidnapped by a " watcher " ( the Observer , played by Michael Cerveris ) working for Sharp . The watcher attempts to kill Olivia by placing her in a wooden crate and sending it out to sea . Fortunately , Olivia is rescued by Peter . After taking her to his hideout , he reveals that the glass heart was his by nature of having been born with it , and that after working with Walter , Peter loved him enough to donate it to him . However , he took it back after learning a terrible secret behind his inventions : they were stolen from children 's dreams and replaced with nightmares . Later , the house is under attack by an army of watchers . Olivia fights them off , but not before they manage to take Peter 's heart with them . After placing batteries in his heart cavity to act as a temporary measure , Olivia discovers that Walter set up the attack . In the confrontation , Walter apologises for his misdeeds and promises to change . However , Peter does not forgive Walter and leaves him , ending the story . 
 Ella is disappointed by the ending , as that is not how she believes stories ought to end , so she proposes an alternate ending : when Walter says he can change , Peter believes him and splits the glass heart in two , and together they " lived happily ever after . " At the episode 's end , Olivia returns , having found no leads on Peter 's location . Farnsworth returns Walter to his home , where the Observer watches from a distance and notes Peter 's disappearance . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was originally called " Overture " , but was later changed to " Brown Betty " as a reference to Walter 's marijuana habit . It was written by executive producers Jeff Pinkner and J. H. Wyman along with consulting producer Akiva Goldsman . Seith Mann served as the director , his only directional credit for the series . For Sweeps Week , the Fox network announced the " Fox Rocks " campaign , in which various shows within their lineup were encouraged to produce musical episodes in the same vein as the sophomore show Glee . Along with Fringe , Family Guy , Bones , The Simpsons , and a few other Fox series took up the musical theme . The episode was already in development before Fox 's announcement . Jeff Pinkner stated that the music was not in the original plan for the episode , but was added to fit into Fox 's sweeps stunt . As the episode occurred after the big reveal of Peter 's true identity ( " The Man from the Other Side " ) , the writers knew they wanted " Brown Betty " to explore the aftermath from Walter 's damaged psyche . Fox did not ask for a full @-@ blown musical , but requested that some music be integrated into the episode in any shape or form . Pinkner elaborated : 
 " We came up with a narrative device to really explore Walter 's feelings . We had largely all the elements of the episode in place and Fox called and said , ' Hey , how would you guys feel about if we asked you to have some musical element in the show ? Anything , like just feature a song playing . ' They didn 't ask us to do Glee . And we instantly , before we got off the phone , said , ' Well , this is what we 're thinking for the episode and here 's an idea how that could work for us . ' We turned their request into what felt like a positive for us and really deepened and sort of blew the episode out even further in the direction we were already taking it " . 
 The episode begins with Walter smoking his own strain of marijuana while listening to " Roundabout " by the band Yes . The scene was originally removed out of concern it would be airing on network television , but was later reinserted because " the story itself had so many different genres playing . We had a noir element . We had a musical <unk> and it just really played funnier coming from an altered state of Walter " , according to co @-@ producer Tanya Swerling . Jeff Pinkner added " We set out to do an episode that explored Walter 's state of mind — he 's dealing with some very upsetting news . When we realized that the way Walter would deal with such news would be to try to anesthetize himself with copious amounts of marijuana , well , singing and dancing became a natural outcome . " Music supervisor Charles Scott IV and J.R. Wyman are big Yes fans , and consequently chose the song that appeared in the opening scene . As the episode was done with a 1940s aesthetic , every department had to act accordingly . Torv 's normally straight hair was placed into a curl hairdo fashionable for the time period , and lighting changes were made to reflect the period as well . New furniture was brought in for various sets , such as Walter 's lab and Nina 's office at Massive Dynamic , which was then removed in preparation for the following week . The ending was a challenge for the producers , as it was supposed to end with Ella 's version of the story conclusion and Walter still feeling upset over Peter 's absence , but they felt this ended making viewers feel depressed . They debated ways to make it a happier tone , so Wyman added the Observer scene to change the feeling of the episode , and prepare viewers for next week . 
 As guest actor Leonard Nimoy , who plays William Bell , was unavailable to shoot the brief conversation with Blair Brown 's Nina Sharp , the producers knew they wanted to do something a little more creative for the scene . They talked to cartoonist Frank Miller and hired a special effects school to do all the modeling , which they accomplished based on photos of Nimoy , because the actor could not come in to have his head scanned ; he did some voicework however . The finished scene included an animated version of Nimoy 's head , shown through the same window as the one used in " Peter " . 
 Pinkner thought the added musical element improved the episode , because it gave insights into each of the characters ' psyches . According to Wyman and Pinkner , the " episode was supposed to be a fantastical episode in the first place , and so the music supports the storytelling " . Wyman continued in a different interview with the Los Angeles Times that " Noirs traditionally are morality tales , and that 's kind of what we 're doing . We felt that that was a great way to get across Walter 's mind frame and where his head is at right now , with his son missing " . Other cast members also praised the added music . John Noble wrote " It really deepened and blew the episode out even further in the direction we were already taking . We get [ Walter 's ] fractured take on the world and his condition now that Peter has left . The music really supports the storytelling " . He added , " It is like a mind @-@ trip of Walter 's . It is Walter trying to grapple with the fact that his son is gone " . Jasika Nicole continued : " I have a musical theater background , so I 've been waiting for some moment in some realm of where I am in TV and film for this to happen and , you know , of course , when Glee came on the air I was like , ' Great , that was my chance , ' and I 'm in this show , which I love this show , but I 'm never going to sing and dance in this show . And I did ! It 's so awesome ! " Swerling called it " the longest and possibly most difficult episode of the season " to create . 
 As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan for grade school children focusing on the science seen in " Brown Betty " , with the intention of having " students learn about fingerprints and how they can be collected and used as evidence to identify an individual . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The co @-@ music supervisor , Billy Gottlieb , called the episode a " little mini feature film in the sense that we had a lot of camera performances with the music . " In order to get the best performances out of the cast and be able to shoot the scenes in various different ways , the producers had the actors go into a music studio in Vancouver and record their respective musical numbers . According to Gottlieb , the actors were very nervous about singing in the episode , despite their parts being around a mere 40 seconds . Actor Joshua Jackson , who plays Peter Bishop , was adamant that he not sing in the episode , despite the fact he frequently sings on set , causing him to be one of the few cast members with no musical part . As the original script contained no musical number for Jasika Nicole , she emailed Jeff Pinkner specifically asking him to let her sing , which he then approved . Some critics noted their surprise that Tony Award @-@ winning actor Michael Cerveris did not sing in the episode . The producers were initially going to have him sing Django Reinhardt 's " Blue Moon " , but changed their minds because they thought it would be better to keep the Observer out of the musical aspect of the episode . Despite the pre @-@ recordings , the audio used in the episode was taken from the actors actually singing on set . Tanya Swerling believed the recordings were not a wasted effort however , as it helped make the actors more comfortable about singing on set . At the end of shooting , Gottlieb believed " everybody was great ... they could jump on stage and do Broadway and it wouldn 't be a problem for any of them " . He and other crew members called Jasika Nicole " probably the most accomplished " musical person of the cast . As one of the episode writers , Akiva Goldsman chose the Stevie Wonder song " For Once in My Life " . 
 On composing the episode 's score , Chris Tilton cited Chinatown as a big influence , and commented " the idea was to have this noir feel but still not be totally away from Fringe " . 
 The episode featured excerpted music from the following tracks : 
 Yes ' " Roundabout " , heard in background 
 Tears for Fears ' " Head over Heels " , also sung by Walter and lip @-@ synched by Rachel 
 Traffic 's " Low Spark of High Heeled Boys " , played on piano and sung by Broyles 
 A Chorus Line 's " I Hope I Get It " , sung by Astrid 
 Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory 's " The Candy Man " , sung by the singing corpses and later by Walter 
 Miles Davis ' " Freddie Freeloader " , played at the Peter house 
 Stevie Wonder 's " For Once in My Life " , sung by Olivia 
 Ella Fitzgerald 's " Blue Moon " , heard in background and also danced by Peter and Olivia 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Brown Betty " was watched by 5 @.@ 551 million viewers in the United States , with a 3 @.@ 4 share out 5 among all households and a 2 @.@ 0 / 6 share of the audience aged 18 – 49 . The episode fell five percent from the previous week . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode premiered to generally positive reviews . Although initially cringing over the musical premise , Ramsey Isler of IGN called the episode " admittedly fun " because it " gave us an indirect window to view how Walter feels about himself " . In a review of the DVD , another critic from IGN later called it the " worst overall episode " of the season however , asking the question " Musical numbers and Olivia Dunham : who thought this would be a good idea ? " Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly was also initially irritated after hearing Fox 's musical plans , and consequently gave " Fringe a lot of credit for pulling off this hour so cleverly " Jennifer Walker from TV Fanatic thought the episode was " bizarre " to watch ; it " held our interest for the entire 60 minutes , but really failed to introduce any new information about Peter and the unknown man that has crossed into our dimension " . MTV 's John Wigler loved the " noir " element , and thought " each and every participating " Fringe " cast member exhibited great musical ability . Overall , it was a very solid effort on everyone 's part " . Jane Boursaw of TV Squad loved the scenes between Walter and Ella , and thought " it was downright brilliant to create a story within a story " . While he praised the episode 's production and the singing abilities of the cast , Kurt Anthony Krug of Mania.com wrote a negative review : " All in all , what was supposed to be a fun filler episode before the question of where Peter went at the end of the last episode when he found out he was the Peter from an alternate reality – one of the turning points in the show ’ s mythology – fell flat " . Sarah Stegall of SFScope enjoyed it , writing " There was just enough music , and just enough dance , to season this story without overburdening it " . She praised the <unk> it took to make the episode " edgy and whimsical , casting aside the concrete conventions of television storytelling ... Not only was it entertaining , but it moved the storyline forward on some important emotional fronts , as the characters deal with Peter 's disappearance in ways that protect them , but reveal as well " . 
 Andrew Hanson from the Los Angeles Times also was impressed with the cast 's singing abilities , and praised the writers ' risk @-@ taking : " that just goes to show how well thought out , creative , and just plain fun tonight ’ s “ Fringe ” really was . A lot of people would have pegged a 1940s film noir musical episode as a big risk , but the bigger the risk , the bigger the pay out " . Rhee Dee of Pinkraygun.com commented " After the revelation in the last episode , and Peter running away , this episode was a great way to express Walter ’ s grief and guilt about this whole situation without actually watching Walter talk about how sad and guilty he feels about everything . Walter ’ s story serves as a powerful metaphor for how he actually feels " . Tim Grierson of New York Magazine thought the episode turned out to be simply mediocre because " its noir elements weren ’ t incorporated in a really interesting way , and as for the musical numbers , they tended to be throwaway bits , save for “ fictional ” Dunham crooning “ For Once in My Life ” to the seemingly dying “ fictional ” Peter near the episode ’ s end " . Grierson continued that " If a show is going to completely throw away its usual rulebook for a fun onetime @-@ only episode , it would be great if the writers could come up with a story as audacious as their premise . But aside from some Chinatown references , fancy threads , and mildly clever mirroring of the show ’ s mythology — Massive Dynamic is up to no good in this story @-@ land world as well — ' Brown Betty ' wasn ’ t all that enjoyable because it didn ’ t do a great job of capturing what generally makes Fringe enjoyable " . 
 Noel Murray of the The A.V. Club graded the episode an A- , while Television Without Pity gave it a C + . Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly named it the fourth best episode of the series , explaining " The late season lark that officially launched a tradition for similar stunts , the musical film noir homage ' Brown Betty ' ... was an offbeat gem that expressed all of Fringe 's core themes — redemption , connection , <unk> — and encapsulated the key relationships ( the slow @-@ moving Walter @-@ Peter reconciliation ; Peter and Olivia 's carefully tended soul @-@ deep romance ) more poignantly than most on @-@ point episodes of Fringe , and it left fans wanting the show to keep pushing the innovation . It could never do it enough . " In a similar list , Den of Geek named it the ninth best episode of the series , explaining that " it shouldn ’ t work , and yet it does , because although technically nothing happens , the episode shows us just how deep Walter has sunk into a metaphorical pit of despair and guilt , making himself the villain in his own story and despairing of ever being forgiven . It also gives the audience a refreshing break from some of the high level angst of the end of the season , allowing Peter and Olivia to act out a properly romantic storyline while their characters in the ‘ real ’ world have been torn apart . Also , there are singing corpses in it . Only on Fringe . " 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 " Brown Betty , " along with Music Editor Paul Apelgren , was nominated for Best Sound Editing : TV Short Form Music in a Musical by the Motion Picture Sound Editors for the 2011 Golden Reel Awards . " The Box " , a season three Fringe episode , was also nominated for Best Sound Editing : TV Short Form Music . " Brown Betty " lost to an episode of Glee . 
 = IPhone 4S = 
 The iPhone 4S ( retroactively stylized with a lowercase ' s ' as iPhone 4s as of September 2013 ) is a smartphone that was designed and marketed by Apple Inc . It is the fifth generation of the iPhone , succeeding the iPhone 4 and preceding the iPhone 5 . Announced on October 4 , 2011 at Apple 's Cupertino campus , its media coverage was accompanied by the death of former Apple CEO and co @-@ founder Steve Jobs on the following day . 
 Available for pre @-@ order on October 7 , 2011 and coming to mainstream availability in retail stores on October 14 , 2011 in the United States , Australia , Canada , the United Kingdom , France , Germany , and Japan , sales peaked over its predecessor with over a million sales in the first twenty @-@ four hours of preorder availability and over four million sales in the first four days of retail availability . Further worldwide rollout , including 22 additional countries on October 28 , came over the next several months . 
 This iPhone was named " 4S " where " S " stood for Siri ( Apple CEO Tim Cook confirmed that during the Q & A session at the D10 conference in May 2012 ) , an iPhone 4S @-@ exclusive intelligent personal assistant that was later included in future generations of mobile Apple products . Retaining the most of the external design of the iPhone 4 , the 4S hosted revised hardware specifications , most notably an upgrade to the Apple A5 chipset , and an 8 @-@ megapixel camera with 1080p video recording . It debuted with iOS 5 , the fifth major version of iOS , Apple 's mobile operating system , that introduced features including iCloud , iMessage , Notification Center , <unk> , and Twitter integration . 
 Reception to the iPhone 4S was generally favorable . Reviewers noted Siri , the new camera , and processing speeds as significant advantages over the prior model . It was succeeded by the iPhone 5 as Apple 's flagship phone on September 12 , 2012 . The iPhone 4S remained in production , albeit being sold with reduced storage ( from 16 / 32 / 64 GB down to 8 GB . ) It was officially discontinued on September 9 , 2014 , following the announcement of the iPhone 6 but is currently supported as of iOS 9 . However iPhone 4S is still being sold in some countries at low prices such as Philippines . During the course of its lifetime , the iPhone 4S is the best @-@ selling iPhone ever produced and it is the first ( and , by the time , the only ) iPhone to support five major versions of iOS : 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , and 9 . It is also the last iPhone to have the original 30 pin connector as it was replaced by the Lightning Connector when the iPhone 5 was released . 
 = = History = = 
 As early as May 2011 , some leaks had a fairly accurate description of the iPhone 4S including the name " iPhone 4S " , the Apple A5 chip , HSDPA , new camera , and Sprint carrying . 
 The iPhone 4S was unveiled at Apple 's " Let 's Talk iPhone " event on October 4 , 2011 , on the Apple Campus in Cupertino , California . The keynote was the first which Tim Cook gave since the Verizon keynote earlier in the year . It was also Cook 's first launch without Apple co @-@ founder Steve Jobs , whose health was deteriorating , and who died the day after the announcement of the iPhone 4S . Tim Carmody of Wired praised Cook for focusing on company achievements , calling him a " global business thinker " and a " taskmaster " . 
 At the " Let 's Talk iPhone " event held by Apple on October 4 , 2011 , Mike Capps demonstrated Epic Games ' Infinity Blade II , the sequel to Infinity Blade , on an iPhone 4S . Capps boasted that the game uses Epic Games ' Unreal Engine 3 and features the same graphic techniques used in the Xbox 360 game Gears of War 3 . 
 Speculation about Apple 's next generation phone , including various specifications and a predicted name " iPhone 5 " , had been widespread in the time preceding its debut . After the iPhone 4S was announced , it was considered by some media to be a disappointment , due to the expected release of an iPhone 5 . 
 There were no external differences between the iPhone 4 CDMA model and the iPhone 4S , with the exception of a SIM card slot on the iPhone 4S . All changes were internal ( slight external differences between the iPhone 4 GSM model and the iPhone 4S exist , as said differences existed between the CDMA and GSM models of the iPhone 4 ) . 
 On September 10 , 2013 the iPhone 4S name was re @-@ stylised as iPhone 4s , using a lower case ' s ' to reflect the names of the newly announced iPhone 5s and iPhone 5c . This was unusual for Apple as an upper case ' S ' had been used since the introduction of the iPhone 3GS in 2009 . 
 On September 9 , 2014 , the iPhone 4S was discontinued following the reveal of the iPhone 6 and the iPhone 6 Plus . 
 On June 13 , 2016 , following the release of iOS 10 , Apple have dropped support on the iPhone 4S , making iOS 9 the last version supporting the iPhone 4S . 
 = = Features = = 
 = = = Software = = = 
 The iPhone 4S runs iOS , Apple 's mobile operating system . The user interface of iOS is based on the concept of direct manipulation , using multi @-@ touch gestures . Interface control elements consist of sliders , switches , and buttons . The response to user input is immediate and provides a fluid interface . Interaction with the OS includes gestures such as swipe , tap , pinch , and reverse pinch , all of which have specific definitions within the context of the iOS operating system and its multi @-@ touch interface . Internal accelerometers are used by some applications to respond to shaking the device ( one common result is the undo command ) or rotating it in three dimensions ( one common result is switching from portrait to landscape mode ) . 
 The iPhone 4S was first shipped with iOS 5 , which was released on October 12 , 2011 , 2 days before the release of the device . The 4S uses iOS 5 @.@ 1 @.@ 1 , which was released on May 7 , 2012 . As of September 2015 , the device can be updated to iOS 9 . It can act as a hotspot , sharing its internet connection over WiFi , Bluetooth , or USB , and also accesses the App Store , a digital application distribution platform for iOS developed and maintained by Apple . The service allows users to browse and download applications from the iTunes Store that were developed with Xcode and the iOS SDK and were published through Apple . 
 The iPhone 4S can play music , movies , television shows , ebooks , audiobooks , and podcasts and can sort its media library by songs , artists , albums , videos , playlists , genres , composers , podcasts , audiobooks , and compilations . Options are always presented alphabetically , except in playlists , which retain their order from iTunes . The iPhone 4S uses a large font that allows users plenty of room to touch their selection . Users can rotate their device horizontally to landscape mode to access Cover Flow . Like on iTunes , this feature shows the different album covers in a scroll @-@ through photo library . Scrolling is achieved by swiping a finger across the screen . Alternatively , headset controls can be used to pause , play , skip , and repeat tracks . On the 4S , the volume can be changed with the included Apple Earphones , and the Voice Control feature can be used to identify a track , play songs in a playlist or by a specific artist , or create a Genius playlist . 
 The iPhone 4S introduced a new automated voice control system called Siri , that allows the user to give the iPhone commands , which it can execute and respond to . For example , iPhone commands such as " What is the weather going to be like ? " will generate a response such as " The weather is to be cloudy and rainy and drop to 54 degrees today . " These commands can vary greatly and control almost every application of the phone . The commands given do not have to be specific and can be used with natural language . Siri can be accessed by holding down the home button for a short amount of time ( compared to using the regular function ) . An impact of Siri , as shown by Apple video messages , is that it is much easier for people to use device functions while driving , exercising , or when they have their hands full . It also means people with trouble reading , seeing , or typing can access the phone more easily . 
 On the iPhone 4S , texting can be aided by the voice assistant , which allows speech @-@ to @-@ text . In addition to regular texting , messaging on the iPhone 4S is supported by iMessage , a specialized instant messaging program and service that allows unlimited texting to other Apple iOS 5 products . This supports the inclusion of media in text messages , integration with the device 's voice controlled software assistant , and read receipts for sent messages . Input to the computer comes from a keyboard displayed on the multi @-@ touch screen or by voice @-@ to text by speaking into the microphone . Entered text is supported by predictive and suggestion software as well as a spell @-@ checker , that includes many regional dialects like Swiss spoken French . 
 At announcement , plans were in place for the iPhone 4S to support many languages . Different features have different language requirements , such as keyboards compared to the word predictor and spell @-@ checker , which needs a large dictionary of words . Language support is related to the iOS 5 operating system that the device launched with , although not always . The Siri digital assistant supported French , English , and German at launch . Since it uses a software based keyboard supported by the multi @-@ touch display , it can support many different keyboard layouts without having to change physically . The iPhone 4S can display different languages and scripts at the same time . 
 On September 19 , 2012 , iOS 6 was released to the iPhone 4S among other compatible iOS device as an over the air ( OTA ) upgrade package . According to Apple the update contains 200 new features and tweaks , which includes a new maps app , dubbed Apple Maps , Facebook integration and Passbook , an application that allows users to store their coupons , boarding passes and tickets digitally . On September 18 , 2013 , Apple released iOS 7 and the iPhone 4S is among other compatible iOS devices that also receive the update without any lagging issues compared to the iPhone 4 . Although the device has improved performance over iOS 7 , some newer features that were released to newer models such as AirDrop and <unk> were not supported . The iPhone 4s can also run iOS 8 which was released on September 17 , 2014 . Given that the device has been supported for more than 3 years , some newer features of the software such as Apple Pay are not supported . It is also unable to work with Apple Watch due to the relatively aged hardware . In fact , some users often reported that performance on the 4s is very slow , similar to how iOS 7 ran on the iPhone 4 , and suggesting that they should not upgrade due to battery draining issues and hanging up on calls . Meanwhile , Apple released iOS 8 @.@ 1 @.@ 1 , which brought slight improvements to the phone and the iPad 2 , but it still did not run as fast as newer models . 
 On June 8 , 2015 , Apple announced at the WWDC that the iPhone 4S would support iOS 9 . This makes it the first and only iPhone to support 5 major versions of iOS , and the second iOS device to support 5 major versions ( iOS 9 will support the iPad 2 as well , bringing its total up to six major versions of iOS supported ) . Although the iPhone 4S has begun its limitations with iOS 8 , iOS 9 is said to bring performance enhancements that may help the aging device run more smoothly again . On December 22 , 2015 , Apple faced a class action lawsuit for crippling the iPhone 4S with the iOS 9 update with slow and buggy software or to pay hundreds of dollars on a new iPhone . 
 On June 13 , 2016 , Apple announced that the iPhone 4S will not support iOS 10 due to its aging hardware . 
 = = = Hardware = = = 
 The iPhone 4S uses the Apple A5 system @-@ on @-@ chip ( SoC ) that incorporates an Imagination Technologies PowerVR <unk> graphics processing unit ( GPU ) . This GPU features pixel , vertex , and geometry shader hardware supporting OpenGL ES 2 @.@ 0 . The <unk> is an improved version of the GPU used in the iPhone 4S 's predecessor , the iPhone 4 . The iPhone 4S uses a dual @-@ core model that is integrated with the Apple A5 SoC in the same way as the iPad 2 . Apple claims that the iPhone 4S has up to seven times faster graphics than the iPhone 4 ; this was corroborated by Epic Games president Mike Capps . 
 The iPhone 4S has 512 MB of DDR2 RAM . Maximum available storage size increased to 64 GB while the 32 GB and 16 GB model options were retained . The screen is the same as the prior generation iPhones ; 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 89 mm ) , 640 × 960 resolution ( Apple 's " retina " design ) . There was an improvement in interactive multimedia applications compared to its predecessor . 
 The iPhone 4S has an improved cellular ( GSM ) antenna design over the iPhone 4 . The new antenna is divided up into two pieces within the stainless steel band that wraps around the sides of the phone . Therefore , if the iPhone 4S is gripped in such a way as to attenuate one piece of the cellular antenna , the radio will switch to the other piece that isn 't being gripped . The iPhone 4S can support a maximum theoretical download speed of up to 14 @.@ 4 <unk> with HSDPA + . As a result of an upgraded radio chip inside the phone , in addition to being a world phone , both GSM and CDMA customers can roam internationally on GSM networks . It also supports Bluetooth 4 @.@ 0 . 
 The camera on the iPhone 4S , also known as an iSight camera , can take 8 @-@ megapixel photos ( 3 @,@ 264 by 2 @,@ 448 pixels ) and record 1080p videos at up to 30 frames per second with upgraded quality ( 30 % better clarity , 26 % better white balance , color accuracy ) due to an additional lens , IR filter , a wider f / 2 @.@ 4 aperture , and Image signal processor ( built @-@ in A5 ) . 
 The built @-@ in gyroscope allows for some image stabilization for the camera while recording video , although it still has room for improvement , since state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art image stabilization algorithms do not need to use a gyroscope , but use image processing . Other features of the camera are macro ( for close up pictures ) and faster capture including being able to take its first picture in 1 @.@ 1 seconds and the next half a second later . 
 The iPhone 4S features a 89 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) 960 by 640 pixel multitouch Retina display . It has two volume buttons and a ring / silent switch on the left side . On the top left there is a 3 @.@ 5 mm headphone jack and a microphone that is used for both noise cancellation during calls and when in speakerphone / FaceTime ( video calling ) mode . The lock / power button is situated on the top right edge of the device . The right side of the device has a Micro @-@ SIM card slot . The bottom of the device features a speaker output on the right and a microphone input on the left with Apple 's proprietary 30 @-@ pin dock connector in the center . The iPhone 4S supports video out via AirPlay and various Apple A / V cables . Supported video formats include H.264 ( 1080p 30 frames per second maximum ) , MPEG @-@ 4 video , and motion JPEG ( M @-@ JPEG ) . 
 In addition to user inputs , the device also has several sensors that give the phone information about its orientation and external conditions . These include a three @-@ axis gyroscope , an accelerometer , a proximity sensor , and an ambient light sensor . The iPhone 4S is stated to have 200 hours standby time , 8 hours talk time on 3G , 14 hours talk time on 2G , 6 hours 3G browsing , and 9 hours Wi @-@ Fi browsing . Additionally , it can sustain up to 10 hours of video playback or 40 hours of audio playback . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The iPhone 4S has a stainless steel , dual cellular antenna design , identical to iPhone 4 CDMA . Apple redesigned the antenna in the iPhone 4 CDMA after some original iPhone 4 users reported cellular signal attenuation problems as a result of holding the phone in certain positions . The improved cellular radio in the phone can switch between two antennas , depending on which is sending / receiving the best signal . These two antennas are incorporated into the distinctive stainless steel band that wraps around the sides of the iPhone 4S . The bands on the iPhone 4S are divided into two antennas : cellular and Global Positioning System GPS , with Bluetooth and Wi @-@ Fi reliant on an internal antenna . 
