 The iPhone 4 and 4S were designed by Jonathan Ive . The ' 4' generation iPhones differ from earlier Apple designs ; the bulges of the back panel as well as the band between the front and back are gone and have been replaced with flattened surfaces . The redesign reflects the utilitarianism and uniformity of existing Apple products , such as the iPad and the iMac . The overall dimensions of the iPhone 4S are lower than that of the 3GS . 
 It is 115 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 5 in ) high , 59 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 3 in ) wide , and 9 @.@ 4 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 37 in ) deep , compared to the iPhone 3GS , which is 116 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 6 in ) high , 62 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) wide , and 12 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) deep ; making the iPhone 4 and 4S 21 @.@ 5 % thinner than the 3GS . The internal components are situated between two panels of aluminosilicate glass , described by Apple as being " chemically strengthened to be 20 times stiffer and 30 times harder than plastic , " theoretically allowing it to be more scratch resistant and durable than the prior models . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Reception to the iPhone 4S was generally favorable . Reviewers noted Siri , the new camera , and processing speeds as significant advantages over the prior model . Tim Stevens of Engadget said that the " iPhone 4S does everything better than the iPhone 4 , but it simply doesn 't do anything substantially different . " Joshua Topolsky of The Verge stated that " if this were to be a car , it would be a Mercedes " and that Siri is " probably one of the most novel applications Apple has ever produced . " Most reviewers thought that Siri was the most important feature on the iPhone 4S . Brian Chen of Wired said that " the fifth @-@ generation iPhone 's superb camera and speedy dual @-@ core processor are classy additions . But Siri is the reason people should buy this phone . " 
 <unk> surveyed more than 1 @,@ 300 U.S. consumers and reported that 71 percent of all smartphone owners were not disappointed by the new iPhone 4S but 47 percent or almost a half of current iPhone 4 owners were ; 12 percent were hoping for a bigger display , 21 percent wanted a refreshed design , and 29 percent desired 4G . Echoing technology pundits , Reuters suggested that the lack of a more radical departure from the iPhone 4 could open new market opportunities for rivals . Analyst C. K. Lu of Gartner believed that Apple no longer had the leading edge and that the 4S would only sell due to brand loyalty , as fans had been expecting an iPhone 5 with a thinner profile , edge @-@ to @-@ edge screen , and stronger features . These same fans had also wanted a cheaper , stripped @-@ down iPhone 4 . 
 Gaming on the iPhone 4S has been likened to the PlayStation Vita , that features the same SGX GPU only in a quad @-@ core configuration , and the Nintendo 3DS handheld game consoles . Further , the iPhone 4S ' ability to process 80 million polygons per second has been compared to the PlayStation 3 and the Xbox 360 home video game consoles that can process 275 million and 500 million polygons per second respectively . 
 Computer and Video Games 's ( CVG ) deputy editor Andy Robinson told TechRadar that the " 4S is certainly laying down some serious credibility for the iPhone as a core gaming device . Not only is it now pushing out games that simply eclipse the 3DS visually , but features like cloud saving and TV streaming support are really exciting for gamers . " The senior gaming analyst at Jon Peddie Research , Ted Pollak , believes the biggest improvement to gaming on the iPhone 4S is the voice control features , noting that " one of the features that Nintendogs players loved was the ability to talk to it . There 's no reason why a game like that couldn 't be done on the iPhone 4S , and much more sophisticated given the voice control shown . " 
 In 2012 , the iPhone 4S won T3 's " Work Gadget of the Year " award , beating RIM 's Blackberry Bold 9900 , rival Samsung 's Galaxy Note amongst others . 
 = = = Issues = = = 
 Since the introduction of the iPhone 4S , there have been several issues reported by users on internet forums that have been noted by media organizations such as CNN , Boy Genius Report , The Guardian and PC World . 
 No audio on outgoing calls . 
 Sometimes there is no speaker audio for services like web radio even though the speaker works fine when used as a telephone . This error may be due to a malfunctioning switch sensing the headphone plug and different handling of this information by different apps . 
 Yellow @-@ tinted screens ( primarily affecting white @-@ cased units ) . It turned out the previous models had a less accurately calibrated screen and thus displayed images with a bluish tint . 
 Battery problems . Apple has acknowledged the problem and have released iOS 5 @.@ 1 @.@ 1 to diagnose and address the issue . However , the update has failed to completely resolve the underperforming battery issue . As of February 2012 , Apple was still investigating the battery drain issue . 
 Not understanding the accent of users from various countries while speaking to Siri . 
 Bluetooth connectivity and range sometimes poor , deficient , and / or defective . The sound quality on the other end is muffled and / or <unk> , with reports indicating the iPhone is likely the problem as opposed to the Bluetooth headsets . 
 Wi @-@ Fi overheating and toggle switch greyed out after updating the operating system to iOS 7 . 
 = = = Commercial reception = = = 
 Unlike prior iPhone models , the number of sales of the iPhone 4 had not yet climaxed before the introduction of the 4S . Previous iPhone models were released during or after declining sales figures . In addition , iPhone 4 users had high marks for being satisfied with their phone . Upon the announcement of the iPhone 4S , shares of Samsung Electronics , HTC and Nokia gained on Wednesday after the 4S was announced , while Apple stock fell . However , later in the day Apple shares rebounded ending with a 1 % gain . 
 With the launch of the pre @-@ order , AT & T said that the demand for the iPhone 4S was " extraordinary " . Over 200 @,@ 000 pre @-@ orders were placed within 12 hours of release through AT & T. The German phone company Deutsche Telekom said they were " satisfied " with consumer interest . In addition , AT & T , Verizon , and Sprint sold @-@ out pre @-@ order stock by October 8 , 2011 , and by October 9 there was a 1 – 2 week estimate on new pre @-@ orders to be filled . On October 20 , 2011 , AT & T surpassed one million iPhone 4S activations . On October 10 , Apple announced that over one million pre @-@ orders for the iPhone 4S had been received within the first 24 hours of it being on sale , beating the 600 @,@ 000 device record set by the iPhone 4 . The 16 @-@ month wait between the iPhone 4 and 4S may have contributed to overwhelming sales as well . 
 On October 17 , 2011 , Apple had announced that four million units of the iPhone 4S were sold in the first three days of release , and 25 million iOS users had upgraded to the then latest version of iOS , iOS 5 , which was released upon the introduction of the phone . Phil Schiller , Apple 's senior vice president of Worldwide Product Marketing , stated that the " iPhone 4S is off to a great start with more than four million sold in its first weekend — the most ever for a phone and more than double the iPhone 4 launch during its first three days . " The used phone market saw unprecedented rates of trade @-@ ins in the weeks leading up to the 4S announcement , and after it there was a drop in prices offered . Previous generation iPhones are recirculated through the markets through various methods and third @-@ party buyers may purchase older generation iPhones . Apple also buys back previous generation iPhones under a special program . On April 24 , 2012 , AT & T announced that 7 @.@ 6 million iPhone units were activated in Q4 2011 , and 4 @.@ 3 million in Q1 2012 . In total , AT & T sold 5 @.@ 5 million smartphones in the first quarter of 2012 , out of which 78 % were iPhones . 
 = = Timeline of models = = 
 = Peter Aduja = 
 Peter Aquino Aduja ( 19 October 1920 – 19 February 2007 ) was the first Filipino American elected to public office in the United States . He was elected as a representative in the Hawaii Legislature in 1954 . 
 Born in the Philippines , Aduja emigrated to Hawaii in his youth , and then served in the United States Army during World War II . After World War II , he worked as a teacher , before becoming one of the first Filipino lawyers in Hawaii . After two years in elected office , he worked for the Hawaiian Department of Attorney General , and served two years as a judge , until being elected to the Hawaii House of Representatives . Aduja died in Las Vegas in 2007 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Aduja was born in Ilocos Sur in the Philippines and emigrated with his family at the age of eight to Hilo , Hawaii . He was raised in nearby Hakalau , Hawaii , while his father worked on a sugarcane plantation as a <unk> . He attended Hilo High , where he was the student body president and an Eagle Scout , graduating with the class of 1941 as salutatorian . After high school , he went on to the University of Hawaii to major in government and history ; while attending university Aduja worked as a timekeeper at Pearl Harbor . In 1944 , he joined the United States Army , and along with 50 other individuals volunteered for the 1st Filipino Infantry Regiment . 
 Following World War II he married Melodie " <unk> " <unk> ( died 2002 ) . He taught on the island of Hawaii , at <unk> Intermediate School , before attending Boston University , where in 1951 he earned a law degree . In 1953 , along with Ben Menor ( later a justice on Hawaii 's Supreme Court ) , Aduja took the bar examination , and both became Hawaii 's first Filipino lawyers . 
 = = Political career = = 
 In 1954 , Aduja was elected to the Territorial House of Representatives , becoming the first Filipino to be elected to public office in Hawaii and the United States . He represented one of three seats of the island of Hawaii . In 1956 , he spoke on behalf of the Republican Party at the <unk> territorial convention in Hilo . After a single term in office , he went on to work for the Department of Attorney General . In 1959 , he ran for State Senate from Oahu , a year when fellow Republican William F. Quinn was elected as the state 's first governor , and lost . From 1960 to 1962 , he was a district court judge , resigning from the bench in June 1962 . After two years out of the public sector , in 1966 , he was elected again to public office , this time as a member of the Hawaii House of Representatives . His district included Kailua , the North Shore , and Kahuku . While a member of the Hawaii House of Representatives , he was a delegate at the Hawaii State Constitution 's 1968 constitutional convention . Aduja departed the Hawaii House of Representatives in 1974 , and returned to the public sector in his final position as a member of the City of Honolulu 's Kaneohe Neighborhood Board , which he was on from 1986 until 1994 . 
 = = Later years = = 
 In 1991 , Professor Dan Boylan wrote that Aduja was one of three important Filipino politicians in Hawaii during the beginning era of Filipino politics in Hawaii . Along with Alfred <unk> and Ben Menor , and a few others minor individuals , they were the few Filipinos in elected office or in significant public office in Hawaii in the mid @-@ 20th century . On 19 February 2007 , he died while on vacation in Las Vegas . Governor Linda Lingle declared 29 March 2007 to be Peter A. Aduja Day . Aduja was survived by two children and two grandchildren ; one of whom is Melodie Aduja , a former Hawaii state senator . 
 = Transformers : War for Cybertron = 
 Transformers : War for Cybertron is a third @-@ person shooter video game developed by High Moon Studios and published by Activision . It was released in North America on June 22 , 2010 and in PAL regions on June 25 , 2010 for Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , and PC . Two portable versions were released for the Nintendo DS , one featuring an Autobot campaign , the other a Decepticon campaign . A game for the Wii called Transformers : Cybertron Adventures was developed by Next Level Games and utilizes the same characters and setting as War for Cybertron . A sequel , Transformers : Fall of Cybertron was released on August 21 , 2012 in North America and on August 24 in Europe . 
 The game takes place on the planet Cybertron , prior to the Transformers arrival on Earth . The Autobots and Decepticons are engaged in a civil war . The game can be played starting from either faction 's perspective , but begins chronologically with the Decepticon campaign . The game revolves around the use of a substance known as Dark Energon , which the evil Decepticon leader Megatron believes will allow him to return the planet to what he refers to as a golden age . 
 War for Cybertron received generally positive reviews from critics . Aggregate websites GameRankings and Metacritic report scores in the mid 70 % range across all three platforms . Several reviewers cited it as an improvement over past Transformers games . Critics generally felt that the cooperative and multiplayer versus modes were solid , but cited repetitive visuals in regards to the game 's setting . 
 = = Setting = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 War for Cybertron is set on the planet Cybertron , prior to the Transformers ' contact with the planet Earth . Robotic in nature , each Transformer has the ability to transform from their robot mode to an alternate form , such as a tank or jet . The Transformers are engaged in civil war with one another . A group of evil Transformers form a splinter group separate from the main faction . Known as Decepticons , they follow Megatron , their powerful and ruthless leader . The main faction , known as the Autobots , follow the command of Zeta Prime . Zeta Prime is killed , leaving behind an inexperienced leader , Optimus , who must lead the Autobot forces to prevent Megatron from corrupting the planet , itself a Transformer , with Dark Energon . The Decepticon story is told in the first five chapters of the game , with the Autobot story directly following it . Players may choose to start either campaign first regardless of chronological order . 
 = = = Decepticon campaign = = = 
 In the Decepticon campaign Megatron fights to return the Transformers ' home planet of Cybertron to what he refers to as a golden age . It opens as Megatron , having heard legends about Dark Energon , an unstable substance with the power to corrupt life on the planet , and the Decepticons attack an orbital research station guarded by Starscream and his forces . Megatron , Barricade and Brawl reach the Dark Energon manufacturing plant , and Megatron immerses himself in it . Inspired by Megatron 's ability to handle the Dark Energon , Starscream asks him to teach him how to control it in return for his service . Shocked by his betrayal , Starscream 's colleague Jetfire escapes the space station , vowing to warn the Autobot leader Zeta Prime . 
 Megatron sends Starscream , Thundercracker , and Skywarp to reactivate an Energon bridge which will feed the station with raw Energon , allowing the manufacturing of more Dark Energon . Once they succeed , Megatron then develops a plan to infect the core of Cybertron with Dark Energon , feeling that he can gain control of the planet once it is infected . He launches a full @-@ scale assault on the Autobot capital city of Iacon , looking for an item called the Omega Key , which he will use to enter Cybertron 's core and infect it . The Decepticons learn that Zeta Prime has placed the key under his personal guard . Megatron 's forces enter the chambers of Zeta Prime and defeat him in battle , taking him prisoner . Zeta Prime tells Megatron that the Omega Key is not actually what unlocks access to the core , but is the means to activate the true key , a colossal Transformer known as Omega Supreme . 
 Now activated , Omega Supreme pursues Megatron and his minions relentlessly . Megatron , Soundwave and Breakdown devise a plan to lure Omega Supreme to a rooftop defended with turrets , where the giant Transformer is ambushed . Omega Supreme sustains heavy damage and plummets to Cybertron 's lower levels . The Decepticons follow Omega Supreme and engage him in a lengthy final battle , in which Omega Supreme is finally defeated , infected with Dark Energon , and captured by the Decepticons . Megatron forces Omega Supreme to open the door to Cybertron 's core and travels there with his minions . Upon arrival he infects the core of Cybertron , also a Transformer , with Dark Energon , which then begins to spread over the entire planet . 
 = = = Autobot campaign = = = 
 In the Autobot campaign Zeta Prime , leader of the Autobots , is reported dead and Bumblebee informs Optimus of this . Optimus then decides to temporarily take the mantle of leadership . Optimus , Bumblebee , and Ratchet lead a defensive campaign to protect their home city of Iacon . The trio activate the city 's defense guns and reactivate the communication grid . They then travel to the <unk> where the three Autobots battle Starscream and force him to retreat . 
 Shortly afterward , the Autobots receive a distress call from Zeta Prime , who informs them that he is being held at Kaon prison . Taking Bumblebee and Sideswipe with him , Optimus allows himself and the others to be captured in order to infiltrate Kaon . With help from Air Raid , the Autobots succeed in releasing all of Kaon 's Autobot prisoners , who escape on Decepticon transports . Optimus , accompanied by Bumblebee and Sideswipe , find Zeta Prime 's cell guarded by Soundwave . A fight ensues in which Soundwave deploys his minions Frenzy , Rumble and Laserbeak . Eventually , Soundwave and his minions retreat and the Autobots rescue Zeta Prime , who dies shortly thereafter from his previous injuries after his battle with Megatron . Optimus returns to Iacon with Zeta Prime 's body and speaks with the high council who declares Optimus the new Prime and informs him of Megatron 's activities . 
 Optimus is given the task of removing the Dark Energon from Cybertron 's core by the council . Optimus , Ironhide , and Warpath first attempt to rescue Omega Supreme from the Decepticons , who is being tortured by Dark Energon . The Autobots free Omega Supreme and gain access to Cybertron 's core . Struggling against a mysterious corrupted worm , Optimus then speaks with Cybertron 's core , which informs him that it has been heavily damaged by the Dark Energon . It states that it can repair itself by shutting down , but the process will take millions of years during which Cybertron will become cold , barren , and lifeless . The core then tells Optimus that if he carries a small piece of the core with him , the core can still survive during the repairs . Optimus accepts the burden and the core relinquishes the Autobot Matrix of Leadership . 
 With the planet soon to shut down , Optimus orders the evacuation of all Autobot cities . As the Autobot evacuation transports reach orbit , many are attacked by Megatron 's orbital space station . <unk> , Air Raid and Jetfire enter the station and destroy vital systems , and during the attack they realize that the station is actually a massive Decepticon known as Trypticon . The damaged Trypticon plunges into Cybertron , and the Autobots band together to narrowly defeat him in one final battle . In the aftermath of the battle Optimus commissions a massive vessel known as the Ark to transport the remaining Autobots into space . Optimus and a small band of remaining Autobots stay to defend Cybertron from Megatron for as long as possible . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 ^ a Originally a pre @-@ order bonus ^ b Downloadable content for multiplayer ^ c Not playable in campaign ^ d Not playable in multiplayer ^ e Unlocked as a multiplayer character 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 War for Cybertron is played from a third person perspective . Transformers are classified into four main categories , Leader , Soldier , Scientist , and Scout . Each character in the campaign is classified as one of these types , and their weaponry , abilities and vehicle form are largely influenced by their character class . Players can change between forms at will , and each form has unique abilities . While in robot form characters can also collect different weapons , reminiscent of those found in first @-@ person shooters . While in vehicle form each character can boost their speed . 
 Each campaign level gives the player a choice of three Transformers . The campaign can be played in single @-@ player or cooperatively via online multiplayer , and players can enter or leave the game at any time . If fewer than three players are present , the game 's AI controls the remaining playable characters . Cooperative and competitive modes of the game are limited to online play , with no split screen features available . The game levels are designed to allow characters to comfortably navigate and play the game in either mode . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 Competitive multiplayer games do not allow players to control official , named characters , and instead must design their own Transformer . Similar to the campaign , generic multiplayer characters are split into four character classes . Contrary to the campaign , however , each created character features some amount of customization . Players can select a base model and vehicle form , then alter major colors for their character and modify weapon <unk> and abilities based on that character class . The multiplayer aspect also features an experience and leveling system , including perks , and upgrades reminiscent of Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 2 , another Activision game . 
 War for Cybertron has several multiplayer modes to choose from . Deathmatch is a free @-@ for @-@ all game type where the player with the most kills at the end of the game is the winner . In Team Deathmatch players are divided into Autobot and Decepticon teams . The winning team is the one who earns the most kills . Conquest is a capture @-@ and @-@ hold style game , similar to the conquest mode found in the Star Wars : Battlefront series . Multiple control points are spread across the level . The object is for players to capture enemy control points by standing near them for a set amount of time while defending their own control points . In Countdown to Extinction players must take an active bomb and place it at an enemy base , similar to the Assault mode in the Halo series . Power Struggle is the game 's equivalent to the common King of the Hill game type . Finally Code of Power is a mode consisting of two and a half minute rounds where teams vie for a giant melee weapon . Also available is the Escalation game mode , the only multiplayer mode where players can control characters from the campaign or downloadable content . Players choose a faction and then work cooperatively to defeat continuous waves of enemy robots until all players are defeated , similar to the Horde mode found in Gears of War and the Halo series Firefight game modes . Players earn credits by defeating enemies which can be used to unlock ammunition , weaponry , health and new areas in each map . 
 = = Development and marketing = = 
 War for Cybertron was announced December 16 , 2009 , and was released in North America on June 22 , 2010 with the PAL region release following on June 25 , 2010 . It is powered by Unreal Engine 3 . Physics for the game are handled using the Havok physics library . A demo was released on June 10 , 2010 which allowed for players to play various multiplayer matches using two of the game 's character classes . Developer High Moon Studios designed the friendly AI so that as a player progresses through the story any accompanying characters will help the player , but still require the player to advance through the game . " The buddies don 't advance the story for you . They get to the point to kinda show you where to go , but then they 'll take up defensive positions and wait for you to progress the story " said Game Director Matt Tieger . " They 're not finishing objectives for you , but they like to stay near you , they 'll heal you if you get too wounded , they 're pretty smart . " 
 = = = Setting and plot = = = 
 War for Cybertron developer High Moon Studios and publisher Activision worked closely with Hasbro to create the design and story for the game . " I want to make the game I 've been waiting 25 years to play " said Tieger . The studio brought the concept and idea to Hasbro for approval . It began with a sketch of Bumblebee . " That was that first sketch that we slid across the table to Hasbro and said ' What do you guys think ? ' And that 's where it all started " said Tieger . High Moon presented the idea of setting the game on Cybertron during the Transformers ' civil war between the Autobots and Decepticons . Aaron Archer , Senior Design Director for Hasbro , stated of the Cybertron @-@ based setting " that 's a really cool place [ ... ] and the early days of that civil war between the Autobots and Decepticons was a story that hadn 't really been fleshed out in any format . " 
 Each of the characters were totally redesigned for the game , taking cues from previous iterations from the Transformers lore . " What they 've allowed us to do is take a licensed property and treat it like a brand new IP " stated Tieger . The vehicle modes for car @-@ based characters initially consisted of wheels , however the developers found that it crippled gameplay by removing the player 's ability to strafe while in vehicle mode . Taking the dilemma to Hasbro , the two companies agreed that characters would turn their wheels down and hover while in vehicle mode , allowing for more movement . The vehicles would then revert to the traditional wheeled mode while using a character 's boost , maintaining what the Transformers license had established with previous canon . 
 The world of Cybertron was designed in such a way that the Transformers would have a proper scale on their homeworld . " It doesn 't make sense that things would be smaller than them in their world , " Tieger said , adding " the key character in scale was making their world gigantic and huge . " Matt <unk> , Lead Designer at High Moon stated that since the game is not tied to a movie they were able to tell their own story . He cited the G1 universe as the inspiration for the game . Jim Daly , Lead Concept Artist at High Moon also cited the G1 universe as the main inspiration for the design of Cybertron itself , also stating that there were elements from Disney 's TRON , Blade Runner , and the Aliens franchise . 
 Hasbro 's Aaron Archer stated the game would be only part of a bigger group of media . " This won 't be the only touch point . It 's a big place that we 're going to build off of . " At a <unk> 2010 panel , War for Cybertron Creative Director Matt Tieger stated Activision is currently in talks with Hasbro on creating additional titles . He also added that Hasbro is " considering " expanding the brand further into the realm of video games . Joe Moscone , Senior Account Manager for Hasbro 's public relations team , further clarified that War for Cybertron is in the same continuity as the Transformers : Prime animated series and Transformers : Exodus novel , and that this would be the primary continuity going forward . Hasbro has released a toy line based on the War for Cybertron setting . Transforming figures of Optimus Prime , Bumblebee , Megatron and Soundwave from the game have been released by Hasbro under the Transformers : Generations banner . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The soundtrack for the console versions was composed by Tyler Bates . The ending theme is " Till All Are One " by Stan Bush , from his 2007 album In This Life . Peter Cullen returns to voice Optimus , having voiced the character several times in the Transformers franchise . Other voice actors include Kari Wahlgren as Arcee , Liam O 'Brien as Air Raid , Johnny Yong Bosch as Bumblebee , Fred Tatasciore as Megatron , Ratchet , Omega Supreme , and Trypticon , Keith Szarabajka as Ironhide , Steven Blum as Barricade and Shockwave , Nolan North as Brawl , and Sam Riegel as Starscream . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 Two downloadable content packs were produced for console versions of the game . The first , entitled simply Character and Map Pack 01 , was announced on July 2 , 2010 . Character and Map Pack 01 contains the three previously pre @-@ order exclusive characters , Demolishor , Jazz and Shockwave , as well as two new characters , Onslaught and <unk> . Four new multiplayer maps are also included . Two maps are exclusive to the game 's Escalation mode , while the other two are used in all other game modes . It was released July 27 , 2010 . The second pack , known as Character and Map Pack 02 , adds the characters Dead End and Zeta Prime and five new maps . It was released September 7 , 2010 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reaction has been generally positive , with many reviews citing that War for Cybertron is an improvement over past Transformers games . Aggregate scores across all three platforms were fairly uniform . The PC version holds a score of 76 @.@ 25 % at GameRankings and 76 / 100 at Metacritic . The PlayStation 3 version has a 78 @.@ 47 % and 77 / 100 at the two aggregate sites , while the Xbox 360 version reports scores of 79 @.@ 45 % and 76 / 100 . Individual review scores ranged from a 50 % approval by Edge magazine to a 94 % approval by Gaming Trend . 
 Reviewers praised the in @-@ game voice acting . G4TV 's Matt Kell noted that Peter Cullen 's voice work as Optimus was " commanding and familiar " , adding that the other actors " even do their best to replicate the voices of the original cartoon . " Mike Nelson of Game Informer agreed and noted the game 's excellent dialogue , stating " the script has all the overwrought melodrama you ’ d expect from giant talking robots . " Several critics also gave high marks for War for Cybertron 's multiplayer . IGN 's Arthur Gies noted the influences from Unreal Championship , Tribes , Team Fortress 2 , and Battlefield : Bad Company 2 adding that " War for Cybertron leverages its transformation mechanic to create something that feels shockingly new . " Tom McShea of GameSpot noted that the game 's Escalation mode provided a Transformers twist on Gears of War 's Horde mode . GamePro 's Kat Bailey noted that the multiplayer was " probably the most appealing part of the package " , adding it had a " strong suite [ of ] options . " 1UP.com 's Matt Miller lauded the ability to play through the game 's campaign with up to three players online , as did G4TV 's Matt Kell . Both reviewers also praised the new character designs , with Kell calling them " inventive . " Wired.com 's John Mix Meyer gave praise to the game 's campaign length , stating " The game ’ s 10 @-@ hour single @-@ player campaign means there ’ s plenty of time for the crazy transformations to strut their stuff . " John Hamblin of Eurogamer praised the transformation animations . He stated players will " occasionally wish there was a Max Payne slow @-@ mo option so you could appreciate the nuance of these feats a little more . " 
 The repetitive visual design of Cybertron drew criticism from critics . Tom McShea of GameSpot stated that " the majority of the game entails walking through similar @-@ looking corridors . " Giant Bomb 's Jeff Gerstmann also cited repetitive visuals , but conceded that " the metallic world of Cybertron doesn 't lend itself particularly well to a lot of environmental variety . " 1UP.com 's Matt Miller also raised issue with the repetitive visuals , but provided a counterpoint in saying " there are a host of features in place to save the game from spiraling into mediocrity . " John Hamblin of Eurogamer and Tom McShea of GameSpot also pointed out the game 's vast lack of ammunition . " Watching Lord Megatron repeatedly suffering the indignity of being shot at by drones while he desperately scours the debris looking for an elusive ammo box [ ... ] is just sad " stated Hamblin . He was further critical of the game 's checkpoint system , which often leaves players in difficult situations upon respawning . 
 The first downloadable content pack received mixed reception from IGN 's Arthur Gies . While he praised the design of the multiplayer maps , he noted that the lack of online players for War for Cybertron hurt the ability to play the new content online . Gies stated that he attempted to host the two Escalation maps , adding that he waited for several minutes for players to join , but had no success . " That 's the problem " , he stated . " War for Cybertron 's multiplayer is all @-@ but @-@ abandoned . " Gies went on to cite a peak population of approximately 4 @,@ 600 players on Xbox Live , 800 on PlayStation Network , and only 158 players on the PC version at the time of his writing . Despite the lack of online players he felt the content may fit a player 's needs , stating " If you 've got nine other friends who bought War for Cybertron and can set up your own private matches , then Character and Map Pack 01 might be worth checking out . " 
 = = Sequel = = 
 A sequel to War for Cybertron was announced in November 2010 . " This is the most highly @-@ rated , critical success of any game that 's had the Hasbro brand yet and we 're looking forward to a sequel in 2012 , " stated Hasbro representative Mark Belcher . The game was slated for a 2012 release and its official title , Transformers : Fall of Cybertron , was revealed on October 6 , 2011 . It is a direct continuation of War for Cybertron , completing the story of the planet Cybertron 's demise and the exodus of the Transformers . One new Autobot , Grimlock was confirmed in the title announcement . 
 = New York State Route 404 = 
 New York State Route 404 ( NY 404 ) is an east – west state highway located in eastern Monroe County , New York , in the United States . It extends for just over 10 miles ( 16 km ) from an interchange with NY 590 in Irondequoit to an intersection with NY 104 on the Monroe – Wayne County line in the town of Webster . The route traverses the southern tip of Irondequoit Bay and passes through the village of Webster , where NY 404 intersects NY 250 . Most of NY 404 passes through commercial areas ; however , the western and eastern extents of the highway serve areas more residential in nature . The westernmost 3 miles ( 5 km ) of the route is part of the Seaway Trail , a National Scenic Byway . 
 NY 404 largely follows the path of the Theodore Roosevelt International Highway , an early 20th @-@ century auto trail , through the towns of Irondequoit , Penfield , and Webster . Most of modern NY 404 was designated as NY 3 in 1924 and redesignated as U.S. Route 104 ( US 104 ) c . 1935 . In the early 1970s , US 104 was realigned to follow a new freeway between Irondequoit and Five Mile Line Road in Webster while NY 404 was assigned to US 104 's former surface routing along the southern and eastern extents of Irondequoit Bay . NY 404 was gradually extended eastward to the Wayne County line over the course of the next decade as more sections of the freeway opened to traffic . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 404 begins at NY 590 exit 8 in Irondequoit as Empire Boulevard , although the 0 @.@ 71 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 14 km ) portion of Empire Boulevard between NY 590 and the Rochester city line is also state maintained as NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . Irondequoit Bay is northeast of this intersection , and Empire Boulevard serves as the northernmost non @-@ bridge route from one side of the bay to the other ; that is , between the inner @-@ ring suburbs of Irondequoit and Brighton and the outer @-@ ring suburbs of Webster and Penfield . The four @-@ lane Empire Boulevard heads east from NY 590 , intersecting North Winton Road ( former NY 47 ) in a residential neighborhood before descending into a valley surrounding the bay . NY 404 continues east across the base of the valley , crossing the southern tip of the bay at the Irondequoit – Penfield town line . 
 At the eastern edge of the bay valley , the route begins to turn to the northeast , slowly ascending in elevation as it heads away from Irondequoit Bay . The terrain levels off at the top of the valley , where NY 404 enters a major commercial strip that follows the route for 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) into the adjacent town of Webster . This strip is largely based around NY 404 's junction with Bay Road , a north – south highway connecting NY 404 to Lake Road . The segment of Empire Boulevard between Culver Road ( located just west of the Rochester city line ) and Bay Road is part of the Seaway Trail , a National Scenic Byway . NY 404 continues into Webster , where it narrows to two lanes ahead of an intersection with Ridge Road in the Webster hamlet of West Webster . The route merges with Ridge Road , taking on that name as it heads east toward the village of Webster . 
 From West Webster to the village of Webster , a distance of 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) , NY 404 runs along the edge of a small ridge as it passes through a commercial corridor anchored by a series of shopping plazas at the base of the hill . The commercial surroundings continue into the village , where NY 404 becomes West Main Street . It changes names to East Main Street upon intersecting NY 250 in Webster 's central business district , but the Ridge Road name returns east of the Webster village limits . NY 404 continues on , passing through a residential area of the town as it approaches the Monroe – Wayne County line . Roughly a half @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) before the county line , NY 404 turns north onto Ridge Road Junction , a road that heads northeast down the edge of the ridge that gives Ridge Road its name . Upon reaching the base of the hill , NY 404 merges with County Line Road for a short distance to reach an intersection with NY 104 , where NY 404 terminates . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1908 , the New York State Legislature created Route 30 , an unsigned legislative route extending from Niagara Falls to Rouses Point via Rochester and Maple View . Route 30 exited Rochester on Empire Boulevard and followed it northeastward around Irondequoit Bay to where it merged with Ridge Road west of Webster . The route continued eastward on Ridge Road through Webster and into Wayne County . When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , most of legislative Route 30 in northeastern Monroe County became part of NY 3 , a cross @-@ state highway that extended from the Niagara Frontier to the North Country and passed through downtown Rochester . In eastern Monroe County , NY 3 originally followed the path of legislative Route 30 from Rochester to the county line . This section of NY 3 was also part of the Theodore Roosevelt International Highway , an international auto trail . 
 By 1930 , NY 3 was realigned through Rochester to exit the city on North Winton Road . It rejoined its previous alignment at the junction of North Winton Road and Empire Boulevard . The designation remained in place until c . 1935 when NY 3 was supplanted east of Rochester by US 104 , a new highway assigned to the length of Ridge Road between Lewiston and Oswego . In the eastern suburbs of Rochester , US 104 initially followed what had been NY 3 — namely Winton Road , Empire Boulevard , and Ridge Road . US 104 was realigned c . 1937 to follow Ridge and Culver Roads through Irondequoit , bypassing downtown entirely . US 104 turned east at the junction of Culver Road and Empire Boulevard , following the latter to Winton Road . 
 The current super two highway paralleling Ridge Road between the Wayne County line and Sodus was built in the mid @-@ 1940s . Also constructed at this time was a short connector named Ridge Road Junction , which carried US 104 between the west end of the super two and Ridge Road just west of the Wayne County line . US 104 was realigned in the late 1950s to follow a new section of the Sea Breeze Expressway between Ridge Road and Empire Boulevard . The route was altered again c . 1971 to follow a newly built expressway between NY 47 ( now NY 590 ) in Irondequoit and Five Mile Line Road in Webster . The former alignment of US 104 from NY 47 around the southern tip of Irondequoit Bay to Five Mile Line Road was redesignated as NY 404 . 
 In the mid @-@ 1970s , NY 404 was extended eastward to NY 250 in the village of Webster , replacing then @-@ NY 104 , which had been moved onto a pair of highways between Five Mile Line Road and NY 250 that eventually became the freeway 's frontage roads . The section from NY 250 to the existing expressway at the Wayne County line was built in the late 1970s while the main carriageway of NY 104 between Five Mile Line Road and NY 250 was completed in the early 1980s . NY 404 was extended east along the former alignment of NY 104 to the county line upon the total completion of the Five Mile Line Road – NY 250 segment . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Monroe County . 
 = Henry de Cornhill ( sheriff ) = 
 Henry de Cornhill ( c . 1135 – c . 1193 ) was a medieval English royal official and sheriff who served King Henry II of England . Henry 's son King Richard I of England put him in charge of assembling part of the fleet for the Third Crusade , plus appointing him as sheriff of three jurisdictions . Through marriage he acquired lands in Somerset , Dorset , Oxfordshire , and Northamptonshire . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Henry de Cornhill was the eldest son of Gervase de Cornhill , a royal official and Sheriff of Kent , Surrey , and London during the reign of King Henry II . Henry de Cornhill was likely born around 1135 . Henry married Alice , the daughter of William de Courcy , and sister and heiress of William de Courcy , lord of <unk> in Somerset . Through this marriage , Henry acquired lands in Somerset , Dorset , Oxfordshire , and Northamptonshire worth 25 and a quarter knight 's fees . 
 = = Career = = 
 By 1175 , Henry was a royal official in charge of purchasing cloth and other items for the royal household . He also was given custody of two estates that had escheated to the crown — Rayleigh in 1181 and Boulogne in 1183 . Henry often acted as a purchaser for the king , for example in 1188 Cornhill spent 290 pounds on gold , jewels , furs , and cloth for the king . Henry was present at the deathbed of Henry II in 1189 . The new king , Richard I , kept Henry close and put him in charge of assembling the fleet that Richard needed to go on the Third Crusade . His accounts for his efforts in 1190 in assembling the fleet still survive . These show that Henry bought part or all of 40 ships and paid out a year 's wages for over a thousand sailors for the expedition . The total expenses for Henry 's efforts totalled over 5 @,@ 000 pounds . 
 Henry was appointed to the office of Sheriff of Surrey early in the reign of King Richard I. He was also Sheriff of Kent during Richard 's reign , in 1190 as well as one of the Sheriffs of London from 1187 to 1189 . Henry was only one of six sheriffs that retained office after the accession of Richard I. He owed his appointments to the influence of William Longchamp , Richard 's chancellor . He was also Warden of the Mint in 1191 . Henry lost his offices when Longchamp fell from favour in 1192 . He died sometime between Michaelmas 1192 and Michaelmas 1193 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Henry 's heir was his daughter Joan , who married Hugh de Neville , either in or soon after 1195 . He left debts at his death that his brothers Reginald de Cornhill and Ralph were responsible for . His widow married Warin fitzGerold sometime in 1193 . Warin was the son of Henry fitzGerold . 
 = Schindler 's List = 
 Schindler 's List is a 1993 American epic historical period drama film , directed and co @-@ produced by Steven Spielberg and scripted by Steven Zaillian . It is based on the novel Schindler 's Ark by Thomas Keneally , an Australian novelist . The film is based on the life of Oskar Schindler , an ethnic German businessman who saved the lives of more than a thousand mostly Polish @-@ Jewish refugees during the Holocaust by employing them in his factories . It stars Liam Neeson as Schindler , Ralph Fiennes as Schutzstaffel ( SS ) officer Amon Göth , and Ben Kingsley as Schindler 's Jewish accountant Itzhak Stern . 
 Ideas for a film about the Schindlerjuden ( Schindler Jews ) were proposed as early as 1963 . Poldek Pfefferberg , one of the Schindlerjuden , made it his life 's mission to tell the story of Schindler . Spielberg became interested in the story when executive Sid Sheinberg sent him a book review of Schindler 's Ark . Universal Studios bought the rights to the novel , but Spielberg , unsure if he was ready to make a film about the Holocaust , tried to pass the project to several other directors before finally deciding to direct the film himself . 
 Principal photography took place in Kraków , Poland , over the course of 72 days in 1993 . Spielberg shot the film in black and white and approached it as a documentary . Cinematographer Janusz Kamiński wanted to give the film a sense of timelessness . John Williams composed the score , and violinist Itzhak Perlman performs the film 's main theme . 
 Schindler 's List premiered on November 30 , 1993 , in Washington , D.C. and it was released on December 15 , 1993 , in the United States . Often listed among the greatest films ever made , it was also a box office success , earning $ 321 @.@ 2 million worldwide on a $ 22 million budget . It was the recipient of seven Academy Awards ( out of twelve nominations ) , including Best Picture , Best Director , Best Adapted Screenplay , and Best Original Score , as well as numerous other awards ( including seven BAFTAs and three Golden Globes ) . In 2007 , the American Film Institute ranked the film 8th on its list of the 100 best American films of all time . The Library of Congress selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry in 2004 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Kraków during World War II , the Germans had forced local Polish Jews into the overcrowded Kraków Ghetto . Oskar Schindler , an ethnic German , arrives in the city hoping to make his fortune . A member of the Nazi Party , Schindler lavishes bribes on Wehrmacht ( German armed forces ) and SS officials and acquires a factory to produce enamelware . To help him run the business , Schindler enlists the aid of Itzhak Stern , a local Jewish official who has contacts with black marketeers and the Jewish business community . Stern helps Schindler arrange financing for the factory . Schindler maintains friendly relations with the Nazis and enjoys wealth and status as " Herr <unk> " , and Stern handles administration . Schindler hires Jewish workers because they cost less , while Stern ensures that as many people as possible are deemed essential to the German war effort , which saves them from being transported to concentration camps or killed . 
 SS @-@ Untersturmführer ( second lieutenant ) Amon Göth arrives in Kraków to oversee construction of Płaszów concentration camp . When the camp is completed , he orders the ghetto liquidated . Many people are shot and killed in the process of emptying the ghetto . Schindler witnesses the massacre and is profoundly affected . He particularly notices a tiny girl in a red coat – one of the few splashes of color in the black @-@ and @-@ white film – as she hides from the Nazis , and later sees her body ( identifiable by the red coat ) among those on a wagon load of corpses . Schindler is careful to maintain his friendship with Göth and , through bribery and lavish gifts , continues to enjoy SS support . Göth brutally mistreats his maid and randomly shoots people from the balcony of his villa , and the prisoners are in constant fear for their lives . As time passes , Schindler 's focus shifts from making money to trying to save as many lives as possible . To better protect his workers , Schindler bribes Göth into allowing him to build a sub @-@ camp . 
 As the Germans begin to lose the war , Göth is ordered to ship the remaining Jews at Płaszów to Auschwitz concentration camp . Schindler asks Göth to allow him to move his workers to a new munitions factory he plans to build in his home town of Zwittau @-@ <unk> . Göth agrees , but charges a huge bribe . Schindler and Stern create " Schindler 's List " – a list of people to be transferred to <unk> and thus saved from transport to Auschwitz . 
 The train carrying the women and children is accidentally redirected to Auschwitz @-@ Birkenau ; Schindler bribes Rudolf Höss , the commandant of Auschwitz , with a bag of diamonds to win their release . At the new factory , Schindler forbids the SS guards to enter the production rooms and encourages the Jews to observe the Jewish Sabbath . He spends much of his fortune bribing Nazi officials and buying shell casings from other companies ; his factory does not produce any usable armaments during its seven months of operation . Schindler runs out of money in 1945 , just as Germany surrenders , ending the war in Europe . 
 As a Nazi Party member and war profiteer , Schindler must flee the advancing Red Army to avoid capture . The SS guards in Schindler 's factory have been ordered to kill the Jews , but Schindler persuades them not to , so that they can " return to their families as men , instead of murderers . " He bids farewell to his workers and prepares to head west , hoping to surrender to the Americans . The workers give Schindler a signed statement attesting to his role saving Jewish lives , together with a ring engraved with a Talmudic quotation : " Whoever saves one life saves the world entire . " Schindler is touched but is also deeply ashamed , as he feels he should have done even more . As the Schindlerjuden ( Schindler Jews ) wake up the next morning , a Soviet soldier announces that they have been liberated . The Jews leave the factory and walk to a nearby town . 
 Following scenes depicting Göth 's execution after the war and a summary of Schindler 's later life , the black @-@ and @-@ white frame changes to a color shot of actual Schindlerjuden at Schindler 's grave in Jerusalem . Accompanied by the actors who portrayed them , the Schindlerjuden place stones on the grave . In the final scene , Neeson places a pair of roses on the grave . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Liam Neeson as Oskar Schindler 
 Ben Kingsley as Itzhak Stern 
 Ralph Fiennes as Amon Göth 
 Caroline Goodall as Emilie Schindler 
 Jonathan <unk> as Poldek Pfefferberg 
 Embeth Davidtz as Helen Hirsch 
 Małgorzata Gebel as <unk> <unk> 
 Mark Ivanir as Marcel Goldberg 
 Beatrice <unk> as Ingrid 
 Andrzej Seweryn as Julian <unk> 
 Friedrich von Thun as Rolf <unk> 
 Jerzy Nowak as Investor 
 Norbert Weisser as Albert <unk> 
 Anna Mucha as <unk> <unk> 
 Piotr Polk as Leo Rosner 
 Rami <unk> as Joseph Bau 
 Ezra Dagan as Rabbi <unk> <unk> 
 Hans @-@ Jörg Assmann as Julius <unk> 
 Hans @-@ Michael Rehberg as Rudolf Höß 
 Daniel Del Ponte as Josef Mengele 
 <unk> Dąbrowska as The Girl in Red 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Pfefferberg , one of the Schindlerjuden , made it his life 's mission to tell the story of his savior . Pfefferberg attempted to produce a biopic of Oskar Schindler with MGM in 1963 , with Howard Koch writing , but the deal fell through . In 1982 , Thomas Keneally published his historical novel Schindler 's Ark , which he wrote after a chance meeting with Pfefferberg in Los Angeles in 1980 . MCA president Sid Sheinberg sent director Steven Spielberg a New York Times review of the book . Spielberg , astounded by Schindler 's story , jokingly asked if it was true . " I was drawn to it because of the paradoxical nature of the character , " he said . " What would drive a man like this to suddenly take everything he had earned and put it all in the service of saving these lives ? " Spielberg expressed enough interest for Universal Pictures to buy the rights to the novel . At their first meeting in spring 1983 , he told Pfefferberg he would start filming in ten years . In the end credits of the film , Pfefferberg is credited as a consultant under the name Leopold Page . 
 Spielberg was unsure if he was mature enough to make a film about the Holocaust , and the project remained " on [ his ] guilty conscience " . Spielberg tried to pass the project to director Roman Polanski , who turned it down . Polanski 's mother was killed at Auschwitz , and he had lived in and survived the Kraków Ghetto . Polanski eventually directed his own Holocaust drama The Pianist ( 2002 ) . Spielberg also offered the film to Sydney Pollack and Martin Scorsese , who was attached to direct Schindler 's List in 1988 . However , Spielberg was unsure of letting Scorsese direct the film , as " I 'd given away a chance to do something for my children and family about the Holocaust . " Spielberg offered him the chance to direct the 1991 remake of Cape Fear instead . Billy Wilder expressed an interest in directing the film as a memorial to his family , most of whom died in the Holocaust . 
 Spielberg finally decided to take on the project when he noticed that Holocaust deniers were being given serious consideration by the media . With the rise of neo @-@ Nazism after the fall of the Berlin Wall , he worried that people were too accepting of intolerance , as they were in the 1930s . Sid Sheinberg greenlit the film on condition that Spielberg made Jurassic Park first . Spielberg later said , " He knew that once I had directed Schindler I wouldn 't be able to do Jurassic Park . " The picture was assigned a small budget of $ 22 million , as Holocaust films are not usually profitable . Spielberg forewent a salary for the film , calling it " blood money " , and believed the film would flop . 
 In 1983 , Keneally was hired to adapt his book , and he turned in a 220 @-@ page script . His adaptation focused on Schindler 's numerous relationships , and Keneally admitted he did not compress the story enough . Spielberg hired Kurt <unk> , who had adapted the screenplay of Out of Africa , to write the next draft . <unk> gave up almost four years later , as he found Schindler 's change of heart too unbelievable . During his time as director , Scorsese hired Steven Zaillian to write a script . When he was handed back the project , Spielberg found Zaillian 's 115 @-@ page draft too short , and asked him to extend it to 195 pages . Spielberg wanted more focus on the Jews in the story , and he wanted Schindler 's transition to be gradual and ambiguous , not a sudden breakthrough or epiphany . He extended the ghetto liquidation sequence , as he " felt very strongly that the sequence had to be almost unwatchable . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Neeson auditioned as Schindler early on , and was cast in December 1992 , after Spielberg saw him perform in Anna Christie on Broadway . Warren Beatty participated in a script reading , but Spielberg was concerned that he could not disguise his accent and that he would bring " movie star baggage " . Kevin Costner and Mel Gibson expressed interest in portraying Schindler , but Spielberg preferred to cast the relatively unknown Neeson , so the actor 's star quality would not overpower the character . Neeson felt Schindler enjoyed outsmarting the Nazis , who regarded him as a bit of a buffoon . " They don 't quite take him seriously , and he used that to full effect . " To help him prepare for the role , Spielberg showed Neeson film clips of Time Warner CEO Steve Ross , who had a charisma that Spielberg compared to Schindler 's . He also located a tape of Schindler speaking , which Neeson studied to learn the correct intonations and pitch . 
 Fiennes was cast as Amon Göth after Spielberg viewed his performances in A Dangerous Man : Lawrence After Arabia and Emily Brontë 's Wuthering Heights . Spielberg said of Fiennes ' audition that " I saw sexual evil . It is all about subtlety : there were moments of kindness that would move across his eyes and then instantly run cold . " Fiennes put on 28 pounds ( 13 kg ) to play the role . He watched historic newsreels and talked to Holocaust survivors who knew Göth . In portraying him , Fiennes said " I got close to his pain . Inside him is a fractured , miserable human being . I feel split about him , sorry for him . He 's like some dirty , battered doll I was given and that I came to feel peculiarly attached to . " Doctors Samuel J. <unk> and Paul <unk> of the Université libre de Bruxelles describe Göth 's character in the film as a classic psychopath . Fiennes looked so much like Göth in costume that when Mila Pfefferberg ( a survivor of the events ) met him , she trembled with fear . 
 The character of Itzhak Stern ( played by Ben Kingsley ) is a composite of accountant Stern , factory manager Abraham Bankier , and Göth 's personal secretary , Mietek Pemper . The character serves as Schindler 's alter ego and conscience . Kingsley is best known for his Academy Award winning performance as Gandhi in the 1982 biographical film . 
 Overall , there are 126 speaking parts in the film . Thousands of extras were hired during filming . Spielberg cast Israeli and Polish actors specially chosen for their Eastern European appearance . Many of the German actors were reluctant to don the SS uniform , but some of them later thanked Spielberg for the cathartic experience of performing in the movie . Halfway through the shoot , Spielberg conceived the epilogue , where 128 survivors pay their respects at Schindler 's grave in Jerusalem . The producers scrambled to find the Schindlerjuden and fly them in to film the scene . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on March 1 , 1993 in Kraków , Poland , with a planned schedule of 75 days . The crew shot at or near the actual locations , though the Płaszów camp had to be reconstructed in a nearby abandoned quarry , as modern high rise apartments were visible from the site of the original camp . Interior shots of the enamelware factory in Kraków were filmed at a similar facility in <unk> , while exterior shots and the scenes on the factory stairs were filmed at the actual factory . The crew was forbidden to do extensive shooting or construct sets on the grounds at Auschwitz , so they shot at a replica constructed just outside the entrance . There were some antisemitic incidents . A woman who encountered Fiennes in his Nazi uniform told him that " the Germans were charming people . They didn 't kill anybody who didn 't deserve it " . Antisemitic symbols were scrawled on billboards near shooting locations , while Kingsley nearly entered a brawl with an elderly German @-@ speaking businessman who insulted Israeli actor Michael Schneider . Nonetheless , Spielberg stated that at Passover , " all the German actors showed up . They put on <unk> and opened up <unk> , and the Israeli actors moved right next to them and began explaining it to them . And this family of actors sat around and race and culture were just left behind . " 
 Shooting Schindler 's List was deeply emotional for Spielberg , the subject matter forcing him to confront elements of his childhood , such as the antisemitism he faced . He was surprised that he did not cry while visiting Auschwitz ; instead he found himself filled with outrage . He was one of many crew members who could not force themselves to watch during shooting of the scene where aging Jews are forced to run naked while being selected by Nazi doctors to go to Auschwitz . Spielberg commented that he felt more like a reporter than a film maker – he would set up scenes and then watch events unfold , almost as though he were witnessing them rather than creating a movie . Several actresses broke down when filming the shower scene , including one who was born in a concentration camp . Spielberg , his wife Kate Capshaw , and their five children rented a house in suburban Kraków for the duration of filming . He later thanked his wife " for rescuing me ninety @-@ two days in a row ... when things just got too unbearable " . Robin Williams called Spielberg to cheer him up , given the profound lack of humor on the set . Spielberg spent several hours each evening editing Jurassic Park , which was scheduled to premiere in June 1993 . 
 Spielberg occasionally used German and Polish language in scenes to recreate the feeling of being present in the past . He initially considered making the film entirely in those languages , but decided " there 's too much safety in reading . It would have been an excuse to take their eyes off the screen and watch something else . " 
 = = = Cinematography = = = 
 Influenced by the 1985 documentary film Shoah , Spielberg decided not to plan the film with storyboards , and to shoot it like a documentary . Forty percent of the film was shot with handheld cameras , and the modest budget meant the film was shot quickly over seventy @-@ two days . Spielberg felt that this gave the film " a spontaneity , an edge , and it also serves the subject . " He filmed without using Steadicams , elevated shots , or zoom lenses , " everything that for me might be considered a safety net . " This matured Spielberg , who felt that in the past he had always been paying tribute to directors such as Cecil B. DeMille or David Lean . 
 The decision to shoot the film mainly in black and white contributed to the documentary style of cinematography , which cinematographer Janusz Kamiński compared to German Expressionism and Italian neorealism . Kamiński said that he wanted to give the impression of timelessness to the film , so the audience would " not have a sense of when it was made . " Spielberg decided to use black and white to match the feel of actual documentary footage of the era . Universal chairman Tom Pollock asked him to shoot the film on a color negative , to allow color VHS copies of the film to later be sold , but Spielberg did not want to accidentally " beautify events . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 John Williams , who frequently collaborates with Spielberg , composed the score for Schindler 's List . The composer was amazed by the film , and felt it would be too challenging . He said to Spielberg , " You need a better composer than I am for this film . " Spielberg responded , " I know . But they 're all dead ! " Itzhak Perlman performs the theme on the violin . 
 Regarding Schindler 's List , Perlman said : 
 Perlman : " I couldn 't believe how authentic he [ John Williams ] got everything to sound , and I said , ' John , where did it come from ? ' and he said , ' Well I had some practice with Fiddler on the Roof and so on , and everything just came very naturally ' and that 's the way it sounds . " 
 Interviewer : " When you were first approached to play for Schindler 's List , did you give it a second thought , did you agree at once , or did you say ' I 'm not sure I want to play for movie music ' ? 
 Perlman : " No , that never occurred to me , because in that particular case the subject of the movie was so important to me , and I felt that I could contribute simply by just knowing the history , and feeling the history , and indirectly actually being a victim of that history . " 
 In the scene where the ghetto is being liquidated by the Nazis , the folk song " <unk> <unk> " ( " On the Cooking Stove " ) ( Yiddish : <unk> <unk> ) is sung by a children 's choir . The song was often sung by Spielberg 's grandmother , Becky , to her grandchildren . The clarinet solos heard in the film were recorded by Klezmer virtuoso Giora <unk> . Williams won an Academy Award for Best Original Score for Schindler 's List , his fifth win . Selections from the score were released on a soundtrack album . 
 = = Themes and symbolism = = 
 The film explores the theme of good versus evil , using as its main protagonist a " good German " , a popular characterization in American cinema . While Göth is characterized as an almost completely dark and evil person , Schindler gradually evolves from Nazi supporter to rescuer and hero . Thus a second theme of redemption is introduced as Schindler , a disreputable schemer on the edges of respectability , becomes a father figure responsible for saving the lives of more than a thousand people . 
 = = = The girl in red = = = 
 While the film is shot primarily in black and white , a red coat is used to distinguish a little girl in the scene depicting the liquidation of the Kraków ghetto . Later in the film , Schindler sees her dead body , recognizable only by the red coat she is still wearing . Spielberg said the scene was intended to symbolise how members of the highest levels of government in the United States knew the Holocaust was occurring , yet did nothing to stop it . " It was as obvious as a little girl wearing a red coat , walking down the street , and yet nothing was done to bomb the German rail lines . Nothing was being done to slow down ... the annihilation of European Jewry , " he said . " So that was my message in letting that scene be in color . " Andy Patrizio of IGN notes that the point at which Schindler sees the girl 's dead body is the point at which he changes , no longer seeing " the ash and soot of burning corpses piling up on his car as just an annoyance . " Professor André H. Caron of the Université de Montréal wonders if the red symbolises " innocence , hope or the red blood of the Jewish people being sacrificed in the horror of the Holocaust . " 
 The girl was portrayed by <unk> Dąbrowska , three years old at the time of filming . Spielberg asked Dąbrowska not to watch the film until she was eighteen , but she watched it when she was eleven , and was " horrified . " Upon seeing the film again as an adult , she was proud of the role she played . Although it was unintentional , the character is similar to Roma <unk> , who was known in the Kraków Ghetto for her red coat . <unk> , unlike her fictional counterpart , survived the Holocaust . After the film was released , she wrote and published her own story , The Girl in the Red Coat : A Memoir ( 2002 , in translation ) . According to a 2014 interview of family members , the girl in red was inspired by Kraków resident Genya <unk> Chil . 
 = = = Candles = = = 
 The opening scene features a family observing Shabbat . Spielberg said that " to start the film with the candles being lit ... would be a rich bookend , to start the film with a normal Shabbat service before the juggernaut against the Jews begins . " When the color fades out in the film 's opening moments , it gives way to a world in which smoke comes to symbolize bodies being burnt at Auschwitz . Only at the end , when Schindler allows his workers to hold Shabbat services , do the images of candle fire regain their warmth . For Spielberg , they represent " just a glint of color , and a glimmer of hope . " Sara Horowitz , director of the <unk> Centre for Jewish Studies at York University , sees the candles as a symbol for the Jews of Europe , killed and then burned in the crematoria . The two scenes bracket the Nazi era , marking its beginning and end . She points out that normally the woman of the house lights the Sabbath candles and intones the Kiddush . In the film it is men who perform these rituals , demonstrating not only the subservient role of women , but also the subservient position of Jewish men in relation to Aryan men , especially Göth and Schindler . 
 = = = Other symbolism = = = 
 To Spielberg , the black and white presentation of the film came to represent the Holocaust itself : " The Holocaust was life without light . For me the symbol of life is color . That 's why a film about the Holocaust has to be in black @-@ and @-@ white . " Robert <unk> notes the film in its entirety can be seen as a metaphor for the Holocaust , with early sporadic violence increasing into a crescendo of death and destruction . He also notes a parallel between the situation of the Jews in the film and the debate in Nazi Germany between making use of the Jews for slave labor or exterminating them outright . Water is seen as giving deliverance by Alan Mintz , Holocaust Studies professor at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York . He notes its presence in the scene where Schindler arranges for a Holocaust train loaded with victims awaiting transport to be hosed down , and the scene in Auschwitz , where the women are given an actual shower instead of receiving the expected gassing . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film opened on December 15 , 1993 . By the time it closed in theaters on September 29 , 1994 , it had grossed $ 96 @.@ 1 million ( $ 157 million in 2016 dollars ) in the United States and over $ 321 @.@ 2 million worldwide . In Germany , where it was shown in 500 theaters , the film was viewed by over 100 @,@ 000 people in its first week alone and was eventually seen by six million people . The film was popular in Germany and a success worldwide . 
 Schindler 's List made its U.S. network television premiere on NBC on February 23 , 1997 . Shown without commercials , it ranked # 3 for the week with a 20 @.@ 9 / 31 rating / share , highest Nielsen rating for any film since NBC 's broadcast of Jurassic Park in May 1995 . The film aired on public television in Israel on Holocaust Memorial Day in 1998 . 
 The DVD was released on March 9 , 2004 in widescreen and fullscreen editions , on a double @-@ sided disc with the feature film beginning on side A and continuing on side B. Special features include a documentary introduced by Spielberg . Also released for both formats was a limited edition gift set , which included the widescreen version of the film , Keneally 's novel , the film 's soundtrack on CD , a <unk> , and a photo booklet titled Schindler 's List : Images of the Steven Spielberg Film , all housed in a plexiglass case . The laserdisc gift set was a limited edition that included the soundtrack , the original novel , and an exclusive photo booklet . As part of its 20th anniversary , the movie was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc on March 5 , 2013 . 
 Following the success of the film , Spielberg founded the Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation , a nonprofit organization with the goal of providing an archive for the filmed testimony of as many survivors of the Holocaust as possible , to save their stories . He continues to finance that work . Spielberg used proceeds from the film to finance several related documentaries , including Anne Frank Remembered ( 1995 ) , The Lost Children of Berlin ( 1996 ) , and The Last Days ( 1998 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Schindler 's List received acclaim from both film critics and audiences . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film received an approval rating of 96 % , based on 81 reviews . The site 's consensus reads " Schindler 's List blends the abject horror of the Holocaust with Steven Spielberg 's signature tender humanism to create the director 's dramatic masterpiece . " Americans such as talk show host Oprah Winfrey and President Bill Clinton urged their countrymen to see it . World leaders in many countries saw the film , and some met personally with Spielberg . 
 Stephen Schiff of The New Yorker called it the best historical drama about the Holocaust , a movie that " will take its place in cultural history and remain there . " Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times described it as Spielberg 's best , " brilliantly acted , written , directed , and seen . " Ebert named it one of his ten favorite films of 1993 . Terrence Rafferty , also with The New Yorker , admired the film 's " narrative boldness , visual audacity , and emotional directness . " He noted the performances of Neeson , Fiennes , Kingsley , and Davidtz as warranting special praise , and calls the scene in the shower at Auschwitz " the most terrifying sequence ever filmed . " In his 2013 movie guide , Leonard Maltin awarded the film a four @-@ star rating , calling it a " staggering adaptation of Thomas Keneally 's best @-@ seller , " saying " this looks and feels like nothing Hollywood has ever made before " . He also described it as " Spielberg 's most intense and personal film to date " . James Verniere of the Boston Herald noted the film 's restraint and lack of sensationalism , and called it a " major addition to the body of work about the Holocaust . " In his review for the New York Review of Books , British critic John Gross said his misgivings that the story would be overly sentimentalized " were altogether misplaced . Spielberg shows a firm moral and emotional grasp of his material . The film is an outstanding achievement . " Mintz notes that even the film 's harshest critics admire the " visual brilliance " of the fifteen @-@ minute segment depicting the liquidation of the Kraków ghetto . He describes the sequence as " realistic " and " stunning " . He points out that the film has done much to increase Holocaust remembrance and awareness as the remaining survivors pass away , severing the last living links with the catastrophe . The film 's release in Germany led to widespread discussion about why most Germans did not do more to help . 
 Criticism of the film also appeared , mostly from academia rather than the popular press . Horowitz points out that much of the Jewish activity seen in the ghetto consists of financial transactions such as lending money , trading on the black market , or hiding wealth , thus perpetuating a stereotypical view of Jewish life . Horowitz notes that while the depiction of women in the film accurately reflects Nazi ideology , the low status of women and the link between violence and sexuality is not explored further . History professor Omer Bartov of Brown University notes that the physically large and strongly drawn characters of Schindler and Göth overshadow the Jewish victims , who are depicted as small , scurrying , and frightened – a mere backdrop to the struggle of good versus evil . 
 Horowitz points out that the film 's dichotomy of absolute good versus absolute evil glosses over the fact that the vast majority of Holocaust perpetrators were ordinary people ; the movie does not explore how the average German rationalized their knowledge of or participation in the Holocaust . Author Jason Epstein commented that the movie gives the impression that if people were smart enough or lucky enough , they could survive the Holocaust ; this was not actually the case . Spielberg responded to criticism that Schindler 's breakdown as he says farewell is too maudlin and even out of character by pointing out that the scene is needed to drive home the sense of loss and to allow the viewer an opportunity to mourn alongside the characters on the screen . 
 = = = Assessment by other filmmakers = = = 
 Schindler 's List was very well received by many of Spielberg 's peers . Filmmaker Billy Wilder wrote to Spielberg saying , " They couldn 't have gotten a better man . This movie is absolutely perfection . " Polanski , who turned down the chance to direct the film , later commented , " I certainly wouldn 't have done as good a job as Spielberg because I couldn 't have been as objective as he was . " He cited Schindler 's List as an influence on his 1995 film Death and the Maiden . The success of Schindler 's List led filmmaker Stanley Kubrick to abandon his own Holocaust project , Aryan Papers , which would have been about a Jewish boy and his aunt who survive the war by sneaking through Poland while pretending to be Catholic . When scriptwriter Frederic Raphael suggested that Schindler 's List was a good representation of the Holocaust , Kubrick commented , " Think that 's about the Holocaust ? That was about success , wasn 't it ? The Holocaust is about 6 million people who get killed . Schindler 's List is about 600 who don 't . " 
 Filmmaker Jean @-@ Luc Godard accused Spielberg of using the film to make a profit out of a tragedy while Schindler 's wife , Emilie Schindler , lived in poverty in Argentina . Keneally disputed claims that she was never paid for her contributions , " not least because I had recently sent Emilie a check myself . " He also confirmed with Spielberg 's office that payment had been sent from there . Filmmaker Michael Haneke criticized the sequence in which Schindler 's women are accidentally sent off to Auschwitz and herded into showers : " There 's a scene in that film when we don 't know if there 's gas or water coming out in the showers in the camp . You can only do something like that with a naive audience like in the United States . It 's not an appropriate use of the form . Spielberg meant well – but it was dumb . " 
 The film was criticized by filmmaker and lecturer Claude Lanzmann , director of the nine @-@ hour Holocaust film Shoah , who called Schindler 's List a " kitschy melodrama " and a " deformation " of historical truth . " Fiction is a transgression , I am deeply convinced that there is a ban on depiction [ of the Holocaust ] " , he said . Lanzmann also criticized Spielberg for viewing the Holocaust through the eyes of a German , saying " it is the world in reverse . " He complained , " I sincerely thought that there was a time before Shoah , and a time after Shoah , and that after Shoah certain things could no longer be done . Spielberg did them anyway . " 
 = = = Reaction of the Jewish community = = = 
 At a 1994 Village Voice symposium about the film , historian Annette <unk> described how her mother , a survivor of three concentration camps , felt gratitude that the Holocaust story was finally being told in a major film that would be widely viewed . Hungarian Jewish author Imre Kertész , a Holocaust survivor , feels it is impossible for life in a Nazi concentration camp to be accurately portrayed by anyone who did not experience it first @-@ hand . While commending Spielberg for bringing the story to a wide audience , he found the film 's final scene at the graveyard neglected the terrible after @-@ effects of the experience on the survivors and implied that they came through emotionally unscathed . Rabbi Uri D. <unk> found the film an " appealing " and " uplifting " demonstration of humanitarianism . Norbert Friedman noted that , like many Holocaust survivors , he reacted with a feeling of solidarity towards Spielberg of a sort normally reserved for other survivors . Albert L. Lewis , Spielberg 's childhood rabbi and teacher , described the movie as " Steven 's gift to his mother , to his people , and in a sense to himself . Now he is a full human being . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Schindler 's List featured on a number of " best of " lists , including the TIME magazine 's Top Hundred as selected by critics Richard Corliss and Richard Schickel , Time Out magazine 's 100 Greatest Films Centenary Poll conducted in 1995 , and Leonard Maltin 's " 100 Must See Movies of the Century " . The Vatican named Schindler 's List among the most important 45 films ever made . A Channel 4 poll named Schindler 's List the ninth greatest film of all time , and it ranked fourth in their 2005 war films poll . The film was named the best of 1993 by critics such as James Berardinelli , Roger Ebert , and Gene Siskel . Deeming the film " culturally significant " , the Library of Congress selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry in 2004 . Spielberg won the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film for his work , and shared the Producers Guild of America Award for Best Theatrical Motion Picture with co @-@ producers Branko Lustig and Gerald R. Molen . Steven Zaillian won the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Adapted Screenplay . 
 The film also won the National Board of Review for Best Film , along with the National Society of Film Critics for Best Film , Best Director , Best Supporting Actor , and Best Cinematography . Awards from the New York Film Critics Circle were also won for Best Film , Best Supporting Actor , and Best Cinematographer . The Los Angeles Film Critics Association awarded the film for Best Film , Best Cinematography ( tied with The Piano ) , and Best Production Design . The film also won numerous other awards and nominations worldwide . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 For the 1997 American television showing , the film was broadcast virtually unedited . The telecast was the first to receive a TV @-@ M ( now TV @-@ MA ) rating under the TV Parental Guidelines that had been established earlier that year . Senator Tom Coburn , then an Oklahoma congressman , said that in airing the film , NBC had brought television " to an all @-@ time low , with full @-@ frontal nudity , violence and profanity " , adding that it was an insult to " decent @-@ minded individuals everywhere " . Under fire from both Republicans and Democrats , Coburn apologized , saying : " My intentions were good , but I 've obviously made an error in judgment in how I 've gone about saying what I wanted to say . " He clarified his opinion , stating that the film ought to have been aired later at night when there would not be " large numbers of children watching without parental supervision " . 
 Controversy arose in Germany for the film 's television premiere on ProSieben . Heavy protests ensued when the station intended to televise it with two commercial breaks . As a compromise , the broadcast included one break , consisting of a short news update and several commercials . 
 In the Philippines , chief censor Henrietta Mendez ordered cuts of three scenes depicting sexual intercourse and female nudity before the movie could be shown in theaters . Spielberg refused , and pulled the film from screening in Philippine cinemas , which prompted the Senate to demand the abolition of the censorship board . President Fidel V. Ramos himself intervened , ruling that the movie could be shown uncut to anyone over the age of 15 . 
 According to Slovak filmmaker Juraj Herz , the scene in which a group of women confuse an actual shower with a gas chamber is taken directly , shot by shot , from his film <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Night Caught Up with Me , 1986 ) . Herz wanted to sue , but was unable to fund the case . 
 The song Yerushalayim Shel <unk> ( " Jerusalem of Gold " ) is featured in the film 's soundtrack and plays near the end of the film . This caused some controversy in Israel , as the song ( which was written in 1967 by Naomi Shemer ) is widely considered an informal anthem of the Israeli victory in the Six @-@ Day War . In Israeli prints of the film the song was replaced with <unk> <unk> ( " A Walk to Caesarea " ) by Hannah <unk> , a World War II resistance fighter . 
 = = Impact on Krakow = = 
 Due to the increased interest in Kraków created by the film , the city bought Oskar Schindler 's Enamel Factory in 2007 to create a permanent exhibition about the German occupation of the city from 1939 to 1945 . The museum opened in June 2010 . 
 = Action of 24 October 1793 = 
 The Action of 24 October 1793 was a minor naval engagement during the first year of the French Revolutionary Wars . While cruising in the Northern Bay of Biscay , the British Royal Navy frigate HMS Thames , under Captain James Cotes , encountered the much larger French frigate Uranie , under Captain Jean @-@ François Tartu . The ships engaged , with each suffering severe damage until they separated after nearly four hours of continual combat . Cotes ordered his crew to make hasty repairs , intending to resume the battle , but Uranie 's crew , with their captain dead , slipped away while Thames was unable to manoeuvre . At 16 : 00 , with repairs on Thames ongoing , a French squadron of three frigates and a brig , under Captain Zacharie Allemand , arrived , firing on Thames as they approached . Outnumbered , Cotes surrendered his ship to Allemand , who commended Cotes on his resistance to the far larger Uranie . 
 The French brought Thames into Brest , where sailors from Allemand 's squadron looted the frigate . The British officers were imprisoned for the next two years . The frigate was commissioned into the French Navy as Tamise , and Uranie was renamed Tartu in honour of her deceased captain . Both vessels then served with the French Atlantic Fleet , Tamise until 8 June 1796 , when the British recaptured her off the Scilly Isles , and Tartu until 30 December 1796 when the British captured her during the Expédition d 'Irlande . 
 = = Background = = 
 In February 1793 , amid rising political tension , the French Republic declared war on Great Britain , drawing Britain into the French Revolutionary Wars . At sea , the Bay of Biscay , the Western Approaches and the English Channel all became areas of significant naval activity as French privateers sailed on raiding cruises against British merchant shipping . To augment these attacks , the French naval authorities dispatched squadrons of frigates to attack British trade routes . To counter these operations , the Royal Navy sent their own frigates to sea , sometimes in squadrons and sometimes on single patrols . 
 A French frigate squadron sent to on a cruise in the Northern Bay of Biscay in the early autumn of 1793 was commanded by Captain Zacharie Allemand and consisted of the frigates Carmagnole , Résolue , Sémillante and Uranie with the brig @-@ corvette <unk> . On 22 October , the squadron sighted the 16 @-@ gun Spanish brig Alcoudia and Allemand ordered Uranie under Captain Jean @-@ François Tartu to separate from the squadron and pursue the Spaniard . Uranie was easily able to capture Alcoudia , taking the prisoners on board the frigate and establishing a prize crew on the brig . Two days later , Uranie was sailing southwards in company with the prize with the wind at the southwest , when a sail appeared to the north at 09 : 30 . 
 The new arrival was a British ship sent from the Channel Fleet on a lone patrol : the frigate HMS Thames under Captain James Cotes . Thames was an old frigate , built in 1758 and carrying 32 12 @-@ pounder guns . The ship was below its standard complement of 215 men , sailing with only 184 , which meant that the 6 @-@ pounder guns that augmented the main battery could not be manned . By comparison , Uranie was five years old and carried 40 18 @-@ pounder guns and weighing almost double the weight of the British ship . Her full complement was of 260 men , but she lacked 60 of her sailors , dispatched in prize crews over three captured ships , and was burdened with over 260 prisoners . At first unsure of the identity of the ship to the north , Tartu hoisted a blue flag as an identification signal and sent the Alcoudia away in case the ship should be revealed to be hostile . Cotes did not respond to the signal , and the two ships were soon hidden from one another by a rain squall . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At 10 : 15 the weather cleared , leaving both frigates well in sight of one another , both Tartu and Cotes identifying the opposing ship as an enemy and clearing for action , Tartu hoisting the French tricolour . With both captains determined on battle , the frigates approached one another rapidly on opposing tacks . Uranie was the first to fire , discharging a full broadside at Thames and then wearing around to pull alongside Thames on the same tack . The manoeuvre placed the two frigates directly alongside one another and a close engagement began , each discharging broadside after broadside at the another . At 12 : 15 , a round shot swept Uranie 's quarterdeck , killing a helmsman , cutting a boy in half , wounding another , and severing Tartu 's leg under the knee ; Tartu was brought below deck and Lieutenant <unk> assumed command of Uranie . The fight continued in this manner for several hours , until 14 : 20 , when Uranie was able to pull ahead of Thames and fire several broadsides into the bows of the British ship , raking her . British historian William James recorded that the crew of Uranie then attempted to board via the starboard bow of Thames , but were driven off by fire from Cotes ' bow guns , which had been double – shotted for this reason . However the after action report by Lieutenant <unk> on Uranie states that no boarding action was attempted . 
 With the boarding attempt thwarted Uranie pulled back , turning southwards to put distance between the vessels . Tartu , brought below deck and dying , had ordered a retreat for fear that his prisoners would revolt and because the engagement was <unk> in the east @-@ north @-@ east direction , where two sails , assumed to be British warships , had been sighted . It was assumed on Thames that the French ship was retreating , the British crew cheering as the firing ceased . Cotes however anticipated a resumption of the action and ordered his men to begin making repairs immediately : Thames was so badly damaged that pursuit was out of the question . All three of Thames ' masts had been shot through , most of the rigging had been torn away , the hull and decks were badly damaged and 34 men were killed or wounded . Uranie was in a similar state , and hauled up approximately 2 nautical miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) away , the masts intact but damaged with most of the rigging shot through and numerous holes smashed through the hull . It was also evident on Thames that the crew of the French ship were pumping water over the side , an indication that the ship had been damaged below the waterline . 
 Cotes ' ship was fit only to sail with the wind , and the captain urged his men to make greater efforts to repair their ship before Uranie could come up with them again . So engrossed was the British crew with their repairs that it was not until 16 : 00 that it was realised that the French frigate was no longer holding station within sight , and had completely disappeared . This led some on the British ship to assume that Uranie had sunk , although in fact the ship had simply turned away in an effort to make it back to Rochefort to repair the damage suffered in the engagement . Also apparent were a number of sails in the distance . These rapidly approached and were revealed to be a frigate squadron flying the Union Flag . Cotes was unable to manoeuvre his ship or respond to the new arrivals , which were soon identified as French vessels wearing false flags . The leading frigate pulled up close to Thames and fired a broadside at the British frigate . Cotes immediately hailed the French , announcing that he was in no position to fight them due to the damage his ship had suffered and that he was striking his flag . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Allemand requested that Cotes come aboard Carmagnole , but Cotes responded that he was unable to do so as his ship 's boats had all been destroyed . Allemand sent a boat from his own ship to Thames and brought Cotes to Carmagnole as a prisoner of war ; Cotes used the delay to destroy his ship 's documents . Allemand questioned Cotes intently about the nature of his recent combat and , on identifying Uranie as one of his own squadron , commented that Tartu should have defeated Thames in half the time the action had taken . 
 Thames subsequently returned to Brest with Allemand 's squadron on 25 October , although the British ship was thoroughly looted during the journey by the French sailors , whose officers were unable to exert any control over them . The ship 's officers had been removed , including the surgeon , and therefore the British wounded did not receive medical treatment until the squadron arrived at Brest on 25 October ; two subsequently died , making the total British deaths 13 , with 21 wounded . Cotes wrote a report on the engagement , which he sent to the Admiralty from captivity in Gisors , which the French authorities intercepted and delayed , with the result that the first news of Thames ' fate did not arrive in Britain until 7 May 1794 . Cotes was soon afterwards exchanged and returned to Britain , where a court @-@ martial investigating the loss of Thames exonerated him . Several of his officers were not repatriated however , remaining in French captivity for the next two years . 
 Uranie lost four killed , including Captain Tartu , and seven wounded , including three seriously , and the frigate arrived at Rochefort soon afterwards , where in honour of the captain 's death , she was renamed Tartu . It was subsequently incorrectly reported in Britain that the ship 's name was changed to Tortue ( tortoise ) to disguise its identity after being defeated by Thames . Thames was taken into French service as Tamise , and participated in the Atlantic campaign of May 1794 the following year . The French lost both frigates in 1796 . HMS Santa Margarita recaptured Tamise in an engagement near the Scilly Isles between British and French frigate squadrons at the Action of 8 June 1796 . Some six months later , the ship of the line HMS Polyphemus captured Tartu on 30 December in the aftermath of the disastrous Expédition d 'Irlande . 
 = Bahrain Bloody Thursday = 
 Bahrain 's Bloody Thursday ( Arabic : <unk> البحرين <unk> ) is the name given by protesters in Bahrain to 17 February 2011 , the fourth day of their national uprising . Bahrain security forces launched a pre @-@ dawn raid to clear Pearl Roundabout in Manama of the protesters camped there , most of whom were at the time asleep in tents ; four were killed and about 300 injured . The event led some to demand even more political reform than they had been before , calling for an end to the reign of King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa . 
 The clearance was described by witnesses as being brutal and sudden . Clouds of tear gas covered the area , and volleys of birdshot were fired on those who refused to withdraw . Medics , ambulances and a journalist were reportedly attacked as well . Sporadic clashes broke out around Bahrain hours after the raid . During the afternoon the National Guard and army deployed armoured vehicles , tanks , more than 50 armoured personnel carriers and set up checkpoints in the streets around the country . Protesters then took refuge at Salmaniya Medical Complex and continued their agitations ; thousands of them chanted " Down with the king , down with the government . " 
 The government accused protesters of attacking the security forces , 50 of whom sustained injuries , and insisted that action had been necessary to pull Bahrain back from the " brink of a sectarian abyss " . But opposition parties dismissed the government 's account as a " silly play " , described the raid as a " heinous massacre " and submitted their resignations from the lower house of Parliament . 
 Internationally , the Gulf Cooperation Council Ministers of Foreign Affairs expressed their solidarity with government of Bahrain and their support for the measures taken . The United Nations , the European Union and the United States on the other hand expressed their deep concern and regret for the violence used against protesters . The United Kingdom government announced that in light of the unrest it would revoke some arms export licences to Bahrain . A number of international rights groups and independent observers criticised the government crackdown . 
 = = Background = = 
 The events were one of a string of protests that occurred across the Arab world following the self @-@ immolation and eventual death of Mohammed <unk> in Tunisia , the majority Shia population of Bahrain , as well as some Sunni Muslims , took to the streets demanding reforms . Al Jazeera reported that a protest was planned for 14 February , just a few months after the controversial 2010 election . 
 On 14 February ( referred to as Day of Rage by protest organisers ) , about 6 @,@ 000 people took part in many protests around Bahrain demanding the release of previously detained protesters , socio @-@ economic justice , political reform and a constitutional monarchy . Police then attacked the protesters throughout the day , using tear gas , rubber bullets and shotguns , inflicting many injuries and causing the hospitalisation of four demonstrators . In the evening , Ali Mushaima died from police shotgun wounds to his back at close range . The next day , thousands of mourners attended his funeral . During the ceremony police shot Fadhel Al @-@ Matrook in the back at close range ; he died from his wounds within an hour . People were then allowed to march to and occupy Pearl Roundabout , where they began to set up tents ; the number of demonstrators had swelled to 10 @,@ 000 people by nightfall . King Hamad offered his condolences for the two deaths and announced the establishment of a committee to investigate the events of the previous two days . In total , 25 people were said to have been injured on 15 February . 
 By 16 February , Pearl Roundabout was still occupied by thousands of protesters . Some of those present at the scene described the mood at the roundabout as " festive , " with protesters distributing tea , coffee and food while discussing the situation in the country . Opposition political figures such as Ali Salman and Abdulwahab Hussain also addressed the crowds gathered at the roundabout . Elsewhere in the country a funeral procession was held for Fadhel Al @-@ Matrook , while a motorcade of about 100 cars with supporters of King Hamad passed without police interference . 
 The Ministry of Interior then announced that the gathering at Pearl Roundabout was illegal and that it was only tolerated as a display of sympathy in the wake of recent events . King Hamad visited the Bahrain Defence Force headquarters , where he met its Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Field Marshal Khalifa bin Ahmad and other senior military officers . Together they reviewed " the preparations undertaken by the Defence Force to protect the security of the homeland and to maintain the safety of citizens . " 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 In Bahrain , especially among the organising activists , the day police stormed the roundabout was posthumously referred to as Bahrain Bloody Thursday ; some doctors also referred to it as Black Thursday ; while other opposition members have called it a massacre . 
 = = Raid = = 
 In a pre @-@ dawn raid , at about 3 : 00 on 17 February , around 1 @,@ 000 police were dispatched to clear the Pearl Roundabout of an estimated 1 @,@ 500 – 3 @,@ 000 individuals staying overnight in tents . According to the Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry , police were armed with sticks , shields , sound bombs , tear gas and shotguns . They moved on protesters from two directions , the flyover north of Pearl Roundabout and Noaim , south of the roundabout . In addition , personnel from NSA and BDF were onsite . 
 = = = Eyewitness and journalist accounts = = = 
 According to eyewitnesses , the raid was sudden and without warning and many sleeping protesters , including women and children , were awoken by the sounds of tear gas and stun grenades . Armed plainclothes policemen arrived in more than 100 civilian cars and started breaking into tents before the uniformed officers started shooting . The police carried knives , which they used to slice through tents , before beating women and men inside and firing on some people with bird @-@ shot shotguns . Clouds of tear gas covered Pearl Roundabout that " one could not see surroundings , " according to one witness . 
 Maryam <unk> of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights said : " The attack was very violent , [ the police ] were not showing any mercy . " An unnamed injured protester told the local independent newspaper Al @-@ Wasat he was within a group of protesters who were awake and that they chanted " peaceful ... peaceful " before being attacked by police who reportedly stole his wallet , camera and mobile phone after beating and dragging him with a rope . Another injured protester described how women and children were running all over the place ; even after withdrawing to nearby villages , police still pursued protesters and arrested " large numbers " of them . Other eyewitnesses said police searched the cars parked around Pearl Roundabout , damaging some of them . 
 Yet another injured protesters said : " They had encircled us and they kept shooting tear gas and live rounds . The circle got closer and closer . " Some witnesses claimed the police used anti @-@ Shia curses during their attacks on the mainly Shia protesters . Medics who arrived at Pearl Roundabout said they saw police stamping on handcuffed protesters who laid on the ground . A nurse said she saw a group of police " execute " a young protester with a gun at " point @-@ blank range " after handcuffing and beating him . 
 ABC News reporter Miguel Marquez said he was beaten by men carrying clubs while he was making a phone call report . " There was a canister that looked like – No ! No ! No ! Hey ! I 'm a journalist here ! I 'm going ! I 'm going ! I 'm going ! I 'm going ! ... I 'm hit . " Then , in an attempt to show he was not a protester , Marquez yelled " Journalist , journalist ! , " yet he reported getting hit multiple times and that his camera was stolen . He described the plainclothes police who reportedly attacked him as a " gang of thugs , " who wanted to clear the square before planned protests following Friday prayers . 
 = = = Health worker accounts = = = 
 A medical volunteer said that despite showing their identification cards police attacked ten medics at the roundabout who had offered their services . 
 For eight hours Health Minister Faisal al @-@ Hamar prevented ambulances going to the assistance of those injured at Pearl Roundabout . Doctors and paramedics protested inside Salmaniya Medical Complex ( SMC ) ; while still doing their best to help the wounded , medics signed a petition and formed a human chain calling for his resignation for " blocking ambulances from going to help those injured in Pearl Roundabout . " They claimed that he told doctors at the hospital of his resignation before leaving . However , he later rejected that claim . 
 Despite the block , Salmaniya Medical Complex 's disaster plan was activated on the morning of the attack . It called for more than a dozen ambulances to search nearby areas and Pearl Roundabout . Another dozen ambulances were put on stand @-@ by , according to a member of the medical staff . The staff said that ambulances were functioning in accordance with the plan until about 6 : 00 am , when an alleged call from the Ministry of Interior ordered all but two ambulances to head back to the SMC . However , this order was ignored and more ambulances were sent to search for the injured in the areas surrounding the roundabout . 
 About five ambulances reached Pearl Roundabout , where they were confronted by police and army forces ; three drivers and nine paramedics were attacked . One of the injured drivers claimed that police had clubbed him and that a senior officer had told him : " If I see you again , I ’ ll kill you . " Another ambulance driver , who was unharmed , said that police removed injured protesters from his vehicle by force and a military officer – whom he believed to be a Saudi , based on his Arabic dialect – held a gun to his head and warned him to drive away or be shot . One ambulance was reportedly confiscated by police , who then took it to an unknown location after beating its driver and other paramedics , who had to walk back to the SMC . 
 A paramedic also said police allowed the first ambulances that reached Pearl Roundabout to pass safely , while some security personnel captured videos , but when the ambulances moved out carrying casualties security forces had targeted the vehicles . He said : " Later Bahrain T.V. showed only the scenes where they allowed us to pass in order to mislead the public opinion . I personally heard orders given to security forces via their communication devices to target , threat and delay paramedics as long as they can . Security forces dealt with us as if we were defendants and partners to protesters who wanted to hide them , whereas what we were doing was a professional and humane duty that has nothing to do with our political position . " When the block was lifted in the late morning till noon , paramedics did not find any casualties to take back to the SMC at Pearl Roundabout , despite seeing handcuffed protesters being stomped on by police when they arrived . 
 = = = Government accounts = = = 
 The government account of the incident indicated that police , using a megaphone , had ordered protesters to evacuate the area and that some had done so , whereas others remained in defiance of the law . It added that police only intervened after exhausting all opportunities for dialogue and that lethal shots were fired only at armed protesters who attacked police officers . Security forces reported finding pistols , bullets , large quantities of knives , daggers , swords and other sharp objects , as well as Hezbollah flags at the site . 
 On a state television show , Ministry of Interior spokesman Tariq Al @-@ Hassan said that fifty police officers had been injured , including two with serious sword wounds and that " one protester drove over police resulting in injuries including cutting @-@ off fingers of a policeman before we could catch him . " He also denied policemen prevented ambulances from reaching Pearl Roundabout or attacked any paramedics , but instead : " What happened is that protesters stole an ambulance car , so we were checking on every ambulance that reaches the roundabout . " One doctor working at SMC 's ER supported the government 's account , accusing protesters of attacking the Under @-@ Secretary @-@ of @-@ State for Health , taking control of all hospital entrances and stealing an ambulance . 
 The Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry , set up by the king to report on the events of February and March , did not see any evidence to support the government 's claim that protesters were armed or that medics had supplied them with weapons , however it stated that medics took control of the first floor of Salmaniya hospital . Eyewitnesses also denied being warned by the police , saying that if they had known of the police presence then women and children would have been evacuated . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The raid culminated in the destruction of the encampment , with flattened tents and protesters ' belongings scattered all over the place . Security forces then declared the protest camp to be illegal and installed barbed wire around Pearl Roundabout . An hour after the attack , a number of protesters tried to return to the roundabout , which was completely controlled by police . Security forces fired a shotgun on one protester directly in the head from a few centimetres away , killing him instantly . Police claimed the protesters attacked them using " metal rods , swords , molotov cocktails , stones , and other weapons . " After some more time around 500 protesters gathered in the Noaim area , but were dispersed by police . 
 Sporadic clashes broke out around Bahrain hours after the raid . During the afternoon , the National Guard deployed eight armoured vehicles and the Bahrain Defence Force deployed tanks and at least 50 armoured personnel carriers armed with machine guns around the capital , Manama , the first time military armoured vehicles had been seen in the streets since the protests commenced . Military checkpoints were set up and patrols circulated throughout the country . The Interior Ministry issued a warning to citizens to stay out of the streets ; while the army warned people that they were ready to take " punitive measures " to restore order . The Bahrain Defence Force issued Statement 1 , which asked citizens to " distance themselves from gatherings in vital areas in the capital [ to prevent ] fear , shock and serious traffic disruptions . " Main roads leading to Manama were blocked and traffic was also redirected , while main roads of the capital were almost empty , as workers stayed home , leaving banks and " other key institutions " closed . 
 = = = Salmaniya hospital = = = 
 According to an unnamed Al Jazeera reporter , hospitals in Manama were full because of patients that were awaiting treatment as a result of and during the police raid , including medical personnel who were attacked by police while trying to help the wounded . New York Times columnist Nicolas Kristof reported that " hospital corridors were also full of frantic mothers searching desperately for children who had gone missing in the attack . " Women 's cries were evident in the hospital and some fainted . The Minister of Health appeared on state television and claimed that the situation at the main hospital was calm and that there were only seven minor injuries . 
 The blood bank at SMC called for blood donations , while the U.S. missionary hospital announced that it will be treating those injured for free . An eyewitness at the hospital said : " Lots of people are standing at the gates of the hospital . The police have closed the area so that no people can get in or out – some tried to get out and were shot at by police . " The SMC was seen as a safe place for the opposition protesters to go . By late afternoon , about 4 @,@ 000 protesters had congregated at the hospital , while protesters who had gathered in the car parks near the emergency entrance chanted : " Down with the regime , with our blood we will defend our rights . " 
 After seeing the violence , Ali al @-@ <unk> , a police officer , left his guard post and joined the crowd , announcing to them that he could no longer support " a killer institution . " The crowd hoisted him on their shoulders and al @-@ <unk> became an immediate " mini @-@ celebrity " of the protest movement . 
 = = Casualties = = 
 More than 300 individuals were injured during the raid , including women and children ; some of them in critical condition . Injured protesters were taken to the Salmaniya Medical Complex , many of them with broken limbs and open wounds . Four individuals were killed by police using shotguns , from close range . While two of them who were shot in the back , another protester was shot in the thigh and subsequently died at the SMC ; the fourth was shot in the head later and died instantly . At least 25 @,@ 000 mourners took part at the funeral procession , which was held in Sitra on 18 February for the three protesters originating from the island . 
 Dr Sadiq Alekry 
 Dr Sadiq Alekry , a 44 @-@ year @-@ old plastic surgeon , voluntarily offered his services at the roundabout on the evening of 16 February , shortly after he had returned from Houston . According to Human rights watch , Alekry along with other staff were wearing special medical jackets showing the Red Crescent . During the raid , riot police attacked his tent and cut through it ; despite telling them he was a physician , police handcuffed him from his back and a number of security officers repeatedly punched , kicked and hit him with sticks on his head and other parts of the body . 
 About 20 officers then marched him away from Pearl Roundabout . Alekry said that while walking him , riot police also broke his nose and damaged his left eye so badly in the process that he temporarily lost his sight . He was then taken to a police bus , where his pants were pulled down by an officer who threatened Alekry with sexual assault ; though the threat was not carried out . 
 In the bus , Alekry 's shirt was pulled over his head and , while he was still hand @-@ cuffed , security officers continued kicking and beating him for about an hour , until he fell to the floor . Nevertheless , the beating continued and Alekry reported that a police officer told him : " If you bleed in my chair with your dirty blood I will beat you to death ! " When an ambulance arrived , police allowed him and three other detainees to be taken to hospital . He arrived at the SMC at 6 : 00 am , with severe injuries to his back , chest and face and underwent facial surgery a few days later . 
 = = = Deaths = = = 
 Ali Ahmed Moumen 
 Ali Ahmed Moumen was a 22 @-@ year @-@ old college senior who died at the SMC on 17 February after being shot by a police in the thigh . His death certificate indicated he died due to " extensive bleeding leading to intractable hypovolemic shock . " Hours before his death he had posted a " status " update on Facebook saying : " My blood is sacrificed for my country . " That night , Moumen was sleeping beside his younger brother and made it out of Pearl Roundabout safely , but , according to his father , was then killed when he tried to return after hearing women and children were trapped . One of his friends said Ali was " shot in the street and merely left to die . " 
 Moumen was picked up at around 8 : 30 from Pearl Roundabout . He had serious injuries to his pelvis and right thigh . Bleeding profusely , two paramedics found Moumen after police allowed them through . The paramedics reported that they saw another possibly dead body with a fractured skull close to Moumen 's , but were not permitted to pick it up . While leaving , the ambulance was reportedly attacked by riot police who beat the driver before allowing them to continue to the SMC . At the emergency room , Moumen had a surgery , but he died at 9 : 30 . His father called Prime Minister Khalifa bin Salman Al Khalifa a " killer " and blamed him for his son 's death . An unnamed policeman who charged with the murder of Moumen was acquitted on 27 September 2012 . 
 Ali Mansoor Khudair 
 Ali Mansour Ahmed Khudair was a 53 or 58 @-@ year @-@ old Bahraini who died on 17 February after police shot at his back . He had 91 pellets in his chest . Khudair was a fisherman from Sitra who lived in a ramshackle house . He had three sons : Hassan ( 21 ) , Jaffar ( 14 ) and Ahmed ( 9 ) , as well as an 18 @-@ year @-@ old daughter . Jaffar said : " I was with my father in Pearl Roundabout when they attacked . We were asleep at first , when I woke up , I started moving away , but my father told me to endure , stay and not fear . Then we heard screams and rushed there . For a few seconds he spoke to the security forces , asking them to stay away from women and children , but they shot him in the chest . He fell to the ground and I couldn 't see him after tear gas cloud covered the place . " 
 Mahmood Makki Abutaki 
 Mahmoud Makki Abutaki was a 22 @-@ year @-@ old college student majoring in engineering , when he died on 17 February after being shot in the back by police . Medics pulled about 200 pellets of birdshot from his chest and arms . Abutaki 's elder brother , Ahmed , who was in the morgue while holding his brothers ' hands , recalled the last conversation they had the previous night for the media present : " He said , ' This is my chance , to have a say , so that maybe our country will do something for us . ' My country did do something ; it killed him . " 
 Isa <unk> Ali Hussain 
 Isa <unk> Ali Hussain was a 60 @-@ year @-@ old Bahraini who died on 17 February morning immediately after riot police fired at his head from point @-@ blank range . Hussain was a part of a group of protesters who marched back towards Pearl Roundabout after being dispersed when police shot him . Eyewitnesses say he went near security forces asking them to allow young people help the injured protesters . However , police claimed he was with a group of protesters who attacked them using metal rods , swords , molotov cocktails , stones and other weapons . His funeral was held on 18 February in Karzakan and was attended by thousands of mourners . An unnamed policeman charged with his murder was acquitted on 27 September 2012 . 
 = = Responses = = 
 = = = Domestic = = = 
 Executive 
 King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa praised the concluding statement from the meeting of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf foreign ministers , which was held on 17 February in Manama , and offered " full support " for Bahrain 's security and politically , economically and defensively . At a news conference , Foreign Minister Khalid ibn Ahmad Al Khalifah alleged , and expressed his surprise , that protesters had attacked police . When asked about the reasons for choosing a pre @-@ dawn time for the raid , he said : " The reason for choosing this time was the smaller number of participants , and this reduces injuries . " He called the deaths of the three protestors during the raid a " regrettable accident . Police action was necessary to pull Bahrain back from the brink of a sectarian abyss . " During the press conference , which was broadcasting live on national television , Al @-@ Wasat correspondent Reem Khalifa cried tears and described what happened as a " real massacre . " 
 In what Al @-@ Wasat called " an unexpected move , " Crown Prince Salman bin Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa appeared on state @-@ owned television to express his condolences to the people for the " hard days " and asked them to " calm down . " He offered open dialogue with political societies , shortly before a royal decree was issued by his father , King Hamad , commissioning Salman to lead the dialogue . 
 Legislative 
 All 18 MPs from Al Wefaq , the only opposition political party represented in parliament , submitted their resignations . They announced that the investigation committee formed by the king to fact @-@ find the issues into the previous two killing incidents was only for media consumption , more so in the light of the deaths of four more protesters . They said the extraordinary session of parliament was illegal according to its rules of procedure . Al Wefaq described the government account as a " silly play that wasn 't even as good as the previously exposed plays . " It considered the report , which published photographs of firearms , swords and daggers , as " funny " and that these tools were not commercially sold in Bahrain . 
 Ali Salman , the head of Al Wefaq , said the party would continue to demand reform . Abdul Jalil Khalil , an Al Wefaq member of parliament , described the raid as " real terrorism . Whoever took the decision to attack the protest was aiming to kill . " He also said the casualty number is <unk> large given the small size of Bahrain 's population and added : " After what happened today , people are asking us to leave parliament . Quit the government . " Other Al Wefaq MP 's and lawyers made a criminal complaint against senior officials of the Ministry of Interior , including its minister , the agents , the commander of public security forces , his assistants and the various heads of security zones . 
 Political 
 Seven opposition political parties , including Al Wefaq and the National Democratic Action Society , issued a joint statement rejecting the government 's charge that the demonstrators were armed and condemning " the heinous massacre " perpetrated by police , including the prevention of ambulances from reaching the site to ferry the wounded to hospital . They demanded the resignation of the government and the formation of a new one to investigate the " crime " and submit political reforms . Ibrahim Sharif , the head of National Democratic Action Society and a Sunni Muslim , said protesters were not given enough time to evacuate the area and that government could have told them hours before or even by small papers thrown from helicopters . He told the BBC that " throughout the day there were rumours we would have another 24 hours , but the attack has come without [ any ] warning . " 
 Other 
 The General Federation of Workers Trade Unions in Bahrain condemned the use of force in breaking up the peaceful gathering at Pearl Roundabout and asked King Hamad to intervene to stop security forces ' violence and to punish those responsible for the incidents . They also announced that a meeting of the Central Council and heads of other trade unions is in the state of permanent session to take any deemed necessary steps , including the call for a general strike . The Bahrain Teachers ’ Society called for a strike and gatherings outside schools on 20 February . The Bahrain Human Rights Society and 18 other civil society foundations condemned the " sudden brutal attack " and asked other international and Arab figures to condemn it . 
 Ayatollah Isa Qassim , Bahrain 's highest @-@ ranking Shia cleric , described the incident as a " massacre " in Friday sermon 's <unk> : " This reckless murder , and thirst to kill would create a complete break between the government and the people , and it will not allow any chance of any vote aiming to calm the situation and heal the wounds . " A group of clerics including the head of the <unk> council visited the wounded at the SMC and spoke of their support for the protesters ' demands and also called for immediate political reforms . The <unk> council described the raid as a " terrible crime and at least a massacre " and asked for immediate urgent initiatives to achieve the " just demands of the people . We refuse blank prosthetic solutions , the practice of wasting time , and referral to the powerless Parliament that lacks popular legitimacy . " 
 Doctors , nurses and paramedics organised a sit @-@ in at the parks of the SMC demanding the resignation of the health minister and condemning the blocking of ambulances from going to Pearl Roundabout . The Bahrain Medical Society and Bahrain Dental Society issued a joint statement denouncing the " unjustified and excessive use of force by police , and the banning of medical teams from performing their duties " and asked the king to take immediate action to stop these procedures from re @-@ occurring . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Supranational bodies 
 The United Nations Secretary @-@ General Ban Ki @-@ moon asked for bringing to justice those responsible for the violence . He expressed his deep concern and disturbance " by the violent means used to disperse demonstrators . " A spokesperson for Catherine Ashton , the European Union 's High Representative , said that she was very concerned about the events that took place and that she expressed regret for the deaths and acts of violence , while also calling on the Bahraini government to respect and protect the basic rights of its citizens including the right to assemble peacefully . " Concerns expressed by the people must be addressed peacefully through dialogue . " 
 States 
 French Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Christine Valle expressed regret for the excessive use of force in several Arab countries and serious concern about the recent developments in Bahrain , as well as Libya and Yemen , in particular . German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle condemned the use of violence by the police and called on officials in Bahrain to stop the use of violence immediately and protect the protesters better . " They [ protestors ] are just exercising their rights . " Saudi Arabian prince Talal Bin Abdulaziz , father of prince Al Waleed Bin Talal , said there is a chance protests in Bahrain would move into Saudi Arabia if serious reforms were not carried out . United Arab Emirates Foreign Minister Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan expressed his country 's support for Bahrain , stressing that what affects Bahrain and its security would affect the entire Gulf Cooperation Council and ultimately all countries of the world . 
 United Kingdom Foreign Secretary William Hague said that he was " deeply concerned " by the " unacceptable violence " used against protesters . He also stressed the " need for peaceful action to address the concerns of protesters " to his Bahraini counterpart . The U.K. government then announced that in light of the unrest it has decided to revoke some arms export licenses to Bahrain stating that " licenses will not be issued when officials judge that there is a risk that the exports may provoke regional or internal conflicts or be used to facilitate internal repression . " However , arms sales continued throughout the year . The British Foreign Office also temporarily closed its embassy in Bahrain . 
 United States President Barack Obama expressed his objection the use of the violence by the Bahraini government against peaceful demonstrators . White House spokesman Jay Carney said that it was " not an appropriate reaction " to use force against the protesters . Secretary of State Hillary Clinton called Bahrain ’ s foreign minister during the day to convey " our deep concern about the actions of the security forces . " The Pentagon 's spokesman said that they were keeping a close look at developments in Bahrain and called on all parties to " exercise restraint and refrain from violence . " Jennifer Stride , the Bahrain @-@ based U.S. Fifth Fleet 's spokeswoman , said there was no " indication the protests will cause significant disruption " for the fleet , which she also said was " not being targeted . " 
 Other 
 Bernie Ecclestone , the F1 commercial rights holder , said if the unrest has " not quietened down by Wednesday , I think we will have to cancel the 2011 Bahrain Grand Prix probably . " On 21 February the race was postponed and then canceled later . Human Rights Watch called on the Bahraini government to stop attacking peaceful protesters and start probes into the deaths . Amnesty International similarly condemned the government crackdown and asked for an independent investigation into the events . Anonymous , an online hackers grouping , issued a statement condemning the crackdown and expressed its solidarity with the protesters : " By interfering with the freedom to hold peaceful protests , the <unk> [ sic ] government has made itself a clear enemy of its own citizens and of Anonymous . The actions of this regime will not be forgotten , nor will they be forgiven . " 
 New York Times columnist Nicolas Kristof described the raid as " brutal repression " that is usually " confined to remote and backward nations " and referred to the government 's version of events as " preposterous " and expressed his sadness over the events . Fareed Zakaria , CNN 's international affairs analyst , said that the crackdown on the protesters was a " rash move that will enrage many of its people and cost the regime international prestige . This is a terrible mistake and they will pay a heavy price for it . The regime in Bahrain is doing something very rash and unwise ; it is trying to respond by using force and punitive measures . This is not going to work in the end . " 
 = = Analysis = = 
 The events at the Pearl Roundabout and <unk> Medical Complex marked a turning point in the Bahraini uprising , according to the media ; an analysis by The Guardian said it reduced , if not killed , any chance of dialogue . The raid expanded the demands of some protesters from asking for reforms which included writing a new constitution to calling for an end to the monarchy . According to the Bahrain Mirror , the phrase " after Thursday , we stopped the talking ; the people want to overthrow the regime " ( Arabic : من <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ، <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) became popular in later protests . On 22 February , a mass rally dubbed the March of loyalty to martyrs was held in honour of the four protesters who had lost their lives during the day ; over 100 @,@ 000 people took part in the protest . The Al Jazeera English documentary Bahrain : Shouting in the Dark also features the events of the day . 
 = Financial history of the New York Giants = 
 The New York Giants , an American football team which plays in the National Football League ( NFL ) , have had a long , and at times turbulent financial history . The Giants were founded in 1925 by businessman and bookmaker Tim Mara with an investment of 500 US $ , and became one of the first teams in the then five @-@ year @-@ old NFL . Mara passed ownership of the team on to his sons Wellington and Jack after the 1929 Stock Market Crash to insulate the team from creditors . At first the Mara sons owned the team in name only , but they took increasingly larger roles in the organization beginning in the mid @-@ 1930s . Tim Mara remained involved in the team 's operations until his death in 1959 , when his sons assumed full control of the club . After Jack 's passing in 1965 , his son , Tim , took over his share of the team . 
 Although the Giants were successful on the field in their initial seasons , they struggled financially . A key event in franchise history occurred in the 11th game of the Giants inaugural season . The Chicago Bears , led by star running back Red Grange , came to town attracting a then pro football record 73 @,@ 000 fans , and giving the Giants a much needed financial influx . The following year , Grange and his agent formed a rival league and stationed a competing team , led by Grange , in New York . Though the Giants lost $ 50 @,@ 000 that season , the rival league folded and was subsumed into the NFL . After these initial struggles , the Giants financial status stabilized , and they led the league in attendance several times in the 1930s and 1940s . By the early 1960s , the Giants had firmly established themselves as one of the league 's biggest attractions . However , rather than continue to receive their higher share of the league television revenue , the Mara sons pushed for equal sharing of revenue for the benefit of the entire league . Revenue sharing is still practiced in the NFL today , and is credited with strengthening the league . 
 After struggling in the latter half of the 1960s and the entire 1970s , the Giants hired an outsider , George Young , to run football operations for the first time in several decades . The Giants on @-@ field product and business aspects improved rapidly following the hiring . In 1990 , Jack Mara 's son , Tim , who was struggling with cancer at the time , sold his half of the team to Bob Tisch . This marked the first time in franchise history the team had not been solely owned by the Mara family . In 2005 , Wellington Mara , who had been with the team since its inception in 1925 when he worked as a ball boy , died . His death was followed two weeks later by the death of Tisch . 
 The Giants are currently owned by the sons of Wellington Mara and Bob Tisch — John K. Mara and Steve Tisch . An estimate of the franchise 's current value places it at $ 1 @.@ 2 billion . 
 = = Early history and fiscal struggles : 1925 – 1929 = = 
 The Giants were founded in 1925 by Tim Mara , a bookmaker ( legal in 1925 ) , businessman , and promoter , with an investment of US $ 500 after a meeting with league president Joseph Carr , and Harry March . Carr was sent to the east coast to find someone to put a team in a major city there to help the struggling league . Carr contacted Billy Gibson who was the manager of heavyweight boxer Gene Tunney and knew of Mara from Mara 's interest in investing in Tunney . Mara decided to spend the $ 500 on the Giants as opposed to Tunney in a spur of the moment decision , and started the team with the statement , " an exclusive franchise for anything in New York is worth $ 500 . " His son Wellington later said that his father felt that even an empty store in the city was worth that price . Mara purchased the team , despite never having watched a single pro game , saying to the sellers at the time , " Just tell me one thing . Now that I have a franchise , what do I do with it . " To differentiate themselves from the baseball team of the same name , they took the name " New York Football Giants " , which they still use as their legal corporate name . 
 Mara soon realized that his purchase of the team did not yield any players , coaches , equipment , or a home field . March helped him establish the team by taking a job as the team 's secretary and handling the personnel decisions , and Gibson served as the team 's president . Mara 's friends were wary of investing in the team , but he convinced Matty Frank , a real estate investor , and a few other people to invest . Mara rented the Polo Grounds as the team 's stadium , and March developed a strategy that hinged on acquiring stars such as running back Jim Thorpe . At 37 years old , Thorpe was a shadow of his former self , and his contract required that he only play parts of games during the early parts of the season , until he got into shape . He played only the first regular season game however , before ending his Giants career due to injury . His absence would severely hurt the team 's monetary outlook for the season . 
 Although the Giants were successful on the field in their first season , going 8 – 4 in 1925 , their financial status was a different story . According to football historian Barry Gottehrer : 
 In the early days the NFL was strictly a low budget operation , and the Giants did little to strengthen it . Players earned less than $ 100 a game , schedules and franchises were subject to change from one day to the next , and Mara couldn 't even give his tickets away . 
 <unk> by baseball , boxing , and college football , professional football was not a popular sport in 1925 . Mara had to spend $ 25 @,@ 000 of his own money during the season just to keep the franchise alive , and close friend and future New York state Governor Al Smith even implored him to sell the team . Mara needed $ 4 @,@ 000 a game to cover his own outlays and $ 2 @,@ 000 to $ 6 @,@ 000 , depending on the team , to pay the visitors to break even . He slashed ticket prices , and gave out over 5 @,@ 000 free tickets a week . Although he used some moderately successful promotional gimmicks , such as having several players from the visiting Kansas City Cowboys dress up in his cowboy outfits and ride horses around New York City to promote that weeks game , his struggle continued until the eleventh game of the season when Red Grange and the Chicago Bears came to town attracting over 73 @,@ 000 fans — setting a pro football record . The game attracted such attention that 20 @,@ 000 fans had to be turned away at the gates . This gave the Giants a much needed influx of revenue , and perhaps altered the history of the franchise . The team could have benefited even further , but Mara refused to raise ticket prices for the game . 
 The Giants went 8 – 4 – 1 in 1926 , and withstood a challenge from an upstart American football league led by a team featuring Grange . Grange and his agent had formed the American Football League and placed their flagship team , the Yankees , in New York . According to a story by The New York Times published at the time , the Giants lost over $ 50 @,@ 000 during the season . Grange 's league lasted one season however , and was subsumed into the NFL . The Giants were so desperate to make money they allowed star Duluth Eskimos running back Ernie Nevers back into a close game after he was injured , even though by the rules they had the right to disallow his re @-@ entrance , to please fans who had come to see him . The Yankees were subsumed into the NFL the next year and played most of their games on the road to avoid direct competition with the Giants . They folded in 1928 , one year after Grange went back to playing for the Bears . The Giants paid a total of $ 21 @,@ 000 in player salary in 1926 , including paying all player expenses during the season , and player salaries ranged from $ 1 @,@ 500 to $ 3 @,@ 000 . According to March , the attendance for the season was nearly equal to the 274 @,@ 500 the team reported in their inaugural season . However , home attendance for games at the Polo Grounds dropped from 25 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 a game . The team 's attendance on the road was significantly higher in their early history — the team averaged 57 @,@ 000 in their three road games in 1925 . 
 Mara replaced Gibson as the team 's president before the 1927 season . He told March to spend whatever he felt necessary to build a championship caliber team . March overhauled the roster and the team finished 11 – 1 – 1 , while winning its first NFL championship . They barely broke even financially however , and the team was still giving away as many as 4 @,@ 000 tickets a game . Mara decided to reduce costs the following season , and instead of traveling first class , the Giants drove to games in a used bus , and stayed at local YMCAs instead of hotels . The team had to push the bus once for several miles when it broke down , and players had trouble sleeping at the Y. They won only four games , and Mara lost $ 40 @,@ 000 . 
 Before the 1929 season , Mara purchased the entire squad of the rival Detroit Wolverines , including star quarterback Benny Friedman , a team which had finished in third place the year before . The rosters of the two teams were combined under the Giants name and this led to immediate improvement as the Giants finished 13 – 1 – 1 . Friedman 's arrival in particular boosted tickets sales to an average of 25 @,@ 000 a game , which more than covered the expense of his high salary ( $ 10 @,@ 000 ) . The team made an $ 8 @,@ 500 profit on the season . 
 = = Wellington and Jack Mara take over : 1930 – 1963 = = 
 I guess the only reason I 'm staying in this now is Jack and Wellington . You 've seen them at the games . If the Giants ever amount to anything it 's all theirs . I 've still got the bookmaking and they 'll have the Giants . 
 After losing money in the 1929 stock market crash , Mara transferred ownership of the team over to his two sons in part to insulate the team from creditors . During the 1930 season , the team signed star Army halfback Red Cagle , who helped them at the box office . March later said , " When Red made his first appearance with the New York Giants , the additional attendance was enough to pay his salary [ $ 7 @,@ 500 ] for the remainder of the season and all of the next . His fame had filled the papers for three or four years and he helped receipts all over the circuit . " Tim Mara called their 1930 home game versus Green Bay , where they made $ 60 @,@ 000 aided by Cagle 's debut , a " lifesaver " . The Giants were projected gains of $ 20 @,@ 000 in 1930 , when they decided to hold a charity game for New York 's homeless against some of Notre Dame 's retired legends including the four horseman backfield from their 1924 team . The Giants won 22 – 0 in a game that raised $ 115 @,@ 183 for the homeless , and is often credited with establishing the legitimacy of the professional game . Despite losing money on the Notre Dame game , and another exhibition to the Staten Island <unk> , the Giants made a profit of $ 23 @,@ 000 on the year . 
 In 1931 the team was struggling financially again after the retirement of Friedman . Tim Mara lamented not deducting expenses from the charity game versus Notre Dame , which had cost Mara a loss of around $ 15 @,@ 000 . Friedman returned around mid @-@ season and his comeback boosted ticket sales . Mara also used promotions like a free ladies night game — which attracted 12 @,@ 000 women — to increase interest in the team . The Giants made a profit of $ 31 @,@ 000 in 1931 . Friedman quit the team after the season when Mara denied him an ownership stake , telling him " I 'm sorry ... but the Giants are for my sons . " 
 By 1932 , Wellington began keeping track of college players by studying " dozens of out @-@ of @-@ town newspapers " every day , and kept a file of all the players — pro and college — that he liked for the team . He updated the file every night , and by that year had begun giving his father lists of what he considered the best college players . After that season , he gave his father another list and suggested they draft more collegians as he felt the team was aging rapidly . When the New York Post became aware of this they published the following mocking poem : 
 Papa , please buy me a tackle . 
 I 'd like a big halfback , too . 
 I 'd like old Green Bay to <unk> . 
 Maybe Angelo <unk> would do . 
 Before the next season Tim Mara signed All @-@ American University of Michigan quarterback Harry Newman , and free agent halfback Ken Strong . Mara broke his own rule by offering Newman a contract which allowed him a percentage of the gate . That same season Wellington Mara 's mother finally allowed him to spend training camp living with the team . When he inadvertently received a black eye while he was helping the team with their punting drills , his father had to talk his mother out of making him come back home . 
 The 1934 NFL Championship Game , dubbed the " Sneakers Game " because the Giants donned sneakers at halftime to get better traction , resulted in a 30 – 13 win on the field for the team but an even more important victory in the box office . Tickets for the game sold so fast that Mara decided to add 6 @,@ 000 temporary seats on the sidelines and in other portions of the stadium , which resulted in the team taking in $ 64 @,@ 504 from that game alone . 
 = = = Wellington becomes secretary : 1935 – 1944 = = = 
 My Brother Jack 's president and treasurer , my Pop 's chairman of the board , and I 'm secretary . Pop and Jack worry about the tickets . Mom and I worry about the team . 
 By 1935 Jack Mara had received a degree from Fordham Law School , passed the bar , and was , at age 27 , the team 's president . By that same year , 19 ‑ year ‑ old Wellington had become the team 's secretary , and he started to exert influence over personal decisions . Newman retired before the 1935 season rather than come back from a back injury suffered the previous year when the team refused to give him a raise . This left Strong as the team 's top draw , and the Giants signed him to a contract which guaranteed him $ 4 @,@ 000 but gave him a percentage of the draw that could make his salary reach a maximum of $ 6 @,@ 000 depending on attendance . At midseason the team 's attendance had increased by 15 % from the previous year 's record ticket sales . Although Strong was paid well that season , and took advantage of high ticket sales from games in which he was injured , many of the other team 's players were not . " I felt pretty damn good , " Strong later said about his salary , " but guys like Hein , Morgan , and Burnett weren 't making much more than a hundred dollars a game . The salaries the front office fed to the newspapers weren 't exactly true . We had three All @-@ Stars on the Giants making less money than most of the bench warmers on the Dodgers . Hein was the greatest player the Giants ever had , but he didn 't start making $ 5 @,@ 000 until after his 12th season . " Hein remarked that he felt he was well paid for the time however , " I think at the time $ 150 [ his salary in 1931 ] was probably the highest pay of any lineman in the league . It was pretty good money , even though it wouldn 't sound that way now , but you could buy a loaf of bread for a nickel and get a full meal for thirty @-@ five cents in the <unk> back then . And you had no income tax . " 
 Wellington was a fan of George Washington University 's Alphonse " Tuffy " Leemans , and one of the first major personnel decisions he made was selecting the obscure running back in the second round of the NFL 's first draft in 1936 . The draft helped reduce player salaries as a drafted player could no longer negotiate with other teams . The Maras were fans of the reduced payouts . " We found out that it didn 't work to pay one star eight hundred dollars a game and the rest about one hundred , " said Tim Mara . " The majority of players resented it and their resentment showed in their play . " The Giants began to standardize pay , which they felt avoided player jealousy . The team paid all of their backs $ 150 a game , and all of their lineman $ 100 a game in 1936 , while Danowski , their quarterback , made $ 350 a contest . Strong was asked to take a pay cut from $ 6 @,@ 000 a season to $ 3 @,@ 200 , but he left for the new American Football League instead . The team finished in the black in 1936 . 
 In 1939 and 1940 , the Giants led the league in attendance , with 233 @,@ 440 in six home games in 1939 , and 247 @,@ 646 over seven home games in 1940 . They also had the league 's two biggest turnouts in 1939 in their games against the Washington Redskins ( 62 @,@ 543 ) and Bears ( 58 @,@ 693 ) . In 1940 , their game against the Brooklyn Dodgers , drew 54 @,@ 997 on December 1 at the Polo Grounds , which was also the league high for that season . In 1943 , the Giants led the league in attendance again with 245 @,@ 398 for six games , and had the league 's highest single game attendance for their game versus the Bears with 56 @,@ 691 . 
 = = = Post World War II era and beyond : 1945 – 1963 = = = 
 By 1946 , Tim Mara had given over complete control of the team to his sons . Jack , the older son , controlled the business aspects , while Wellington concentrated on the on @-@ field operations . In that same year , NBC televised the Giants game versus the Green Bay Packers on September 20 — the first non @-@ experimental televised game in league history . In 1953 , John Mara stated that he felt television was actually harmful to the Giants financial prospects . In court testimony at the government 's anti @-@ trust case against the NFL , Mara called for what he termed a " full @-@ house guarantee " , stating that unless all home game were guaranteed to be sold out , they should not be televised within a 75 @-@ mile ( 121 km ) radius of New York City . The Giants had made $ 49 @,@ 000 in gate revenue , $ 50 @,@ 000 in radio receipts , and $ 108 @,@ 000 in television receipts in 1952 . 
 Although the Giants were no longer the league 's top draw by 1955 , falling to ninth in attendance and being one of three teams which had decreased attendance compared to the previous season , the Maras were still financially secure enough to turn down an offer of one million dollars for the team . NFL commissioner Bert Bell had personally made the offer on behalf of an unidentified group of investors , and accorded to Bell the Maras responded , " [ f ] <unk> is our business and we intend to remain in it . " The offer was the largest for a franchise in pro football up to that point . The investment group was reportedly enticed by the team 's potential television revenue — at the time the Giants " television @-@ radio " income led the league at $ 150 @,@ 000 annually — and the 8 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 population of New York City from which it could draw . Despite the size of the offer , John Mara considered the figure low , and stated that he had " no idea " who was in the group attempting to buy the team . 
 Before the 1956 season , the Giants , who had previously been renting the Polo Grounds from baseball 's Giants at a rate of $ 75 @,@ 000 a year , began playing their home games at Yankee Stadium . The Giants run of championship game appearances in their late 1950s and early 1960s combined with their large market location translated into financial success . In 1958 they set a new home attendance record when 71 @,@ 163 fans attended their November 8 game against Baltimore . And in 1959 they established their next four highest home game totals by drawing between 66 @,@ 000 and 68 @,@ 000 fans for games versus the Eagles , Packers , Browns , and Steelers . By the early 1960s , the Giants were receiving $ 175 @,@ 000 a game under the NFL 's television contract with CBS — four times as much as small @-@ market Green Bay , which was one of the most successful teams of the era . However , in the league 's new contract , the Maras convinced the other owners that it would be in the best interest of the NFL to share television revenue equally , a practice which is still current , and is credited with strengthening the NFL . The Giants and professional football as a whole , were helped financially by their contest versus the Baltimore Colts in the 1958 NFL Championship game . The televised game became the first professional football game to go into overtime , and is credited with increasing the popularity of the NFL in the US . The explosion in interest in pro football was evidenced in the Giants financials : in 1956 they had less than 8 @,@ 000 season ticket holders and by 1963 that number had increased to over 50 @,@ 000 . They sold out every home game in 1962 and 1963 . Additionally , while scalpers hardly existed in 1956 , by 1963 they regularly received $ 25 for a $ 5 ticket . 
 The Giants captivated New York . Before the 1962 NFL championship game versus the Packers , 10 @,@ 000 fans at a New York Knicks game spontaneously began chanting " Beat Green Bay ! Beat Green Bay ! " , and when the 18 @,@ 000 tickets available to non season ticket holders went on sale for the game , they sold within three hours . Fans made reservations for motels in Pennsylvania , New Jersey , and Connecticut so they could watch the game out of the 75 mile blackout zone , and even though the game was played in single digit weather with 35 mph winds , only 299 fans who bought tickets stayed home . 
 = = Wilderness years : 1964 – 1978 = = 
 After advancing to the league championship game in five out of the past six seasons , the Giants financial outlook was bright heading into the 1964 season . The team even went so far as to book movie theaters where fans could watch the team 's games for six dollars . However , the team struggled mightily , finishing 2 – 10 – 2 in 1964 , beginning an 18 @-@ season playoff drought . This period in team history is often referred to as " the wilderness years " . In 1965 , Jack Mara died , leaving his 50 % share in the team to his son Tim . 
 While Wellington and Jack had a solid relationship , Tim and Wellington frequently clashed . " Wellington Mara lives the spiritual life . " Former Giant Frank Gifford later recalled . " I never heard him utter a swear word . He goes to mass almost every day and has put all eleven of his children through catholic colleges . That 's Well 's life : his family , his church , and his Giants . " Tim , however , had two ex @-@ wives and lived a more outgoing , laid back lifestyle . 
 Wellington fought the AFL @-@ NFL merger that took place in the 1966 season , and as a result , the league gave him $ 10 million to allow another team , the Jets , into the city as an NFL team . The money was paid out in yearly installments of $ 500 @,@ 000 . In 1971 , Pete <unk> , writing in New York magazine , said that " a conservative estimate of Wellington Mara 's profit would begin at $ 1 million . " The writer said that the Maras were known to treat positive reporters well and mistreat negative ones , sometimes by giving them unfavorable seats and on some occasions by supposedly calling their sports editors to request they no long cover the team . 
 Desiring their own home stadium , in the early 1970s the Giants reached an agreement with the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority to play their home games at a brand @-@ new , state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art , dedicated football stadium . Some New Yorkers were furious and Mayor John Lindsay had attempted to keep the team in the city by proposing to buy Yankee Stadium and renovate it at a cost of $ 24 million . Lindsay estimated that they brought $ 3 million to the city , and was anxious to keep that revenue , as well as satisfy New York Giant fans . <unk> characterized the Giants fan base at the time as mostly " white , suburban and fairly well to do , and its members drive cars to football games . " The battle became nasty with members of the New York City side claiming that the Maras " complained of how inconvenient it was for them to park , or for them to get out to the neighborhood . " They claimed the Maras " never really negotiated . They just listened ... I think they were afraid if they asked for something , we might give it to them — and they wanted to keep us from offering a deal that they couldn 't turn down . " In fact , the Maras had already made the agreement to move out of the city , even though Wellington was still placating the city . He felt this was a factor in the Mara 's decision to move the stadium , as the attendees could drive to their New Jersey stadium as opposed to traveling through the Bronx to Yankee Stadium . The new stadium , which would become known as Giants Stadium , was to be built at a brand new sports complex in East Rutherford , New Jersey . The decision met with outrage from some New Yorkers , and the city 's mayor John Lindsay sought legal action to prevent the team from playing in Yankee Stadium — or anywhere else in New York — and demanded a congressional investigation into the deal . 
 As the complex was being built , and their current home at Yankee Stadium was being renovated , they would be without a home for three years . Their final full season at Yankee Stadium was 1972 . After playing their first two games there in 1973 , the Giants played the rest of their home games in 1973 , as well as all of their home games in 1974 , at the Yale Bowl in New Haven , Connecticut . This was done primarily out of a desire to have their own home field , as opposed to having to share Shea Stadium with the Jets . Initially the NFL had a blackout policy which prevented them from playing in Connecticut , but congress passed legislation , later signed by Richard Nixon , that changed the blackout rule . However , between access problems , neighborhood issues , the fact that the Yale Bowl was not ideally suited for pro football ( the stadium did not have lights , nor does it have lights today ) , the age of the stadium ( it was built in 1914 ) , and the lack of modern amenities , the Giants reconsidered their decision when their stadium was not completed on schedule in time for the 1975 season . Construction was delayed a year because of construction delays , cost overruns , seven lawsuits by various groups , and political haggling — New York 's Governor attempted to block the team 's move , and the incumbent Democratic New Jersey Governor and his republican challenger argued over the stadium . They ultimately agreed to share Shea Stadium with the Jets for the 1975 season . The Giants left Yale Bowl after losing all seven home games played at Yale in the 1974 season and compiling a home record of 1 – 11 over that two @-@ year stretch . 
 Giants Stadium opened in 1976 to a sellout crowd . The stadium cost $ 78 million to build , and had a capacity of 80 @,@ 242 . The Giants led the league in home attendance in 1978 , drawing 604 @,@ 800 in their eight games . However , one of the low points in team history occurred during the season : the so @-@ called " Miracle at the Meadowlands " . With the Giants needing only to kneel the ball to secure a certain victory against the Philadelphia Eagles , they chose to call a running play — which resulted in a fumble that was returned for a game winning touchdown by the Eagles . Two games later , angry Giants fans burned tickets in the parking lot . Protests continued throughout the remainder of the season , reaching a crescendo in the final home game . A group of fans hired a small plane to fly over the stadium on game day carrying a banner that read : " 15 years of lousy football ... we 've had enough . " The game had 24 @,@ 374 no @-@ shows , and fans hanged an effigy of Wellington Mara in the Stadium parking lot . 
 = = Modern history : 1979 – present = = 
 The Giants made the decision to hire a General Manager for the first time in team history following the 1978 season . However , disagreements during the search caused severe friction and discord between Wellington and Tim Mara . At one point they had tried to hire Jan Van <unk> , a league executive , but he declined the offer due to the ownership squabbles . Finally , the Maras asked NFL Commissioner Pete Rozelle to step in with a recommendation . Rozelle discussed the hiring with former Giants Frank Gifford and Tom Scott , who recommended hiring George Young , who worked in personnel for the Miami Dolphins and had been an assistant coach for the Baltimore Colts . They had already recommended Young to Wellington and his son John who both liked the choice . But felt if Rozelle presented the recommendation as his own idea Wellington and Tim would be more likely to accept the pick , as relations were so bad that any idea that came from one side was immediately rejected by the other . Rozelle recommended Young , he was hired , and was instrumental in turning around the fortunes of the franchise . " Oh , there is no question he helped save the franchise , " John Mara said . " It looked like a no @-@ win situation . He came in and overhauled everything we did in a more professional way . " Despite the hiring and subsequent success , the rift between the Maras lasted for several years and , at one point a partition had to be put between the two in the owner 's box . 
 Following the 1983 season , the Giants were involved in a fight for the services of star linebacker Lawrence Taylor — who the team had drafted number two overall in the 1981 NFL Draft — with the New Jersey Generals of the USFL and the Giants . Taylor had been given a $ 1 million interest @-@ free , 25 @-@ year loan by the Generals ' owner Donald Trump on December 14 , 1983 , with the provision that he would begin playing in the USFL in 1988 . Taylor quickly regretted the decision and less than a month later attempted to get out of the agreement . The Giants , who were eager to keep Taylor , took part in attempting to free Taylor from it . The results of this tussle included many considerations but the ultimate result was threefold : Taylor had to return the $ 1 million to Trump ; the Giants were required to pay Trump $ 750 @,@ 000 over the next five seasons in order for Trump to release Taylor 's rights ; and Taylor was given a new six @-@ year $ 6 @.@ 2 @-@ million contract by the Giants . With Taylor retained , the Giants won two Super Bowls ; in 1986 , led by Taylor , who won the league 's Most Valuable Player award , they defeated the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XXI , and in 1990 , they defeated the Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XXV . The decision to put football matters in the hands of Young was a key factor in those victories ; 19 of the 22 Giants starters in Super Bowl XXI , plus the team 's kicker and punter , were acquired after Young took over as GM . 
 The 1990 season and Super Bowl win marked the end of an era for the Giants . Shortly after the win , defensive coordinator Bill Belichick left to become head coach of the Cleveland Browns , and Parcells decided in the spring of 1991 to leave the Giants for a career in broadcasting . There was also an ownership change in what had been one of the most stable front offices in professional sports . In February 1991 , after being diagnosed with Cancer , Tim Mara sold his 50 % interest in the team to Bob Tisch for a reported $ 80 million . The sale was actually worked out before the Super Bowl but not announced until afterwards , so as to avoid distracting the team . It marked the first time since their inception in 1925 that the Giants had not been wholly owned and controlled by the Mara family . 
 Tisch was technically the team 's co @-@ chief executive at first , however given his lack of football knowledge he chose to defer to Wellington Mara on football decisions in his initial seasons with the club . Although he later took a more active role in making decisions related to the football side of the team , in general , Tisch concentrated on the financial aspects , while Mara focused on the on @-@ field product . After leading the league in attendance in 2001 , the Giants finished second to Washington from 2002 to 2005 . 
 On October 25 , 2005 , Giants patriarch Wellington Mara died after a brief illness , at the age of 89 . Mara had been involved with the Giants since he was nine years old , when he was a ball boy for the team . Mara was universally beloved by the players . Hall of Fame linebacker Harry Carson , who played during some of the team 's down years in the 1970s , never became angry at Mara despite being frustrated with the team 's performances . " The Giants ’ organization cares about its players more than most teams in the NFL . This stems from the top . The Maras are family men and Wellington , especially , has sought to cultivate a family atmosphere in the team .... If any NFL owner deserves a championship , it is Mara . " According to Parcells , Wellington made an effort to get to know each of his players . " The Giants are Wellington Mara ’ s whole life , they have been his whole life . He ’ s at the office every day , he ’ s at practice very day , he loves hanging around the locker room and getting to know the players . " Despite his strong religious convictions , he put aside his personal beliefs , and avoided preaching to players who were having problems . " Nobody did more for me than Wellington Mara . " Lawrence Taylor said . " He didn ’ t have to save me , he didn ’ t have to keep helping me to find help .... And he never lectured me . I could tell he disapproved but he never lectured me . " Several players went to Mara 's bedside as he was dying to say goodbye to the owner . The team dedicated their next game to Mara , and shut out the Redskins 36 – 0 . 
 Just twenty days after Mara 's death , on November 15 , 2005 , Tisch died at the age of 79 . He was diagnosed in 2004 with inoperable brain cancer . Tisch was a philanthropist all his life and donated considerable sums of money to charitable causes . After his diagnosis , he donated money to institutions aimed towards the research of drugs and treatments to control brain tumors . 
 In 2010 , the New Meadowlands Stadium opened , replacing Giants Stadium . The new stadium is a 50 / 50 partnership between the Giants and Jets , and while the stadium is owned by the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority on paper , the two teams jointly built the stadium using private funds , and administer it jointly through New Meadowlands Stadium Corporation . The Giants had previously planned a $ 300 @-@ million renovation to the Meadowlands , before deciding in favor of the new stadium which was originally estimated to cost approximately $ 600 million , before rising to an estimated cost of $ 1 @.@ 2 billion . One advantage gained by owning the stadium is that the teams saved considerable money in tax payments , leasing the land from the state at a cost of $ 6 @.@ 3 million per year . The state paid for all utilities , including the $ 30 million needed to install them . Both teams received $ 150 million loans from the NFL to pay for construction of the stadium . Representatives from the league 's teams voted 30 – 2 in favor of the loan . 
 The Giants are currently owned and operated by John K. Mara and Steve Tisch — the sons of Wellington Mara and Bob Tisch . Mara had run the day @-@ to @-@ day operations under Bob Tisch 's supervision in the years leading up to his father 's death . Forbes magazine estimates the 2010 value of the team at $ 1 @.@ 183 billion . This ranks them fourth in the 30 team league in terms of value . The value has steadily increased from $ 288 million in 1998 , to the current value . The magazine estimated their revenue in 2004 at $ 175 million , of which $ 43 million came from gate receipts . Operating revenue was $ 26 @.@ 7 million , and player salary was $ 97 million . The team finished second to the Redskins in the NFL in attendance in 2006 , 2007 , and 2008 , drawing 628 @,@ 910 , 629 @,@ 848 , and 632 @,@ 554 respectively . They fell to third behind the Cowboys and Redskins in 2009 with 629 @,@ 615 . Before the 2010 season , Forbes estimated the team 's value at $ 1 @.@ 2 billion . 
 As of 2010 , major sponsors include Gatorade , Anheuser Busch , Toyota , Timex , and Verizon Wireless . Recent former sponsors include Miller Brewing and North Fork Bank . Game day concessions are provided by Aramark , and the Giants average ticket price is $ 90 . As of 2014 , the Giants were listed by Forbes as the fourth most profitable NFL team with a value of $ 2 @.@ 1 billion . 
 = Melford Stevenson = 
 Sir Aubrey Melford Steed Stevenson , PC ( 17 October 1902 – 26 December 1987 ) was an English barrister and later a High Court judge , whose judicial career was marked by his controversial conduct and outspoken views . One of his fellow judges , Sir Robin Dunn , described him as " the worst judge since the war " . Dunn is generally thought , however , to have harboured an irrational grudge . 
 After establishing a legal career in the field of insolvency , Stevenson served during the Second World War as a Deputy Judge Advocate . He was subsequently Judge Advocate at the 1945 war crimes trial of former personnel of the German submarine U @-@ 852 for their actions in what became known as the Peleus affair . In 1954 Stevenson represented the British Government in Kenya during Jomo Kenyatta 's unsuccessful appeal against his conviction for membership of the rebel organisation Mau Mau . Later that year he represented the litigants in the <unk> Down affair , which led to changes in the law on compulsory purchase . In 1955 he defended Ruth Ellis , the last woman to be executed for murder in the United Kingdom , and two years later took part in the unsuccessful prosecution of suspected serial killer John Bodkin Adams . He was deeply distressed by the execution of Ellis , for whom there had been no defence in law , but who was expected to have been reprieved by the Home Secretary . 
 Stevenson became a High Court judge in 1957 , and acquired a reputation for severity in sentencing . He sentenced the Kray twins to life imprisonment in 1969 , with a recommendation that they serve not less than 30 years each . In 1970 Stevenson passed long sentences on eight Cambridge University students who took part in the Garden House riot , and the following year gave Jake Prescott of the Angry Brigade 15 years for conspiracy to cause explosions . 
 After Dunn 's strange attack , several high @-@ profile legal figures came to Stevenson 's defence , among them fellow judge and biographer Lord Roskill , who pointed out that Stevenson could be merciful to those he regarded as victims . Lord Devlin described Stevenson as the " last of the grand eccentrics " . Stevenson retired from the bench in 1979 aged 76 , and died at St Leonards in East Sussex on 26 December 1987 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Stevenson was born in Newquay , Cornwall , on 17 October 1902 , the eldest child and only son of the Reverend John George Stevenson and his wife Olive , sister of Henry Wickham Steed , journalist and editor of The Times from 1919 until 1922 . Reverend Stevenson , a Congregational minister , died when his son was fourteen years old , plunging the family into economic distress . An uncle who was a solicitor funded Stevenson 's ongoing education at Dulwich College in London , intending that the young Stevenson would join the family firm once his schooling was complete . There was no money available to allow him to attend university , so Stevenson studied for an external London University LLB degree after becoming an articled clerk in his uncle 's legal practice . Stevenson was determined to become a barrister , and joined the Inner Temple , of which he became the treasurer in 1972 . 
 = = Career at the bar = = 
 Shortly after being called to the bar in 1925 he joined the chambers of <unk> Stable at 2 Crown Office Row , now Fountain Court Chambers . He remained there for the rest of his legal career except for the war years , eventually becoming head of chambers . 
 Most of Stevenson 's early legal work was in the field of <unk> , " almost always with small fees " , and he made steady progress until the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 . He did very little criminal work in this part of his career . In 1940 he joined the army and served until 1945 as a Deputy Judge Advocate with the rank of major ; he was appointed a King 's Counsel in 1943 . In 1945 he served as Judge Advocate at the war crimes trial in Hamburg of former personnel of the German submarine U @-@ 852 , the so @-@ called Peleus affair . The U @-@ boat captain , Heinz @-@ Wilhelm Eck , was accused of ordering his crew to open fire on the survivors of a Greek ship , the SS Peleus , which they had just torpedoed and sunk . Eck and two of his junior officers were executed by firing squad ; he was the only U @-@ boat commander of the war to be convicted of war crimes committed at sea . 
 Stevenson was elected a bencher of the Inner Temple in 1950 , and appointed Recorder of Cambridge , a part @-@ time judge , in 1952 ; he had previously served as Recorder for Rye from 1944 to 1951 . In 1954 he represented the British Government in Kenya during Jomo Kenyatta 's unsuccessful appeal against his conviction for membership of the rebel Mau Mau ; Kenyatta was a moderate , and is now considered unlikely to have been a member of the organisation . He was imprisoned until 1959 , lived under house arrest until 1961 , and became the first president of the newly independent Kenya in 1964 . Also in 1954 Stevenson represented the Marten family in the <unk> Down affair . The Air Ministry had compulsorily purchased land for bombing practice before the war , promising to return it after the end of hostilities . When they did not honour this promise , the Martens successfully campaigned to be allowed to buy the land back . The case led to a public enquiry , changes in the law on compulsory purchase , and the first resignation of a government minister since 1917 . 
 According to fellow judge Eustace Roskill , Stevenson 's " fluent delivery , distinctive voice , remarkable sense of timing , and pungency of phrase soon marked him out as an advocate of note . " One commentator described him as a " shameless performer " in court . He was probably the most successful barrister of his day . 
 In 1955 , aided by junior counsel Sebag Shaw and Peter Rawlinson , Stevenson defended Ruth Ellis against the charge of murdering her lover . Stevenson 's decision to keep his cross @-@ examination of the prosecution witnesses to a minimum , and his " near silent performance in court " , have been severely criticised by Muriel <unk> , Ellis 's sister . He opened the defence by saying : " Let me make this abundantly plain : there is no question here but this woman shot this man ... You will not hear one word from me – or from the lady herself – questioning that . " The jury took 23 minutes to find Ellis guilty ; she was sentenced to be hanged , the last woman executed for murder in the United Kingdom . Public revulsion at the case is thought to have played a part in the abolition of capital punishment in the UK in 1969 . 
 Stevenson was a leading member of the legal team assisting Sir Reginald Manningham @-@ Buller during the failed prosecution of alleged serial killer Dr John Bodkin Adams in 1957 . The prosecution 's conduct of the trial has been heavily criticised , and its decision to drop a second murder charge via a nolle prosequi was scathingly described by the trial judge , Patrick Devlin , as " an abuse of process " . Stevenson was of the opinion that had he been allowed to , he " could have successfully prosecuted Adams on six murder counts " . Journalist Rodney <unk> reports that Stevenson said of Adams ' decision not to give evidence in court " I firmly believe justice is not served by the present law . It should be possible for the prosecution to directly examine an accused ... It was a clear example of the privilege of silence having enabled a guilty man to escape . " In Stevenson 's opinion Adams " was so incredibly lucky to have literally got away with murder " . It was widely thought that had Stevenson rather than Manningham @-@ Buller led for the prosecution Adams would have been convicted 
 = = Judicial career = = 
 Stevenson was appointed a High Court judge on 1 October 1957 , and ( as is traditional ) was knighted a few days later . From 1958 until 1960 he was a member of an Inter @-@ Departmental Committee on Human Artificial Insemination . For the first four years of his judicial career Stevenson was assigned to the Probate , Divorce and Admiralty Division , after which he was transferred to the Queen 's Bench Division , where he presided over criminal cases . He then began to attract press attention . Known for his outspokenness , Stevenson described one case as a " pretty anaemic kind of rape " , because the victim was the accused 's ex @-@ girlfriend and had been hitch @-@ hiking , before sentencing the man to a two @-@ year suspended sentence . To a man acquitted of rape , he remarked " I see you come from Slough . It is a terrible place . You can go back there . " In similar vein he told a husband involved in a divorce case that his decision to live in Manchester was " a wholly incomprehensible choice for any free man to make " . 
 Following a 1964 parallel of his comments in the wake of the Bodkin Adams case , Stevenson attracted criticism for his summing up to the jury in the case of Ryan ( 1964 ) 50 Cr App R 144 , at 148 : 
 It is , we think , clear ... that it is wrong to say to a jury " Because the accused exercised what is undoubtedly his right , the privilege of remaining silent , you may draw an inference of guilt " ; it is quite a different matter to say " this accused , as he is entitled to do , has not advanced at an earlier stage the explanation that has been offered to you today ; you the jury may take that into account when you are assessing the weight that you think it right to attribute to the explanation . " 
 Professor of English law Rupert Cross described Stevenson 's pronouncement as " gibberish " , and to the Court of Appeal in 1977 it seemed that Stevenson had made a distinction " without a difference " . Stevenson was ultimately vindicated by Parliament : the formulation he proposed is precisely reflected in the caution prescribed under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 . 
 Stevenson believed that it was the judge 's duty to help prevent crime by imposing robust punishments on those found guilty , and he became noted for the severity of his sentencing , which led to occasional calls from the " liberal establishment " for his resignation . In 1969 he sentenced the Kray twins , Reggie and Ronnie , to a minimum of 30 years in jail each , saying , " In my view , society has earned a rest from your activities . " He remarked later that the Krays had only told the truth twice during the trial : when Reggie referred to a barrister as " a fat slob " and when Ronnie accused the judge of being biased . 
 In 1970 he controversially gave what were seen as excessively long sentences to eight Cambridge University students who took part in the Garden House riot , a demonstration against the Greek military government that turned violent . He noted that the sentences would have been even longer but for the students ' exposure to " the evil influence of some members of the university " . There were few , if any , examples of serious violence at student demonstrations in the years which followed the trial . The following year he gave a 15 @-@ year sentence to Jake Prescott , a member of the Angry Brigade , for conspiracy to cause explosions . Prescott had been found not guilty of direct involvement in the bombings , but had admitted to addressing three envelopes . His sentence was reduced to ten years on appeal . 
 Stevenson turned down a chance to join the Court of Appeal , a decision he later regretted , and was subsequently critical of some of its decisions . He was appointed a Privy Counsellor in the 1973 New Year Honours . His reference to the Sexual Offences Act 1967 as a " buggers ' charter " earned him a reprimand from the Lord Chancellor Elwyn Jones , and a parliamentary motion in the UK House of Commons calling for his resignation . In 1976 the Court of Appeal overturned three of Stevenson 's decisions in a single day , and Labour MP Marcus Lipton tabled another parliamentary motion calling for his removal from the bench . 
 But Eustace Roskill cautions that " It would be wrong to judge Stevenson simply by the notoriety of a few cases .... he showed great mercy to those whom he saw to be victims rather than aggressors . " In the early 1970s , while conducting training sessions in sentencing for newly appointed recorders , Stevenson summed up his attitude : " You sentence off the top of your head . If the man 's a shit , down he goes . If there 's something to be said for him , you do your best not to put him inside . " Despite his stern and authoritarian reputation , in the 1970s he sometimes submitted letters to the Court of Appeal supporting the reduction of his sentences . 
 When asked towards the end of his career whether he had been stung by the criticism he had received , Stevenson replied " A lot of my colleagues are just constipated Methodists " . There was no compulsory retirement age for a judge with Stevenson 's length of service , which resulted in some speculation following the announcement of his retirement from the bench in 1979 that perhaps his unpopularity with certain sections of the media and establishment had led to pressure on him to step down . 
 In an article published on the day of Stevenson 's retirement Corinna Adams of The Guardian observed that : 
 He [ Stevenson ] holds the record among Old Bailey judges for having his sentences queried and taken to appeal . He also holds the record for getting away with it . He has gradually become such a stock hate @-@ figure that lawyers tend automatically to advise their clients , if found guilty , to take their cases higher up . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Stevenson married Anna Cecilia Francesca Imelda in 1929 . He " turned her [ his wife ] out " after he discovered that she had been having an affair with Colonel Maurice Buckmaster , head of the French section of the Special Operations Executive , and they were divorced in 1942 . They had one daughter . He married his second wife , Rosalind Monica Wagner , the sister of Anthony Wagner , in 1947 , and together they had a son – who also became a barrister – and a daughter . 
 After the war Stevenson stood as the Conservative Party candidate to represent Maldon in the 1945 United Kingdom general election . He opened his campaign by declaring that in the interests of a clean fight , he would make no allusions to the " alleged homosexuality " of his opponent , Tom Driberg , who heavily defeated him in the vote ; Stevenson returned to his legal practice the following year . 
 Despite his severe manner Stevenson was extremely sociable , and he was often the centre of a lively crowd at the bar of the Garrick Club , of which he was a member . His home on the Sussex coast was called <unk> , sometimes taken to reflect his authoritarian views , but the area had been known by that name for many years before his arrival . Following his retirement Stevenson called for the restoration of the death penalty for all murders , and made regular guest appearances on television until his health and eyesight began to fail . Among the programmes he took part in was Granada Television 's six @-@ part series The Bounds of Freedom , broadcast in 1979 . 
 Stevenson died at St Leonards on 26 December 1987 . A memorial tablet to him and his wife was erected in the Church of St Mary the Virgin , Rye , in 1992 . 
 = Young Love ( Janet Jackson song ) = 
 " Young Love " is a song by American recording artist Janet Jackson from her self @-@ titled debut album ( 1982 ) . It was written and produced by René Moore , Angela Winbush , with additional production by Bobby Watson . It was released as Jackson 's debut single on July 7 , 1982 by A & M Records . Prior to her rise to fame , the singer had no interest in pursuing a musical career . Despite this , she was motivated to pursue a career in entertainment , and considered the idea after recording herself in the studio . After acting in the variety show The Jacksons , she began starring in several TV series and commenced recording her debut album . 
 " Young Love " received generally positive reviews from music critics , who highlighted it as a standout song from Janet Jackson and praised its catchiness . It peaked at number 64 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and was a success on the R & B chart , additionally peaking at number 16 in New Zealand . In order to promote her album , she performed the song on Soul Train and American Bandstand . In recent years , she has included the song on her 2008 Rock Witchu Tour and her performance at the 2010 Essence Music Festival . 
 = = Background = = 
 Janet Jackson was born in Gary , Indiana , the youngest of ten children . Jackson had initially desired to become a horse racing jockey or entertainment lawyer , with plans to support herself through acting . Despite this , she was anticipated to pursue a career in entertainment , and considered the idea after recording herself in the studio . At age seven , Jackson performed at the Las Vegas Strip at the MGM Casino and began acting in the variety show The Jacksons in 1976 . The year after , she was selected to have a starring role as Penny Gordon Woods in the sitcom Good Times . She later starred in A New Kind of Family before joining the cast of Diff 'rent Strokes , portraying Charlene Duprey for two years . Jackson also played the recurring role of Cleo Hewitt during the fourth season of Fame , but expressed indifference towards the series . When Jackson was sixteen , she was arranged a contract with A & M Records and began recording her debut album with the assistance of her father , working with a number of songwriters and producers such as René Moore , Angela Winbush and Bobby Watson , who produced her first single , entitled " Young Love " , released on July 7 , 1982 . 
 = = Composition and reception = = 
 Lou Broadus , music director of <unk> Radio , described the song as an " uptempo , happy song with a good hook " . After the single " Young Love " was released , it became a hit with young people . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from website AllMusic noted that Jackson demonstrated " no distinctive musical personality of her own , which isn 't surprising considering that she was in her teens . [ ... ] Only " Young Love " stands out among the undistinguished , sub @-@ disco thumpers and drippy ballads . Similarly , Wilson & Alroy 's Record Reviews commented that " only " Young Love " has the catchiness Winbush is capable of " among the first part of the album . 
 In the United States , " Young Love " received little notoriety on the principal singles chart , the Billboard Hot 100 ; it was able to reach a peak of number 64 . However , on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , the single managed to reach number six . In New Zealand , " Young Love " debuted at number 46 on its singles chart , on the issue dated March 13 , 1983 . Several weeks later , on April 17 , 1983 , the song reached its peak of number 16 . It fell off the chart on May 1 , at number 33 . A year later , it re @-@ entered the singles chart , at number 45 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In order to promote Janet Jackson , she performed the song on American TV shows American Bandstand and Soul Train in 1982 . Several years later , Jackson included the song on her 2008 Rock Witchu Tour in the " Pre @-@ Control Medley " section of the show . It was later added to her performance at the 2010 Essence Music Festival , held in New Orleans , Louisiana , which she headlined . 
 = = Official versions = = 
 Album Version - 4 : 58 
 Seven Inch Version ° - 3 : 41 
 12 " Dance Mix - 5 : 07 
 ° Unavailable on CD 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 US vinyl / 7 " single 
 " Young Love " – 3 : 39 
 " The Magic is Working " - 4 : 08 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Janet Jackson - vocals 
 René Moore - songwriter , producer 
 Angela Winbush - songwriter , producer 
 Bobby Watson - producer 
 Harry Langdon - <unk> 
 Allen Zentz - mastering 
 Source : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = French fry vending machine = 
 A French fry vending machine is a vending machine that dispenses hot French fries , also known as chips . The first known french fry vending machine was developed circa 1982 by the defunct Precision Fry Foods Pty Ltd. in Australia . A few companies have developed and manufactured French fry vending machines and prototypes . Furthermore , a prototype machine was also developed at Wageningen University in the Netherlands . 
 = = Brands , manufacturers and prototypes = = 
 = = = Historical = = = 
 The now defunct Australian company Precision Fry Foods Pty Ltd. designed the first known French fry vending machine , named Mr. French Fry . The company registered the design with the Australian government in January 1982 . The machine cooked hot chips within 60 seconds , and operated using three AUD $ 0 @.@ 20 coins . A salt packet was included underneath the cup that the chips were served in . 
 Another company , Houser <unk> Co . , Inc . , developed a French fry vending machine named Mr. Crispy 's , which was used in various locations such as college campuses and factories since at least September 1990 . The fries were cooked in 365 ° F sunflower oil for around 40 seconds , and 500 orders of fries were prepared before the oil was changed . The machine had a feature that automatically turned it off in the event of a malfunction , and it also had a fire extinguisher built into it . 
 = = = Contemporary = = = 
 <unk> Technology , based in Shenzhen Province , China , began development of the Robo French fry machine in 2008 , which delivers hot French fries in around 95 seconds . <unk> Technology was acquired by Breaktime Solutions in Belgium . The machine was developed by Belgian entrepreneurs , and field tested in Brussels , Belgium during the summer of 2012 . The machine weighs 750 pounds , and can cook French fries in beef fat or cooking oil . Breaktime Solutions adapted the machine to operate using beef fat , the development of which took a year . It requires manual servicing and cleaning after around 150 orders are prepared . Later developments included installation of a ventilation system that uses three filters to reduce odors emitting from the machine . The New York Post has referred to the Robo French fry machine as the " Rolls Royce of vending machines . " In August 2013 , an order of French fries from the machine was priced at USD $ 3 @.@ 50 . Customers can choose an accompaniment of mayonnaise or ketchup , and can optionally add harissa , all of which are provided in single @-@ serving packets . The machine also dispenses a small fork . 
 E @-@ Vend Technology , a Russian company , manufactures a French fry vending machine in China and Israel using technology from the United States . The machine uses frozen French fries , and prepares them in around 45 seconds using hot air , rather than cooking oil . 
 <unk> , <unk> , based in <unk> Mikuláš , Slovakia markets a French fry vending machine . 
 After ten years of development , in January 2015 the Hot Chips Company in Perth , Australia released a hot chips vending machine that uses rice bran oil . The company stated plans to produce and market more machines sometime in 2015 , and has developed four prototypes that were tested in Adelaide and Perth . The prototypes also supply condiments , including one named " chicken salt , " which is chicken @-@ flavored salt . 
 In September 2015 at Wageningen University in the Netherlands , students and entrepreneurs presented a fully automatic , prototype vending machine that cooks frozen potato strips by deep frying them . The final product is served with mayonnaise , ketchup or curry . The process takes around two minutes from start to finish , in which the product is served in a paper cup . The potato strips are stored in a frozen state inside the machine at − 18 ° C , and it cooks them in oil at 180 ° C. The unit uses a specially @-@ designed dispenser to prevent the potatoes from being crushed or broken . As of September 2015 , only the single prototype is available , which is housed at Wageningen University . Orders are placed using a touchscreen , and a fork and salt are provided separately in a box . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Minnie Pwerle = 
 Minnie Pwerle ( also Minnie <unk> or Minnie Motorcar <unk> ; born between 1910 and 1922 – 18 March 2006 ) was an Australian Aboriginal artist . She came from Utopia , Northern Territory ( <unk> in local language ) , a cattle station in the Sandover area of Central Australia 300 kilometres ( 190 mi ) northeast of Alice Springs . 
 Minnie began painting in 2000 at about the age of 80 , and her pictures soon became popular and sought @-@ after works of contemporary Indigenous Australian art . In the years after she took up painting on canvas , until she died in 2006 , Minnie 's works were exhibited around Australia and collected by major galleries , including the Art Gallery of New South Wales , the National Gallery of Victoria and the Queensland Art Gallery . With popularity came pressure from those keen to acquire her work . She was allegedly " kidnapped " by people who wanted her to paint for them , and there have been media reports of her work being forged . Minnie 's work is often compared with that of her sister @-@ in @-@ law Emily Kame Kngwarreye , who also came from the Sandover and took up acrylic painting late in life . Minnie 's daughter , Barbara Weir , is a respected artist in her own right . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Minnie was born in the early 20th century near Utopia , Northern Territory , 300 kilometres ( 190 mi ) north @-@ east of Alice Springs , Northern Territory . Utopia was a cattle station that was returned to Indigenous ownership in the late 1970s . It is part of a broader region known as the Sandover , containing about 20 Indigenous outstations and centred on the Sandover River . Minnie was one of the traditional owners of Utopia station recognised in the 1980 Indigenous land claim made over the property ; her particular country was known as Atnwengerrp . 
 Pwerle ( in the <unk> language ) or <unk> ( in <unk> ) is a skin name , one of 16 used to denote the subsections or subgroups in the kinship system of central Australian Indigenous people . These names define kinship relationships that influence preferred marriage partners , and may be associated with particular totems . Although they may be used as terms of address , they are not surnames in the sense used by Europeans . Thus " Minnie " is the element of the artist 's name that is specifically hers . 
 Estimates of Minnie 's birthdate vary widely . The National Gallery of Victoria estimates around 1915 ; Birnberg 's biographical survey of Indigenous artists from central Australia gives a birth date of around 1920 ; The new McCulloch 's Encyclopedia of Australian Art suggests around 1922 ; Elizabeth Fortescue 's biographical essay in Art of Utopia offers a range between 1910 and 1920 . The uncertainty arises because Indigenous Australians often estimate dates of birth by comparison with other events , especially for those born before contact with European Australians . Minnie was one of six children , and had three sisters : Molly , born around 1920 , Emily , born around 1922 , and <unk> , born in the 1930s . She was of the <unk> and <unk> Aboriginal language groups . 
 In about 1945 , Minnie had an affair with a married man , Jack Weir , described by one source as a pastoral station owner , by a second as " an Irish Australian man who owned a cattle run called Bundy River Station " , and by another as an Irish " stockman " . A relationship such as that between Minnie and Weir was illegal , and the pair were jailed ; Weir died shortly after his release . Minnie had a child from their liaison , who was partly raised by Minnie 's sister @-@ in @-@ law , artist Emily Kngwarreye , and became prominent Indigenous artist Barbara Weir . Barbara Weir was one of the Stolen Generations . At about the age of nine , she was forcibly taken from her family , who believed she had then been killed . The family were reunited in the late 1960s , but Barbara did not form a close bond with Minnie . Barbara married Mervyn Torres , and as of 2000 had six children and thirteen grandchildren . 
 Minnie went on to have six further children with her husband " Motorcar " Jim <unk> , including Aileen , Betty , Raymond and Dora <unk> , and two others who by 2010 had died . Her grandchildren include Fred Torres , who founded private art gallery <unk> in 1993 , and artist Teresa <unk> ( or Pwerle ) . 
 Minnie began painting in late 1999 or 2000 , when she was almost 80 . When asked why she had not begun earlier ( painting and batik works had been created at Utopia for over 20 years ) , her daughter Barbara Weir reported Minnie 's answer as being that " no @-@ one had asked her " . By the 2000s , she was reported as living at <unk> , the largest of Utopia 's communities , or at <unk> ( also <unk> , again in the Sandover region ) . Sprightly and outgoing , even in her eighties she could outrun younger women chasing goannas for <unk> , and she continued to create art works until two days before her death on 18 March 2006 . She was outlived by all her sisters except Maggie Pwerle , mother of artists Gloria and Kathleen Petyarre ( or <unk> ) . 
 = = Career = = 
 In the 1970s and 1980s Utopia became well known for the design and production of batiks . By 1981 there were 50 artists at Utopia creating batik works ; 88 artists participated in a major design project supported by the Central Australian Aboriginal Media Association . Although several sources comment that artistic activity at Utopia began with batik and only later moved to painting , they do not state whether or not Minnie was a textile artist before she took up the brush . The National Gallery of Victoria 's brief biography suggests that she did not participate in the making of batik , but she was aware of it . 
 When Minnie decided to take up painting in 2000 while she waited for her daughter Barbara to complete a canvas in an Adelaide workshop , the reception was immediately positive : she had her first solo exhibition that same year at Melbourne 's Flinders Lane Gallery . She was first selected to exhibit in the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Art Award in 2002 . One of her pieces , Awelye Atnwengerrp , was exhibited in the 2003 Award , in which her name was given as Minnie Motorcar <unk> ( Pwerle ) . The artist 's asking price for the picture , A $ 44 @,@ 000 , was the second @-@ highest in the exhibition and the highest for an artist from the central and western deserts . Her painting Awelye Atnwengerrp 2 was exhibited in the 2005 competition . She was named by Australian Art Collector as one of Australia 's 50 most collectible artists in 2004 . 
 There were many group and solo exhibitions of Minnie 's work at private galleries between 2000 and 2006 . These included exhibitions at <unk> Gallery in Western Australia in 2003 and 2005 , Adelaide 's <unk> Gallery in 2000 and 2002 , Sydney 's Gallery <unk> between 2000 and 2002 as well as in 2006 , and Melbourne 's Flinders Lane Gallery in 2000 , 2004 and 2006 , the last of which was a joint exhibition conducted with her three sisters , all of whom are artists in their own right . 
 Desert art specialist Professor Vivien Johnson noted that Minnie was one of the Utopia artists whose style was " radically different from [ that of ] all the other painting communities in the Western Desert — and stunningly successful in the market place " . Her most famous fellow artist was Emily Kngwarreye , whose painting Earth 's Creation in 2007 sold for over $ 1 million , setting a record for the price paid for a painting by an Indigenous Australian artist . Unlike Minnie , Emily had been an active participant in the early batik movement at Utopia . 
 Minnie ( like Emily ) was often placed under considerable pressure to produce works . She was reportedly " kidnapped " by people " keen to go to often quite bizarre lengths to acquire " her work . Minnie 's experience reflected broader issues in the industry surrounding artists , who were often older , had limited education or English language ability , and faced serious poverty both themselves and amongst their families . In addition to being pressured to paint by others , there were media reports suggesting that some of the vast number of paintings traded under Minnie 's name were not created by her at all . 
 = = Style of painting = = 
 Minnie 's style was spontaneous , and typified by " bold " and " vibrant " colour executed with great freedom . Her works , such as <unk> , Akali held by the National Gallery of Victoria , were executed in acrylic ( often referred to as synthetic polymer ) paint on canvas . As with other contemporary artists of the central and western deserts , her paintings included depictions of stories or features for which she had responsibility within her family or clan , such as the Awelye Atnwengerrp dreaming ( or Women 's Dreaming ) . Indigenous art expert Jenny Green believes Minnie 's work continues the tradition of " gestural <unk> " established by Emily Kngwarreye , which contrasted with the use of recognisable traditional motifs — such as animal tracks — in the works of Western Desert artists . Brisbane artist and gallerist Michael Eather has likened her work not only to that of Emily , but also to Australian abstract impressionist artist Tony <unk> . 
 Minnie 's paintings include two main design themes . The first is free @-@ flowing and parallel lines in a pendulous outline , depicting the body painting designs used in women 's ceremonies , or <unk> . The second theme involves circular shapes , used to symbolise bush tomato ( Solanum <unk> ) , bush melon , and northern wild orange ( Capparis umbonata ) , among a number of forms of <unk> represented in her works . Together , the designs were characterised by one reviewer as " broad , luminescent flowing lines and circles " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Minnie 's art was quickly added to major public collections such as the Art Gallery of NSW , Art Gallery of South Australia , National Gallery of Victoria and Queensland Art Gallery . It was also included in a 2009 exhibition of Indigenous Australian painting at the New York Metropolitan Museum of Art . Her works later formed the basis of a series of designer rugs , and , together with paintings by her sisters , illustrated the cover of art critic Benjamin Genocchio 's book , Dollar Dreaming . Described by art dealer Hank Ebes as the works of " a genius " , Minnie 's paintings were typically selling for $ 5 @,@ 000 in 2005 ; the highest price fetched on the secondary market at that time was $ 43 @,@ 000 . 
 Regarded as one of Australia 's leading contemporary women artists , Minnie ranks alongside other notable Indigenous female painters Dorothy Napangardi , Gloria Petyarre and Kathleen Petyarre . One of a number of women such as Emily Kngwarreye who dominated central and western desert painting in the first decade of the 21st century , Minnie is considered to be one of Australia 's best @-@ known Indigenous artists , whose work " the market couldn 't get enough [ of ] " . 
 = = Major collections = = 
 Art Gallery of NSW 
 Art Gallery of South Australia 
 Kelton Foundation 
 <unk> Collection 
 National Gallery of Victoria 
 Queensland Art Gallery 
 Thomas Vroom Collection 
 Hank Ebes Collection 
 AMP Collection 
 = The Boat Race 1960 = 
 The 106th Boat Race took place on 2 April 1960 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions having won the previous year 's race . In a race umpired by former Cambridge rower Kenneth Payne and attended by Princess Margaret , Countess of Snowdon , it was won by Oxford by one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths in a time of 18 minutes 59 seconds , their second consecutive victory , which took the overall record in the event to 58 – 47 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1959 race by six lengths , while Cambridge led overall with 58 victories to Oxford 's 46 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by Chris Addison ( who rowed for Cambridge in the 1939 race ) , James Crowden ( who rowed for the Light Blues in the 1951 and 1952 races ) , A. T. Denby ( 1958 Blue ) , David Jennens ( who rowed three times between 1949 and 1951 ) and J. R. Owen ( 1959 race ) . Oxford 's coaching team comprised Jumbo Edwards ( who rowed for Oxford in 1926 and 1930 ) , J. L. Fage ( an Oxford Blue in 1958 and 1959 ) and L. A. F. Stokes ( who rowed for the Dark Blues in the 1951 and 1952 races ) . The Oxford crew had opted to use 7 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 3 @.@ 4 kg ) oars , 2 pounds ( 0 @.@ 9 kg ) lighter than normal . 
 The main race was umpired for the seventh and penultimate time by the former British Olympian Kenneth Payne who had rowed for Cambridge in the 1932 and 1934 races . Antony Armstrong @-@ Jones , who had coxed Cambridge to victory in the 1950 race , and his fiance Princess Margaret were spectators on board the Cambridge launch Amaryllis . 
 = = Crews = = 
 Both crews weighed an average of 12 st 9 lb ( 80 @.@ 1 kg ) . Cambridge 's crew contained three rowers who had taken part in the 1959 race , bow J. R. Owen , G. H. Brown and John Beveridge . Oxford saw two rowers return from the previous year 's race , Alexander Lindsay and D. C. Rutherford . Former Olympic gold medallist Jack Beresford , writing in The Observer said the Dark Blues " are good watermen : their co @-@ ordination is precise , their boat control admirable " . Beresford suggested that the Cambridge crew were " not fully under control ... there is a definite jerkiness and hurry about their work . " 
 Only one participant in this year 's race was registered as non @-@ British in American Townsend Swayze , the former Harvard University captain . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Cambridge . The Dark Blues made the quicker start and held a canvas @-@ length lead after ten strokes , extending to half a length after the first minute . With the bend of the river in their favour , Oxford pulled further ahead and were three @-@ quarters of a length up by Craven Cottage . Passing the Mile Post in a record time ( beating that set in the 1934 ) , Oxford spurted at Harrods Furniture Depository to hold held a clear water advantage , and were two lengths ahead by the time the crews passed below Hammersmith Bridge . 
 As the Oxford cox , P. J. Reynolds steered the Dark Blues towards the Middlesex shore , allowing Cambridge to start to reduce the deficit . Difficult conditions between Chiswick and Barnes Bridge slowed the pace of the race , but a spurt just before Barnes allowed Cambridge to close the gap to four seconds . Aggressive steering from Cambridge 's Roger Weston was held off by Oxford who took advantage of the tide , and in a sprint finish , Oxford won by one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths in a time of 18 minutes 59 seconds . It was Oxford 's second consecutive victory for just the second time since the First World War . It was also the first time since the 1921 race that the event was witnessed by a member of the British Royal Family . 
 Ian Thomson , writing in The Observer , described the event as " a really titanic struggle ... an exceptionally gallant race . " The rowing correspondent for The Guardian stated that the race saw " one of the most gallant finishing efforts by a crew two lengths in arrears at the half @-@ way mark . " 
 = Harisu = 
 Lee Kyung @-@ <unk> ( born Lee Kyung @-@ yeop , February 17 , 1975 ) , better known by her stage name Harisu ( Hangul : <unk> ; <unk> : <unk> ) , is a Korean pop singer , model , and actress . Assigned male at birth , Harisu identified as female from early childhood , and underwent sex reassignment surgery in the 1990s . She is the Republic of Korea 's first transgender entertainer , and in 2002 became only the second person in Korea to legally change their gender . Her stage name is an adaptation of the English phrase " hot issue " . 
 Harisu first gained public attention in 2001 , after appearing in a television commercial for DoDo cosmetics . The commercial was a success and ended up launching her career , allowing her to branch out into other fields such as music and acting . So far she has recorded five Korean musical albums , switching genres between techno and R & B , and her overseas releases have featured songs recorded in Mandarin . Her first major acting role was in the 2001 film Yellow Hair 2 , and since then her credits have included Hi ! Honey , a Taiwanese drama series , and Colour Blossoms , an erotic drama by Hong Kong filmmaker <unk> . On May 19 , 2007 , Harisu married Micky Jung , whom she had been dating for two years . 
 = = Early life and transition = = 
 Harisu was born Lee Kyung @-@ yeop in <unk> , Korea , and is one of five children . Although assigned male at birth , she identified as female from an early age , recalling , " I was always a girl who loved playing with dolls . " This did not go unnoticed by her family or school friends , who often remarked that she looked and acted like a girl . A failed relationship with a boy during her teenage years convinced Harisu of the need to change her sex , and by the time she graduated from the all @-@ boys <unk> High School , she was already undergoing hormone replacement therapy . It was for this reason that she was exempted from the military service usually required of males in the Republic of Korea , being rejected on the grounds of " mental illness " . By the end of the 1990s , Harisu had undergone breast augmentation , sex reassignment surgery , rhinoplasty , and increase of hips , having had surgery performed in Korea and Japan . 
 Harisu lived in Japan for several years , where she studied to be a hair stylist . It was while working as a nightclub singer that she was discovered by a talent agency , and soon after she began her career as a model . After returning to Korea in 2000 , she signed with management company TTM Entertainment , and first began using the stage name " Harisu " , derived from the English phrase " hot issue " . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Debut = = = 
 Harisu made her acting debut in 1991 — while still living as a boy — as a supporting actor in a high school TV drama series , and this was followed by other minor film and TV roles as an extra during the 1990s . 
 Her big break came in early 2001 , when she appeared in a TV commercial for DoDo cosmetics . The commercial hinted at the fact she is a transsexual , zooming in to reveal her Adam 's apple ( although this was added digitally , since Harisu herself does not have a prominent Adam 's apple ) . DoDo were initially cautious about using the commercial , and had been prepared to withdraw it if the response was negative , but it turned out to be a big success and quickly established her as a celebrity . As the Republic of Korea 's first transgender entertainer , there was a great deal of media interest in Harisu , and she was routinely described as being " more beautiful than a woman " . Explaining her reasons for " coming out " , she said , " I don 't want to face people dishonestly . I won 't be able to hide it after all . It 's better to make it clear from the start . " In June 2001 , Harisu was the subject of a television documentary produced by KBS , which covered her childhood , family relationships , and debut as an entertainer . 
 Later that year she was cast in the film Yellow Hair 2 , her first leading role . In addition to contributing songs for the films soundtrack , Harisu played a transsexual who goes on the run after the apparent death of a convenience store owner . Regarding her decision to appear in the film , she said , " I wanted to break the stereotype of transsexuals — the <unk> and extreme weakness with which they are often portrayed . " The film was released on July 21 . 
 Also in 2001 , Harisu published her autobiography , Eve from Adam , and appeared in a music video for dance group Turbo . In September , she entered the K @-@ pop music scene with her debut album , Temptation , a mix of techno @-@ style pop music and slow ballads , which peaked at number 32 on the <unk> ( Music Industry Association of Korea ) K @-@ pop albums chart . She released her second album , Liar , in October 2002 , describing it as " a high @-@ energy dance record with a very upbeat rhythm . " Liar became her biggest domestic chart success , reaching number 23 in its first month of release . 
 = = = 2003 – 2005 = = = 
 In October 2003 , Harisu made the decision to leave her management company , TTM Entertainment . However , TTM claimed to hold the rights to her stage name , and announced their intentions to use that name to promote other artists . The matter was taken to court , and in early 2004 the ruling went in favour of Harisu , allowing her to keep the name . She subsequently set up her own company , G & F Entertainment , in order to make her own decisions regarding her career . In February she released her third album , Foxy Lady , which marked a change from the sound of her previous albums towards a more hip @-@ hop / R & B style , with Harisu saying " now I am on my own , and showing my true colors , doing exactly the kind of music that I 've always wanted . " The album , however , failed to make the top 50 in the Korean charts . 
 In 2004 , Harisu began to develop her career overseas , expressing frustration at being " pigeon @-@ holed " as a transsexual in Korea . She starred in the Taiwanese drama series Hi ! Honey alongside local celebrity Pace Wu , despite not being fluent in Mandarin ( her lines were spoken in Korean and later dubbed ) . She drew attention by promoting sanitary napkins in a series of advertisements for Taiwanese company <unk> , for which she was paid an estimated ₩ 100 million per ad . Although she had been initially reluctant to take on the project , observers hailed the casting of a trans woman in such a campaign as a sign of progress . Towards the end of the year Harisu appeared in <unk> 's Colour Blossoms , an erotic drama film from Hong Kong in which she shared a role with veteran Japanese actress Keiko Matsuzaka . Released on October 18 , 2004 , it was poorly received at the box office and by the media , though it had some success at film festivals , and picked up several awards and nominations . 
 Harisu made a return to Korean screens in early 2005 , after being cast in the MBC miniseries Beating Heart , her first major role in a Korean drama . She starred in several episodes as a transsexual woman , returning to her family after a lengthy absence in a bid to gain acceptance . Later that year her Foxy Lady album was released in Taiwan and China with the inclusion of songs re @-@ recorded in Mandarin , and she was even promoted by her Taiwanese record label as the " Kylie Minogue of the East " . In September 2005 , Harisu gained a foothold in Malaysia after signing a three @-@ year memorandum of understanding with Hock Star Entertainment , a deal which included the production of two feature films and secured the Malaysian release of her album . 
 = = = 2006 – present = = = 
 After a prolonged absence from the Korean music scene , Harisu returned in January 2006 with her fourth , self @-@ titled album . Although her comeback was originally scheduled for the summer of 2005 , this had been prevented by other commitments overseas . The album was preceded by a digital single , " Winter Story " , and marked a change in her image , with an emphasis on being " cute " rather than " sexy " . Harisu charted at number 46 in Korea , and as with her previous album it was released in Taiwan and China with extra songs recorded in Mandarin . Her fifth Korean album , Summer , was released just six months later , though it failed to chart in the top 50 . 
 Her next film — the first as part of the deal with Hock Star Entertainment — was Possessed , a Malaysian horror film released on November 30 , 2006 , in which she starred alongside Amber Chia . Harisu played <unk> , a murdered pop singer who becomes a vengeful ghost , and also performed the films theme song , though it was necessary for her dialogue to be spoken in Korean and later dubbed . She was praised by director Bjarne Wong for her hard work and professionalism , and has hinted that they may collaborate on another film in the future . 
 In early 2007 , Harisu was cast as the lead actress in Police Line , a Korean drama series produced for cable network On @-@ Media . The series , based around a special unit for victims of sexual abuse , starred Harisu as a policewoman who was molested as a child by her stepfather . Filming for Police Line began in April 2007 , and the series was launched in June with Harisu 's husband Micky Jung making a cameo appearance . In December 2007 , Harisu released a digital mini @-@ album , Winter Special , which featured a duet with her husband on the track " First Snow " . 
 Harisu published a collection of essays in Japan in March 2008 , titled Haris Beauty ( sic ) . The essays formed a comprehensive guide to beauty , diet and fashion , and contained photographs of Harisu taken by Yamagishi Shin , who had traveled to Seoul the previous December for a four @-@ day photo shoot . Harisu also provided narration for the visually impaired for the 2008 film If You Were Me : Anima Version 2 , an animated film about human rights . 
 As of 2008 , Harisu believed that she still faced discrimination within the entertainment industry , saying on television , " Many people pretend to smile and welcome me , but after the filming , they 'd scold me behind my back " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Harisu 's decision to undergo sex reassignment surgery placed a strain on the relationship with her family , and she noted that when her parents first found out they " were very upset . They weren 't angry , but very sad . " Her father in particular had great difficulty accepting his child as a daughter , but her family have since accepted this and show great pride in her career . 
 Harisu has been given credit for raising social awareness of transgenderism in the Republic of Korea , and has said in interviews that she hopes to be a role model for other <unk> . In April 2007 , she came to the aid of a Chinese trans woman unable to afford surgery , giving her the financial support needed to complete her transition . Affected by the 2008 suicides of gay actor Kim Ji @-@ hoo and transsexual television personality Jang Chae @-@ won , Harisu opened transgender club " Mix @-@ Trans " in <unk> @-@ dong , southern Seoul , in June 2009 . 
 = = = Legal recognition of gender = = = 
 On November 29 , 2002 , Harisu filed a petition with the Incheon District Court to have her sex corrected on her family register , and that her birth name be changed from Lee Kyung @-@ yeop to the more feminine Lee Kyung @-@ <unk> . The subsequent court ruling went in her favour , and on December 13 , 2002 , she became only the second person in the Republic of Korea to legally change their sex . Speaking of the difficulties she had previously encountered , Harisu has said : " My most embarrassing moments were when I have had to show my personal identification card in public ... I couldn 't get a passport , visa or even my own bank accounts because I was legally a man " . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 Since her debut in 2001 , Harisu has consistently expressed a desire to marry and have a family of her own . In 2005 , she began dating Micky Jung ( real name Jung Yong @-@ jin ) , a rapper whom she had met online . Jung , who had been a member of dance group EQ during the 1990s , later joined Harisu 's management company and worked on her fourth and fifth albums . The couple briefly separated in 2006 , but were reunited after Jung saw her dating another man on a TV show . Rumours that the two were to marry began circulating in November 2006 , and a date for the wedding was announced in February , following meetings between their respective families . Harisu and Jung starred in a reality television show on cable network Mnet showing their <unk> lives and preparations for their wedding , but the couple were subjected to harsh criticism from netizens . 
 On May 19 , 2007 , Harisu and Jung were married at Central City Millennium Hall in the <unk> @-@ gu district of Seoul . The ceremony was presided over by KBS anchor Shin Young @-@ il , and officiated by Kim Suk @-@ kwon , a Dong @-@ A University professor who had performed Harisu 's sex change surgery in the 1990s . The couple honeymooned on the Thai island of Ko Samui , and began their married life at Harisu 's family home in <unk> @-@ dong , in the Gangnam @-@ gu district of Seoul . The couple have said that they plan to adopt four children , though the news prompted a mixed public reaction . A poll by Mnet found that 69 % of 1 @,@ 300 respondents were in favour of Harisu 's decision to adopt , while in a similar poll by Daum , 58 % of 8 @,@ 094 respondents were against the idea . 
 = = = Welfare and politics = = = 
 In November 2007 , Harisu unveiled plans to build and run an orphanage , stating that it was one of her " long @-@ cherished dreams " . With the support of her husband and mother @-@ in @-@ law , she purchased a 3 @,@ 300 m2 ( 3 @,@ 900 sq yd ) plot of land in <unk> , Gyeonggi @-@ do , and studied for a community service license . Harisu campaigned for the New Progressive Party in the 2008 Republic of Korea legislative elections , supporting the legalization of marijuana . 
 = = Discography = = 
 As of 2007 , Harisu has released five Korean language studio albums , though her song lyrics typically include English as well . While her early work has been described as " techno @-@ flavored K @-@ pop " , her more recent albums have leaned towards the R & B , hip @-@ hop and disco genres . She has named Madonna and Janet Jackson as her musical influences ; of her contemporaries she holds Chae Rina in high esteem . 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = Other releases = = = 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 " History " by Turbo ( 2001 ) 
 " Temptation " ( 2001 ) 
 " Always " by Kang Sung ( 2002 ) 
 " Liar " ( 2002 ) 
 " Foxy Lady " ( 2004 ) 
 " Reaction " ( 2006 ) 
 " Shopping girl " ( 2012 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = 2010 Gascoyne River flood = 
 The 2010 Gascoyne River flood was regarded as the most severe flood to take place along the Gascoyne River in Western Australia on record . Triggered by record @-@ breaking rainfall , amounting to over 6 @,@ 000 percent of the monthly mean , 313 @.@ 6 mm ( 12 @.@ 35 in ) and 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) respectively , in just four days , the floods caused widespread damage in the region . By 17 December , the river began to rise in response to the heavy rains , eventually exceeding its banks within two days . Water levels reached record values at three stations along the river , cresting at 15 @.@ 53 m ( 51 @.@ 0 ft ) near Fishy Pool . Evacuation orders were issued for several towns affected by rising waters . The most substantial impact was felt in Carnarvon where entire homes were washed away . Following the disaster , emergency supplies and funds were distributed to affected residents to aid them in restoring their livelihoods . Though no people died in the event , an estimated two thousand head of cattle perished and damage was estimated at A $ 100 million . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 11 December 2010 , a monsoon trough developed northwest of Western Australia . Slowly tracking to the south , the system spawned a low pressure system ( Tropical Low <unk> ) by 15 December . Turning southeastward , the low later made landfall near Coral Bay on 18 December . Within hours of moving inland , the system turned to the southwest and moved back over water the following morning . The storm was last noted on 20 December well off the coast of Western Australia . 
 Climatologically , the region affected by the floods is a dry area , with annual rainfall in most areas averaging between 200 and 300 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 and 11 @.@ 8 in ) . December is regarded as the third @-@ driest month of the year , with a mean rainfall of just 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) . Prior to the event , much of the Gascoyne River catchment was suffering from a drought and many places abruptly shifted from drought conditions to record floods in less than 24 hours . Additionally , the river had no water flow before the floods , being a dry riverbed . 
 Between 16 and 20 December , the low produced heavy rains over much of the area around Shark Bay . These rains reached record amounts in numerous locations and greatly surpassed the monthly mean December rainfall ; some areas reached levels of more than 6 @,@ 000 percent above this value due to the storm . During a 24 ‑ hour span on 17 December , a record @-@ shattering 247 @.@ 6 mm ( 9 @.@ 75 in ) of rain fell in Carnarvon . This value greatly exceeded both the previous record of 119 @.@ 4 mm ( 4 @.@ 70 in ) , set in 1923 , and the city 's annual average of 228 @.@ 8 mm ( 9 @.@ 01 in ) . Several other locations recorded similar rainfall in the region , also surpassing their annual rainfall totals in under two days . During the five @-@ day span in which there was rainfall , a maximum of 313 @.@ 6 mm ( 12 @.@ 35 in ) was measured in Carnarvon . A total of 23 stations and towns recorded record 24 ‑ hour rainfall for the month of December in relation to the storm . According to the Bureau of Meteorology , Carnarvon Airport measured its wettest month on record , with 255 mm ( 10 @.@ 0 in ) of rain falling in just four days . The previous record was set in June 1895 at 219 @.@ 7 mm ( 8 @.@ 65 in ) . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Prior to the arrival of the monsoon low , the Bureau of Meteorology issued a flood watch for the Gascoyne River catchment on 15 December , stating that 150 to 200 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 to 7 @.@ 9 in ) of rain could fall over the following 72 hours . This was later upgraded to a flood warning as the situation worsened on 18 December . Once the rains ceased on 21 December , the warning was discontinued . During the torrential downpours , the Gascoyne River began to rise on 17 December , threatening to flood several towns along its banks . Water levels continuously rose through the morning of 19 December , at which time the floods attained their peak . In Fishy Pool , the river reached a record crest of 15 @.@ 53 m ( 51 @.@ 0 ft ) , surpassing the previous peak of 12 @.@ 23 m ( 40 @.@ 1 ft ) in 1980 . The floods subsided relatively quickly as the river dropped below flood stage on 21 December . 
 Once the river overflowed its banks , flood waters spread through vast agricultural and grazing areas , severely damaging crops and killing an estimated two thousand head of cattle . By 19 December , evacuations had taken place in rural parts of Carnarvon , with 200 residents residing in emergency shelters . The entire town was isolated from surrounding areas as flood waters cut off all roads ; however , the main centre of the town remained untouched due to levees that were constructed in 1960 . One person had to be rescued by a police helicopter after he was swept away by strong currents . Large portions of the North West Coastal Highway were shut down due to flooding for several days , hindering travel in the region . In <unk> , six residents required an airlift after becoming stranded in their home . A total of 30 people were rescued by helicopter on 20 December in Gascoyne Junction . Two days later , the entire town was evacuated and displaced residents sought refuge in Carnarvon . The most severe losses took place in the horticultural plantations which flank both sides of the river in Carnarvon , and in small communities and stations upriver . Several homesteads near Gascoyne Junction were washed away in the <unk> and the center of the Gascoyne Junction township was referred to as an , " obliterated ghost town . " Additionally , one person stated that he lost 50 percent of his banana crop . Throughout the affected area , preliminary assessments placed damage at A $ 100 million . 
 = = Response = = 
 By 20 December , arrangements for the delivery of emergency food and water supplies were made and expected to reach Carnarvon later that day . Supplies were also sent to outlying Aboriginal communities affected by the floods . After evacuating on 20 December , residents were allowed to return to their homes two days later in Carnarvon . However , most were left without power and clean water and required assistance from local agencies . Following the disaster , there were concerns that the Australian government could have prevented at least some of the floods by following through with a flood mitigation program . Dudley Maslen , the President of The Shire of Carnarvon stated that he did not want to place blame on any agency , though hoped for improvement during the future . More than 100 local government areas and regions were declared natural disaster areas on 21 December , encompassing areas from central Western Australia to the Pilbara coastline . 
 By January 2011 , much of the nation 's attention had shifted from the Gascoyne flood to the devastating floods in Queensland . Many residents struggling to get their lives back together were frustrated with the government and demanded aid . Though people affected by the floods were to be given A $ 15 @,@ 000 in funds , they expressed further anger after hearing that residents in Queensland would receive A $ 25 @,@ 000 . On 11 January , Prime Minister Julia Gillard stated that the imbalance in funds was to be corrected and residents of Western Australia would receive equal amounts to those in Queensland . By 20 January , donations for flood victims from the Lord Mayor 's Distress Relief Fund exceeded A $ 1 million . Power restoration , especially in Gascoyne Junction , was unusually sluggish . Dozens of residents were without power for eight weeks , as electricity was finally restored between 12 and 13 February . This coincided with the arrival of replacement furniture from <unk> ; however , heavy rains renewed flooding and prevented most residents from picking up the supplies . 
 = Vandalic War = 
 The Vandalic War ( Greek : <unk> <unk> ) was a conflict fought in North Africa ( largely in modern Tunisia ) between the forces of the Eastern Roman ( " Byzantine " ) Empire and the Vandalic Kingdom of Carthage , in 533 – 534 . It was the first of Justinian I 's wars of reconquest of the lost Western Roman Empire . 
 The Vandals had occupied Roman North Africa in the early 5th century , and established an independent kingdom there . Under their first king , Geiseric , the formidable Vandal navy carried out pirate attacks across the Mediterranean , sacked Rome and defeated a massive Roman invasion in 468 . After Geiseric 's death , relations with the surviving Eastern Roman Empire normalized , although tensions flared up occasionally due to the Vandals ' militant adherence to Arianism and their persecution of the Chalcedonian native population . In 530 , a palace coup in Carthage overthrew the pro @-@ Roman Hilderic and replaced him with his cousin Gelimer . The Eastern Roman emperor Justinian took this as a pretext to interfere in Vandal affairs , and after he secured his eastern frontier with Sassanid Persia in 532 , he began preparing an expedition under general Belisarius , whose secretary Procopius wrote the main historical narrative of the war . Justinian took advantage of , or even instigated , rebellions in the remote Vandal provinces of Sardinia and Tripolitania . These not only distracted Gelimer from the Emperor 's preparations , but also weakened Vandal defences through the dispatch of the bulk of the Vandal navy and a large portion of their army under Gelimer 's brother Tzazon to Sardinia . 
 The Roman expeditionary force set sail from Constantinople in late June 533 , and after a sea voyage along the coasts of Greece and southern Italy , landed on the African coast at Caputvada in early September , to Gelimer 's complete surprise . The Vandal king gathered his forces and met the Roman army at the Battle of Ad Decimum , near Carthage , on 13 September . Gelimer 's elaborate plan to encircle and destroy the Roman army came close to success , but Belisarius was able to drive the Vandal army to flight and occupy Carthage . Gelimer withdrew to Bulla Regia , where he gathered his remaining strength , including the army of Tzazon , which returned from Sardinia . In December , Gelimer advanced towards Carthage and met the Romans at the Battle of Tricamarum . The battle resulted in a Roman victory and the death of Tzazon . Gelimer fled to a remote mountain fortress , where he was blockaded until he surrendered in the spring . 
 Belisarius returned to Constantinople with the Vandals ' royal treasure and the captive Gelimer to enjoy a triumph , while Africa was formally restored to imperial rule as the praetorian prefecture of Africa . Imperial control scarcely reached beyond the old Vandal kingdom , however , and the Moorish tribes of the interior proved unwilling to accept imperial rule and soon rose up in rebellion . The new province was shaken by the wars with the Moors and military rebellions , and it was not until 548 that peace was restored and Roman government firmly established . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Establishment of the Vandalic Kingdom = = = 
 In the course of the gradual decline and dissolution of the Western Roman Empire in the early 5th century , the Germanic tribe of the Vandals , allied with the Alans , had established themselves in the Iberian peninsula . In 429 , the Roman governor of the Diocese of Africa , Bonifacius , who had rebelled against the West Roman emperor Valentinian III ( r . 425 – 455 ) and was facing an invasion by imperial troops , called upon the Vandalic King Geiseric for aid . Thus , in May 429 , Geiseric crossed the straits of Gibraltar with his entire people , reportedly 80 @,@ 000 in total . Geiseric 's Vandals and Alans , however , had their own plans , and aimed to conquer the African provinces outright . Their possession of Mauretania Caesariensis , Mauretania Sitifensis and most of Numidia was recognized in 435 by the Western Roman court , but this was only a temporary expedient . Warfare soon recommenced , and in October 439 , the capital of Africa , Carthage , fell to the Vandals . In 442 , another treaty exchanged the provinces hitherto held by the Vandals with the core of the African diocese , the rich provinces of <unk> and Byzacena , which the Vandals received no longer as foederati of the Empire , but as their own possessions . These events marked the foundation of the Vandalic Kingdom , as the Vandals made Carthage their capital and settled around it . Although the Vandals now gained control of the lucrative African grain trade with Italy , they also launched raids on the coasts of the Mediterranean that ranged as far as the Aegean Sea and culminated in their sack of Rome itself in 455 , which allegedly lasted for two weeks . Taking advantage of the chaos that followed Valentinian 's death in 455 , Geiseric then regained control — albeit rather tenuous — of the Mauretanian provinces , and with his fleet took over Sardinia , Corsica and the Balearic Islands . Sicily barely escaped the same fate through the presence there of Ricimer . 
 Throughout this period , the Vandals survived several Roman attempts at a counterstrike : the Eastern Roman general Aspar had led an unsuccessful expedition in 431 , an expedition assembled by the Western emperor <unk> ( r . 457 – 461 ) off the coast of Spain in 460 was scattered or captured by the Vandals before it could set sail , and finally , in 468 , Geiseric defeated a huge joint expedition by both western and eastern empires under Basiliscus . In the aftermath of this disaster , and following further Vandal raids against the shores of Greece , the eastern emperor Zeno ( r . 474 – 491 ) concluded a " perpetual peace " with Geiseric ( 474 / 476 ) . 
 = = = Roman – Vandal relations until 533 = = = 
 The Vandal state was unique in many respects among the Germanic kingdoms that succeeded the Western Roman Empire : instead of respecting and continuing the established Roman socio @-@ political order , they completely replaced it with their own . Whereas the kings of Western Europe continued to pay deference to the emperors and minted coinage with their portraits , the Vandal kings portrayed themselves as fully independent rulers . The Vandals also consciously differentiated themselves from the native Romano @-@ African population through their continued use of their native language and peculiar dress , which served to emphasize their distinct social position as the elite of the kingdom . In addition , the Vandals — like most Germanics , adherents of Arianism — persecuted the Chalcedonian majority of the local population , especially in the reigns of <unk> ( r . 477 – 484 ) and <unk> ( r . 484 – 496 ) . The emperors at Constantinople protested at this , but the peace held for almost sixty years , and relations were often friendly , especially between Emperor Anastasius I ( r . 491 – 518 ) and <unk> ( r . 496 – 523 ) , who largely ceased the persecutions . 
 In 523 , Hilderic ( r . 523 – 530 ) , the son of <unk> , ascended the throne at Carthage . Himself a descendant of Valentinian III , Hilderic re @-@ aligned his kingdom and brought it closer to the Roman Empire : according to the account of Procopius ( The Vandalic War , <unk> ) he was an unwarlike , amiable person , who ceased the persecution of the Chalcedonians , exchanged gifts and embassies with Justinian I ( r . 527 – 565 ) even before the latter 's rise to the throne , and even replaced his image in his coins with that of the emperor . Justinian evidently hoped that this rapprochement would lead to the peaceful subordination of the Vandal state to his empire . However , Hilderic 's pro @-@ Roman policies , coupled with a defeat suffered against the Moors in Byzacena , led to opposition among the Vandal nobility , which resulted in his overthrow and imprisonment in 530 by his cousin , Gelimer ( r . 530 – 534 ) . Justinian seized the opportunity , demanding Hilderic 's restoration , with Gelimer predictably refusing to do so . Justinian then demanded Hilderic 's release to Constantinople , threatening war otherwise . Geiseric was unwilling to surrender a rival claimant to Justinian , who could use him to stir up trouble in his kingdom , and probably expected war to come either way , according to J.B. Bury . He consequently refused Justinian 's demand on the grounds that this was an internal matter among the Vandals . 
 Justinian now had his pretext , and with peace restored on his eastern frontier with Sassanid Persia in 532 , he started assembling an invasion force . According to Procopius ( The Vandalic War , <unk> ) , the news of Justinian 's decision to go to war with the Vandals caused great consternation among the capital 's elites , in whose minds the disaster of 468 was still fresh . The financial officials resented the expenditure involved , while the military was weary from the Persian war and feared the Vandals ' sea @-@ power . The emperor 's scheme received support mostly from the Church , reinforced by the arrival of victims of renewed persecutions from Africa . Only the powerful minister John the Cappadocian dared to openly voice his opposition to the expedition , however , and Justinian disregarded it and pressed on with his preparations . 
 = = = Diplomatic preparations and revolts in Tripolitania and Sardinia = = = 
 Soon after his seizure of power , Gelimer 's domestic position began to deteriorate , as he persecuted his political enemies among the Vandal nobility , confiscating their property and executing many of them . These actions undermined his already doubtful legitimacy in the eyes of many , and contributed to the outbreak of two revolts in remote provinces of the Vandal kingdom : in Sardinia , where the local governor , Godas , declared himself an independent ruler , and shortly after in Tripolitania , where the native population , led by a certain <unk> , rebelled against Vandal rule . Although Procopius ' narrative makes both uprisings seem coincidental , Ian Hughes points out the fact that both rebellions broke out shortly before the commencement of the Roman expedition against the Vandals , and that both Godas and <unk> immediately asked for assistance from Justinian , as evidence of an active diplomatic involvement by the Emperor in their preparation . 
 In response to Godas ' emissaries , Justinian detailed Cyril , one of the officers of the foederati , with 400 men , to accompany the invasion fleet and then sail on to Sardinia . Gelimer reacted to Godas ' rebellion by sending the bulk of his fleet , 120 of his best vessels , and 5 @,@ 000 men under his own brother Tzazon , to suppress it . The Vandal king 's decision played a crucial role in the outcome of the war , for it removed from the scene the Vandal navy , the main obstacle to a Roman landing in Africa , as well as a large part of his army . Gelimer also chose to ignore the revolt in Tripolitania for the moment , as it was both a lesser threat and more remote , while his lack of manpower constrained him to await Tzazon 's return from Sardinia before undertaking further campaigns . At the same time , both rulers tried to win over allies : Gelimer contacted the Visigoth king <unk> ( r . 531 – 548 ) and proposed an alliance , while Justinian secured the benevolent neutrality and support of the Ostrogothic Kingdom of Italy , which had strained relations with the Vandals over the ill treatment of the Ostrogoth princess <unk> , the wife of <unk> . The Ostrogoth court readily agreed to allow the Roman invasion fleet to use the harbour of Syracuse in Sicily and establish a market for the provisioning of the Roman troops there . 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 Justinian selected one of his most trusted and talented generals , Belisarius , who had recently distinguished himself against the Persians and in the suppression of the Nika riots , to lead the expedition . As Ian Hughes points out , Belisarius was also eminently suited for this appointment for two other reasons : he was a native Latin @-@ speaker , and was solicitous of the welfare of the local population , keeping a tight leash on his troops . Both these qualities would be crucial in winning support from the Latin @-@ speaking African population . Belisarius was accompanied by his wife , Antonina , and by Procopius , his secretary , who wrote the history of the war . 
 According to Procopius ( The Vandalic War , <unk> ) , the army consisted of 10 @,@ 000 infantry , partly drawn from the field army ( comitatenses ) and partly from among the foederati , as well as 5 @,@ 000 cavalry . There were also some 1 @,@ 500 – 2 @,@ 000 of Belisarius ' own retainers ( bucellarii ) , an elite corps ( it is unclear if their number is included in the 5 @,@ 000 cavalry mentioned as a total figure by Procopius ) . In addition , there were two additional bodies of allied troops , both mounted archers , 600 Huns and 400 <unk> . The army was led by an array of experienced officers , among whom the eunuch Solomon was chosen as Belisarius ' chief of staff ( domesticus ) and the former praetorian prefect Archelaus was placed in charge of the army 's provisioning . The whole force was transported on 500 vessels manned by 30 @,@ 000 sailors under admiral <unk> of Alexandria , guarded by ninety @-@ two dromon warships . The traditional view , as expressed by J.B. Bury , is that the expeditionary force was remarkably small for the task , especially given the military reputation of the Vandals , and that perhaps it reflects the limit of the fleet 's carrying capacity , or perhaps it was an intentional move to limit the impact of any defeat . Ian Hughes however comments that even in comparison with the armies of the early Roman Empire , Belisarius ' army was a " large , well @-@ balanced force capable of overcoming the Vandals and may have contained a higher proportion of high quality , reliable troops than the armies stationed in the east " . 
 On the Vandal side , the picture is less clear . The Vandal army was not a professional and mostly volunteer force like the East Roman army , but comprised every able @-@ bodied male of the Vandal people . Hence modern estimates on the available forces vary along with estimates on the total Vandal population , from a high of between 30 @,@ 000 – 40 @,@ 000 men out of a total Vandal population of at most 200 @,@ 000 people ( Diehl and Bury ) , to as few as 25 @,@ 000 men — or even 20 @,@ 000 , if their losses against the Moors are taken into account — for a population base of 100 @,@ 000 ( Hughes ) . Despite their martial reputation , the Vandals had grown less warlike over time , having come to lead a luxurious life amidst the riches of Africa . In addition , their mode of fighting was ill suited to confronting Belisarius ' veterans : the Vandal army was composed exclusively of cavalry , lightly armoured and armed only for hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , to the point of neglecting entirely the use of bows or javelins , in stark contrast to Belisarius ' heavily armoured cataphracts and horse archers . 
 The Vandals were also weakened by the hostility of their Roman subjects , the continued existence among the Vandals of a faction loyal to Hilderic , and by the ambivalent position of the Moorish tribes , who watched the oncoming conflict from the sidelines , ready to join the victor and seize the spoils . 
 = = The war = = 
 = = = Belisarius ' army sails to Africa = = = 
 Amidst much pomp and ceremony , with Justinian and the Patriarch of Constantinople in attendance , the Roman fleet set sail around 21 June 533 . The initial progress was slow , as the fleet spent five days at Heraclea Perinthus waiting for horses and further four days at <unk> due to lack of wind . The fleet left the Dardanelles on 1 July , and crossed the Aegean Sea to the port of Methone , where it was joined by the last contingents of troops . Belisarius took advantage of an enforced stay there due to a lull in the wind to train his troops and acquaint the disparate contingents with each other . It was at Methone , however , that 500 men died of dysentery caused by mouldy bread . According to Procopius , the responsibility fell on John the Cappadocian , who had cut costs by baking it only once , with the result that the bread went bad . Justinian was informed , but John does not appear to have been punished . Belisarius took steps to remedy the situation , and the army soon recovered . 
 From Methone , the fleet sailed up the Ionian Sea to <unk> , from where they crossed over to Italy . The crossing took longer than expected due to lack of wind , and the army suffered of lack of fresh water when the supplies they had brought aboard went bad . Eventually , the fleet reached Catania in Sicily , from where Belisarius sent Procopius ahead to Syracuse to gather intelligence on the Vandals ' activities . By chance , Procopius met a merchant friend of his there , whose servant had just arrived from Carthage . The latter informed Procopius that not only were the Vandals unaware of Belisarius ' sailing , but that Gelimer , who had just dispatched Tzazon 's expedition to Sardinia , was away from Carthage at the small inland town of Hermione . Procopius quickly informed Belisarius , who immediately ordered the army to re @-@ embark and set sail for the African coast . After sailing by Malta , they reached Cape Caputvada on the eastern shore of modern Tunisia some 162 Roman miles ( 240 km ) south from Carthage . 
 = = = Advance on Carthage and the Battle of Ad Decimum = = = 
 When the Roman fleet reached Africa , a council was held aboard Belisarius ' flagship ( The Vandalic War , <unk> ) , where many of his officers advocated an immediate attack on Carthage itself , especially since it was the only fortified city in the Vandal realm , the walls of the other cities having been torn down to prevent a rebellion . Belisarius , however , mindful of the fate of the 468 expedition and wary of an encounter with the Vandal fleet , spoke against it . Thus the army disembarked and built a fortified camp to spend the night . 
 Belisarius knew that success for his expedition relied on gaining the support of the local population , which had largely retained its Roman identity and to which he presented himself as a liberator . Thus on the next day of the landing , when some of his men stole some fruit from a local orchard , he severely punished them , and assembled the army and exhorted them to maintain discipline and restraint towards the native population , lest they abandon their Roman sympathies and go over to the Vandals . Belisarius ' pleas bore results , for , as Procopius reports ( The Vandalic War , <unk> ) , " the soldiers behaved with moderation , and they neither began any unjust brawls nor did anything out of the way , and [ Belisarius ] , by displaying great gentleness and kindness , won the Libyans to his side so completely that thereafter he made the journey as if in his own land " . 
 Then the Roman army began its march north , following the coastal road . 300 horse under John the Armenian were detached as an advance guard some 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 5 km ) in front of the main army , while the 600 Huns covered the army 's left flank . Belisarius himself with his bucellarii led up the rear , to guard against any attack from Gelimer , who was known to be in the vicinity . The fleet followed the army , sailing along the coast . The first town they encountered was <unk> , which was captured by a detachment under <unk> by a ruse . In an attempt to sow division among the Vandals , Belisarius gave a letter written by Justinian and addressed to the Vandal nobles to a captured Vandal messenger , in which the emperor claimed to be campaigning on behalf of the legitimate king Hilderic against the usurper Gelimer . As the messenger was too afraid to deliver the letter , this ploy came to nothing . 
 Gelimer , in the meantime , upon learning of the Romans ' arrival , immediately notified his brother Ammatas in Carthage to assemble the Vandal forces in the vicinity , as well as to execute Hilderic and his relatives , while his secretary Bonifatius was ordered to load the royal treasure on a ship and sail for Spain if the Romans won . Deprived of his best troops , which were with Tzazon , Gelimer contented himself with shadowing the northward march of the Roman army , all the while preparing a decisive engagement before Carthage , at a place called Ad Decimum ( " at the tenth [ milepost ] " ) where he had ordered Ammatas to bring his forces . The Romans advanced through Thapsus , Leptis Parva and Hadrumetum to Grasse , where for the first time they engaged in a skirmish with the scouts of Gelimer 's army . After exchanging blows , both parties retired to their camps . From Grasse , Belisarius turned his army westwards , cutting across the neck of the Cape Bon peninsula . This was the most dangerous part of the route to Carthage , with the fleet out of sight . 
 Thus , on the morning of 13 September , the tenth day of the march from Caputvada , the Roman army approached Ad Decimum . There Gelimer planned to ambush and encircle them , using a force under his brother Ammatas to block their advance and engage them , while 2 @,@ 000 men under his nephew <unk> would attack their left flank , and Gelimer himself with the main army would attack from the rear and completely annihilate the Roman army . In the event , the three forces failed to synchronize exactly : Ammatas arrived early and was killed as he attempted a reconnaissance with a small force by the Roman vanguard , while <unk> 's force was intercepted by the Hunnic flank guard and was utterly destroyed . Unaware of all this , Gelimer marched up with the main army and scattered the Roman advance forces present at Ad Decimum . Victory might have been his , but he then came upon his dead brother 's body , and apparently forgot all about the battle . This gave Belisarius the time to rally his troops , come up with his main cavalry force and defeat the disorganized Vandals . Gelimer with the remainder of his forces fled westwards to Numidia . The Battle of Ad Decimum ended in a crushing Roman victory , and Carthage lay open and undefended before Belisarius . 
 = = = Belisarius ' entry into Carthage and Gelimer 's counterattack = = = 
 It was only by nightfall , when John the Armenian with his men and the 600 Huns rejoined his army , that Belisarius realized the extent of his victory . The cavalry spent the night at the battlefield . In the next morning , as the infantry ( and Antonina ) caught up , the whole army made for Carthage , where it arrived as night was falling . The Carthaginians had thrown open the gates and illuminated the city in celebration , but Belisarius , fearing a possible ambush in the darkness and wishing to keep his soldiers under tight control , refrained from entering the city , and encamped before it . In the meantime , the fleet had rounded Cape Bon and , after learning of the Roman victory , had anchored at <unk> , some 7 @.@ 5 km from the city . Ignoring Belisarius ' instructions , <unk> and his men proceeded to plunder the merchant settlement of <unk> nearby . 
 On the morning of the next day , 15 September , Belisarius drew up the army for battle before the city walls , but as no enemy appeared , he led his army into the city , after again exhorting his troops to show discipline . The Roman army received a warm welcome from the populace , which was favourably impressed by its restraint . While Belisarius himself took possession of the royal palace , seated himself on the king 's throne , and consumed the dinner which Gelimer had confidently ordered to be ready for his own victorious return , the fleet entered the Lake of Tunis and the army was billeted throughout the city . The remaining Vandals were rounded up and placed under guard to prevent them from causing trouble . Belisarius dispatched Solomon to Constantinople to bear the emperor news of the victory , but expecting an imminent re @-@ appearance of Gelimer with his army , he lost no time in repairing the largely ruined walls of the city and rendering it capable of sustaining a siege . 
 During the following weeks , while Belisarius remained in Carthage strengthening its walls , Gelimer established himself and the remnant of his army at Bulla Regia . By distributing money he had managed to cement the loyalty of the locals to his cause , and sent messages recalling Tzazon and his men from Sardinia , where they had been successful in re @-@ establishing Vandal authority and killing Godas . While waiting for Tzazon 's arrival , the Vandal king 's army also increased by the arrival of more and more fugitives from the battle of Ad Decimum , as well as by a contingent of his Moorish allies . Most of the Moorish tribes of Numidia and Byzacena , however , sent embassies to Belisarius , pledging allegiance to the Empire . Some even offered hostages and asked for the insignia of office traditionally awarded to them by the emperor : a gilded silver staff and a silver crown , a white cloak , a white tunic , and a gilded boot . Belisarius had been furnished by Justinian with these items in anticipation of this demand , and duly dispatched them along with sums of money . Nevertheless , it was clear that , as long as the outcome of the war remained undecided , neither side could count on the firm loyalty of the Moors . During this period , messengers from Tzazon , sent to announce his recovery of Sardinia , sailed into Carthage unaware that the city had fallen and were taken captive , followed shortly after by Gelimer 's envoys to <unk> , who had reached Spain after the news of the Roman successes had arrived there and hence failed to secure an alliance . Belisarius was also reinforced by the Roman general Cyril with his contingent , who had sailed to Sardinia only to find it once again in possession of the Vandals . 
 As soon as Tzazon received his brother 's message , he left Sardinia and landed in Africa , joining up with Gelimer at Bulla . The Vandal king now determined to advance on Carthage . His intentions are not clear ; the traditional interpretation is that that he hoped to reduce the city by blockading it , but Ian Hughes believes that , lacking the reserves for a protracted war of attrition , he hoped to force Belisarius into a " single , decisive confrontation " . Approaching the city , the Vandal army cut the aqueduct supplying it with water , and attempted to prevent provisions from arriving in the city . Gelimer also dispatched agents to the city to undermine the loyalty of the inhabitants and the imperial army . Belisarius , who was alert to the possibility of treachery , set an example by impaling a citizen of Carthage who intended to join the Vandals . The greatest danger for defection came from the Huns , who were disgruntled because they had been ferried to Africa against their will and feared being left there as a garrison . Indeed , Vandal agents had already made contact with them , but Belisarius managed to maintain their allegiance — at least for the moment — by making a solemn promise that after the final victory they would be richly rewarded and allowed to return to their homes . Their loyalty however remained suspect , and , like the Moors , the Huns probably awaited to see who would emerge as the victor and rally to him . 
 = = = Tricamarum and the surrender of Gelimer = = = 
 After securing the loyalty of the populace and the army , and completing the repairs to the walls , Belisarius resolved to meet Gelimer in battle , and in mid @-@ December marched out of Carthage in the direction of the fortified Vandal camp at Tricamarum , some 28 km from Carthage . As at Ad Decimum , the Roman cavalry proceeded in advance of the infantry , and the ensuing Battle of Tricamarum was a purely cavalry affair , with Belisarius ' army considerably outnumbered . Both armies kept their most untrustworthy elements — the Moors and Huns — in reserve . John the Armenian played the most important role on the Roman side , and Tzazon on the Vandal . John led repeated charges at the Vandal centre , culminating in the death of Tzazon . This was followed by a general Roman attack across the front and the collapse of the Vandal army , which retreated to its camp . Gelimer , seeing that all was lost , fled with a few attendants into the wilds of Numidia , whereupon the remaining Vandals gave up all thoughts of resistance and abandoned their camp to be plundered by the Romans . Like the previous battle at Ad Decimum , it is again notable that Belisarius failed to keep his forces together , and was forced to fight with a considerable numerical disadvantage . The dispersal of his army after the battle , looting heedlessly and leaving themselves vulnerable to a potential Vandal counter @-@ attack was also an indication of the poor discipline in the Roman army and the command difficulties Belisarius faced . As Bury comments , the expedition 's fate might have been quite different " if Belisarius had been opposed to a commander of some ability and experience in warfare " , and points out that Procopius himself " expresses amazement at the issue of the war , and does not hesitate to regard it not as a feat of superior strategy but as a paradox of fortune " . 
 A Roman detachment under John the Armenian pursued the fleeing Vandal king for five days and nights , and was almost upon him when he was killed in an accident . The Romans halted to mourn their leader , allowing Gelimer to escape , first to Hippo Regius and from there to the city of Medeus on Mount Papua , on whose Moorish inhabitants he could rely . Belisarius sent 400 men under the <unk> Pharas to blockade him there . Belisarius himself made for Hippo Regius , where the Vandals who had fled to various sanctuaries surrendered to the Roman general , who promised that they would be well treated and sent to Constantinople in spring . Belisarius was also fortunate in recovering the Vandal royal treasure , which had been loaded in a ship at Hippo . Bonifatius , Gelimer 's secretary , was supposed to sail with it to Spain , where Gelimer too would later follow , but adverse winds kept the ship in harbour and in the end , Bonifatius handed it over to the Romans in exchange for his own safety ( as well as a considerable share of the treasure , if Procopius is to be believed ) . Belisarius also began to extend his authority over the more distant provinces and outposts of the Vandal kingdom : Cyril was dispatched to Sardinia and Corsica with Tzazon 's head as proof of his victory , John was sent to Caesarea on the coast of Mauretania Caesariensis , another John was sent to the twin fortresses of Septem and <unk> , which controlled the Straits of Gibraltar , and <unk> to take possession of the Balearic Islands . Aid was also sent to the provincials in Tripolitania , who had been subject to attacks by the local Moorish tribes . Belisarius also demanded the return of the port of Lilybaeum in western Sicily from the Ostrogoths , who had captured it during the war , as it too had been part of the Vandal kingdom . An exchange of letters followed between Justinian and the Ostrogoth court , through which Justinian was drawn into the intrigues of the latter , leading to the Roman invasion of Italy a year later . 
 Meanwhile , Gelimer remained blockaded by Pharas at the mountain stronghold of Medeus , but as the blockade dragged through the winter , Pharas grew impatient . He attacked the mountain stronghold , only to be beaten back with the loss of a quarter of his men . While a success for Gelimer , it did not alter his hopeless situation as he and his followers remained tightly blockaded and began to suffer from lack of food . Pharas sent him messages calling upon him to surrender and spare his followers the misery , but it was not until March that the Vandal king agreed to surrender after receiving guarantees for his safety . Gelimer was then escorted to Carthage . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Belisarius ' triumph = = = 
 Belisarius would not remain long in Africa to consolidate his success , as a number of officers in his army , in hopes of their own advancement , sent messengers to Justinian claiming that Belisarius intended to establish his own kingdom in Africa . Justinian then gave his general two choices as a test of his intentions : he could return to Constantinople or remain in Africa . Belisarius , who had captured one of the messengers and was aware of the slanders against him , chose to return . He left Africa in the summer , accompanied by Gelimer , large numbers of captured Vandals — who were enrolled in five regiments of the <unk> Iustiniani ( " Vandals of Justinian " ) by the emperor — and the Vandal treasure , which included many objects looted from Rome 80 years earlier , including the imperial regalia and the menorah of the Second Temple . In Constantinople , Belisarius was given the honour of celebrating a triumph — the first to be celebrated in Constantinople since its foundation and the first granted to a private citizen in over five and a half centuries — and described by Procopius : 
 Gelimer was given an ample estate in Galatia , and would have been raised to patrician rank if he had not steadfastly refused to renounce his Arian faith . Belisarius was also named consul ordinarius for the year 535 , allowing him to celebrate a second triumphal procession , being carried through the streets seated on his consular curule chair , held aloft by Vandal warriors , distributing largesse to the populace from his share of the war booty . 
 = = = Re @-@ establishment of Roman rule in Africa and the Moorish Wars = = = 
 Immediately after Tricamarum , Justinian hastened to proclaim the recovery of Africa : 
 The emperor was determined to restore the province to its former extent and prosperity — indeed , in the words of J.B. Bury , he intended " to wipe out all traces of the Vandal conquest , as if it had never been , and to restore the conditions which had existed before the coming of Geiseric " . To this end , the Vandals were barred from holding office or even property , which was returned to its former owners ; most Vandal males became slaves , while the victorious Roman soldiers took their wives ; and the Chalcedonian Church was restored to its former position while the Arian Church was dispossessed and persecuted . As a result of these measures , the Vandal population was diminished and emasculated . It gradually disappeared entirely , becoming absorbed into the broader provincial population . Already in April 534 , before the surrender of Gelimer , the old Roman provincial division along with the full apparatus of Roman administration was restored , under a praetorian prefect rather than under a diocesan vicarius , since the original parent prefecture of Africa , Italy , was still under Ostrogothic rule . The army of Belisarius was left behind to form the garrison of the new prefecture , under the overall command of a magister militum and several regional duces . Almost from the start , an extensive fortification programme was also initiated , including the construction of city walls as well as smaller forts to protect the countryside , whose remnants are still among the most prominent archaeological remains in the region . 
 Despite Justinian 's intentions and proclamations , however , Roman control over Africa was not yet secure . During his campaign , Belisarius had secured most of the provinces of Byzacena , <unk> and Tripolitania . Further west , on the other hand , imperial control extended in a series of strongholds captured by the fleet along the coast as far as Constantine , while most of the inland areas of Numidia and Mauretania remained under the control of the local Moorish tribes , as indeed had been the case under the Vandal kings . The Moors initially acknowledged the Emperor 's suzerainty and gave hostages to the imperial authorities , but they soon became restive and rose in revolt . The first imperial governor , Belisarius ' former domesticus Solomon , who combined the offices of both magister militum and praetorian prefect , was able to score successes against them and strengthen Roman rule in Africa , but his work was interrupted by a widespread military mutiny in 536 . The mutiny was eventually subdued by Germanus , a cousin of Justinian , and Solomon returned in 539 . He fell , however , in the Battle of Cillium in 544 against the united Moorish tribes , and Roman Africa was again in jeopardy . It would not be until 548 that the resistance of the Moorish tribes would be finally broken by the talented general John Troglita . 
 = = = Primary = = = 
 Procopius of Caesarea . History of the Wars : The Vandalic War , Volumes I. & II .. Wikisource . 
 = = = Secondary = = = 
 Browning , Robert ( 1992 ) . The Byzantine Empire ( Revised Edition ) . Washington , DC : The Catholic University of America Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Bury , John <unk> ( 1923 ) . History of the Later Roman Empire : From the Death of Theodosius I to the Death of Justinian . London : MacMillan & Co . ISBN 0 @-@ 486 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Diehl , Charles ( 1896 ) . L 'Afrique Byzantine . Histoire de la Domination Byzantine en Afrique ( 533 – 709 ) ( in French ) . Paris , France : Ernest Leroux . 
 Hughes , Ian ( 2009 ) . Belisarius : The Last Roman General . Yardley , PA : Westholme Publishing , LLC . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 528 @-@ 3 . 
 <unk> , Andy ; Miles , Richard ( 2010 ) . The Vandals . Chichester , U.K. ; Malden , MA : Wiley @-@ Blackwell . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 405 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 = Hasan al @-@ Kharrat = 
 Abu Muhammad Hasan al @-@ Kharrat ( Arabic : حسن <unk> 1861 – 25 December 1925 ) was one of the principal Syrian rebel commanders of the Great Syrian Revolt against the French Mandate . His main area of operations was in Damascus and its Ghouta countryside . He was killed in the struggle and is considered a hero by Syrians . 
 As the qabaday ( local youths boss ) of the al @-@ Shaghour quarter of Damascus , al @-@ Kharrat was connected with Nasib al @-@ Bakri , a nationalist from the quarter 's most influential family . At al @-@ Bakri 's invitation , al @-@ Kharrat joined the revolt in August 1925 and formed a group of fighters from al @-@ Shaghour and other neighborhoods in the vicinity . He led the rebel assault against Damascus , briefly capturing the residence of French High @-@ Commissioner Maurice Sarrail before withdrawing amid heavy French bombardment . 
 After his aborted operation in Damascus , al @-@ Kharrat continued to lead forays against French forces in and around the city . Towards the end of 1925 , relations grew tense between al @-@ Kharrat and other rebel leaders , particularly Sa 'id al- ' As and Ramadan al @-@ Shallash , as they traded accusations of plundering villages or extorting local inhabitants . Al @-@ Kharrat was killed in a French ambush in the Ghouta , and the revolt dissipated by 1927 , but he gained a lasting reputation as a martyr of the Syrian resistance to French rule . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Al @-@ Kharrat was born to a Sunni Muslim family in Damascus in 1861 , during Ottoman rule in Syria . He served as the night watchman of the city 's al @-@ Shaghour quarter and as a guard for the neighborhood 's orchards . Damascus was captured by Arab rebels in October 1918 . Afterward , the Arab Club , an Arab nationalist organization , emerged in the city to raise support for the rebels . The club assisted the rebels ' leader , Emir Faisal , who formed a rudimentary government . Al @-@ Kharrat became an affiliate of the Arab Club and raised support for Faisal in al @-@ Shaghour . In July 1920 , Faisal 's government collapsed after its motley forces were defeated by the French at the Battle of Maysalun . Afterward , the French ruled Syria under the aegis of their League of Nations mandate . 
 In the early years of French rule , al @-@ Kharrat was al @-@ Shaghour 's qabaday ( pl. qabadayat ) , the traditional leader of a neighborhood 's local toughs . The qabaday was informally charged with redressing grievances and defending a neighborhood 's honor against local criminals or the encroachments of qabadayat from other neighborhoods . He was popularly characterized as an honorable man , noted for his personal strength , and protection of minorities and the poor . The qabaday was considered an " upholder of Arab traditions and customs , the guardian of popular culture " , according to historian Philip S. Khoury . Khoury asserts that al @-@ Kharrat was " probably the most respected and esteemed qabaday of his day " . Qabadayat normally shunned formal education , and historian Michael Provence maintains that al @-@ Kharrat was likely illiterate . Qabadayat were normally linked with particular city notables and could secure them political support in their neighborhoods . Al @-@ Kharrat was allied with Nasib al @-@ Bakri , a Damascene politician and landowner . The al @-@ Bakri family was the most influential in al @-@ Shaghour , and al @-@ Kharrat served as the family 's principal connection and enforcer in the quarter . 
 = = Commander in the Great Syrian Revolt = = 
 = = = Recruitment and early confrontations = = = 
 A revolt against French rule was launched in the mid @-@ summer of 1925 by the Druze sheikh ( chieftain ) , Sultan Pasha al @-@ Atrash , in the southern mountains of Jabal al @-@ Druze . As al @-@ Atrash 's men scored decisive victories against the French Army of the Levant , Syrian nationalists were inspired and the revolt spread northward to the countryside of Damascus and beyond . Al @-@ Bakri was the chief liaison between al @-@ Atrash and the emerging rebel movement in Damascus and the Ghouta . The Ghouta is the fertile plain surrounding Damascus , and its orchard groves and extensive waterways provided cover for the rebels and a base from which they could raid Damascus . In August , al @-@ Bakri convinced al @-@ Kharrat to join the uprising . According to Provence , al @-@ Kharrat was " ideal " for the job , possessing " a local following of young men , notoriety outside the quarter , good connections and a reputation for toughness " . The group of fighters he commanded was known as ′ isabat al @-@ Shawaghirah ( the band of al @-@ Shaghour ) . Though named after al @-@ Kharrat 's quarter , the band included twenty qabadayat and their armed retinues from other Damascus neighborhoods and nearby villages . His main areas of operation were in the vicinity of al @-@ Shaghour and the al @-@ Zur forest in the eastern Ghouta . Through his alliance with a Sufi religious leader , al @-@ Kharrat brought an Islamic holy war dimension to the largely secular revolt , something that was not welcomed by some involved . 
 Al @-@ Kharrat commenced guerrilla operations in September , targeting French forces posted in the eastern and southern Ghouta . His prominence rose as he led nighttime raids against the French in Damascus , during which he disarmed army patrols and took soldiers hostage . In al @-@ Shaghour , Souk <unk> and <unk> , al @-@ Kharrat and his band burnt down all French @-@ held buildings . In the first week of October , sixty French gendarmes were dispatched to the Ghouta to apprehend al @-@ Kharrat and his fighters . The gendarmes were quartered in the home of al @-@ Malihah 's mukhtar ( village headman ) . In the evening , the rebels attacked the residence , killing one gendarme and capturing the rest ; the prisoners were eventually all returned unharmed . 
 On 12 October , French troops backed by tanks , artillery and aerial support launched an operation to surround and eliminate al @-@ Kharrat 's rebels in the al @-@ Zur forest . Al @-@ Kharrat 's men were forewarned of the French deployment by the peasants of al @-@ Malihah . Positioned among the trees , the rebels used sniper fire against the French troops . The latter were unable to lure the rebels out and retreated . 
 As the French withdrew toward al @-@ Malihah , they looted the village and set it on fire . French intelligence officials justified the collective punishment of al @-@ Malihah as retaliation for the rebels ' capture and humiliation of the gendarmes during the previous week ; the French claimed a young boy from al @-@ Malihah had notified al @-@ Kharrat 's men of the French presence in the village . Though they were unable to engage al @-@ Kharrat and his forces directly , French troops executed around 100 civilians from Ghouta villages . Their corpses were brought to Damascus , and the bodies of sixteen men described by the French as " brigands " were put on display . 
 = = = Battle of Damascus and operations in Ghouta = = = 
 Spurred by French army actions in the Ghouta , al @-@ Bakri planned to capture the Citadel of Damascus , where French forces were concentrated , and the Azm Palace , where General Maurice Sarrail , the French high commissioner of Syria , would be residing on 17 – 18 October ( Sarrail was typically headquartered in Beirut ) . The high commissioner functioned as the overall administrator of Syria on behalf of France and exercised practically absolute power . The rebel units active in Damascus at the time were al @-@ Kharrat 's ′ isabat and a mixed force of Druze fighters and rebels from the al @-@ Midan quarter and the Ghouta . To compensate for the lack of rebel strength , al @-@ Bakri sent a letter to Sultan al @-@ Atrash requesting reinforcements . Al @-@ Atrash replied that he was currently occupied with operations in the Hauran , but would dispatch his entire force to back the Damascus rebels as soon as affairs there were settled . Before he received al @-@ Atrash 's reply , al @-@ Bakri decided to move ahead with the operation . 
 On 18 October , al @-@ Kharrat led forty rebels into al @-@ Shaghour from the old cemeteries adjacent to the southern gate of Damascus , announcing that the Druze had arrived to relieve the city from French occupation . Crowds of residents enthusiastically welcomed the rebels and many took up arms alongside them . Al @-@ Kharrat 's men captured the quarter 's police station , disarming its garrison . They were joined by Ramadan al @-@ Shallash , a rebel commander from Deir ez @-@ Zor , and twenty of his Bedouin fighters . The joint forces proceeded to the Hamidiyya Market and captured the Azm Palace , but Sarrail was not present , having already left to attend a meeting in the Hauran town of Daraa . The rebels plundered the palace and set it on fire . Provence asserts that capturing the palace without Sarrail " held no tactical importance " but was a highly symbolic achievement for the rebels because of the Azm Palace 's " importance as the historical seat of economic and political power in Damascus , now usurped by the French and totally undefended " . 
 While al @-@ Kharrat captured the Azm Palace , al @-@ Bakri and 200 rebels under his command rode through the city and were joined by civilians in increasing numbers . After sealing the Old City to prevent the entry of enemy reinforcements , al @-@ Kharrat issued an order to kill anyone linked to the French army . About 180 French soldiers were killed . Sarrail ordered the shelling and aerial bombardment of the city . About 1 @,@ 500 people were killed in the bombardment , which lasted two days . General chaos and scattered fighting ensued as whole neighborhoods , mosques and churches were leveled , French forces moved in , and hundreds of leading figures in the Syrian national movement were arrested , including al @-@ Kharrat 's son Fakhri . The latter was captured on 22 October during a botched nighttime raid by the rebels against the French , who by then were in control of Damascus . Al @-@ Kharrat was offered the release of his son in exchange for his own surrender , but refused . 
 The rebels withdrew from Damascus as a meeting was held between French army commander Maurice Gamelin and a delegation of Damascene notables . As a result of the meeting , the French agreed to end their bombardment in return for a payment of 100 @,@ 000 Turkish gold liras by 24 October . The fine was not paid by the French deadline , but the bombardment was not renewed , likely as a result of orders from the French government in Paris . International condemnation of Sarrail 's bombardment of Damascus and growing criticism in France of his mishandling of the revolt led to his dismissal on 30 October . He was replaced by politician Henry de Jouvenel , who arrived in Syria in December . On 22 November , al @-@ Kharrat commanded 700 rebels in a battle with about 500 French soldiers outside of Damascus . Al @-@ Kharrat 's men inflicted " trifling " losses on the French , but experienced heavy casualties themselves , with thirty dead and forty wounded according to Reuters . On 5 December , al @-@ Kharrat was one of the commanders of a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ strong force uniting rebels from disparate backgrounds , which assaulted the French Army barracks in al @-@ Qadam , south of Damascus . The French claimed to have inflicted significant casualties , but rebel activity continued . 
 = = = Tensions with rebel leaders = = = 
 Centralized order and oversight among the revolt 's armed participants was difficult to establish because of the diversity and independence of the rebel factions . A meeting of rebel leaders was held in the Ghouta village of Saqba on 26 November . Sa 'id al- ' As accused al @-@ Kharrat and others of plundering in the Ghouta , while al @-@ Kharrat alleged that al @-@ Shallash extorted the residents of al @-@ Midan and the Ghouta town of Douma . The meeting concluded with an agreement to elect a government to replace the French authorities , increase recruitment of the Ghouta 's inhabitants , coordinate military operations under a central command , and establish a revolutionary court to execute spies . The meeting also designated the area between the village of <unk> and north of the Douma @-@ Damascus road as being part of al @-@ Kharrat 's zone of operations . Despite his leading role in the rebels ' military efforts , al @-@ Kharrat was not included in the newly formed rebel leadership council , nor were any of al @-@ Bakri 's allies . Instead , al- ' As served as the rebels ' overall head . 
 Sharp divisions among rebel factions became apparent during a second meeting in Saqba on 5 December . According to Syrian journalist Munir al @-@ <unk> , hostility between al @-@ Kharrat and al @-@ Shallash was well @-@ known among the rebels . Because al @-@ Shallash had levied war taxes on the major landlords and city elites of the Ghouta , al @-@ Kharrat 's benefactor al @-@ Bakri viewed him as a threat to the traditional landowning class to which al @-@ Bakri belonged . Al @-@ Rayyis claimed the meeting was called for by al @-@ Kharrat , who ordered his fighters to capture and bring al @-@ Shallash to Saqba . However , according to al- ' As , the summit was called by al @-@ Shallash , and once the latter arrived in the village , al @-@ Kharrat personally detained him and confiscated his horse , weapons and money . 
 After his detention , al @-@ Shallash was given a brief trial during which al @-@ Kharrat accused him of making " impositions and ransoms and financial collections in the name of the revolt " , while al @-@ Bakri condemned him specifically for extorting the residents of Douma for 1 @,@ 000 giney ( Ottoman pounds ) , and imposing large fines on the inhabitants of Harran al @-@ Awamid , al @-@ Qisa and <unk> for his own personal enrichment . Al @-@ Kharrat and al @-@ Bakri decided al @-@ Shallash 's verdict , and dismissed him from the revolt . While many rebels with officer backgrounds similar to al @-@ Shallash disapproved of the judgement , they did not intervene . In his account of the meeting , al @-@ Rayyis condemned the rebel commanders for complacency in the " ridiculous trial " and accused al @-@ Kharrat of being motivated solely by personal animosity . Al @-@ Shallash was able to escape — or was released by al- ' As — when French planes bombed the meeting . Al @-@ Shallash would later surrender to Jouvenel and collaborate with French authorities . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Al @-@ Kharrat was killed in an ambush by French troops in the Ghouta on 25 December 1925 . He was succeeded as qabaday of al @-@ Shaghour and commander of the ′ isabat al @-@ Shawaghirah by Mahmud <unk> al @-@ <unk> . Al @-@ Kharrat 's men continued to fight the French until the revolt ended in 1927 , although historian Thomas Philipp states that al @-@ Kharrat 's group dissipated after his death . In January 1926 , al @-@ Kharrat 's son Fakhri was sentenced to death and publicly executed , along with two other rebels , in Marjeh Square , Damascus . The French had previously implored Fakhri to persuade his father to surrender in return for his release , but Fakhri had refused . 
 Abd al @-@ Rahman Shahbandar , a prominent Syrian nationalist leader , described al @-@ Kharrat as having played " the preeminent role " in the battle against the French in the Ghouta and Damascus . Historian Daniel <unk> wrote that al @-@ Kharrat was the " best @-@ known " of all of the Damascus @-@ based rebel leaders , although other leaders of the rebel movement attributed the publicity and praise of al @-@ Kharrat to the efforts of the Cairo @-@ based Syrian @-@ Palestinian Committee , with which al @-@ Bakri was closely affiliated . Al @-@ Kharrat and his son Fakhri are today considered " martyred heroes " by Syrians for their nationalist efforts and their deaths in the Syrian struggle for independence from France . 
 = Alien : Resurrection = 
 Alien : Resurrection is a 1997 American science fiction action horror film directed by Jean @-@ Pierre Jeunet and written by Joss Whedon . It is the fourth installment in the Alien film series , and was filmed at the 20th Century Fox studios in Los Angeles , California . 
 In the film , which is set 200 years after the preceding installment Alien 3 ( 1992 ) , Ellen Ripley ( Sigourney Weaver ) is cloned and an Alien queen is surgically removed from her body . The United Systems Military hopes to breed Aliens to study and research on the spaceship USM Auriga , using human hosts kidnapped and delivered to them by a group of mercenaries . The Aliens escape their enclosures , while Ripley and the mercenaries attempt to escape and destroy the Auriga before it reaches its destination , Earth . 
 Alien : Resurrection was released on November 26 , 1997 and received mixed reviews from film critics . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times felt " there is not a single shot in the movie to fill one with wonder " , while Desson Thomson of The Washington Post said the film " satisfactorily recycles the great surprises that made the first movie so powerful " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Two hundred years after the events of Alien 3 , military scientists on the space vessel USM Auriga create a clone of Ellen Ripley using DNA from blood samples taken before her death . The Alien queen 's DNA was mixed in with Ripley 's , and the clone grows up with an embryo inside it . The scientists extract the embryo , raise it and collect its eggs . The Ripley clone is kept alive for further study . As a result of the alien 's DNA inside her , she develops enhanced strength and reflexes , has acidic blood and a psychic link with the Aliens . Also , the alien 's genetic memory allows the clone to have some of Ripley 's memories . 
 A group of mercenaries , <unk> , <unk> , Christie , <unk> , Hillard and Call , arrive at Auriga on their ship Betty . They deliver several kidnapped humans in stasis . The military scientists use the humans as hosts for the Aliens , raising several adult Aliens for study . 
 The Betty crew soon encounters Ripley . Call recognizes her name and tries to kill her , suspecting she may be used to create more Aliens . The Aliens have already matured and escape confinement by killing off one of their own and using the acidic blood to burn through their enclosures . They damage the Auriga and kill the crew members who do not evacuate , including General Perez and <unk> . Military scientist Dr. Wren reveals that the ship 's default command in an emergency is to return to Earth . Realizing this will unleash the Aliens on Earth , Ripley , the mercenaries , Wren , a Marine named <unk> and surviving Alien host Purvis decide to head for the Betty and use it to destroy the Auriga . Along the way , Ripley encounters the grotesque products of failed attempts to clone Ripley . The surviving one begs Ripley to mercy kill her , and she complies . 
 As the group makes their way through the damaged ship , they swim through a flooded kitchen . They are chased by two Aliens . One is killed , while the other snatches Hillard . As they escape the kitchen , the Alien returns and blinds Christie , who sacrifices himself to kill the Alien so the others can escape . After Wren betrays the group , Call is revealed to be an android . Using her ability to interface with the Auriga 's systems , Call sets it on a collision course with Earth , hoping to destroy the Aliens in the crash . She cuts off Wren 's escape route , and directs the Aliens towards him . Ripley is captured by the Aliens , while the others head for the Betty . Wren shoots Purvis and takes Call hostage , demanding that she abort the collision . An injured Purvis attacks Wren and forces his head to his chest just as the Alien embryo he is carrying bursts through his ribcage , causing it to go through Wren 's head and kill them both . The survivors shoot the embryo . 
 Ripley is taken to the Alien nest , where the Queen , now possessing a womb as a result of the genetic mixture , gives birth to a Newborn , a Xenomorph with human traits . The hybrid Alien recognizes Ripley as its mother , kills the queen Alien and Dr. Jonathan <unk> , a scientist previously captured and cocooned . Ripley takes advantage of the distraction to escape and makes her way to the Betty . 
 The Newborn reaches the Betty and attacks Call . It kills <unk> when he tries to help her . Ripley finds her way onto the ship and saves Call by distracting the Newborn . Using her acidic blood , Ripley melts the glass of a window and pushes the Newborn towards the hole . It is violently sucked through the hole due to decompression . 
 The countdown on the Auriga continues as the survivors escape in the Betty . The Auriga collides with Earth , causing a large explosion . Call and Ripley look down at Earth , and when Call asks what Ripley wants to do next , she says , " I 'm a stranger here myself . " In an alternate ending that is used in some extended adaptions , the Betty lands in a ruined Paris . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Impressed with his work as a screenwriter , 20th Century Fox hired Joss Whedon to write the film 's script . Whedon 's initial screenplay had a third act on Earth , with a final battle for Earth itself . Whedon wrote five versions of the final act , none of which ended up in the film . 
 The studio initially imagined that the film would center around a clone of the character Newt from Aliens , as the Ellen Ripley character had died at the end of Alien 3 . Whedon composed a thirty @-@ page treatment surrounding this idea before being informed that the studio , though impressed with his script , now intended to base the story on a clone of Ripley , whom they saw as the anchor of the series . Whedon had to rewrite the script in a way that would bring back the Ripley character , a task he found difficult . The idea of cloning was suggested by producers David Giler and Walter Hill , who opposed the production of Alien : Resurrection , as they thought it would ruin the franchise . 
 Sigourney Weaver , who had played Ripley throughout the series , wanted to liberate the character in Alien 3 as she did not want Ripley to become " a figure of fun " who would continuously " wake up with monsters running around " . The possibility of an Alien vs. Predator film was another reason for the character 's death , as she thought the concept " sounded awful " . However , Weaver was impressed with Whedon 's script . She thought that the error during Ripley 's cloning process would allow her to further explore the character , since Ripley becoming part human and part Alien would create uncertainty about where her loyalties lay . This was an interesting concept to Weaver , who thought the film brought back the spirit of Alien and Aliens . Weaver received a co @-@ producer credit and was reportedly paid $ 11 million . 
 = = = Direction and design = = = 
 Trainspotting director Danny Boyle was the producers ' first choice to direct the film . Boyle and his producer met with effects supervisors to discuss the film , but he was not interested in pursuing the project and went on to make A Life Less Ordinary instead . Peter Jackson was also approached , but declined as he could not get excited about an Alien film . In 1995 , after the release of The Usual Suspects , 20th Century Fox approached Bryan Singer to direct . Jean @-@ Pierre Jeunet was asked to direct , as the film 's producers believed he had a unique visual style . Jeunet had just completed the script to Amélie and was surprised he was offered the job for Alien : Resurrection , as he thought the franchise had finished with Alien 3 and believed that making a sequel was a bad idea . Jeunet , however , accepted the project with a budget of $ 70 million . He required an interpreter as he did not speak much English when filming began . 
 Jeunet hired French special effects supervisor Pitof and cinematographer Darius Khondji , both of whom he had worked with on The City of Lost Children . Jeunet and his crew watched the latest science fiction and Alien films as reference material , and obtained production reports from the Alien films to study the camera setups . Jeunet was given creative control , contributing several elements to the script including five different endings , although the expensive ones were dismissed . He also opted to make the film a dark comedy and was encouraged to include more violence . In June 1996 , Jeunet 's frequent co @-@ director , conceptual artist Marc Caro had drawn rough sketches of characters ' costumes , which were shown to veteran costume designer Bob Ringwood . Ringwood made several modifications for the final design . 
 = = = Creatures = = = 
 Special effects company Amalgamated Dynamics Incorporated ( ADI ) was hired for the film , having previously worked on Alien 3 . ADI founders Tom Woodruff , Jr. and Alec Gillis also had experience working with Stan Winston on Aliens . ADI based their designs and modifications of the Alien creatures on the film 's script , which included the creatures having pointed tails for swimming , making their head domes and chins more pointed , and establishing them to appear more vicious using techniques of camera angles and shot duration . After receiving the director 's approval , ADI began to create small sculptures , sketches , paintings , and life @-@ size models . 
 Jeunet asked ADI to lean towards making the human / Alien hybrid creature more human than Alien . An early concept was to replicate Sigourney Weaver 's features , although the crew felt this design would be too similar to the design of the creature Sil from the 1995 film Species . Eyes and a nose were added to the hybrid to allow it to have more expressions and communicate more emotion than the <unk> , so that it would have more depth as a character rather than being " just a killing machine " . Jeunet was adamant about the hybrid having genitalia which resembled a mix of male and female sexes . 20th Century Fox was uncomfortable with this , however , and Jeunet eventually changed his mind , feeling that " even for a Frenchman , it 's too much " . The genitalia were removed during post @-@ production using digital effects techniques . The animatronic hybrid required nine puppeteers and was the most complex animatronic in the film . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Alien : Resurrection was filmed at Fox studios in Los Angeles , California , from October 1996 to February 1997 . Jeunet had difficulty securing studio space , as the filming of Hollywood blockbusters such as Titanic , Starship Troopers , and The Lost World : Jurassic Park were taking place at the same time . Alien : Resurrection was the first installment in the Alien series to be filmed outside England , a decision made by Weaver , who believed that the previous films ' travel schedules exhausted the crew . 
 The underwater scene was the first to be shot , and for its filming Stage 16 at Fox Studios was reconstructed into a 36 by 45 meter tank , 4 @.@ 5 meters deep , containing 548 @,@ 000 gallons of water . The decision was made to convert the stage rather than film the scene elsewhere , since moving the film crew to the nearest adequate facility in San Diego would have been too costly for a single scene , and by converting Stage 16 20th Century Fox would be able to use the tank for future films . Because of the aquatic filming , the ability to swim was a prerequisite for cast and crew when signing onto the film . The cast trained in swimming pools in Los Angeles with professional divers to learn how to use the equipment . An additional two and a half weeks of training took place at the studio with stunt coordinator Ernie <unk> and underwater cinematographer Peter Romano . Weaver , however , was unable to participate in most of the training due to commitments on Broadway . Winona Ryder faced a challenge with the scene , as she had nearly drowned at age 12 and had not been in the water since . She suggested using a body double , but knew that it would be too obvious to audiences due to the difference in hair length . She filmed the scene , but suffered from anxiety on the first day of filming . 
 Director Jeunet wanted to display Ripley 's new powers , including a scene in which Ripley throws a basketball through a hoop while facing the opposite direction . Weaver trained for ten days and averaged one out of six baskets , although the distance required for filming was farther than she had practiced . Jeunet was concerned about the time being spent on the shot and wanted to either use a machine to throw the ball or to insert it later using computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) . Weaver , however , was determined to make the shot authentic , and insisted on doing it herself . The shot required many dozens of takes , during which none of the balls went in . The crew were going to give up , but gave Weaver one last shot , and in this take , she got the ball in perfectly ; the idea that she did it in one take is a myth . The ball was out of frame for a moment during the shot , and Pitof offered to edit it so that the ball was on @-@ screen for the entire scene , but Weaver refused . Ron Perlman broke character when she made the basket , and turned to the camera to say " Oh my god ! " There was enough of a pause between Weaver 's basket and Perlman 's statement for the film 's editors to cut the scene accordingly during post @-@ production . 
 = = = Visual effects and miniatures = = = 
 The film 's script was laid out similar to a comic book , with pictures on the left and dialog and descriptions on the right . Jeunet planned every shot , which made it easier for visual effects artists to do their work . Blue Sky Studios was hired to create the first CGI Aliens to appear on film . Impressed with the company 's work on Joe 's Apartment creating CGI cockroaches , Jeunet and Pitof opted to hire the company to create 30 to 40 shots of CGI Aliens . The decision was made to use CGI Aliens rather than puppets or suited actors whenever the creatures ' legs were in frame , as Jeunet felt that a man in a suit is easy to distinguish when the full body is seen . 
 All of the spaceships in the film were miniatures , as visual effects supervisors believed CGI was not effective enough to create realistic spaceships . The USM Auriga was originally designed by artist Nigel Phelps and resembled a medical instrument . This design proved to be too vertical for the film 's opening shot , in which the camera pans out to show the ship , and did not appear satisfactory in the film 's 2 @.@ 35 : 1 aspect ratio . Three days before the design had to be finalized , Jeunet rejected it . Phelps , production illustrator Jim Martin , and concept artist Sylvain Despretz were tasked to redesign the ship . Jeunet felt Martin 's design was too much like a space station , while he accepted Despretz 's design due to its streamlined and horizontal appearance . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Composer John Frizzell was encouraged by a friend to audition to compose Alien : Resurrection 's film score . Frizzell sent in four cassettes and received a call from 20th Century Fox about the fourth , which contained music from The Empty Mirror . Impressed with his work , Fox representative Robert Kraft had a short meeting with Frizzell and hired him . Frizzell spent seven months writing and recording the score , which Jeunet requested to be very different and unique from the previous films in the series . This included themes of romance and eroticism , incorporating sound effects such as a gong and rub rod . The cue " They Swim " took one month to complete as Jeunet was not pleased with Frizzell 's original version , although the final result was a mix between the first and third versions he had composed . Popeye is whistled and is credited . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 A pre @-@ screening of Alien : Resurrection was held in Camarillo , California , and the film was released in North America on November 26 , 1997 . Debuting at number two at the box office behind <unk> , Alien : Resurrection grossed $ 25 million in its first five days – $ 16 million over the weekend , for an average of $ 6 @,@ 821 per 2 @,@ 415 theaters . The film grossed $ 47 @.@ 7 million in North America , the least successful of the Alien series on that continent . It was well received internationally , however , with a gross of $ 113 @.@ 5 million , bringing its total gross to $ 161 @.@ 2 million . It was the 43rd highest @-@ grossing film in North America in 1997 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Alien : Resurrection received mixed reviews from film critics , generally regarded as a slight improvement over Alien 3 . The film scored 54 % on Rotten Tomatoes and 63 / 100 on Metacritic based on 21 reviews . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film a negative review , stating " There is not a single shot in the movie to fill one with wonder . " And he placed it to one of his worst films of 1997 . Jeffery Overstreet of Looking Closer commented " It 's time they quit killing the aliens , and just killed the Alien series altogether . ... How the mighty have fallen . " Joe <unk> of the Sacramento Bee stated that " This ' Alien ' should never have been resurrected " , while Tom Meek of Film Threat wrote " Weaver and Jeunet 's efforts are shortchanged by the ineptness of Joss Whedon 's script , that seems to find a way to make action sequences unexciting . " 
 On the other hand , Mary Brennan of Film thought that the movie was " A lot of fun to watch , and easy to surrender to in the moment . " Houston Chronicle editor Louis B. Parks said " The film is a marvel , a well @-@ photographed feast of visual imagery " , while Richard Schickel of Time wrote that it was " Less frightening , but as much fun as ever . " Washington Post contributor Desson Thomson felt it " satisfactorily recycles the great surprises that made the first movie so powerful . And most significantly , it makes a big hoot of the whole business . " 
 Screenwriter Joss Whedon was unhappy with the final product . When asked in 2005 how the film differed from the script he had written , Whedon responded : 
 " It wasn 't a question of doing everything differently , although they changed the ending ; it was mostly a matter of doing everything wrong . They said the lines ... mostly ... but they said them all wrong . And they cast it wrong . And they designed it wrong . And they scored it wrong . They did everything wrong that they could possibly do . There 's actually a fascinating lesson in filmmaking , because everything that they did reflects back to the script or looks like something from the script , and people assume that , if I hated it , then they ’ d changed the script ... but it wasn ’ t so much that they ’ d changed the script ; it ’ s that they just executed it in such a ghastly fashion as to render it almost unwatchable . " 
 Conversely , H. R. Giger , designer of the original Alien , was pleased with Resurrection , describing it as an " excellent film " , but was disappointed about not being credited in the film . 
 = = = = Accolades = = = = 
 = = Home media = = 
 Alien : Resurrection was first released onto home video in the VHS and DVD formats on June 1 , 1998 . The film received its first Blu @-@ ray release as part of the Alien Anthology box set released in 2010 including all four films and their alternate versions . The film was re @-@ released on Blu @-@ ray on May 10 , 2011 in a stand @-@ alone feature . 
 = = = 2003 Special Edition = = = 
 In 2003 , Jeunet included an alternate version of the film on the Alien Quadrilogy DVD box set with different opening and closing credits , which were originally cut due to budget restrictions . The deleted scenes included references to the character Newt from Aliens , <unk> making a joke to Call , Ripley 's clone waking up in the middle of her operation , an extended conversation in the mess hall that reveals the details of Ripley 's former employers , Weyland @-@ Yutani , an extended dialogue between Call and Ripley 's clone in the chapel and scenes of the Betty landing on Earth and the planet 's landscape during the final dialogue between Ripley and Call , as they view the ruins of Paris . The special edition restores 13 minutes and 5 seconds worth of footage ( including the new opening and ending ) , and is 7 minutes longer than theatrical version . Jeunet has stated that the special edition is not a director 's cut as his preferred version is the theatrical cut . 
 Alien : Resurrection : Collector 's Edition was released on January 6 , 2004 , containing the two discs contained in the Quadrilogy set . The second disc , called One Step Beyond : The Making of Alien : Resurrection , features over two hours of footage relating to pre @-@ production , production , post @-@ production , screen tests , concept art , and audio commentary by the cast and crew . 
 = = Merchandising = = 
 To coincide with the release of the film , a book titled Making of Alien : Resurrection was released on November 28 , 1997 in addition to a novelization of the film released on December 1 , 1997 . Dark Horse Comics also published a two @-@ issue comic book <unk> Toys produced a line of 6 " scale action figures for the film . The characters were Ripley , Call , Newborn Alien , Aqua Alien , Battle @-@ Scarred Alien , and Warrior Alien . 
 = = Possible sequel = = 
 Joss Whedon had written an Earth @-@ set script for Alien 5 , but Sigourney Weaver was not interested in this setting , and sought to return the story to the planetoid from the first film . Weaver has remained open to a role in a fifth installment on the condition that she likes the story . Before 20th Century Fox greenlit Alien vs. Predator , James Cameron had been collaborating on the plot for a fifth Alien film with another writer . Learning of Fox 's plans for a crossover , he ceased work on his concept . Before he saw the film , Cameron had stated that it would " kill the validity of the franchise " , and that " it was Frankenstein Meets Werewolf " – like " Universal just taking their assets and starting to play them off against each other " . Although he later admitted to liking Alien vs. Predator , Cameron ruled out any future involvement with the series . 
 In a 2002 interview , Ridley Scott stated that a new Alien project " would be a lot of fun " , but that " the most important thing was to get the story right " . Scott 's concept for the plot was " to go back to where the alien creatures were first found and explain how they were created " . In late 2008 , Weaver hinted in an interview with MTV that she and Scott were working on an Alien spinoff film , which would focus on the chronicles of Ellen Ripley rather than on the Aliens , but the continuation of Ripley 's story has not materialized . Instead , Prometheus , was released in 2012 . A sequel to Prometheus , called Alien : Covenant , is scheduled to be released on August 4 , 2017 . 
 At the 2014 Hero Complex Film Festival , Sigourney Weaver hinted that she 'd be interested in returning to the role of Ripley , saying : " Had we done a fifth one , I don 't doubt that her humanity would have prevailed . … I do feel like there is more story to tell . I feel a longing from fans for the story to be finished . I could imagine a situation where we finish telling the story . " She was quoted : " I don 't think Alien belongs on Earth popping out of a haystack , which is where I was afraid it was going to go . I feel it should take place in the far reaches of the universe where no one in their right mind would go . There are very few filmmakers that I can think of that I would want to entrust this to . " 
