 In February 2015 , Neill Blomkamp posted artwork of an Alien film on his Instagram , announcing that he had been signed on to direct a new Alien film . Sigourney Weaver has announced that she will be reprising her role . Ridley Scott announced that he will do Alien 5 after the Prometheus sequel Alien : Covenant ( originally titled Alien : Paradise Lost ) . 
 = Bobby Lowe = 
 Robert Lincoln " Bobby " Lowe ( July 10 , 1865 – December 8 , 1951 ) , nicknamed " Link " , was an American Major League Baseball ( MLB ) player , coach and scout . He played for the Boston Beaneaters ( 1890 – 1901 ) , Chicago Cubs ( 1902 – 1903 ) , Pittsburgh Pirates ( 1904 ) , and Detroit Tigers ( 1904 – 1907 ) . Lowe was the first player in Major League history to hit four home runs in a game , a feat which he accomplished in May 1894 . He also tied or set Major League records with 17 total bases in a single game and six hits in a single game . Lowe was a versatile player who played at every position but was principally known as a second baseman . When he retired in 1907 , his career fielding average of .953 at second base was the highest in Major League history . 
 Lowe also worked as a baseball manager , coach and scout . He was the player @-@ manager of the Detroit Tigers during the last half of the 1904 season . He was also a player @-@ manager for the Grand Rapids Wolverines in 1908 , and coached college baseball in 1907 for the University of Michigan and from 1909 to 1910 for Washington & Jefferson College . Lowe was a scout for the Detroit Tigers in 1911 and 1912 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Lowe was born in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania in July 1865 , two months after the end of the American Civil War and the assassination of Abraham Lincoln . His middle name " Lincoln " likely derives from the historic circumstances immediately preceding his birth . Lowe 's father , Robert L. Lowe , was a Pennsylvania native and a railroad engineer . His mother , Jane ( or Jennie ) Lowe was an immigrant from Ireland . At the time of the 1870 U.S. Census , at age five , he was living with his parents and four siblings Mary , Eliza ( or Lida ) , John Charles and Olive B. , in Union Township , Lawrence County , Pennsylvania , approximately 50 miles north of Pittsburgh , a township adjoining the city of New Castle . By 1880 , Lowe 's father had died and at age 15 he was living with his mother and three siblings in Union Township . 
 = = Amateur and minor league baseball = = 
 In 1881 , Lowe was working as an " office devil " at the Newcastle Courant , a newspaper in New Castle , Pennsylvania . In the summer of 1881 , at age 16 , he played in a baseball game between the printers and the doctors of New Castle . Charley Powers , who played minor league baseball , was working as a compositor at the Courant and was selected as the captain of the printers . Lowe pleaded for a place on the team , and Powers stationed him in right field . He later recalled that " the kid carried off the honors both in the field and at the bat . I saw at once that he was a born ballplayer . " 
 In 1882 , Lowe played with the Archie Reeds , an amateur baseball club in New Castle . He left his job with the Courant in 1883 and , at age 18 , took a job as a machinist at Witherow & Co . , the largest manufacturing establishment in New Castle . He was the sole support at the time for his mother and youngest sister , Olive , and gave up baseball for several years . Some accounts indicate he also played for Witherow 's plant baseball team and for the <unk> of New Castle . 
 In 1886 , Charley Powers organized a baseball club in New Castle and persuaded Lowe 's employer to allow him to play with the club occasionally . He played catcher and third base for New Castle in 1886 and led the team in batting and baserunning . 
 Powers and Lowe both signed to play with the Eau Claire , Wisconsin team in the Northwestern League during the summer of 1887 . Powers later recalled that the manager of the Eau Claire club , Abe Devine , ran a saloon and refused to use Lowe because he refused to patronize his saloon . Devine sent him back to New Castle , declaring , " That boy can 't play ball , " but brought him back to Eau Claire after the team 's starting third baseman , Charlie Levis , was injured . Lowe was put into the lineup in a game against Milwaukee and drew cheers from the crowd for his defensive play at third base . In his first at bat , he hit a long home run off Varney Anderson that " sailed far over the center field fence . " He appeared in 108 games for Eau Claire in 1887 , batting .294 with 47 extra base hits , 61 stolen bases , 100 runs scored and 240 total bases . He also demonstrated his versatility in the field , playing 51 games in left field , 21 games at shortstop , 17 games in right field , 11 games at third base , 6 games as catcher and 5 games in center field . 
 During the 1888 and 1889 baseball season , Lowe played for the Milwaukee Brewers of the Western Association . He hit .246 in 114 games in 1888 , and hit .315 in 99 games in 1889 . 
 = = Major League Baseball = = 
 = = = Boston Beaneaters = = = 
 After the 1889 baseball season , the Boston Beaneaters purchased Lowe from the Milwaukee Brewers for $ 700 in a deal that has been described as " one of baseball 's biggest bargains . " He made his Major League Baseball debut with the Beaneaters on April 19 , 1890 , and remained with the Beaneaters for 12 years through 1901 . 
 During his years in Boston , Lowe developed a reputation both as a hitter and a fielder . Listed at 5 ft 10 in ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) , 150 pounds ( 68 kg ) , he hit right @-@ handed and was considered one of the best second baseman of the 19th century . He was one of only three ( along with Kid Nichols and Herman Long ) to play on all five of the Beaneaters teams that won pennants in the 1890s . 
 In 1891 , Lowe tied a then major league record with six hits ( four singles , a double and a home run ) in six at bats . Having played mostly in the outfield in 1891 and 1892 , he replaced Joe Quinn at second base in 1893 and was the Beaneaters ' starting second baseman for eight straight years , from 1893 to 1900 . 
 On May 30 , 1894 , Lowe became the first major leaguer to hit four home runs in one game , including two home runs in the third inning . He accomplished the feat in front of a Decoration Day crowd of 8 @,@ 500 spectators against Elton " Ice Box " Chamberlain of the Cincinnati Reds at Boston 's Congress Street Grounds . The Boston Daily Globe reported on the game as follows : 
 " Bobby Lowe broke all league records with four home runs in succession , and then tied the record for total bases by adding a single , making a total of 17 bases . The hitting of Lowe has never been surpassed in a game . His home runs were on line drives far over the fence , and would be good for four bases on an open prairie . The crowd cheered Bobby every time he came up , and when he responded with a home run even the visitors had to join in the good @-@ natured smile . " 
 After the game , fans " showered $ 160 worth of silver on the plate for Lowe . " In 1894 , he led the National League with 613 at bats and was among the leaders in fielding and particularly in batting , with 319 total bases ( 2nd in the league ) , 17 home runs ( 2nd in the league ) , 345 putouts as a second baseman ( 2nd in the league ) , 212 hits ( 4th in the league ) , 402 assists as a second baseman ( 4th in the league ) , and 158 runs scored ( 5th in the league ) . 
 He was part of a Beaneater infield that included Fred Tenney at first base , Lowe at second base , Herman Long at shortstop and Jimmy Collins at third base , and has been rated by some as " the greatest infield of all time . " John McGraw reportedly called Lowe and Long the greatest double play combination he had seen . 
 In December 1895 the Boston Daily Globe published a lengthy biography of Lowe , whom the paper described as Boston 's " quiet , unassuming but phenomenal second baseman . " The Globe noted that the ease with which Lowe played the game led many to understate his value to the club : 
 " For a grand player , Lowe is seldom given the credit often dished out to his inferiors . His work does not appeal to the bleachers and grandstand like the less natural and clumsy player who is often seen floundering around like a fish out of water , while the crowd enjoy the effort and go home to tell what great playing they saw . ' He is a hard worker , ' you will hear them say . Bobby Lowe is not only a hard worker but a conscientious player and an artist of the first magnitude . " 
 His annual salary while playing for Boston never exceeded $ 3 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Chicago Cubs = = = 
 On December 16 , 1901 , Lowe was purchased by the Chicago Orphans from the Beaneaters . In April 1902 , manager Frank Selee named him team captain . He played for the Orphans , renamed the Cubs later that season , for two years . He was the starting second baseman in 1902 . Although his batting statistics declined that year ( .248 batting average ) , his .956 fielding percentage , 328 putouts and 412 assists each ranked second among National League second basemen . In 1903 , he became a backup to Johnny Evers at second base , appearing in only 32 games for the Cubs . He was paid a salary of $ 3 @,@ 500 per year for his two years in Chicago . 
 = = = Detroit Tigers = = = 
 On April 20 , 1904 , Lowe was purchased by the Pittsburgh Pirates from the Cubs . He appeared in only one game for the Pirates before being sold to the Detroit Tigers on April 30 . He was the Tigers ' starting second baseman in 140 games that season . His .964 fielding percentage and 328 assists in 1904 were the second highest among American League second basemen . Halfway through the season , he also became the manager . In 74 games as a player @-@ manager , he led the Tigers to a 30 @-@ 44 record . Despite solid fielding in 1904 , Lowe 's offensive output continued to decline as his batting average dropped to .207 , 66 points below his career average of .273 . 
 In 1905 , Bill Armour took over as Tiger manager and Lowe stayed on as a part @-@ time player . He was a utility player for the next three seasons , playing all four infield positions and in the outfield . In August 1906 , he sustained a broken nose and a fractured jaw after being struck by a foul tip from his own bat during a game in Philadelphia . After the injury , Lowe missed the remainder of the 1906 season and appeared in only 17 games ( with 37 at bats ) in 1907 , his final year in the major leagues . After that season , The Detroit News wrote that Lowe at age 42 " has not lost his batting eye nor his speed . His arm is just as good as ever and he is a much stronger ball player than many who held down regular jobs in the league this past season . " 
 = = = Career statistics and legacy = = = 
 In his 18 @-@ season career in Major League Baseball , Lowe batted .273 , with 71 home runs , 984 RBIs , 1 @,@ 131 runs , 1 @,@ 929 hits , 230 doubles , 85 triples , and 302 stolen bases in 1 @,@ 818 games . 
 At the time of his retirement , his career fielding average of .953 was the highest for a second baseman , and his totals of 3 @,@ 336 putouts and 4 @,@ 171 assists also ranked among the top ten of all @-@ time among second baseman . 
 In 1911 , Fred Tenney wrote a series of articles for The New York Times selecting the greatest player in baseball history at each position . Having picked Johnny Evers at second base , Tenney chose Lowe as the best utility player of all time . He wrote : " Lowe of Boston was one of those baseball <unk> [ sic ] who could play any position on the team in first @-@ class style . " 
 In 1932 , syndicated sports writer Whitney Martin wrote a column arguing that Lowe ranked with Bobby Doerr , Joe Gordon , Nap Lajoie and Eddie Collins as the greatest second basemen of all time . Martin argued that Lowe 's accomplishments were overlooked because he played " at a time when the ball had more turtle in it than rabbit . " He catalogued a number of Lowe 's accomplishments to support the argument : 
 Hit four home runs and a single in one game for 17 total bases . 
 <unk> over .300 from 1893 to 1897 " with the dead ball . " 
 Made six hits in six at bats for 10 total bases in another game . 
 Scored six runs in one game on May 3 , 1895 . 
 Played 34 consecutive games without an error , accepting 165 chances . 
 Lowe also won a reputation as gentleman in an era of rough play . Whitney Martin noted that , in his 18 @-@ year career , Lowe " never once was fined or thumbed out of a game . " At the conclusion of his playing career , The Detroit News wrote : " Lowe was one of the greatest and is today one of the most popular ball players ever in the game . There is no better type of the gentleman in baseball and no one ever heard ought but words of praise for him . " 
 In 1936 , the Baseball Hall of Fame appointed a Veteran 's Committee to consider candidates from baseball 's early years . Lowe ranked 34th in the voting by the Veteran 's Committee , trailing Nap Lajoie and Dan Brouthers by a half vote . Of the 33 players who finished ahead of him in the voting , 24 have been inducted into the Hall of Fame , and several players who finished behind Lowe in the voting ( including Bobby Wallace , Jesse Burkett , Jake Beckley , Tommy McCarthy , Tim Keefe and Candy Cummings ) have also been inducted into the Hall of Fame . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 In addition to his having been the manager of the Tigers for the last half of the 1904 season , Lowe also coached baseball at the college and minor league level . In 1907 , he was hired as the baseball coach for the University of Michigan Wolverines baseball team . In April 1907 , a newspaper reported : " Mr. Lowe is the idol of the students at the university and has received the highest possible praise from the college for the excellent manner in which he handles the team . " Lowe led the Wolverines to a record of 11 @-@ 4 @-@ 1 in 1907 . 
 After his career as a Major League player ended in 1907 , Lowe was actively pursued by several minor league teams for coaching positions . He ultimately signed with Grand Rapids Wolverines of the Central League . In March 1908 , Lowe expressed optimism that " there is more interest being taken in baseball in different league towns than ever before . " 
 Lowe 's final coaching position was as the baseball coach at Washington & Jefferson College in 1909 and 1910 . 
 = = Later years = = 
 After retiring as a player and coach , Lowe continued his affiliation with the game as a scout for the Detroit Tigers in the early 1910s . In February 1912 , a syndicated newspaper story reported that Lowe had traveled 20 @,@ 000 miles as a scout during the prior year , and noted that his itinerary " reads like a cross between a railroad guide and an atlas . " Lowe 's destinations in 1911 included Hattiesburg , Mississippi , Macon , Georgia , Yazoo City , Mississippi , Montgomery , Alabama , New Orleans , Chicago , Memphis , Atlanta , Oklahoma City , Tulsa , Hannibal , Missouri , Denver , Butte , Montana , Boise , Idaho , Kansas City , Minneapolis , Waterloo , Iowa , Green Bay , Wisconsin , Calgary and Moose Jaw . 
 Lowe was married to Harriet Hughes , whose father operated the Leslie Hotel in New Castle . They had no children . After retiring from baseball , Lowe remained in Detroit . In 1920 , he was living with his wife and was employed as a " dealer " in real estate . Later , he became an inspector for the City of Detroit Department of Public Works . In 1930 , he was living with his wife at the Case De Vine Apartments and was employed as an inspector for the City of Detroit . 
 Lowe remained " a student and ardent patron of baseball . " In 1922 , he returned to Boston to play in a veterans baseball game to benefit Boston Children 's Hospital . After Lou Gehrig hit four home runs in a game in 1932 , Lowe , wearing his old Beaneaters uniform , posed with Gehrig . Lowe said , " I feel complimented to share the record with so grand a boy . " He was 38 years older than Gehrig , but outlived him by 10 years . 
 In December 1951 , Lowe died at his home in Detroit at the age of 86 . He was posthumously inducted into the Lawrence County Sports Hall of Fame in 1995 . 
 = Miracle of the Moment = 
 " Miracle of the Moment " is a song recorded by contemporary Christian singer and songwriter Steven Curtis Chapman . Written and produced by Chapman and Matt <unk> , it was released as the lead single from Chapman 's 2007 studio album This Moment . Lyrically , the song challenges the listener to let go of their past regrets and live in the moment . 
 " Miracle of the Moment " received positive reviews from critics , several of whom praised the song 's lyrical message , and it has been performed by Chapman on his concert tours . The song has been included on several compilation albums ; an acoustic version has also been released . It peaked at No. 3 on the Billboard Hot Christian AC chart and at No. 4 on the Billboard Hot Christian Songs chart , as well as at No. 3 on the Radio & Records Christian AC chart and at No. 4 on the Radio & Records INSPO chart . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 According to Steven Curtis Chapman , the idea for " Miracle of the Moment " came out of a song he had written called " Find Me " , which did not end up being included on This Moment . He reflected that he thought " God was just saying ' I really just want you to be present in this moment - the good ones , the bad ones - all that ' " . " Miracle of the Moment " was written and produced by Chapman and Matt Bronlewee . It was mixed by F. Reid Shippen and mastered by Ted Jensen . 
 " Miracle of the Moment " is a contemporary Christian song with a length of three minutes and twenty @-@ eight seconds . It is set in common time in the key of A major and has a tempo of 84 beats per minute , with a vocal range spanning from the low note of F ♯ 4 to the high note of E5 . Chapman 's vocal delivery on the song is " matured " and " slightly sandy " , while the lyrics challenge the listener to let go of past regrets and to live in the moment . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Miracle of the Moment " met with a positive critical reception upon the release of This Moment . John DiBiase of Jesus Freak Hideout praised the song as " possibly the album 's strongest offering " and said that its message is one " most everyone can gravitate towards " . Russ Breimeier of Christianity Today commented that " Miracle of the Moment " sets up the message of This Moment , which he defined as " enjoying the God @-@ given time we 're blessed with " . Deborah Evans Price of CCM Magazine regarded the song as a " meaningful anthem " and stated that it would " take its place alongside [ Steven Curtis ] Chapman classics such as ' For the Sake of the Call ' and ' The Great Adventure ' " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Miracle of the Moment " was released as the lead single from Chapman 's 2007 studio album This Moment and began going for adds on Christian AC radio on July 20 , 2007 . On the Billboard Hot Christian Songs chart , it debuted at No. 26 for the chart week of August 18 , 2007 ; it was the second @-@ highest debuting song of that chart week on the Hot Christian Songs chart , with only Relient K 's " Give Until There 's Nothing Left " debuting higher on that particular week . " Miracle of the Moment " advanced to No. 20 in its second chart week , and to No. 16 in its third chart week . It its eighth chart week , the song advanced to No. 10 on the Hot Christian Songs chart , and it moved to No. 6 in its tenth chart week . The song advanced to No. 5 in its twelfth chart week , and advanced to its peak position of No. 4 in its fourteenth chart week . In total , " Miracle of the Moment " spent twenty weeks on the Hot Christian Songs chart . The song spent twenty @-@ one weeks on the Billboard Hot Christian AC chart , peaking at No. 3 for the chart week of November 2 , 2007 . " Miracle of the Moment " also peaked at No. 3 on the Radio & Records Christian AC chart and at No. 4 on the Radio & Records INSPO chart . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Steven Curtis Chapman has performed " Miracle of the Moment " on his concert tours , including the Live in the Moment Tour , The United Tour , and the Stories and Songs Tour . At a concert of November 13 , 2007 at Calvary Church in Lancaster , Pennsylvania , Chapman performed the song as part of his setlist . At a concert with fellow contemporary Christian singer Michael W. Smith on April 4 , 2009 in Wilkes @-@ Barre , Pennsylvania , Chapman performed the song as the third song of his opening setlist . On October 6 , 2011 at Calvary Church in Lancaster , Pennsylvania , Chapman performed the song as part of an exclusive acoustic session . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 " Miracle of the Moment " has been included on the compilation album WOW Hits 1 and Discover : Steven Curtis Chapman . Acoustic versions of the song were included on the " Special Edition " of This Moment and the compilation album Acoustic Playlist - Medium : A New Blend of Your Favorite Songs . A live version of the song was included on the live EP Live in This Moment Tour EP . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Jean de Carrouges = 
 Sir Jean de Carrouges IV ( c . 1330s – 25 September 1396 ) was a fourteenth @-@ century French knight who governed estates in Normandy as a vassal of Count Pierre d 'Alençon and served under Admiral Jean de Vienne in several campaigns against the English and the forces of the Ottoman Empire . He became infamous in medieval France for fighting in the last judicial duel permitted by the French king and the Parlement of Paris . The combat was decreed in 1386 to contest charges of rape Carrouges had brought against his neighbour and erstwhile friend Jacques Le Gris on behalf of his wife Marguerite . It was attended by much of the highest French nobility of the time led by King Charles VI and his family , including a number of royal dukes . It was also attended by thousands of ordinary Parisians and in the ensuing decades was chronicled by such notable medieval historians as Jean Froissart , Jean Juvénal des Ursins and Jehan de Waurin . 
 Described in the chronicles as a rash and temperamental man , Carrouges was also a fierce and brave warrior whose death in battle came after a forty @-@ year military career in which he served in Normandy , Scotland and Hungary with distinction and success . He was also heavily involved in court politics , initially at the seat of his overlord Count Pierre of Alençon at Argentan , but later in the politics of the Royal household at Paris , to which he was attached as a chevalier d 'honneur and Royal bodyguard in the years following the judicial duel . During his life he conducted a long trail of legal and financial dealings which infuriated his contemporaries and may have invited violence against himself and his family . The truth of the events which led him into public mortal combat in the Paris suburbs may never be known , but the legend is still debated and discussed 600 years later . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Carrouges was born in the late 1330s in the village of Saint @-@ Marguerite @-@ de @-@ Carrouges as the eldest son of knight and minor noble Sir Jean de Carrouges III and his wife Nicole de <unk> . Carrouges III was an influential man in lower Normandy , being a vassal of the Count of Perche and a veteran soldier in his service . Carrouges III had been rewarded for his long military service in the Hundred Years War with a knighthood and the title of Viscount of Bellême , a rank that came with command of a vital hill castle overlooking the town as well as the role of sheriff in the vicinity , a post carrying significant financial and social rewards . 
 Carrouges IV grew up within his father 's domain , centred around the village of Carrouges where the family maintained their own hereditary castle . He followed his father into the armed service of the Counts of Perche and served in several minor campaigns against the English and <unk> in Normandy . Following his majority at age 21 , he was given a parcel of the family lands to administer and became interested in solidifying and expanding the family holdings . In 1367 the family castle and the village of Carrouges were destroyed by English soldiers and a new castle was built on a hilltop nearby , under instructions from Charles V of France . 
 In the early 1370s , Carrouges IV married Jeanne de Tilly , a daughter of the Lord of Chambois whose dowry included lands and rents vital to Carrouges ' ambition of expanding his family estates . Shortly after their wedding Jeanne gave birth to a son , whose godfather was a neighbour and close friend of de Carrouges , Squire Jacques Le Gris . In 1377 , Pierre d 'Alençon inherited his brother Robert 's county of Perche and with it the castle of Bellême . In addition , he gained the fealty of his brother 's vassals , including the Carrouges father and son as well as Jacques Le Gris . The younger Carrouges and Le Gris soon joined the court circle of the Count , centered around the town of Argentan . 
 It was at Argentan that the friendship between Carrouges and Le Gris began to deteriorate , as Le Gris rapidly became a favourite of Count Pierre . While Carrouges was overlooked , Le Gris was rewarded for service to the Count , inheriting his father 's lordship of the castle at Exmes and being granted a newly purchased estate at Arnou @-@ le @-@ Faucon . Carrouges became jealous of his friend and the two men soon became rivals at the court . A year after entering Count Pierre 's service , tragedy struck Carrouges as both his wife and son died of unknown but natural causes . In response , Carrouges left home and joined the service of Jean de Vienne accompanied by a retinue of nine squires . With this force , under the overall command of King Charles V , Carrouges distinguished himself in minor actions against the English in Beuzeville , Carentan and Coutances in a five @-@ month campaign , during which over half his retinue were killed in battle or by disease . 
 = = Marguerite de Thibouville = = 
 Returning home in 1380 after a successful campaign , Carrouges married Marguerite de Thibouville , only daughter of the highly controversial Robert de Thibouville . Thibouville was a Norman lord who had twice sided against the French king in territorial conflicts , betrayals he was lucky to survive , albeit in reduced circumstances . By the union of Marguerite and Carrouges , Thibouville hoped to restore his family 's status and wealth while Carrouges was hoping for an heir from the young Marguerite , whom contemporaries described as " young , beautiful , good , sensible and modest " . 
 Shortly after his marriage , Carrouges revealed another motive for the union . The valuable estate of Arnou @-@ le @-@ Faucon , given to his rival Jacques Le Gris two years earlier , had been formerly owned by Carrouges ' father @-@ in @-@ law and had been bought by Count Pierre for 8 @,@ 000 French livres in 1377 . Carrouges immediately began a lawsuit to recover the land based on an assumed prior claim to it . The case dragged on for some months until ultimately Count Pierre was forced to visit his cousin King Charles VI to officially confirm his ownership of the land and his right to give it to whomever of his followers he chose . Despite losing the case , the lawsuit reflected very poorly on Carrouges at the court in Argentan and resulted in his further estrangement from Count Pierre 's circle . 
 Two years after the Arnou @-@ le @-@ Faucon lawsuit , Carrouges was once again in court facing Count Pierre , this time in dispute over the lands administered by his recently deceased father . Carrouges III 's death early in 1382 vacated the captaincy of the castle of Bellême , a post Carrouges IV believed would be his by right . However , due to the failed lawsuit two years earlier , Count Pierre passed Carrouges over for the captaincy and gave it to another of his followers . The infuriated Carrouges again brought legal action against his overlord and again he was defeated in court . The only lasting result of the action was the further separation of Carrouges and Count Pierre 's court . 
 In March 1383 , Carrouges made a third effort to expand his family holdings , with the purchase of the neighbouring fiefs of <unk> and Plainville from his neighbour Sir Jean de <unk> . The sale required approval from Count Pierre , who was overlord of both fiefs , but as consequence of the previous legal difficulties Carrouges had caused him , Pierre refused to permit the sale and insisted that Carrouges turn the properties over to him in exchange for a full refund of the original price paid . Carrouges had no choice but to comply and subsequently blamed Jacques Le Gris ' influence for this new misfortune . 
 = = Campaigning in Scotland = = 
 Late in 1384 Carrouges entered society for the first time since his marriage four years earlier , attending a party to celebrate the birth of a neighbour 's son . Carrouges and Le Gris met at the celebration and agreed to end their quarrel , Carrouges introducing Le Gris to his wife Marguerite for the first time . A few months after this meeting , in March 1385 , Carrouges attempted to increase his family wealth through military means , by joining the army of Jean de Vienne for an expedition sailing to Edinburgh . This force of about 3 @,@ 000 soldiers was intended to unite with the Scottish army and raid Northern England , distracting English forces from operations in France . Traveling with men @-@ at @-@ arms , horses , gold and equipment , Carrouges and his entourage rode to Sluys and took ship to Leith during the spring of 1385 . 
 On arrival in Scotland much time was spent gathering Scottish troops together for the campaign on England and the French were delayed for some months collecting supplies . The army thus did not move south until July , ravaging villages and farms in the region of the River Tweed before besieging Wark Castle and burning it to the ground . The allied army then continued south through Northumberland and there burnt villages , towns , farms and castles across their line of advance in a large chevauchée . The English responded with an army led by King Richard II which advanced against the allied force and offered battle . The French prepared to fight but their Scots allies retreated , leaving the French exposed , and they were consequently forced to retreat as well . Outside Edinburgh the Scottish army dispersed and the inhabitants of the city fled north , leaving the French alone in the city . Realising that his force was outnumbered and without food or help , Vienne took the army south , rounding the English on the night of the 10 August and reentering Northumberland for further looting , attacking Carlisle but being unable to break through its walls . As the Franco @-@ Scottish army returned northwards it was attacked by an army under Henry Percy which destroyed the army 's wagon train and took many prisoners . When the defeated French returned to Edinburgh the Scots refused to provision the French army and many men died of disease or starvation . Late in the year the French army boarded ship and returned to Flanders , bankrupt and defeated . 
 Despite the expedition 's failure , Carrouges had distinguished himself in the campaign . Although he had lost five of his nine men @-@ at @-@ arms and a substantial amount of money he had also been awarded a knighthood on the battlefield , substantially raising his social status and the amount of money he received from military service . Despite being in poor health on his return from Scotland , Carrouges had business in Paris and in January 1386 he traveled there to collect his wages for the previous year 's campaign , leaving his wife with her mother @-@ in @-@ law at the village of Capomesnil . 
 = = Rape of Marguerite = = 
 Before setting off for Paris , Carrouges first visited Argentan to meet with Count Pierre and there announcing his intention of continuing to the capital . What followed was a sequence of events which will forever remain unclear but which would have a dramatic effect on the lives of all concerned . What is certain is that Carrouges encountered his rival Jacques Le Gris at the court of Count Pierre and words were exchanged , although what was said is unknown . In contrast to his bankrupt rival , Le Gris had not been on the Scottish expedition and had grown wealthier in Carrouges ' absence . Le Gris also had a reputation as a fierce and strong soldier in addition to that of a notorious womaniser , a reputation that may have played a part in the allegations which followed . 
 On the morning of 18 January 1386 , Dame Nicole de Carrouges departed her chateau at Capomesnil for the neighbouring town of Saint @-@ Pierre @-@ sur @-@ Dives where she had legal business to attend to . Although the journey was only a short one , she apparently took some or all of the household servants with her , leaving her daughter @-@ in @-@ law unattended during the day . Marguerite 's testimony then alleged that a man @-@ at @-@ arms named Adam Louvel knocked on the chateau door , which Marguerite opened herself in the absence of servants . According to Marguerite , Louvel then made enquiries about a loan he owed Jean de Carrouges before suddenly announcing that Jacques Le Gris was outside the door and insisted on seeing her . At her refusal , Louvel exclaimed that " he loves you passionately , he will do anything for you and he greatly desires to see you " . Although Marguerite protested , Le Gris then forced his way into the house and propositioned her , offering money if she would remain silent of their affair . When Marguerite refused , Le Gris then violently raped her with the aid of Louvel and threatened her not to tell anyone what had occurred on pain of death . 
 Marguerite remained silent of her ordeal for several days , until her husband 's return on the 21 or 22 January . Upon hearing of the encounter , the outraged Carrouges summoned his circle of courtiers and friends , including his mother and most of Marguerite 's family , and a council was convened where Marguerite repeated her account of the rape . Carrouges decided immediately to begin legal proceedings against Le Gris but faced great difficulties in prosecuting them as Le Gris was a favourite of Count Pierre , who would act as judge in the case . In addition , the case was weak because the only witness was Marguerite . Indeed , the trial at Argentan was so one @-@ sided an affair that Carrouges and his wife did not even bother to attend ; Pierre acquitted Le Gris of all charges and furthermore accused Marguerite of inventing or even " dreaming " the attack . 
 = = = Legal proceedings = = = 
 In search of a fair trial , Carrouges traveled to Paris to appeal to the King himself . Knowing that his case depended solely on his wife 's testimony and was therefore weak , Carrouges developed a plan : Instead of proceeding with a normal criminal trial , Carrouges would challenge Le Gris to a judicial duel , the survivor of which would thus have been deemed by God to have been the rightful claimant . Such trials @-@ by @-@ combat , once common in France , were rare by 1386 and the chance of one being permitted by the King unlikely . Nevertheless , Carrouges saw this scheme as his best option of procuring justice and redeeming his wife 's reputation . A few days after his arrival in Paris , Carrouges was presented to the King at the Château de Vincennes in order to make the first official appeal in the lengthy trial process . In doing so , he captured the imagination of the French court , which later become so fascinated with the Carrouges @-@ Le Gris trial that it would shape its schedule around watching the culminating combat . 
 On 9 July 1386 , the second stage in the legal process began when both Carrouges and Le Gris , with their followers , presented themselves before the Parlement of Paris at the Palais de Justice to issue the formal challenge . This involved reciting their accusations and throwing down a gauntlet signifying their intention to fight . The declarations were pronounced in front of the King , his brother Louis of Valois and the entire Parlement , who decided to initially hear the case as an ordinary criminal one and defer their decision on whether to permit the judicial duel until both sides had given testimony . Attempts had been made to persuade Le Gris to insist on a church trial , but these proved unsuccessful as Le Gris wished to counter the accusation with a lawsuit against his opponent claiming 40 @,@ 000 livres for defamation . Following the declarations a number of high @-@ ranking noblemen stepped forward to act as seconds in the duel for both men , including Waleran of Saint @-@ Pol for Carrouges and Philip of Artois , Count of Eu for Le Gris . 
 The criminal trial continued for most of the summer and Carrouges , Le Gris and Marguerite were all called on to give evidence . Marguerite was by this time visibly pregnant , although medieval medical knowledge claimed that children could not be conceived as a result of rape and her condition therefore was determined to have no bearing on the case . Adam Louvel and at least one of Marguerite 's maidservants also gave evidence and , as was the custom of the day for people of low birth , they were tortured to test the veracity of their testimony . During this process neither produced evidence incriminating Le Gris , although Louvel was subsequently challenged to a duel himself by Marguerite 's cousin , <unk> du Bois . In his evidence , Carrouges statement primarily repeated and supported his wife 's testimony , while Le Gris accused Carrouges of inventing the charges and beating his wife into making the accusations against the squire . In his statement , Le Gris painted a picture of a man driven wild with anger and jealousy who sought to restore his family fortune by concocting false accusations against his most significant rival . Le Gris also offered alibis for his whereabouts during the entire week the crime was supposed to have been committed and attempted to explain that it was not possible for him to have ridden the twenty @-@ five miles which supposedly separated him from Marguerite on the morning in question . A rebuttal from Carrouges emphasised the shame the trial had brought to his family as a reason against its invention and offered a counter demonstration of horsemanship indicating that the suggested fifty mile round trip was not impossible even if Le Gris 's alibi was true . Le Gris ' alibi was compromised some days later when the man providing it , a squire named Jean Beloteau , was arrested for committing rape in Paris even as the trial progressed . On 15 September , with the King in Flanders preparing for an invasion of England , the parlement handed down its verdict : As they had been unable to determine the guilt in the case , the two men would fight a duel to the death on 27 November 1386 . 
 = = Trial by Combat = = 
 The two months following the verdict were ones of great activity between the two parties and the citizens of Paris . As judicial duels were now so rare , no established battleground had been set aside , and a jousting arena at the Abbey of Saint @-@ Martin @-@ des @-@ Champs north of the city agreed to host the combat . Both Carrouges and Le Gris endured bouts of illness in the weeks following the verdict but recovered with the aid of their families and supporters , who had joined the hundreds of people flocking to the city from nearby regions to witness the fight . Indeed , the event was so popular that when King Charles VI believed that his return to Paris in time for the combat would be held up in Flanders due to bad roads , he sent a fast messenger to Paris delaying the duel by a month in order that he would be present to witness it . This Royal intervention set the date for the combat back to 29 December 1386 . 
 In the months between trial and duel , Marguerite and the French queen Isabeau of Bavaria had both given birth to sons . While Marguerite 's son Robert was a strong , healthy boy , the Dauphin was a sickly child and on the 28 December he died . Rather than descend into mourning , the King ordered a frenzy of parties and celebrations , the pinnacle of which was intended to be the duel between Carrouges and Le Gris . The morning of the combat saw thousands of Parisians arriving at the Abbey at dawn , long before the appointed hour . Amongst the spectators were the King and his entourage , including his uncles John , Duke of Berry , Philip the Bold and Louis II , Duke of Bourbon as well as his brother the Duke of Orléans . Also present , dressed in black and sitting in a carriage overlooking the field , was Marguerite . Should her husband lose the battle , she would be burnt at the stake in Montfaucon immediately following the duel , having been thus " proven " guilty of perjury by its outcome . 
 The combatants took the field in the early afternoon , mounted and dressed in plate armour . Both carried a lance , longsword , a heavy battle axe known as the " Holy Trinity " and a long dagger called the " misericordia " . Carrouges appeared first , reciting his charges against Le Gris to the King and crowd before Le Gris followed and did the same . Le Gris was then knighted in order that he and Carrouges be of equal standing during the fight . Both knights then dismounted and gave oaths to God , the Virgin Mary and St George , thereby sanctifying God 's judgment over the duel 's outcome . Finally , Carrouges approached his wife and pledged his honour before her , kissing her and promising to return . 
 As the field was cleared , silence descended on the arena following the King 's instructions that anybody who interfered in the duel would be executed and that anyone who shouted or verbally interrupted the combat would lose a hand . <unk> their steeds , the knights squared up and at the marshal 's signal , charged towards one another . Their lances struck but failed to penetrate the thick hides covering their shields and the combatants wheeled and charged again , this time striking one another on their helms . Rounding once more , the knights charged a third time , again striking shields and this time both shattering their lances . Reeling from the impact , the warriors drew their axes and charged a fourth time . Slashing and kicking at one another in the centre of the field , they traded blows until Le Gris , the much stronger man , was able to drive his axe through the neck of Carrouges ' horse . As the beheaded beast tumbled to the ground , Carrouges jumped clear and lashed out with his own weapon , disemboweling Le Gris ' steed in turn . 
 Now on foot , the knights drew swords and returned to battle , Le Gris again proving stronger than his opponent and slowly gaining the upper hand . After several minutes of engagement , Carrouges slipped and Le Gris was able to stab his rival through the right thigh . As the crowd gasped and murmured , Le Gris stepped back to view his opponent 's injury and Carrouges desperately counter @-@ attacked , wrestling Le Gris to the ground . Le Gris ' heavy armour prevented him from regaining his feet and Carrouges repeatedly stabbed at his floored opponent , his blows denting but not puncturing the thick plate steel . Realising that his sword was inadequate , Carrouges straddled Le Gris and used the handle of his dagger to smash the lock holding Le Gris ' faceplate in position . Even as his opponent struggled beneath him , Carrouges tore the plate off and demanded that Le Gris admit his guilt . Le Gris refused and cried out " In the name of God and on the peril and damnation of my soul , I am innocent " . Infuriated , Carrouges drove his dagger through Le Gris ' neck , killing him instantly . 
 Standing over his vanquished opponent , Carrouges remained on the field as the crowd cheered him and pages rushed to bind his wound . He then kneeled before the King , who presented him with a prize of a thousand francs in addition to a royal income of 200 francs a year . Only then did he greet his wife , in an emotional scene before the thousands of spectators . Jean and Marguerite de Carrouges then , with the crowd following in a great procession , rode from the abbey to the cathedral of Notre @-@ Dame de Paris , to give thanks for the victory . 
 A few weeks after the duel , Parlement awarded Carrouges a further six thousand livres in gold and a position within the Royal Household . Such rewards enabled <unk> to begin further legal action , attempting to exert his earlier claim to Arnou @-@ le @-@ Faucon . However , this land which Carrouges so coveted remained beyond his reach . Count Pierre , who held the land , never forgave Carrouges the death of his favourite , and held the estates from him in court . 
 = = Royal Service = = 
 Over the next three years , Jean and Marguerite de Carrouges had two more children and settled in Paris and Normandy , profiting from their celebrity with gifts and investments . In 1390 , Carrouges was promoted to a chevalier d 'honneur as a bodyguard of the King , a title which came with a substantial financial stipend and was a position of important social standing . The following year he was dispatched to Hungary on a mission to investigate the severity of the threat from the Ottoman Empire , the boundaries of which had been steadily spreading under Sultan Bayezid I. In this mission he was second in command to Jean de <unk> , a Marshal of France and famous soldier , indicating the elevated social position Carrouges enjoyed following the duel . 
 In 1392 however , Carrouges was present for one of the more notorious occurrences in fourteenth century France ; the first descent into madness of King Charles VI . As a chevalier d 'honneur , Carrouges accompanied the King on campaign and thus was present when the Royal Army entered Brittany to hunt for Pierre de Craon , a noble who had fled Paris following a failed attempt to murder Olivier de Clisson , Constable of France . As the army passed Le Mans on 8 August 1392 , a loud noise within his entourage startled the French King , who believing himself to be under attack , lashed out at the nearest person to him . The man happened to be his brother Louis of Valois , who turned and fled from his brother 's sword . Killing several pages who attempted to calm his temper , the King set off on full pursuit of Louis , leaving the army strung out across the countryside behind him . The pursuit continued for hours until the exhausted King was eventually subdued by his bodyguard , including Jean de Carrouges . 
 = = = Crusade of Nicopolis = = = 
 In early 1396 , following the peace treaty with England , the French army mobilised against another pressing threat ; that of the Turks to the east as part of a new crusade . As a leader of the original party to investigate events in Hungary , it was natural that Jean de Carrouges would return with his followers in the service of his old commander , Admiral Jean de Vienne . The army crossed Central Europe , united with the Hungarians and marched south , burning the city of Vidin and massacring the inhabitants before following the course of the Danube southeast , cutting a swathe of destruction through Ottoman territory . On the 12 September , the army arrived at the city of Nicopolis but were repulsed from its walls and settled into a siege . 
 Two weeks later , Sultan Bayezid arrived with a large army to the south of the town and took up a strong defensive position , challenging the crusaders to meet him . The crusader army moved to confront him on 24 September , but poor discipline and fractured leadership between the national factions resulted in a premature assault by the French force against the bluffs controlled by Ottoman troops . With the allied army strung out , Bayezid marshaled his reserves and defeated the crusaders in a furious engagement in which fell most of the allied army . Thousands more were captured and executed after the battle by the victorious Turkish troops . The exact fate of Sir Jean de Carrouges in the midst of this melee is unknown but it is probable that he fell close to his commander Jean de Vienne , whose forces were trapped in a gully and decimated by Turkish cavalry . Following his death , his estates passed to his ten @-@ year @-@ old son Robert and a mural of Jean and Marguerite de Carrouges was painted in the Abbey of St. Etienne in Caen to celebrate his memory . Since that time however , both the family and mural have faded into obscurity . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Due to the controversy and celebrity surrounding the case , the judicial duel between Carrouges and Le Gris was the last ever permitted by the French government and as such a well attended and infamous event , it soon attracted near @-@ legendary status . In France the memory of the duel far outlasted its participants , primarily a result of it being recorded soon after by the contemporary chronicler Jean Froissart . Over the following century , vivid and imaginative accounts were carried in the chronicles of Jean Juvénal des Ursins and the Grandes <unk> de France as well as by Jehan de Waurin and others , many embellishing the story with imaginative twists . The factual details of the case are unusually well recorded for a medieval trial as the records of the Parlement de Paris have survived intact and Jacques Le Gris ' lawyer Jean Le Coq kept meticulous notes on the case which still exist . In addition to a clear view of proceedings these notes also contain Le Coq 's own concerns about his client , whose innocence Le Coq deemed highly suspect . 
 Despite these records , the event entered many historical texts as an example of a great miscarriage of justice which therefore brought the tradition of trial @-@ by @-@ combat to an end . Several chronicles , including the " Chronique du <unk> de Saint @-@ Denys " and the Chronicles of Jean Juvénal des Ursins , tell of a deathbed confession to the rape by another man . This story , which is without basis in fact , was subsequently repeated in many later sources , most notably the Encyclopædia Britannica which for many years contained a version of the tale under the entry for " Duel " . This information was eventually removed in an edition printed in the 1970s . 
 Other sources have discussed the story in varying degrees of detail , including a section in Diderot 's Encyclopédie , in the Histoire du Parlement de Paris by Voltaire and in a number of books written in the nineteenth century , including a work in the 1880s by a descendant of Jacques Le Gris in which the author attempted to prove his ancestor 's innocence . In the twentieth century other authors have studied the case , the most recent being " The Last Duel " in 2004 , by Eric Jager , a professor of English at UCLA . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Eric Jager ( 2004 ) . The Last Duel . Century . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6190 @-@ 5 . 
 Malcolm Billings ( 1987 ) . The Cross and the Crescent . BBC . ISBN 0 @-@ 563 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 = Radek Zelenka = 
 Dr. Radek Zelenka is a fictional character in the television series Stargate Atlantis , portrayed by David Nykl . He is a scientist from the Czech Republic and a member of the original expedition from Earth to the Ancient city of Atlantis in the Pegasus galaxy . His expertise on Ancient technology is only surpassed by Dr. Rodney McKay , with whom he shares a friendly rivalry . Zelenka 's planned one @-@ time appearance in the season 1 episode " Thirty @-@ Eight Minutes " was followed by a recurring role for expository scenes with McKay and the leader of the expedition . Zelenka has since appeared in approximately half of each season 's episodes and also appeared in the crossover episode " The Pegasus Project " of Stargate SG @-@ 1 . The series finale of Atlantis , " Enemy at the Gate " , marks his last appearance . For his portrayal of Radek Zelenka , David Nykl was nominated for a 2005 Leo Award in the category " Dramatic Series : Best Supporting Performance by a Male " . 
 = = Role in Stargate = = 
 Dr. Radek Zelenka is a careful and precise scientist of the original Atlantis Expedition who often supplements the scientific decisions of the " equally brainy " Dr. Rodney McKay , with whom he has a friendly rivalry . He frequently appears in the control room with McKay and the leader of the Atlantis expedition for expository scenes to lay out an episode 's premise to the audience , and is " a key player in helping the Atlantis team stay one step ahead of the bad guys as well as solving some of its most perplexing scientific conundrums " . GateWorld 's David Read felt that while Zelenka may " play second fiddle to Rodney " , he is also " the only one who even has the potential to put McKay down . " Actor David Nykl explained that Zelenka has " reasonably well honed social skills " and " can put up with a lot of stress [ ... ] and a lot of pressure , particularly from McKay and the situations that he can get into " , but he may be too focused and determined to get one thing done . 
 Zelenka recurs in all five seasons of Stargate Atlantis and is also among the Atlantis characters to appear in the Stargate SG @-@ 1 crossover episode " The Pegasus Project " . In his first appearance in the early Atlantis season 1 episode " Thirty @-@ Eight Minutes " , Zelenka helps devise a plan to free Major Sheppard 's team including Dr. McKay from a potentially lethal technical problem . After a first short collaboration in " Suspicion " , Zelenka and McKay are the driving forces in finding a solution to protect the city of Atlantis from a massive hurricane in " The Storm " . 
 " Hot Zone " reveals that Zelenka has been given the ATA gene therapy to enable him to operate Ancient technology , but the therapy had no effect on him . Season 2 's " Duet " shows Zelenka off @-@ world for the first time , where he needs to save McKay and a soldier from being captured in a Wraith dart . Following a major dispute about an experimental Ancient power generator in " Trinity " , McKay apologizes to Zelenka when the experiment causes the death of a scientist . McKay saves Zelenka from certain death in " Tao of Rodney " and later apologizes for so often putting him down , admitting that Zelenka is " a brilliant scientist and a decent human being " . Zelenka last appears in the series finale of Atlantis , " Enemy at the Gate " , where he implements a wormhole drive that sends the city of Atlantis from the Pegasus Galaxy to Earth within seconds . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 From the beginning of Stargate Atlantis , the producers were looking for actors to play non @-@ Americans to present the cooperation between different nations and other groups of people in an alien environment . When actor David Nykl mentioned his Czech Canadian background during his audition for a Russian character for the season 1 episode " Thirty @-@ Eight Minutes " , the producers changed the character 's nationality to Czech and cast him . Nykl made such an impression that producer Brad Wright wrote Zelenka into the Rodney McKay ( David Hewlett ) scenes of the next episode , " Suspicion " . 
 Zelenka was re @-@ introduced in the mid @-@ season @-@ 1 finale " The Storm " , Martin Gero 's second Atlantis episode . Gero had had difficulty with laying out the dangers of the storm and its solution in a quick and entertaining manner with just the McKay character , and Brad Wright was not opposed to introducing another expository character . Zelenka has since frequently appeared for expository scenes in the control room with McKay and the leader of the Atlantis expedition . Zelenka 's given name is first mentioned by McKay in the season 1 finale " The Siege " ; McKay had previously been unable to remember Zelenka 's name . The producers chose " Radek " , a fairly common Czech given name , without input from Nykl . When Colonel Samantha Carter ( Amanda Tapping ) replaced Dr. Elizabeth Weir ( Torri Higginson ) as the leader of the Atlantis expedition in season 4 , the producers shifted the emphasis of Zelenka 's collaboration with McKay to his interaction with Carter . By the end of the show 's run , the interactions between Zelenka and McKay become more subtle to the point where they finish each other 's sentences and need fewer words and expressions to get by . 
 Portraying a recurring character , David Nykl was not under contract and neither knew his number of episodes nor his character 's story arc in advance . Nevertheless , he appeared in approximately half of each season 's episodes . No scenes with Zelenka were cut in the first two seasons of Atlantis , and extra scenes involving Zelenka were shot in the first episodes of the season 3 to fill time . However , all of David Nykl 's scenes were cut from the season 5 episode " The Shrine " due to time constraints , although Nykl 's credits appear in the finished episode . 
 Since Zelenka 's first appearance , David Nykl 's fluent Czech was worked into Stargate Atlantis as part of Zelenka . Approximately half of Zelenka 's Czech lines were scripted ( in English ) , which Nykl then translated verbatim . The other half was ad @-@ libbed and usually included swearing . His usual Czech exclamations include Ty vole and Do <unk> . Nykl normally speaks with a Canadian accent , but Zelenka had a thick Czech accent ; Nykl found it increasingly hard to remember to put on the accent as the show went on . The late season 1 episode " Letters from Pegasus " features a minute @-@ long non @-@ subtitled monologue in which Zelenka describes the city of Atlantis in his <unk> . Nykl translated the scripted monologue at home and performed it in Czech the next day . A version in English was initially planned to be filmed but was dropped after Nykl 's successful first take . The end of Zelenka 's video message ( " <unk> se <unk> " – " take care , darling " ) was ad @-@ libbed , but Nykl left it to the writers to create Zelenka 's backstory . But during the show 's run , Zelenka only ever mentions having a brother , a sister , and a nephew , and is never shown to be or have been in a romantic relationship . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Often informing his superiors of critical situations , Zelenka earned the nickname " Mr. Bad News " among fans . In an interview with David Nykl , <unk> 's Gilles <unk> referred to Zelenka as a " popular " and " interesting " character , and compared Zelenka 's apparitions in Atlantis to those of the Stargate SG @-@ 1 character Walter Harriman , " a bit like the icing on the cake " . Another interviewer mentioned that , following a " warm reception " , the " fans have really taken [ Zelenka ] to heart " . When GateWorld hypothesized that viewers were looking forward to an episode where the " underdog " Zelenka saves the day instead of McKay , Nykl replied that the set @-@ up dynamic earns the character more sympathy from the audience . For his portrayal of Radek Zelenka , David Nykl was nominated for a 2005 Leo Award in the category " Dramatic Series : Best Supporting Performance by a Male " . 
 = The Thin White Line ( Millennium ) = 
 " ' The Thin White Line " is the fourteenth episode of the first season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on February 14 , 1997 . The episode was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong and directed by Thomas J. Wright . " The Thin White Line " featured guest appearances by Jeremy Roberts and Scott Heindl . 
 When a spate of killings seems to echo that of a man currently incarcerated , Millennium Group consultant Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) must confront the specter of his past and face a murderer who nearly took a younger Black 's life . 
 " The Thin White Line " draws inspiration from real killers Herbert Mullin , Lawrence <unk> and Roy Norris , and contains several references to Morgan and Wong 's previous series Space : Above and Beyond . The episode was viewed by approximately 6 @.@ 6 million households in its initial broadcast and has received positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Anne Rothenburg answers a knock on her front door . When she speaks to the man waiting there , he hears something else entirely ; believing that she is giving her consent to be murdered , he attacks her . 
 Millennium Group consultant Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) visits a Seattle hospital to pick up his wife Catherine ( Megan Gallagher ) , who works there as a counsellor . Rothenburg is brought in on a stretcher by paramedics . Black notices a peculiar slash across her palm , and glances down at his own , which bears a scar matching the woman 's cut exactly . Rothenburg then dies of her injuries . 
 Black contacts Seattle Police Department detective Bob Bletcher ( Bill Smitrovich ) for information on Rothenburg . Her husband found her when he came home , assuming that she had surprised a burglar . Elsewhere , her attacker shoots the clerk in a liquor store , again hearing the victim give permission to be killed . Black and Bletcher review security camera footage of the crime , which leads to them discovering half a playing card — the Jack of Spades — at the scene . Rothenburg 's home is searched and the other half is found there . 
 Black tells Bletcher about Richard Alan Hance ( Jeremy Roberts ) , a serial killer Black had helped to apprehend twenty years before . Hance was a disturbed Vietnam War veteran who marked his kills with half a playing card , a custom he picked up during his tours of duty . Black was one of a number of Federal Bureau of Investigation agents who responded to an anonymous tip , leading them to Hance 's location — however , the tip was called in by Hance himself and the raid became an ambush . Three agents were killed , and Black was cornered by Hance , who cut open his palm and nearly took Black 's life before the young Black was able to overpower and arrest him . 
 In the present , Black realizes that the current murderer must be Hance 's former cellmate Jacob Tyler ( Scott Heindl ) . Black visits Hance in prison , and upon speaking to Hance , realizes that Tyler believes himself Hance 's reincarnation , aspiring to follow his methods exactly . Meanwhile , Tyler calls the police and leaves an anonymous tip , telling them that the liquor store murderer is hiding in an abandoned building . Black accompanies a SWAT team encircling the building , but the officers come under sniper fire from a construction site across the street . Black and Bletcher separate as they search for Tyler , who gets the drop on Black . Black disarms Tyler , attempting to talk him into surrendering . Tyler empties a handgun at Black , but misses ; when Bletcher confronts him , Tyler points the gun and Bletcher instinctively shoots and kills him . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Thin White Line " was written by frequent collaborators Glen Morgan and James Wong , and directed by Thomas J. Wright . " The Thin White Line " was the third episode of the series to have been written by Morgan and Wong , after " Dead Letters " and " 522666 " . The duo would go on to pen a further twelve episodes over the series ' run , and would take charge of the second season as co @-@ executive producers . Wright would go on to direct twenty @-@ six episodes across all three seasons , and would also direct " Millennium " , the series ' crossover episode with its sister show The X @-@ Files . He had also previously worked with Morgan and Wong on their series Space : Above and Beyond . 
 The relationship between the characters of Jacob Tyler and Richard Allen Hance seems to have been based on that of Lawrence <unk> and Roy Norris , two convicts whose time in prison together formed the basis of a partnership that saw them torture and kill several young women in 1979 . Tyler 's delusional visions of his victims consenting to be murdered may stem from West German serial killer Waldemar <unk> , who chose his victims based on their response to him ringing their doorbells — those who answered he deemed to have given their permission to be killed and their houses burgled ; those who did not were simply left alone . The character also draws inspiration from American serial killer Herbert Mullin , who likewise felt that his victims had offered him permission to kill them . Mullin claimed that their last words were often " I understand " . 
 Scott Heindl , who portrayed Jacob Tyler , would later return in an unrelated role in the second season episode " A Room with No View " , and the third season episode " Antipas " . The episode contains several references to Morgan and Wong 's short @-@ lived series Space : Above and Beyond , which had been cancelled prior to the pair joining Millennium . The phrase " expect no mercy " found on the playing cards is the motto of that series ' United States Marine Corps squadron , while the individual cards used — the Jack of Spades , King of Clubs and Queen of Hearts — mirror the call signs used by individual marines . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Thin White Line " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on February 14 , 1997 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 6 @.@ 8 during its original broadcast , meaning that 6 @.@ 8 percent of households in the United States viewed the episode . This represented 6 @.@ 6 million households , and left the episode the seventy @-@ second most @-@ viewed broadcast that week . 
 The episode received positive reviews from critics . The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode an A − , finding that it showed the series to be " unafraid to be unapologetically weird " . VanDerWerff felt that " The Thin White Line " introduced elements of mysticism and the supernatural to the character of Frank Black , which " presages the weirder direction Morgan and Wong took the show in season two , while still staying roughly consistent with the first season ’ s more realistic focus " . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 , comparing it to the 1991 film The Silence of the Lambs . Gibron noted that " with a stellar final act and a closing scene that has a great deal of impact in a very restrained manner , this is an excellent installment [ sic ] " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated " The Thin White Line " five stars out of five , noting that " it 's a return to the serial killer format , but it 's never been done before with as much verve as it had here " . Shearman compared the episode to both The Silence of the Lambs and the works of film director Quentin Tarantino , and felt that the interrogation scene between Black and Hance was " maybe the single best scene in the whole season " . 
 Cinematographer Robert McLachlan received an American Society of Cinematographers award nomination in the category Outstanding Achievement in Cinematography in a Regular Series for his work on " The Thin White Line " . McLachlan lost to Marc <unk> for the 3rd Rock from the Sun episode " Nightmare on Dick Street " . 
 = Egyptian temple = 
 Egyptian temples were built for the official worship of the gods and in commemoration of the pharaohs in ancient Egypt and regions under Egyptian control . Temples were seen as houses for the gods or kings to whom they were dedicated . Within them , the Egyptians performed a variety of rituals , the central functions of Egyptian religion : giving offerings to the gods , reenacting their mythological interactions through festivals , and warding off the forces of chaos . These rituals were seen as necessary for the gods to continue to uphold maat , the divine order of the universe . Housing and caring for the gods were the obligations of pharaohs , who therefore dedicated prodigious resources to temple construction and maintenance . Out of necessity , pharaohs delegated most of their ritual duties to a host of priests , but most of the populace was excluded from direct participation in ceremonies and forbidden to enter a temple 's most sacred areas . Nevertheless , a temple was an important religious site for all classes of Egyptians , who went there to pray , give offerings , and seek oracular guidance from the god dwelling within . 
 The most important part of the temple was the sanctuary , which typically contained a cult image , a statue of its god . The rooms outside the sanctuary grew larger and more elaborate over time , so that temples evolved from small shrines in the late Predynastic Period ( late fourth millennium BC ) to massive stone edifices in the New Kingdom ( c . 1550 – 1070 BC ) and later . These edifices are among the largest and most enduring examples of Egyptian architecture , with their elements arranged and decorated according to complex patterns of religious symbolism . Their typical design consisted of a series of enclosed halls , open courts , and massive entrance pylons aligned along the path used for festival processions . Beyond the temple proper was an outer wall enclosing a wide variety of secondary buildings . 
 A large temple also owned sizable tracts of land and employed thousands of laymen to supply its needs . Temples were therefore key economic as well as religious centers . The priests who managed these powerful institutions wielded considerable influence , and despite their ostensible subordination to the king they may have posed significant challenges to his authority . 
 Temple @-@ building in Egypt continued despite the nation 's decline and ultimate loss of independence to the Roman Empire . With the coming of Christianity , however , Egyptian religion faced increasing persecution , and the last temple was closed in AD 550 . For centuries , the ancient buildings suffered destruction and neglect . But at the start of the 19th century , a wave of interest in ancient Egypt swept Europe , giving rise to the science of Egyptology and drawing increasing numbers of visitors to see the civilization 's remains . Dozens of temples survive today , and some have become world @-@ famous tourist attractions that contribute significantly to the modern Egyptian economy . Egyptologists continue to study the surviving temples and the remains of destroyed ones , as they are invaluable sources of information about ancient Egyptian society . 
 = = Functions = = 
 = = = Religious = = = 
 Ancient Egyptian temples were meant as places for the gods to reside on earth . Indeed , the term the Egyptians most commonly used to describe the temple building , <unk> @-@ nṯr , means " mansion ( or enclosure ) of a god " . A god 's presence in the temple linked the human and divine realms and allowed humans to interact with the god through ritual . These rituals , it was believed , sustained the god and allowed it to continue to play its proper role in nature . They were therefore a key part of the maintenance of maat , the ideal order of nature and of human society in Egyptian belief . Maintaining maat was the entire purpose of Egyptian religion , and it was the purpose of a temple as well . 
 Because he was credited with divine power himself , the pharaoh , as a sacred king , was regarded as Egypt 's representative to the gods and its most important upholder of maat . Thus , it was theoretically his duty to perform the temple rites . While it is uncertain how often he actually participated in ceremonies , the existence of temples across Egypt made it impossible for him to do so in all cases , and most of the time these duties were delegated to priests . The pharaoh was nevertheless obligated to maintain , provide for , and expand the temples throughout his realm . 
 Although the pharaoh delegated his authority , the performance of temple rituals was still an official duty , restricted to high @-@ ranking priests . The participation of the general populace in most ceremonies was prohibited . Much of the lay religious activity in Egypt instead took place in private and community shrines , separate from the official temples . However , as the primary link between the human and divine realms , temples attracted considerable veneration from ordinary Egyptians . 
 Each temple had a principal deity , and most were dedicated to other gods as well . However , not all deities had temples dedicated to them . Many demons and household gods were involved primarily in magical or private religious practice , with little or no presence in temple ceremonies . There were also other gods who had significant roles in the cosmos but , for uncertain reasons , were not honored with temples of their own . Of those gods who did have temples of their own , many were venerated mainly in certain areas of Egypt , though many gods with a strong local tie were also important across the nation . Even deities whose worship spanned the country were strongly associated with the cities where their chief temples were located . In Egyptian creation myths , the first temple originated as a shelter for a god — which god it was varied according to the city — that stood on the mound of land where the process of creation began . Each temple in Egypt , therefore , was equated with this original temple and with the site of creation itself . As the primordial home of the god and the mythological location of the city 's founding , the temple was seen as the hub of the region , from which the city 's patron god ruled over it . 
 Pharaohs also built temples where offerings were made to sustain their spirits in the afterlife , often linked with or located near their tombs . These temples are traditionally called " mortuary temples " and regarded as essentially different from divine temples . However , in recent years some Egyptologists , such as Gerhard <unk> , have argued that there is no clear division between the two . The Egyptians did not refer to mortuary temples by any distinct name . Nor were rituals for the dead and rituals for the gods mutually exclusive ; the symbolism surrounding death was present in all Egyptian temples . The worship of gods was present to some degree in mortuary temples , and the Egyptologist Stephen Quirke has said that " at all periods royal cult involves the gods , but equally ... all cult of the gods involves the king " . Even so , certain temples were clearly used to commemorate deceased kings and to give offerings to their spirits . Their exact purpose is not fully understood ; they may have been meant to unite the king with the gods , elevating him to a divine status greater than that of ordinary kingship . In any case , the difficulty of separating divine and mortuary temples reflects the close intertwining of divinity and kingship in Egyptian belief . 
 = = = Economic and administrative = = = 
 Temples were also key centers of economic activity . The largest of them required prodigious resources and employed tens of thousands of priests , craftsmen , and laborers . The temple 's economic workings were analogous to those of a large Egyptian household , with servants dedicated to serving the temple god as they might serve the master of an estate . This similarity is reflected in the Egyptian term for the temple lands and their administration , pr , meaning " house " or " estate " . 
 Some of the temple 's supplies came from direct donations by the king . In the New Kingdom , when Egypt was an imperial power , these donations often came out of the spoils of the king 's military campaigns or the tribute given by his client states . The king might also levy various taxes that went directly to support a temple . Other revenue came from private individuals , who offered land , slaves , or goods to temples in exchange for a supply of offerings and priestly services to sustain their spirits in the afterlife . 
 Much of a temple 's economic support came from its own resources . These included large tracts of land beyond the temple enclosure , sometimes in a completely different region than the temple itself . The most important type of property was farmland , producing grain , fruit , or wine , or supporting herds of livestock . The temple either managed these lands directly , rented them out to farmers for a share of the produce , or managed them jointly with the royal administration . Temples also launched expeditions into the desert to collect resources such as salt , honey , or wild game , or to mine precious minerals . Some owned fleets of ships with which to conduct their own trade across the country or even beyond Egypt 's borders . Thus , as Richard H. Wilkinson says , the temple estate " often represented no less than a slice of Egypt itself " . As a major economic center and the employer of a large part of the local population , the temple enclosure was a key part of the town in which it stood . Conversely , when a temple was founded on empty land , a new town was built to support it . 
 All this economic power was ultimately under the pharaoh 's control , and temple products and property were often taxed . Their employees , even the priests , were subject to the state corvée system , which conscripted labor for royal projects . They could also be ordered to provide supplies for some specific purposes . <unk> 's trading expedition in the Old Kingdom was allowed to procure supplies from any temple it wished , and the mortuary temples of the Theban Necropolis in the New Kingdom oversaw the provision of the royally employed tomb workers at Deir el @-@ Medina . Kings could also exempt temples or classes of personnel from taxation and conscription . 
 The royal administration could also order one temple to divert its resources to another temple whose influence it wished to expand . Thus , a king might increase the income of the temples of a god he favored , and mortuary temples of recent rulers tended to siphon off resources from temples to pharaohs long dead . The most drastic means of controlling the temple estates was to completely revise the distribution of their property nationwide , which might extend to closing down certain temples . Such changes could significantly alter Egypt 's economic landscape . The temples were thus important instruments with which the king managed the nation 's resources and its people . As the direct overseers of their own economic sphere , the administrations of large temples wielded considerable influence and may have posed a challenge to the authority of a weak pharaoh , although it is unclear how independent they actually were . 
 Once Egypt became a Roman province , Roman officials sought to limit temples ' power and independence . Temples were made to either pay rent to the government for the land they owned or surrender that land to the state in exchange for a government stipend . Their cults became tightly regulated , less self @-@ supporting , and more dependent on government donations . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Early development = = = 
 The earliest known shrines appeared in Egypt in the late Predynastic Period , in the late fourth millennium BC , at sites such as Sais and <unk> in Lower Egypt and Nekhen and <unk> in Upper Egypt . Most of these shrines were made of perishable materials such as wood , reed matting , and mudbrick . Despite the impermanence of these early buildings , later Egyptian art continually reused and adapted elements from them , evoking the ancient shrines to suggest the eternal nature of the gods and their dwelling places . 
 In the Early Dynastic Period ( c . 3100 – 2686 BC ) , the first pharaohs built funerary complexes in the religious center of Abydos following a single general pattern , with a rectangular mud @-@ brick enclosure . In the Old Kingdom ( c . 2686 – 2181 BC ) that followed the Early Dynastic Period , royal funerary monuments greatly expanded , while most divine temples remained comparatively small , suggesting that official religion in this period emphasized the cult of the divine king more than the direct worship of deities . Deities closely connected with the king , such as the sun god Ra and the goddess Hathor , received more royal contributions than other deities . Ra 's temple at Heliopolis was one of the great religious centers of the age , and several Old Kingdom pharaohs built large sun temples in his honor near their pyramids . Meanwhile , the small provincial temples retained a variety of local styles from Predynastic times , unaffected by the royal cult sites . 
 The expansion of funerary monuments began in the reign of Djoser , who built his complex entirely of stone and placed in the enclosure a step pyramid under which he was buried : the Pyramid of Djoser . For the rest of the Old Kingdom , tomb and temple were joined in elaborate stone pyramid complexes . Near each pyramid complex was a town that supplied its needs as towns would support temples throughout Egyptian history . Other changes came in the reign of Sneferu , who , beginning with his first pyramid at <unk> , built pyramid complexes symmetrically along an east – west axis , with a valley temple on the banks of the Nile linked to a pyramid temple at the foot of the pyramid . Sneferu 's immediate successors followed this pattern , but beginning in the late Old Kingdom , pyramid complexes combined different elements from the axial plan and from the rectangular plan of Djoser . To supply the massive pyramid complexes , kings founded new towns and farming estates on undeveloped lands across Egypt . The flow of goods from these lands to the central government and its temples helped unify the kingdom . 
 The rulers of the Middle Kingdom ( c . 2055 – 1650 BC ) , continued building pyramids and their associated complexes . The rare remains from Middle Kingdom temples , like the one at Medinet Madi , show that temple plans grew more symmetrical during that period , and divine temples made increasing use of stone . The pattern of a sanctuary lying behind a pillared hall frequently appears in Middle Kingdom temples , and sometimes these two elements are fronted by open courts , foreshadowing the standard temple layout used in later times . 
 = = = New Kingdom = = = 
 With greater power and wealth during the New Kingdom ( c . 1550 – 1070 BC ) , Egypt devoted still more resources to its temples , which grew larger and more elaborate . Higher @-@ ranking priestly roles became permanent rather than rotating positions , and once again they controlled a large portion of Egypt 's wealth . The Egyptologist Anthony Spalinger suggests that , as the influence of temples expanded , religious celebrations that had once been fully public were absorbed into the temples ' increasingly important festival rituals . The most important god of the time was Amun , whose main cult center , the Precinct of Amun @-@ Re at Karnak in Thebes , eventually became the largest of all temples , and whose high priests may have wielded considerable political influence . 
 Many temples were now built entirely of stone , and their general plan became fixed , with the sanctuary , halls , courtyards , and pylon gateways oriented along the path used for festival processions . New Kingdom pharaohs ceased using pyramids as funerary monuments and placed their tombs a great distance from their mortuary temples . Without pyramids to build around , mortuary temples began using the same plan as those dedicated to the gods . 
 In the middle of the New Kingdom , Pharaoh Akhenaten promoted the god Aten over all others and eventually abolished the official worship of most other gods . Traditional temples were neglected while new Aten temples , differing sharply in design and construction , were erected . But Akhenaten 's revolution was reversed soon after his death , with the traditional cults reinstated and the new temples dismantled . Subsequent pharaohs dedicated still more resources to the temples , particularly Ramesses II , the most prolific monument @-@ builder in Egyptian history . As the wealth of the priesthoods continued to grow , so did their religious influence : temple oracles , controlled by the priests , were an increasingly popular method of making decisions . Pharaonic power waned , and in the 11th century BC a military leader , <unk> , made himself High Priest of Amun and the de facto ruler of Upper Egypt , beginning the political fragmentation of the Third Intermediate Period ( c . 1070 – 664 BC ) . 
 As the New Kingdom crumbled , the building of mortuary temples ceased and was never revived . However , some rulers of the Third Intermediate Period , such as those at Tanis , were buried within the enclosures of divine temples , thus continuing the close link between temple and tomb . 
 = = = Later development = = = 
 In the Third Intermediate Period and the following Late Period ( 664 – 323 BC ) , the weakened Egyptian state fell to a series of outside powers , experiencing only occasional periods of independence . Many of these foreign rulers funded and expanded temples to strengthen their claim to the kingship of Egypt . One such group , the Kushite pharaohs of the 8th and 7th centuries BC , adopted Egyptian style temple architecture for use in their native land of Nubia , beginning a long tradition of sophisticated Nubian temple building . Amid this turmoil the fortunes of various temples and clergies shifted , and the independence of Amun 's priesthood was broken , but the power of the priesthood in general remained . 
 Despite the political upheaval , the Egyptian temple style continued to evolve without absorbing much foreign influence . Whereas earlier temple building mostly focused on male gods , goddesses and child deities grew increasingly prominent . Temples focused more on popular religious activities such as oracles , animal cults , and prayer . New architectural forms continued to develop , such as covered kiosks in front of gateways , more elaborate column styles , and the <unk> , a building celebrating the mythical birth of a god . Though the characteristics of the late temple style had developed by the last period of native rule , most of the examples date from the era of the Ptolemies , Greek kings who ruled as pharaohs for nearly 300 years . 
 After Rome conquered the Ptolemaic kingdom in 30 BC , Roman emperors took on the role of ruler and temple patron , reducing the temples ' wealth and political power . Many temples in Roman Egypt continued to be built in Egyptian style . Others , including some that were dedicated to Egyptian gods — such as the temple to Isis at Ras el @-@ Soda — were built in a style derived from Roman architecture . 
 Temple @-@ building continued into the third century AD , but as the empire weakened , imperial donations to the temple cults dried up . Cult activities continued , relying increasingly on financial support and volunteer labor from surrounding communities . In the following centuries , however , Christian emperors issued decrees that were increasingly hostile to pagan cults and temples . Some Christians attacked and destroyed temples , as in the plundering of the Serapeum and other temples in Alexandria in AD 391 or 392 . Through some combination of Christian coercion and loss of funds , temples ceased to function at various times . The last temple cults died out in the fifth or sixth centuries AD , although locals may have venerated some sites long after the regular ceremonies there had ceased . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Temples were built throughout Upper and Lower Egypt , as well as at Egyptian @-@ controlled oases in the Libyan Desert as far west as Siwa , and at outposts in the Sinai Peninsula such as <unk> . In periods when Egypt dominated Nubia , Egyptian rulers also built temples there , as far south as Jebel <unk> . Most Egyptian towns had a temple , but in some cases , as with mortuary temples or the temples in Nubia , the temple was a new foundation on previously empty land . The exact site of a temple was often chosen for religious reasons ; it might , for example , be the mythical birthplace or burial place of a god . The temple axis might also be designed to align with locations of religious significance , such as the site of a neighboring temple or the rising place of the sun or particular stars . The Great Temple of Abu Simbel , for instance , is aligned so that twice a year the rising sun illuminates the statues of the gods in its innermost room . Most temples , however , were aligned toward the Nile with an axis running roughly east – west . 
 An elaborate series of foundation rituals preceded construction . A further set of rituals followed the temple 's completion , dedicating it to its patron god . These were conducted , at least in theory , by the king as part of his religious duties ; indeed , in Egyptian belief all temple construction was symbolically his work . In reality , it was the work of hundreds of his subjects , conscripted in the corvée system . Using mostly stone and wood tools , they built the massive temple structures in construction processes that lasted years or decades . 
 The use of stone in Egyptian temples emphasized their purpose as eternal houses for the gods and set them apart from buildings for the use of mortals , which were built of mudbrick . However , early temples were built of brick and other perishable materials , and most of the outlying buildings in temple enclosures remained brick @-@ built throughout Egyptian history . The main stones used in temple construction were limestone and sandstone , which are common in Egypt ; stones that are harder and more difficult to carve , such as granite , were used in smaller amounts for individual elements like obelisks . The stone to build a temple might be quarried nearby or shipped on the Nile from quarries elsewhere . 
 Temple structures were built on foundations of stone slabs set into sand @-@ filled trenches . Walls and other structures were built with large blocks of varying shapes . The blocks were laid in courses , usually without mortar . Each stone was dressed to fit with its neighbors , producing cuboid blocks whose uneven shapes interlocked . The interiors of walls were often built with less care , using rougher , poorer @-@ quality stones . To build structures above ground level , the workers used massive construction ramps . When cutting chambers in living rock , workers excavated from the top down , carving a crawlspace near the ceiling and cutting down to the floor . Once the temple structure was complete , the rough faces of the stones were dressed to create a smooth surface . In decorating these surfaces , reliefs were carved into the stone or , if the stone was too poor @-@ quality to carve , a layer of plaster that covered the stone surface . Reliefs were then decorated with gilding , inlay , or paint . The paints were usually mixtures of mineral pigments with some kind of adhesive , possibly natural gum . 
 Temple construction did not end once the original plan was complete ; pharaohs often rebuilt or replaced decayed temple structures or made additions to those still standing . In the course of these additions , they frequently dismantled old temple buildings to use as fill for the interiors of new structures . On rare occasions this may have been because the old structures or their builders had become anathema , as with Akhenaten 's temples , but in most cases the reason seems to have been convenience . Such expansion and dismantling could considerably distort the original temple plan , as happened at the enormous Precinct of Amun @-@ Re at Karnak , which developed two intersecting axes and several satellite temples . 
 = = Design and decoration = = 
 Like all ancient Egyptian architecture , Egyptian temple designs emphasized order , symmetry , and monumentality and combined geometric shapes with stylized organic motifs . Elements of temple design also alluded to the form of the earliest Egyptian buildings . <unk> cornices at the tops of walls , for instance , were made to imitate rows of palm fronds placed atop archaic walls , and the batter of exterior walls , while partly meant to ensure stability , was also a holdover from archaic building methods . Temple ground plans usually centered on an axis running on a slight incline from the sanctuary down to the temple entrance . In the fully developed pattern used in the New Kingdom and later , the path used for festival processions — a broad avenue punctuated with massive doors — served as this central axis . The path was intended primarily for the god 's use when it traveled outside the sanctuary ; on most occasions people used smaller side doors . The typical parts of a temple , such as column @-@ filled hypostyle halls , open peristyle courts , and towering entrance pylons , were arranged along this path in a traditional but flexible order . Beyond the temple building proper , the outer walls enclosed numerous satellite buildings . The entire area enclosed by these walls is sometimes called the <unk> , the sacred precinct dedicated to the god . 
 The temple pattern could vary considerably , apart from the distorting effect of additional construction . Many temples ( rock temples ) were cut entirely into living rock , as at Abu Simbel , or had rock @-@ cut inner chambers with masonry courtyards and pylons , as at Wadi es @-@ <unk> . They used much the same layout as free @-@ standing temples but used excavated chambers rather than buildings as their inner rooms . In some temples , like the mortuary temples at Deir el @-@ Bahari , the processional path ran up a series of terraces rather than sitting on a single level . The Ptolemaic Temple of Kom <unk> was built with two main sanctuaries , producing two parallel axes that run the length of the building . The most idiosyncratic temple style was that of the Aten temples built by Akhenaten at el @-@ Amarna , in which the axis passed through a series of entirely open courts filled with altars . 
 The traditional design was a highly symbolic variety of sacred architecture . It was a greatly elaborated variant on the design of an Egyptian house , reflecting its role as the god 's home . Moreover , the temple represented a piece of the divine realm on earth . The elevated , enclosed sanctuary was equated with the sacred hill where the world was created in Egyptian myth and with the burial chamber of a tomb , where the god 's ba , or spirit , came to inhabit its cult image just as a human ba came to inhabit its mummy . This crucial place , the Egyptians believed , had to be insulated from the impure outside world . Therefore , as one moved toward the sanctuary the amount of outside light decreased , and restrictions on who could enter increased . Yet the temple could also represent the world itself . The processional way could therefore stand for the path of the sun traveling across the sky , and the sanctuary for the Duat where it was believed to set and to be reborn at night . The space outside the building was thus equated with the waters of chaos that lay outside the world , while the temple represented the order of the cosmos and the place where that order was continually renewed . 
 = = = Inner chambers = = = 
 The temple 's inner chambers centered on the sanctuary of the temple 's primary god , which typically lay along the axis near the back of the temple building , and in pyramid temples directly against the pyramid base . The sanctuary was the focus of temple ritual , the place where the divine presence manifested most strongly . The form in which it manifested itself varied . In Aten temples and traditional solar shrines , the object of ritual was the sun itself or a <unk> stone representing the sun , worshipped in a court open to the sky . In many mortuary temples , the inner areas contained statues of the deceased pharaoh , or a false door where his ba was believed to appear to receive offerings . 
 In most temples , however , the focus was the cult image : a statue of the temple god which that god 's ba was believed to inhabit while interacting with humans . The sanctuary in these temples contained either a naos , a cabinet @-@ like shrine that housed the divine image , or a model barque containing the image within its cabin , which was used to carry the image during festival processions . In some cases , however , the sanctuary may have housed several cult statues . To emphasize the sanctuary 's sacred nature , it was kept in total darkness . Whereas in earlier times the sanctuary lay at the very back of the building , in the Late and Ptolemaic periods it became a freestanding building inside the temple , further insulated from the outside world by the surrounding corridors and rooms . 
 Subsidiary chapels , dedicated to deities associated with the primary god , lay to the sides of the main one . When the main temple god was male , the secondary chapels were often dedicated to that god 's mythological consort and child . The secondary chapels in mortuary temples were devoted to gods associated with kingship . 
 Several other rooms neighbored the sanctuary . Many of these rooms were used to store ceremonial equipment , ritual texts , or temple valuables ; others had specific ritual functions . The room where offerings were given to the deity was often separate from the sanctuary itself , and in temples without a barque in the sanctuary , there was a separate shrine to store the barque . In late temples the ritual areas could extend to chapels on the roof and crypts below the floor . Finally , in the exterior wall at the back of the temple , there were often niches for laymen to pray to the temple god , as close as they could come to its dwelling place . 
 = = = Halls and courts = = = 
 Hypostyle halls , covered rooms filled with columns , appear in temples throughout Egyptian history . By the New Kingdom they typically lay directly in front of the sanctuary area . These halls were less restricted than the inner rooms , being open to laymen at least in some cases . They were often less dark as well : New Kingdom halls rose into tall central passages over the processional path , allowing a clerestory to provide dim light . The epitome of this style is the Great Hypostyle Hall at Karnak , whose largest columns are 69 feet ( 21 m ) tall . In later periods , the Egyptians favored a different style of hall , where a low screen wall at the front let in the light . The shadowy halls , whose columns were often shaped to imitate plants such as lotus or papyrus , were symbolic of the mythological marsh that surrounded the primeval mound at the time of creation . The columns could also be equated with the pillars that held up the sky in Egyptian cosmology . 
 Beyond the hypostyle hall were one or more peristyle courts open to the sky . These open courts , which had been a part of Egyptian temple design since the Old Kingdom , became transitional areas in the standard plan of the New Kingdom , lying between the public space outside the temple and the more restricted areas within . Here the public met with the priests and assembled during festivals . At the front of each court was usually a pylon , a pair of broad , flat towers flanking the main gateway . The pylon is known from only scattered examples in the Old and Middle Kingdoms , but in the New it quickly became the distinctive and imposing façade common to most Egyptian temples . The pylon served symbolically as a guard tower against the forces of disorder and may also have been meant to resemble the hieroglyph for " horizon " , underscoring the temple 's solar symbolism . 
 The front of every pylon held niches for pairs of flagpoles to stand . Unlike pylons , such flags had stood at temple entrances since the earliest Predynastic shrines . They were so closely associated with the presence of a deity that the hieroglyph for them came to stand for the Egyptian word for " god " . 
 = = = Enclosure = = = 
 Outside the temple building proper was the temple enclosure , surrounded by a rectangular brick wall that symbolically protected the sacred space from outside disorder . On occasion this function was more than symbolic , especially during the last native dynasties in the fourth century BC , when the walls were fully fortified in case of Persian invasion . In late temples these walls frequently had alternating concave and convex courses of bricks , so that the top of the wall undulated vertically . This pattern may have been meant to evoke the mythological waters of chaos . 
 The walls enclosed many buildings related to the temple 's function . Some enclosures contain satellite chapels dedicated to deities associated with the temple god , including <unk> celebrating the birth of the god 's mythological child . The sacred lakes found in many temple enclosures served as reservoirs for the water used in rituals , as places for the priests to ritually cleanse themselves , and as representations of the water from which the world emerged . Mortuary temples sometimes contain a palace for the spirit of the king to whom the temple was dedicated , built against the temple building proper . The temple of Seti I at Abydos incorporates an unusual underground structure , the Osireion , which may have served as a symbolic tomb for the king . <unk> in some temples provided a place for the sick to await healing dreams sent by the god . Other temple buildings included kitchens , workshops , and storehouses to supply the temple 's needs . Especially important was the pr @-@ <unk> or " house of life " , where the temple edited , copied , and stored its religious texts , including those used for temple rituals . The house of life also functioned as a general center of learning , containing works on non @-@ religious subjects such as history , geography , astronomy , and medicine . Although these outlying buildings were devoted to more mundane purposes than the temple itself , they still had religious significance ; even granaries might be used for specific ceremonies . 
 Through the enclosure ran the processional path , which led from the temple entrance through the main gate in the enclosure wall . The path was frequently decorated with sphinx statues and punctuated by barque stations , where the priests carrying the festival barque could set it down to rest during the procession . The processional path usually ended in a quay on the Nile , which served as the entrance point for river @-@ borne visitors and the exit point for the festival procession when it travelled by water . In Old Kingdom pyramid temples , the quay adjoined an entire temple ( the valley temple ) , which was linked to the pyramid temple by the processional causeway . 
 = = = Decoration = = = 
 The temple building was elaborately decorated with reliefs and free @-@ standing sculpture , all with religious significance . As with the cult statue , the gods were believed to be present in these images , <unk> the temple with sacred power . Symbols of places in Egypt or parts of the cosmos enhanced the mythical geography already present in the temple 's architecture . Images of rituals served to reinforce the rituals ' magical effect and to perpetuate that effect even if the rituals ceased to be performed . Because of their religious nature , these decorations showed an idealized version of reality , emblematic of the temple 's purpose rather than real events . For instance , the king was shown performing most rituals , while priests , if depicted , were secondary . It was unimportant that he was rarely present for these ceremonies ; it was his broader role as intermediary with the gods that mattered . 
 The most important form of decoration is relief . Relief became more extensive over time , and in late temples , walls , ceilings , columns , and beams were all decorated , as were free @-@ standing stelae erected within the enclosure . Egyptian artists used both bas relief and sunken relief . Bas relief allowed more subtle artistry but involved more carving than sunken relief . Sunken relief was therefore used on harder , more difficult stone and when the builders wanted to finish quickly . It was also appropriate for exterior surfaces , where the shadows it created made the figures stand out in bright sunlight . Finished reliefs were painted using the basic colors black , white , red , yellow , green , and blue , although the artists often mixed pigments to create other colors . In some cases , gilding or inlaid pieces of colored glass or faience substituted for paint . 
 The reliefs , including both images and hieroglyphic text , are among the most important sources of information on Ancient Egypt . They contain calendars of festivals , accounts of myths , depictions of rituals , and the texts of hymns . Pharaohs recorded their temple @-@ building activities and their campaigns against the enemies of Egypt . The Ptolemaic temples go further to include information of all kinds taken from temple libraries . The decoration in a given room either depicts the actions performed there or has some symbolic tie to the room 's purpose , providing a great deal of information on temple activities . 
 Large , free @-@ standing sculpture included obelisks , tall , pointed pillars that symbolized the sun . The largest of them , the Lateran Obelisk , was more than 118 feet ( 36 m ) high . They were often placed in pairs in front of pylons or elsewhere along the temple axis . Statues of the king , which were similarly placed , also reached colossal size ; the <unk> of Memnon at the mortuary temple of Amenhotep III and the statue of Ramesses II at the <unk> are the largest free @-@ standing statues made in ancient Egypt . There were also figures of gods , often in sphinx form , that served as symbolic guardians of the temple . The most numerous statues were votive figures donated to the temple by kings , private individuals , or even towns to gain divine favor . They could depict the god to whom they were dedicated , the people who donated the statue , or both . The most essential temple statues were the cult images , which were usually made of or decorated with precious materials such as gold and lapis lazuli . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 A temple needed many people to perform its rituals and support duties . Priests performed the temple 's essential ritual functions , but in Egyptian religious ideology they were far less important than the king . As temple decoration illustrates , all ceremonies were , in theory , acts by the king , and priests merely stood in his place . The priests were therefore subject to the king 's authority , and he had the right to appoint anyone he wished to the priesthood . In fact , in the Old and Middle Kingdoms most priests were government officials who left their secular duties for part of the year to serve the temple in shifts . Once the priesthood became more professional , the king seems to have used his power over appointments mainly for the highest @-@ ranking positions , usually to reward a favorite official with a job or to intervene for political reasons in the affairs of an important cult . Lesser appointments he delegated to his vizier or to the priests themselves . In the latter case , the holder of an office named his own son as his successor , or the temple clergy conferred to decide who should fill an empty post . Priestly offices were extremely lucrative and tended to be held by the wealthiest and most influential members of Egyptian society , until Roman economic reforms reduced the temples ’ resources . 
 The requirements for the priesthood differed over time and among the cults of different gods . Although detailed theological knowledge was involved in priestly offices , little is known about what knowledge or training may have been required of the officeholders . Priests were , however , required to observe strict standards of ritual purity in the sacred space . They shaved their heads and bodies , washed several times a day , and wore only clean linen clothing . They were not required to be celibate , but sexual intercourse rendered them unclean until they underwent further purification . The cults of specific gods might impose additional restrictions related to that god 's mythology , such as rules against eating the meat of an animal that represented the god . The acceptance of women into the priesthood was variable . In the Old Kingdom many women served as priests , but their presence in clergies declined drastically in the Middle Kingdom before increasing in the Third Intermediate Period . Lesser positions , such as that of musician in ceremonies , remained open to women in even the most restrictive periods , as did the special role of ceremonial consort of the god . This latter role was highly influential , and the most important of these consorts , the God 's Wife of Amun , even supplanted the High Priest of Amun during the Late Period . 
 At the head of the temple hierarchy was the high priest , who oversaw all the temple 's religious and economic functions and in the largest cults was an important political figure . Beneath him might be as many as three grades of subordinate priests who could substitute for him in ceremonies . While these higher ranks were full @-@ time positions from the New Kingdom onward , the lower grades of priesthood still worked in shifts over the course of the year . Whereas many priests did a variety of menial tasks , the clergy also contained several ritual specialists . Prominent among these specialized roles was that of the lector priest who recited hymns and spells during temple rituals , and who hired out his magical services to laymen . Besides its priests , a large temple employed singers , musicians , and dancers to perform during rituals , plus the farmers , bakers , artisans , builders , and administrators who supplied and managed its practical needs . In the Ptolemaic era , temples could also house people who had sought asylum within the precinct , or <unk> who voluntarily dedicated themselves to serving the god and living in its household . A major cult , therefore , could have well over 150 full or part @-@ time priests , with tens of thousands of non @-@ priestly employees working on its lands across the country . These numbers contrast with mid @-@ sized temples , which may have had 10 to 25 priests , and with the smallest provincial temples , which might have only one . 
 Some priests ' duties took them beyond the temple precinct . They formed part of the entourage in festivals that traveled from one temple to another , and clergies from around the country sent representatives to the national sed festival that reinforced the king 's divine power . Some temples , such as those in the neighboring cities of Memphis and <unk> , were overseen by the same high priest . 
 At certain times there was an administrative office that presided over all temples and clergies . In the Old Kingdom , pharaohs gave this authority first to their relatives and then to their viziers . In the reign of Thutmose III the office passed from the viziers to the High Priests of Amun , who held it for much of the New Kingdom . The Romans established a similar office , that of the high priest for all Egypt , which oversaw the temple cults until their extinction . 
 = = Religious activities = = 
 = = = Daily rituals = = = 
 The daily rituals in most temples included two sequences of offering rites : one to clean and dress the god for the day , and one to present it with a meal . The exact order of events in these rituals is uncertain and may have varied somewhat each time they were performed . In addition , the two sequences probably overlapped with each other . At sunrise , the officiating priest entered the sanctuary , carrying a candle to light the room . He opened the doors of the shrine and prostrated himself before the god 's image , reciting hymns in its praise . He removed the god from the shrine , clothed it ( replacing the clothes of the previous day ) , and anointed it with oil and paint . At some point the priest presented the god 's meal , including a variety of meats , fruits , vegetables , and bread . The god was believed to consume only the spiritual essence of this meal . This belief allowed the food to be distributed to others , an act that the Egyptians called the " reversion of offerings " . The food passed first to the other statues throughout the temple , then to local funerary chapels for the sustenance of the dead , and finally to the priests who actually ate it . Temple artwork often shows the king presenting an image of the goddess Maat to the temple deity , an act that represented the purpose of all other offerings . 
 Other offering rituals took place at noon and at sunset , though the sanctuary was not reopened . Some ceremonies other than offerings also took place daily , including rituals specific to a particular god . In the cult of the sun god Ra , for instance , hymns were sung day and night for every hour of the god 's journey across the sky . Many of the ceremonies acted out in ritual the battle against of the forces of chaos . They might , for instance , involve the destruction of models of inimical gods like Apep or Set , acts that were believed to have a real effect through the principle of heka . 
 In fact , the Egyptians believed that all ritual actions achieved their effect through heka . <unk> , usually translated as " magic " was a fundamental force that rituals were meant to manipulate . Using magic , people , objects , and actions were equated with counterparts in the divine realm and thus were believed to affect events among the gods . In the daily offering , for instance , the cult statue , regardless of which deity it represented , was associated with Osiris , god of the dead . The priest performing the ritual was identified with Horus , the living son of Osiris , who in mythology sustained his father after death through offerings . By magically equating himself with a god in a myth , the priest was able to interact with the temple deity . 
 = = = Festivals = = = 
 On days of particular religious significance , the daily rituals were replaced with festival observances . Different festivals occurred at different intervals , though most were annual . Their timing was based on the Egyptian civil calendar , which most of the time was far out of step with the actual year . Thus , while many festivals had a seasonal origin , their timing lost its connection with actual seasons . Most festivals took place at a single temple , but others could involve two or more temples or an entire region of Egypt ; a few were celebrated throughout the country . In the New Kingdom and later , the festival calendar at a single temple could include dozens of events , so it is likely that most of these events were observed only by the priests . However , in those festivals that involved a procession outside the temple , the local population also gathered to watch and to celebrate . These were the most elaborate temple ceremonies , accompanied by the recitation of hymns and the performance of musicians . 
 Festival ceremonies entailed reenactment of mythological events or the performance of other symbolic acts , like the cutting of a sheaf of wheat during the harvest @-@ related festival dedicated to the god Min . Many of these ceremonies took place only within the temple building , such as the " union with the sun disk " festival practiced in the Late Period and afterwards , when cult statues were carried to the temple roof at the start of the New Year to be enlivened by the rays of the sun . In festivals that involved a procession , priests carried the divine image out from the sanctuary , usually in its model barque , to visit another site . The barque might travel entirely on land or be loaded onto a real boat to travel on the river . 
 The purpose of the god 's visit varied . Some were tied to the ideology of kingship . In the Opet Festival , an extremely important ceremony during the New Kingdom , the image of Amun from Karnak visited the form of Amun worshipped at Luxor Temple , and both acted to reaffirm the king 's divine rule . Still other celebrations had a funerary character , as in the Beautiful Feast of the Valley , when Amun of Karnak visited the mortuary temples of the Theban Necropolis to visit the kings commemorated there , while ordinary people visited the funerary chapels of their own deceased relatives . Some may have centered on ritual marriages between deities , or between deities and their human consorts , although the evidence that ritual marriage was their purpose is ambiguous . A prominent example is a festival in which an image of Hathor from Dendera Temple was brought annually to visit the Edfu , the temple of her mythological consort Horus . These varied ceremonies were united by the broad purpose of renewing life among the gods and in the cosmos . 
 The gods involved in a festival also received various offerings in much larger quantities than in daily ceremonies . The enormous amounts of food listed in festival texts are unlikely to have been divided among the priests alone , so it is likely that the celebrating commoners also participated in the reversion of these offerings . 
 = = = Sacred animals = = = 
 Some temples kept sacred animals , which were believed to be manifestations of the temple god 's ba in the same way that cult images were . Each of these sacred animals was kept in the temple and worshipped for a certain length of time , ranging from a year to the lifetime of the animal . At the end of that time , it was replaced with a new animal of the same species , which was selected by a divine oracle or based on specific markings that were supposed to indicate its sacred nature . Among the most prominent of these animals were the Apis bull , worshipped at Memphis as a manifestation of the Memphite god Ptah , and the falcon at Edfu who represented the falcon god Horus . 
 During the Late Period , a different form of worship involving animals developed . In this case , laymen paid the priests to kill , <unk> , and bury an animal of a particular species as an offering to a god . These animals were not regarded as especially sacred , but as a species they were associated with the god because it was depicted in the form of that animal . The god Thoth , for instance , could be depicted as an ibis and as a baboon , and both ibises and baboons were given to him . Although this practice was distinct from the worship of single divine representatives , some temples kept stocks of animals that could be selected for either purpose . These practices produced large cemeteries of mummified animals , such as the catacombs around the Serapeum of Saqqara where the Apis bulls were buried along with millions of animal offerings . 
 = = = Oracles = = = 
 By the beginning of the New Kingdom , and quite possibly earlier , the festival procession had become an opportunity for people to seek oracles from the god . Their questions dealt with subjects ranging from the location of a lost object to the best choice for a government appointment . The motions of the barque as it was carried on the bearers ' shoulders — making simple gestures to indicate " yes " or " no " , tipping toward tablets on which possible answers were written , or moving toward a particular person in the crowd — were taken to indicate the god 's reply . In the Greco @-@ Roman period , and possibly much earlier , oracles were used outside the festival , allowing people to consult them frequently . Priests interpreted the movements of sacred animals or , being asked questions directly , wrote out or spoke answers that they had supposedly received from the god in question . The priests ' claim to speak for the gods or interpret their messages gave them great political influence and provided the means for the High Priests of Amun to dominate Upper Egypt during the Third Intermediate Period . 
 = = = Popular worship = = = 
 Although they were excluded from the formal rituals of the temple , laymen still sought to interact with the gods . There is little evidence of the religious practices of individual people from early Egyptian history , so Egyptologists ' understanding of the subject derives mostly from the New Kingdom or later periods . The evidence from those times indicates that while ordinary Egyptians used many venues to interact with the divine , such as household shrines or community chapels , the official temples with their sequestered gods were a major focus for popular veneration . 
 Unable to address the cult image directly , laymen still attempted to convey their prayers to it . At times they related messages to priests to deliver to the temple deity ; at other times they expressed their piety in the parts of the temple that they could access . Courts , doorways , and hypostyle halls might have spaces designated for public prayer . Sometimes people directed their appeals to the royal colossi , which were believed to act as divine intermediaries . More private areas for devotion were located at the building 's outer wall , where large niches served as " chapels of the hearing ear " for individuals to speak to the god . 
 The Egyptians also interacted with deities through the donation of offerings , ranging from simple bits of jewelry to large and finely carved statues and stelae . Among their contributions were statues that sat in temple courts , serving as memorials to the donors after their deaths and receiving portions of the temple offerings to sustain the donors ' spirits . Other statues served as gifts to the temple god , and inscribed stelae conveyed to the resident deity the donors ' prayers and messages of thanks . Over the centuries , so many of these statues accumulated within a temple building that priests sometimes moved them out of the way by burying them in caches beneath the floor . Commoners offered simple wooden or clay models as votives . The form of these models may indicate the reason for their donation . Figurines of women are among the most common types of votive figures , and some are inscribed with a prayer for a woman to bear a child . 
 Festival processions offered a chance for laymen to approach and perhaps even glimpse the cult image in its barque , and for them to receive portions of the god 's food . However , because the key rituals of any festival still took place within the temple , out of public sight , Egyptologist Anthony Spalinger has questioned whether the processions inspired genuine " religious feelings " or were simply seen as occasions for revelry . In any case , the oracular events during festivals provided an opportunity for people to receive responses from the normally isolated deities , as did the other varieties of oracle that developed late in Egyptian history . Temples eventually became a venue for yet another type of divine contact : dreams . The Egyptians saw dreaming as a means of communion with the divine realm , and by the Ptolemaic period many temples provided buildings for ritual incubation . People slept in these buildings in hopes of contacting the temple god . The petitioners often sought a magical solution to sickness or infertility , but at other times they simply sought an answer to a question , receiving the answer through a dream rather than an oracle . 
 = = After abandonment = = 
 After their original religious activities ceased , Egyptian temples suffered slow decay . Many were defaced by Christians trying to erase the remnants of ancient Egyptian religion . Some , such as the temple of Khnum at Elephantine , were adapted into churches or other types of buildings . Most commonly , the sites were left disused , while locals carried off their stones to serve as material for new buildings . Limestone was especially useful as a source of lime , so temples built of limestone were almost all dismantled . Sandstone temples , found mostly in Upper Egypt , were more likely to survive . What humans left intact was still subject to natural weathering . Temples in desert areas could be covered by drifts of sand , while those near the Nile , particularly in Lower Egypt , were often completely buried under layers of river @-@ borne silt . Thus , some major temple sites like Memphis were reduced to ruin , while many temples far from the Nile and centers of population remained mostly intact . With understanding of the hieroglyphic script lost , the information about Egyptian culture that was preserved in the surviving temples lay incomprehensible to the world . 
 The situation changed dramatically with the French military expedition to Egypt in 1798 , which brought with it a corps of scholars to examine the surviving ancient monuments . The results of their study inspired a fascination with ancient Egypt throughout Europe . In the early nineteenth century , growing numbers of Europeans traveled to Egypt , both to see the ancient monuments and to collect Egyptian antiquities . Many temple artifacts , from small objects to massive obelisks , were removed by outside governments and private collectors . This wave of Egyptomania resulted in the rediscovery of temple sites such as Abu Simbel , but artifacts and even whole temples were often treated with great carelessness . The discoveries of the period did , however , make possible the decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphs and the beginnings of Egyptology as a scholarly discipline . 
 Nineteenth @-@ century Egyptologists studied the temples intensively , but their emphasis was on collection of artifacts to send to their own countries , and their slipshod excavation methods often did further harm . Slowly , however , the antique @-@ hunting attitude toward Egyptian monuments gave way to careful study and preservation efforts . The government also took greater control of archaeological activity as Egypt 's independence from foreign powers increased . Yet even in recent times the ancient remains have faced threats . The most severe was the construction of the Aswan High Dam in the 1960s , which threatened to submerge the temples in what had been Lower Nubia beneath the newly formed Lake Nasser . A massive effort by the United Nations disassembled some of the threatened monuments and rebuilt them on higher ground , and the Egyptian government gave several of the others , such as <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , as gifts to nations that had contributed to the preservation effort . Nevertheless , several other temples vanished beneath the lake . 
 Today there are dozens of sites with substantial temple remains , although many more once existed , and none of the major temples in Lower or Middle Egypt are well preserved . Those that are well preserved , such as Karnak , Luxor , and Abu Simbel , draw tourists from around the world and are therefore a key attraction for the Egyptian tourist industry , which is a major sector of the Egyptian economy . The Egyptian government is working to balance the demands of tourism against the need to protect ancient monuments from the harmful effects of tourist activity . Archaeological work continues as well , as many temple remains still lie buried and many extant temples are not yet fully studied . Some damaged or destroyed structures , like the temples of Akhenaten , are even being reconstructed . These efforts are improving modern understanding of Egyptian temples , which in turn allow better understanding of ancient Egyptian society as a whole . 
 = Over ( Drake song ) = 
 " Over " is a song by Canadian recording artist , Drake . The song serves as the lead single from his debut album , Thank Me Later . It was written by Drake with Boi @-@ 1da , and produced by the latter and Al Khaaliq ( Nick Brongers ) . The orchestral samples were composed and arranged by Brongers . The single was released for digital download on March 8 , 2010 . The song is midtempo hip @-@ hop featuring an orchestral backdrop and lyrically about an introduction to fame . The song received positive reviews , commending the lyrics among other content . 
 It has peaked in the top twenty of the United States and Canada , becoming Drake 's fourth consecutive top twenty hit in the U.S. It also charted within the top five on the U.S. R & B and rap charts , becoming Drake 's fourth consecutive top five on those respective charts . The song has also charted in the United Kingdom and its R & B chart . The song 's accompanying music video features Drake reflecting on an experience , and the struggle between his old life and the new . Several artists have made a freestyle over the track , including Eminem , Trey Songz , and Diggy Simmons , among others . Drake performed the song a number of times , including at the 2010 MuchMusic Video Awards . The track received a nomination for Best Rap Solo Performance at the 53rd Grammy Awards . 
 The song is featured on the NBA <unk> soundtrack . 
 = = Background = = 
 On choosing his lead single , Drake told Rap @-@ Up , " It ’ s gotta be a real great song . It ’ s gotta be something that I feel is timeless and is better than anything that I ’ ve ever done . " Drake exclusively revealed to Rap @-@ Up on February 15 , 2010 that " Over " would be the lead single from his debut album , Thank Me Later , and would be produced by Boi @-@ 1da , producer of his previous singles " Best I Ever Had " and " Forever " . Drake chose to premiere the song on his hometown Toronto 's radio station Flow 93 @.@ 5 . In an interview session with the station , Drake said , " I went with ' Over ' as the first look because of the words in the hook , " he said . " The hook being the most repetitive part . I got a lot of great songs on my album . I got songs for women who wanna feel special . I got songs for dudes — if you ever thought my music was too soft , this is one you will enjoy . I got a lot of variety on there , but the biggest thing was that opening line on the hook : ' I know way too many people here right now that I didn 't know last year ' . " He went on to explain that the record sums up where he is in his career right now , and called it a " great first impression " . Drake did a lot of work for the song and also the album in Jamaica , during which he called the " calm before the storm " , and called " Over " the storm . He said , " It 's the moment . I wanted to emerge at first from this album and just let people know ' This is how I 'm coming out in the public eye . I 'm ready for anything . " He then went to explain that after the album people will be like " he 's still human " or " he 's still thinking the same way " , and said he wanted people to " understand I could have lost it . He said , " ' Over ' could have been my entire album . Just ' cause that 's what this industry and game will do to you if you lose yourself . " Drake later said that the song was a " warm @-@ up record " . He went on to say , 
 " I love the song . I love the message in the song . It 's funny , because ' Over ' is the fourth song on the album and it 's the turning point in the album . It 's like , you get three songs of me sort of trying to paint the picture of what the last year has been like for me — trying to fill you in , almost let you into my world as much as I can . ' Over ' is that moment where you 're almost worried on the album . ' Is this kid about to ... ? What 's happening ? Is he changing ? ' I wanted that to come out first . I wanted people to be a little nervous . This whole journey could have changed me drastically . Fortunately I 'm able to step out of my shoes and reflect on it and give you some great music . ' Over ' is a great alter @-@ ego moment . It 's the dark side of things and I really wanted that to come out first . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 According to MTV News , the song " touches on Drake reaction to fame and stardom " . Drake told MTV News , that the song was " definitely " a choice of his for releasing as a single , and that it was a song he did for himself . Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly called the song , " a prideful track about a guy who fought for notoriety , gained it , and now struggles with what comes with it : criticism , groupies , and the pressure of expected greatness . " The song makes heavy use of an orchestral backdrop , while Drake delivers confident , aggressive raps in a paced fashion . Drake makes references to film critics Roger Ebert & Richard Roeper , as well as actress Jada Pinkett Smith and her 1996 film , Set It Off . According to Michael <unk> of MusicOMH , the song contains three hooks . Several lines in the second verse are actually a flip of hip @-@ hop group Dead Prez 's " Hip @-@ Hop " , from their 2000 debut , Let 's Get Free . Ironically , Dead Prez 's track is meant as a jab at media controlled artists like Drake , stating , " One thing about music when it hits you feel no pain / White folks say it controls your brain / I know better than that / It 's just game " , to which Drake stated when asked about it , " I love that flow . So I took that flow and flipped it in the second verse . " He also references Michael Jackson 's iconic attire in his " Thriller " video , though the lines , " ' Bout to go ' Thriller ' Mike Jackson on these niggas / All I need is a fucking red jacket with some zippers . " [ sic ] On the reference , Drake said , 
 " That was sort of my reference point ; that phenomenon of Michael . He was young and had the world excited and anticipating his every move . That was my homage to him and the impact that he had on the world that I live in . It 's also ... great for people to say . Especially , unfortunately what happened to him , just to honor him was great . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Mariel Conception of Billboard said that the single lived up to its expectations , and that " Drake continues to prove he 's worthy of the hype . " She commented , " It definitely isn 't over for Drake @-@ this is only the beginning . " . Chris Ryan of MTV News said the song sounded " very much a first single " and that Drake " is almost overwhelmed by the opportunity to officially go off " . Ryan also said that " it sounds like he 's pouring all of himself into every corner of the song " . Ryan Dombal of Pitchfork Media said the song " does not back down " as the album 's lead track , with " royal <unk> strings , horns , the works " , which he called " an emperor 's welcome " . 
 Henry Adaso of About.com dismissed the song , giving it two out of five stars , not pleased with the chorus , and called the rhymes and metaphors " redundant " and " <unk> " . While he called the lead single a " disappointment " , he said that it raises expectations for his album , hoping that " he 's saving the gems for his album " and also called the " distracting music " a pro of the song . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The song debuted at number thirty @-@ five on the Billboard Hot 100 , and eventually peaked at fourteen on the chart . While it peaked at number one on the Rap Songs chart , it charted at number two on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . In Drake 's native Canada , the song debuted at fifty @-@ six , later peaking at seventeen . The song peaked at number fifty in the United Kingdom , and at eighteen on the UK R & B Chart . In Germany , the song peaked at seventeen on the German Black Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The video was shot on March 12 , 2010 in Los Angeles , directed by Anthony Mandler . Mandler previously worked with Drake on the video for his collaboration with Mary J. Blige , " The One " . It premiered on VEVO on April 12 , 2010 . In an exclusive with Rap @-@ Up , when asked about how the connection came about , Mandler said , " I ’ m a big fan of Drake and I was really excited when he called me about doing it , and really put a lot into making it special and capturing what I think is an image he hasn ’ t had yet . Here ’ s a guy whose lyrical presence does not equal his visual presence yet , by any means . That ’ s something that he and I spoke a lot about . He felt strongly that nobody had really captured him , and some of the videos that had been done were less iconic than he would like to be represented as . " On Drake and the song he said , " It ’ s so refreshing that he ’ s confident , but he ’ s not arrogant . I think that dimensionality is so important in a genre that is very one note with words like “ bravado ” and “ swagger ” and “ arrogance ” and “ promiscuity . ” Here ’ s a guy that ’ s finally putting a duality to the words and saying , “ Yeah , I have all that and I do all that , but I ’ m also somebody that ’ s asking , is that what I should be doing with my life ? " When asked of the concept of the " Over " video , Mandler said that it was something that would not be expected . Mandler explained , " Drake and I were very conscious about trying to push the limits and trying to push things forward . He came to me because he wanted to throw away the conventions of a medium , and take chances and be daring and take certain themes that are relevant to him and try to visualize them in not the obvious way " . 
 In an interview with MTV News on the set of the video shoot , Drake said , " I 've shot a lot of videos before , but this is my first attempt to establish myself as Drake the artist . " Confronting the criticism of his past videos , notably the one for " Best I Ever Had " , Drake said , " I really don 't care what other people think about them , they were great experiences for me . I 've learned a lot from them " , and he explained that he was working on that day with Mandler , someone he respects and looks up to . On the video , Drake said , " We talked colors , we talked epic , emotion @-@ evoking visuals . " He called the story of the video interesting and the song tells " sort of a love story " . He explained that the video has a lot to do with his debut album , stating " The album is about finding love , feeling ' Have I sold my soul ' as far as ' Will I ever be able to gain the trust of a woman ? Will I only be able to be around the dark , evil women ? Will I ever find that pure love ? ' Those elements are in the video . " In a separate interview on his Away From Home Tour , with MTV News , Drake said the video takes the song to " another place " . He said it offers up a different look to the song . He explained , 
 " This video is what I was really thinking about . The song is like a bad dream — but it 's not a bad dream , it 's not a terrible dream . It 's a little evil . The video really reflects that . It 's a struggle between the <unk> of my past life and what this new life has to offer . Even in the video , you see me looking back and forth between the two and deciding . At the end of the video I don 't necessarily make a decision , but when you get the album , you 'll see what choice I make . " 
 = = = Synopsis and reception = = = 
 Roc Nation artist , Rita Ora , plays Drake 's distant love interest in the video . It begins with Drake dressed sitting in a room on a bed , reflecting on his new life . Several images including explosions and cityscapes are shown on him and on the wall before the performance begins . Drake is later shown throughout the video in front of a gray backdrop , as he seems to be thinking about two women in his visions , Ora , who seems to portray the good girl , and another woman , who remained yet to be seen fully , portrayed as dangerous as she dances provocatively in the background . Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly called the video " artistically contradictory " , however said that the scenes of Drake sitting " alone in his bedroom as flashing images of busy streets and crowds of strangers float around him , pensive and rebellious " , and called them " controlled chaos " , but said that it worked in the video . Wete also pointed out that " He chose not to go the cliche rap @-@ video route and fill his four @-@ minute flick with nearly naked women , Ciroc bottles , and <unk> " , and that he stuck with " one leading lady " . 
 = = Remixes = = 
 Several artists have remixed or made a freestyle over the beat , including Eminem , B.o.B , Sean Kingston , Royce da 5 ' 9 " , Trey Songz , Fat Joe , Teairra Marí , and Diggy Simmons . Simmons , the first to release a freestyle over the track told Vibe , “ With that freestyle , I heard the track , loved it , then got the instrumental from a friend of mine and just did it on the whim . It wasn ’ t really anything I planned . I wasn ’ t even ready for this to be a big thing because I ’ ve had tracks out before . I put my all into everything , but sometimes some tracks come out better than others . It got such a big buzz maybe because it came out the day after and people enjoyed it . ” 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Drake performed the song at MTV 's Spring Break 2010 in Acapulco , Mexico , and at the 2010 Juno Awards . He also performed the song at the 2010 MuchMusic Video Awards . " Over " was also performed alongside " BedRock " with Nicki Minaj on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! on June 25 , 2010 . Drake also performed the song at the 2010 BET Awards on June 27 , 2010 , in a medley along with " Fireworks " and a remix of Young Jeezy 's " Lose My Mind " . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting - Drake , Boi @-@ 1da , Nick Brongers , Noah " 40 " Shebib 
 Production - Boi @-@ 1da , co @-@ produced by Al Khaaliq 
 Mixing - Noah " 40 " Shebib , assisted by Dale <unk> Virgo and <unk> <unk> 
 Engineering - Noah " 40 " Shebib 
 Drum programming - Boi @-@ 1da 
 Keys , Strings and Horns - Al @-@ Khaaliq , additional by Noah " 40 " Shebib 
 Source 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Spirit of the American Doughboy = 
 The Spirit of the American Doughboy is a pressed copper sculpture by E. M. Viquesney , designed to honor the veterans and casualties of World War I. Mass @-@ produced during the 1920s and 1930s for communities throughout the United States , the statue 's design was the most popular of its kind , spawning a wave of collectible miniatures and related memorabilia as well as numerous copies by other artists . Its title is often shortened to " The Doughboy " , and in some locales it is nicknamed Iron Mike . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 The statue depicts a doughboy walking through shattered tree stumps strung with barbed wire , his rifle in his left hand and his right hand held high above his head , clutching a hand grenade . The aggressive design and affordability of the statue made it extremely popular , and more than 150 copies of it were created for municipal memorials across the nation . The Smithsonian American Art Museum currently lists 159 locations . Of that number , 134 currently existing originals have been independently authenticated , and several have been identified as copies by other artists ( notably Over the Top by John Paulding ) . Viquesney 's actual brochures quoted a figure of over 300 by the late 1930s , claiming at least one in every state of the Union , but this is believed to be an inflated figure . 
 Two of the statues , both in Arkansas , are individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places ; one in Helena and one in Fort Smith . Installed in cemeteries , town squares , outside museums , parks , on courthouse lawns , and countless other places , the design is said to be the most @-@ viewed example of outdoor statuary in the U.S. ( after the Statue of Liberty ) although many people do not even realize they have seen it . 
 In 1998 , longtime Sarasota @-@ resident sculptor Frank Colson was commissioned to create a copy for the city of Sarasota , Florida , and again in 2002 , for the city of Columbia , South Carolina . These were new copies in their own right , not meant to replace any existing Doughboys as Sarasota never had an original Viquesney Doughboy . An original does exist in another part of Columbia , SC , giving that city two ; an original and a copy . Colson and his son also worked on the restoration of the Doughboy in Clearwater , Florida , along with its companion statue , Spirit of the American Navy . 
 The original " Doughboy " statue was completed in 1921 while Viquesney was living in Americus , Georgia and is located in Nashville , Georgia . However , it was the second to be installed , and about the 25th to be formally dedicated . The first completed installation was at Furman University in Greenville , South Carolina . The statue in Spencer , Indiana , the sculptor 's hometown , was not dedicated until May 29 , 1927 . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The statue also sparked an interior decorating fad in the 1920s . The design was so popular that Viquesney manufactured replica pot metal statuettes by the thousands . Also available were doughboy lamps , which were made from the 12 " statuettes ( the doughboy held a light bulb and lampshade in his raised hand ) , candlesticks , plaques , a smaller 6 " version of the statuette , as well as less expensive plaster versions . The statuettes and lamps were made from 1921 to 1925 in Americus , Georgia , and continued to be produced in Spencer , Indiana until at least the late 1930s . With the passage of time and changes in fashion , many of these items were lost , broken , or discarded , making those few remaining in good condition sought after by modern collectors . 
 = = Variations on the theme = = 
 Another statue , created as a companion to the Doughboy , was entitled " Spirit of the American Navy " . This version depicted a sailor in a working uniform holding his cover aloft in his right hand . Far less popular than the Doughboy , only seven were made . All the known Navy statues are installed as part of a set along with a Doughboy statue , or occur nearby , as one of each at the ends of a bridge . Another version , holding a large artillery shell with both hands instead of waving his cap , appears in a 1926 <unk> @-@ <unk> catalog . The only stone version of the " Spirit of the American Navy " is found in Crowell , Texas according to a Nov. 2 , 2011 article by Daniel Walker in The Vernon Daily Record . 
 The Smithsonian lists only six under the correct title ( the seventh being listed along with the doughboy at Kingman , Arizona ) . One , located in Palatka , Florida , is actually a different version of the statue said to have been created by sculptor Ray Fernandez , although no reference to any sculptor by that name exists in either the Smithsonian Art Inventories Catalogue or the <unk> database . Viquesney 's 1936 list shows " 2 Doughboys , 2 Sailors " , reinforcing the likelihood that Viquesney 's " 2 + 2 " brochure claim was a typo , since all four statues ( the two " standard " Doughboys , the " Sailor " , and a variant design Doughboy ) , were all dedicated at Palatka on November 11 , 1927 , according to newspaper articles . A Smithsonian reference to the Palatka variant Doughboy states that it may possibly have been sculpted by Gutzon Borglum . There is no proof of this , although Viquesney 's self @-@ written obituary boasts that " he knew Borglum " . 
 Other variants were designed by Viquesney to depict different doughboy poses , but very few got past the drawing stage and none were ever realized at full scale . The largest variant actually known to be by Viquesney is a unique three @-@ foot memorial in <unk> , Ohio , also listed as The Spirit of the Doughboy by the Smithsonian . It was copyrighted in 1930 and dedicated in 1938 . No full @-@ sized Viquesney doughboys in any pose other than the original have been confirmed to exist . New information and photographs confirm this piece is actually titled Resting Doughboy and was copyrighted in 1936 . 
 = Thomas Müller = 
 Thomas Müller ( German pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; born 13 September 1989 ) is a German professional footballer who plays for Bayern Munich and the Germany national team . Müller plays as a midfielder or forward , and has been deployed in a variety of attacking roles – as an attacking midfielder , second striker , centre forward and on either wing . He has been praised for his positioning , teamwork and stamina , work @-@ rate , and has shown consistency in scoring and creating goals . 
 A product of Bayern 's youth system , he made his first @-@ team breakthrough in the 2009 – 10 season after Louis van Gaal was appointed as the main coach ; he played almost every game as the club won the league and cup double and reached the Champions League final . Müller scored 23 goals in the 2012 – 13 season as Bayern won a historic treble ; the league title , cup and Champions League . 
 Müller earned a call @-@ up to the German national team in 2010 . At the 2010 World Cup he scored five goals in six appearances as Germany finished in third place . He was named the Best Young Player of the tournament and won the Golden Boot as the tournament 's top scorer , with five goals and three assists . At the 2014 World Cup he played a major role in helping the team win the trophy , scoring five goals and receiving the Silver Boot as the tournament 's second top goalscorer , and was also named in the World Cup All Star XI . 
 In 2014 , Müller was ranked the fifth @-@ best footballer in the world by The Guardian . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Born in Weilheim , Müller played as a youth for TSV <unk> , and at the age of 10 he made the 50 km journey to join local Bundesliga side Bayern Munich in 2000 . He progressed through the youth system and was part of the team that finished runner @-@ up in the Under 19 Bundesliga in 2007 . He made his debut for the reserve team in March 2008 when he replaced Stephan <unk> in a Regionalliga match against SpVgg <unk> , in which he scored . He made two more Regionalliga appearances in the 2007 – 08 season , while continuing to play for the under @-@ 19 team . The following season , Bayern 's second string qualified for the newly formed 3 . Liga , and Müller established himself as a key player – he played in 32 out of 38 matches and scored 15 times to make him the league 's fifth top scorer . He also became involved in the first @-@ team under then manager Jürgen Klinsmann ; he appeared in pre @-@ season friendlies , and made his full debut on 15 August 2008 , when he came on as a substitute for Miroslav Klose for the last ten minutes of a Bundesliga match against Hamburger SV . Despite Müller feeling that his performance did not go well , he made three more Bundesliga appearances that season and made his Champions League debut on 10 March 2009 when he was substituted on in the 72nd minute for Bastian Schweinsteiger in a 7 – 1 win over Sporting CP . He scored Bayern 's last goal as they won the tie 12 – 1 on aggregate . 
 = = = Bayern Munich = = = 
 In February 2009 , Müller signed his first contract for the senior team , a two @-@ year deal effective from the 2009 – 10 season , along with reserve team @-@ mate Holger <unk> . 
 = = = = 2009 – 10 season = = = = 
 He was prepared to be loaned or even transferred away to find first @-@ team football , but when Louis van Gaal was appointed manager , both players became fixtures in the Bayern first team from the start of the season . In the first few matches Müller was a regular substitute , and on 12 September 2009 , he was brought on against Borussia Dortmund and scored two goals in a 5 – 1 victory . Three days later , he scored another brace in a 3 – 0 Champions League victory over Maccabi Haifa . He rounded off September by being named the Bundesliga player of the month and earned praise from his namesake , legendary former Bayern and Germany striker Gerd Müller . After the Haifa match , Müller was in the starting eleven for almost every match , only missing one match – a Champions League match against Bordeaux , for which he was suspended , because he was sent off in an earlier match against the same team . 
 In February 2010 , Müller signed a new contract with Bayern Munich through 2013 . During the second half of the season , Müller continued to be a regular first @-@ team starter , usually playing in a central striking role due to the availability of other wide players Franck Ribéry and Arjen Robben . In April 2010 , he scored the second goal in a 2 – 1 win against title rivals Schalke 04 , and in the penultimate league match of the season , he scored the first hat @-@ trick of his career , in a 3 – 1 win over VfL Bochum which effectively secured the German title for Bayern . The title was confirmed a week later with a 3 – 1 win at Hertha BSC , a match which Müller started . For the season he played in all 34 Bundesliga matches , starting 29 , and recorded 13 goals and 11 assists . Bayern and Müller were back in Berlin the following week , to face Werder Bremen in the final of the DFB @-@ Pokal . Müller started the match and Bayern won 4 – 0 to complete the domestic double . Müller scored four goals and made two assists during the competition , which made him its leading scorer for the season . Bayern 's season ended in pursuit of a first treble , in the 2010 Champions League Final against Inter Milano at Santiago Bernabéu Stadium in Madrid . It was not to be , however , as they lost 2 – 0 , with both goals coming from Diego <unk> . Müller was in the starting line @-@ up and had a key chance just after half @-@ time , with Bayern 1 – 0 down , but his shot was saved by Júlio César . Müller felt particularly disappointed by this defeat , but he ended his first season as a first @-@ team player with 52 matches played and 19 goals in all competitions . In a poll conducted by the sports magazine kicker , he was voted by his fellow professionals as the best newcomer of the 2009 – 10 season and was named in the Bundesliga team of the season . Müller credits Van Gaal for having had the biggest part to play in his rise to success – the coach arrived with a reputation for promoting youth team players , particularly at Ajax , and consistently gave Müller his chance in the first @-@ team , going as far to say " Müller <unk> bei mir immer " ( with me , Müller will always play ) . Müller , in return , described Van Gaal as " a genius technician " , who makes players " improve every time " . 
 = = = = 2010 – 11 season = = = = 
 Müller returned from his post @-@ World Cup break to sign another contract extension , this time extending his stay at Bayern until 2015 . As with all of Bayern 's World Cup participants , he missed much of pre @-@ season , and his first match back was the Supercup against Schalke 04 on 7 August . He was named in the starting 11 , and scored the opening goal in a 2 – 0 win . Two weeks later he scored the opening goal of Bayern 's league season in a 2 – 1 home win against VfL Wolfsburg . Müller played in every match of the first half of the season , usually as a starter , but as the team struggled for results , Müller was unable to match the previous season 's goalscoring exploits , being dropped to the bench , and even receiving a telling off from Louis van Gaal after missing an easy chance in a 2 – 0 defeat against 1 . FC Kaiserslautern in August . He was philosophical about this dip in form , though , and after eight league games without a goal , he scored in a 4 – 1 win against Eintracht Frankfurt on 27 November ; He followed that by scoring in consecutive league and cup wins against VfB Stuttgart three weeks later . These goals took his tally to eight goals in all competitions and included a spectacular goal to open the scoring in a 2 – 0 Champions League victory against Roma on 15 September . 
 As his team was on its winter break , Müller was left to reflect on what he described as " an almost unbelievable first year as a pro " . Müller began the second half of the season in good form , but was involved in an altercation with team @-@ mate Arjen Robben , who was angered when Müller showed his displeasure at a poor free @-@ kick Robben took during a 3 – 1 win at Werder Bremen . Müller again played in every game of the season and scored 19 goals ( 12 in the league ) , but the season was less successful for Bayern , as they finished third in the league , and were knocked out of the DFB @-@ Pokal in the semi @-@ finals by Schalke 04 and in the round of 16 of the UEFA Champions League by Inter Milan ; Bayern had won 1 – 0 in the San Siro , and Müller scored 31 minutes into the second leg to make it 3 – 1 on aggregate , but Inter levelled the score at 3 – 3 in the 88th minute , to go through on the away goals rule . Müller 's mentor Van Gaal was increasingly criticised for inflexibility in tactical , transfer and selection policy , and ultimately lost his job , being replaced with Jupp Heynckes . 
 = = = = 2011 – 12 season = = = = 
 In Bayern 's first DFB @-@ Pokal game Müller was awarded the man of the match after earning two penalties which were converted by Mario Gómez and Bastian Schweinsteiger , Müller then added a third in the closing stages to secure a 3 – 0 victory over Eintracht Braunschweig . It took Müller five matches for him to get his first league goal ; he scored it against Schalke 04 in Bayern 's 2 – 0 win . Müller then scored in Bayern 's next home game in the early stages of the match , Bayern went on to win the game 3 – 0 . On 26 November 2011 , Müller netted the opener on the half @-@ hour in Bayern 's 6 – 0 thrashing of FC Ingolstadt 04 giving him his second DFB @-@ Pokal goal . Müller was on the short @-@ list of this year 's FIFA Ballon d 'Or award . On 10 and 15 January , in Bayern 's warm up friendlies Müller scored three goals in two games , a brace against the India national team ( which Bayern then went on to win 4 – 0 ) and one goal in Bayern 's other 4 – 0 victory over Rot @-@ Weiß Erfurt . Müller provided two assists in Bayern 's win over VfB Stuttgart in the DFB @-@ Pokal . On 11 February , Bayern played 1 . FC Kaiserslautern and Müller ended a goal drought lasting since 24 September 2011 with a header in their 2 – 0 victory . On 31 March 2012 , Müller played his 100th Bundesliga game against 1 . FC Nürnberg . On 19 May 2012 , Müller scored the opening goal in the UEFA Champions League final against Chelsea F.C. with a powerful header . He was substituted shortly afterwards . Bayern Munich however lost the final on penalties . Müller stated how dissatisfied he was about the amount of time he had spent on the bench recently . Müller said that although he was dissatisfied he wanted to stay at Bayern . During the season , Müller scored seven goals in 34 league matches , two goals in five German Cup matches , and two goals in 14 Champions League matches . 
 = = = = 2012 – 13 season = = = = 
 Müller 's first Bundesliga goal of the season came over 2 . Bundesliga champions SpVgg Greuther Fürth in Bayern 's 3 – 0 victory on 27 August 2012 . On 2 September , he netted a brace as Bayern thrashed southern rivals Stuttgart , 6 – 1 , in front of 71 @,@ 000 at the newly expanded Allianz Arena . Müller helped Bayern achieve a record @-@ breaking start to the league season , when he netted a brace over newly promoted Fortuna Düsseldorf on 20 October in their 5 – 0 victory , recording Bayern 's eighth successive win . Three days later , he scored his first Champions League goal of the season , netting from the penalty spot , as Bayern defeated Lille 1 – 0 at the French side 's newly built Grand Stade Lille Métropole . 
 On 13 December , after his good run of form in the first half of the Bundesliga season , Müller pledged his allegiance claiming he was at home in Munich and that " There is no club to step up from when you leave FC Bayern ... there almost is no better club . " Six days later , he signed a two @-@ year contract extension , keeping him at the Allianz Arena until 2017 . At the winter break in the Bundesliga , he had nine goals and seven assists in 16 league appearances and a further three goals in the Champions League . Giving him a total of thirteen goals halfway through the season , including his strike against Borussia Dortmund in Bayern 's win in the 2012 DFL @-@ Supercup . Müller scored his first goal in Bayern 's second game back from the break in a 2 – 0 away win over VfB Stuttgart . Müller tapped in his fifth goal of the Champions League campaign on 2 April , completing a 2 – 0 first leg defeat of Juventus in the quarter @-@ finals , ending the Italian club 's 18 @-@ match unbeaten record in Europe . On 23 April 2013 , Müller scored two goals and gave one assist in 4 – 0 win against FC Barcelona in the Champions League semi @-@ final in the Allianz Arena . On the return fixture , Müller scored a header as Bayern won 3 – 0 and gave Barcelona their biggest defeat ever in the UEFA Champions League , with a 7 – 0 aggregate score . Müller then went on to play an important role in Bayern 's 2 – 1 victory over Borussia Dortmund in the final . On 1 June , Müller scored a penalty in the final of the 2012 – 13 DFB @-@ Pokal . Bayern won the cup 3 – 2 to complete an historic treble . Müller scored 23 goals overall in the season ( including all competitions ) , netting 13 in the Bundesliga , one in the Pokal , and an impressive eight in the Champions League , he also added one in the 2012 DFL @-@ Supercup which Bayern won 2 – 1 . This topped off Müller 's highest scoring season to date . 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 season = = = = 
 Müller began the 2013 – 14 season by playing in the German Super <unk> by scoring in seven of Bayern 's 12 pre @-@ season games . His first competitive match came against Borussia Dortmund in the German Super Cup . On 5 August , Müller scored a hat @-@ trick as Bayern won 5 – 0 in the team 's 2013 – 14 DFB @-@ Pokal first round game against Schwarz @-@ Weiß <unk> . In Bayern 's opening 2013 – 14 Bundesliga fixture , Müller missed a penalty for the first time . Seconds later , the save from the penalty flicked the hand of Álvaro Domínguez which resulted in another penalty which David <unk> converted . After this Müller stated " I am still happy to take penalties , but I think David <unk> is the main man for spot kicks for now . " He played in the UEFA Super Cup . On 25 September , against Hannover 96 in the second round of the DFB @-@ Pokal , Müller scored twice taking his cup tally to five goals in just two games . On 28 September , Müller scored the only goal in a 1 – 0 victory over VfL Wolfsburg , giving him his first goal in the 2013 – 14 Bundesliga . Müller scored his first 2013 – 14 UEFA Champions League goal of the campaign and Bayern defeated Manchester City 3 – 1 at the City of Manchester Stadium on 2 October . He played in a match at the FIFA Club World Cup . 
 On 17 May 2014 , Müller scored Bayern 's second goal in a 2 – 0 extra @-@ time defeat of Borussia Dortmund in the 2014 DFB @-@ Pokal Final , giving die <unk> the tenth league and cup double in their history . Müller finished as the tournament 's top scorer with eight goals in five appearances . He finished the season by scoring 13 goals in 31 league matches , eight goals in five DFB @-@ Pokal matches , and five goals in 12 Champions League matches . 
 = = = = 2014 – 15 season = = = = 
 After the 2013 – 14 season , Müller signed a new contract keeping him at Bayern until 2019 and rejected a contract offer from Manchester United . Müller played in the DFL @-@ Supercup , which was Bayern 's first match in the 2014 – 15 season . Bayern lost the match 2 – 0 . His first goal of the season was against Preußen Münster in the DFB @-@ Pokal on 17 August 2014 . Then in the opening match of the Bundesliga , on 22 August 2014 , Müller scored the opening goal of Bayern 's Bundesliga season against VfL Wolfsburg . Bayern went on to win the match 2 – 1 . On 11 March 2015 , Müller scored two goals against Shakhtar Donetsk in a 7 – 0 win to draw level with Mario Gómez as the top @-@ scoring German player in UEFA Champions League history . He subsequently became the leader when he scored in a 6 – 1 win against Porto on 21 April 2015 . He finished the season with 13 goals in 32 league matches , a goal in five DFB @-@ Pokal matches , and seven goals in 10 Champions League matches . 
 = = = = 2015 – 16 season = = = = 
 Müller started the season by playing in the German Super Cup against VfL Wolfsburg . Müller started the league season with two goals against Hamburger SV , a goal against 1899 Hoffenheim , two goals against Bayer Leverkusen , and a goal against FC Augsburg in the first four matchdays . He had scored from the penalty spot against Bayer Leverkusen and Augsburg . He failed to score in his next three Bundesliga matches . He failed to convert a penalty shot against Mainz 05 on matchday seven . His next Bundesliga goal came when he scored two goals against Borussia Dortmund on matchday eight . One of the goals was scored from the penalty spot . His goalscoring continued in other competitions . He scored two goals against Wolfsburg in the second round of the DFB @-@ Pokal , and in Champions League , two goals against Olympiacos , two goals against Arsenal , and a goal in the return leg against Olympiacos . In scoring in the home win over Olympiacos , Müller became the youngest player to win 50 UEFA Champions League games , beating the record of Lionel Messi by 14 months . 
 On 9 December 2015 , Müller came on as a 46th @-@ minute substitute for Franck Ribéry in a 2 – 0 win against Dinamo Zagreb . He failed to convert his penalty shot in the match and finished the group stage with five goals from six appearances . On 18 December 2015 , Müller signed a new contract with Bayern , keeping him at the club until 2021 . On 19 December 2015 , Bayern defeated Hannover 96 1 – 0 with a goal from the penalty mark from Müller . Bayern went on winter break after the match . Müller finished the first half of the league with 14 goals from 17 appearances . This includes scoring five goals from the penalty mark in six opportunities . He had scored 21 goals in 25 appearances in all competitions up until the winter break . 
 On 12 March 2016 , Müller scored a brace in a 5 – 0 victory over Werder Bremen . Four days later , with Bayern trailing Juventus 1 – 2 in the second leg of the Champions League round of 16 , he scored a 91st @-@ minute equaliser , before Bayern won in extra time 4 – 2 ( 6 – 4 aggregate ) . 
 On 19 April 2016 , Müller scored both goals in Bayern 's 2 – 0 defeat of Werder Bremen in the DFB @-@ Pokal semi @-@ final . His first goal of the match was his 150th for the club in all competitions . 
 On 3 May 2016 , Müller had a penalty kick saved by Jan <unk> in the Champions League semi @-@ final second leg at home to Atlético de Madrid . The match ended in a 2 – 1 win for Bayern but the team was knocked out on the away goals rule . 
 He finished the season by scoring 20 goals in 31 league matches , four goals in five German Cup matches , and eight goals in 12 Champions League matches . He didn 't score in the German Super Cup . 
 = = International career = = 
 Müller represented Germany at various youth levels , starting with the under @-@ 16s in 2004 . In August 2009 , he was called up to the under @-@ 21 team for his debut in a 3 – 1 friendly defeat against Turkey . He earned six caps for the under @-@ 21s and scored one goal , the eighth in an 11 – 0 thrashing of San Marino . 
 In October of the same year , Müller 's regular appearances for Bayern 's first team caused German national team manager Joachim Löw to publicly consider him for a call @-@ up , despite initial reluctance from the Bayern Munich board ; the following month , Müller was named in the squad for a friendly against Côte d 'Ivoire . However , this coincided with the death of national team goalkeeper Robert Enke , which led to the cancellation of a match against Chile the same week . With less opportunity to try out new players , and with the under @-@ 21 team facing crucial qualifiers for the 2011 European Championship , Löw and under @-@ 21 manager Rainer <unk> felt that Müller was needed at the under @-@ 21 level , and Müller was called back into the under @-@ 21s . 
 He was back in the senior squad for its next get @-@ together , a training session in <unk> in January 2010 , and was named in the squad for the following match , a friendly against Argentina in March . He made his debut in this game in the starting eleven at the Allianz Arena , his home stadium . He was substituted in the 66th minute for fellow debutant Toni Kroos as Germany lost 1 – 0 . 
 = = = 2010 World Cup = = = 
 Müller was named in Germany 's provisional 27 @-@ man squad for the 2010 World Cup along with seven other Bayern Munich players . Despite suffering a scare when he fell off his bicycle at the team 's training camp in South Tyrol , Müller only received superficial injuries and made the final cut for the tournament when the squad was reduced to 23 players . He was allocated the number 13 , normally worn by injured captain Michael Ballack , and previously worn by Müller 's eponym Gerd . He earned his second international cap in the final warm @-@ up match before the World Cup when he came on as a half @-@ time substitute for Piotr <unk> in a 3 – 1 win over Bosnia and Herzegovina . He started the first game of Germany 's World Cup campaign and scored the third goal – his first internationally – in a 4 – 0 win over Australia , winning Germany 's goal of the month award in the process . He played in all Germany 's group games , as they finished top of Group D ; he scored twice and assisted once in the 4 – 1 victory over England in the round of 16 . In the third minute of Germany 's 4 – 0 quarter final win against Argentina , he opened the scoring with his fourth tournament goal . However , he picked up his second booking of the tournament in the first half , for a handball and was suspended for the semi @-@ final defeat against Spain . Müller said that he felt far more nervous during the Spain game than any he was able to play . He returned to the team for the third @-@ place playoff against Uruguay and scored the first goal , his fifth of the tournament , as Germany won 3 – 2 to take the bronze medals . The team 's success was a culmination of a series of changes made after the national team 's failure at Euro 2000 . The Germans emphasized a more open , attack @-@ minded style not previously associated with Germany , and included prominent young players , including Müller , Sami Khedira and Mesut Özil . 
 With five goals Müller ended as joint top goalscorer of the tournament . He earned the Golden Boot with these goals and his three assists . He also won the Best Young Player Award over fellow nominees André Ayew of Ghana and Giovani dos Santos of Mexico . For both awards , he succeeded a German team @-@ mate , Miroslav Klose and Lukas Podolski , respectively , from 2006 . 
 In October 2010 , he was named on the shortlist for the FIFA Ballon d 'Or award along with four of his Germany team @-@ mates . Reflecting on his World Cup success , Müller said " I basically got lucky , I hit form at just the right time " . 
 = = = Euro 2012 = = = 
 Müller started all ten of Germany 's qualifiers for Euro 2012 , as the team qualified for the finals with a 100 % record . Müller provided assists for seven goals , three of which came in a 6 – 2 win over Austria in September 2011 which secured Germany 's qualification for the finals with two games to spare . He scored three times in the campaign , two goals coming in a 4 – 0 win over Kazakhstan in March 2011 , the third in a 3 – 1 win over Turkey in October of the same year . 
 Müller was included in Joachim Löw 's squad for Euro 2012 , where the Germans were knocked out in the semi @-@ finals by Italy . 
 = = = 2014 World Cup = = = 
 Müller scored his first World Cup qualifying goals on 22 March 2013 , scoring Germany 's opener and final goal in a 3 – 0 away win over Kazakhstan . He also scored in the 3 – 0 victories over Austria and Faroe Islands to give him four goals in Germany 's successful qualification campaign . 
 On 16 June 2014 , in Germany 's opening match of the 2014 FIFA World Cup , Müller scored the first hat @-@ trick of the tournament and was named man of the match in a 4 – 0 win against Portugal . In addition , he was also the target of Pepe 's headbutt in the 37th minute , which resulted in the Portuguese defender being sent off . He denied that he had " overplayed " the situation leading to the red card . On 26 June , Müller scored the only goal of the final group match against the United States to help the Germans win Group G and dispelled fear of collusion between German coach Joachim Löw and American coach Jürgen Klinsmann to play to a draw as had occurred in 1982 . 
 On 8 July , he scored Germany 's opening goal in the 7 – 1 semi @-@ final defeat of Brazil . This goal was Germany 's 2000th goal in its history . Müller has now scored at least five goals in each of his first two World Cups , making him only the third player to do so ( after Teófilo Cubillas and teammate Miroslav Klose ) . With the goal , he has tied Helmut Rahn with 10 World Cup goals . 
 On 11 July , Müller was named on the 10 @-@ man shortlist for FIFA 's Golden Ball award for the tournament 's best player . Having played a major role in the team 's World Cup triumph , Müller received the Silver Boot as the tournament 's second top goalscorer with five goals , and was also named in the World Cup All Star XI . 
 = = = Euro 2016 = = = 
 Müller featured in 9 of 10 matches during Germany 's qualifying campaign for UEFA Euro 2016 , scoring 9 goals as Germany topped their qualifying group to qualify for Euro 2016 . 
 Müller started in all six matches that Germany played at the Euro 2016 finals . In the quarter @-@ final match against Italy , Müller 's shot was the first one to be saved in the penalty shoot @-@ out during the tournament . This was the first time Germany failed to score in a shoot out since Uli Stielike missed in the 1982 FIFA World Cup . Germany ended up winning the shootout 6 – 5 . Müller 's poor run of form throughout the tournament hurt Germany 's chances . Eventually , Müller finished the tournament without adding a goal to his name at the Euros . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Müller 's role can be described as an attacking all @-@ rounder , a player able to play in a variety of forward positions . As he came through the youth system , he was seen primarily as a midfielder , but since breaking into the first @-@ team he has been used in more forward roles . Both Bayern Munich and the Germany national team usually play a 4 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 @-@ 1 formation , and Müller is most often part of the three attacking midfielders behind the central striker . He can play in any of the attacking midfield roles but usually plays in the center for Bayern Munich , and on the right for Germany . He has been used as an out @-@ and @-@ out striker on occasion . 
 Müller has been praised for his maturity , pace , technique , awareness and positioning . He has been particularly noted for his composure ; Germany manager Joachim Löw said he is " impervious to pressure " and former Bayern manager Louis van Gaal said he has tremendous mental strength . A consistent scorer and creator of goals , he describes himself as a player who can find gaps in the opposition defence but not particularly good at dribbling or one @-@ on @-@ ones . Müller describes this role as <unk> , a term that translates to " interpreter of space " ( cf . <unk> , " dream interpreter " ) . During 2014 World Cup , Germany manager Joachim Löw stated that Müller " is a very unorthodox player and you can 't really predict his lines of running , but he has one aim and that is ' how can I score a goal ? " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Müller was born in Weilheim , Upper Bavaria , and grew up in the nearby village of <unk> , which became the centre of media attention during his World Cup exploits . His parents are <unk> and Gerhard , and he has a brother , Simon , who is two and a half years younger . He married his long @-@ time girlfriend Lisa <unk> , a semi @-@ professional equestrian who works on a farm , in December 2009 after being engaged for two years . In June 2011 he became an ambassador for <unk> , a charity that helps children who have suffered bereavement or trauma . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of 28 May 2016 
 1 . ^ Includes German Cup . 
 2 . ^ Includes UEFA Champions League . 
 3 . ^ Includes German Super Cup , UEFA Super Cup , and FIFA Club World Cup . 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of 7 July 2016 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 Scores and results table list Germany 's goal tally first . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Bayern Munich 
 Bundesliga : 2009 – 10 , 2012 – 13 , 2013 – 14 , 2014 – 15 , 2015 – 16 
 DFB @-@ Pokal : 2009 – 10 , 2012 – 13 , 2013 – 14 , 2015 – 16 
 DFL @-@ Supercup : 2010 , 2012 
 UEFA Champions League : 2012 – 13 
 UEFA Super Cup : 2013 
 FIFA Club World Cup : 2013 
 = = = Country = = = 
 Germany 
 FIFA World Cup : 2014 ; Third Place : 2010 
 UEFA European Football Championship Semi @-@ finalist : 2012 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 FIFA World Cup 2010 Man of the Match : vs. England , vs. Uruguay 
 FIFA World Cup 2014 Man of the Match : vs. Portugal , vs. United States 
 FIFA World Cup Golden Boot : 2010 
 FIFA World Cup Best Young Player : 2010 
 FIFA World Cup 2010 Most assists ( 3 , shared with Mesut Özil , Bastian Schweinsteiger , Kaká , and Dirk Kuyt ) 
 Bayerischer <unk> : 2010 
 Silbernes Lorbeerblatt : 2010 , 2014 
 World Soccer Young Player of the Year : 2010 
 Bravo Award : 2010 
 FIFA Ballon d 'Or : 15th place 2010 , 13th place 2011 , 17th place 2013 , 5th place 2014 , 6th place 2015 
 ESM Team of the Year : 2012 – 13 
 UEFA Best Player in Europe Award 2013 ( 6th place ) 
 UEFA Best Player in Europe Award 2014 ( 4th place ) 
 UEFA Champions League Team of the Group Stage : 2015 
 FIFA World Cup Silver Ball : 2014 
 FIFA World Cup Silver Boot : 2014 
 FIFA World Cup All @-@ Star Team : 2014 
 FIFA World Cup Dream Team : 2014 
 Most FIFA World Cups with at least five goals ( 2010 – 2014 ) ; record shared with Teófilo Cubillas ( 1970 , 1978 ) & Miroslav Klose ( 2002 – 2006 ) 
 = SpongeBob SquarePants ( character ) = 
 SpongeBob SquarePants is a fictional character , the protagonist of the American animated television series of the same name . He is voiced by actor and comedian Tom Kenny , and first appeared on television in the series ' pilot episode on May 1 , 1999 . 
 SpongeBob SquarePants was created and designed by cartoonist and marine biologist Stephen Hillenburg shortly after the cancellation of Rocko 's Modern Life in 1996 . Hillenburg intended to create a series about an over @-@ optimistic sponge that annoys other characters . Hillenburg compared the concept to Laurel and Hardy and Pee @-@ wee Herman . As he drew the character , he decided that a " squeaky @-@ clean square " ( like a kitchen sponge ) fit the concept . His name is derived from " Bob the Sponge " , the host of Hillenburg 's comic strip The Intertidal Zone that he originally drew in the 1980s while teaching marine biology to visitors of the Ocean Institute . SpongeBob is a naïve and goofy sea sponge who works as a fry cook in the fictional underwater town of Bikini Bottom . 
 The character has received positive critical response from media critics and achieved popularity with both children and adults , though he has been involved in public controversy . SpongeBob appeared in a We Are Family Foundation video promoting tolerance , which was criticized by James Dobson of Focus on the Family because of the foundation 's link to homosexuality . 
 = = Role in SpongeBob SquarePants = = 
 SpongeBob is depicted as being an good @-@ natured , optimistic , cheerful , naïve , enthusiastic yellow sea sponge residing in the undersea city of Bikini Bottom alongside an array of anthropomorphic aquatic creatures . He works as a fry cook at a local fast food restaurant , the Krusty Krab , to which he is obsessively attached . At work , SpongeBob answers to Eugene Krabs , a greedy , miserly crab who shows SpongeBob favor , alongside his ill @-@ tempered , hostile , snobbish next @-@ door neighbor Squidward Tentacles . His favorite hobbies include his occupation , jelly @-@ fishing , karate ( albeit at an elementary level , with Sandy Cheeks as his sensei ) , relentless fandom of superheroes Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy , and blowing bubbles . 
 He is often seen hanging around with his best friend Patrick , who lives on the same street as SpongeBob two doors down . However , SpongeBob 's varying intelligence , unlimited optimistic cheer , and irritating behavior often leads him to perceive the outcome of numerous endeavors and the personalities of those around him as happier and sunnier than they often actually are ; for instance , he believes that Squidward enjoys his company in spite of the fact that he clearly loathes him . A recurring gag in several episodes is SpongeBob 's extremely poor " boating " ( driving ) ability and his repeated failures to pass his road test at Mrs. Puff 's Boating School . He lives in an iconic pineapple with his pet snail Gary . 
 = = Character = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Stephen Hillenburg first became fascinated with the ocean as a child . Also at a young age , he began developing his artistic abilities . During college , he majored in marine biology and minored in art . He planned to return to college eventually to pursue a master 's degree in art . After graduating in 1984 , he joined the Ocean Institute , an organization in Dana Point , California , dedicated to educating the public about marine science and maritime history . While he was there , he initially had the idea that would lead to the creation of SpongeBob SquarePants : a comic book titled The Intertidal Zone . The host of the comic was " Bob the Sponge " who , unlike SpongeBob , resembled an actual sea sponge . In 1987 , Hillenburg left the institute to pursue an animation career . 
 A few years after studying experimental animation at the California Institute of the Arts , Hillenburg met Joe Murray , the creator of Rocko 's Modern Life , at an animation festival , and was offered a job as a director of the series . While working on the series , Hillenburg met writer Martin Olson , who saw his previous comic The Intertidal Zone . Olson liked the idea and suggested Hillenburg to create a series of marine animals . Hillenburg said , " a show ... I hadn 't even thought about making a show ... and it wasn 't my show " . It spurred his decision to create SpongeBob SquarePants and said , " It was the inspiration for the show " . 
 Rocko 's Modern Life ended in 1996 . Shortly afterwards , Hillenburg began working on SpongeBob SquarePants . For the show characters , Hillenburg started drawing and took some of the characters from his comic — like starfish , crab , and sponge . At the time , Hillenburg knew that " everybody was doing buddy shows " — like The Ren & Stimpy Show — and thought that " I can 't do a buddy show , " so he decided to do a " one character " show instead . He conceived a sponge as the title character because , according to him , it is " the weirdest animal . " Hillenburg derived the character 's name from Bob the Sponge , the host of his comic strip The Intertidal Zone , after changing it from SpongeBoy due to trademark issues . 
 = = = Creation and design = = = 
 Hillenburg had made several " horrible impersonations " before he finally conceived his character . Hillenburg compared the concept to Laurel and Hardy and Pee @-@ wee Herman . He said " I think SpongeBob [ was ] born out of my love of Laurel and Hardy shorts . You 've got that kind of idiot @-@ buddy situation – that was a huge influence . SpongeBob was inspired by that kind of character : the Innocent – a la Stan Laurel . 
 The first concept sketch portrayed the character as wearing a red hat with a green base and a white business shirt with a tie . SpongeBob 's look gradually progressed to brown pants that was used in the final design . SpongeBob was designed to be a child @-@ like character who was goofy and optimistic in a style similar to that made famous by Jerry Lewis . 
 Originally the character was to be named SpongeBoy but this name was already in use . This was discovered after voice acting for the original seven @-@ minute pilot was recorded in 1997 . The Nickelodeon legal department discovered that the name was already in use for a mop product . Upon finding this out , Hillenburg decided that the character 's given name still had to contain " Sponge " so viewers would not mistake the character for a " Cheese Man . " Hillenburg decided to use the name " SpongeBob . " He chose " SquarePants " as a family name as it referred to the character 's square shape and it had a " nice ring to it " . 
 Although SpongeBob 's driver 's license says his birthdate is July 14 , 1986 , Hillenburg joked that he is fifty in " sponge years " . He explained that SpongeBob actually has no specific age , but that he is old enough to be on his own and still be going to boating school . The decision to have SpongeBob attend a boat driving school was made due to a request from Nickelodeon that the character attend a school . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 SpongeBob is voiced by veteran voice actor Tom Kenny . Kenny previously worked with Hillenburg on Rocko 's Modern Life , and when Hillenburg created SpongeBob SquarePants , he approached Kenny to voice the character . Hillenburg utilised Kenny 's and other people 's personalities to help create the personality of SpongeBob . 
 The voice of SpongeBob was originally used by Kenny for a minor background character in Rocko 's Modern Life . Kenny forgot the voice initially as he created it only for that single use . Hillenburg , however , remembered it when he was coming up with SpongeBob and used a video clip of the episode to remind Kenny of the voice . When Hillenburg heard Kenny do the voice , he said , " That 's it — I don 't want to hear anybody else do the voice . We 've got SpongeBob . " He said that to Nickelodeon ; however , the network said , " Well , let 's just listen to 100 more people . " Kenny said , " But one of the advantages of having a strong creator is that the creator can say , ' No , I like that — I don 't care about celebrities . ' " Kenny says that SpongeBob 's high pitched laugh was specifically aimed at being unique , stating that they wanted an annoying laugh in the tradition of Popeye and Woody Woodpecker . 
 SpongeBob 's voice evolved from " low @-@ key " to high @-@ pitched . Kenny said , " I hear the change . I hear it . It 's mostly a question of pitch . " He said that " It 's unconscious on my part " because " I don 't wake up and think , ' Hmm , I 'm going to change SpongeBob 's voice today , just for the hell of it . " He described it that " It 's like erosion : a very slow process . As time goes on , you need to bring him to different places and more places , the more stories and scripts you do . " Contrasting first season episodes to those of the seventh season , Kenny said that " there 's a bit of a change [ in voice ] , but I don 't think it 's that extreme at all . " 
 When SpongeBob SquarePants is broadcast in non @-@ English languages , the voice actors dubbing SpongeBob 's voice use Tom Kenny 's rendition of the character as a starting point but also add unique elements . For example , in the French version of the series , SpongeBob speaks with a slight Daffy Duck @-@ style lisp . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Throughout the run of SpongeBob SquarePants , the SpongeBob character has become popular with both children and adults . In June 2010 , Entertainment Weekly named him one of the " 100 Greatest Characters of the Last 20 Years " . TV Guide listed SpongeBob SquarePants No. 9 on its " 50 Greatest Cartoon Characters of All Time " list . However , not all critical reception for the character has been positive . AskMen 's " Top 10 : Irritating ' 90s Cartoon Characters " ranked SpongeBob No. 4 , saying that his well @-@ meaning attitude is extremely annoying . 
 James Poniewozik of Time magazine considered the character as " the anti @-@ Bart Simpson , temperamentally and physically : his head is as squared @-@ off and neat as Bart 's is unruly , and he has a personality to match – conscientious , optimistic and blind to the faults in the world and those around him " . The New York Times critic Joyce Millman said , " His relentless good cheer would be irritating if he weren 't so darned lovable and his world so excellently strange ... Like Pee @-@ wee 's Playhouse , SpongeBob joyfully dances on the fine line between childhood and adulthood , guilelessness and camp , the warped and the sweet " . Robert Thompson , a professor of communications and director of the Center for the Study of Popular Television at Syracuse University , told The New York Times , " There is something kind of unique about [ SpongeBob ] . It seems to be a refreshing breath from the pre @-@ irony era . There 's no sense of the elbow @-@ in @-@ rib , tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek aesthetic that so permeates the rest of American culture – including kids ' shows like the Rugrats . I think what 's subversive about it is it 's so incredibly naive – deliberately . Because there 's nothing in it that 's trying to be hip or cool or anything else , hipness can be grafted onto it " . 
 In a 2007 interview with TV Guide , Barack Obama named SpongeBob his favorite T.V. character , and admitted that SpongeBob SquarePants was " the show I watch with my daughters " . British Prime Minister Gordon Brown has also said he watches the show with his children . 
 = = = Criticism and controversy = = = 
 In 2005 , a promotional video which showed SpongeBob along with other characters from children 's shows singing together to promote diversity and tolerance , was criticized by a Christian evangelical group in the United States because they saw the character SpongeBob being used as an advocate for homosexuality though the video contained " no reference to sex , sexual lifestyle or sexual identity . " James Dobson of Focus on the Family accused the makers of the video of promoting homosexuality due to a gay rights group sponsoring the video . 
 The incident led to questions as to whether or not SpongeBob is a homosexual character . In 2002 , when SpongeBob 's popularity with gay men grew , Hillenburg denied that SpongeBob was gay . He clarified that he considers the character to be " almost asexual ; " he has been shown in various episodes to regenerate his limbs and reproduce by " budding " , much like real sponges do . After Dobson 's comments , Hillenburg repeated this assertion that sexual preference was never considered during the creation of the show . Tom Kenny and other production members were shocked and surprised that such an issue had arisen . 
 Dobson later stated that his comments were taken out of context and that his original complaints were not with SpongeBob or any of the characters in the video but with the organization that sponsored the video , the We Are Family Foundation . Dobson noted that the foundation had posted pro @-@ homosexual material on its website , but later removed it . After the controversy , John H. Thomas , the United Church of Christ 's general minister and president , said they would welcome SpongeBob into their ministry . He said " Jesus didn 't turn people away . Neither do we " . 
 Jeffrey P. Dennis , author of the journal article " The Same Thing We Do Every Night : Signifying Same @-@ Sex Desire in Television Cartoons " , argued that SpongeBob and Sandy are not romantically in love , while adding that he believed that SpongeBob and Patrick " are paired with arguably erotic intensity . " Dennis noted the two are " not consistently coded as romantic partners , " since they live in separate residences , and have distinct groups of friends , but claimed that in the series , " the possibility of same @-@ sex desire is never excluded . " Martin Goodman of Animation World Magazine described Dennis 's comments regarding SpongeBob and Patrick as " interesting . " 
 In April 2009 , in a tie @-@ in partnership with Burger King and Nickelodeon , Burger King released an advertisement featuring SpongeBob and Sir Mix @-@ a @-@ Lot singing " Baby Got Back " . Angry parents and the Campaign for a Commercial @-@ Free Childhood protested the ad for being sexist and inappropriately sexual , especially considering that SpongeBob 's fan base includes pre @-@ schoolers . Susan Linn , the director of the Campaign for Commercial @-@ Free Childhood said " It 's bad enough when companies use a beloved media character like SpongeBob to promote junk food to children , but it 's utterly reprehensible when that character simultaneously promotes objectified , sexualized images of women . " In an official statement released by Burger King , they claimed that " this campaign is aimed at parents . " 
 = = = Cultural impact = = = 
 Throughout the run of SpongeBob SquarePants , the SpongeBob character has become very popular with children , teens , and adults . The character 's popularity has spread from Nickelodeon 's original demographic of two- to eleven @-@ year @-@ olds , to teenagers and adults , including college campuses and celebrities such as Sigourney Weaver and Bruce Willis . Salon.com indicates that the unadulterated innocence of SpongeBob is what makes the character so appealing . SpongeBob has also become popular with gay men , despite Stephen Hillenburg saying that none of the characters are homosexual . The character draws fans due to his flamboyant lifestyle and tolerant attitude . 
 In July 2009 , the Madame Tussauds wax museum in New York launched a wax sculpture of SpongeBob . SpongeBob is the first fictional character to be featured in Tussauds . In May 2011 , a new species of mushroom , Spongiforma squarepantsii , was described in the journal Mycologia . The mushroom was named after the famous cartoon character . The authors note that the hymenium , when viewed with scanning electron microscopy , somewhat resembles a " seafloor covered with tube sponges , reminiscent of the fictitious home of SpongeBob . " Although the epithet was originally rejected by the editors of Mycologia as " too frivolous " , the authors insisted that " we could name it whatever we liked . " 
 The character has also become a fashion trend . In 2008 , American fashion designer Marc Jacobs donned a SpongeBob tattoo on his right arm . He explained that " Well , I just worked with Richard Prince on the collaboration for Louis Vuitton and Richard has done a series of paintings of SpongeBob . He had brought up in our conversation how he saw the artistic value of SpongeBob as the cartoon and I kind of liked it , so I did it . " He further added that " It 's funny . " The tattoo was described by blogger and TV personality Perez Hilton as one of the " Worst Celebrity Tattoos " . In the same year , A Bathing Ape released SpongeBob @-@ themed shoes . Singer Pharrell Williams backed a line of SpongeBob T @-@ shirts and shoes targeted at hip adults . In 2014 , the character was among the popular culture icons referenced by American fashion designer Jeremy Scott in his Moschino debut collection at the Milan Fashion Week . 
 In Egypt 's Tahrir Square , after the Egyptian Revolution of 2011 , SpongeBob became a fashion phenomenon , appearing on various items of merchandise from <unk> to boxer shorts . The phenomenon led to the creation of the Tumblr project called " SpongeBob on the Nile " . The project was founded by American students Andrew Leber and Elisabeth <unk> , and attempts to document every appearance of SpongeBob in Egypt . <unk> <unk> cited the phenomenon in an essay about the incoherent state of politics in Egypt in an independent monthly paper titled Midan Masr . He wrote , " Why isn 't he [ SpongeBob ] at least holding a Molotov cocktail ? Or raising a fist ? " The phenomenon has even spread to Libya , where a Libyan rebel in SpongeBob dress was photographed celebrating the revolution . 
 = = Merchandising = = 
 The popularity of SpongeBob translated well into sales figures . In 2002 , SpongeBob SquarePants dolls sold at a rate of 75 @,@ 000 per week , which was faster than Tickle Me Elmo dolls were selling at the time . SpongeBob has gained popularity in Japan , specifically with Japanese women . Nickelodeon 's parent company Viacom purposefully targeted marketing at women in the country as a method of building the SpongeBob SquarePants brand . Skeptics initially doubted that SpongeBob could be popular in Japan as the character 's design is very different from already popular designs for Hello Kitty and Pikachu . The character also spawned a soap @-@ filled sponge product manufactured by <unk> . 
 In early 2009 , the Simmons Jewelry Co. released a $ 75 @,@ 000 diamond pendant as part of a SpongeBob collection . 
 On May 17 , 2013 , Build @-@ A @-@ Bear Workshop introduced the new SpongeBob <unk> collection in stores and online in North America . " For the first time ever , Build @-@ A @-@ Bear Workshop Guests can finally take home the underwater fun of SpongeBob SquarePants and his friends , " said Maxine Clark , Build @-@ A @-@ Bear Workshop founder and chief executive . " We are excited to be working with Nickelodeon to bring this iconic series and its lovable characters to life at Build @-@ A @-@ Bear Workshop . " Shoppers can dress their SpongeBob and Patrick plush in a variety of clothing and accessories . Sandy Cheeks and Gary the Snail are also available as pre @-@ stuffed minis . Build @-@ A @-@ Bear Workshop stores nationwide celebrated the arrival of SpongeBob with a series of special events from May 17 through May 19 . 
 SpongeBob also inspired vehicle designs . On July 13 , 2013 , Toyota , with Nickelodeon , unveiled a SpongeBob @-@ inspired Toyota Highlander . The 2014 Toyota Highlander as launched at the SpongeBob Day at San Diego 's Giants v. Padres game . The SpongeBob Toyota Highlander visited seven U.S. locations during its release , including the Nickelodeon Suites Resort Orlando in Florida . 
 = Trump International Hotel and Tower ( Chicago ) = 
 The Trump International Hotel and Tower , also known as Trump Tower Chicago and Trump Tower , is a skyscraper condo @-@ hotel in downtown Chicago , Illinois . The building , named after real estate developer Donald Trump , was designed by architect Adrian Smith of Skidmore , Owings and Merrill . Bovis Lend Lease built the 98 @-@ story structure , which reaches a height of 1 @,@ 389 feet ( 423 m ) including its spire , its roof topping out at 1 @,@ 170 feet ( 360 m ) . It is next to the main branch of the Chicago River , with a view of the entry to Lake Michigan beyond a series of bridges over the river . The building received publicity when the winner of the first season of The Apprentice reality television show , Bill Rancic , chose to manage the construction of the tower over managing a new Trump National Golf Course and resort in Los Angeles . 
 Trump announced in 2001 that the skyscraper would become the tallest building in the world , but after the September 11 attacks that same year , he scaled back the building 's plans , and its design underwent several revisions . When topped out in 2009 , it became the fourth @-@ tallest building in the US . It surpassed the city 's John Hancock Center as the building with the highest residence ( apartment or condo ) in the world , and held this title until the completion of the Burj Khalifa . 
 The design of the building includes , from the ground up , retail space , a parking garage , a hotel and condominiums . The 339 @-@ room hotel opened for business with limited accommodations and services on January 30 , 2008 , then full accommodation and services on April 28 . A restaurant on the 16th floor , Sixteen , opened in early 2008 to favorable reviews . The building topped out in late 2008 and construction was completed in 2009 . As of 2015 , the hotel is among three in Chicago with an elite five @-@ star Forbes Travel Guide rating . It hosts a restaurant ( named Sixteen ) that is one of three five @-@ star Forbes @-@ rated restaurants in the city and a spa that is one of six that is at least a four @-@ star Forbes @-@ rated in the Chicago area in 2015 . Sixteen is one of five restaurants in Chicago with at least a Michelin Guide two @-@ star rating in 2016 . 
 = = Location = = 
 The tower sits at 401 North Wabash Avenue in the River North Gallery District , part of the Near North Side community area of Chicago . The building occupies the site vacated by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , one of the city 's two major newspapers , and its location within the River North Gallery District places it in a neighborhood that has had a high concentration of art galleries since the 1980s . The site , at the foot of Rush Street , is on the north side of the Chicago River just west of the Wrigley Building and the Michigan Avenue Bridge , and just east of Marina City and 330 North Wabash The building is close to numerous Chicago landmarks ; it borders the Michigan @-@ Wacker District , which is a Registered Historic District . Parts of the building are visible throughout the city , and the entire length of the building is visible from boats on the river , as well as from locations to the east along the river , such as the mouth of Lake Michigan , the Lake Shore Drive Overpass , and the Columbus Drive Bridge . 
 The building is across the Chicago River from the Chicago Loop , the city 's business district . It is a block away from the southern end of the Magnificent Mile portion of Michigan Avenue . The restaurant , Sixteen , has a clear view of the Chicago River 's entrance to Lake Michigan and of the four buildings completed in the 1920s that flank the Michigan Avenue Bridge ( Wrigley Building , Tribune Tower , 333 North Michigan , and 360 North Michigan ) . 
 = = Design and architecture = = 
 The design of the building incorporates three setback features designed to provide visual continuity with the surrounding skyline , each reflecting the height of a nearby building . The first setback , on the east side of the building , aligns with the cornice line of the Wrigley Building to the east ; the second , on the west side , aligns with River Plaza to the north and with the Marina City Towers to the west . The third setback , on the east side , relates to 330 North Wabash building ( formerly known as IBM Plaza ) . However , some views distort the alignment of the second setback . The setbacks and rounded edges of the building combat vortex formation . The body of the building is raised 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) above the main Wabash entrance and 70 feet ( 21 m ) above the Chicago River . The building uses clear low @-@ emissivity coated glass and a curved wing @-@ shaped polished stainless @-@ steel mullion system that projects 9 inches ( 23 cm ) from the glass line . It incorporates a brushed stainless steel spandrel panels and clear anodized aluminum . 
 The building has 2 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 square feet ( 240 @,@ 000 m2 ) of floor space , rises to 98 stories , and houses 486 luxury residential condominiums . These include studio apartments , a mixture of suites with one to four bedrooms , and five @-@ bedroom penthouses . The tower also features a luxury hotel condominium with 339 guest rooms . The building includes , from the ground up , retail space , a parking garage , a hotel , and condominiums . The 3rd through 12th floors house lobbies , retail space , and the parking garage ; the 14th floor and its mezzanine hosts a health club and spa . The 17th floor through the 27th @-@ floor mezzanine contain hotel condominiums and executive lounges . The 28th through 85th floors have residential condominiums , and the 86th through 89th floors have penthouses . A 1 @.@ 2 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 49 ha ) riverfront park and riverwalk , along a 500 @-@ foot ( 150 m ) space in the area adjacent to the building to the east , was opened in the first half of 2010 . The park facilitates public assembly and entertainment activity while linking the building effectively with aquatic commuters . 
 In 2011 , the riverfront park landscaping surrounding the building , which is referred to as Trump Plaza and Riverwalk or sometimes just Trump Plaza , became the subject of controversy . In 2010 , the Plaza had earned special recognition at the Mayor Daley 's Landscape Awards . The press release noted the landscaping " for their magnificent new civic landscape that is a poetic interpretation of native Illinois that seems at once sophisticated and familiar . " However , in 2011 , the award @-@ winning plantings of small sumac trees , ferns and native grasses with yellow , orange and red hues were removed and replaced with evergreens like junipers and boxwoods , pieces of gray stone , and purple perennials ( catmint and salvia ) , which may require less watering . To add to the controversy , the planting was accompanied by a plan to light the trees to attract nighttime park visitors , in conflict with the " dark skies " movement to reduce light pollution to facilitate better stargazing . 
 The building broke the record for the world 's highest residence above ground level , held since 1969 by the nearby John Hancock Center . Because the Trump Tower has both hotel condominiums and residential condominiums , it does not contest the record held by the 88 @-@ story 432 Park Avenue in New York City , which , at 1 @,@ 396 feet ( 426 m ) , is the tallest residential building in the world . 
 = = = Height = = = 
 The Trump International Hotel and Tower rises 1 @,@ 362 feet ( 415 m ) from the building 's main entrance on Wabash Avenue to the tip of the architectural spire . Upon its completion in 2009 , the building became the seventh @-@ tallest building in the world , behind the 1 @,@ 380 @-@ foot ( 421 m ) Jin Mao Tower in Shanghai , People 's Republic of China . On November 17 , 2009 , however , the Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat ( CTBUH ) , which composes rankings of the tallest skyscrapers in the world based on various criteria , changed its standard for measuring a building 's height . Prior to this change , a building 's architectural height was calculated from the main entrance to the tip of the spire ; new standards measured from the lowest open @-@ air pedestrian level of a building . As the Trump International Hotel and Tower has a riverwalk entrance and pedestrian level 27 feet ( 8 m ) below the building 's Wabash Avenue entrance , the skyscraper 's official height was recalculated as 1 @,@ 389 feet ( 423 m ) without a physical addition to the structure . According to the CTBUH , the recalculated height also made the tower the sixth @-@ tallest building in the world , surpassing the Jin Mao Tower by 9 feet ( 3 m ) . In January 2010 , the building moved back to its position as seventh @-@ tallest with the opening of the 2 @,@ 717 @-@ foot ( 828 m ) Burj Khalifa in Dubai . 
 = = = Sign = = = 
 According to Trump , he received approval for a 3 @,@ 600 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 334 @.@ 5 m2 ) sign from Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley 's administration in 2009 , but renegotiated with Mayor Rahm Emanuel 's administration . In October 2013 , Trump received approval to erect 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 10 m ) tall stainless steel letters back @-@ lit with white LED lighting spelling out <unk> on the 16th floor of the building . He made his impending plans for the sign public in February 2014 . According to a city planning department spokesperson , standard protocol for such a sign is to require approval from the local alderman ( Brendan Reilly , 42nd ward ) and the full Chicago City Council . The five letters span a width of approximately 141 feet ( 42 @.@ 98 m ) , making the final approved version approximately 2 @,@ 800 square feet ( 260 @.@ 1 m2 ) — 2 @,@ 891 square feet ( 268 @.@ 6 m2 ) according to some sources — rather than the originally proposed size . The sign is located about 200 feet ( 60 @.@ 96 m ) above ground level . 
 Crews began hanging the sign in May 2014 . When Chicago Tribune architecture critic Kamin warned Trump that his review of the sign would be unfavorable , Trump responded " As time passes , it 'll be like the Hollywood Sign " , but architect Smith distanced himself from the sign saying " Just for the record , I had nothing to do with this sign ! " . The controversy surrounding the sign drew attention in the national press and international press as it neared completion and the Associated Press ran a story about Mayor Emanuel 's disapproval in mid @-@ June . According to the Mayor 's spokeswoman Kelley Quinn , " Mayor Emanuel believes this is an architecturally tasteful building scarred by an architecturally tasteless sign " . Kamin has noted that part of the problem is the architectural traditions of the city : " If this sign was in Atlantic City or Las Vegas , nobody would care — but it is in Chicago , and in a part of Chicago full of great buildings from the 1920s to the 1960s and onward " . Trump and Reilly both pointed out how unbecoming the prior Chicago Sun @-@ Times building signage was via Twitter . As a result of the fiasco , Emanuel initiated a study on how to alter the rules to avert similar signage controversies in the future . 
 = = Features = = 
 According to the " 2010 City Guide : Chicago " edition of the Forbes Travel Guide , the building hosts one of the seven four @-@ star restaurants in the city and one of the three four @-@ star spas . The hotel is one of two four star hotels . In 2010 Chicago had two five @-@ star hotels and two five @-@ star restaurants . By the time of the Forbes Travel Guide : 2013 City Guide , the hotel and restaurant were each among only three five @-@ star ratings in the city . It retained this ranking in the 2015 Forbes Guide ( along with hotels The Peninsula and Four Seasons and with restaurants <unk> and Grace ) . The spa was among 6 four- or five @-@ star Forbes @-@ rated spas in the Chicago area in 2015 . 
 The restaurant was promoted to two @-@ star rating by the Michelin Guide for 2014 and retained that rating in 2015 . It was one of 5 Chicago restaurants to achieve at least a two @-@ star Michelin rating in both years . In 2016 , it again retained its two @-@ star rating as one of five restaurants in the city with such a rating . 
 = = = Hotel = = = 
 The original plan was to have a partial opening of three of the hotel 's floors on December 3 , 2007 , with a grand opening to follow . The interim ceremony , however , was delayed until January 30 , 2008 , while the City of Chicago granted occupancy approval for the staff of the hotel in the first 27 floors . Four floors of guest rooms were opened , comprising 125 of the planned 339 rooms . By January 30 , construction on the exterior of the building had passed the 53rd floor . The grand opening of the hotel , including amenities , originally scheduled for March 17 , 2008 , took place on April 28 , 2008 . Pulitzer @-@ Prize @-@ winning Chicago Tribune architecture critic Blair Kamin faults the <unk> paneling in the hotel lobby , but another Tribune reporter praises the hotel for its " understated , contemporary look , distinguished by stunning views " . 
 = = = Restaurants = = = 
 On the 16th floor , a restaurant named Sixteen opened in early February 2008 , and an outdoor patio terrace , named The Terrace at Trump , opened on June 25 , 2009 following the completion of construction . The restaurant opened to favorable reviews for its cuisine , decor , location , architecture , and view . Sixteen , which was designed by Joe Valerio , is described architecturally as a sequence of spaces that do not reveal themselves at once , but rather in " procession " . The restaurant 's foyer is T @-@ shaped , and a passageway to the hotel is lined with floor @-@ to @-@ ceiling architectural bronze wine racks in opposing red and white wine rooms . The passageway leads to views — praised by Kamin — that showcase the Wrigley Building clock tower and the Tribune Tower 's flying buttresses . Kamin notes that these views are " more intimate " than the panoramic ones of the Signature Room , a restaurant near the top of the Hancock Center . The views are described as equally impressive by day and by night . The main part of the procession is the Tower Room , a dining room with a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) dome @-@ shaped ceiling made of West African wood . The dome is furnished with Swarovski chandeliers and incorporates mirrors so that all diners can experience the view . 
 The Terrace , which opened on June 25 , 2009 , has views of the Chicago River and Lake Michigan as well as Navy Pier 's seasonal Wednesday and Saturday evening fireworks , and was designed for outdoor or " al fresco " dining . 
 Located on the mezzanine level , Rebar — the hotel bar — opened on April 18 , 2008 . 
 = = = Spa = = = 
 The 23 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 100 m2 ) spa , named The Spa at Trump , opened in late March 2008 . The spa offers gemstone @-@ infused ( diamond , ruby , or sapphire ) oil massages , hydrating masques , <unk> salts and the " Deluge shower " . The spa features a health club with an indoor pool , eleven treatment rooms , a private couples treatment suite , Swiss shower , and saunas . The Citysearch editorial review described this as the " Bentley of hotel spas " . A Chicago Tribune critic spoke of the spa in positive terms for both the treatment and the physical spa itself . The Spa at Trump can be accessed from a large circular staircase inside the hotel , enabling its customers to access the facility from specially designed spa guest rooms without using the elevator . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Design history = = = 
 In July 2001 , when Donald Trump announced plans for the site of the former seven @-@ story Sun @-@ Times Building , the tower was expected to reach a height of 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 460 m ) , which would have made it the world 's tallest building . It was expected to contain between 2 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 square feet ( 220 @,@ 000 and 290 @,@ 000 m2 ) of floor space and cost about $ 77 million just for the property rights . Three architectural firms were considered : Lohan Associates , Kohn Pedersen Fox Associates , and Skidmore , Owings and Merrill ; Trump selected Skidmore , Owings and Merrill in August 2001 . Adrian Smith , who had previously designed the Jin Mao Tower , headed the SOM team , giving Chicago a third skyscraper from the same firm which had previously designed the Willis Tower and the Hancock Center . 
 After the terrorist acts of September 11 , 2001 , Trump reduced the planned height to 78 stories and 1 @,@ 073 feet ( 327 m ) , to reduce the risk of similar attacks . Time magazine reported that a meeting between Smith and Trump about erecting the tallest building in Chicago was taking place at the actual time of the attacks . Some international news sources later claimed that the planned tower height was reduced to 900 feet ( 270 m ) after the original plans called for a 150 @-@ story building that would reach 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) . These claims are supported by computer renderings from 1999 of the proposed skyscraper , shown in the Chicago Tribune in 2005 . 
 The building 's 1 @,@ 073 @-@ foot ( 327 m ) design was first released in December 2001 . However , the first design did not meet with approval from other architects , or from the residents of Chicago . A subsequent revision in July 2002 resulted in an 86 @-@ floor design for use as an office and residential structure , similar to the current design which is , however , for a different combination of uses . Smith 's 2002 plans put broadcast antennas ( multiple communications dishes ) at the top of the building . A revised 90 @-@ story , 1 @,@ 125 feet ( 343 m ) plan was unveiled in September 2003 for a building including condominiums , office space , a " condominium hotel " , retail stores , and restaurants . In January 2004 , another revision changed floors 17 through 26 from offices into condominiums and hotel rooms . In his May 2004 plan , Smith decided to top the building with an ornamental spire instead of communications dishes . These dishes , according to the Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat , would not have counted toward the building 's height . The spire , however , will count , raising the tower 's height to 1 @,@ 300 feet ( 396 m ) . At one point in 2005 , Trump aspired to build a slightly taller building that would surpass the Sears Tower as the nation 's tallest building , but Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley was against the plan . Eventually , Smith settled on a design with a height of 1 @,@ 362 feet ( 415 m ) , which was the height of 2 World Trade Center , the shorter of the former twin World Trade Center towers . This height makes the Tower the third tallest in the United States after One World Trade Center and the Willis Tower . 
 = = = Initial phases = = = 
 On October 16 , 2004 , Donald Trump and Hollinger International , the parent company of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , completed the $ 73 million sale of the former home of the newspaper a week after it relocated . On October 28 , 2004 , Trump held a ceremony to begin the demolition of the former Sun @-@ Times Building . The demolition and construction were financed by a 650 @-@ million @-@ dollar loan from Deutsche Bank and a trio of hedge fund investors who represented George Soros as one of their sources of funds . 
 In March 2005 , the construction process began with the sinking of the first caisson for the tower into the bedrock . In April , construction began on the foundation below the Chicago River . In July 2005 , water from the river began seeping into the building site , through crevices in a corner where the foundation wall meets the Wabash Avenue Bridge . Divers discovered that the leak could not be sealed from the water side . After several other failed attempts to correct the problem , they drove a steel plate next to the gap and filled the space between with concrete after digging it out . 
 Within a single 24 @-@ hour period in October 2005 , a fleet of 30 concrete trucks made 600 trips to pour 5 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 3 @,@ 800 m3 ) of concrete , and thus create a 200 @-@ by @-@ 66 @-@ by @-@ 10 @-@ foot ( 61 @.@ 0 m × 20 @.@ 1 m × 3 @.@ 0 m ) concrete " mat " . The mat serves as the base of the building , from which its spine rises . Those involved with the construction referred to the day as the " Big Pour " . James McHugh Construction Co. was contracted for the concrete work on this job . They obtained the concrete from the Chicago Avenue and Halsted Street distribution site of Prairie Material Sales Inc of Bridgeview , Illinois , the former largest privately owned ready @-@ mix concrete company in the United States . Prairie used a formula of concrete that had never been used in the construction business to meet a 10 @,@ 000 psi ( 69 MPa ) specification , which exceeded the standard 7 @,@ 000 psi ( 48 MPa ) for conventional concrete . 
 = = = Legal issues = = = 
 In October 2006 , controversy erupted over a 10 @-@ by @-@ 4 @.@ 5 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 by 1 @.@ 4 m ) street kiosk at the foot of the Magnificent Mile in front of the Wrigley Building at 410 North Michigan Avenue that advertised Trump Tower a full block away . Extensive debate and publicity occurred on the issue of whether such advertising should have been allowed . Two distinct pieces of legislation in 2002 and 2003 by the Chicago City Council had authorized the kiosk , but sidewalk billboards were not common in Chicago at the time , and their desirability was questioned . Although there were demands from citizens ' organizations and the local Alderman Burton Natarus ( who had voted in favor of the legislation ) to remove the kiosk , Trump agreed only to remove pricing information from the signage , after a request to remove all advertising from it . Originally , one side displayed the geographical information and the other side functioned as a billboard . 
 In a separate legal development , Donald Trump was sued by former Chicago Sun @-@ Times publisher F. David Radler and his daughters in February 2008 for rescinding all " friends and family " condominium purchases , including Radler 's . As president of the Sun @-@ Times ' holding company , Radler had negotiated the sale of the paper 's headquarters building to Trump 's consortium . The price of Radler 's condo had been discounted by 10 % , and only a 5 % deposit was required instead of the standard 15 % . Radler and family were part of a group of 40 insiders who were able to purchase property at about $ 500 per square foot ( $ 5 @,@ 400 / m2 ) . When the market value of the property eventually rose to over $ 1 @,@ 300 per square foot ( $ 14 @,@ 000 / m2 ) , Trump nullified the " friends and family " sales . The insiders were involved in the planning and designing of the building . In January 2007 , Trump cited both a clause about " matters beyond [ the ] seller 's reasonable control " and the desire to " have more income to handle potentially higher construction costs " . Despite Trump 's concerns about higher construction costs , earlier in the same month , Ivanka Trump , his daughter and an executive of the company , had stated that the construction was $ 50 million under budget . In addition to the Radler suit over the validity of the " friends and family " discount contracts , a group of four owners sued over revisions to the closing terms , which placed limits on the owner occupancy of condo hotel units and excluded the meeting rooms and ballrooms from the common elements of which the owners have an interest . 
 In an additional legal issue , on February 8 , 2005 , Trump had closed on a construction loan of $ 640 million from Deutsche Bank for the project . He also obtained a $ 130 – 135 million junior mezzanine loan from another syndicate headed by Fortress Investment Group . As part of these contracts , Trump had included a $ 40 million personal guarantee . The contracts also mandated partial repayments for each closed unit sale , and minimum sale prices . In September 2008 , due to slow unit sales , Trump sought to extend both loans until mid @-@ 2009 because he felt that it was necessary in the business environment and expected from the outset of the contract . On November 10 , Deutsche Bank demanded the outstanding loan payment and the $ 40 million guarantee . Trump filed suit later that month against Deutsche Bank in New York State Supreme Court in an effort to excuse a repayment of more than $ 330 million that had been due November 7 , and to extend the construction loan for an unspecified period of time because of extenuating circumstances arising from the financial crisis of 2007 – 2010 . Trump cited a " force majeure " clause that allowed the borrower to delay completion of the project under a catch @-@ all section covering " any other event or circumstance not within the reasonable control of the borrower " . Trump not only sought an extension , but sought damages of $ 3 billion from the bank for its use of predatory lending practices to undermine the project and damage his reputation , which he claimed " is associated worldwide with on @-@ time , under @-@ budget , first @-@ class construction projects and first @-@ class luxury hotel operations . " At the end of November , Deutsche Bank countersued Trump to force him to uphold his personal payment guarantee from February 2005 , after he failed to repay the amount due November 7 — a date that already had been extended . The suits did not interfere with Trump 's ability to continue drawing on the credit line provided by Deutsche Bank , because without the project 's continued financing , Deutsche Bank may have had to assume the role of developer . In March 2009 , both parties agreed to suspend litigation and resolve the disagreement amicably in an effort to help the project to succeed . In September 2010 , an amended loan agreement stopped the litigation and extended the term on an approximately $ 600 million construction loan for five years . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Bill Rancic , The Apprentice 's season one winner in 2004 , was originally hired to manage the project for a $ 250 @,@ 000 salary . Rancic 's title was President of the Trump International Hotel and Tower , but the title was somewhat misleading , because he was in fact learning on the job as an " Apprentice " . Rancic 's contract was renewed after his first year , but in September 2005 it appeared that his employment with Trump would finish at the end of his second year in April 2006 . During 2005 Donald Trump , Jr . , who had been involved in the building since its earliest stages in 1999 , was overseeing the construction with weekly visits , while Rancic worked on sales and marketing . In December 2005 , Rancic made it clear that he wanted to continue working for Trump , and in April 2006 his contract was renewed for a third year . In that year Donald Trump 's children began to assume prominent public roles as in the Trump Organization ; by January 2007 all three adult Trump children ( Ivanka Trump , Donald Trump , Jr . , and Eric Trump ) were executives in the acquisitions and development division of the organization . By the time the Chicago Trump Tower 's hotel opened in the building in January 2008 , Donald Trump and his three adult children were in the spotlight , overseeing the construction . 
 Bovis Lend Lease , noted for work on Disneyland Paris , Petronas Towers , and the Time Warner Center , was the construction company . James McHugh Construction Co , the concrete subcontractor , implemented a comprehensive formwork for the construction of the building . At the completion of construction the building was the tallest formwork structure in the world , and follows in the footsteps of its neighbor , Marina City , as well as Chicago 's Two Prudential Plaza , as past <unk> . Concrete moulding was used , because using a traditional ironwork structure would have required a building footprint that would have been too big for the property size , proportional to the height of the designed building . A steel frame would have had to be 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) wider to have supported a building of this proportion . Concrete will counteract the force of wind with the force of gravity of the 360 @,@ 000 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 330 @,@ 000 t ) building . A new chemical process that leveraged more fluid liquid concrete facilitated pumping concrete up several hundred feet to the elevating construction site . Although previous technology limited formwork to 700 feet ( 210 m ) , this technology permitted the pumping of concrete 1 @,@ 700 feet ( 520 m ) high . 
 The building is cantilevered into a section of 420 million @-@ year @-@ old limestone bedrock 110 feet ( 34 m ) underground . It uses 4 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) -wide stilt @-@ like pillars that were drilled beneath the building . Every 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) around its perimeter , steel @-@ reinforced concrete was poured into these holes to form the structural support . On top of these caisson shafts and pillars , an 8 @,@ 400 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 7 @,@ 600 t ) concrete pad foundation was built to support the building 's spine . The building has 241 caissons , and the majority of the caissons only descend 75 feet ( 23 m ) into hard clay . However , 57 of them go an additional 35 feet ( 11 m ) into the ground , including 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) of bedrock . The concrete spine uses five I @-@ beam @-@ shaped walls and exterior columns , narrowing to two as the building rises . Each floor is separated by a concrete slab , and stainless steel , glass , and aluminum panels are attached to each floor . 50 @,@ 000 short tons ( 45 @,@ 000 t ) of reinforcing steel bars , called rebar , support the hotel . The extensive use of concrete makes the building more fireproof . Of the $ 600 million construction budget , $ 130 million was earmarked for the James McHugh Construction Co , who handled the 180 @,@ 000 @-@ cubic @-@ yard ( 140 @,@ 000 m3 ) concrete @-@ only portion of the job . 
 Two earlier business decisions by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times led to substantial savings of time and money during the Trump Tower 's construction . The original 1950s sea wall was built by the newspaper company to bomb @-@ shelter thickness , to withstand a Cold War attack , and thus did not have to be broken down and rebuilt . Furthermore , the company decided in the 1970s to switch from petroleum @-@ based to soy @-@ based ink , which reduced ground pollution from the printing plant . This considerably reduced the costs and time for cleaning up the site prior to building anew . 
 On August 16 , 2008 , construction crews made the last major concrete pour to top off the Trump tower 's concrete core , which was commemorated with an unofficial ceremony . To celebrate the milestone , a yellow tower crane raised a bucket full of concrete and an American flag to the rooftop of the skyscraper . Another ceremony occurred on August 19 , when construction supervisors , structural engineers and company representatives from McHugh Construction made a minor concrete pour at the top of the Trump tower . Though Donald Trump was absent from both of these ceremonies , he , Donald Jr . , Ivanka and Eric Trump attended the topping off party on September 24 , 2008 . Original plans called for the windows to be completed and the spire erected in October 2008 . However , the spire installation was delayed through high winds in December 2008 , and was finally completed on January 3 , 2009 . Kamin 's critical opinion is that the spire is not aesthetically complementary . 
 At the September 2008 topping off ceremony , Donald Trump marketed his hotel by expressing doubts about the Chicago Spire ever being completed due to the financial crisis of 2007 – 2009 . However , Donald Jr. said that they were fortunate to complete the project , while the Spire and Waterview Tower were among developments hit by the economic slowdown that followed the financial crisis . Occupancy had begun on lower @-@ floor condominiums at the time of the ceremony . 
 Residents of the Trump building are zoned to Chicago Public Schools , more specifically to Ogden School and Wells Community Academy High School . 
 = = After opening = = 
 = = = Residential unit sales = = = 
 Trump 's hotel was 25 % unsold at the time of the 2008 topping off ceremony , and was expected to need the mid @-@ 2009 construction loan extension that has caused legal complications . Trump had sold all but 36 of the building 's 486 residential condos at the end of 2012 , and 15 remained unsold at the end of 2013 . By May 15 , 2014 only six units remained for sale including three that were used as the sales center and sales models . 
 Several local celebrities purchased units in the building , including numerous professional athletes . Juwan Howard , Rex Grossman ( who has put his unit on the market ) , and Patrick Kane are among the purchasers of Trump properties . Derrick Rose purchased a $ 2 @.@ 8 million 3 @,@ 102 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 288 @.@ 2 m2 ) condo in spring 2012 . Other prominent purchasers of units included McDonald 's Chief Executive and President Don Thompson and <unk> @-@ TV ( NBC 5 Chicago ) president and general manager David <unk> . 
 Two units on the 87th and 88th floors sold for prices in excess of $ 5 million in 2009 directly from the developer . After a few soft years in the real estate market , it took until August 2014 , for units to sell for prices in excess of $ 1000 per square foot . Two units sold for over $ 3 million that month including a $ 3 @.@ 99 million sale , which was the highest sale price in the building since 2009 . The penthouse sold for $ 17 million in late 2014 to Sanjay Shah , the founder and CEO of <unk> . 
 In May 2016 , a one @-@ bedroom unit with a parking space became the first listed Chicago one @-@ bedroom unit to fetch over $ 1 @,@ 100 @-@ a @-@ square @-@ foot when Mark and Deborah Hellman moved their interests from a one @-@ bedroom to a two @-@ bedroom unit in the building . 
 = = = Floods in 2014 = = = 
 In February after one round of drink service , three men were denied further service at Sixteen due to their apparent intoxication and as a payback , the three pulled what was intended to be a prank . They set off fire alarms and opened a fifth @-@ floor stairwell Chicago Fire Department <unk> valve and flooded elevator shafts with thousands of gallons of water and damaged woodwork , electrical circuitry and marble . The resulting damage was estimated at $ 700 @,@ 000 and the three faced felony criminal damage to property charges . 
 On June 26 , a pipe burst near the west public parking entrance , causing the first floor of the tower to flood . 
 = = Critical review = = 
 Fodor 's Chicago 2010 ranks the hotel as having one of the best spas and one of the best pools in the city . It also ranked the hotel as a Fodor 's Choice among Chicago lodging options . Fodor 's also notes that the hotel has impeccable service and lavish amenities , but also notes that the hotel may be a bit " too decadent " , with offerings such as $ 25 bottles of water . 
 Frommer 's Chicago 2010 describes the hotel as having the gorgeous views and upscale amenities to provide a place to go to live the life of a wealthy tourist . The building is praised for its location , which provides as many views along the Chicago River as possible . Its modern architecture is praised for " contemporary synthesis of adjacent building fabrics and modulations " that preserve the city 's architectural heritage and integrate the riverfront setting . 
 BlackBook Magazine 's Guide to Chicago describes the Hotel as an embodiment of <unk> which gives the visitor bragging rights upon his / her return home . 
 Forbes Travel Guide describes the hotel as having an understated upscale lobby , sophisticated lounge , gorgeous restaurant and lavish rooms with amazing views . It also describes the hotel as befitting of the Trump name in several ways . 
 Time Out describes the building as a " testament to a vibrant 21st @-@ century optimism in Chicago " . It notes that the hotel meets all expectations attached to the name Trump in terms of luxury , modern conveniences and speaks highly of the views . 
 Insight Guides describes the building 's architectural swagger as fitting for the post @-@ September 11 attacks skyline . Ten years after the September 11 attacks , Kamin described the building as the one that " best reveals how the Sept . 11 terrorist attacks either did or did not change architecture " . Kamin clarified his belief : 
 Simply by virtue of standing there — and by being the tallest American building built since the 1974 completion of Sears ( now Willis ) Tower — Trump confounds those who predicted after 9 / 11 that iconic skyscrapers would never be built again . At the same time , Trump 's height — originally pegged at more than 2 @,@ 000 feet but eventually scaled back to 1 @,@ 362 feet — suggests that the fear spawned by the attacks did have some effect . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The building 's planning and redesign led to publicity in local and national media both before and during its construction . For example , on September 19 , 2007 , the Trump International Hotel and Tower was featured on an episode of the Discovery Channel series Build It Bigger titled " High Risk Tower " . 
 The final confrontation scene between Batman and The Joker in the 2008 film The Dark Knight was shot at the construction site of the then partially completed tower . The 2009 annual Countdown Chicago on ABC7 , hosted by Mark Giangreco and Janet Davies was filmed on the roof of the hotel and in the Sixteen restaurant . 
 When Fox News Channel embarked on its month @-@ long 6 @-@ city tour to celebrate its 15th anniversary , Neil Cavuto broadcast the network 's 1 @-@ hour Your World with Neil Cavuto show from the riverwalk at the Trump International Hotel & Tower on October 3 , 2011 . 
 The tower was also one of the key locations filmed in Chicago for the 2011 film Transformers : Dark of the Moon . 
 = Mississippi Highway 24 = 
 Mississippi Highway 24 ( MS 24 ) is a state highway in Mississippi , United States . The highway runs 76 @.@ 0 miles ( 122 @.@ 3 km ) from Fort Adams east to an interchange with Interstate 55 ( I @-@ 55 ) and U.S. Highway 98 ( US 98 ) in McComb . The roadway passes through Wilkinson , Amite , and Pike counties , serving the communities of Woodville , Centreville , Gloster , and Liberty . MS 24 has concurrencies with MS 33 between Centerville and Gloster and MS 48 from Liberty to west of McComb . 
 MS 24 was designated in 1932 to run from Fort Adams east to Leakesville , following gravel roads across the southern part of the state . Throughout the 1930s and 1940s , much of the route was paved and realigned . The route was extended from Leakesville to the Alabama border in 1953 . US 98 replaced the MS 24 designation from McComb to east of McLain in 1955 , splitting MS 24 into two segments . The eastern segment was redesignated MS 594 in 1958 . The eastern terminus was moved to its current location in 1967 , with US 98 replacing the part leading into McComb . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MS 24 begins at Main Street in Fort Adams , Wilkinson County , heading northeast as a two @-@ lane undivided road . The highway passes through a mix of farmland and woodland before entering dense forests . The road curves to the east and continues through forested areas with some fields and homes . After passing through several miles of rural areas , MS 24 heads into Woodville and runs south through wooded residential neighborhoods . The highway turns east onto Main Street and passes homes before heading through the commercial downtown of Woodville . On the eastern edge of town , the road comes to an intersection with US 61 . Past this junction , MS 24 leaves Woodville and becomes an unnamed road that runs southeast through forested areas with some development . The highway curves east and continues through a mix of farm fields and woodland . The road heads through denser areas of forests as it approaches Centreville . At this point , MS 24 bypasses the town to the south and crosses a Gloster Southern Railroad line before it reaches an intersection with MS 33 . At this point , MS 33 turns east to form a concurrency with MS 24 . 
 MS 24 / MS 33 curves to the northeast and enter Amite County , passing businesses as it bypasses Centreville to the southeast . The road heads into wooded areas and curves north , intersecting the western terminus of MS 48 . The highway continues north through a mix of farm fields and woodland ; eventually the roadway turns to the northeast . MS 24 / MS 33 becomes Captain Gloster Drive as it heads into Gloster . The road passes through wooded areas with some development as it bypasses the center of Gloster to the southeast . MS 33 splits from MS 24 by heading to the north while MS 24 curves east to leave Gloster . The highway continues east @-@ southeast through dense forest for several miles . Farther east , the road heads through a mix of fields and woods , where the name becomes Main Street . 
 MS 24 heads east into Liberty and intersects the southern terminus of MS 567 . The highway passes commercial development and comes to an intersection with MS 48 / MS 569 . At this intersection , MS 48 / MS 569 turn east to join MS 24 on Main Street and the road runs through the commercial downtown of Liberty . The portion of MS 24 which continues east from this point until it reaches McComb has been designated as Jerry Clower highway by Mississippi state statute 65 @-@ 3 @-@ 71 @.@ 23 . The highway intersects the western terminus of MS 584 immediately before MS 569 splits from MS 24 / MS 48 by heading to the north . Following this , MS 24 / MS 48 passes through more residential areas with some businesses before leaving Liberty . The road becomes unnamed and heads through a mix of farmland and woodland with occasional development , where it curves northeast . The highway continues through rural areas for several miles and turns back to the east . MS 24 / MS 48 enters Pike County and passes through more farmland and forests . MS 48 splits from MS 24 by heading to the south . MS 24 continues through rural areas with some businesses before ending at a cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 55 / US 98 west of McComb . At this point , the roadway continues east into McComb as part of US 98 . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1928 , what would become MS 24 existed as gravel or unimproved roads . MS 24 was designated by 1932 to run from Fort Adams east to MS 63 north of Leakesville ; the road went east to McComb before passing through Tylertown , Columbia , Hattiesburg , and New Augusta . At this time , the entire highway was gravel . In 1935 , a portion of the road west of Tylertown was paved . A small portion of the road between McCallum and New Augusta was paved a year later . Paving was completed on a part of the highway east of Tylertown in 1939 . In 1940 , the portions of MS 24 between Foxworth and Columbia and between Beaumont and McLain were paved . That same year , new alignments for the highway were under construction between McComb and Tylertown , from US 49 south of Hattiesburg to Beaumont , and from McLain to Leakesville . In addition , construction was underway to upgrade MS 24 between Columbia and Hattiesburg . 
 A year later , the highway was paved between Woodville and McComb , from east of Tylertown to Foxworth , and within Lamar County between Columbia and Hattiesburg . In addition , MS 24 was shifted to a new improved alignment from Hattiesburg to west of New Augusta , following a portion of US 49 along with a newly constructed road . In 1943 , the new alignment of MS 24 between McComb and Tylertown was completed . Also , the highway was paved between Columbia and the border between Marion County and Lamar County as well as west of New Augusta . In 1944 , paving was completed between McLain and Leakesville . A year later , MS 24 was moved to a more direct alignment between Hattiesburg and New Augusta that bypassed Camp Shelby . MS 24 was extended east from Leakesville to the Alabama border in 1953 . The same year , a portion of the highway west of Woodville was paved . 
 In 1955 , US 98 replaced the MS 24 designation from US 51 in McComb to east of McLain ; as a result , MS 24 was split into two segments . In 1957 , the paved portion of MS 24 west of Woodville was extended further to the west . The eastern segment of MS 24 between McLain and the Alabama border was redesignated as MS 594 in 1958 . In 1962 , the highway was paved to a point east of Fort Adams . Paving was completed on the remainder of MS 24 leading to Fort Adams in 1964 . In 1967 , the eastern terminus of MS 24 was truncated to its current location at the interchange with I @-@ 55 ; US 98 replaced the route between there and US 51 . Since then , MS 24 has remained on the same alignment . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Battle of Hastings = 
 The Battle of Hastings was fought on 14 October 1066 between the Norman @-@ French army of Duke William II of Normandy and an English army under the Anglo @-@ Saxon King Harold Godwinson , beginning the Norman conquest of England . It took place approximately 7 miles ( 11 kilometres ) northwest of Hastings , close to the present @-@ day town of Battle , East Sussex , and was a decisive Norman victory . 
 The background to the battle was the death of the childless King Edward the Confessor in January 1066 , which set up a succession struggle between several claimants to his throne . Harold was crowned king shortly after Edward 's death , but faced invasions by William , his own brother Tostig and the Norwegian King Harald Hardrada ( Harold III of Norway ) . Hardrada and Tostig defeated a hastily gathered army of Englishmen at the Battle of Fulford on 20 September 1066 , and were in turn defeated by Harold at the Battle of Stamford Bridge five days later . The deaths of Tostig and Hardrada at Stamford left William as Harold 's only serious opponent . While Harold and his forces were recovering from Stamford , William landed his invasion forces in the south of England at Pevensey on 28 September 1066 and established a beachhead for his conquest of the kingdom . Harold was forced to march south swiftly , gathering forces as he went . 
 The exact numbers present at the battle are unknown ; modern estimates are around 10 @,@ 000 for William and about 7 @,@ 000 for Harold . The composition of the forces is clearer ; the English army was composed almost entirely of infantry and had few archers , whereas only about half of the invading force was infantry , the rest split equally between cavalry and archers . Harold appears to have tried to surprise William , but scouts found his army and reported its arrival to William , who marched from Hastings to the battlefield to confront Harold . The battle lasted from about 9 am to dusk . Early efforts of the invaders to break the English battle lines had little effect ; therefore , the Normans adopted the tactic of pretending to flee in panic and then turning on their pursuers . Harold 's death , probably near the end of the battle , led to the retreat and defeat of most of his army . After further marching and some skirmishes , William was crowned as king on Christmas Day 1066 . 
 There continued to be rebellions and resistance to William 's rule , but Hastings effectively marked the culmination of William 's conquest of England . Casualty figures are hard to come by , but some historians estimate that 2 @,@ 000 invaders died along with about twice that number of Englishmen . William founded a monastery at the site of the battle , the high altar of the abbey church supposedly placed at the spot where Harold died . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 911 , French Carolingian ruler Charles the Simple allowed a group of Vikings to settle in Normandy under their leader Rollo . Their settlement proved successful , and they quickly adapted to the indigenous culture , renouncing paganism , converting to Christianity , and intermarrying with the local population . Over time , the frontiers of the duchy expanded to the west . In 1002 , King Æthelred II of England married Emma , the sister of Richard II , Duke of Normandy . Their son Edward the Confessor spent many years in exile in Normandy , and succeeded to the English throne in 1042 . This led to the establishment of a powerful Norman interest in English politics , as Edward drew heavily on his former hosts for support , bringing in Norman courtiers , soldiers , and clerics and appointing them to positions of power , particularly in the Church . Edward was childless and embroiled in conflict with the formidable Godwin , Earl of Wessex and his sons , and he may also have encouraged Duke William of Normandy 's ambitions for the English throne . 
 = = = Succession crisis in England = = = 
 Following King Edward 's death on 5 January 1066 , the lack of a clear heir led to a disputed succession in which several contenders laid claim to the throne of England . Edward 's immediate successor was the Earl of Wessex , Harold Godwinson , the richest and most powerful of the English aristocrats and son of Godwin , Edward 's earlier opponent . Harold was elected king by the Witenagemot of England and crowned by Archbishop of York Ealdred , although Norman propaganda claimed that the ceremony was performed by Stigand , the uncanonically elected Archbishop of Canterbury . Harold was at once challenged by two powerful neighbouring rulers . Duke William claimed that he had been promised the throne by King Edward and that Harold had sworn agreement to this . Harald III of Norway , commonly known as Harald Hardrada , also contested the succession . His claim to the throne was based on an agreement between his predecessor Magnus I of Norway and the earlier King of England Harthacanute , whereby , if either died without heir , the other would inherit both England and Norway . William and Harald immediately set about assembling troops and ships for separate invasions . 
 = = = Tostig and Hardrada 's invasions = = = 
 In early 1066 , Harold 's exiled brother Tostig Godwinson raided south @-@ eastern England with a fleet he had recruited in Flanders , later joined by other ships from Orkney . Threatened by Harold 's fleet , Tostig moved north and raided in East Anglia and Lincolnshire . He was driven back to his ships by the brothers Edwin , Earl of Mercia , and Morcar , Earl of Northumbria . Deserted by most of his followers , he withdrew to Scotland , where he spent the middle of the year recruiting fresh forces . King Harald III of Norway invaded northern England in early September , leading a fleet of more than 300 ships carrying perhaps 15 @,@ 000 men . Harald 's army was further augmented by the forces of Tostig , who supported the Norwegian king 's bid for the throne . Advancing on York , the Norwegians occupied the city after defeating a northern English army under Edwin and Morcar on 20 September at the Battle of Fulford . 
 = = English army and Harold 's preparations = = 
 The English army was organised along regional lines , with the fyrd , or local levy , serving under a local magnate – whether an earl , bishop , or sheriff . The fyrd was composed of men who owned their own land , and were equipped by their community to fulfil the king 's demands for military forces . For every five hides , or units of land nominally capable of supporting one household , one man was supposed to serve . It appears that the hundred was the main organising unit for the fyrd . As a whole , England could furnish about 14 @,@ 000 men for the fyrd , when it was called out . The fyrd usually served for two months , except in emergencies . It was rare for the whole national fyrd to be called out ; between 1046 and 1065 it was only done three times , in 1051 , 1052 , and 1065 . The king also had a group of personal <unk> , known as housecarls , who formed the backbone of the royal forces . Some earls also had their own forces of housecarls . <unk> , the local landowning elites , either fought with the royal housecarls or attached themselves to the forces of an earl or other magnate . The fyrd and the housecarls both fought on foot , with the major difference between them being the <unk> 's superior armour . The English army does not appear to have had a significant number of archers . 
 Harold had spent mid @-@ 1066 on the south coast with a large army and fleet waiting for William to invade . The bulk of his forces were militia who needed to harvest their crops , so on 8 September Harold dismissed the militia and the fleet . Learning of the Norwegian invasion he rushed north , gathering forces as he went , and took the Norwegians by surprise , defeating them at the Battle of Stamford Bridge on 25 September . Harald of Norway and Tostig were killed , and the Norwegians suffered such great losses that only 24 of the original 300 ships were required to carry away the survivors . The English victory came at great cost , as Harold 's army was left in a battered and weakened state . 
 = = William 's preparations and landing = = 
 William assembled a large invasion fleet and an army gathered from Normandy and the rest of France , including large contingents from Brittany and Flanders . He spent almost nine months on his preparations , as he had to construct a fleet from nothing . According to some Norman chronicles , he also secured diplomatic support , although the accuracy of the reports has been a matter of historical debate . The most famous claim is that Pope Alexander II gave a papal banner as a token of support , which only appears in William of Poitiers 's account , and not in more contemporary narratives . In April 1066 Halley 's Comet appeared in the sky , and was widely reported throughout Europe . Contemporary accounts connected the comet 's appearance with the succession crisis in England . 
 William mustered his forces at Saint @-@ Valery @-@ sur @-@ Somme , and was ready to cross the English Channel by about 12 August . But the crossing was delayed , either because of unfavourable weather or to avoid being intercepted by the powerful English fleet . The Normans crossed to England a few days after Harold 's victory over the Norwegians , following the dispersal of Harold 's naval force , and landed at Pevensey in Sussex on 28 September . A few ships were blown off course and landed at Romney , where the Normans fought the local fyrd . After landing , William 's forces built a wooden castle at Hastings , from which they raided the surrounding area . More fortifications were erected at Pevensey . 
 = = = Norman forces at Hastings = = = 
 The exact numbers and composition of William 's force are unknown . A contemporary document claims that William had 776 ships , but this may be an inflated figure . Figures given by contemporary writers are highly exaggerated , varying from 14 @,@ 000 to 150 @,@ 000 . Modern historians have offered a range of estimates for the size of William 's forces : 7 @,@ 000 – 8 @,@ 000 men , 1 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 000 of them cavalry ; 10 @,@ 000 – 12 @,@ 000 men ; 10 @,@ 000 men , 3 @,@ 000 of them cavalry ; or 7500 men . The army consisted of cavalry , infantry , and archers or crossbowmen , with about equal numbers of cavalry and archers and the foot soldiers equal in number to the other two types combined . Later lists of companions of William the Conqueror are extant , but most are padded with extra names ; only about 35 named individuals can be reliably identified as having been with William at Hastings . 
 The main armour used was chainmail <unk> , usually knee @-@ length , with slits to allow riding , some with sleeves to the elbows . Some <unk> may have been made of scales attached to a tunic , with the scales made of metal , horn or hardened leather . Headgear was usually a conical metal helmet with a band of metal extending down to protect the nose . Horsemen and infantry carried shields . The infantryman 's shield was usually round and made of wood , with reinforcement of metal . Horsemen had changed to a kite @-@ shaped shield and were usually armed with a lance . The couched lance , carried tucked against the body under the right arm , was a relatively new refinement and was probably not used at Hastings ; the terrain was unfavourable for long cavalry charges . Both the infantry and cavalry usually fought with a straight sword , long and double @-@ edged . The infantry could also use javelins and long spears . Some of the cavalry may have used a mace instead of a sword . Archers would have used a self bow or a crossbow , and most would not have had armour . 
 = = Harold moves south = = 
 After defeating his brother Tostig and Harald Hardrada in the north , Harold left much of his forces in the north , including Morcar and Edwin , and marched the rest of his army south to deal with the threatened Norman invasion . It is unclear when Harold learned of William 's landing , but it was probably while he was travelling south . Harold stopped in London , and was there for about a week before Hastings , so it is likely that he spent about a week on his march south , averaging about 27 miles ( 43 kilometres ) per day , for the approximately 200 miles ( 320 kilometres ) . Harold camped at Caldbec Hill on the night of 13 October , near what was described as a " hoar @-@ apple tree " . This location was about 8 miles ( 13 kilometres ) from William 's castle at Hastings . Some of the early contemporary French accounts mention an emissary or emissaries sent by Harold to William , which is likely . Nothing came of these efforts . 
 Although Harold attempted to surprise the Normans , William 's scouts reported the English arrival to the duke . The exact events preceding the battle are obscure , with contradictory accounts in the sources , but all agree that William led his army from his castle and advanced towards the enemy . Harold had taken a defensive position at the top of Senlac Hill ( present @-@ day Battle , East Sussex ) , about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 kilometres ) from William 's castle at Hastings . 
 = = = English forces at Hastings = = = 
 The exact number of soldiers in Harold 's army is unknown . The contemporary records do not give reliable figures ; some Norman sources give 400 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 men on Harold 's side . The English sources generally give very low figures for Harold 's army , perhaps to make the English defeat seem less devastating . Recent historians have suggested figures of between 5 @,@ 000 and 13 @,@ 000 for Harold 's army at Hastings , and most modern historians argue for a figure of 7 @,@ 000 – 8 @,@ 000 English troops . These men would have been a mix of the fyrd and housecarls . Few individual Englishmen are known to have been at Hastings ; about 20 named individuals can reasonably be assumed to have fought with Harold at Hastings , including Harold 's brothers Gyrth and Leofwine and two other relatives . 
 The English army consisted entirely of infantry . It is possible that some of the higher class members of the army rode to battle , but when battle was joined they dismounted to fight on foot . The core of the army was made up of housecarls , full @-@ time professional soldiers . Their armour consisted of a conical helmet , a mail hauberk , and a shield , which might be either kite @-@ shaped or round . Most housecarls fought with the two @-@ handed Danish battleaxe , but they could also carry a sword . The rest of the army was made up of levies from the fyrd , also infantry but more lightly armoured and not professionals . Most of the infantry would have formed part of the shield wall , in which all the men in the front ranks locked their shields together . Behind them would have been axemen and men with javelins as well as archers . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Background and location = = = 
 Because many of the primary accounts contradict each other at times , it is impossible to provide a description of the battle that is beyond dispute . The only undisputed facts are that the fighting began at 9 am on Saturday 14 October 1066 and that the battle lasted until dusk . Sunset on the day of the battle was at 4 : 54 pm , with the battlefield mostly dark by 5 : 54 pm and in full darkness by 6 : 24 pm . Moonrise that night was not until 11 : 12 pm , so once the sun set , there was little light on the battlefield . William of Jumieges reports that Duke William kept his army armed and ready against a surprise night attack for the entire night before . The battle took place 7 miles ( 11 km ) north of Hastings at the present @-@ day town of Battle , between two hills – Caldbec Hill to the north and <unk> Hill to the south . The area was heavily wooded , with a marsh nearby . The name traditionally given to the battle is unusual – there were several settlements much closer to the battlefield than Hastings . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle called it the battle " at the hoary apple tree " . Within 40 years , the battle was described by the Anglo @-@ Norman chronicler Orderic Vitalis as " Senlac " , a Norman @-@ French adaptation of the Old English word " <unk> " , which means " sandy water " . This may have been the name of the stream that crosses the battlefield . The battle was already being referred to as " bellum <unk> " or " Battle of Hastings " by 1087 , in the Domesday Book . 
 Sunrise was at 6 : 48 am that morning , and reports of the day record that it was unusually bright . The weather conditions are not recorded . The route that the English army took to the battlefield is not known precisely . Several roads are possible : one , an old Roman road that ran from Rochester to Hastings has long been favoured because of a large coin hoard found nearby in 1876 . Another possibility is a Roman road between London and Lewes and then over local tracks to the battlefield . Some accounts of the battle indicate that the Normans advanced from Hastings to the battlefield , but the contemporary account of William of Jumieges places the Normans at the site of the battle the night before . Most historians incline towards the former view , but M. K. Lawson argues that William of Jumieges 's account is correct . 
 = = = Dispositions of forces and tactics = = = 
 Most recent historians conclude that Harold 's forces deployed in a small , dense formation around the top of Caldbec Hill , with their flanks protected by woods and a stream and marshy ground in front of them . Lawson points out the possibility that the English line was a bit longer and extended enough to anchor on one of the streams nearby . The English formed a shield wall , with the front ranks holding their shields close together or even overlapping to provide protection from attack . 
 More is known about the Norman deployment . Duke William appears to have arranged his forces in three groups , or " battles " , which roughly corresponded to their origins . The left units were the Bretons , along with those from Anjou , Poitou and Maine . This division was led by Alan the Red , a relative of the Breton count . The centre was held by the Normans , under the direct command of the duke and with many of his relatives and kinsmen grouped around the ducal party . The final division on the right consisted of the Frenchmen , along with some men from Picardy , Boulogne , and Flanders . The right was commanded by William fitzOsbern and Count Eustace II of Boulogne . The front lines were archers with a line of foot soldiers armed with spears behind . There were probably a few crossbowmen and slingers in with the archers . The cavalry was held in reserve , and a small group of clergymen and servants situated at the base of <unk> Hill was not expected to take part in the fighting . 
 William 's disposition of his forces implies that he planned to open the battle with archers in the front rank weakening the enemy with arrows , followed by infantry who would engage in close combat . The infantry would create openings in the English lines that could be exploited by a cavalry charge to break through the English forces and pursue the fleeing soldiers . 
 = = = Beginning of the battle = = = 
 The battle opened with the Norman archers shooting uphill at the English shield wall , to little effect . The uphill angle meant that the arrows either bounced off the shields of the English or overshot their targets and flew over the top of the hill . The lack of English archers hampered the Norman archers , as there were few English arrows to be gathered up and reused . After the attack from the archers , William sent the spearmen forward to attack the English . They were met with a barrage of missiles , not arrows but spears , axes and stones . The infantry was unable to force openings in the shield wall , and the cavalry advanced in support . The cavalry also failed to make headway , and a general retreat began , blamed on the Breton division on William 's left . A rumour started that the duke had been killed , which added to the confusion . The English forces began to pursue the fleeing invaders , but William rode through his forces , showing his face and yelling that he was still alive . The duke then led a counter @-@ attack against the pursuing English forces ; some of the English rallied on a hillock before being overwhelmed . 
 It is not known whether the English pursuit was ordered by Harold or if it was spontaneous . Wace relates that Harold ordered his men to stay in their formations but no other account gives this detail . The Bayeux Tapestry depicts the death of Harold 's brothers Gyrth and Leofwine occurring just before the fight around the hillock . This may mean that the two brothers led the pursuit . The Carmen de <unk> <unk> relates a different story for the death of Gyrth , stating that the duke slew Harold 's brother in combat , perhaps thinking that Gyrth was Harold . William of Poitiers states that the bodies of Gyrth and Leofwine were found near Harold 's , implying that they died late in the battle . It is possible that if the two brothers died early in the fighting their bodies were taken to Harold , thus accounting for their being found near his body after the battle . The military historian Peter <unk> speculates that if Gyrth and Leofwine died early in the battle , that may have influenced Harold to stand and fight to the end . 
 = = = <unk> flights = = = 
 A lull probably occurred early in the afternoon , and a break for rest and food would probably have been needed . William may have also needed time to implement a new strategy , which may have been inspired by the English pursuit and subsequent rout by the Normans . If the Normans could send their cavalry against the shield wall and then draw the English into more pursuits , breaks in the English line might form . William of Poitiers says the tactic was used twice . Although arguments have been made that the chroniclers ' accounts of this tactic were meant to excuse the flight of the Norman troops from battle , this is unlikely as the earlier flight was not glossed over . It was a tactic used by other Norman armies during the period . Some historians have argued that the story of the use of feigned flight as a deliberate tactic was invented after the battle ; most historians agree that it was used by the Normans at Hastings . 
 Although the feigned flights did not break the lines , they probably thinned out the housecarls in the English shield wall . The housecarls were replaced with members of the fyrd , and the shield wall held . Archers appear to have been used again before and during an assault by the cavalry and infantry led by the duke . Although 12th @-@ century sources state that the archers were ordered to shoot at a high angle to shoot over the front of the shield wall , there is no trace of such an action in the more contemporary accounts . It is not known how many assaults were launched against the English lines , but some sources record various actions by both Normans and Englishmen that took place during the afternoon 's fighting . The Carmen claims that Duke William had two horses killed under him during the fighting , but William of Poitiers 's account states that it was three . 
 = = = Death of Harold = = = 
 Harold appears to have died late in the battle , although accounts in the various sources are contradictory . William of Poitiers only mentions his death , without giving any details on how it occurred . The Tapestry is not helpful , as it shows a figure holding an arrow sticking out of his eye next to a falling fighter being hit with a sword . Over both figures is a statement " Here King Harold has been killed " . It is not clear which figure is meant to be Harold , or if both are meant . The earliest written mention of the traditional account of Harold dying from an arrow to the eye dates to the 1080s from a history of the Normans written by an Italian monk , <unk> of Montecassino . William of Malmesbury stated that Harold died from an arrow to the eye that went into the brain , and that a knight wounded Harold at the same time . Wace repeats the arrow @-@ to @-@ the @-@ eye account . The Carmen states that Duke William killed Harold , but this is unlikely , as such a feat would have been recorded elsewhere . The account of William of Jumièges is even more unlikely , as it has Harold dying in the morning , during the first fighting . The Chronicle of Battle Abbey states that no one knew who killed Harold , as it happened in the press of battle . A modern biographer of Harold , Ian Walker , states that Harold probably died from an arrow in the eye , although he also says it is possible that Harold was struck down by a Norman knight while mortally wounded in the eye . Another biographer of Harold , Peter Rex , after discussing the various accounts , concludes that it is not possible to declare how Harold died . 
 Harold 's death left the English forces leaderless , and they began to collapse . Many of them fled , but the soldiers of the royal household gathered around Harold 's body and fought to the end . The Normans began to pursue the fleeing troops , and except for a rearguard action at a site known as the " <unk> " , the battle was over . Exactly what happened at the <unk> , or " Evil Ditch " , and where it took place , is unclear . It occurred at a small fortification or set of trenches where some Englishmen rallied and seriously wounded Eustace of Boulogne before being destroyed by Duke William . 
 = = = Reasons for the outcome = = = 
 Harold 's defeat was probably due to several circumstances . One was the need to defend against two almost simultaneous invasions . The fact that Harold had dismissed his forces in southern England on 8 September also contributed to the defeat . Many historians fault Harold for hurrying south and not gathering more forces before confronting William at Hastings , although it is not clear that the English forces were insufficient to deal with William 's forces . Against these arguments for an exhausted English army , the length of the battle , which lasted an entire day , show that the English forces were not tired by their long march . Tied in with the speed of Harold 's advance to Hastings is the possibility Harold may not have trusted Earls Edwin of Mercia and Morcar of Northumbria once their enemy Tostig had been defeated , and declined to bring them and their forces south . Modern historians have pointed out that one reason for Harold 's rush to battle was to contain William 's depredations and keep him from breaking free of his beachhead . 
 Most of the blame for the defeat probably lies in the events of the battle . William was the more experienced military leader , and in addition the lack of cavalry on the English side allowed Harold fewer tactical options . Some writers have criticised Harold for not exploiting the opportunity offered by the rumoured death of William early in the battle . The English appear to have erred in not staying strictly on the defence , for when they pursued the retreating Normans they exposed their flanks to attack . Whether this was due to the inexperience of the English commanders or the indiscipline of the English soldiers is unclear . In the end , Harold 's death appears to have been decisive , as it signalled the break @-@ up of the English forces in disarray . The historian David Nicolle said of the battle that William 's army " demonstrated – not without difficulty – the superiority of Norman @-@ French mixed cavalry and infantry tactics over the Germanic @-@ Scandinavian infantry traditions of the Anglo @-@ Saxons . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The day after the battle , Harold 's body was identified , either by his armour or marks on his body . His personal standard was presented to William , and later sent to the papacy . The bodies of the English dead , including some of Harold 's brothers and his housecarls , were left on the battlefield , although some were removed by relatives later . The Norman dead were buried in a large communal grave , which has not been found . Exact casualty figures are unknown . Of the Englishmen known to be at the battle , the number of dead implies that the death rate was about 50 per cent of those engaged , although this may be too high . Of the named Normans who fought at Hastings , one in seven is stated to have died , but these were all noblemen , and it is probable that the death rate among the common soldiers was higher . Although Orderic Vitalis 's figures are highly exaggerated , his ratio of one in four casualties may be accurate . <unk> speculates that perhaps 2 @,@ 000 Normans and 4 @,@ 000 Englishmen were killed at Hastings . The Normans buried their dead in mass graves . Reports stated that some of the English dead were still being found on the hillside years later . Although scholars thought for a long time that remains would not be recoverable , due to the acidic soil , recent finds have changed this view . One skeleton that was found in a medieval cemetery , and originally was thought to be associated with the 13th century Battle of Lewes now is thought to be associated with Hastings instead . 
 One story relates that Gytha , Harold 's mother , offered the victorious duke the weight of her son 's body in gold for its custody , but was refused . William ordered that Harold 's body be thrown into the sea , but whether that took place is unclear . Another story relates that Harold was buried at the top of a cliff . Waltham Abbey , which had been founded by Harold , later claimed that his body had been secretly buried there . Other legends claimed that Harold did not die at Hastings , but escaped and became a hermit at Chester . 
 William expected to receive the submission of the surviving English leaders after his victory , but instead Edgar the Ætheling was proclaimed king by the Witenagemot , with the support of Earls Edwin and Morcar , Stigand , the Archbishop of Canterbury , and Ealdred , the Archbishop of York . William therefore advanced on London , marching around the coast of Kent . He defeated an English force that attacked him at Southwark but was unable to storm London Bridge , forcing him to reach the capital by a more circuitous route . 
 William moved up the Thames valley to cross the river at Wallingford , where he received the submission of Stigand . He then travelled north @-@ east along the Chilterns , before advancing towards London from the north @-@ west , fighting further engagements against forces from the city . The English leaders surrendered to William at Berkhamsted , Hertfordshire . William was acclaimed King of England and crowned by Ealdred on 25 December 1066 , in Westminster Abbey . 
 Despite the submission of the English nobles , resistance continued to erupt for several years . There were rebellions in Exeter in late 1067 , an invasion by Harold 's sons in mid @-@ 1068 , and an uprising in Northumbria in 1068 . In 1069 William faced more troubles from Northumbrian rebels , an invading Danish fleet , and rebellions in the south and west of England . He ruthlessly put down the various risings , culminating in the Harrying of the North in late 1069 and early 1070 that devastated parts of northern England . A further rebellion in 1070 by Hereward the Wake was also defeated by the king , at Ely . 
 Battle Abbey was founded by William at the site of the battle . According to 12th @-@ century sources , William made a vow to found the abbey , and the high altar of the church was placed at the site where Harold had died . More likely , the foundation was imposed on William by papal legates in 1070 . The topography of the battlefield has been altered by subsequent construction work for the abbey , and the slope defended by the English is now much less steep than it was at the time of the battle ; the top of the ridge has also been built up and levelled . After the Dissolution of the Monasteries , the abbey 's lands passed to secular landowners , who used it as a residence or country house . In 1976 the estate was put up for sale and purchased by the government with the aid of some American donors who wished to honour the 200th anniversary of American independence . The battlefield and abbey grounds are currently owned and administered by English Heritage and are open to the public . The Bayeux Tapestry is an embroidered narrative of the events leading up to Hastings probably commissioned by Odo of Bayeux soon after the battle , perhaps to hang at the bishop 's palace at Bayeux . In modern times annual reenactments of the Battle of Hastings have drawn thousands of participants and spectators to the site of the original battle . 
 = Castles and Town Walls of King Edward in Gwynedd = 
 The Castles and Town Walls of King Edward in Gwynedd is a UNESCO @-@ designated World Heritage Site located in Gwynedd , Wales . It includes the castles of Beaumaris and Harlech and the castles and town walls of Caernarfon and Conwy . UNESCO considers the sites to be the " finest examples of late 13th century and early 14th century military architecture in Europe " . 
 The fortifications were built by Edward I after his invasion of North Wales in 1282 . Edward defeated the local Welsh princes in a major campaign and set about permanently colonising the area . He created new fortified towns , protected by castles , in which English immigrants could settle and administer the territories . The project was hugely expensive and stretched royal resources to the limit . Fresh Welsh revolts followed in 1294 under the leadership of Madog ap Llywelyn . Conwy and Harlech were kept supplied by sea and held out against the attack , but Caernarfon , still only partially completed , was stormed . In the aftermath , Edward reinvigorated the building programme and ordered the commencement of work at Beaumaris . Edward 's wars in Scotland began to consume royal funding , however , and work soon slowed once again . Building work on all the fortifications had ceased by 1330 , without Caernarfon and Beaumaris having been fully completed . 
 The fortifications played an important part in the conflicts in North Wales over the coming centuries . They were involved in the Glyndŵr Rising of the early 15th century and the Wars of the Roses in the late 15th century . Despite declining in military significance following the succession of the Tudor dynasty to the throne in 1485 , they were pressed back into service during the English Civil War in the 17th century . In the aftermath of the conflict , Parliament ordered the slighting , or deliberate destruction , of parts of Conwy and Harlech , but the threat of a pro @-@ Royalist invasion from Scotland ensured that Caernarfon and Beaumaris remained intact . By the end of the 17th century , however , the castles were ruinous . They became popular with visiting artists during the late 18th and early 19th centuries , and visitor numbers increased as access to the region improved during the Victorian period . The British state invested heavily in the castles and town walls during the 20th century , restoring many of their medieval features . In 1986 the sites were collectively declared to be a World Heritage Site , as outstanding examples of fortifications and military architecture built in the 13th century , and are now operated as tourist attractions by the Welsh heritage agency Cadw . 
 For much of the 20th century , the castles and walls were considered primarily from a military perspective . Their use of concentric defences , barbicans and substantial gatehouses led D. J. Cathcart King to describe them as the " zenith of English castle @-@ building " , and Sidney Toy to assess them as " some of the most powerful castles of any age or country " . In the late 20th and 21st centuries , historians such as Michael Prestwich and Abigail Wheatley also highlighted the sites ' roles as palaces and symbols of royal power . The location of castles such as Caernarfon and Conwy were chosen for their political significance as well as military functions , being built on top of sites belonging to the Welsh princes . The castles incorporated luxury apartments and gardens , with the intention of supporting large royal courts in splendour . Caernarfon 's castle and town walls incorporated expensive stonework , probably intended to evoke images of Arthurian or Roman imperial power in order to bolster Edward 's personal prestige . The precise role of the royal architect James of St George in the construction projects , and the influence of his native kingdom of Savoy on the designs , also continues to be debated by academics . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 13th – 14th centuries = = = 
 = = = = Background = = = = 
 The Edwardian castles and town walls in Gwynedd were built as a consequence of the wars fought for the control of Wales in the late 13th century . The kings of England and the Welsh princes had vied for control of the region since the 1070s , with Norman and English nobles and settlers slowly expanding their territories over several centuries . In the 1260s , however , the Welsh leader Llywelyn ap Gruffudd exploited a civil war between Henry III and rebel barons in England to become the dominant power , and was formally recognised as the prince of Wales under the Treaty of Montgomery . 
 Edward I became the king of England in 1272 . Edward had extensive experience of warfare and sieges , having fought in Wales in 1257 , led the six @-@ month siege of Kenilworth Castle in 1266 and joined the crusade to North Africa in 1270 . He had seen numerous European fortifications , including the planned walled town and castle design at Aigues @-@ Mortes . On assuming the throne , one of Edward 's first actions was to renovate and extend the royal fortress of the Tower of London . Edward was also responsible for building a sequence of planned , usually walled , towns called bastides across Gascony as part of his attempt to strengthen his authority in the region . Edward also authorised new planned towns to be built across England . 
 Meanwhile , relations between Edward and Llywelyn rapidly collapsed , leading to Edward invading North Wales in 1276 in an attempt to break Llywelyn 's hold on power . During the war Edward built several major castles in order to better control the region and act as bases for campaigning . Edward was successful , and the Treaty of Aberconwy in 1277 reaffirmed English dominance , dividing up most of Llwelyn 's lands amongst his brothers and Edward . 
 = = = = War of 1282 – 83 = = = = 
 Edward and his allies amongst the Welsh princes soon began to quarrel , and in early 1282 rebellion broke out , led by Llwelyn 's brother , Dafydd ap Gruffydd . Edward responded to the revolt by mobilising a royal army of 8 @,@ 000 foot soldiers and 750 cavalry , which he marched north to Rhuddlan , while in South and mid @-@ Wales Marcher Lord forces advanced from Carmarthen and Montgomery . Edward then mounted a naval invasion of the Isle of Anglesey and formed a temporary bridge to cross over onto the mainland , taking the war into the Welsh heartlands of Snowdonia . Llywelyn was killed that December , and in early 1283 Dafydd was captured and executed . 
 Rather than repeating the devolved arrangements of previous treaties , Edward chose to permanently colonise North Wales instead . The remaining royal family of Llwelyn and Dafydd was crushed and their lands divided amongst major English nobles . The governance of Wales was reformed , and the arrangements set out in the Statute of Rhuddlan , enacted on 3 March 1284 . Wales was divided into counties and shires , emulating how England was governed , with three new shires created in the north @-@ west : Caernarfon , Merioneth and Anglesey . 
 As part of this scheme , in 1283 Edward ordered the construction of new castles and walled towns across the occupied territories , in part to encourage substantial migration to the region from England . Amongst these were the future World Heritage sites of Caernarfon Castle and its walled town , overlooking the River Seiont ; Conwy Castle and its walled town , controlling a crossing point over the River Conwy ; and Harlech Castle , protecting a sea port and newly established English town . Plans were probably made to establish a castle and walled settlement near the strategically important town of Llanfaes on Anglesey – the future Beaumaris – but were postponed due to the costs of the other projects . 
 The new towns were important administrative centres for the new English governmental structures : Caernarfon and Harlech were the centres of new shires , and Conwy responsible for a new county . The castles were key military centres , but were also designed to function as royal palaces , capable of supporting the king and queen 's households in secure comfort . Several of the projects also carried special symbolic importance . Conwy was deliberately sited on the top of Aberconwy Abbey , the traditional burial place of the Welsh princes ; the abbey was relocated eight miles inland . The native Welsh rulers had prized the former Roman site at Caernarfon for its imperial symbolism , and parts of the fortifications of the Welsh princes were seized and symbolically reused to build Edward 's new castle there . The site of Harlech Castle was associated with the legend of Branwen , a Welsh princess . 
 Edward employed trusted architects and engineers to run the projects , most prominently the Savoyard Master James of St George , but also Edward 's close friend Otto de Grandson , the soldier Sir John de Bonvillars and the master mason John Francis . The English had built castles in the wake of the 1272 conflict , usually larger and more expensive than those of the local Welsh rulers , but the new fortifications were on a still grander scale . Carpenters , ditch diggers and stonemasons were gathered by local sheriffs from across England and mustered at Chester and Bristol , before being sent on to North Wales in the spring , returning home each winter . The number of workers involved was so great that it placed a significant strain on England 's national labour force . The costs were huge : Caernarfon 's castle and walls cost £ 15 @,@ 500 , Conwy 's castle and walls came to around £ 15 @,@ 000 and Harlech Castle cost £ 8 @,@ 190 to construct . 
 The walled towns were planned out in a regular fashion , drawing both on the experience of equivalent bastides in France and on various English planned settlements . Their new residents were English migrants , with the local Welsh banned from living inside the walls . The towns had varying levels of success . Measured in terms of burgages , town properties rented from the Crown by citizens , Conwy had 99 around 1295 , and Caernarfon had 57 in 1298 . Harlech lagged badly behind in terms of growth , and the town had only 24 and a half burgages in 1305 . The castles were entrusted by Edward to constables , charged to defend them and , in some cases , also empowered to defend the town walls as well . Permanent garrisons of soldiers were established , 40 at Caernarfon , 30 at Conwy and 36 at Harlech , equipped with crossbows and armour . The castles and towns were all ports and could be supplied by sea if necessary , an important strategic advantage as Edward 's navy had near total dominance around the Welsh coastline . The castles were each equipped with a rear or postern gate that would allow them to resupplied directly by sea even if the town had fallen . 
 = = = = Rebellion of 1294 – 95 = = = = 
 Edwards 's fortifications were tested in 1294 when Madog ap Llywelyn rebelled against English rule , the first major insurrection since the conquest . The Welsh appear to have risen up over the introduction of taxation , and Madog had considerable popular support . By the end of the year , Edward had returned to Wales with a large army and marched west from Chester , reaching his castle at Conwy by Christmas . Here he was trapped and besieged until January 1295 , supplied only by sea , before forces arrived to relieve him in February . Harlech was also besieged but was saved from defeat by the arrival of supplies by sea from Ireland . Caernarfon , however , was still only partially completed and was stormed by Welsh forces and the castle and town set alight . In Anglesey , Welsh forces killed the royal sheriff . In the spring Edward pressed home his counterattack with a force of 35 @,@ 000 soldiers , putting down the uprising and killing Madog . 
 In the aftermath of the rebellion , Edward ordered work to recommence on repairing and completing Caernarfon . Once Anglesey was reoccupied he also began to progress the delayed plans to fortify the area . The chosen site was called Beaumaris and was about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the Welsh town of Llanfaes . The decision was therefore taken to move the Welsh population some 12 miles ( 19 km ) south @-@ west , where a settlement by the name of Newborough was created for them . The deportation of the local Welsh opened the way for the construction of an English town , protected by a substantial castle . A furious programme of building work commenced on the site under the direction of James of St George , the workforce sheltering in temporary huts in the centre of the half @-@ built fortification . The project was very expensive , frequently falling into arrears , and by 1300 had cost around £ 11 @,@ 000 . Despite the absence of town walls , the surrounding settlement grew quickly and by 1305 it had 132 and a quarter burgages paying rent to the Crown . 
 By 1300 only Harlech and Conwy had been properly completed : Caernarfon 's town walls were finished , but much of the castle was still incomplete and at Beaumaris Castle the inner walls was only half their intended height , with gaps in the outer walls . By 1304 the total building programme in Wales had come to at least £ 80 @,@ 000 , almost six times Edward 's annual income . Edward had meanwhile become embroiled in a long @-@ running sequence of wars in Scotland which began to consume his attention and financial resources , and as a result further work on the Welsh castles slowed to a crawl . In 1306 Edward became concerned about a possible Scottish invasion of North Wales , spurring fresh construction work , but money remained much more limited than before . By 1330 all new work had finally ceased , and Caernarfon and Beaumaris were never fully completed . 
 = = = = Decline = = = = 
 Maintaining the castles proved challenging , and they rapidly fell into disrepair . The money given to the castle constables to enable them to maintain and garrison the castles had not been generous to start with , but the sums provided declined considerably during the 14th century . The constable of Conwy Castle had been provided with £ 190 a year in 1284 , but this fell away to £ 40 a year by the 1390s ; Harlech 's funding fell similarly from £ 100 a year to only £ 20 by 1391 . By 1321 a survey reported that Conwy was poorly equipped , with limited stores and suffering from leaking roofs and rotten timbers , and in the 1330s , Edward III was advised that none of the castles were in fit state to host the royal court should he visit the region . A 1343 survey showed that Beaumaris needed extensive work , with several of the towers in a ruinous conditions . 
 Repairs and renovations were sometimes carried out . When Edward II was threatened in South Gwynedd by the Mortimer Marcher Lord family , he ordered his sheriff , Sir Gruffudd <unk> , to extend the defences leading up to the gatehouse with additional towers . Edward , the Black Prince carried out extensive work at Caernarfon after he took over control of the fortification in 1343 . 
 At the end of the 14th century , Conwy Castle was involved in the downfall of Richard II . Richard returned from Ireland in August 1399 and took shelter in the castle from the forces of his rival , Henry Bolingbroke . Henry Percy , Bolingbroke 's emissary , went into the castle to conduct negotiations with the king . Henry Percy took an oath in the castle chapel to protect the king if he agreed to leave the castle , but when Richard left he was promptly taken prisoner , and was taken away to die later in captivity at Pontefract Castle . 
 = = = 15th – 17th centuries = = = 
 = = = = Glyndŵr Rising and Wars of the Roses = = = = 
 Tensions between the Welsh and the English persisted and spilled over in 1400 with the outbreak of the Glyndŵr Rising . At the start of the conflict , Harlech 's garrison was badly equipped , and Conwy had fallen into disrepair . Conwy Castle was taken at the start of the conflict by two Welsh brothers , who took control of the fortress in a sneak attack , enabling Welsh rebels to attack and capture the rest of the walled town . Caernarfon was besieged in 1401 , and that November the Battle of Tuthill took place nearby between Caernarfon 's defenders and the besieging force . In 1403 and 1404 , Caernarfon was besieged again by Welsh troops with support from French forces , but withstood the attacks . Beaumaris fared less well . It was placed under siege and captured by the rebels in 1403 , only being retaken by royal forces in 1405 . Harlech was attacked and taken at the end of 1404 , becoming Glyndŵr 's military headquarters until English forces under the command of the future Henry V retook the castle in a siege over the winter of 1408 – 09 . By 1415 the uprising had been completely crushed , but the performance of the great castles and town walls is assessed by historian Michael Prestwich to have been " no more than partially successful " . 
 Later in the century , a series of civil wars known as the Wars of the Roses broke out between the rival factions of the House of Lancaster and York . After the Battle of Northampton in 1460 , Harlech formed a refuge for Queen Margaret of Anjou , and between 1461 – 68 it was held by her Lancastrian supporters , under the command of Dafydd ap Ieuan , against the Yorkist Edward IV . Thanks to its natural defences and the supply route by sea , Harlech held out and eventually became the last major stronghold still under Lancasterian control . It finally fell after a month 's siege , the events credited with inspiring the song Men of Harlech . 
 The ascension of the Tudor dynasty to the English throne in 1485 marked the end of the Wars of the Roses and heralded a change in the way Wales was administered . The Tudors were Welsh in origin , and their rule eased hostilities between the Welsh and English . As a result , the Edwardian castles became less important . They were neglected , and in 1538 it was reported that many castles in Wales were " <unk> <unk> and <unk> in decaye for <unk> of <unk> reparations " . Harlech appears not to have been repaired following the 1468 siege , and became completely dilapidated . Conwy was restored by Henry VIII in the 1520s and 1530s , but soon fell into disrepair once again , and was sold off by the Crown in 1627 . Complaints about the poor state of Beaumaris mounted , and by 1609 the castle was classed as " <unk> decayed " . Caernarfon Castle 's walls were intact , but buildings inside were rotten and falling down . In 1610 the cartographer John Speed produced a famous sequence of pictorial maps of the towns of North Wales , including their castles and town defences , which have become iconic images of the sites at the turn of the 17th century . 
 = = = = English Civil War and aftermath = = = = 
 The English Civil War broke out in 1642 between the Royalist supporters of Charles I and the supporters of Parliament . The fortifications in North Wales were held by supporters of the king and in some cases became strategically important as part of the communications route between royal forces operating in England and supplies and reinforcements in Ireland . The castles and towns ' defences were repaired at considerable expense and brought back into service , garrisoned by local Royalists . Parliament gained the upper hand in England , however , and by 1646 its armies were able to intervene in North Wales . Caernarfon , Beaumaris and Conwy were taken that year . Harlech – the last fortress to hold out for the king – surrendered in March 1647 , marking the end of the first phase of the civil war . 
 In the aftermath of the war , Parliament ordered the slighting of castles across the country , deliberately destroying or damaging the structures to prevent them being used in any subsequent Royalist uprisings . North Wales proved to be a special case , as there were concerns that Charles II might lead a Presbyterian uprising in Scotland and mount a sea @-@ borne attack on the region . Conwy , Caernarfon and Beaumaris were initially garrisoned by Parliament to defend against such an attack . Conwy was later partially slighted in 1655 , but Caernarfon and Beaumaris escaped entirely . Harlech , less of a potential Scottish target , was rendered unusable by Parliament , but was not totally demolished . 
 In 1660 Charles II was restored to the throne and ownership of the castles changed once again . Beaumaris was restored to the control of the Bulkeley family , traditionally the constables of the castle , who promptly stripped the castle of any remaining materials , including the roofs , and Conwy was returned to the Conway family , who stripped down the castle for lead and timber , reducing it to a ruin as well . Charles ' new government regarded Caernarfon 's castle and town walls as a security risk and ordered them to be destroyed , but this order was never carried out , possibly because of the costs involved in doing so . 
 = = = 18th – 21st centuries = = = 
 = = = = Picturesque attractions = = = = 
 The sites began to pass into varied private ownership . Lord Thomas Bulkeley bought Beaumaris from the Crown in 1807 , incorporating it into the park that surrounded his local residence . Conwy Castle was leased by the descendants of the Conways to the Holland family . In the late 18th and 19th centuries , the ruined castles started to be considered picturesque and sublime , attracting visitors and artists from across a wide area . The fashion was encouraged by the events of the Napoleonic Wars at the turn of the 19th century , which made it difficult for British artists to visit the continent , leading many to travel to North Wales instead . These artists included John Cotman , Henry Gastineau , Thomas Girtin , Moses Griffith , Julius Ibbetson , Paul Sandby , J. M. W. Turner and John Varley . The sites became heavily overgrown with ivy and other vegetation . In the 1830s the stonework of <unk> Castle began to collapse , and the Crown employed Anthony Salvin to conduct emergency repairs . 
 Transport infrastructure to the region began to improve throughout the 19th century , adding to the flow of visitors to the sites , including the future Queen Victoria in 1832 . Academic research into the sites , particularly Caernarfon and Conwy , began to occur in the middle of the 19th century . Local and central government interest began to increase . In 1865 Conwy Castle passed to the civic leadership of Conwy town who began restoration work on the ruins , including the reconstruction of the slighted Bakehouse tower . From the 1870s onwards , the government funded repairs to Caernarfon Castle . The deputy @-@ constable , Llewellyn Turner , oversaw the work , controversially restoring and rebuilding the castle , rather than simply conserving the existing stonework . Despite the protests of local residents , the moat to the north of the castle was cleared of post @-@ medieval buildings that were considered to spoil the view . 
 = = = = State restoration = = = = 
 In the early 20th century the central British state began to reacquire control of the sites . Caernarfon had never left the direct control of the Crown , but Harlech was transferred to the control of the Office of Works in 1914 , Beaumaris followed in 1925 and Conwy was finally leased to the Ministry of Works in 1953 . The state invested heavily in conservation of the sites . The 1920s saw large @-@ scale conservation programmes at both Beaumaris and Harlech , stripping back the vegetation , digging out the moat and repairing the stonework , but otherwise leaving the sites intact and avoiding outright restoration . Major work was undertaken at Conwy in the 1950s and 1960s , including the clearing away of newer buildings encroaching on the 13th @-@ century walls . 
 Academic research increased at the turn of the 20th century , and as the Ministry of Works took control of the sites , government spending on these investigations began . Historians such as Sidney Toy and Charles Peers published work on the sites , and research continued under Arnold Taylor , who joined the Office of Works as an assistant inspector in 1935 . Major academic reports were published in the 1950s , adding to the sites ' reputation . Taylor was also instrumental in the successful opposition to road projects proposed in the 1970s which would have had a substantial impact on the appearance of the Conwy site . In the late 20th century , detailed reconstructions of the castles were painted by historical artists including Terry Ball , John Banbury and Ivan <unk> . 
 In 1984 Cadw was formed as the historic environment service of the Welsh Government and took over the management of the four sites , operating them as tourist attractions . In 2007 , over 530 @,@ 000 visits were made to the sites . In the late 20th and early 21st centuries , the castles and town walls played a more prominent part in debates surrounding Welsh identity . The use of Caernarfon in the investiture of the Prince of Wales in 1911 and 1969 , for example , was challenged by Welsh nationalists such as Alun <unk> Jones . Cadw expanded the interpretation provided at the sites to give more emphasis to the impact of the creation of the castles on the native Welsh , and the role of the Welsh princes in the events leading up to the 1282 invasion itself . 
 = = = = Creation of the World Heritage site = = = = 
 In 1986 sites were collectively declared a UNESCO World Heritage site , titled the Castles and Town Walls of King Edward in Gwynedd . UNESCO considered the castles and town walls to be the " finest examples of late 13th century and early 14th century military architecture in Europe " . UNESCO also cited the importance of their links to Edward I and James of St George , their scale and advanced military architecture , and their unusually good condition and historical documentation . The sites require ongoing maintenance , and as an example of this it cost £ 239 @,@ 500 between 2002 – 03 to maintain the historical parts of the properties . " Buffer zones " have been established around the sites , aimed to protect the views and setting from inappropriate development or harm . The sites are protected by a mixture of UK Scheduled Monument , Listed Building and conservation area legislation . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Interpretation = = = 
 = = = = Military architecture = = = = 
 The Castles and Town Walls of King Edward in Gwynedd incorporated a range of military features developed during the late 13th century . As a consequence , for much of the 20th century , historians regarded these sites as the evolutionary pinnacle of scientific military architecture . D. J. Cathcart King described them as the " zenith of English castle @-@ building " , and Sidney Toy considered them to be " some of the most powerful castles of any age or country " . The sites included concentric defences , in which inner castle walls were completely enclosed within outer defences , with the height and angles calculated to allow both rings of walls to fire on external attackers , as seen at Harlech and Beaumaris . Narrow sites such as Conwy were instead built on tall rock formations , making any attack difficult . Arrowslits and barbicans were incorporated into the defences , with multiple firing platforms built into the walls to allow the massed use of archers . These were further defended in some cases by gatehouses with characteristic twin towers , which replaced the older keeps as a stronghold for defence . 
 Despite these strengths , the castles and town walls are now recognised to have also had military flaws . The castles were much larger than they needed to be in order to protect against Welsh attack , but the sheer scale of them meant that the Crown could not afford to maintain or garrison them properly . The fortifications were in some regards simply too big , and as historian Michael Prestwich notes , smaller projects might actually have been more effective . Rather than the sites being scientifically designed , historian Richard Morris suggested that " the impression is firmly given of an elite group of men @-@ of @-@ war , long @-@ standing comrades in arms of the king , indulging in an orgy of military architectural expression on an almost unlimited budget " . 
 = = = = Palatial architecture and symbolism = = = = 
 Architectural research in the late 20th and early 21st centuries focused less on the military aspects of the fortifications , however , and more on their roles as luxurious palaces and symbols of royal power . Each of the castles was designed to be suitable to support the royal court , should it visit . In the late 13th century , this meant having several sets of private chambers , discreet service facilities and security arrangements , producing , in effect , a royal palace in miniature . Some of these survive largely intact ; Conwy , for example , has what historian Jeremy Ashbee considers to be the " best preserved suite of medieval private royal chambers in England and Wales " , including a private garden for the use of the queen . When built , the castles would have been more colourful than today , in keeping with the fashions of the 13th century . At Conwy , for example , the walls were white @-@ washed with a lime render , and the putlog holes in the walls may have been used to display painted shields called <unk> from the walls . 
 The castles made a clear , imperial statement about Edward 's intentions to rule North Wales on a permanent basis . As already noted , they were typically located on sites that had been associated with the former Welsh princes . Caernarfon , in particular , stands out for its use of banded , coloured stone in the walls , statues of eagles and its polygonal , rather than round , towers . There has been extensive academic debate over the interpretation of these features . Historian Arnold Taylor argued that the design of the castle was a representation of the Walls of Constantinople . The conscious use of imagery from the Byzantine Roman Empire was therefore an assertion of authority by Edward I. Recent work by historian Abigail Wheatley suggests that the design of Caernarfon was indeed an assertion of Edward 's authority , but that it drew on imagery from Roman sites in Britain with the intent of creating an allusion of Arthurian legitimacy for the king . 
 = = = = Savoy influence = = = = 
 The Edwardian sites have strong architectural links to castles and town walls built in the kingdom of Savoy in North Italy during the same period . The resemblance between the two sets of buildings was first noted by historian Arnold Taylor in the 1950s . Similarities include the semi @-@ circular door arches , window styles , corbelled towers , the positioning of putlog holes , tall circular towers and crenellations with pinnacles found in Edward 's works in North Wales ; in Savoy these can be seen in constructions such as the defences of <unk> , La <unk> and Chillon Castles . Many of these similarities have been considered to be the result of the influence of the Savoy architect Master James of St George , employed by Edward I , and who brought other Savoyard architects with him to North Wales . 
 Early 21st @-@ century research , however , suggested that Master James ' role , and Savoyard influence more generally , may have been overstated . The stonework of the sites in North Wales is of much higher quality than that in North Italy , and key features – such as the gatehouses – are not seen in Savoyard . Research indicates that Master James also appears to have had a stronger project management function , rather than an architectural design role , in the development of the sites . Furthermore , in some cases the relevant Savoy structures were built only after James had left the region , and would never have been seen by the architect . The similarity in architectural details may , therefore , be the result of the wider role played by Savoy craftsmen and engineers on the projects , rather than that of a single individual . 
 = = = The sites = = = 
 = = = = Beaumaris Castle = = = = 
 Beaumaris Castle was built at around sea @-@ level and was constructed from local Anglesey stone . The castle design formed an inner and an outer ward , surrounded in turn by a moat , now partially filled . The main entrance to the castle was the " Gate next the Sea " , next to the castle 's tidal dock that allowed it to be supplied directly by sea . The dock was protected by a wall later named the Gunners Walk and a firing platform that may have housed a trebuchet siege engine during the medieval period . The outer ward consisted of an eight @-@ sided curtain wall with twelve turrets ; one gateway led out to the Gate next the Sea , and the other , the Llanfaes Gate , led out to the north side of the castle . The walls of the inner ward were more substantial than those of the outer ward , with huge towers and two large gatehouses . The inner ward was intended to hold the accommodation and other domestic buildings of the castle , with ranges of buildings stretching along the west and east sides of the ward ; some of the remains of the fireplaces for these buildings can still be seen in the stonework . 
 Historian Arnold Taylor described Beaumaris as Britain 's " most perfect example of symmetrical concentric planning " , and for many years the castle was regarded as the pinnacle of military engineering during Edward I 's reign . The castle is considered by UNESCO to be a " unique artistic achievement " for the way in which is combines " characteristic 13th century double @-@ wall structures with a central plan " and for the beauty of its " proportions and masonry " . 
 = = = = Harlech Castle = = = = 
 Harlech Castle rests upon the spur of rock called the Harlech Dome ; the land falls away sharply on the north and west , and a ditch cut into the rock protects the remaining approaches to the castle . The castle has a concentric design , with one line of defences enclosed by another , forming an inner and outer ward ; the outer wall was originally somewhat taller than today . Harlech is built from local grey @-@ green sandstone , with large , regular blocks used for the towers and irregular material , possibly taken from the ditch , used for the walls . The main entrance to the castle would have involved crossing a stone bridge between the two easterly ditch bridge towers and the main gatehouse ; little remains of the bridge towers today and a timber entrance way to the gatehouse replaces the bridge . A water gate overlooks a protected stairway of 127 steps that runs down to the foot of the cliffs . 
 The gatehouse has two massive " D @-@ shaped " defensive towers flanking the entrance . The passage into the castle was guarded by three portcullises and at least two heavy doors . The gatehouse has two upper floors , broken up into various rooms . Each floor has three large windows overlooking the inner ward ; the second floor has two additional grand windows on the sides of the gatehouse . The gatehouse was fitted with fireplaces and would originally have had prominent chimneys . The inner ward is guarded by four large circular towers which at various times housed a dungeon and an artillery workshop . Several ranges of buildings were built around the inner ward , including a chapel , kitchen , service buildings , a granary and a great hall . The battlements may originally have been built with triple finials in a similar fashion to Conwy , although little remains of these in the modern era . 
 = = = = Caernarfon Castle and town walls = = = = 
 Caernarfon Castle is divided into an upper and lower ward . The lower ward contained royal accommodation , while the upper consisted of service facilities and the accommodation for the garrison . These are surrounded by a curtain wall , defended by polygonal towers . Defensive firing galleries were built along the southern side of the castle . There are two main entrances , the King 's Gate , leading from the tow , and the Queen 's Gate , allowing more direct access to the castle . All that remains of the buildings contained within the castle are the foundations . If Caernarfon been completed as intended , it would have been able to contain a royal household of several hundred people . In the opinion of military historian Allen Brown , Caernarfon was " one of the most formidable concentrations of fire @-@ power to be found in the Middle Ages " . 
 Caernarfon 's town walls present an unbroken , 734 m ( 2 @,@ 408 ft ) long circuit around the town , enclosing 4 @.@ 18 hectares ( 10 @.@ 3 acres ) . They are mostly built from the same carboniferous limestone used at the castle . The eight towers along the wall are mostly " gap @-@ backed " , lacking walls on the inside of the towers , and originally included removable wooden bridges to allow sections of the walls to be sealed off from attackers . The two original entrances to the town were through the West and East Gates . The West Gate faced onto the harbour , and was also known as the Golden Gate , named after the principal gateway in the city of Constantinople . 
