 The video begins with Rihanna 's fans screaming and cheering her name before a concert is about to start , while Rihanna is shown walking to her dressing room , preparing to perform by doing her make @-@ up and changing outfits . As a firework explodes in the sky , scenes of Rihanna driving through her hometown and having a drink at the bar are intercut . As the song starts to play , Rihanna is seen in a variety of different outfits from various parts of the concert , whilst also showing clips of the audience dancing and singing . Rihanna is also seen holding a handheld camera , which she uses to film herself and other people , as well as goings @-@ on backstage . Avril Lavigne , who makes a cameo appearance in the video , is seen raising her glass to the camera before being pushed fully clothed into a swimming pool while on a skateboard . Jay @-@ Z , Kanye West and CeeLo Green are also featured in the various clips of the video , as the former two were special guests at Rihanna 's tour on certain dates , while the latter was an opening act on selected dates during the North American leg of the tour . Shots of Rihanna flying on a private jet , avoiding paparazzi and participating in the Barbados <unk> Day are also intercut throughout the video . Other scenes include her taking pictures together with her mother and grandmother , swimming , relaxing , partying with her brother , and spending time with her friends and family . The video ends with Rihanna on a boat shouting " Rihanna Navy ! " , referring to her fan group . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Upon its release , the video received general acclaim from critics . Iona Kirby of Daily Mail praised the documentary @-@ style video , which gives fans an opportunity to see the life of Rihanna and insight into what she likes to do . A reviewer from Rap @-@ Up praised the video , commenting that it is a " real blast in a glass ! " . According to <unk> 's Giovanna Falcone , the video shows " Rihanna goofing around with friends and family , on stage and loving life , you can 't help but smile throughout " . Robbie Daw of Idolator commented that the music video looks " like one big , drunken night out " . A reviewer from Rolling Stone magazine also commented that the video " finds Rihanna in an appropriately celebratory mood ..... it 's mostly a lot of shots of her partying backstage with friends and celebrities " . Sarah Maloy of Billboard magazine commented " there are no special effects , storylines – and no chance of lawsuits , " referring to one of Rihanna 's previous music videos , " S & M " , which was faced with two lawsuits . Maloy also noted that the video presents Rihanna 's ordinary life just as it is . 
 A reviewer of OK ! commented that " Rihanna gets buddy Avril Lavigne on board in the video for the track ' which will be our anthem for the Bank Holiday weekend . ' " Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly simply commented that " It 's party time , folks ! And that 's exactly what the video makes apparent " . With regard to the cameo appearance of several celebrities and Rihanna 's colleagues , Leah Collins of The Vancouver Sun stated " Rihanna shows that she has more celebrity friends than hairstyles ( which is saying something considering she manages to change her weave approximately every 5 seconds in the clip ) " . According to William Goodman from Spin magazine " Barbadian pop queen Rihanna leads a charmed life . But at heart , she 's just a hometown party girl , and her new video for ' Cheers ( Drink to That ) ' proves it " . In reference to raising glasses in the video , Rebeca Ford from The Hollywood Reporter commented " the singer can also be seen raising a [ glass ] to her audience , probably thanking them for their support with her own personal ' cheers . ' " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Cheers ( Drink to That ) " was included on the set list of the Loud Tour ( 2011 ) . Rihanna also performed the song at V Festival in the United Kingdom on August 20 and 21 , 2011 . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Loud . 
 Songwriting – Andrew Harr , Jermaine Jackson , Stacy Barthe , Laura Pergolizzi , Corey Gibson , Chris Ivery , Lauren Christy , Graham Edwards , Avril Lavigne , Scott Spock 
 Production – The Runners 
 Vocal production – Makeba Riddick 
 Vocal recording and mixing – Marcos Tovar 
 Assistant vocal recording – Antonio <unk> , Inaam Haq , Dane Liska , Brad Shea 
 Recording – Jeff " Supa Jeff " Villanueva 
 Recording assistant – Ben O 'Neill 
 Assistant mixing – Bobby Campbell 
 Backing vocals – Stacy Barthe , Laura Pergolizzi , Avril Lavigne 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Dylan and Cole Sprouse = 
 Dylan Thomas Sprouse and Cole Mitchell Sprouse ( born August 4 , 1992 ) are American actors . They are twins and are referred to as the Sprouse brothers or Sprouse Bros. Their first major theatrical film role was in Big Daddy , in which they co @-@ starred with Adam Sandler . They later appeared in several television sitcoms and starred in the straight @-@ to @-@ DVD films I Saw Mommy Kissing Santa Claus and Just for Kicks . 
 From 2005 until 2008 , they starred in the Disney Channel sitcom The Suite Life of Zack & Cody . As a result of the series ' success , the media has termed them " heartthrobs " and " overwhelming draws " among preteen and teen audiences . The following year , the brothers launched a franchise known as the Sprouse Bros brand , which included a clothing line , book series and magazine . The majority of the Sprouses ' franchise ended in 2008 , except for their clothing line . The Suite Life of Zack & Cody was retooled in 2008 as The Suite Life on Deck , in which the brothers reprised their roles as Zack and Cody . The Suite Life on Deck went on to become the most @-@ watched tween / children 's television show in 2008 and 2009 . The show ended in May 2011 . They also starred in the The Suite Life Movie , which aired in March of the same year . They began cultivating an adult image by starring in the independent theatrical suspense film The Kings of Appletown in 2009 . 
 Dylan and Cole were two of the wealthiest children alive in 2007 , and in 2010 , the Sprouse brothers were the highest @-@ paid teenage Disney television actors , earning $ 40 @,@ 000 per episode combined . MSN reported by the end of the 2000s that the twin brothers became the richest teenage twins in the world . In 2010 , the brothers were accepted to New York University . They deferred admission for one year , and attended the university from 2011 to 2015 . Both Cole and Dylan have confirmed they wish to pursue acting post @-@ university . 
 = = Early lives = = 
 The Sprouses were born at a small hospital called <unk> <unk> in Arezzo , Italy , to American parents Matthew Sprouse and Melanie Wright , while they were teaching at an English language school in Tuscany . Dylan was named after British poet Dylan Thomas , and Cole is named after jazz singer and pianist Nat King Cole . Dylan is 15 minutes older than Cole . They have German ancestry . The boys moved back to the United States four months after their birth to their parents ' native Long Beach , California . Some of the money Dylan and Cole earned by acting was used to buy a house in Calabasas , California , where their family still lives as of summer 2012 . 
 = = Acting = = 
 The Sprouses began acting at the age of eight months following a suggestion from their grandmother , <unk> Booth Wright , who was a drama teacher and actress . The twins first appeared in a commercial for diapers , switching on @-@ screen time every few seconds . As with many twins , the two have often played the same role , due to child labor laws in California restricting the amount of time children can be filmed in a day . Casting twins in a single role thus allows more time for the character to be filmed . Beginning at eight months old , the two played a single character , Patrick Kelly , on the ABC series Grace Under Fire . 
 In 1999 , the boys appeared in their first major feature film , Big Daddy , in which they shared the role of a five @-@ year @-@ old boy named Julian who is adopted by Adam Sandler 's character , Sonny Koufax . Though the film received mixed reviews , the two were nominated for multiple awards for their role in the movie . However , they did not win any . The same year , the boys also had a minor role in the thriller The Astronaut 's Wife . The Sprouses have noted that after Big Daddy 's release , they entered a slow period in their careers and were not cast in any major roles for a time . During the early 2000s , the twins appeared in episodes of The Nightmare Room and That ' 70s Show , as well as in MADtv and portrayed roles in the feature films The Master of Disguise and Adam Sandler 's Eight Crazy Nights . Cole began appearing in episodes of the television show Friends , as Ross Geller 's son Ben in 2001 ; this role was not shared with Dylan . 
 They both appeared in I Saw Mommy Kissing Santa Claus and Just for Kicks , both of which were family films that received a direct @-@ to @-@ video release . David Nusair of Reel Film Reviews said of their acting in Just for Kicks that the brothers " aren 't the worst child actors I 've ever seen , ... but they certainly leave a lot to be desired . " Dylan and Cole were later cast in the Disney Channel original series The Suite Life of Zack & Cody , where they portrayed identical twins Zack and Cody Martin , respectively . The series , which debuted in March 2005 , became a ratings success . As part of their involvement with Disney , the brothers also became part of the 11 @-@ member group , the Disney Channel Circle of Stars , and sang the song " A Dream is a Wish Your Heart Makes " along with the members of the circle , for a video that was released as bonus material in the special edition version of the Disney film Cinderella . They also participated in the Disney Channel Games . 
 The Sprouses played one character , Jeremiah , in the independent film The Heart Is <unk> Above All Things . The film was produced in 2004 but not given a theatrical release until March 2006 , when it played at three theatres in the United States , ultimately grossing $ 29 @,@ 000 domestically . Harvey Karten praised their acting , stating that " acting is superlative all around " , and Tamara Straus of the San Francisco Chronicle called them " the movie 's only saving grace " . In 2007 , the two filmed A Modern Twain Story : The Prince and the Pauper . Carrie R. <unk> of Common Sense Media said the film was a " slow story for Zack and Cody fans only " . The Sprouse brothers both had voice roles in the animated film <unk> : The Christmas That Almost Didn 't Happen alongside Brenda Song and Emily Osment . Dylan played the voice of Shasta in Disney 's " Snow Buddies . " The brothers both starred in the theatrical film The Kings of Appletown , which is based on the book The Adventures of Tom Sawyer . The film was directed by Bobby Moresco and written by Amanda Moresco . Shot in New Braunfels , Texas , the movie was originally estimated to be released in the winter of 2008 . Kings of Appletown had a limited theatrical release on December 12 , 2009 and was officially released at the Newport Beach Film Festival in April 2010 . 
 They appeared on the cover of the May 2009 issue People Magazine , in an eighty @-@ page special edition issue devoted to The Suite Life on Deck . The twin brothers began filming another Modern Twain Story film in the summer of 2009 . The film was tentatively titled " <unk> " and was a modern version of Huckleberry Finn . However , in mid @-@ 2010 , Dylan stated that they would not be doing the movie , in part because they " outgrew " the movie . They became the new face of the children 's yogurt , <unk> <unk> , in 2009 ; their endorsement deal was renewed in 2010 . The twin brothers signed an endorsement deal with Nintendo DS in August 2010 . 
 As of early to mid @-@ 2011 , Dylan and Cole are not in any acting projects and are focusing instead on college as well as art and photography , respectively . However , Dylan has stated that they would both like to continue acting while in college . Dylan and Cole are represented by William Morris Endeavor as of 2011 . 
 = = Sprouse Bros brand = = 
 In 2005 , the Sprouse brothers signed a licensing agreement with Dualstar Entertainment to produce Sprouse Bros branded merchandise for the preteen and teenage market , the Sprouse Bros brand included a clothing line , comics series and a magazine , as well as personal hygiene line and a line of sportswear . Dylan said of the brand that they wanted to " reach out to the nerd group and the cool group " and " appeal to everybody " . A magazine targeting boys was launched by Dualstar and Leisure Publishing LLC in 2006 called Sprouse Bros. Code . Simon & Schuster Inc. published two volumes of a book series titled Sprouse Bros. 47 <unk> , which was described as featuring the Sprouse twins as " young James Bonds or undercover agents " ; the book series continued . In 2008 , the brothers ended their association with the Olsens ' Dualstar , but they continued to sell their clothing line . The items in their clothing lines were sold exclusively online until mid @-@ March 2012 , when the online store could no longer be accessed . 
 = = Personal lives = = 
 Dylan Sprouse has stated that the experience of coming to fame after the success of The Suite Life of Zack & Cody is " kind of scary , how fast everything is moving " and that a year prior " none of this was happening , it was just doing Suite Life , " and that he was excited for the future . While filming The Suite Life of Zack & Cody , the both of them received on @-@ set tutoring for three hours each day for school , and said they were getting " straight A 's and honors . " In their last year of high school , the brothers both took Advanced Placement classes . Dylan took AP Psychology and AP Spanish , and Cole took AP Psychology and AP Government . 
 The twins ' family has three dogs : Bubba , which belongs to Dylan and Cole ; Pinky , who is their father 's ; and Curry , their stepmother 's . Their favorite actor and co @-@ star is Adam Sandler . Dylan has said that Adam is " a role model in acting " and that they learned a lot about comedy from him . In mid @-@ 2010 , Dylan launched a site for his art called Sprouse Arts , and in mid @-@ 2011 , Cole launched a site for his photography called Cole Sprouse Photography . 
 In 2010 , the brothers were both accepted to New York University . They had initial plans to attend the university in the fall of 2010 ; however , they deferred for one year . Dylan initially planned on majoring in fine / studio arts and minoring in economics while Cole planned on majoring in film and television production and minoring in drama . Instead , they both enrolled in the Gallatin School of Individualized Study , which allows students to plan their own curriculum . Cole focused his curriculum on the humanities and archaeology while Dylan focused on video game design . In 2011 , Dylan was elected president of the Third Avenue North residence hall at New York University . 
 In 2012 , Dylan and Cole were officially appointed as the International Ambassadors of the Koyamada Foundation . They traveled to Japan with Shin Koyamada to empower the youth of Japan to better themselves and rebuild Japan as a society as well as to deepen the friendly relations and brotherhood between the youth of Japan and America in August 2013 . 
 As of 2013 , Dylan was working as a host at a New York City restaurant , which he explained was a result of his desire to try a new experience , as he said , " working somewhat below the means I 'm used to , as well as a way to socialize and get out of the house . " 
 Since 2014 , Dylan has commentated a few Super Smash Bros. tournaments . 
 In May 2015 , both Dylan and Cole Sprouse graduated from the Gallatin School of Individualized Study of NYU . Cole devoted his time studying archeology while Dylan studied video game design . Interestingly enough , they disclosed to Entertainment magazine that they managed to walk away with each other 's diplomas at their graduation ceremony . 
 Following their graduation , the two have disclosed they will possibly get back to their acting careers and take time to pursue their other interests such as photography and modeling . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 2005 – " A Dream Is a Wish Your Heart Makes " in DisneyMania 4 
 2008 – " A Dream Is a Wish Your Heart Makes " in Princess DisneyMania 
 = Operation Ring = 
 Operation Ring ( Russian : <unk> « <unk> » , <unk> <unk> ; Armenian : « <unk> » <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , known in Azerbaijan as the <unk> Operation ( Azerbaijani : <unk> <unk> ) was the codename for the May 1991 military operation conducted by Soviet Internal Security Forces and OMON units in the northern regions ( Shahumyan , Shusha , Martakert and <unk> ) of Nagorno @-@ Karabakh Autonomous Oblast of the Azerbaijan SSR and in a number of bordering regions of the Armenian SSR ( <unk> , Goris and Tavush ) . Officially dubbed a " passport checking operation , " the ostensible goal launched by the Soviet Union 's internal and defense ministries was to disarm Armenian militia detachments that had been organized in " [ illegally ] armed formations . " The operation involved the use of ground troops who accompanied a complement of military vehicles , artillery and helicopter gunships to be used to root out the self @-@ described Armenian fedayeen . 
 However , contrary to their stated objectives , Soviet troops and the predominantly Azerbaijani soldiers in the <unk> OMON and army forcibly uprooted Armenians living in the 24 villages strewn across Shahumyan to leave their homes and settle elsewhere in Nagorno @-@ Karabakh or in the neighboring Armenian SSR . British journalist Thomas de Waal has described Ring as the Soviet Union 's first and only civil war . Some authors have also described the actions of the joint Soviet and Azerbaijani force as ethnic cleansing . The military operation was accompanied by systematic and gross human rights abuses . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Nagorno @-@ Karabakh movement that had originally begun in Armenia during the late 1980s called for the Karabakh enclave to be united with that country , despite it being behind the borders of Azerbaijan . With a population that was 75 percent Armenian , official petitions were sent by Armenian leaders to the Soviet government in Moscow in order to address the issue but were rejected by General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev . The demands to annex the region came in the middle of Gorbachev 's reform policies , Glasnost and Perestroika . First implemented in 1985 , when Gorbachev came into power , the liberalization of political and economical constraints in the Soviet Union gave birth to numerous nationalist groups in the different Soviet republics who insisted that they be given the right to secede and form their own independent countries . 
 By late 1989 , the Communist Parties of the republics of Armenia , Azerbaijan , Georgia , Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania had largely been weakened in power . In Nagorno @-@ Karabakh , the intercommunal relations between Armenians and Azerbaijanis had worsened due to violence and pogroms . Gorbachev 's policies hastened the collapse of the Soviet system and many Armenians and Azerbaijanis sought protection by arming themselves with Soviet military weaponry . His preoccupation in dealing with the numerous demands by the other republics saw the disappearance of vast amounts of assault rifles , rocket @-@ propelled grenades , and other small arms munitions stored in caches throughout Armenia and Azerbaijan . 
 Foreseeing the inevitable conflict that would unfold after the Soviet Union disintegrated , Armenian volunteers from both the Republic and the Armenian diaspora flocked to the enclave and formed detachments of several dozen men . Gorbachev deemed these detachments and others in Karabakh as illegal entities and banned them in a decree in July 1990 . Despite this promulgation , these groups continued to exist and actively fought against Azerbaijani " special @-@ purpose " militia brigades . The volatility of the attacks led the Soviet government to position military units in the Armenian capital of Yerevan and along the five @-@ kilometer gap between the Armenian border and Nagorno @-@ Karabakh . 
 Shahumyan had a population of about 20 @,@ 000 , of whom 85 percent were ethnic Armenian . While the Armenian volunteers pledged to defend and protect civilians living in Shahumyan from Azerbaijani incursions , many of them were told to stay away by the inhabitants themselves to save the villages and the entire district from violence . 
 = = Origins of planning = = 
 It is widely believed that Operation Ring was conceived by Soviet authorities in order to intimidate the Armenians . The Armenian SSR had boycotted the All @-@ Union referendum , though Armenian sources allege that Baku had planned measures against the Armenians long before the referendum . Although the execution of Operation Ring was not proposed to Soviet officials until mid @-@ April 1991 , Mutalibov insisted in an interview that such plans had originally been formulated as early as 1989 . 
 Viktor <unk> , who visited Karabakh in 1990 , writes : 
 Early in November 1990 our fact @-@ finding group got hold of secret materials of the authorities of the Azerbaijan SSR on the total deportation of the Armenian population from the villages of <unk> and of former Shahumyan regions . At the session of the Supreme Council of Azerbaijan SSR , which took place in February 1991 , the plan of deportations of the Armenian population from Azerbaijan was actually approved . 
 The Russian human rights organization Memorial reports the expulsion of civilians in this region as early as 1989 @-@ 90 , when the inhabitants of the Kushi @-@ Armavir , <unk> , and Kamo were forced to abandon their homes . The Azerbaijani OMON , a special paramilitary unit known as the " black berets " , had similarly been engaged in various " acts of harassment against Armenian villages in the enclave , including raids on collective farms and the destruction of ... communal facilities . " 
 In 1991 , Gorbachev set 17 March as the date of the All @-@ Union referendum that the republics would take part in to decide the fate of the Soviet Union . Offering to grant greater autonomy to the individual republics , Armenia , Georgia , along with several other republics , vowed not to take part in the referendum and instead seek independence from Moscow . Meanwhile , Azerbaijan 's Communist Party head , Ayaz Mutalibov , continued to support Gorbachev 's attempts to keep the Union together and took part in the referendum ; with 92 percent of voters agreeing to remain a part of the Soviet Union . Mutalibov 's staunch loyalty to Gorbachev allowed him to garner backing from Moscow and , in effect , he now had the support to discourage the aspirations of Armenians desiring to unite with Armenia or to force them to leave the region altogether . 
 The operation 's codename , Ring , referred to the encirclement of the towns of Getashen and Martunashen by the Soviet MVD and armed forces . A date in late April was chosen for the commencement of the operation , which called for Soviet troops to surround the towns and search the villages for both illegally procured weapons and Armenian guerrilla fighters . Reacting to the growing violence , Gorbachev had also assigned units of the Soviet 4th Army 's predominantly Azerbaijani 23rd Motorized Rifle Division , stationed along the Armenian @-@ Azerbaijani border , to serve as a buffer force . The 23rd Division and other elements of the Fourth Army were selected along with the Azerbaijani OMON to take part in Ring . 
 = = Implementation = = 
 = = = First operation = = = 
 On 30 April , the Soviet troops and OMON converged toward Getashen and Martunashen , which were approximately twenty @-@ five kilometers north of Karabakh , meeting little , if any , resistance on the way . Accompanying the normal ground troops were an assortment of tanks , armored personnel carriers , artillery and attack helicopters . While approaching the villages in Shahumyan , the military would announce their intended actions with a loudspeaker and called for the inhabitants to display proof of their citizenship ( known as a " passport @-@ regime " check ) in an effort to root out the fedayeen groups led by <unk> <unk> , a local schoolteacher . The following ultimatum was issued to residents in a village in Shahumyan : 
 Within one hour , all citizens of this village will be required to go through a passport regime . Comrade citizens , we implore you to show no resistance to the MVD . Should you choose to ignore this warning , the MVD will take the strictest measures to defend itself . I repeat , we will use the strictest measures to defend ourselves , the strictest measures . We will be waiting for you at the location of this loudspeaker one hour from now . 
 However , this served only as a pretext as civilians were subjected to grueling interrogations and many were taken out of their homes and beaten . The troops also arrested several adult males , often without any conclusive evidence , who they accused of being members of the militia . Additionally , if there was no response by the villagers to the ultimatum issued by the troops , an artillery barrage was launched above and over the village itself to further intimidate the civilians . 
 After Soviet units completed the operation in the towns , they ordered a full @-@ scale deportation of all resident Armenians in the two towns , <unk> them to Nagorno @-@ Karabakh 's capital , Stepanakert , and later to Armenia proper . Supplanting the previous occupants were Azerbaijani refugees who had fled from Armenia to Azerbaijan during the previous three years of fighting . Initial public outcry denounced the launching of the operation as the Soviet and Azerbaijani governments went on to defend it , stating that the villagers of Shahumyan were providing aid and harboring the militias in their homes . The Armenian government , along with the Soviet media , including Pravda and the <unk> Novosti , condemned the operation and described the acts of violence carried out by the army and OMON as excessive and unnecessary ; the operation continued until the first week of May . 
 = = = Second operation = = = 
 On 7 May , a second operation was conducted by the same units , this time in a town in the northern Armenian town of Voskepar . Under the same pretext as the previous operation , the joint forces entered Armenia with tanks and other armored vehicles , claiming that militia units were staging attacks from that area into Azerbaijan . The operation was conducted in a similar manner but with deadlier results . In addition to the arbitrary arrests of twenty men in towns surrounding Voskepar , a bus carrying thirty Armenian policemen was attacked by elements of the 23rd Division , killing eleven of the officers and arresting the rest . The OMON units also took part in razing and looting the outlying villages around Voskepar . Residents were similarly forced to leave their homes and thus ceded them after signing a form which stated that they were leaving their homes at their own volition . 
 The second operation provoked further anger from the Armenian government , which saw the operation as an encroachment against its sovereignty . Armenia 's president , Levon Ter @-@ Petrosyan claimed that the Soviet government was exacting retribution against his country for not taking part in the All @-@ Union referendum by depopulating the towns . Reacting to media reports of unprovoked atrocities by the OMON , four members of the Russian parliament intervened on behalf of the Armenians , arriving in Voskepar on 15 May . Anatoly <unk> , the leading parliamentary member , secured the return of the captured Armenian policemen as the Soviet forces desisted from continuing out the rest of the operation . In total , five thousand Armenians were deported from Getashen and Martunashen , with an estimated 20 or 30 of them killed . <unk> was killed in fighting with Soviet troops in Getashen . 
 = = Human rights abuses and legality = = 
 Human rights organizations documented a wide number of human rights violations and abuses committed by Soviet and Azerbaijani forces . These included forced deportations of civilians , unlawful killings , torture , kidnapping harassment , rape and the wanton seizure or destruction of property . Despite fierce protests , no measures were taken either to prevent the human rights abuses or to punish the perpetrators . Approximately 17 @,@ 000 Armenians living in twenty @-@ three of Shahumyan 's villages were deported out of the region . 
 Despite fierce protests , no measures were taken either to prevent the human rights abuses or to punish the perpetrators . Approximately 17 @,@ 000 Armenians living in twenty @-@ three of Shahumyan 's villages were deported out of the region . 
 Professor Richard Wilson of Harvard University , who presented a report to the First International Andrei Sakharov Conference , noted that his fact @-@ finding group did not find any " evidence , in spite of diligent enquiry , that anyone recently deported from the village of Getashen left it voluntarily . " The delegation of the International Andrei Sakharov Conference concluded that : 
 Azerbaijani officials , including President of Azerbaijan Ayaz <unk> and the second secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Azerbaijan Victor <unk> , keep on approving these deportations , presenting them as a voluntary resetting of the inhabitants of NKAO . However , we have irrefutable evidence proving that these actions were carried out with a brutal use of force and weaponry , which led to murders , mutilations and the loss of personal property . 
 The final report of the Committee on Human Rights of the Supreme Council of the RSFSR also concluded that the documents signed under the use of force cannot serve as evidence of voluntary departure of residents . The United States Congress ( 17 May 1991 ) and the European Parliament ( 14 March 1991 ) likewise passed resolutions condemning the Operation Ring . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On 4 July , Gorbachev declared that the region was stabilizing , and announced an end to the operation . In both military and strategic terms , Operation Ring was a failure . The aim of disarming the Armenian volunteer groups was never achieved . Despite the presence of the helicopter gunships and armored vehicles , the militiamen managed to elude and evade capture . Ring , however , managed to reinforce the ethnic divide between Armenians and Azerbaijanis , " virtually precluding , according to Michael Croissant " the possibility of further coexistence between the peoples within " Azerbaijan 's borders . Gorbachev and other Soviet officials maintained that Ring was necessary to prevent the region from further deteriorating into chaos and as the militias ' presence contravened the July 1990 presidential decree . According to <unk> , however , the operation 's objectives were impractical and Gorbachev had been misled on the general situation in Karabakh : 
 Evidently Mutalibov had persuaded Gorbachev that there was a powerful partisan army of fedayeen there and that its actions would lead to the secession of Armenian populated territories from Azerbaijan , that they were bandits and that they had to be liquidated . And Gorbachev – it was a great stupidity on his part of course – agreed to this operation . He probably understands now that an operation of that sort was doomed , it was impossible . We see in Chechnya that a war against partisans is an empty undertaking . 
 Armenia fiercely contested the legality of the operation and within two months declared its independence and seceded from the Soviet Union . Within several months , the fighting between Azerbaijan and Armenia worsened and precipitated the open @-@ phased segment of the Nagorno @-@ Karabakh War . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 A series of documentary films titled " Wounds of Karabakh " ( 1994 ) were shot by Bulgarian journalist <unk> <unk> . The documentaries , shot during different phases of the operation Ring , give a detailed account of the events . 
 In June 2006 , the film Destiny ( Armenian : <unk> ; <unk> ) premiered in Yerevan and Stepanakert . The film stars and is written by Gor Vardanyan and is a fictional account of the events revolving around Operation Ring . It cost $ 3 @.@ 8 million to make , the most expensive film ever before in the country , and is the first such film made about the Nagorno @-@ Karabakh War . 
 = McLaren M2B = 
 The McLaren M2B was the McLaren team 's first Formula One racing car , used during the 1966 season . It was conceived in 1965 and preceded by the M2A development car . Designed by Robin Herd , the innovative but problematic Mallite material was used in its construction . The car was powered by Ford and Serenissima engines but both lacked power and suffered from reliability issues . 
 Driven by team founder Bruce McLaren , the M2B had a short Grand Prix career , entering six races and starting only four . It scored the team 's first point at the British Grand Prix and two more points at the United States Grand Prix . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Bruce McLaren Motor Racing was founded in 1964 ; Bruce McLaren was a factory driver for the Cooper motor racing team which competed in Formula One , the highest level of international single @-@ seater competition . For two years the McLaren team had raced in the Tasman Series , a competition for single @-@ seaters that ran during the Formula One world championship off @-@ season , and in various sports car races . Bruce McLaren continued to race in Grands Prix ( i.e. Formula One championship races ) for Cooper , but by 1965 the team 's performances were worsening and so he decided to build his own Formula One car to race the following year . Despite being a skilled engineer himself , McLaren enlisted Robin Herd to design the car . Herd was an aerospace engineer who had previously worked at the National Gas Turbine Establishment ( <unk> ) where he had been involved with the Concorde project . In September 1965 the M2A development car was completed . Powered by a 4 @.@ 5 litre Oldsmobile V8 engine , it was used to test Herd 's design ideas and Firestone 's tyres . With McLaren still employed by Cooper , the McLaren team initially denied that they were building a Formula One competitor , claiming that the M2A was purely a tyre test bed . 
 At the factory in Colnbrook , construction started on at least two M2B chassis , whilst a third was possibly started but not completed . By December 1965 the M2A had completed over 2 @,@ 000 miles ( 3 @,@ 200 km ) of testing and two race engines were ready to be installed in the M2B , Bruce McLaren testing the car at Goodwood Circuit . Also that month , the design team was joined by Herd 's former <unk> colleague Gordon Coppuck ; Coppuck later became chief designer at McLaren . In February 1966 further testing was carried out in California , United States in anticipation of the start of the world championship season in May . 
 = = Design = = 
 The M2B was a mid @-@ engined rear @-@ wheel drive monocoque design , monocoques having been popularised by Lotus 's 25 of 1962 . Influenced by his aerospace experience , Herd built the chassis with Mallite , a material that had originally been designed for internal panelling in aircraft . Mallite is a composite of balsa wood bonded between two sheets of aluminium alloy that is much stiffer than ordinary aluminium alloy , a useful characteristic for a racing car . However , the material proved to be difficult to bend into the curved shapes needed and so , whilst the M2A prototype was made entirely of Mallite except for the steel bulkheads , on the M2B it was utilised only for the inner and upper skins , the remainder being aluminium alloy . Mallite was also complicated to repair after crash damage . Its use did mean though that the chassis was the stiffest then built for an open @-@ cockpit car , with torsional rigidity of nearly 10 @,@ 000 lb · ft ( 13 @,@ 600 N · m ) per degree . Glass @-@ reinforced plastic bodywork covered the nose , cockpit and engine . Fuel was stored in rubber bag tanks situated within the <unk> . 
 Herd 's knowledge of aerodynamics and Bruce McLaren 's experience with Ford 's sports car racing programme combined to spur the team into experimenting with aerodynamic bodywork . The M2A was fitted with a rear wing that produced downforce – downwards pressure on the car and tyres which allows faster cornering – and reduced lap times by three seconds at a test at Zandvoort circuit in November 1965 , two and a half years before the Brabham and Ferrari teams eventually debuted wings in a Grand Prix . The team intended to use the wing on the M2B , but the engine problems that occurred prevented this . 
 The suspension was a conventional wishbone @-@ based arrangement with inboard <unk> springs and dampers at the front and outboard <unk> springs and dampers at the rear . Braking was provided by Girling discs within 13 inches ( 330 mm ) diameter magnesium alloy wheels . The wheelbase measured exactly 8 feet ( <unk> mm ) , and front and rear track was 4 feet 10 inches ( 1473 mm ) and 4 feet 10 @.@ 75 inches ( 1492 mm ) , respectively . 
 For 1966 the Formula One engine capacity limit was increased to 3 @.@ 0 litres from the 1 @.@ 5 litres of the previous five seasons . McLaren considered and discounted British Racing Motors ( BRM ) , Maserati , Coventry Climax and Oldsmobile engines before opting for a Ford V8 engine . This engine was originally designed for the Indianapolis 500 , the premier single @-@ seater oval track race in the United States , and had to be reduced in capacity from 4 @.@ 2 litres to the 3 @.@ 0 litre limit . This choice was partly motivated by the belief that it might bring financial support from Ford , although this never materialised . Ex BMW and Daimler @-@ Benz engineer Klaus von Rucker was initially appointed to carry out the conversion of the engine in England . However , progress was slow so the project was transferred to <unk> Engineering in California , United States , where extensive modifications were made to the internals under the oversight of McLaren 's Gary Knutson . In its 4 @.@ 2 litre form the Ford engine produced 470 bhp and McLaren expected the reduced capacity version to produce about 335 bhp . In fact , it produced 300 bhp in a narrow power band and was further handicapped by its large size and weight ; combined with the gearbox it weighed nearly as much as rival team Brabham 's entire car . In order to allow time to further develop the Ford , McLaren also used a Serenissima <unk> 3 @.@ 0 litre V8 engine for some of the races . This engine produced about 260 bhp and required modifications to be made to the monocoque but was at least relatively light and compact . <unk> and five @-@ speed ZF transaxle gearboxes and a Borg & Beck clutch were employed . 
 The M2B was originally intended to be raced in a green and silver colour scheme designed by Michael Turner . However , short on money , the McLaren team made a financial deal with the makers of the film Grand Prix – a drama that included actual race footage – which involved the car being painted white with a green stripe in order to represent the film 's fictional Japanese " <unk> " team . 
 = = Racing history = = 
 The Ford @-@ powered M2B made its debut driven by McLaren at the world championship season @-@ opening Monaco Grand Prix . There he qualified 10th on the grid and ran as high as sixth but retired after nine laps due to an oil leak . After Monaco McLaren decided " it looks as though we 're going to have to make some fairly drastic moves in the engine room " , and so for the next race in Belgium the Serenissima engine was used . The replacement unit did not provide an immediate solution though , terminally damaging its bearings in practice . With no spare , McLaren was unable to start the race . The team missed the next race in France , but at the British Grand Prix at Brands Hatch the M2B finished sixth to score McLaren 's first championship point . Another non @-@ start resulted when the Serenissima failed again before the Dutch Grand Prix , and the entries for the German and Italian Grands Prix were withdrawn in anticipation of the improved Ford engine being readied . Thus equipped at the United States Grand Prix , McLaren drove to fifth place and two more points . At final event in Mexico , the rear bodywork was cut away to help prevent overheating but the engine failed during the race . McLaren had intended for Chris Amon , who was already racing sports cars for the team , to race a second car but the engine problems prevented this . 
 = = = World Championship results table = = = 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Despite the M2B 's lack of success Herd said of the team , " Everyone was ten times more determined to do better the following year . " On the design of the car he reflected that , " our emphasis tended to be more on the elegance of the chassis structure rather than on the design of a really quick racing car " and that , " we ... tended to go towards technical ingenuity and bullshit rather than <unk> engineering " . Team member and later manager of the organisation Teddy Mayer said , " Our main problems were with the choice of the Ford engine . " Bruce McLaren 's personal secretary and author Eoin Young concurs . The winners of the 1966 drivers ' and constructors ' championships , Jack Brabham and his eponymous team , used a Repco @-@ modified and badged Oldsmobile engine . It produced approximately 290 bhp – less than the Ford – but its light weight and reliability rendered it effective . Despite having used the Oldsmobile in sports racing cars , the McLaren team discounted it . Afterwards , Mayer said , " We considered it , but the kind of modifications which Repco did were well beyond our resources , and I doubt very much if we could have done any more with it than we did with the Indy Ford . " 
 McLaren 's later cars abandoned Mallite in favour of conventional aluminium construction ; the Ford and Serenissima engine also saw no further action . For 1967 BRM engines powered the <unk> and <unk> but it was not until the Cosworth DFV became available in 1968 that McLaren scored their first Formula One wins with the <unk> . Herd stayed on designing all of these cars until he left for Cosworth in 1967 . McLaren have since become one of the most successful teams in Formula One . 
 The M2A was sold on to be used by various private racers in the United Kingdom before being destroyed by fire in 1969 . Sources suggest that three M2B chassis were similarly sold on ; one is awaiting restoration in the United States and another is currently on display at the Donington Grand Prix Exhibition . 
 = Controversies surrounding Grand Theft Auto V = 
 Grand Theft Auto V is an open world , action @-@ adventure video game developed by Rockstar North and published by Rockstar Games . Upon its 17 September 2013 release on PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 , the game generated controversies related to its violence and depiction of women . A mission that requires players to use torture equipment in a hostage interrogation polarised reviewers , who noted its political commentary but felt that the torture sequence was in poor taste . The mission also received criticism from politicians and anti @-@ torture charity groups . The game became subject to widespread online debate over its portrayal of women , particularly in the wake of backlash against GameSpot journalist Carolyn Petit after she claimed the game was <unk> in her review . After Petit 's review webpage received more than 20 @,@ 000 largely negative comments , many journalists defended her right to an opinion and lamented the gaming community 's defensiveness towards criticism . Television personality Karen Gravano and actress Lindsay Lohan have both filed lawsuits against Rockstar in allegation that characters in the game were based on their likenesses . Target 's Australian division pulled the game from their 300 stores following a Change.org petition against depictions of violence of women in the game . 
 = = Depiction of torture = = 
 The mission " By the Book " generated controversy from reviewers and commentators for its depiction of torture . In the mission , protagonist Trevor Philips interrogates a man , Mr K , to extract information about an Azerbaijani fugitive who poses a threat to the FIB . Trevor uses torture equipment ( such as electricity and pliers ) on the restrained man , which players select from a table . Once Mr K provides the FIB with the information , Trevor is asked to kill him , but instead drives him to the airport , providing him an opportunity to escape . While driving Mr K , Trevor monologues about the ineffectiveness of torture , pointing out Mr K 's readiness to supply the FIB with the information without being tortured , and expressing that torture is used as a power play " to assert ourselves " . 
 Reviewers echoed that while the mission served as political commentary on the use of torture by the United States government , its use of torture was in poor taste . IGN 's Keza MacDonald felt the torture sequence " pushed the boundaries of taste " and Polygon 's Chris Plante commented : " The script plays it for laughs . I felt nauseated " . Carolyn Petit of GameSpot felt that placing the torture scene in context with the monologue created a hypocrisy in the mission 's function as a commentary device . In an editorial , Tom Bramwell of Eurogamer discussed whether the political commentary was overshadowed by the violent content and compared the mission to Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 2 's " No Russian " controversy . He said that the close @-@ up camera and quick time events accentuated the sequence 's impact beyond the violence depicted in previous Grand Theft Auto games . Summarising its function as " flawed " , he considered the sequence lacking enough context to justify its violence . 
 Keith Best of Freedom from Torture said that developer Rockstar North " crossed a line " by forcing players into the role of torturer . British Labour Party MP Keith Vaz said he was " astonished " by the mission 's violence , and Alison Sherratt of the Association of Teachers and Lecturers said that parents should be aware of children being exposed to the game because of its realistic graphics and violence . Independent journalist Tom Chick defended the torture sequence , and wrote that unlike the " No Russian " mission or the 2012 film Zero Dark Thirty , the underlying political commentary on torture in " By the Book " necessitated the violent content . Asked about performing the torture sequence , Trevor 's actor Steven Ogg said that he treated it like " just another day at the office " , and was focused more on not making mistakes during filming than the scene 's ethics . In Japanese versions of the game , the torture sequence is censored . 
 = = Portrayal of women = = 
 Some reviewers claim that the game 's portrayal of women is misogynistic . Chris Plante of Polygon felt that the supporting female characters were constructed on stereotypes , and wrote that the game 's " treatment of women is a relic from the current generation " . Todd Martens of the Los Angeles Times considered the satirical portrayals of women uncreative , and added that violent and sexist themes hurt the game experience . Edge noted that while " every female in the game exists solely to be sneered , <unk> or laughed at " , it treated its all @-@ male lead characters in a similar vein through their stereotyped tendencies towards violence . Dave Cook of VG247 reinforced the sentiment that the female characters were constructed on stereotypes in an editorial : " They 're either there to be rescued , shouted at , fucked , to be seen fucking , put up with , killed , heard <unk> away like <unk> on their mobile phones or shopping " . Sam Houser , Rockstar Games co @-@ founder , felt that the development team sometimes overlooked their portrayal of women in Grand Theft Auto games , but that the weight towards male characters " fit with the story we wanted to tell " . 
 In her review , Petit of GameSpot observed misogynistic undertones in the treatment of women as " strippers , prostitutes , long @-@ suffering wives , humourless girlfriends and goofy , new @-@ age feminists " , and felt that the satirical representation of misogyny legitimises it . Her review was met with backlash as users responded with 20 @,@ 000 largely negative comments on the webpage and a Change.org petition for her firing . Petit 's comments and the backlash against them prompted a wider discussion about the role of women in Grand Theft Auto V and the gaming community 's defensiveness towards criticism . Helen Lewis of The Guardian felt Petit 's observations were valid , but were stigmatised by gamers who have become " hyper @-@ sensitive to criticism " . Tom Hoggins of The Telegraph felt that the backlash against Petit was predicated on an audience that has become accustomed to women being " shallow and sidelined " in the game . Rob Fahey of GamesIndustry.biz felt that debate about games ' thematic concerns could become stigmatised if gamers opposed criticism , writing , " This isn 't just about women — it 's robbing every single one of us of the opportunity to have intelligent , interesting discussions about how our medium deals with ..... complex topics ..... It 's frustrating , it 's stupid , and it 's downright boring — and it risks making our games stupid and boring too " . Journalist Tom Bissell agreed with Petit 's " defensible position " , and wrote that gamers respond to game criticism more aggressively than fans of other entertainment mediums . Over a year after publication of her review , Petit stated in her personal blog that the " average straight male player " opposes sociopolitical criticism of video games because Grand Theft Auto V 's satire reinforces their own worldview and " political agenda " . She stated that the prominence of " straight white men " in online forums <unk> women , different ethnic groups and the LGBT community , and that those who attack video game criticism should " put themselves in the shoes of people different from themselves " . 
 In December 2014 , Australian department store Target removed the game from their 300 stores after customers complained about " depictions of violence against women " and a Change.org petition amassed more than 40 @,@ 000 signatures . In a public statement , Target corporate affairs manager Jim Cooper said that the decision was reached following " extensive community and customer concern about the game " . The same week , another division of <unk> , Kmart Australia , also pulled the game off shelves . Take @-@ Two Interactive CEO Strauss Zelnick publicly expressed the company 's disappointment that the game had been pulled from the retailers , and affirmed that he " stands behind our products , the people who create them , and the consumers who play them " . IGN 's Luke Reilly called the Change.org petition " misinformed " , stating that its complaints about incentives for committing sexual violence in the game are untrue . A focal point of the petition claimed players could earn health and money from having sex with strippers and then killing them . While true , it is in no way exclusive to women only , as the effects for killing a prostitute are the same as killing a regular man or woman . The petition drew much criticism and mockery on the internet . Kotaku 's Mark <unk> said that the depiction of women is inherently " problematic " , and that Target were within their rights to refuse to stock the game and were obligated to respond to the petition 's wide support . David Keogh of ABC News ' The Drum felt that Rockstar depends on controversy and were " burned by the fire they voluntarily decided to play with " since the gaming industry is no longer on the margins of popular culture . 
 = = Legal actions = = 
 In October 2013 , hip @-@ hop artist Daz Dillinger issued a cease and desist letter to Rockstar Games and Take Two Interactive for allegedly using two of his songs without authorisation . American television personality Karen Gravano of the reality television programme Mob Wives filed suit against Rockstar Games in February 2014 in allegation that a character in the game is based on her likeness and story and was depicted without her consent . Rockstar filed to dismiss Gravano 's lawsuit in April , and stated that the allegations are foreclosed by the First Amendment . In July , actress Lindsay Lohan also filed a lawsuit , claiming elements in the game were influenced by her image , voice and clothing line without permission . Rockstar responded in court papers that sought a dismissal of the case , saying that the case was frivolous and filed for publicity purposes . 
 = The Splendid Source = 
 " The Splendid Source " is the 19th episode of the eighth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . Directed by Brian Iles and written by Mark Hentemann , the episode originally aired on Fox in the United States on May 16 , 2010 . The episode follows Peter , Joe and Quagmire as they set out on a journey to find the ultimate source of all the world 's dirty jokes . Along the way , the group is reunited with their old friend , Cleveland Brown , while traveling through Stoolbend , Virginia . Their journey becomes much more difficult than expected when they are kidnapped and taken to a remote island . There , they discover a secret society of the world 's greatest geniuses at the center of all the world 's dirty jokes . The plot is based on a short story of the same name written by Richard Matheson and first published in the May 1956 edition of Playboy magazine . 
 The episode was a follow @-@ up to the departure of main character Cleveland Brown , who was removed from Family Guy to become the center of the spin @-@ off The Cleveland Show . Former series writer and cast member Mike Henry returned to the series to provide the voice of Cleveland . The episode also featured the first official crossover between Family Guy and The Cleveland Show , and included cameo appearances by several of The Cleveland Show 's main characters . The episode was first announced at the 2009 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . 
 Critical response to the episode was favorable . Critics praised the episode for its original premise , and its under @-@ reliance on cultural references , but criticized the episode 's plot . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 7 @.@ 59 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Marc Alaimo , Gary Cole , Ioan Gruffudd , Sanaa Lathan , David Lynch , Kevin Michael Richardson and Wally Wingert , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " The Splendid Source " was released on DVD along with ten other episodes from the season on December 13 , 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As Peter and Lois discuss a family trip to Maine , Chris alerts his parents that he has been suspended indefinitely from school for telling an inappropriate joke . <unk> Principal Shephard it will never happen again , Chris reveals that he learned the joke from Quagmire . 
 Peter confronts Quagmire at the Drunken Clam later that day , but he enjoys the joke so much that he accidentally defecates . Quagmire and Joe soon discover that Peter soils his pants every time they tell him the joke , and they try to make him defecate himself repeatedly . Quagmire hires Freddy Krueger from the Nightmare On Elm Street film series to make Peter soil himself in his dreams as well . When Lois berates Peter for soiling the bed , he realizes " when you poop in your dreams , you poop for real . " 
 Tired of Joe and Quagmire 's antics , Peter wears Quagmire 's pants to the bar the next day , discouraging them from making him laugh . Peter asks where Quagmire heard the dirty joke in the first place , and Quagmire reveals that he heard it from Bruce . Locating Bruce at his job at the bowling alley , the group discovers that the joke has been transmitted by a large number of people including Consuela , Dr. Hartman , Mayor Adam West , Angela , Opie , Tom Tucker , Bender from Futurama , Al Harrington , and REO Speedwagon frontman Kevin Cronin . Cronin tells them that he heard the joke from a Virginia bartender . 
 The Griffins , the Swansons , and Quagmire prepare for a road trip , ostensibly for a vacation in Maine . Quagmire distracts Bonnie and Lois as Peter alters course to Virginia instead . The group arrives at a bar in Stoolbend , Virginia , and discover that it was Cleveland who told the bartender the joke . Peter asks Cleveland where he first heard the joke , and Cleveland reveals that a Washington , D.C. , bellhop named Sal Russo told it to him . The group sets out for D.C. with Cleveland in tow . They are attacked by a black car , whose occupants fire guns at them to prevent them from learning the joke 's origin . Joe shoots out one of the car 's tires , causing it to spin out of control and flip onto its roof . The Quahog group arrive at a Washington hotel and locate Sal , who is reluctant to reveal the source of the joke . He races away on a handcart through Washington . Losing track of Sal , they are soon captured by several men in black suits who pistol @-@ whip them until they are unconscious . 
 Kidnapped and thrown on a plane , they land on a remote island . They are led by the men in suits through a jungle wilderness to a large stone temple . The Dean of the Secret Order of Dirty Joke Writers appears from the shadows and leads the group into a large library , where the world 's greatest geniuses study . The Dean explains that the world 's greatest thinkers have come together to create dirty jokes , and distribute them throughout the world by a network of agents like the bellhop . The Dean takes them into a dark room . He reveals that they will not be permitted to leave the island now that they know the source of all the world 's dirty jokes . They are locked in a jail cell . As a diversion , Peter stabs Cleveland with a pencil . When the guard opens the door to investigate , the prisoners escape . They are recaptured by the Dean and his armed guards immediately . As they are about to be shot by the guards , an old man claims he has just written the world 's greatest dirty joke and then suddenly dies . Peter snatches a small piece of paper that the man dropped as he died , containing the joke . The prisoners escape with the joke on a small plane . As they fly over the secret enclave , it is destroyed in a fireball resulting from a burning drapery that Peter had set alight with a candle . Quagmire bemoans that they destroyed the source of all dirty jokes . They quickly realize that as long as there are people there will be dirty jokes . Peter , Joe , Cleveland and Quagmire then fly off into the sunset , before finding out the supposed greatest joke ever written is " Guess what ? Chicken butt ! " Peter doubts that that is really the world 's greatest joke . Cleveland replies , " No , this is ! , " and then stabs Peter with a pencil and requests to be taken to Virginia . 
 In the final scene , Peter introduces footage of an ape scratching himself as a public service announcement from the March of Dimes Foundation . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 First announced at the 2009 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International in San Diego , California on July 25 , 2009 , by future showrunner Mark Hentemann , the episode was directed by Brian Iles , written by Hentemann , and based on a short story by Richard Matheson before the conclusion of the eighth production season . Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum acted as supervising directors of the episode , with Andrew Goldberg and Alex Carter working as staff writers for the episode . The episode saw the fourth re @-@ appearance , the first being an equally brief appearance in " Spies Reminiscent of Us " , the second in " Road to the Multiverse " and the third being " Go Stewie Go " , by former main cast member Mike Henry as the voice of Cleveland Brown . The actor had previously left the role on Family Guy , in order to star as the character in his own spinoff , entitled The Cleveland Show . This episode is also the first crossover with The Cleveland Show , which was created by Family Guy creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane , voice actor Mike Henry , and former animated comedy writer Richard Appel . 
 " The Splendid Source " , along with the eleven other episodes from Family Guy 's eighth season , was released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on December 13 , 2011 . The sets include brief audio commentaries by various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes and animatics , a special mini @-@ feature which discussed the process behind animating " And Then There Were Fewer " , a mini @-@ feature entitled " The Comical Adventures of Family Guy – Brian & Stewie : The Lost Phone Call " , and footage of the Family Guy panel at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . 
 In addition to the regular cast , actor Marc Alaimo , actor Gary Cole , actor Ioan Gruffudd , actress Sanaa Lathan , film director David Lynch , voice actor Kevin Michael Richardson and voice actor Wally Wingert guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Chris Cox , actor Ralph Garman , writer Patrick Meighan , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin , actress Jennifer Tilly , and writer John Viener also made minor appearances . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The dirty joke told through the episode by Glenn Quagmire is taken from a joke the character Marty <unk> told in an episode of Curb Your Enthusiasm . In one of Quagmire 's plots to have Peter soil himself , Quagmire falls asleep and encounters Freddy Krueger , the principal character from the Nightmare on Elm Street series , in a dream and hires him to go into Peter 's dream , and tell the joke to him . The chain of the joke leads to the band REO Speedwagon , and the line " heard it from a friend who ... " from " Take It on the Run " is played , though the scene where the lead singer appears was not voiced by any of their actual members . 
 While tracking down the person who first told the joke , Peter and the gang find Bender , from the Fox / Comedy Central series Futurama , who is shown telling the joke . When Peter , Joe and Quagmire get to Virginia they meet up with Cleveland and his new family from The Cleveland Show . There is a scene where Cleveland chases after the other three guys in the car , which alludes to the opening from What 's Happening ! ! , and uses the music from the show 's opening as well . When the group gets to Washington D.C. , Peter , Joe , Cleveland and Quagmire see the Washington Monument , and next to it appears the Barack Obama Monument , which resembles the Washington monument , but is bigger and is colored black . 
 With the plane , they land on an island which has the source for every dirty joke ever made , the base looks similar to a temple @-@ compound from the 1979 film Apocalypse Now . The base is inhabited with many great minds including Warren Buffett ( who was in a deleted scene on the DVD ) , Bill Gates , and Stephen Hawking where they pass their time writing the world 's dirty jokes . It is shown that the first dead baby joke was written in the era of Ancient Egypt . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a slight improvement over the previous episode , the episode was viewed in 7 @.@ 59 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings , despite airing simultaneously with the season finale of Desperate Housewives on ABC , the season finale of Survivor on CBS and Celebrity Apprentice on NBC . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 8 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating The Simpsons , The Cleveland Show and American Dad ! , in addition to edging out all three shows in total viewership . 
 Reviews of the episode were mostly favorable , calling it " the only show with any sense of mystery . " John Teti of The A.V. Club found the episode to have a " fantastic premise for a Peter Griffin adventure " but went on to state that he gives the episode " points for a strong first half , but I wish that the writers had pushed themselves a little harder to make this one go the distance . " Ramsey Isler of IGN reiterated his own enjoyment of the premise of the episode , but went on to state , " While I can appreciate the point that good comedy does take a certain degree of wit and cleverness , this just wasn 't a very satisfying end to an idea that had so much potential . " In a much more positive review , Jason Hughes of TV Squad praised the underuse of cutaways , going on to note , " Reducing the reliance on cutaways seems to be the continuing trend for the series , and I think it 's a good move [ ... ] It forces smarter writing , and creates a better narrative structure . " 
 = Esham = 
 Esham Attica Smith ( born September 20 , 1973 ) is an American rapper from Detroit , Michigan known for his hallucinogenic style of hip hop which he refers to as " acid rap " . That style of music fuses rock @-@ based beats and lyrics involving subjects such as death , drug use , evil , paranoia and sex . 
 Esham and his brother James Smith ran the biggest @-@ selling independent hip hop label in Detroit , Michigan throughout the 1990s . Their influence spawned an entire subgenre within hip hop that eventually fueled the careers of Kid Rock , Eminem , D12 , Royce Da 5 ' 9' ' , Tech N9ne , ICP and many more . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Born Esham Attica Smith – in Long Island , New York , Esham grew up splitting time between the Seven Mile neighborhood on the East side of Detroit , where he lived with his mother , attending Osborn High School , and lived with his grandmother in New York during summers . He studied piano , guitar , and trombone in high school , and listened to artists such as Sugar Hill Gang , Run @-@ DMC , Ozzy Osbourne and Kiss . Esham began to write original lyrics , and was encouraged by his older brother , James H. Smith , to seriously pursue a career in hip hop . According to Esham , " He felt like I had a dope flow , and he thought I could bring something new to the game , just coming from the city of Detroit . Back then , it wasn 't really a [ rap ] music scene in Detroit . Everybody was just imitating what everybody else was doing . " In the second grade , Esham met Champtown , who was also an aspiring rapper . The two performed together at open mic events Seafood Bay . In one occurrence , Champtown and Esham were forced to rap for a drug dealer at gunpoint . 
 At the age of 16 , Smith released his debut album , Boomin ' Words from Hell , in 1989 . Of the album , Smith stated , " It was the crack era , [ ... ] and that 's where all that really came from . It was all an expression about [ ' <unk> ' 80s drug cartel ] Young Boys Incorporated , Mayor Coleman Young , the city we lived in and just the turmoil that our city was going through at the time . We referred to the streets of Detroit as ' Hell ' on that record . So that 's where my ideas came from . " In 1990 , Esham and James H. Smith founded the independent record label Reel Life Productions , which reissued his debut album with an alternate track listing and artwork . Esham found it difficult to develop a fanbase , because many wrote off the dark content of his lyrics and imagery as shock value , while hip hop fans did not connect to Esham 's albums because of his heavy metal influences . 
 In 1991 , Esham met Joseph Bruce , a member of the group Inner City Posse , who praised Esham and Reel Life Productions , and gave Esham a copy of the group 's EP Dog Beats , beginning the two rappers ' friendship and professional relationship . 
 After releasing two EPs , Erotic Poetry and Homey Don 't Play , Esham completed the double album Judgement Day , and its two volumes , Day and Night were released separately on April 9 , 1992 . In All Music Guide to Hip @-@ Hop , Jason Birchmeier wrote that Judgement Day , Vol . 1 " may not be his most well @-@ crafted work , but it certainly stands as his most inspired work of the ' 90s " , while Vol . 2 " isn 't quite as strong as the first volume , suffering mostly from a number of weak tracks [ ... ] the first volume doesn 't rely quite so much on cheap shock , instead focusing on evocative horror motifs , making Judgement Day , Vol . 2 the less important of the two . " 
 = = = KKKill the Fetus , Closed Casket and Dead Flowerz = = = 
 As a student at Osborn High School , Esham met <unk> , who gave him a three @-@ song demo tape of his music , leading the two to form the group Natas with Esham 's longtime friend , TNT . In 1992 , Esham appeared on Carnival of Carnage , the debut album of Insane Clown Posse , released on October 18 . He produced three tracks and rapped on the album 's final track . In November , Natas released their debut album , Life After Death . Following the release of this album , Esham , Natas and Reel Life Productions were the subject of much controversy when a 17 @-@ year @-@ old fan killed himself while smoking cannabis and playing Russian roulette while listening to Life After Death . In 1993 , Esham released his third solo album , KKKill the Fetus . Jason Birchmeier wrote that " At this point in his career , his rapping has already reached near @-@ peak levels , and his production shows a continued path towards an inventiveness . [ ... ] Never again would Esham be so gritty . " 
 On November 22 , 1994 , Esham released his fourth studio album , Closed Casket . Jason Birchmeier wrote that " most fans taking a chronological approach to his catalog should be fairly numb to Esham 's exploitative shock attempts . Yet if this is one of your first experiences with Esham the Unholy , this album should pack a punch with its dark nature . " In May 1996 , Esham released his fifth studio album , Dead Flowerz . It peaked at # 38 on the Billboard Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart . 
 = = = Gothom Records ( 1997 – 2001 ) = = = 
 In June 1997 , Esham rebranded Reel Life Productions as Gothom Records , and released the album Bruce Wayne : Gothom City 1987 , which charted at # 57 on Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums . Esham later signed a distribution deal with <unk> , a subsidiary of Overture Music , which later became distributed by TVT Records . In June 2001 , Gothom released Kool Keith 's <unk> album , which featured several contributions by Esham , as well as Smith 's eighth album , Tongues , which peaked at # 7 on the Top Independent Albums chart , # 46 on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart and # 195 on the Billboard 200 . In August 2001 , Esham and D12 were kicked off the Warped Tour after members of the group allegedly physically attacked Smith over the lyrics of his song " Chemical <unk> , " which contained a reference to the daughter of D12 member Eminem , who was not present during the tour . 
 = = = Psychopathic Records ( 2002 – 2005 ) = = = 
 In 2002 , Esham signed to Psychopathic Records , releasing the compilation Acid Rain . It was announced that Esham would be moving away from the horror themes of his previous efforts . On November 18 , 2003 , Esham released his ninth studio album , Repentance . It peaked at # 9 on the Top Heatseekers chart , # 10 on the Top Independent Albums chart , and # 71 on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart . Jason Birchmeier wrote that " Repentance is a small step forward for Esham . He seems very confident here , comfortable with himself as an artist [ ... ] when he pulls everything together [ ... ] he makes some of the best music of his long , fruitful , yet largely unacknowledged career . " 
 In 2005 Esham joined forces with Insane Clown Posse and <unk> to release the <unk> <unk> album , Furious . 
 His follow @-@ up album on Psychopathic A @-@ 1 Yola , saw Esham achieving his highest consecutive level of charting success , as it peaked at 176 on the Billboard 200 , his highest selling album on that chart to date , as well as peaking at # 6 on Top Heatseekers , # 12 on the Independent Albums chart , # 23 on the Top Rap Albums chart , and # 48 on the Top R & B chart . Allrovi wrote , " During the course of A @-@ 1 <unk> , Esham takes the form of street hustler , kingpin , vampire , and all sorts of underworld characters , injecting his undiluted personality into each three @-@ to @-@ four @-@ minute sketch . His sonic backdrop remains raw but fresh , drawing an impressive amount of energy out of sparse beats . " 
 Following this release , Esham left Psychopathic in 2005 to relaunch Reel Life / Gothom . 
 Smith released his twelfth studio album , Suspended Animation on August 3 , 2010 , followed by the album DMT Sessions , and a documentary directed by Smith , Death of an Indie Label in 2011 , which was originally announced as a bonus feature on a deluxe edition of DMT Sessions , but was instead uploaded onto Gothom Inc . ' s YouTube channel . The Documentary was released with a soundtrack entitled the same , the LP would feature Seven the General as well as Poe <unk> . Smith was interviewed for the documentary The Untold Story of Detroit Hip @-@ Hop , which is being produced by Detroit rapper Champtown . In 2015 Esham and Insane Clown Posse reconciled their differences and Esham performed at the 2016 Juggalo Day " Ringmaster " Show . With a well reception from the fans Esham was then announced and scheduled to perform at the 2016 <unk> . On July 24 , 2016 Esham announced via social media that he will not perform at any more Gathering of the Juggalos . 
 = = Style = = 
 Esham 's lyrical style , which author Sara Cohen says " utilize [ s ] shocking ( and blatantly over the top ) narratives to give an over @-@ exaggerated , almost cartoon @-@ like version of urban deprivation in Detroit " , was derived from the style of the Geto Boys . Smith 's lyrics have focused on themes such as death , drug use , evil , paranoia and sex , and have included references to Satan . Smith refers to his performance style as " acid rap , " comparing the lyrics to hallucinations induced by LSD . Esham 's style has also been described as horrorcore hip hop . 
 " People were literally scared of my records . There have been so many rumors about me and my records . People got the first album , and they would just make up stories . They 'd get into an accident and be like , ' I got into an accident because I was playing that tape . ' It wasn 't like we helped ourselves when we described what was in people 's heads . It wasn 't to shock people , though , but to get people involved in what we were doing . We had to get peoples ' attention . [ ... ] We said a lot of things that people wanted to say but didn 't say . We talked about a lot of political and social [ issues ] that people didn 't want to talk about . " 
 Following accusations of Satanism , Smith decided that Closed Casket would be the last album to feature such themes , and that he would no longer rap about the Devil . According to Smith , " I 've been able to entertain people for 20 years . I just try to uplift people now . The latest things I do , I 'm trying to get a message out to people , while I 'm entertaining them at the same time . " 
 Esham 's music style has been described as a fusion of hip hop beats and death metal lyrics . Esham defined his style as analogous to " modern day blues [ or ] heavy metal " . Rappers influenced by Esham include Insane Clown Posse , Eminem and Kid Rock . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Boomin ' Words from Hell ( 1989 ) 
 Judgement Day ( 1992 ) 
 KKKill The Fetus ( 1993 ) 
 Closed Casket ( 1994 ) 
 Dead Flowerz ( 1996 ) 
 Bruce Wayne : Gothom City 1987 ( 1997 ) 
 Mail Dominance ( 1999 ) 
 Tongues ( 2001 ) 
 Repentance ( 2003 ) 
 A @-@ 1 Yola ( 2005 ) 
 Sacrificial <unk> ( 2008 ) 
 Suspended Animation ( 2010 ) 
 DMT Sessions ( 2011 ) 
 Venus Fly Trap LP ( 2012 ) 
 Dichotomy ( 2015 ) 
 = Ohio State Route 370 = 
 State Route 370 ( SR 370 ) is 1 @.@ 21 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 95 km ) long north – south state highway in the western part of the U.S. state of Ohio . The highway runs from its southern terminus at the main entrance to John Bryan State Park nearly two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) southeast of Yellow Springs to its northern terminus at SR 343 about 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) east of Yellow Springs . 
 SR 370 was established in the middle of the 1930s . A spur route , it connects John Bryan State Park to the state highway system . This two @-@ lane highway is located in the northern portion of Greene County . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The entire 1 @.@ 21 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 95 km ) length of SR 370 exists within the boundaries of Miami Township in northern Greene County . The highway begins at the main entrance to John Bryan State Park nearly 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) southeast of Yellow Springs . As it travels to the north , SR 370 passes amidst a blend of open fields and woods , with a number of houses appearing alongside the highway . It arrives at its northern terminus where it intersects SR 343 . 
 According to a 2008 survey by the Ohio Department of Transportation , an average of 250 passenger vehicles and 10 commercial vehicles travel the length of SR 370 on a daily basis . This route is not included as a part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 370 was established in 1934 . Throughout its history , SR 370 has served as a spur route off of SR 343 that provides access to John Bryan State Park . When it was first designated , the entirety of the route was a gravel roadway . The highway was paved by 1941 . Since that time , the route has not experienced any changes of major significance . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Miami Township , Greene County . 
 = E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial = 
 E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial is a 1982 American science fiction fantasy film co @-@ produced and directed by Steven Spielberg and written by Melissa Mathison , featuring special effects by Carlo Rambaldi and Dennis Muren , and starring Henry Thomas , Dee Wallace , Robert MacNaughton , Drew Barrymore , Peter Coyote and Pat Welsh as the voice of the title character . It tells the story of Elliott ( Thomas ) , a lonely boy who befriends an extraterrestrial , dubbed " E.T. " ( Welsh ) , who is stranded on Earth . He and his siblings help it return home while attempting to keep it hidden from their mother and the government . 
 The concept for the film was based on an imaginary friend Spielberg created after his parents ' divorce in 1960 . In 1980 , Spielberg met Mathison and developed a new story from the stalled science fiction / horror film project Night Skies . It was shot from September to December 1981 in California on a budget of US $ 10 @.@ 5 million . Unlike most motion pictures , it was shot in rough chronological order , to facilitate convincing emotional performances from the young cast . 
 Released on June 11 , 1982 by Universal Pictures , E.T was a blockbuster , surpassing Star Wars to become the highest @-@ grossing film of all time — a record it held for eleven years until Jurassic Park , another Spielberg @-@ directed film , surpassed it in 1993 . It is the highest @-@ grossing film of the 1980s . Widely regarded as one of the greatest films of all time , critics acclaimed it as a timeless story of friendship , and it ranks as the greatest science fiction film ever made in a Rotten Tomatoes survey . In 1994 , it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . It was re @-@ released in 1985 , and then again in 2002 to celebrate its 20th anniversary , with altered shots and additional scenes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a Californian forest , a group of alien botanists land in a spacecraft , collecting flora samples . When government agents appear on the scene , they flee in their spaceship , leaving one of their own behind in their haste . At a suburban home , a ten @-@ year @-@ old boy named Elliott is trying to spend time with his fifteen @-@ year @-@ old brother , Michael , and his friends . As he returns from picking up a pizza , he discovers that something is hiding in their tool shed . The creature promptly flees upon being discovered . Despite his family 's disbelief , Elliott leaves Reese 's Pieces candy to lure the creature to his bedroom . Before he goes to sleep , he realizes it is imitating his movements . He feigns illness the next morning to stay home from school and play with it . Later that day , Michael and their five @-@ year @-@ old sister , Gertie , meet it . They decide to keep it hidden from their mother , Mary . When they ask it about its origin , it levitates several balls to represent its solar system and then demonstrates its powers by reviving a dead chrysanthemum . 
 At school the next day , Elliott begins to experience a psychic connection with the alien , including exhibiting signs of intoxication ( because it is at his home , drinking beer ) , and he begins freeing all the frogs in his biology class . As the alien watches John Wayne kiss Maureen O 'Hara in The Quiet Man on TV , Elliott kisses a girl he likes . He is then sent to the principal 's office . 
 The alien learns to speak English by repeating what Gertie says as she watches Sesame Street and , at Elliott 's urging , dubs itself " E.T. " He reads a comic strip where Buck Rogers , stranded , calls for help by building a makeshift communication device and is inspired to try it himself . E.T. receives Elliott 's help in building a device to " phone home " by using a Speak & Spell toy . Michael notices that his health is declining and that Elliott is referring to himself as " we . " 
 On Halloween , Michael and Elliott dress E.T. as a ghost so they can sneak him out of the house . Elliott and E.T. ride the former 's bike to the forest , where E.T. makes a successful call home . The next morning , Elliott wakes up in the field , only to find E.T. gone , so he returns home to his distressed family . Michael searches for and finds E.T. dying next to a culvert , being investigated by a raccoon . Michael takes him home to Elliott , who is also dying . Mary becomes frightened when she discovers her son 's illness and the dying E.T. , just as government agents invade the house . Scientists set up a medical facility there , quarantining Elliott and E.T. Their link disappears and E.T. then appears to die while Elliott recovers . A grief @-@ stricken Elliott is left alone with the motionless E.T. when he notices a dead chrysanthemum , the plant E.T. had previously revived , coming back to life . E.T. reanimates and reveals that his people are returning . Elliott and Michael steal a van that E.T. had been loaded into and a chase ensues , with Michael 's friends joining them as they attempt to evade the authorities by bike . Suddenly facing a police roadblock , they escape as E.T. uses telekinesis to lift them into the air and toward the forest . 
 Standing near the spaceship , E.T. ' s heart glows as he prepares to return home . Mary , Gertie , and " Keys , " a government agent , show up . E.T. says goodbye to Michael and Gertie , as she presents him with the chrysanthemum that he had revived . Before boarding the spaceship , he tells Elliott " I 'll be right here , " pointing his glowing finger to his forehead . He then picks up the chrysanthemum , boards the spaceship , and it takes off , leaving a rainbow in the sky as everyone watches it leave . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Henry Thomas as Elliott , a lonely 10 @-@ year @-@ old boy who longs for a good friend , which he finds in E.T. , who was left behind on Earth . He adopts him and they form a mental , physical , and emotional bond . 
 Robert MacNaughton as Michael , Elliott 's football playing 15 @-@ year @-@ old brother who often makes fun of him . He saves E.T. ' s life . 
 Drew Barrymore as Gertie , Elliott 's mischievous 5 @-@ year @-@ old sister who is sarcastic and initially terrified of E.T. but grows to love him . 
 Dee Wallace as Mary , the children 's mother , recently separated from her husband . She is mostly oblivious to E.T. ' s presence in her house . 
 Peter Coyote as " Keys " , a government agent . His face is not shown until the film 's second half , his name is never mentioned , and he is identified by the key rings that prominently hang from his belt . He tells Elliott that he has waited to see an alien since he was 10 . 
 Pat Welsh as the voice of E.T. ( Short for Extra @-@ Terrestrial ) , the friendly , cute , charming , sweet , lovable alien that Elliot adopted and helped to bring him to his home planet . 
 K. C. Martel , Sean Frye and C. Thomas Howell as Michael 's friends Greg , Steve , and Tyler . They help Elliott and E.T. evade the authorities during the film 's climax . 
 Erika <unk> as the young girl Elliott kisses in class . 
 David O 'Dell as Schoolboy 
 Richard <unk> as Science Teacher 
 Frank Toth as Policeman 
 Robert Barton as Ultra Sound Man 
 Michael Darrell as Van Man 
 Having worked with Cary Guffey on Close Encounters of the Third Kind , Spielberg felt confident in working with a cast composed mostly of child actors . For the role of Elliott , he auditioned hundreds of boys before Jack Fisk suggested Henry Thomas for the role because Henry had played the part of Harry in the movie Raggedy Man which Jack Fisk had directed . Thomas , who auditioned in an Indiana Jones costume , did not perform well in the formal testing , but got the filmmakers ' attention in an improvised scene . Thoughts of his dead dog inspired his convincing tears . Robert MacNaughton auditioned eight times to play Michael , sometimes with boys auditioning for Elliott . Spielberg felt Drew Barrymore had the right imagination for mischievous Gertie after she impressed him with a story that she led a punk rock band . He enjoyed working with the children , and he later said that the experience made him feel ready to be a father . 
 The major voice work of E.T. for the film was performed by Pat Welsh , a woman who lived in Marin County , California . She smoked two packets of cigarettes a day , which gave her voice a quality that sound effects creator Ben Burtt liked . She spent nine @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours recording her part , and was paid $ 380 by Burtt for her services . He also recorded 16 other people and various animals to create E.T. ' s " voice " . These included Spielberg , Debra Winger , his sleeping wife , who had a cold , a burp from his USC film professor , raccoons , otters , and horses . 
 Doctors working at the USC Medical Center were recruited to play the ones who try to save E.T. after government agents take over Elliott 's house . Spielberg felt that actors in the roles , performing lines of technical medical dialogue , would come across as unnatural . During post @-@ production , he decided to cut a scene featuring Harrison Ford as the principal at Elliott 's school . It featured his character reprimanding Elliott for his behavior in biology class and warning of the dangers of underage drinking . He is then taken aback as Elliott 's chair rises from the floor , while E.T. is levitating his " phone " equipment up the stairs with Gertie . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 After his parents ' divorce in 1960 , Spielberg filled the void with an imaginary alien companion . He said that the imaginary alien was " a friend who could be the brother I never had and a father that I didn 't feel I had anymore . " During 1978 , he announced he would shoot a film entitled Growing Up , which he would film in 28 days . The project was set aside because of delays on 1941 , but the concept of making a small autobiographical film about childhood would stay with him . He also thought about a follow @-@ up to Close Encounters of the Third Kind , and began to develop a darker project he had planned with John Sayles called Night Skies in which malevolent aliens terrorize a family . 
 Filming Raiders of the Lost Ark in Tunisia left Spielberg bored , and memories of his childhood creation resurfaced . He told screenwriter Melissa Mathison about Night Skies , and developed a subplot from the failed project , in which Buddy , the only friendly alien , befriends an autistic child . His abandonment on Earth in the script 's final scene inspired the E.T. concept . She wrote a first draft titled E.T. and Me in eight weeks , which he considered perfect . The script went through two more drafts , which deleted an " Eddie Haskell " -esque friend of Elliott . The chase sequence was also created , and he also suggested having the scene where E.T. got drunk . Columbia Pictures , which had been producing Night Skies , met him to discuss the script . The studio passed on it , calling it " a wimpy Walt Disney movie " , so he approached the more receptive Sid Sheinberg , president of MCA . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Carlo Rambaldi , who designed the aliens for Close Encounters of the Third Kind , was hired to design the animatronics of E.T. Rambaldi 's own painting Women of Delta led him to give the creature a unique , extendable neck . Its face was inspired by those of Carl Sandburg , Albert Einstein and Ernest Hemingway . Producer Kathleen Kennedy visited the Jules Stein Eye Institute to study real and glass eyes . She hired Institute staffers to create E.T. ' s eyes , which she felt were particularly important in engaging the audience . Four heads were created for filming , one as the main animatronic and the others for facial expressions , as well as a costume . Two dwarfs , Tamara De <unk> and Pat <unk> , as well as 12 @-@ year @-@ old Matthew DeMeritt , who was born without legs , took turns wearing the costume , depending on what scene was being filmed . DeMeritt actually walked on his hands and played all scenes where he walked awkwardly or fell over . The head was placed above that of the actors , and the actors could see through slits in its chest . Caprice Roth , a professional mime , filled prosthetics to play E.T. ' s hands . The puppet was created in three months at the cost of $ 1 @.@ 5 million . Spielberg declared it was " something that only a mother could love . " Mars , Incorporated found E.T. so ugly that they refused to allow M & M 's to be used in the film , believing the creature would frighten children . This allowed The Hershey Company the opportunity to market Reese 's Pieces . Science and technology educator Henry Feinberg created E.T. ' s communicator device . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The film began shooting in September 1981 . The project was filmed under the cover name A Boy 's Life , as Spielberg did not want anyone to discover and plagiarize the plot . The actors had to read the script behind closed doors , and everyone on set had to wear an ID card . The shoot began with two days at a high school in Culver City , and the crew spent the next 11 days moving between locations at Northridge and Tujunga . The next 42 days were spent at Culver City 's Laird International Studios , for the interiors of Elliott 's home . The crew shot at a redwood forest near Crescent City for the production 's last six days . The exterior Halloween scene and the " flying bicycle " chase scenes were filmed in Porter Ranch . Spielberg shot the film in roughly chronological order to achieve convincingly emotional performances from his cast . In the scene in which Michael first encounters E.T. , his appearance caused MacNaughton to jump back and knock down the shelves behind him . The chronological shoot gave the young actors an emotional experience as they bonded with E.T. , making the quarantine sequences more moving . Spielberg ensured the puppeteers were kept away from the set to maintain the illusion of a real alien . For the first time in his career , he did not storyboard most of the film , in order to facilitate spontaneity in the performances . The film was shot so adults , except for Dee Wallace , are never seen from the waist up in its first half , as a tribute to Tex Avery 's cartoons . The shoot was completed in 61 days , four days ahead of schedule . According to Spielberg , the memorable scene where E.T. disguises himself as a stuffed toy in Elliott 's closet was suggested by colleague Robert Zemeckis , after he read a draft of the screenplay that Spielberg had sent him . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Longtime Spielberg collaborator John Williams , who composed the film 's musical score , described the challenge of creating one that would generate sympathy for such an odd @-@ looking creature . As with their previous collaborations , Spielberg liked every theme Williams composed and had it included . Spielberg loved the music for the final chase so much that he edited the sequence to suit it . Williams took a modernist approach , especially with his use of polytonality , which refers to the sound of two different keys played simultaneously . The Lydian mode can also be used in a polytonal way . Williams combined polytonality and the Lydian mode to express a mystic , dreamlike and heroic quality . His theme — emphasizing coloristic instruments such as the harp , piano , celesta , and other keyboards , as well as percussion — suggests E.T. ' s childlike nature and his " machine . " 
 = = = Allegations of plagiarism = = = 
 There were allegations that the film was plagiarized from a 1967 script , The Alien , by Indian Bengali director Satyajit Ray . He stated , " E.T. would not have been possible without my script of The Alien being available throughout the United States in mimeographed copies . " Spielberg denied this claim , stating , " I was a kid in high school when his script was circulating in Hollywood . " Star Weekend Magazine disputes Spielberg 's claim , pointing out that he had graduated from high school in 1965 and began his career as a director in Hollywood in 1969 . Besides it , some believe that an earlier Spielberg film , Close Encounters of the Third Kind , was also inspired by The Alien . Veteran filmmakers Martin Scorsese and Richard Attenborough also pointed out Spielberg 's influences from Ray 's script . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Spielberg drew the story of the film from his parents ' divorce ; Gary Arnold of The Washington Post called it " essentially a spiritual autobiography , a portrait of the filmmaker as a typical suburban kid set apart by an uncommonly fervent , mystical imagination " . References to his childhood occur throughout : Elliott fakes illness by holding a thermometer to the bulb in his lamp while covering his face with a heating pad , a trick frequently employed by the young Spielberg . Michael picking on Elliott echoes Spielberg 's teasing of his younger sisters , and Michael 's evolution from tormentor to protector reflects how Spielberg had to take care of his sisters after their father left . 
 Critics have focused on the parallels between E.T. ' s life and Elliott , who is " alienated " by the loss of his father . A.O. Scott of The New York Times wrote that while E.T. " is the more obvious and desperate foundling " , Elliott " suffers in his own way from the want of a home . " E.T. is the first and last letter of Elliott 's name . At the film 's heart is the theme of growing up . Critic Henry Sheehan described the film as a retelling of Peter Pan from the perspective of a Lost Boy ( Elliott ) : E.T. cannot survive physically on Earth , as Pan could not survive emotionally in Neverland ; government scientists take the place of Neverland 's pirates . Vincent Canby of The New York Times similarly observed that the film " freely recycles elements from [ ... ] Peter Pan and The Wizard of Oz " . Some critics have suggested that Spielberg 's portrayal of suburbia is very dark , contrary to popular belief . According to A.O. Scott , " The suburban milieu , with its unsupervised children and unhappy parents , its broken toys and brand @-@ name junk food , could have come out of a Raymond Carver story . " Charles Taylor of Salon.com wrote , " Spielberg 's movies , despite the way they 're often characterized , are not Hollywood <unk> of families and the suburbs . The homes here bear what the cultural critic <unk> Ann Marling called ' the marks of hard use ' . " 
 Other critics found religious parallels between E.T. and Jesus . Andrew <unk> described E.T. ' s story as " crucifixion by military science " and " resurrection by love and faith " . According to Spielberg , biographer Joseph McBride , Universal Pictures appealed directly to the Christian market , with a poster reminiscent of Michelangelo 's The Creation of Adam and a logo reading " Peace " . Spielberg answered that he did not intend the film to be a religious parable , joking , " If I ever went to my mother and said , ' Mom , I 've made this movie that 's a Christian parable , ' what do you think she 'd say ? She has a Kosher restaurant on Pico and Doheny in Los Angeles . " 
 As a substantial body of film criticism has built up around the film , numerous writers have analyzed it in other ways as well . It has been interpreted as a modern fairy tale and in psychoanalytic terms . Producer Kathleen Kennedy noted that an important theme of E.T. is tolerance , which would be central to future Spielberg films such as Schindler 's List . Having been a loner as a teenager , Spielberg described it as " a minority story " . Spielberg 's characteristic theme of communication is partnered with the ideal of mutual understanding : he has suggested that the story 's central alien @-@ human friendship is an analogy for how real @-@ world adversaries can learn to overcome their differences . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Release and sales = = = 
 The film was previewed in Houston , Texas , where it received high marks from viewers . It premiered at the 1982 Cannes Film Festival 's closing gala , and was released in the United States on June 11 , 1982 . It opened at number one with a gross of $ 11 million , and stayed at the top of the box office for six weeks ; it then fluctuated between the first and second positions until October , before returning to the top spot for the final time in December . 
 In 1983 , E.T. surpassed Star Wars as the highest @-@ grossing film of all @-@ time , and by the end of its theatrical run it had grossed $ 359 million in North America and $ 619 million worldwide . Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold more than 120 million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run . Spielberg earned $ 500 @,@ 000 a day from his share of the profits , while The Hershey Company 's profits rose 65 % due to its prominent use of Reese 's Pieces . The " Official E.T. Fan Club " offered photographs , a newsletter that let readers " relive the film 's unforgettable moments [ and ] favorite scenes " , and a phonographic record with " phone home " and other sound clips . 
 The film was re @-@ released in 1985 and 2002 , earning another $ 60 million and $ 68 million respectively , for a worldwide total of $ 792 million with North America accounting for $ 435 million . It held the global record until it was usurped by Jurassic Park — another Spielberg @-@ directed film — in 1993 , although it managed to hold on to the domestic record for a further four years , where a Star Wars reissue reclaimed it . It was eventually released on VHS and laserdisc on October 27 , 1988 ; to combat piracy , the <unk> and tape hubs on the videocassettes were colored green , the tape itself was affixed with a small , holographic sticker of the 1963 Universal logo ( much like the holograms on a credit card ) , and encoded with <unk> . In North America alone , VHS sales came to $ 75 million . It was released on VHS and Laserdisc again in 1996 . The Laserdisc included a 90 @-@ minute documentary . Produced and directed by Laurent Bouzereau , it included interviews with Spielberg , producer Kathleen Kennedy , composer John Williams and other cast and crew members . It also included two theatrical trailers , an isolated music score , deleted scenes , and still galleries . The VHS included a 10 @-@ minute version of the same documentary from the Laserdisc . 
 The film was the first major one to have been seriously affected by video piracy . The usual account is that the public in some areas were becoming impatient at long delays getting it to their cinemas ; an illegal group realized this , got hold of a copy of it for a night by bribing a projectionist , and made it into a video by projecting it with a sound and video recording device . The resulting video was used as a master to run off very many copies , which were widely sold illegally . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received critical acclaim . Roger Ebert wrote , " This is not simply a good movie . It is one of those movies that brush away our cautions and win our hearts . " He later added it to his Great Movies list , structuring the essay as a letter to his grandchildren about the first time they watched it . Michael Sragow of Rolling Stone called Spielberg " a space age Jean Renoir .... [ F ] or the first time , [ he ] has put his breathtaking technical skills at the service of his deepest feelings " . Derek Malcolm of The Guardian wrote that " E.T. is a superlative piece of popular cinema ... a dream of childhood , brilliantly orchestrated to involve not only children but anyone able to remember being one " . Leonard Maltin would include it in his list of " 100 Must @-@ See Films of the 20th Century " as one of only two movies from the 1980s . George Will was one of the few to pan the film , feeling it spread subversive notions about childhood and science . 
 The film holds a 98 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes , and a Metacritic score of 94 / 100 . In addition to the many impressed critics , President Ronald Reagan and First Lady Nancy Reagan were moved by it after a screening at the White House on June 27 , 1982 . Princess Diana was even in tears after watching it . On September 17 , 1982 , it was screened at the United Nations , and Spielberg received the U.N. Peace Medal . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The film was nominated for nine Oscars at the 55th Academy Awards , including Best Picture . Gandhi won that award , but its director , Richard Attenborough , declared , " I was certain that not only would E.T. win , but that it should win . It was inventive , powerful , [ and ] wonderful . I make more mundane movies . " It won four Academy Awards : Best Original Score , Best Sound ( Robert Knudson , Robert Glass , Don Digirolamo , Gene Cantamessa ) , Best Sound Effects Editing ( Charles L. Campbell and Ben Burtt ) , and Best Visual Effects ( Carlo Rambaldi , Dennis Muren and Kenneth F. Smith ) . 
 At the 40th Golden Globe Awards , the film won Best Picture in the Drama category and Best Score ; it was also nominated for Best Director , Best Screenplay , and Best New Male Star for Henry Thomas . The Los Angeles Film Critics Association awarded the film Best Picture , Best Director , and a " New Generation Award " for Melissa Mathison . 
 The film won Saturn Awards for Best Science Fiction Film , Best Writing , Best Special Effects , Best Music , and Best Poster Art , while Henry Thomas , Robert McNaughton , and Drew Barrymore won Young Artist Awards . In addition to his Golden Globe and Saturn , composer John Williams won two Grammy Awards and a BAFTA for the score . It was also honored abroad : it won the Best Foreign Language Film award at the Blue Ribbon Awards in Japan , Cinema Writers Circle Awards in Spain , César Awards in France , and David di Donatello in Italy . 
 In American Film Institute polls , the film has been voted the 24th greatest film of all time , the 44th most heart @-@ pounding , and the sixth most inspiring . Other AFI polls rated it as having the 14th greatest music score and as the third greatest science @-@ fiction one . The line " E.T. phone home " was ranked 15th on AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes list , and 48th on Premiere 's top movie quote list . The character of Elliott was nominated for AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes & Villains as one of the 50 greatest heroes . In 2005 , it topped a Channel 4 poll of the 100 greatest family ones , and was also listed by Time as one of the 100 best ones ever made . 
 In 2003 , Entertainment Weekly called the film the eighth most " tear @-@ jerking " ; in 2007 , in a survey of both films and television series , the magazine declared it the seventh greatest work of science @-@ fiction media in the past 25 years . The Times also named it as their ninth favorite alien in a film , calling it " one of the best @-@ loved non @-@ humans in popular culture " . It is among the top ten in the BFI list of the 50 films you should see by the age of 14 . In 1994 , it was selected for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry . 
 In 2011 , ABC aired Best in Film : The Greatest Movies of Our Time , revealing the results of a poll of fans conducted by ABC and People magazine : it was selected as the fifth best film of all time and the second best science fiction film . 
 On October 22 , 2012 , Madame Tussauds unveiled wax likenesses of E.T. at six of its international locations . 
 = = 20th anniversary version = = 
 An extended version of the film , including altered special effects , was released on March 22 , 2002 . Certain shots of E.T. had bothered Spielberg since 1982 , as he did not have enough time to perfect the animatronics . Computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) , provided by Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) , was used to modify several shots , including ones of E.T. running in the opening sequence and being spotted in the cornfield . The spaceship 's design was also altered to include more lights . Scenes shot for but not included in the original version were introduced . These included E.T. taking a bath , and Gertie telling Mary that Elliott went to the forest on Halloween . Spielberg did not add the scene featuring Harrison Ford , feeling that would reshape the film too drastically . He became more sensitive about the scene where gun @-@ wielding federal agents confront Elliott and his escaping friends and had them digitally replaced with walkie @-@ talkies . 
 At the premiere , John Williams conducted a live performance of the score . The new release grossed $ 68 million in total , with $ 35 million coming from Canada and the United States . The changes to it , particularly the escape scene , were criticized as political correctness . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wondered , " Remember those guns the feds carried ? Thanks to the miracle of digital , they 're now brandishing walkie @-@ talkies .... Is this what two decades have done to free speech ? " Chris Hewitt of Empire wrote , " The changes are surprisingly low @-@ key ... while ILM 's CGI E.T. is used sparingly as a complement to Carlo Rambaldi 's extraordinary puppet . " South Park ridiculed many of the changes in the 2002 episode " Free Hat " . 
 The two @-@ disc DVD release which followed in October 22 , 2002 contained the original theatrical and 20th Anniversary extended versions of the film . Spielberg personally demanded the release to feature both versions . The features on disc one included an introduction with Steven Spielberg , a 20th Anniversary premiere featurette , John Williams ' performance at the 2002 <unk> and a Space <unk> game . Disc two included a 24 @-@ minute documentary about the 20th Anniversary edition changes , A " Reunion " featurette , a trailer , cast and filmmaker bios , production notes , and the still galleries ported from the 1996 laserdisc set . The two @-@ disc edition , as well as a three @-@ disc collector 's edition containing a " making of " book , a certificate of authenticity , a film cell , and special features that were unavailable on the two @-@ disc edition , were placed in moratorium on December 31 , 2002 . Later , it was re @-@ released on DVD as a single @-@ disc re @-@ issue in 2005 , featuring only the 20th Anniversary version . 
 In a June 2011 interview , Spielberg said that in the future 
 There 's going to be no more digital enhancements or digital additions to anything based on any film I direct .... When people ask me which E.T. they should look at , I always tell them to look at the original 1982 E.T. If you notice , when we did put out E.T. we put out two <unk> We put out the digitally enhanced version with the additional scenes and for no extra money , in the same package , we put out the original ' 82 version . I always tell people to go back to the ' 82 version . 
 = = Other portrayals = = 
 In July 1982 , during the film 's first theatrical run , Spielberg and Mathison wrote a treatment for a sequel to be titled E.T. II : Nocturnal Fears . It would have shown Elliott and his friends getting kidnapped by evil aliens and follow their attempts to contact E.T. for help . Spielberg decided against pursuing it , feeling it " would do nothing but rob the original of its virginity " . 
 Atari , Inc. made a video game based on the film for the Atari 2600 . Released in 1982 , it was widely considered to be one of the worst video games ever made . 
 William <unk> , author of the film 's novelization , wrote a sequel , E.T. : The Book of the Green Planet , which was published in 1985 . In the novel , E.T. returns home to the planet <unk> <unk> , but is subsequently demoted and sent into exile . He then attempts to return to Earth by effectively breaking all of <unk> <unk> 's laws . E.T. Adventure , a theme park ride , debuted at Universal Studios Florida in 1990 . The $ 40 million attraction features the title character saying goodbye to visitors by name . 
 In 1998 , E.T. was licensed to appear in television public service announcements produced by the Progressive Corporation . The announcements featured his voice reminding drivers to " buckle up " their seat belts . Traffic signs depicting a stylized E.T. wearing one were installed on selected roads around the United States . The following year , British Telecommunications launched the " Stay in Touch " campaign , with him as the star of various advertisements . The campaign 's slogan was " B.T. has E.T. " , with " E.T. " also taken to mean " extra technology " . At Spielberg 's suggestion , George Lucas included members of E.T. ' s species as background characters in Star Wars : Episode I – The Phantom Menace ( 1999 ) . 
 E.T. is an upcoming playable character in the crossover video game Lego Dimensions and will include the phone he used . 
 = Electric ( Robyn song ) = 
 " Electric " is a song by Swedish recording artist Robyn from her second studio album My Truth ( 1999 ) . It was released as the album 's lead single on 29 April 1999 by BMG Sweden . Robyn wrote the track in collaboration with its producers Ulf Lindström and Johan Ekhé . The single artwork features the singer wearing a feather headpiece designed by Sebastian Wahl . Musically , " Electric " is an electronic funk song , and the lyrics address unexpected life events that make one feel alive . 
 " Electric " was hailed by music critics as a highlight on My Truth . It achieved commercial success in Sweden , with a peak position of number six on the Sverigetopplistan chart and a gold certification by the Swedish Recording Industry Association ( GLF ) . Though it was initially planned to be serviced internationally , " Electric " and its parent album were never released outside of Sweden due to a dispute between Robyn and her overseas label RCA Records . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Electric " was written by Robyn , Ulf Lindström and Johan Ekhé . Lindström and Ekhé recorded Robyn 's vocals and produced the track at Lifeline Studios in Stockholm , Sweden . Lindström and Patrik Berger played the guitar , while all other instruments as well as mixing were handled by Lindström and Ekhé . Hernan " Boogie " Donoso served as an assistant engineer and Björn Engelmann mastered the song at Cutting Room Studios in Stockholm . " Electric " is an electronic funk song with elements of R & B and reggae music . In a chat room provided by Swedish tabloid newspaper Aftonbladet , Robyn elaborated on the lyrical matter of the song when asked by a fan ; she stated that it is about unexpected events in life , both good and bad , that are " fantastic " and make one feel alive . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Electric " was released on 29 April 1999 in CD format by BMG Sweden , as the lead single for the singer 's second studio effort My Truth ( 1999 ) . Eric Broms photographed the single cover art which features Robyn wearing a feather headpiece designed by Sebastian Wahl . The single release contains both the radio edit and the extended album version , which includes a 90 @-@ second intro . The maxi single includes the radio edit and remixes by Mad Professor , Internal Dread and Berger . RCA Records , Robyn 's international label at the time , planned to release " Electric " in the United States in September 1999 , followed by the album in January 2000 . The label wanted Robyn to re @-@ record portions of the album as certain aspects reflected on the singer 's abortion , a topic deemed unsuitable for the American market and pop radio . When she refused to make alterations , the two parties were unable to reach a compromise and My Truth and its singles were left unreleased outside of Sweden . 
 = = Reception and promotion = = 
 " Electric " received favorable reviews from music critics . While reviewing My Truth , a writer for <unk> particularly commended the single and " Main Thing " . The writer praised the extended intro of " Electric " , calling the first 90 seconds " magical " . John Lucas of AllMusic deemed the single a stand @-@ out and described it as " distinctive " and " minimal " . Aftonbladet 's Per Bjurman praised the electronic funk sound . " Electric " made its debut on the Sverigetopplistan singles chart at number eight on 22 April 1999 . The next week , it ascended to acquire a peak position at number six . It became Robyn 's third top @-@ ten single on the chart , following " Do You Really Want Me ( Show Respect ) " and " Do You Know ( What It Takes ) " . " Electric " stayed in the top @-@ ten for four weeks , and remained on the chart for fourteen weeks in total . On 18 May 1999 , it received a gold certification by the Swedish Recording Industry Association ( GLF ) for sales of 15 @,@ 000 units . The single was placed at number 53 on the chart 's year @-@ end list of 1999 . A music video was made to promote the single . The video is set in a club where Robyn , wearing all @-@ white clothing , is dancing and singing in the centre . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 CD single 
 " Electric " ( radio edit ) – 3 : 46 
 " Electric " ( extended ) – 5 : 09 
 Maxi CD single 
 " Electric " ( radio edit ) – 3 : 46 
 " Electric " ( Mad Professor Shocking mix ) – 5 : 14 
 " Electric " ( Mad Professor High Voltage dub ) – 5 : 18 
 " Electric " ( Rub @-@ A @-@ Dub Roots dub ) – 4 : 41 
 " Electric " ( Patric Berger Alchemist remix ) – 5 : 52 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of " Electric " . 
 Recording 
 Produced , arranged , recorded and mixed at Lifeline Studios ( Stockholm , Sweden ) 
 Mastered at Cutting Room Studios ( Stockholm , Sweden ) 
 Personnel 
 Robyn – songwriting 
 Ulf Lindström – arrangement , guitar , instruments , mixing , production , recording 
 Johan Ekhé – arrangement , instruments , mixing , production , recording 
 Patrik Berger – guitar 
 Hernan " Boogie " Donoso – assistant engineering 
 Björn Engelmann – mastering 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Gerard K. O 'Neill = 
 Gerard Kitchen O 'Neill ( February 6 , 1927 – April 27 , 1992 ) was an American physicist and space activist . As a faculty member of Princeton University , he invented a device called the particle storage ring for high @-@ energy physics experiments . Later , he invented a magnetic launcher called the mass driver . In the 1970s , he developed a plan to build human settlements in outer space , including a space habitat design known as the O 'Neill cylinder . He founded the Space Studies Institute , an organization devoted to funding research into space manufacturing and colonization . 
 O 'Neill began researching high @-@ energy particle physics at Princeton in 1954 , after he received his doctorate from Cornell University . Two years later , he published his theory for a particle storage ring . This invention allowed particle physics experiments at much higher energies than had previously been possible . In 1965 at Stanford University , he performed the first colliding beam physics experiment . 
 While teaching physics at Princeton , O 'Neill became interested in the possibility that humans could survive and live in outer space . He researched and proposed a futuristic idea for human settlement in space , the O 'Neill cylinder , in " The Colonization of Space " , his first paper on the subject . He held a conference on space manufacturing at Princeton in 1975 . Many who became post @-@ Apollo @-@ era space activists attended . O 'Neill built his first mass driver prototype with professor Henry Kolm in 1976 . He considered mass drivers critical for extracting the mineral resources of the Moon and asteroids . His award @-@ winning book The High Frontier : Human Colonies in Space inspired a generation of space exploration advocates . He died of leukemia in 1992 . 
 = = Birth , education , and family life = = 
 O 'Neill was born in Brooklyn , New York on February 6 , 1927 to Edward Gerard O 'Neill , a lawyer , and Dorothy Lewis O 'Neill ( née Kitchen ) . He had no siblings . His family moved to Speculator , New York when his father temporarily retired for health reasons . For high school , O 'Neill attended Newburgh Free Academy in Newburgh , New York . While he was a student there he edited the school newspaper and took a job as a news broadcaster at a local radio station . He graduated in 1944 , during World War II , and enlisted in the United States Navy on his 17th birthday . The Navy trained him as a radar technician , which sparked his interest in science . 
 After he was honorably discharged in 1946 , O 'Neill studied for an undergraduate degree in physics and mathematics at Swarthmore College . As a child he had discussed the possibilities of humans in space with his parents , and in college he enjoyed working on rocket equations . However , he did not see space science as an option for a career path in physics , choosing instead to pursue high @-@ energy physics . In 1950 he graduated with Phi Beta Kappa honors . O 'Neill performed his graduate studies at Cornell University with the help of an Atomic Energy Commission fellowship , and was awarded a Ph.D. in physics in 1954 . 
 O 'Neill married Sylvia Turlington , also a Swarthmore graduate , in June 1950 . They had a son , Roger , and two daughters , Janet and Eleanor , before their marriage ended in divorce in 1966 . 
 One of O 'Neill 's favorite activities was flying . He held instrument certifications in both powered and sailplane flight and held the FAI Diamond Badge , a gliding award . During his first cross @-@ country glider flight in April 1973 , he was assisted on the ground by Renate " Tasha " Steffen . He had met Tasha , who was 21 years younger than him , previously through the YMCA International Club . They were married the day after his flight . They had a son , Edward O 'Neill . 
 = = High @-@ energy physics research = = 
 After graduating from Cornell , O 'Neill accepted a position as an instructor at Princeton University . There he started his research into high @-@ energy particle physics . In 1956 , his second year of teaching , he published a two @-@ page article that theorized that the particles produced by a particle accelerator could be stored for a few seconds in a storage ring . The stored particles could then be directed to collide with another particle beam . This would increase the energy of the particle collision over the previous method , which directed the beam at a fixed target . His ideas were not immediately accepted by the physics community . 
 O 'Neill became an assistant professor at Princeton in 1956 , and was promoted to associate professor in 1959 . He visited Stanford University in 1957 to meet with Professor Wolfgang K. H. Panofsky . This resulted in a collaboration between Princeton and Stanford to build the Colliding Beam Experiment ( <unk> ) . With a US $ 800 @,@ 000 grant from the Office of Naval Research , construction on the first particle storage rings began in 1958 at the Stanford High @-@ Energy Physics Laboratory . He figured out how to capture the particles and , by pumping the air out to produce a vacuum , store them long enough to experiment on them . <unk> stored its first beam on March 28 , 1962 . O 'Neill became a full professor of physics in 1965 . 
 In collaboration with Burton Richter , O 'Neill performed the first colliding beam physics experiment in 1965 . In this experiment , particle beams from the Stanford Linear Accelerator were collected in his storage rings and then directed to collide at an energy of 600 MeV . At the time , this was the highest energy involved in a particle collision . The results proved that the charge of an electron is contained in a volume less than 100 <unk> across . O 'Neill considered his device to be capable of only seconds of storage , but , by creating an even stronger vacuum , others were able to increase this to hours . In 1979 , he , with physicist David C. Cheng , wrote the graduate @-@ level textbook Elementary Particle Physics : An Introduction . He retired from teaching in 1985 , but remained associated with Princeton as professor emeritus until his death . 
 = = Space colonization = = 
 = = = Origin of the idea ( 1969 ) = = = 
 O 'Neill saw great potential in the United States space program , especially the Apollo missions . He applied to the Astronaut Corps after NASA opened it up to civilian scientists in 1966 . Later , when asked why he wanted to go on the Moon missions , he said , " to be alive now and not take part in it seemed terribly myopic " . He was put through NASA 's rigorous mental and physical examinations . During this time he met Brian O 'Leary , also a scientist @-@ astronaut candidate , who became his good friend . O 'Leary was selected for Astronaut Group 6 but O 'Neill was not . 
 O 'Neill became interested in the idea of space colonization in 1969 while he was teaching freshman physics at Princeton University . His students were growing cynical about the benefits of science to humanity because of the controversy surrounding the Vietnam War . To give them something relevant to study , he began using examples from the Apollo program as applications of elementary physics . O 'Neill posed the question during an extra seminar he gave to a few of his students : " Is the surface of a planet really the right place for an expanding technological civilization ? " His students ' research convinced him that the answer was no . 
 O 'Neill was inspired by the papers written by his students . He began to work out the details of a program to build self @-@ supporting space habitats in free space . Among the details was how to provide the inhabitants of a space colony with an Earth @-@ like environment . His students had designed giant pressurized structures , spun up to approximate Earth gravity by centrifugal force . With the population of the colony living on the inner surface of a sphere or cylinder , these structures resembled " inside @-@ out planets " . He found that pairing counter @-@ rotating cylinders would eliminate the need to spin them using rockets . This configuration has since been known as the O 'Neill cylinder . 
 = = = First paper ( 1970 – 1974 ) = = = 
 Looking for an outlet for his ideas , O 'Neill wrote a paper titled " The Colonization of Space " , and for four years attempted to have it published . He submitted it to several journals and magazines , including Scientific American and Science , only to have it rejected by the reviewers . During this time O 'Neill gave lectures on space colonization at Hampshire College , Princeton , and other schools . Many students and staff attending the lectures became enthusiastic about the possibility of living in space . Another outlet for O 'Neill to explore his ideas was with his children ; on walks in the forest they speculated about life in a space colony . His paper finally appeared in the September 1974 issue of Physics Today . In it , he argued that building space colonies would solve several important problems : 
 It is important to realize the enormous power of the space @-@ colonization technique . If we begin to use it soon enough , and if we employ it wisely , at least five of the most serious problems now facing the world can be solved without recourse to repression : bringing every human being up to a living standard now enjoyed only by the most fortunate ; protecting the biosphere from damage caused by transportation and industrial pollution ; finding high quality living space for a world population that is doubling every 35 years ; finding clean , practical energy sources ; preventing overload of Earth 's heat balance . 
 He even explored the possibilities of flying gliders inside a space colony , finding that the enormous volume could support atmospheric thermals . He calculated that humanity could expand on this man @-@ made frontier to 20 @,@ 000 times its population . The initial colonies would be built at the Earth @-@ Moon L4 and L5 Lagrange points . L4 and L5 are stable points in the Solar System where a spacecraft can maintain its position without expending energy . The paper was well received , but many who would begin work on the project had already been introduced to his ideas before it was even published . The paper received a few critical responses . Some questioned the practicality of lifting tens of thousands of people into orbit and his estimates for the production output of initial colonies . 
 While he was waiting for his paper to be published , O 'Neill organized a small two @-@ day conference in May 1974 at Princeton to discuss the possibility of colonizing outer space . The conference , titled First Conference on Space Colonization , was funded by Stewart Brand 's Point Foundation and Princeton University . Among those who attended were Eric Drexler ( at the time a freshman at MIT ) , scientist @-@ astronaut Joe Allen ( from Astronaut Group 6 ) , Freeman Dyson , and science reporter Walter Sullivan . Representatives from NASA also attended and brought estimates of launch costs expected on the planned Space Shuttle . O 'Neill thought of the attendees as " a band of daring radicals " . Sullivan 's article on the conference was published on the front page of The New York Times on May 13 , 1974 . As media coverage grew , O 'Neill was inundated with letters from people who were excited about living in space . To stay in touch with them , O 'Neill began keeping a mailing list and started sending out updates on his progress . A few months later he heard Peter Glaser speak about solar power satellites at NASA 's Goddard Space Flight Center . O 'Neill realized that , by building these satellites , his space colonies could quickly recover the cost of their construction . According to O 'Neill , " the profound difference between this and everything else done in space is the potential of generating large amounts of new wealth " . 
 = = = NASA studies ( 1975 – 1977 ) = = = 
 O 'Neill held a much larger conference the following May titled Princeton University Conference on Space Manufacturing . At this conference more than two dozen speakers presented papers , including Keith and Carolyn Henson from Tucson , Arizona . 
 After the conference Carolyn Henson arranged a meeting between O 'Neill and Arizona Congressman Morris Udall . Udall wrote a letter of support , which he asked the Hensons to publicize , for O 'Neill 's work . The Hensons included his letter in the first issue of the L @-@ 5 Society newsletter , sent to everyone on O 'Neill 's mailing list and those who had signed up at the conference . 
 In June 1975 , O 'Neill led a ten @-@ week study of permanent space habitats at NASA Ames . During the study he was called away to testify on July 23 to the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications . On January 19 , 1976 , he also appeared before the Senate Subcommittee on Aerospace Technology and National Needs . In a presentation titled Solar Power from Satellites , he laid out his case for an Apollo @-@ style program for building power plants in space . He returned to Ames in June 1976 and 1977 to lead studies on space manufacturing . In these studies , NASA developed detailed plans to establish bases on the Moon where space @-@ suited workers would mine the mineral resources needed to build space colonies and solar power satellites . 
 = = = Private funding ( 1977 – 1978 ) = = = 
 Although NASA was supporting his work with grants of up to $ 500 @,@ 000 per year , O 'Neill became frustrated by the bureaucracy and politics inherent in government @-@ funded research . He thought that small privately funded groups could develop space technology faster than government agencies . In 1977 , O 'Neill and his wife Tasha founded the Space Studies Institute , a non @-@ profit organization , at Princeton University . SSI received initial funding of almost $ 100 @,@ 000 from private donors , and in early 1978 began to support basic research into technologies needed for space manufacturing and settlement . 
 One of SSI 's first grants funded the development of the mass driver , a device first proposed by O 'Neill in 1974 . Mass drivers are based on the coilgun design , adapted to accelerate a non @-@ magnetic object . One application O 'Neill proposed for mass drivers was to throw baseball @-@ sized chunks of ore mined from the surface of the Moon into space . Once in space , the ore could be used as raw material for building space colonies and solar power satellites . He took a sabbatical from Princeton to work on mass drivers at MIT . There he served as the Hunsaker Visiting Professor of Aerospace during the 1976 – 77 academic year . At MIT , he , Henry H. Kolm , and a group of student volunteers built their first mass driver prototype . The eight @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) long prototype could apply 33 g ( 320 m / s2 ) of acceleration to an object inserted into it . With financial assistance from SSI , later prototypes improved this to 1 @,@ 800 g ( 18 @,@ 000 m / s2 ) , enough acceleration that a mass driver only 520 feet ( 160 m ) long could launch material off the surface of the Moon . 
 = = = Opposition ( 1977 – 1985 ) = = = 
 In 1977 , O 'Neill saw the peak of interest in space colonization , along with the publication of his first book , The High Frontier . He and his wife were flying between meetings , interviews , and hearings . On October 9 , the CBS program 60 Minutes ran a segment about space colonies . Later they aired responses from the viewers , which included one from Senator William Proxmire , chairman of the Senate Subcommittee responsible for NASA 's budget . His response was , " it 's the best argument yet for chopping NASA 's funding to the bone .... I say not a penny for this nutty fantasy " . He successfully eliminated spending on space colonization research from the budget . In 1978 , Paul <unk> wrote for the L @-@ 5 newsletter , " no one expects Congress to commit us to O 'Neill 's concept of large @-@ scale space habitats ; people in NASA are almost paranoid about the public relations aspects of the idea " . When it became clear that a government funded colonization effort was politically impossible , popular support for O 'Neill 's ideas started to evaporate . 
 Other pressures on O 'Neill 's colonization plan were the high cost of access to Earth orbit and the declining cost of energy . Building solar power stations in space was economically attractive when energy prices spiked during the 1979 oil crisis . When prices dropped in the early 1980s , funding for space solar power research dried up . His plan had also been based on NASA 's estimates for the flight rate and launch cost of the Space Shuttle , numbers that turned out to have been wildly optimistic . His 1977 book quoted a Space Shuttle launch cost of $ 10 million , but in 1981 the subsidized price given to commercial customers started at $ 38 million . Eventual accounting of the full cost of a launch in 1985 raised this as high as $ 180 million per flight . 
 O 'Neill was appointed by United States President Ronald Reagan to the National Commission on Space in 1985 . The commission , led by former NASA administrator Thomas Paine , proposed that the government commit to opening the inner Solar System for human settlement within 50 years . Their report was released in May 1986 , four months after the Space Shuttle Challenger broke up on ascent . 
 = = Writing career = = 
 O 'Neill 's popular science book The High Frontier : Human Colonies in Space ( 1977 ) combined fictional accounts of space settlers with an explanation of his plan to build space colonies . Its publication established him as the spokesman for the space colonization movement . It won the Phi Beta Kappa Award in Science that year , and prompted Swarthmore College to grant him an honorary doctorate . The High Frontier has been translated into five languages and remained in print as of 2008 . 
 His 1981 book 2081 : A Hopeful View of the Human Future was an exercise in <unk> . O 'Neill narrated it as a visitor to Earth from a space colony beyond Pluto . The book explored the effects of technologies he called " drivers of change " on the coming century . Some technologies he described were space colonies , solar power satellites , anti @-@ aging drugs , hydrogen @-@ propelled cars , climate control , and underground magnetic trains . He left the social structure of the 1980s intact , assuming that humanity would remain unchanged even as it expanded into the Solar System . Reviews of 2081 were mixed . New York Times reviewer John Noble Wilford found the book " imagination @-@ stirring " , but Charles Nicol thought the technologies described were unacceptably far @-@ fetched . 
 In his book The Technology Edge , published in 1983 , O 'Neill wrote about economic competition with Japan . He argued that the United States had to develop six industries to compete : <unk> , robotics , genetic engineering , magnetic flight , family aircraft , and space science . He also thought that industrial development was suffering from short @-@ sighted executives , self @-@ interested unions , high taxes , and poor education of Americans . According to reviewer Henry Weil , O 'Neill 's detailed explanations of emerging technologies differentiated the book from others on the subject . 
 = = Entrepreneurial efforts = = 
 O 'Neill founded Geostar Corporation to develop a satellite position determination system for which he was granted a patent in 1982 . The system , primarily intended to track aircraft , was called Radio Determination Satellite Service ( <unk> ) . In April 1983 Geostar applied to the FCC for a license to broadcast from three satellites , which would cover the entire United States . Geostar launched <unk> @-@ 2 into geosynchronous orbit in 1986 . Its transmitter package permanently failed two months later , so Geostar began tests of <unk> by transmitting from other satellites . With his health failing , O 'Neill became less involved with the company at the same time it started to run into trouble . In February 1991 Geostar filed for bankruptcy and its licenses were sold to Motorola for the Iridium satellite constellation project . Although the system was eventually replaced by GPS , O 'Neill made significant advances in the field of position determination . 
 O 'Neill founded O 'Neill Communications in Princeton in 1986 . He introduced his Local Area Wireless Networking , or LAWN , system at the PC Expo in New York in 1989 . The LAWN system allowed two computers to exchange messages over a range of a couple hundred feet at a cost of about $ 500 per node . O 'Neill Communications went out of business in 1993 ; the LAWN technology was sold to <unk> Communications . As of 2008 , <unk> continued to sell a variant of O 'Neill 's LAWN system . 
 On November 18 , 1991 , O 'Neill filed a patent application for a <unk> system . He called the company he wanted to form VSE International , for velocity , silence , and efficiency . However , the concept itself he called Magnetic Flight . The vehicles , instead of running on a pair of tracks , would be elevated using electromagnetic force by a single track within a tube ( permanent magnets in the track , with variable magnets on the vehicle ) , and propelled by electromagnetic forces through tunnels . He estimated the trains could reach speeds of up to 2 @,@ 500 mph ( 4 @,@ 000 km / h ) — about five times faster than a jet airliner — if the air was evacuated from the tunnels . To obtain such speeds , the vehicle would accelerate for the first half of the trip , and then decelerate for the second half of the trip . The acceleration was planned to be a maximum of about one @-@ half of the force of gravity . O 'Neill planned to build a network of stations connected by these tunnels , but he died two years before his first patent on it was granted . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 O 'Neill was diagnosed with leukemia in 1985 . He died on April 27 , 1992 , from complications of the disease at the Sequoia Hospital in Redwood City , California . He was survived by his wife Tasha , his ex @-@ wife Sylvia , and his four children . A sample of his incinerated remains was buried in space . The vial containing his ashes was attached to a Pegasus XL rocket and launched into Earth orbit on April 21 , 1997 . It re @-@ entered the atmosphere in May 2002 . 
 O 'Neill directed his Space Studies Institute to continue their efforts " until people are living and working in space " . After his death , management of SSI was passed to his son Roger and colleague Freeman Dyson . SSI continued to hold conferences every other year to bring together scientists studying space colonization until 2001 . 
 Henry Kolm went on to start <unk> Technology in the 1990s to develop the magnetic transportation technology that O 'Neill had written about . In 2007 , <unk> demonstrated a working magnetic pipeline system to transport phosphate ore in Florida . The system ran at a speed of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) , far slower than the high @-@ speed trains O 'Neill envisioned . 
 All three of the founders of the Space Frontier Foundation , an organization dedicated to opening the space frontier to human settlement , were supporters of O 'Neill 's ideas and had worked with him in various capacities at the Space Studies Institute . One of them , Rick <unk> , describes three men as models for space advocacy : Wernher von Braun , Gerard K. O 'Neill , and Carl Sagan . Von Braun pushed for " projects that ordinary people can be proud of but not participate in " . Sagan wanted to explore the universe from a distance . O 'Neill , with his grand scheme for settlement of the Solar System , emphasized moving ordinary people off the Earth " en masse " . 
 The National Space Society ( NSS ) gives the Gerard K. O 'Neill Memorial Award for Space Settlement Advocacy to individuals noted for their contributions in the area of space settlement . Their contributions can be scientific , legislative , and educational . The award is a trophy cast in the shape of a Bernal sphere . The NSS first bestowed the award in 2007 on lunar entrepreneur and former astronaut Harrison Schmitt . In 2008 , it was given to physicist John Marburger . 
 In fiction , the protagonist of Stephen Baxter 's Manifold : Time names his spaceship the Gerard K. O 'Neill . 
 As of November , 2013 , Gerard O 'Neill 's papers and work are now located in the archives at the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum , Steven F. Udvar @-@ Hazy Center . 
 = = Publications = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( 1977 ) . The High Frontier : Human Colonies in Space . New York : William Morrow & Company . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ 6 . 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( ed . ) ; O 'Leary , Brian ( 1977 ) . Space @-@ Based Manufacturing from <unk> Materials . New York : American Institute of Aeronautics . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 21 @-@ 3 . 
 Cheng , David C. ; O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( 1979 ) . Elementary Particle Physics : An Introduction . Reading , Massachusetts : Addison @-@ Wesley . ISBN 0 @-@ 201 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( 1981 ) . 2081 : A Hopeful View of the Human Future . New York : Simon and Schuster . ISBN 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( 1983 ) . The Technology Edge : Opportunities for America in world competition . New York : Simon and Schuster . ISBN 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 = = = Papers = = = 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( 1954 ) . " Time @-@ of @-@ Flight Measurements on the <unk> Scattering of 14 @.@ 8 @-@ <unk> Neutrons " . Physical Review 95 ( 5 ) : 1235 – 1245 . Bibcode : <unk> ... <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1103 / <unk> 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( April 1956 ) . " Storage @-@ Ring Synchrotron : Device for High @-@ Energy Physics Research " . Physical Review 102 ( 5 ) : 1418 . Bibcode : <unk> .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1103 / <unk> 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( August 1963 ) . " Storage Rings " . Science 141 ( <unk> ) : 679 – 686 . Bibcode : <unk> ... 141 .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1126 / <unk> PMID <unk> . 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( May 1968 ) . " A High @-@ Resolution Orbiting Telescope : New techniques would lead to orbiting an optical telescope 25 times the diameter of Palomar 's " . Science 160 ( <unk> ) : 843 – 847 . Bibcode : <unk> ... 160 .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1126 / <unk> PMID <unk> . 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( September 1974 ) . " The Colonization of Space " . Physics Today 27 ( 9 ) : 32 – 40 . Bibcode : <unk> .... <unk> .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1063 / 1 @.@ <unk> . 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( Fall 1975 ) . " The High Frontier " . <unk> Quarterly ( 7 ) : 6 – 9 . Retrieved 2008 @-@ 08 @-@ 18 . 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( December 5 , 1975 ) . " Space Colonies and Energy Supply to the Earth " . Science 190 ( <unk> ) : 943 – 947 . Bibcode : <unk> ... 190 .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1126 / <unk> 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( October 1976 ) . " Engineering a Space Manufacturing Center " . Astronautics and Aeronautics 14 : 20 – 28 , 36 . Bibcode : <unk> .. 14 ... <unk> . 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( March 1978 ) . " The Low ( Profile ) Road to Space Manufacturing " . Astronautics and Aeronautics 16 ( 3 ) : 18 – 32 . Bibcode : <unk> .. 16 ... 18G . 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ; <unk> , Gerald ; O 'Leary , Brian ( October 1980 ) . " New Routes to Manufacturing in Space " . Astronautics and Aeronautics 18 ( 10 ) : 46 – 51 . Bibcode : <unk> .. 18 ... 46G . 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ; Kolm , Henry H. ( November 1980 ) . " High acceleration mass drivers " . Acta <unk> 7 ( 11 ) : 1229 – 1238 . Bibcode : <unk> ... <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1016 / 0094 @-@ <unk> ( 80 ) <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( 1981 ) . " Where is everybody ? Some new answers " . Nature 294 ( 25 ) : 25 . Bibcode : <unk> ... <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1038 / <unk> . 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( March 1981 ) . " Satellite Air Traffic Control " . Astronautics and Aeronautics 19 ( 3 ) : 27 – 31 . 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( 1981 ) . " Recent developments in mass drivers " . Space manufacturing 4 : 97 – 104 . OCLC <unk> . 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( July 1982 ) . " Satellites Instead " . AOPA Pilot 25 ( 1 ) : 51 – 54 , 59 – 63 . 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ( September 1983 ) . " Geostar " . AOPA Pilot 26 ( 9 ) : 53 – 57 . 
 O 'Neill , Gerard K. ; <unk> , G. E. ( 1988 ) . " Radiation Shielding to Solar Power Satellites : Results of the January 1988 SSI / Princeton Lunar Systems Study " . Lunar Bases 2 : 185 . Bibcode : <unk> .. <unk> . 
 = = Patents = = 
 O 'Neill was granted six patents in total ( two posthumously ) in the areas of global position determination and magnetic levitation . 
 US <unk> Satellite @-@ based vehicle position determining system , granted November 16 , 1982 
 US <unk> Satellite @-@ based position determining and message transfer system with monitoring of link quality , granted May 10 , 1988 
 US <unk> Position determination and message transfer system employing satellites and stored terrain map , granted June 13 , 1989 
 US <unk> Position determination and message transfer system employing satellites and stored terrain map , granted October 23 , 1990 
 US <unk> High speed transport system , granted February 1 , 1994 
 US <unk> High speed transport system , granted July 18 , 1995 
 = Working on a Dream Tour = 
 The Working on a Dream Tour was a concert tour by Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band , which began in April 2009 and ended in November 2009 . It followed the late January 2009 release of the album Working on a Dream . This was the first full E Street Band tour without founding member Danny Federici , who died during the previous tour in 2008 , and the final tour for founding member Clarence Clemons , who died in 2011 . 
 The tour was shorter than a typical Springsteen outing , but for the first time in his career , it placed an emphasis on performing at music festivals , especially in Europe . Even more unlike all his previous tours , the Working on a Dream Tour featured little of his new album . Instead , several trends from the latter stages of the previous year 's Magic Tour were carried forward : a focus on topical content , this time the late @-@ 2000s recession ; a repetition of some of the stage raps and antics ; and most visibly , continuation of a ' signs ' segment , in which audience members would hold up signs requesting rare Springsteen songs or decades @-@ past oldies and the band would stage ( sometimes impromptu ) performances of them . The final leg of the tour often featured another first as Springsteen played one of his classic 1970s or 1980s albums all the way through . Critical reaction to the tour 's shows was generally positive , although the absence of the new material was noted . 
 Max Weinberg was not available for parts of the tour due to his bandleader obligations to The Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien , which was just commencing . His 18 @-@ year @-@ old son , Jay Weinberg , became his replacement for parts or all of a number of shows , to a mostly positive reception from the rest of the band , the audience , and critics . The tour also gave Springsteen a chance to bid farewell to two famous venues he had played many shows at – the Philadelphia Spectrum and New Jersey 's Giants Stadium . 
 The tour was a commercial success , grossing over $ 156 million , being seen by over 1 @.@ 7 million ticket holders , and finishing as the third @-@ highest grossing tour in the world for 2009 even though the tour faced some logistical issues . Ticket sales were botched by Ticketmaster , a situation further exacerbated by revelations of their holding seats back for their secondary market TicketsNow . Before long , legislatures and attorneys general of several states , as well as members of the U.S. Congress and federal regulatory agencies , were weighing in on the matter , with various lawsuits , settlements , and proposed laws as the result . 
 = = Itinerary = = 
 The tour was envisioned by the Springsteen camp as not being " a total marathon " , and was thus considerably shorter than usual for Springsteen , especially in North America , where only 26 stops were planned . It did include a date in Oklahoma , where Springsteen had not played in three decades and where officials at Tulsa 's BOK Center had been trying to lure Springsteen for years . 
 On February 23 , 2009 , it was confirmed that Springsteen would be headlining the Saturday night at Glastonbury festival in June of the same year . Springsteen also signed up for the Pinkpop Festival in the Netherlands and the Bonnaroo Music Festival in the U.S. ; playing such festivals was a departure from his normal routing , and challenged him with audiences that were not pre @-@ selected with his fans . 
 One continuing subplot with the tour 's scheduling was E Street drummer Max Weinberg 's availability vis à vis his job as The Max Weinberg 7 bandleader for Conan O 'Brien , given that during the first half of 2009 Late Night with Conan O 'Brien in New York was ending and The Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien in Los Angeles was beginning . The mid @-@ January announcement that Late Night would continue until February 20 precluded any notion of starting the tour immediately following Springsteen 's appearance at Super Bowl XLIII , in addition to the band feeling that they had just gotten off the Magic Tour and " Wait , let ’ s stop a minute . " Meanwhile , the June 1 start date of The Tonight Show posed problems for Weinberg 's continued presence on the tour . O 'Brien told a Variety reporter at the time of the announcement that he hoped that Weinberg would follow him to Los Angeles and that he also hoped an arrangement could be worked out to let Weinberg go on the road with Springsteen as had been done for past tours . At NBC , the coexistence between the drummer 's two bosses was known as the Weinberg @-@ Springsteen Rule , and was not typically extended to other talent at the network . In a high @-@ profile Rolling Stone cover story interview , Springsteen was vague about the matter : " All I know is this – it 's all gonna work out , one way or another . If people wanna come out and see the E Street Band , they 'll be able to come out and see the E Street Band . " And whether Weinberg would stay with O 'Brien and move or not was a subject of conflicting news reports until O 'Brien confirmed on February 18 that Weinberg and the band were indeed coming with him . A few days later , E Streeter Steven Van Zandt said of Weinberg 's availability for the post @-@ June 1 , European leg : “ We ’ re still figuring that out . We ’ ll see . I think Max will be there for most of it . ... I know he was very much trying to figure it out . ” Weinberg had not missed an E Street Band show since joining the outfit in 1974 , and Van Zandt said that no amount of rehearsal by another drummer could replace Weinberg 's intuitive understanding of Springsteen 's performance gambits . 
 As had been the practice since the Reunion Tour in 1999 , Springsteen and the band began rehearsals at Asbury Park Convention Hall . Beginning on March 11 , some of the Springsteen faithful listened outside closed doors for what songs and arrangements the tour might bring . The presence of Max Weinberg 's 18 @-@ year @-@ old son Jay , a freshman at Stevens Institute of Technology and also a drummer , at rehearsals indicated that he might be the one to replace his father for European leg shows where Tonight Show duties came into play . On one occasion on the Magic Tour , Jay Weinberg had sat in on drums for " Born to Run " . This was confirmed by Springsteen on March 20 , who said that Jay Weinberg would be drumming at a small number of shows during the tour . Springsteen added , " Once again , I want to express my appreciation to Conan O 'Brien , and everyone on his team , for making it possible for Max to continue to do double duty for both us and for him . We promise to return him in one piece . " Van Zandt said , " I ’ ve been avoiding this question for weeks ! Thank God they finally announced it . We already did three days of rehearsals . Jay 's a fantastic drummer . It ’ s in the Weinberg DNA . " 
 By the time the American first leg was well underway , there was speculation of more American dates to come in the late summer and fall , but E Street guitarist Nils Lofgren said that Springsteen and wife Patti Scialfa would make a decision later on . 
 On May 21 , 2009 , while playing at the Izod Center , Springsteen announced he would be playing three dates at next @-@ door Giants Stadium in late September and early October , saying the band would " say goodbye to old Giants Stadium ... Before they bring the wrecking ball , the wrecking crew is coming back ! " The video screens on stage showed a huge banner being hung on the stadium , which was the forerunner of heavy advertising for the shows on local television . They sold out quickly , and two more dates were added , finishing on October 9 . These were scheduled to be the last concerts ever at the stadium . The final show sold out quickly but not the one before it . Subsequent U.S. tour dates in the late summer began to be announced as well , focusing on outdoor amphitheaters in the Northeast . In mid @-@ July , a further extension to the U.S. tour was announced , adding shows in indoor arenas through November . 
 The November 22 , 2009 performance in Buffalo , New York was slated as the tour 's last . After that the E Street Band was expected to take a one to two @-@ year hiatus , while Springsteen worked on another project . 
 The October 26 , 2009 show in Kansas City , Missouri was canceled an hour before its scheduled start time due to the death of Lenny Sullivan , Springsteen 's cousin and assistant road manager for ten years . It was not rescheduled . 
 = = Ticket sales = = 
 Even before any official tour announcement , tickets went on sale in Norway and Sweden . The heavy demand caused a crash in the Scandinavian ticketing system . A similar situation due to heavy demand occurred in Finland with the <unk> ticketing system . 
 On January 27 , 2009 , the day of the Working on a Dream release in the United States , the official announcement of the tour came . 
 On February 1 , 2009 , Springsteen & the E Street Band performed at halftime of Super Bowl XLIII . The following day , February 2 , 2009 , tickets for many of the U.S. shows went on sale . Despite the ongoing global financial crisis of 2008 – 2009 , demand was heavy in a number of areas , both due to Springsteen 's continued popularity and the high visibility from the Super Bowl appearance . Other areas failed to show the ticket fervor of past outings . The pair of shows in both New Jersey and Philadelphia sold out in about an hour . East Coast online sales through Ticketmaster , including the New Jersey ones , were especially troublesome , as many customers endured long waits or were in the middle of a purchasing transaction , only to be hit with screens saying the site was down " due to routine maintenance " . Ticketmaster acknowledged that the technical problem with the sales " wasn 't our finest hour . " Tickets for the New Jersey shows were in limited supply to begin with , as some 27 percent of them were held back from sale by the venue , the record company , Springsteen 's organization , and others . Indeed , for one of the shows Springsteen 's management held back all but 108 of the 1 @,@ 126 seats in the four sections nearest the stage . 
 Frustration became a public outcry when many of Ticketmaster online customers , upon being informed shows were sold out , were directed to TicketsNow , a Ticketmaster @-@ owned site , where tickets were sold on the secondary market at extremely inflated prices . Ticketmaster even pushed fans to TicketsNow even when there were still tickets available for a given show . Bill Pascrell , the member of the U.S. House of Representatives from New Jersey 's 8th congressional district , asked the Federal Trade Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice to investigate the relationship between Ticketmaster and TicketsNow , saying , " I am concerned that the business affiliation between Ticketmaster and TicketsNow may represent a conflict of interest that is detrimental to the average fan . There is a significant potential for abuse when one company is able to monopolize the primary market for a product and also directly manipulate , and profit from , the secondary market . " 
 Springsteen issued a statement on his website where he chastised Ticketmaster and made it clear that he had no affiliation with them ( the venues had the affiliation ) . Springsteen 's organization , as well as record companies and promoters , held back substantial numbers of tickets from public sales and made their supply even tighter , especially for New Jersey shows . On the same day that New Jersey State <unk> Gary <unk> and Wayne DeAngelo called for an inquiry , New Jersey Attorney General Anne Milgram also said that her office and the New Jersey Division of Consumer Affairs would investigate the sale of Springsteen concert tickets amidst a number of complaints . As the matter gained national attention , it became what The Washington Post described as a " public relations nightmare " for Ticketmaster . On February 5 , Ticketmaster issued an " open letter of apology " to Springsteen and his fans , saying that it would no longer link to TicketsNow from Ticketmaster during high @-@ demand sales and promising it would refund customers who inadvertently bought secondary market tickets . Pascrell , whose office received over 1 @,@ 000 complaints on the matter , and Connecticut Attorney General Richard Blumenthal also used the sales tales to indicate concern with the possible merger of Ticketmaster with Live Nation . Springsteen also voiced his objection to the merger , and his comments also gained national attention . 
 On February 23 , 2009 , Ticketmaster agreed to an out @-@ of @-@ court settlement with the New Jersey Attorney General . Ticketmaster agreed to refund payments made to TicketsNow and reduce its visibility , and made some 2 @,@ 000 tickets to the New Jersey shows available to complaints via random lottery , with promises of additional reparations if Springsteen scheduled a third leg to return to the U.S. in the summer . The company was not fined , but did reimburse the Attorney General 's office $ 350 @,@ 000 for investigatory expenses . Over 1 @,@ 800 people qualified for the March 31 lottery , and those that got them eventually picked up their tickets at an amusingly named " Attorney General Will Call Line " before the shows . In March 2009 , Springsteen manager Jon Landau emphasized that Springsteen never directly releases tickets into the secondary market , in the wake of revelations about other artists doing so . In May 2009 – and on the same day that Springsteen would perform at the local Xcel Energy Center – Governor of Minnesota Tim Pawlenty signed into law " the Bruce Springsteen bill " , which forbade online ticket sellers from sending frustrated customers to resale sites that offer inflated @-@ price secondary market tickets . 
 Different but similar Ticketmaster drama occurred on March 20 when tickets went on sale for Springsteen 's two Asbury Park Convention Hall rehearsal shows a few days hence . Dozens of fans said that the Ticketmaster automated lines gave messages that no shows were on sale , while those using the human operator lines were able to make purchases . Ticketmaster denied that anything had gone wrong . 
 The secondary markets ticket saga re @-@ emerged in mid @-@ May during the first leg of the tour when TicketsNow announced they had oversold by some 300 persons the date at Washington , D.C. ' s Verizon Center . TicketsNow offered double refunds and <unk> located tickets to other Springsteen shows , but Springsteen manager Landau was quite unhappy : " We would like our audience to know that this is a problem caused entirely by Ticketmaster and its wholly owned subsidiary TicketsNow . Neither Bruce nor his management have any control whatsoever over these two troubled entities but we deeply resent the abuse of our fans . " 
 When Springsteen 's autumn Giants Stadium shows were announced in late May 2009 , secondary market sellers began advertising steeply marked @-@ up tickets before they went on sale . This caused Attorney General Milgram to file suit against three such sellers for fraudulent behavior , especially given that some of the advertised seat locations did not even exist . On June 1 , Congressman Pascrell announced proposed federal legislation , titled the " BOSS ACT " ( Better Oversight of Secondary Sales and Accountability in Concert Ticketing ) , which would require primary ticket sellers to disclose how many tickets were being held back from sale , prohibit ticket brokers from buying tickets during the first 48 hours on sale , and prohibit primary ticket sellers , promoters , and artists from entering the secondary market . 
 In February 2010 , Ticketmaster reached a settlement with the Federal Trade Commission , which denounced the company 's " deceptive bait @-@ and @-@ switch tactics " regarding phantom tickets , and made reference to an example in which the same 38 tickets to a tour show in Washington were sold and resold 1 @,@ 600 times . Ticketmaster conceded no wrongdoing but agreed to stop the practice ; they also agreed to $ 1 million in refunds for <unk> for secondary market sales via TicketsNow . 
 = = The show = = 
 = = = Planning and rehearsals = = = 
 One idea under early consideration was to include a mini @-@ set at each stop , containing a full performance of one of Springsteen 's classic albums . Van Zandt predicted that they would play most of Working on a Dream during the initial stages of the tour , but what the rest of the show would be was uncertain . If the full album idea did go forward , he thought 1980 's double album The River combined with outtakes from those sessions would make a full show on its own . Nothing came of the full album notion right away ; it would have to wait until the tour 's U.S. third leg to materialize . 
 Per past practice , Springsteen performed a couple of public rehearsal shows at Asbury Park Convention Hall before beginning the tour proper . The eight @-@ minute " Outlaw Pete " from Working on a Dream opened and various other selections from the album were played , but the show generally included patterns and staples of the early Magic Tour and other previous outings . Jay Weinberg did some of the drumming , and the band was augmented by Curtis King and Cindy Mizelle ( both veterans of the Sessions Band Tour ) as additional backing vocalists . 
 = = = North American first leg = = = 
 Once the first leg of the tour proper began at San Jose , California on April 1 , the consistent show opener was " Badlands " – whose ending , or false ending , was framed with a recurrence of the Magic Tour 's question of " Is there anybody alive out there ? " – several things became apparent . Typical shows contained only three songs from Working on a Dream : " Outlaw Pete " ( initially accompanied by a fog machine ) , " Working on a Dream " , and " Kingdom of Days " . This was in stark departure from all previous Springsteen tours , when material from newly released albums was heavily featured . One other recently released Springsteen song , " The Wrestler " , was also included in about half the set lists , although it did not share the new album 's romantic pop style . Of the other Working on a Dream songs , a couple were never attempted in private rehearsal ; some others were rehearsed privately but not publicly ; " This Life " and " Surprise Surprise " did not survive past the first Asbury Park rehearsal show ; " Good Eye " did not survive past the first proper show ; and " My Lucky Day " was played in the first three shows before being dropped . The disappearance of " This Life " and " My Lucky Day " were especially notable , given the former had an elaborate , extended multi @-@ part Beach Boys @-@ style " Ba ba ba " outro section featuring King and Mizelle in its one rehearsal performance , and that the latter was the album 's second single . Nor was the prior album , Magic , given any due , with only " Radio Nowhere " included . Set lists relied mostly upon Springsteen material up through 1984 's Born in the U.S.A. , 2002 's The Rising , and a few scattered selections from other periods . 
 Commenting on the paucity of new material , The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution suggested that the whole production would more accurately be named the <unk> ’ a Blast Tour . The Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette said that " The strange thing ... is that the ' Working on a Dream ' tour no longer seems to be about ' Working on a Dream ' " and suggested that the album was unpopular among many fans and as a result , " Springsteen , always the savvy showman , has chosen not to shove it down anyone 's throat . " Springsteen fans instantly discussed and analyzed setlists as shows happened on the <unk> <unk> website , associated with which Twitter and other sources were used to post , or in some cases crudely broadcast , shows as they happened . E Street bassist Garry Tallent and guitarist Nils Lofgren found themselves amused that fans had complained on the previous Magic Tour of too much new material being played , and were now complaining of too little . Guitarist Steve Van Zandt said that the Working on a Dream songs that were played were " big " songs , so that made up for their lack of number . 
 One theme that was apparent in the show was the ongoing late @-@ 2000s recession . The early part of shows contained a " recession pack " consisting of " Seeds " ( brought back from the 1980s ) , " Johnny 99 " ( elongated with incongruous train " woo @-@ whoo 's " ) , and either " Youngstown " or " The Ghost of Tom Joad " ( both featuring fiery guitar solos from Nils Lofgren ) . Encores began with a rendition of Stephen Foster 's 1850s classic " Hard Times Come Again No More " – which provided one of the few featured spots for King and Mizelle , who otherwise played a lot of tambourine – and later included both of Springsteen 's reunion @-@ era encore epics of American struggle , survival and hope , " Land of Hope and Dreams " and " American Land " . Van Zandt said that the emergence of the recession theme was in part why the concerts did not showcase the Working on a Dream album . One regular moment of optimism , however , was the playing of " Waitin ' on a Sunny Day " from The Rising , with Springsteen holding a microphone down to one or more young children in the front of the pit area to sing along to the chorus on . 
 One holdover from the latter stages of the Magic Tour was the " Build Me a House " stage rap , now located in " Working on a Dream " . Springsteen would say : " We 're not just here to rock the house tonight . We 're going to build a house .... We 're going to use the good news and we 're going to use the bad news . We 've got all the news we need - on this stage and in those seats . " 
 An even more visible holdover was the ' signs ' segment . This would begin when Springsteen collected request signs from the pit audience as an extended introduction to " Raise Your Hand " was played . Once that song completed , Springsteen selected two or three numbers to play from the requests . The first was often a garage rock classic such as " Wild Thing " , " 96 Tears " , or " Mony Mony " or a punk rock staple such as " I Wanna Be Sedated " or " London Calling " . This activity was billed as " Stump the Band " , and led to impromptu arrangements being worked out onstage . Springsteen would sometimes taunt the audience afterwards with declarations that the E Street Band could not be stumped , such as saying in Atlanta 's Philips Arena , " ... this is the greatest bar band in the land , and if they don 't think we know 96 fuckin ' Tears ! " The immediate introduction of the signs segment surprised even E Street guitarist Nils Lofgren , who thought Springsteen would hold it off until later in the tour . The precise degree of challenge in this segment was unclear , as lyrics were often loaded into the teleprompter that Springsteen uses and in some cases the songs had been <unk> earlier . In any case , most of the challenges were to the band 's shared knowledge of British Invasion , Motown , Stax @-@ Volt , and other 1960s material . Springsteen subsequently said , " we started to take unusual requests and do songs that we 'd never played before , just depending on the common memory that the band would have from everyone 's individual playing experience as teenagers . We ended up with a system where we can jump on a lot pretty quick . " Other honored sign requests were usually for Springsteen songs not normally in the set list . 
 Show lengths were generally between 2 hours 30 minutes to 2 hours 45 minutes . Springsteen scheduled his two Philadelphia shows at the soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ demolished Spectrum , commenting that " They don 't make arenas like this anymore " and stating that the smaller size and lack of luxury boxes made the old venue " ideal for rock shows . " The Spectrum had seen Springsteen 's first headlining arena show in 1976 during the Born to Run tours , and now he said they would " fulfill our solemn vow to rock the Spectrum one more time . " Accordingly , the band played local act The <unk> ' 1963 hit " You Can 't Sit Down " among other Philadelphia @-@ related selections . Springsteen voiced similar sentiments about the old @-@ but @-@ still @-@ going Nassau Coliseum , and selected The Soul Survivors ' 1967 hit " Expressway to Your Heart " as a tribute to the nearby Long Island Expressway . 
 Jay Weinberg appeared at a number of shows on the first , North American leg , drumming on anywhere from four songs to half the show . He had been a fan of heavy metal music for much of his life , and in playing with Springsteen he integrated a polyrhythmic approach influenced by metal bands such as Lamb of God , Mastodon , and Slipknot with the E Street drumming style derived from big bands and early rock and roll . He received a very positive reaction from both audiences and reviewers as a spark plug for the band , with his vigorous , long @-@ hair @-@ flying style inviting comparisons to Dave Grohl and his potential for replacing his father drawing allusions to Wally Pipp . Chicago Tribune critic Greg Kot wrote , " All hail Jay Weinberg . ... With [ him drumming ] the band ’ s chemistry was slightly unsettled for the better . ... His fills during ' Radio Nowhere ' kicked the song , and the concert , into a higher gear , and galvanized a band that was starting to pace itself . " Jay Weinberg said " it 's a summer job that anybody would want , " while Max Weinberg said Jay 's segments allowed him a " total out @-@ of @-@ body experience . For the first time in – I 've been with Bruce for 35 years – I 've been able to go out in the audience and enjoy a Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band concert . " Jay Weinberg played his first full show on May 14 at the Times Union Center in Albany , New York , as Max Weinberg was in California to prepare test runs for The Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien start . Springsteen said of the occasion , “ This is the first night in 35 years that somebody else sat at the drums . ” Overall , Modern Drummer magazine 's editor said that a college freshman playing on one of the year 's biggest rock tours was " certainly a unique story " . For the final Meadowlands Arena shows of the first leg , Jay Weinberg did the first but his father took a red @-@ eye flight back from Los Angeles to do the second . 
 = = = Western European second leg = = = 
 Once the show moved into its European second leg , more Working on a Dream songs began to sporadically appear , with " My Lucky Day " becoming a regular for a while and " Queen of the Supermarket " getting its first airing anywhere . For Scandinavian shows , as band members walked on stage , Lofgren opened with solo accordion performances of local summer @-@ themed specialties , " <unk> <unk> " in Sweden and " Du skal <unk> <unk> bort <unk> " in Norway . Jay Weinberg did the first seven shows , as his father was now beginning The Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien . 
 Springsteen and the band returned to the U.S. to make their first @-@ ever appearance at the Bonnaroo Music Festival , as the headlining act on June 13 , 2009 . Playing before festival audiences who were not guaranteed to be fans of his music was largely new to Springsteen , but after a slow start the show captured over most of the Bonnaroo audience . The following night , Springsteen joined the recently reunited and headlining Phish for three songs , " Mustang Sally " , " Bobby Jean " , and " Glory Days " . Phish guitarist Trey Anastasio said later , " I got to play with Bruce . That 's my hero . " The Bonnaroo performance of " Outlaw Pete " was included on a Fuse TV show of festival highlights , and the performance of " Tenth Avenue Freeze @-@ Out " included a bit with Triumph , the Insult Comic Dog singing along that was included on a Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien segment . Springsteen subsequently reflected , " We played festivals for the very first time on this tour , and that was one of the greatest experiences of all of them . That was an eye @-@ opener . When we played Glastonbury [ ... ] you come out and there 's like 100 @,@ 000 kids in their 20s and under . It was fun playing on bills with other bands , and it 's something I 'd do again in the future . " 
 On June 25 , Max Weinberg departed The Tonight Show temporarily for four weeks to join the band for the resumption of its Western European leg , via a comedy bit that had his drum riser turn into a float that took him outside and studio and purportedly to the airport . During this stretch , Jay Weinberg did not appear during any of the shows until reappearing during the Spanish shows at the end of the leg . While Springsteen 's wife Scialfa was nowhere to be seen in Europe , their son Evan appeared and played guitar during encores of a number of shows , while Clarence Clemons ' nephew Jake also made playing appearances and Springsteen 's mother and aunt also took the stage . 
 He also was the headliner of the Festival des <unk> <unk> in Brittany , France in July , his only tour stop in France . His son Evan participated in the concert , playing guitar . 
 Lofgren continued to open shows , playing national songs on accordion . Set lists further loosened , with many tour premieres showing up in request slots or elsewhere and shows sometimes running to 30 songs in length . After a while , the encore break was disposed with and the show ran continuously to the end without the band ever leaving the stage . Springsteen ran past local curfews at both Dublin shows and at Glastonbury . The Dublin violations resulted in a potential € 50 @,@ 000 fine , but Springsteen mocked the prospect by on @-@ staging a bit : “ We have to go , we have a curfew ! ” with Van Zandt replying , “ We don 't care about the curfew , this is the curfew breaking Boss and E Street Band ! " " American Skin ( 41 Shots ) " made unexpected appearances in Dublin and at several stops in Italy , while " My City of Ruins " was played at Stadio Olimpico in Rome in honor of the victims of the 2009 L 'Aquila earthquake . The Western European leg ended with five shows in Spain , at more out @-@ of @-@ the @-@ way locations than in the past . The last of these shows , at the Auditorio Monte do Gozo in Santiago de Compostela , was marred by disorganized security and overbooking by the promoter , leaving some of the approximately 40 @,@ 000 ticket holders unable to get in . ( Dozens of complaints against the promoter were filed to police , city , and consumer authorities the following day . ) In any event , the band played " Rockin ' All Over the World " and concluded its encore with " Born in the U.S.A. " after 1 a.m. local time ( the Spanish shows did not begin until 10 p.m. ) . Max Weinberg immediately flew back to Los Angeles and resumed his role on The Tonight Show later that same day . 
 = = = U.S. third leg = = = 
 The American third leg began in mid @-@ August with shows at outdoor amphitheaters as well as indoor arenas . Shows were often scheduled for weekends , to allow Max Weinberg to play without missing any Tonight Show time ; Jay Weinberg played those shows held during the week . Then on September 25 , Max Weinberg took a two @-@ month absence from the television show , to join Springsteen for the final portion of the leg . Ticket sales were slower than normal on this leg , partly due to Ticketmaster 's new " paperless ticketing " system that may have come into effect due to the earlier problems with Springsteen sales . In arenas that did not sell well , management relocated the people who bought tickets behind the stage to other sections and put up the screen used for stadium and amphitheater shows behind the stage . In a hint to fans to buy up , Van Zandt said , “ You never know . This could be the last tour . We do every show like it ’ s our last show anyway . ” In any case , by September 2009 the tour had sold over two million tickets overall . Even some shows in Philadelphia , long a Springsteen bastion , were not sold out . 
 During the U.S. third leg , it was reported that Born to Run would be featured in its entirety during several shows , possibly in a scheme to boost ticket sales . The full @-@ album idea took fruition with the late September @-@ early October set of five shows at Giants Stadium , which would be the final concerts ever in that venue in Springsteen 's home state . Born to Run was played at two shows , Darkness on the Edge of Town at one show , and Born in the U.S.A. at two shows . Springsteen later said of the full album idea , " We had done so many shows and were going to come back around one more time , so we were like , ' OK , what can we do that we haven 't done ? Let 's try to play some of the albums . ' There were some people who were starting to do it , it sounded like a good idea , and my audience fundamentally experienced all my music in album form . People took Born to Run home and played it start to finish 100 times ; they didn 't slip on a cut in the middle . And we made albums – we took a long time , and we built them to last . ... Those records are packed with songs that have lasted 30 – 35 years . It simply was a way to revitalize the show and do something appealing and fun for the fans , but it ended up being a much bigger emotional experience than I thought it would be . " 
 The Giants Stadium shows were opened with a new Springsteen song written for the occasion , " Wrecking Ball " , written from the point of view of the stadium itself : “ I was raised out of steel here in the swamps of Jersey , some misty years ago ... ” The stand featured several other new touches as well , including Springsteen crowd surfing during " Hungry Heart " , evocative behind @-@ the @-@ stage upper @-@ level lighting during " The Rising " , and fireworks at the " E ! Street ! Band ! " conclusion of " American Land " . The final show , which drew nearly 60 @,@ 000 people , concluded with the second playing on the stand of " Jersey Girl " , dedicated to “ all the crew and staff that ’ s worked all these years at Giants Stadium . ” 
 The full album versions continued , as well as a localized rendition of " Wrecking Ball " , at Springsteen 's four shows to close out the Philadelphia Spectrum as well ; some 43 different songs were playing during the stand . Apart from the album playings , Springsteen kept setlists flexible during the third leg ; sign requests continued , as in Springsteen 's words they allowed " the fans to have input into the show in a way that just pumps the blood into everything and enlivens the evening . " Born to Run remained the standard full album choice for the rest of the tour , but the two shows at New York 's Madison Square Garden saw The Wild , the Innocent & the E Street Shuffle and The River , with the latter 's 20 @-@ song length dominating the setlist . Springsteen felt The River show succeeded , saying " I sequenced [ the album ] to feel like a live show , so you have four fast songs and a couple of ballads . It played real well when we went to play it . " 
 Springsteen 's show on November 13 , 2009 at The Palace of Auburn Hills outside Detroit , Michigan became well known for Springsteen 's multiple statements to the crowd about being in Ohio , the first as he came on , the second during the lyric to " Wrecking Ball " , and the third in the " Build me a house " rap during " Working on a Dream " . ( The band had played in Cleveland , Ohio , three nights earlier . ) By now getting some boos from the crowd , guitarist Van Zandt , who had hoped Springsteen would stop making the mistake on his own , finally went over to Springsteen and corrected him : " ‘ You don ’ t realize it , but you ’ re saying Ohio and we ’ re in Michigan . ’ He was like ‘ What ! ? ’ " Springsteen then told the crowd that he had committed " every front man 's nightmare , " and made a show of saying " Michigan " from then on . The Spinal Tap @-@ esque blunder attracted worldwide television and print publicity . ( The show subsequently featured a rare performance of Bob Seger 's " Ramblin ' Gamblin ' Man " , appealing to Seger 's fan base in Detroit . ) Springsteen made joking references to being in Ohio , or made exaggerated statements as to being in the correct state , in subsequent shows . 
 During the final stretch of the tour , the final encores of many shows presented a long , rousing , ebullient rendition of Jackie Wilson 's classic " ( Your Love Keeps Lifting Me ) Higher and Higher " . Showcasing featured vocals from Cindy Mizelle or Curtis King and trumpet solos from Curt Ramm , the song stretched to eight minutes with key changes , reprises , and walks through the pit area by Springsteen and the singers , and became recognized as one of the highpoints of the entire tour . Springsteen dispelled any notion of this being the final E Street Band show or the last for a long time ; in an interview near the end of the tour he said , " We 're playing to an audience now that will outlive us . But at the same time the band is very , very powerful right now . And part of the reason it 's powerful is that it 's carrying a lot of very strong cumulative history . You come and you see 35 years of a speeding train going down the track , and you 're gonna get to be on the front end of it . We look forward to many , many more years of touring and playing and enjoying it . " 
 The tour concluded with the November 22 , 2009 , show at HSBC Arena in Buffalo , New York . Fans came from far away and the show dominated the feel of the city that day . The full album played was Springsteen 's first , Greetings from Asbury Park , N.J. , which he wryly said " was the miracle . This was the record that took everything from way below zero to ... one . " The performance of it was dedicated to his first manager and producer , Mike Appel , who was present in the audience , and featured quite rare renditions of " Mary Queen of Arkansas " and ( the first ever with the E Street Band ) " The Angel " . Other rarities peppered the 34 @-@ song , nearly 3 ½ -hour night , including Chuck Willis 's " ( I Don 't Want to ) Hang Up My Rock and Roll Shoes " and , to mark Steven Van Zandt 's birthday , totally obscure outtake " Restless Nights " ( supposedly Van Zandt 's favorite Springsteen song ) and a now @-@ unusual second song from the current album , " Surprise Surprise " . Near the end he said , " So we 're gonna say goodbye , but just for a little while ... a very little while ... " The tour finished not with the emotional statement in song that some other Springsteen tours have in the 2000s , but instead with John Fogerty 's " Rockin ' All Over the World " . 
 = = Critical and commercial reception = = 
 Newspaper reviews of the show often commented on the high level of energy and stamina the nearly 60 @-@ year @-@ old Springsteen brought to the concerts . The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution and the Chicago Tribune favorably compared Springsteen to the rest of the band in this regard , saying " Some of the guys in the band look their age " and " they lack the physicality , the sustained urgency of their prime . " 
 The Philadelphia Inquirer and the San Jose Mercury News both commented on the fundamental problem that Springsteen seemed to be facing on the tour . The former said " Bruce Springsteen may well have miscalculated earlier this year when he released Working on a Dream , one of the most hopeful and downright happy sounding albums of his career just as a cratering economy was rendering the songs of struggle and strife that are his stock in trade more resonant than they have sounded in years . " The latter said , " As Don Rumsfeld might say , you don 't go on tour with the album you wish you had , you go on tour with the album you 've got . So Springsteen faces the tough task of hyping a new romantic pop record while simultaneously offering hope and support to a wounded nation – not an easy task . " Rolling Stone voiced a similar theory . Chicago Tribune critic Greg Kot wrote that " If there was a disappointment , it was that Springsteen didn ’ t make a stronger case for his latest album , Working on a Dream . I ’ m not a fan of the album , but I always look forward to how the singer reinvents his studio work on the stage . In this case , however , he barely touched the new material ... " Views on one , the early @-@ in @-@ show , eight @-@ minute " Outlaw Pete " – one of the few new material centerpieces – varied considerably . 
 The San Jose Mercury News and the Connecticut Post both gave the show a mixed review , with the former saying it was " decidedly subpar " and latter saying " the concert itself wasn 't as captivating as past visits to the state . " The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution and The Philadelphia Inquirer were unreserved in their praise , with the former saying Springsteen " deliver [ ed ] a show that proves boomer @-@ oriented rock ' n ' roll can still tear it up " and the latter saying Springsteen adapted to circumstances " with an altered game plan that wisely plays to his strengths " . The Greensboro , North Carolina News & Record said that " Springsteen and the E Street Band were received like conquering heroes during an exhilarating three @-@ hour show that repeatedly drove the adoring , near @-@ sellout crowd into fist @-@ thrusting , sing @-@ along frenzies . " The Globe and Mail said of the tour 's sole Canadian show , " an evening with Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band still ranks as the epitome of the rock concert experience . " Rolling Stone said of the first leg 's concluding New Jersey shows , " Springsteen tours don ’ t usually hit highs like this until the end , but the band has essentially been on the road since September of 2007 . " 
 Of the European shows , critical reaction was generally quite favorable . The Irish Times said Springsteen showing no signs of age as he neared his 60th birthday , despite taking a spill during his stage antics in rainy Dublin , and remarked upon how " a set that features so many songs about the toughness of life ... can be delivered with such extraordinary verve that by the time you leave , you ’ re very glad to be alive . " The Independent echoed the sentiment in reviewing the Hyde Park show , writing that he showed " the vigour of a frontman a third of his age " and that " Springsteen 's intensity was staggering from first powerful vocal to final thrashed @-@ out chord . " The Bath Chronicle saluted Springsteen 's performance at Glastonbury , saying " As all the tickets were sold before Springsteen was even confirmed on the bill , he must have known he was facing something very rare for him – the musical equivalent of a sporting ' away match ' where not everyone was necessarily a worshipper at the altar of Bruce . " They concluded that Springsteen gave " a performance of passion , exuberance , exhilaration and musical majesty " while sticking with his standard tour set list and not resorting to playing many of his better @-@ known hits . 
 Of the final Giants Stadium stand , the New York Daily News said that " Wrecking Ball " was " a rousing declaration of defiance in the face of destruction , " and overall said that " Once again , this proved [ Springsteen ] to be one of the few performers charismatic enough , and anthemic enough , to use the stadium scale to his advantage . " Entertainment Weekly called " Wrecking Ball " " an inspiring start to another of the marathon three @-@ hour shows Springsteen still manages to put on night after night . " The New York Times said of the full performance of Born in the U.S.A. that " Springsteen sang with deeper nuance ... the songs have not faded . " Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune said that while during the first leg of the tour the band had " appeared to be running on fumes " , the Born to Run album performance was " easily the best Springsteen show with the E Streeters I 'd seen since the ' 80s . " 
 Looking back on the tour as a whole , and in combination with the preceding Magic Tour , Billboard magazine cover story stated that " Even for an artist who has largely built his career on epic shows , Springsteen and the E Streeters have managed to find yet another gear at this stage in their legendary career . " Springsteen himself said , " With the end of these shows , we 're coming to the end of a decade @-@ long project that really was a tremendous renewal of the power , the strength and the service that our band hopefully provides . " Springsteen also touted the quality of the shows : " I believe if you come and see us now you 're seeing the best E Street Band that 's ever played . " Specific shows from the tour were named as among the best concerts of 2009 by Spin magazine , The Philadelphia Inquirer , the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette , and the Chicago Tribune . 
 Springsteen himself remained quite interested in his and the band 's commercial fortunes . He said before the tour 's start that remaining popular had been one of his motivations for the Super Bowl appearance : " I 've said no for about 10 years or however long they 've been asking , but , I tell you , we played on the last tour and there were some empty seats here and there and , well , there shouldn 't be any empty seats at an E Street Band show . I hold pride that we remain one of the great wonders of the world ... so sometimes you got to remind people a little bit . " 
 Through September 2009 , the Working on a Dream Tour was in the top five in grosses of 2009 tours worldwide , alongside the U2 360 ° Tour , Coldplay 's Viva la Vida Tour , and AC / DC 's Black Ice Tour . For all of 2009 , the Working on a Dream Tour was the third @-@ highest grossing tour , trailing only U2 360 ° and Madonna 's Sticky & Sweet Tour . It grossed over $ 156 million , was seen by over 1 @.@ 7 million ticket holders , and sold out 42 of 72 non @-@ festival shows . Unlike the past Magic and Devils & Dust Tours , the Working on a Dream Tour failed to win any Billboard Touring Awards . The tour completed a busy ten years on the road for Springsteen , who ranked fourth among pop artists for the decade in terms of total touring grosses . 
 = = Broadcasts and recordings = = 
 Several of the tour 's festival appearances aired on television or radio during 2009 . 
 One song 's worth of the June 13 Bonnaroo Music Festival appearance , " Outlaw Pete " , made it into a U.S. packaged broadcast of festival highlights for television , " The Best of Bonnaroo 2009 " , that appeared on Fuse TV on June 20 . The performance of that song subsequently appeared on a Live From Bonnaroo 2009 DVD . 
 Portions of the June 27 Glastonbury Festival performance were aired live on BBC Two television and BBC 6 Music radio . A number of fans complained that the full set had not been shown by the BBC , which in turn said the set had been too long to broadcast in its entirety . Televised highlights were later shown on BBC Four and BBC HD . 
 In conjunction with the Fourth of July holiday in the U.S. , E Street Radio featured 45 minutes from the July 3 Frankfurt Commerzbank Arena show . 
 In the U.S. , the Hard Rock Calling Hyde Park appearance was included in an August 21 broadcast on the VH1 , VH1 Classic , and Palladia cable channels ; seven Springsteen and E Street Band performances , including " London Calling " to open the program , were included in amongst other artists ' performances . 
 Several shows were filmed , but at the tour 's conclusion no decisions had been made about whether to release them on DVD or other media . Then in June 2010 , London Calling : Live in Hyde Park was released : a 163 @-@ minute , near @-@ complete Blu @-@ ray / DVD accounting of the named show . 
 = = Shows = = 
 = = Cancelled shows = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The E Street Band 
 Bruce Springsteen – lead vocals , lead guitar , rhythm guitar , acoustic guitar , harmonica 
 Roy Bittan – piano , synthesizer , accordion 
 Clarence Clemons – tenor saxophone , baritone saxophone , percussion , pennywhistle , piccolo , harmonica , whistling , background vocals 
 Nils Lofgren – rhythm guitar , lead guitar , pedal steel guitar , acoustic guitar , accordion , background vocals 
 Patti Scialfa – background vocals , some duet vocals , acoustic guitar , occasional tambourine 
 Garry Tallent – bass guitar , rare background vocals , rare tuba 
 Steven Van Zandt – rhythm guitar , lead guitar , mandolin , acoustic guitar , background vocals , occasional featured lead vocal 
 Max Weinberg – drums , rare tambourine 
 Charles Giordano – organ , accordion , electronic glockenspiel , rare piano , occasional background vocals 
 <unk> Tyrell – violin , acoustic guitar , percussion , background vocals 
 Jay Weinberg – drums 
 Curtis King – background vocals and tambourine 
 Cindy Mizelle – background vocals and tambourine 
 Curt Ramm – trumpet 
 Scialfa missed some shows on the first leg due to injuries received from falling off her horse , then due to family responsibilities , and was absent from all the shows on the European leg . She continued to miss all but a handful of shows during the U.S. third leg , including only making it to two of the five final Giants Stadium performances . As on the Magic Tour , Tyrell assumed a more prominent role when Scialfa was absent . ( Despite consistently having highly visible profiles during shows , Giordano and Tyrell have not been considered full @-@ fledged E Street Band members in official Springsteen material . ) Clemons continued to have a diminished physical role on stage due to his multiple physical problems , and was scheduled for spine surgery once the tour concluded with a 12 @-@ month recovery period . ( As it happened , Clemons never played with the E Street Band again , suffering a fatal stroke in June 2011 . ) Jay Weinberg substituted for Max Weinberg on a number of dates , and the two alternated for portions of the show on a number of other dates . Ramm , a veteran of the Sessions Band Tour , played on several songs per show during much of the U.S. third leg . 
 = World Series of Poker Casino Employee Championship = 
 The Casino Employees Championship is one of only three closed tournaments awarding WSOP bracelet 's at the World Series of Poker gathering . While most of the events are open to the general public , participants in the Ladies Championship , Seniors Championship , and the Casino Employees Championship must meet certain eligibility requirements . While these events are closed , the winner of these events is " afforded the same distinction as all gold bracelet tournaments . " The WSOP bracelet is considered the most coveted non @-@ monetary prize a poker player can win . 
 = = History = = 
 The World Series of Poker ( WSOP ) , held annually in Las Vegas , is " the oldest , largest , most prestigious , and most media @-@ hyped gaming competition in the world " . In 2000 , the WSOP started to honor Casino Employees by offering a bracelet event that only they could enter . The first tournament was called the " Dealers World Poker Championship " because it was limited to poker dealers . The following year the field was open to all casino employees . 
 Since the tournament is restricted to casino employees , most of the big name poker pros and previous bracelet winners are not allowed to participate . Therefore , even though the Casino Employee Championship is a World Series of Poker bracelet event , it has typically received relatively little coverage . Despite this perception , the Casino Employee Championship event does involve numerous recognized names in the poker world . The 2009 tournament included two time bracelet winner Pat Poels , WSOP vice president Ty Stewart , Bellagio Tournament Director / Former WSOP Director Jack McClelland , and Woman Poker Hall of Famer Marsha Waggoner . 
 Prior to 2003 , the tournament format was a Limit Hold 'em tournament , but in 2004 , No @-@ Limit Hold 'em became the standard . The 2006 tournament , with 1 @,@ 232 entrants , was the largest field ever for the event . Since its inception , with the exception of 2008 , the Casino Employees event has started on the first day of the WSOP . Much of the drama encountered at the Casino Championship often involves informal <unk> between dealers and proposition players . Proposition players are people hired to play poker , with their own money , at casinos to get games started or to ensure that they do not die out . Thus , while both the prop and dealer are casino employees , they sit on opposite sides of the table . 
 = = Highlights = = 
 In 2000 , Dave <unk> from Las Vegas outlasted a field of 109 participants to become the first " Dealers World Poker Championship " . While other Dealer Tournaments had a reputation for sloppy play , the first Dealer Championship was noted for the seriousness with which the players approached the game . In the end , however , the winner was not determined by the deal of the cards , but by a deal at the table . According to initial reports , the deal was only achieved because " a World Series bracelet was not available for negotiation , the players decided to take their money and go home . " Other sources , however , indicate that the event was always intended to be a bracelet event . Either way , the official WSOP standings , credits <unk> with winning a WSOP bracelet at this event . By contrast the final three contestants at the 2003 Championship were doing Kamikaze shots . " We were all having such a great time , " the winner David <unk> said , " sitting around playing poker that I think we may have forgotten about the prize money and the bracelet . " 
 The 2002 Casino Employee Championship almost mirrored <unk> Straus 's amazing comeback in the 1982 WSOP Main event . At the 1982 Main Event , <unk> was down to one $ 500 chip and came back to win the tournament . At the Casino Employee Championship , Dave <unk> , who has made 11 final WSOP tables but never won a bracelet , was down to one $ 500 chip with only four players left in the tournament . <unk> went all in with pocket eights and then succeeded in rebuilding his stack to $ 26 @,@ 000 before being busted in third place . The 2002 winner , David <unk> went on to become the first Casino Employee Champion to win a WSOP open event in 2010 . 
 Many of the top professional poker players got their start working in casinos . 1998 WSOP Main Event Champion and five time bracelet winner , Scotty Nguyen 's first job was as a dealer . Ted Forrest , another five time bracelet winner , credits his ability to read players because of his experience as a dealer . One @-@ time bracelet winner Erick Lindgren also boasts a pedigree of starting out as a dealer . 
 = = Key = = 
 = = WSOP Casino Employee Championship Events = = 
 = Campaign history of the Roman military = 
 From its origin as a city @-@ state on the peninsula of Italy in the 8th century BC , to its rise as an empire covering much of Southern Europe , Western Europe , Near East and North Africa to its fall in the 5th century AD , the political history of Ancient Rome was closely entwined with its military history . The core of the campaign history of the Roman military is an aggregate of different accounts of the Roman military 's land battles , from its initial defense against and subsequent conquest of the city 's hilltop neighbors on the Italian peninsula , to the ultimate struggle of the Western Roman Empire for its existence against invading Huns , Vandals and Germanic tribes . These accounts were written by various authors throughout and after the history of the Empire . Following the First Punic War , naval battles were less significant than land battles to the military history of Rome due to its <unk> of lands of the periphery and its unchallenged dominance of the Mediterranean Sea . 
 The Roman army battled first against its tribal neighbours and Etruscan towns within Italy , and later came to dominate the Mediterranean and at its height the provinces of Britannia and Asia Minor . As with most ancient civilizations , Rome 's military served the triple purpose of securing its borders , exploiting peripheral areas through measures such as imposing tribute on conquered peoples , and maintaining internal order . From the outset , Rome 's military typified this pattern , and the majority of Rome 's campaigns were characterised by one of two types . The first is the territorial expansionist campaign , normally begun as a counter @-@ offensive , in which each victory brought subjugation of large areas of territory and allowed Rome to grow from a small town to a population of 55 million in the early empire when expansion was halted . The second is the civil war , which plagued Rome from its foundation to its eventual demise . 
 Roman armies were not invincible , despite their formidable reputation and host of victories , Romans " produced their share of incompetents " who led Roman armies into catastrophic defeats . Nevertheless , it was generally the fate of even the greatest of Rome 's enemies , such as Pyrrhus and Hannibal , to win the battle but lose the war . The history of Rome 's campaigning is , if nothing else , a history of obstinate persistence overcoming appalling losses . 
 = = Kingdom ( 753 – 508 BC ) = = 
 Knowledge of Roman history stands apart from other civilizations in the ancient world . Its chronicles , military and otherwise , document the city 's very foundation to its eventual demise . Although some histories have been lost , such as Trajan 's account of the Dacian Wars , and others , such as Rome 's earliest histories , are at least semi @-@ apocryphal , the extant histories of Rome 's military history are extensive . 
 Rome 's earliest history , from the time of its founding as a small tribal village , to the downfall of its kings , is the least well preserved . Although the early Romans were literate to some degree , this void may be due to the lack of will to record their history at that time , or such histories as they did record were lost . 
 Although the Roman historian Livy ( 59 BC – 17 AD ) lists a series of seven kings of early Rome in his work Ab <unk> condita , from its establishment through its earliest years , the first four kings ( Romulus , Numa , <unk> <unk> and <unk> Marcius ) may be apocryphal . A number of points of view have been proposed . Grant and others argue that prior to the establishment of the Etruscan kingdom of Rome under the traditional fifth king , Tarquinius Priscus , Rome would have been led by a religious leader of some sort . Very little is known of Rome 's military history from this era , and what history has come down to us is more of a legendary than of factual nature . Traditionally , Romulus , after founding the city , fortified the Palatine Hill , and shortly thereafter , Rome was " equal to any of the surrounding cities in her prowess in war " . 
 The first of the campaigns fought by the Romans in this legendary account are the wars with various Latin cities and the Sabines . According to Livy , the Latin village of <unk> responded to the event of the abduction of the Sabine women by invading Roman territory , but were routed and their village captured . The Latins of <unk> and those of <unk> were defeated next in a similar fashion . The remaining main body of the Sabines attacked Rome and briefly captured the citadel , but were then convinced to conclude a treaty with the Romans under which the Sabines became Roman citizens . 
 There was a further war in the 8th century BC against Fidenae and Veii . In the 7th century BC there was a war with Alba Longa , a second war with Fidenae and Veii and a second Sabine War . <unk> Marcius led Rome to victory against the Latins and , according to the Fasti Triumphales , over the Veientes and Sabines also . 
 = = = Tarquinius Priscus ( Ruled 616 – 579 BC ) = = = 
 Lucius Tarquinius Priscus ' first war was waged against the Latins . Tarquinius took the Latin town of <unk> by storm and took great booty from there back to Rome . According to the Fasti Triumphales , the war occurred prior to 588 BC . 
 His military ability was tested by an attack from the Sabines . Tarquinius doubled the numbers of equites to help the war effort , and defeat the Sabines . In the peace negotiations that followed , Tarquinius received the town of <unk> and appointed his nephew , <unk> Tarquinius , also known as <unk> , as commander of the garrison which he stationed in that city . Tarquinius returned to Rome and celebrated a triumph for his victories that , according to the Fasti Triumphales , occurred on 13 September 585 BC . 
 Subsequently the Latin cities of <unk> , old <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> were subdued and became Roman . 
 = = = Servius Tullius ( Ruled 578 – 535 BC ) = = = 
 Early in his reign , Servius Tullius warred against Veii and the Etruscans . He is said to have shown valour in the campaign , and to have routed a great army of the enemy . The war helped him to cement his position at Rome . According to the Fasti Triumphales , Servius celebrated three triumphs over the Etruscans , including on 25 November 571 BC and 25 May 567 BC ( the date of the third triumph is not legible on the Fasti ) . 
 = = = Tarquinius Superbus ( Ruled 535 – 509 BC ) = = = 
 Early in his reign Tarquinius Superbus , Rome 's seventh and final king , called a meeting of the Latin leaders at which he persuaded them to renew their treaty with Rome and become her allies rather than her enemies , and it was agreed that the troops of the Latins would attend at a grove sacred to the goddess <unk> on an appointed day to form a united military force with the troops of Rome . This was done , and Tarquin formed combined units of Roman and Latin troops . 
 Tarquin next began a war against the <unk> . He took the wealthy town of <unk> <unk> , with the spoils of which he commenced the erection of the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus which his father had vowed . He also celebrated a triumph for his victory . 
 He was next engaged in a war with <unk> , one of the Latin cities , which had rejected the Latin treaty with Rome . Unable to take the city by force of arms , Tarquin had his son , Sextus Tarquinius , infiltrate the city , gain the trust of its people and command of its army . In time he killed or exiled the city 's leaders , and handed control of the city over to his father . 
 Tarquin also agreed to a peace with the Aequi , and renewed the treaty of peace between Rome and the Etruscans . According to the Fasti Triumphales , Tarquin also won a victory over the Sabines . 
 Tarquinius later went to war with the Rutuli . According to Livy , the Rutuli were , at that time , a very wealthy nation . Tarquinius was desirous of obtaining the booty which would come with victory over the Rutuli . Tarquin unsuccessfully sought to take the <unk> capital , Ardea , by storm , and subsequently began an extensive siege of the city . The war was interrupted by the revolution which overthrew the Roman monarchy . The Roman army , camped outside Ardea , welcomed Lucius Junius Brutus as their new leader , and expelled the king 's sons . It is unclear what was the outcome of the siege , or indeed the war . 
 = = Republic = = 
 = = = Early ( 509 – 274 BC ) = = = 
 = = = = Early Italian campaigns ( 509 – 396 BC ) = = = = 
 The first non @-@ apocryphal Roman wars were wars of both expansion and defence , aimed at protecting Rome itself from neighbouring cities and nations and establishing its territory in the region . Florus writes that at this time " their neighbours , on every side , were continually harassing them , as they had no land of their own ... and as they were situated , as it were , at the junction of the roads to Latium and <unk> , and , at whatever gate they went out , were sure to meet a foe . " 
 In the semi @-@ legendary period of the early republic , sources record Rome was twice attacked by Etruscan armies . About 509 BC war with Veii and <unk> was said to have been instigated by the recently overthrown king Tarquinius Superbus . Again in 508 BC Tarquin persuaded the king of Clusium , Lars <unk> , to wage war on Rome , resulting in a siege of Rome and afterwards a peace treaty . 
 Initially , Rome 's immediate neighbours were either Latin towns and villages on a tribal system similar to that of Rome , or else tribal Sabines from the Apennine hills beyond . One by one , Rome defeated both the persistent Sabines and the local cities that were either under Etruscan control or else Latin towns that had cast off their Etruscan rulers , as had Rome . Rome defeated the <unk> and <unk> in the Battle of Lake <unk> in 496 BC , were defeated by the Veientes in the Battle of the <unk> in 477 BC , the Sabines in an unnamed battle in 449 BC , the Aequi in the Battle of Mons <unk> in 458 BC and the Battle of Corbione in 446 BC , the <unk> in the Battle of Corbione in 446 BC the <unk> in the Battle of Aricia , the Capture of Fidenae in 435 BC and the Siege of Veii in 396 BC , and the Capture of <unk> in 377 BC . After defeating the Veientes , the Romans had effectively completed the conquest of their immediate Etruscan neighbours , as well as secured their position against the immediate threat posed by the tribespeople of the Apennine hills . 
 However , Rome still controlled only a very limited area and the affairs of Rome were minor even to those in Italy and Rome 's affairs were only just coming to the attention of the Greeks , the dominant cultural force at the time . At this point the bulk of Italy remained in the hands of Latin , Sabine , Samnite and other peoples in the central part of Italy , Greek colonies to the south , and the Celtic people , including the Gauls , to the north . 
 = = = = Celtic invasion of Italia ( 390 – 387 BC ) = = = = 
 By 390 BC , several Gallic tribes had begun invading Italy from the north as their culture expanded throughout Europe . Most of this was unknown to the Romans at this time , who still had purely local security concerns , but the Romans were alerted when a particularly warlike tribe , the <unk> , invaded the Etruscan province of Siena from the north and attacked the town of Clusium , not far from Rome 's sphere of influence . The <unk> , overwhelmed by the size of the enemy in numbers and ferocity , called on Rome for help . Perhaps unintentionally the Romans found themselves not just in conflict with the <unk> , but their primary target . The Romans met them in pitched battle at the Battle of the Allia around 390 – 387 BC . The Gauls , under their chieftain Brennus , defeated the Roman army of around 15 @,@ 000 troops and proceeded to pursue the fleeing Romans back to Rome itself and partially sacked the town before being either driven off or bought off . 
 Now that the Romans and Gauls had blooded one another , intermittent Roman @-@ Gallic wars were to continue between the two in Italy for more than two centuries , including the Battle of Lake <unk> , the Battle of <unk> in 225 BC , the Battle of Telamon in 224 BC , the Battle of <unk> in 222 BC , the Battle of Cremona in 200 BC , the Battle of Mutina in 194 BC , the Battle of Arausio in 105 BC , and the Battle of Vercellae in 101 BC . The Celtic problem would not be resolved for Rome until the final subjugation of all Gaul following the Battle of Alesia in 52 BC . 
 = = = = Expansion into Italia ( 343 – 282 BC ) = = = = 
 After swiftly recovering from the sack of Rome , the Romans immediately resumed their expansion within Italy . Despite their successes , their mastery of the whole of Italy was by no means assured . The Samnites were a people just as martial and as rich as the Romans and had the objective of their own to secure more lands in the fertile Italian plains on which Rome itself lay . The First Samnite War of between 343 BC and 341 BC that followed widespread Samnite incursions into Rome 's territory was a relatively short affair : the Romans beat the Samnites in both the Battle of Mount <unk> in 342 BC and the Battle of <unk> in 341 BC but were forced to withdraw from the war before they could pursue the conflict further due to the revolt of several of their Latin allies in the Latin War . 
 Rome was therefore forced to contend by around 340 BC against both Samnite incursions into their territory and , simultaneously , in a bitter war against their former allies . Rome bested the Latins in the Battle of Vesuvius and again in the Battle of <unk> , after which the Latin cities were obliged to submit to Roman rule . Perhaps due to Rome 's lenient treatment of their defeated foe , the Latins submitted largely amicably to Roman rule for the next 200 years . 
 The Second Samnite War , from 327 BC to 304 BC , was a much longer and more serious affair for both the Romans and Samnites , running for over twenty years and incorporating twenty @-@ four battles that led to massive casualties on both sides . The fortunes of the two sides fluctuated throughout its course : the Samnites seized Neapolis in the Capture of Neapolis in 327 BC , which the Romans then re @-@ captured before losing at the Battle of the <unk> Forks and the Battle of <unk> . The Romans then proved victorious at the Battle of <unk> and the tide turned strongly against the Samnites from 314 BC onwards , leading them to sue for peace with progressively less generous terms . By 304 BC the Romans had effectively annexed the greater degree of the Samnite territory , founding several colonies . This pattern of meeting aggression in force and so inadvertently gaining territory in strategic counter @-@ attacks was to become a common feature of Roman military history . 
 Seven years after their defeat , with Roman dominance of the area looking assured , the Samnites rose again and defeated the Romans at the Battle of <unk> in 298 BC , to open the Third Samnite War . With this success in hand they managed to bring together a coalition of several previous enemies of Rome , all of whom were probably keen to prevent any one faction dominating the entire region . The army that faced the Romans at the Battle of <unk> in 295 BC included Samnites , Gauls , Etruscans and <unk> . When the Roman army won a convincing victory over these combined forces it must have become clear that little could prevent Roman dominance of Italy and in the Battle of <unk> ( 282 BC ) Rome finished off the last vestiges of Etruscan power in the region . 
 = = = = Pyrrhic War ( 280 – 275 BC ) = = = = 
 By the beginning of the 3rd century , Rome had established itself in 282 BC as a major power on the Italian Peninsula , but had not yet come into conflict with the dominant military powers in the Mediterranean at the time : Carthage and the Greek kingdoms . Rome had all but completely defeated the Samnites , mastered its fellow Latin towns , and greatly reduced Etruscan power in the region . However , the south of Italy was controlled by the Greek colonies of Magna Grecia who had been allied to the Samnites , and continued Roman expansion brought the two into inevitable conflict . 
 In the naval Battle of Thurii , Tarentum appealed for military aid to Pyrrhus , ruler of Epirus . Motivated by his diplomatic obligations to Tarentum , and a personal desire for military accomplishment , Pyrrhus landed a Greek army of some 25 @,@ 000 men and a contingent of war elephants on Italian soil in 280 BC , where his forces were joined by some Greek colonists and a portion of the Samnites who revolted against Roman control , taking up arms against Rome for the fourth time in seventy years . 
 The Roman army had not yet seen elephants in battle , and their inexperience turned the tide in Pyrrhus ' favour at the Battle of Heraclea in 280 BC , and again at the Battle of <unk> in 279 BC . Despite these victories , Pyrrhus found his position in Italy untenable . Rome steadfastly refused to negotiate with Pyrrhus as long as his army remained in Italy . Furthermore , Rome entered into a treaty of support with Carthage , and Pyrrhus found that despite his expectations , none of the other Italic peoples would defect to the Greek and Samnite cause . Facing unacceptably heavy losses with each encounter with the Roman army , and failing to find further allies in Italy , Pyrrhus withdrew from the peninsula and campaigned in Sicily against Carthage , abandoning his allies to deal with the Romans . 
 When his Sicilian campaign was also ultimately a failure , and at the request of his Italian allies , Pyrrhus returned to Italy to face Rome once more . In 275 BC , Pyrrhus again met the Roman army at the Battle of Beneventum . This time the Romans had devised methods to deal with the war elephants , including the use of javelins , fire and , one source claims , simply hitting the elephants heavily on the head . While Beneventum was indecisive , Pyrrhus realised that his army had been exhausted and reduced by years of foreign campaigns , and seeing little hope for further gains , he withdrew completely from Italy . 
 The conflicts with Pyrrhus would have a great effect on Rome . It had shown that it was capable of pitting its armies successfully against the dominant military powers of the Mediterranean , and further showed that the Greek kingdoms were incapable of defending their colonies in Italy and abroad . Rome quickly moved into southern Italia , subjugating and dividing Magna Grecia . Effectively dominating the Italian peninsula , and with a proven international military reputation , Rome now began to look to expand from the Italian mainland . Since the Alps formed a natural barrier to the north , and Rome was none too keen to meet the fierce Gauls in battle once more , the city 's gaze turned to Sicily and the islands of the Mediterranean , a policy that would bring it into direct conflict with its former ally Carthage . 
 = = = Middle ( 274 – 148 BC ) = = = 
 Rome first began to make war outside the Italian peninsula during the Punic wars against Carthage , a former Phoenician colony that had established on the north coast of Africa and developed into a powerful state . These wars , starting in 264 BC were probably the largest conflicts of the ancient world yet and saw Rome become the most powerful state of the Western Mediterranean , with territory in Sicily , North Africa , Iberia , and with the end of the Macedonian wars ( which ran concurrently with the Punic wars ) Greece as well . After the defeat of the Seleucid Emperor Antiochus III the Great in the Roman @-@ Syrian War ( Treaty of Apamea , 188 BC ) in the eastern sea , Rome emerged as the dominant Mediterranean power and the most powerful city in the classical world . 
 = = = = Punic Wars ( 264 – 146 BC ) = = = = 
 The First Punic War began in 264 BC when settlements on Sicily began to appeal to the two powers between which they lay – Rome and Carthage – in order to solve internal conflicts . The willingness of both Rome and Carthage to become embroiled on the soil of a third party may indicate a willingness to test each other 's power without wishing to enter a full war of annihilation ; certainly there was considerable disagreement within Rome about whether to prosecute the war at all . The war saw land battles in Sicily early on , such as the Battle of <unk> , but the theatre shifted to naval battles around Sicily and Africa . For the Romans , naval warfare was a relatively unexplored concept . Before the First Punic War in 264 BC there was no Roman navy to speak of , as all previous Roman wars had been fought on land in Italy . The new war in Sicily against Carthage , a great naval power , forced Rome to quickly build a fleet and train sailors . 
 Rome took to naval warfare " like a brick to water " and the first few naval battles of the First Punic War such as the Battle of the <unk> Islands were catastrophic disasters for Rome , as might fairly be expected from a city that had no real prior experience of naval warfare . However , after training more sailors and inventing a grappling engine known as a Corvus , a Roman naval force under C. <unk> was able to roundly defeat a Carthaginian fleet at the Battle of <unk> . In just four years , a state without any real naval experience had managed to better a major regional maritime power in battle . Further naval victories followed at the Battle of <unk> and the Battle of Cape <unk> . 
 After having won control of the seas , a Roman force landed on the African coast under Marcus Regulus , who was at first victorious , winning the Battle of <unk> and forcing Carthage to sue for peace . However , the terms of peace that Rome proposed were so heavy that negotiations failed , and in response , the Carthaginians hired Xanthippus of Carthage , a mercenary from the martial Greek city @-@ state of Sparta , to reorganise and lead their army . Xanthippus managed to cut off the Roman army from its base by re @-@ establishing Carthaginian naval supremacy and then defeated and captured Regulus at the Battle of Tunis . 
 Despite being defeated on African soil , the Romans with their newfound naval abilities , roundly beat the Carthaginians in naval battle again – largely through the tactical innovations of the Roman fleet – at the Battle of the <unk> Islands . Carthage was left without a fleet or sufficient coin to raise a new one . For a maritime power , the loss of their access to the Mediterranean stung financially and psychologically , and the Carthaginians again sued for peace , during which negotiations , Rome battled the <unk> tribe in the Ligurian War and the <unk> in the Gallic War . 
 Continuing distrust led to the renewal of hostilities in the Second Punic War when Hannibal Barca , a member of the Barcid family of Carthaginian nobility , attacked <unk> , a city with diplomatic ties to Rome . Hannibal then raised an army in Iberia and famously crossed the Italian Alps with elephants to invade Italy . In the first battle on Italian soil at <unk> in 218 BC Hannibal defeated the Romans under Scipio the Elder in a small cavalry fight . Hannibal 's success continued with victories in the Battle of the Trebia , the Battle of Lake Trasimene , where he ambushed an unsuspecting Roman army , and the Battle of Cannae , in what is considered one of the great masterpieces of tactical art , and for a while " Hannibal seemed invincible " , able to beat Roman armies at will . 
 In the three battles of Nola , Roman general Marcus Claudius Marcellus managed to hold off Hannibal but then Hannibal smashed a succession of Roman consular armies at the First Battle of Capua , the Battle of the <unk> , the Second Battle of <unk> , the Battle of <unk> and the Battle of Asculum . By this time Hannibal 's brother Hasdrubal Barca sought to cross the Alps into Italy and join his brother with a second army . Despite being defeated in Iberia in the Battle of <unk> , Hasdrubal managed to break through into Italy only to be defeated decisively by Gaius Claudius Nero and Marcus Livius <unk> on the <unk> River . 
 Unable to defeat Hannibal himself on Italian soil , and with Hannibal savaging the Italian countryside but unwilling or unable to destroy Rome itself , the Romans boldly sent an army to Africa with the intention of threatening the Carthaginian capital . In 203 BC at the Battle of <unk> the invading Roman army under Scipio Africanus Major defeated the Carthaginian army of Hasdrubal <unk> and <unk> and Hannibal was recalled to Africa . At the famous Battle of Zama Scipio decisively defeated – perhaps even " annihilated " – Hannibal 's army in North Africa , ending the Second Punic War . 
 Carthage never managed to recover after the Second Punic War and the Third Punic War that followed was in reality a simple punitive mission to raze the city of Carthage to the ground . Carthage was almost defenceless and when besieged offered immediate surrender , conceding to a string of outrageous Roman demands . The Romans refused the surrender , demanding as their further terms of surrender the complete destruction of the city and , seeing little to lose , the Carthaginians prepared to fight . In the Battle of Carthage the city was stormed after a short siege and completely destroyed , its culture " almost totally extinguished " . 
 = = = = Conquest of the Iberian peninsula ( 219 – 18 BC ) = = = = 
 Rome 's conflict with the Carthaginians in the Punic Wars led them into expansion in the Iberian peninsula of modern @-@ day Spain and Portugal . The Punic empire of the Carthaginian Barcid family consisted of territories in Iberia , many of which Rome gained control of during the Punic Wars . Italy remained the main theatre of war for much of the Second Punic War , but the Romans also aimed to destroy the Barcid Empire in Iberia and prevent major Punic allies from linking up with forces in Italy . 
 Over the years , Rome had expanded along the southern Iberian coast until in 211 BC it captured the city of <unk> . Following two major military expeditions to Iberia , the Romans finally crushed Carthaginian control of the peninsula in 206 BC , at the Battle of <unk> , and the peninsula became a Roman province known as Hispania . From 206 BC onwards the only opposition to Roman control of the peninsula came from within the native Celtiberian tribes themselves , whose disunity prevented their security from Roman expansion . 
 Following two small @-@ scale rebellions in 197 BC , in 195 – 194 BC war broke out between the Romans and the Lusitani people in the Lusitanian War , in modern @-@ day Portugal . By 179 BC , the Romans had mostly succeeded in pacifying the region and bringing it under their control . 
 About 154 BC , a major revolt was re @-@ ignited in Numantia , which is known as the First <unk> War , and a long war of resistance was fought between the advancing forces of the Roman Republic and the Lusitani tribes of Hispania . The praetor Servius Sulpicius Galba and the proconsul Lucius Licinius Lucullus arrived in 151 BC and began the process of subduing the local population . In 150 BC , Galba betrayed the Lusitani leaders he had invited to peace talks and had them killed , ingloriously ending the first phase of the war . 
 The Lusitani revolted again in 146 BC under a new leader called Viriathus , invading <unk> ( southern Iberia ) in a guerrilla war . The <unk> were initially successful , defeating a Roman army at the Battle of <unk> and going on to sack nearby <unk> , and then besting a second Roman army at the First Battle of Mount Venus in 146 BC , again going on to sack another nearby city . In 144 BC , the general Quintus Fabius Maximus Aemilianus campaigned successfully against the Lusitani , but failed in his attempts to arrest Viriathus . 
 In 144 BC , Viriathus formed a league against Rome with several Celtiberian tribes and persuaded them to rise against Rome too , in the Second <unk> War . Viriathus ' new coalition bested Roman armies at the Second Battle of Mount Venus in 144 BC and again at the failed Siege of <unk> . In 139 BC , Viriathus was finally killed in his sleep by three of his companions who had been promised gifts by Rome . In 136 and 135 BC , more attempts were made to gain complete control of the region of Numantia , but they failed . In 134 BC , the Consul Scipio Aemilianus finally succeeded in suppressing the rebellion following the successful Siege of Numantia . 
 Since the Roman invasion of the Iberian peninsula had begun in the south in the territories around the Mediterranean controlled by the <unk> , the last region of the peninsula to be subdued lay in the far north . The Cantabrian Wars or <unk> @-@ Cantabrian Wars , from 29 BC to 19 BC , occurred during the Roman conquest of these northern provinces of Cantabria and Asturias . Iberia was fully occupied by 25 BC and the last revolt put down by 19 BC 
 = = = = Macedon , the Greek poleis , and Illyria ( 215 – 148 BC ) = = = = 
 Rome 's preoccupation with its war with Carthage provided an opportunity for Philip V of the kingdom of Macedon in northern Greece to attempt to extend his power westward . Philip sent ambassadors to Hannibal 's camp in Italy , to negotiate an alliance as common enemies of Rome . However , Rome discovered the agreement when Philip 's emissaries , along with emissaries from Hannibal , were captured by a Roman fleet . Desiring to prevent Philip from aiding Carthage in Italy and elsewhere , Rome sought out land allies in Greece to fight a proxy war against Macedon on its behalf and found partners in the Aetolian League of Greek city @-@ states , the Illyrians to the north of Macedon and the kingdom of Pergamon and the city @-@ state of Rhodes , which lay across the Aegean from Macedon . 
 The First Macedonian War saw the Romans involved directly in only limited land operations . When the Aetolians sued for peace with Philip , Rome 's small expeditionary force , with no more allies in Greece , was ready to make peace . Rome had achieved its objective of pre @-@ occupying Philip and preventing him from aiding Hannibal . A treaty was drawn up between Rome and Macedon at Phoenice in 205 BC which promised Rome a small indemnity , formally ending the First Macedonian War . 
 Macedon began to encroach on territory claimed by several other Greek city states in 200 BC and these pleaded for help from their newfound ally Rome . Rome gave Philip an ultimatum that he must submit Macedonia to being essentially a Roman province . Philip , unsurprisingly , refused and , after initial internal reluctance for further hostilities , Rome declared war against Philip in the Second Macedonian War . In the Battle of the Aous Roman forces under Titus Quinctius Flamininus defeated the Macedonians , and in a second larger battle under the same opposing commanders in 197 BC , in the Battle of Cynoscephalae , Flamininus again beat the Macedonians decisively . Macedonia was forced to sign the Treaty of <unk> , in which it lost all claim to territory in Greece and Asia , and had to pay a war indemnity to Rome . 
 Between the second and third Macedonian wars Rome faced further conflict in the region due to a tapestry of shifting rivalries , alliances and leagues all seeking to gain greater influence . After the Macedonians had been defeated in the Second Macedonian War in 197 BC , the Greek city @-@ state of Sparta stepped into the partial power vacuum in Greece . Fearing the Spartans would take increasing control of the region , the Romans drew on help from allies to prosecute the Roman @-@ Spartan War , defeating a Spartan army at the Battle of Gythium in 195 BC . They also fought their former allies the Aetolian League in the Aetolian War , against the <unk> in the Istrian War , against the Illyrians in the Illyrian War , and against Achaia in the Achaean War . 
 Rome now turned its attentions to Antiochus III of the Seleucid Empire to the east . After campaigns as far abroad as Bactria , India , Persia and Judea , Antiochus moved to Asia Minor and Thrace to secure several coastal towns , a move that brought him into conflict with Roman interests . A Roman force under <unk> <unk> <unk> defeated Antiochus at the Battle of Thermopylae and forced him to evacuate Greece : the Romans then pursued the Seleucids beyond Greece , beating them again in naval battles at the Battle of the Eurymedon and Battle of <unk> , and finally in a decisive engagement of the Battle of Magnesia . 
 In 179 BC Philip died and his talented and ambitious son , Perseus of Macedon , took his throne and showed a renewed interest in Greece . He also allied himself with the warlike Bastarnae , and both this and his actions in Greece possibly violated the treaty signed with the Romans by his father or , if not , certainly was not " behaving as [ Rome considered ] a subordinate ally should " . Rome declared war on Macedonia again , starting the Third Macedonian War . Perseus initially had greater military success against the Romans than his father , winning the Battle of <unk> against a Roman consular army . However , as with all such ventures in this period , Rome responded by simply sending another army . The second consular army duly defeated the Macedonians at the Battle of Pydna in 168 BC and the Macedonians , lacking the reserve of the Romans and with King Perseus captured , duly capitulated , ending the Third Macedonian War . 
 The Fourth Macedonian War , fought from 150 BC to 148 BC , was the final war between Rome and Macedon and began when <unk> usurped the Macedonian throne . The Romans raised a consular army under Quintus Caecilius Metellus , who swiftly defeated <unk> at the Second battle of Pydna . 
 Under Lucius Mummius , Corinth was destroyed following a siege in 146 BC , leading to the surrender and thus conquest of the Achaean League ( see Battle of Corinth ) . 
 = = = Late ( 147 – 30 BC ) = = = 
 = = = = Jugurthine War ( 112 – 105 BC ) = = = = 
 Rome had , in the earlier Punic Wars , gained large tracts of territory in Africa , which they consolidated in the following centuries . Much of that land had been granted to the kingdom of Numidia , a kingdom on the north African coast approximating to modern Algeria , in return for its past military assistance . The Jugurthine War of 111 – 104 BC was fought between Rome and Jugurtha of Numidia and constituted the final Roman pacification of Northern Africa , after which Rome largely ceased expansion on the continent after reaching natural barriers of desert and mountain . In response to Jugurtha 's usurpation of the Numidian throne , a loyal ally of Rome since the Punic Wars , Rome intervened . Jugurtha <unk> bribed the Romans into accepting his usurpation and was granted half the kingdom . Following further aggression and further bribery attempts , the Romans sent an army to depose him . The Romans were defeated at the Battle of <unk> but fared better at the Battle of the <unk> and finally defeated Jugurtha at the Battle of <unk> , the Battle of <unk> , and the Battle of Cirta ( 104 BC ) . Jugurtha was finally captured not in battle but by treachery , ending the war . 
 = = = = Resurgence of the Celtic threat ( 121 BC ) = = = = 
 Memories of the sack of Rome in 390 / 387 BC by Celtic tribes from Gaul , having been made into a legendary account that was taught to each generation of Roman youth , were still prominent despite their historical distance . In 121 BC , Rome came into contact with the Celtic tribes of the Allobroges and the <unk> , both of which they defeated with apparent ease in the First Battle of Avignon near the Rhone river and the Second Battle of Avignon , the same year . 
 = = = = New Germanic threat ( 113 – 101 BC ) = = = = 
 The Cimbrian War ( 113 – 101 BC ) was a far more serious affair than the earlier clashes of 121 BC . The Germanic tribes of the Cimbri and the Teutons or <unk> migrated from northern Europe into Rome 's northern territories , where they clashed with Rome and her allies . The Cimbrian War was the first time since the Second Punic War that Italia and Rome itself had been seriously threatened , and caused great fear in Rome . The opening action of the Cimbrian War , the Battle of <unk> in 112 BC , ended in defeat and near disaster for the Romans . In 105 BC the Romans were defeated at the Battle of Arausio and was the costliest Rome had suffered since the Battle of Cannae . After the Cimbri inadvertently granted the Romans a reprieve by diverting to plunder Iberia , Rome was given the opportunity to carefully prepare for and successfully meet the Cimbri and Teutons in the Battle of Aquae Sextiae ( 102 BC ) and the Battle of Vercellae ( 101 BC ) where both tribes were virtually annihilated , ending the threat . 
 = = = = Internal unrest ( 135 – 71 BC ) = = = = 
 The extensive campaigning abroad by Rome , and the rewarding of soldiers with plunder from these campaigns , led to a trend of soldiers becoming increasingly loyal to their commanders rather than to the state , and a willingness to follow their generals in battle against the state . Rome was plagued by several slave uprisings during this period , in part because in the past century vast tracts of land had been given to veterans who farmed by use of slaves and who came to greatly outnumbered their Roman masters . In the last century BC , at least twelve civil wars and rebellions occurred . This pattern did not break until Octavian ( later Caesar Augustus ) ended it by becoming a successful challenger to the Senate 's authority , and was made princeps ( emperor ) . 
 Between 135 BC and 71 BC there were three Servile Wars against the Roman state ; the third , and most serious , may have involved the revolution of 120 @,@ 000 to 150 @,@ 000 slaves . Additionally , in 91 BC the Social War broke out between Rome and its former allies in Italy , collectively known as the Socii , over the grievance that they shared the risk of Rome 's military campaigns , but not its rewards . Despite defeats such as the Battle of <unk> Lake , Roman troops defeated the Italian militias in decisive engagements , notably the Battle of Asculum . Although they lost militarily , the Socii achieved their objectives with the legal proclamations of the Lex Julia and Lex <unk> <unk> , which granted citizenship to more than 500 @,@ 000 Italians . 
 The internal unrest reached its most serious stage in the two civil wars or marches upon Rome by the consul Lucius Cornelius Sulla at the beginning of 82 BC . In the Battle of the <unk> Gate at the very door of the city of Rome , a Roman army under Sulla bested an army of the Roman senate and its Samnite allies . Whatever the merits of his grievances against those in power of the state , his actions marked a watershed of the willingness of Roman troops to wage war against one another that was to pave the way for the wars of the triumvirate , the overthrowing of the Senate as the de facto head of the Roman state , and the eventual endemic usurpation of power by contenders for the emperor @-@ ship in the later Empire . 
 = = = = Conflicts with Mithridates ( 89 – 63 BC ) = = = = 
 Mithridates the Great was the ruler of Pontus , a large kingdom in Asia Minor , from 120 to 63 BC . He is remembered as one of Rome 's most formidable and successful enemies who engaged three of the most prominent generals of the late Roman Republic : Sulla , Lucullus , and Pompey the Great . In a pattern familiar from the Punic Wars , the Romans came into conflict with him after the two states ' spheres of influence began to overlap . Mithridates antagonised Rome by seeking to expand his kingdom , and Rome for her part seemed equally keen for war and the spoils and prestige that it might bring . After conquering western Anatolia ( modern Turkey ) in 88 BC , Roman sources claim that Mithridates ordered the killing of the majority of the 80 @,@ 000 Romans living there . In the subsequent First Mithridatic War , the Roman general Lucius Cornelius Sulla forced Mithridates out of Greece proper after the Battle of Chaeronea and later Battle of Orchomenus but then had to return to Italy to answer the internal threat posed by his rival Marius ; consequently , Mithridates VI was defeated but not destroyed . A peace was made between Rome and Pontus , but this proved only a temporary lull . 
 The Second Mithridatic War began when Rome tried to annex Bithynia as a province . In the Third Mithridatic War , first Lucius Licinius Lucullus and then Pompey the Great were sent against Mithridates . Mithridates was finally defeated by Pompey in the night @-@ time Battle of the Lycus . After defeating Mithridates , Pompey invaded <unk> , subjugated the Kingdom of Iberia and established Roman control over Colchis . 
 = = = = Campaign against the Cilician pirates ( 67 BC ) = = = = 
 The Mediterranean had at this time fallen into the hands of pirates , largely from Cilicia . Rome had destroyed many of the states that had previously policed the Mediterranean with fleets , but had failed to step into the gap created . The pirates had seized the opportunity of a relative power vacuum and had not only strangled shipping lanes but had plundered many cities on the coasts of Greece and Asia , and had even made descents upon Italy itself . After the Roman admiral Marcus Antonius <unk> ( father of the triumvir Marcus Antonius ) failed to clear the pirates to the satisfaction of the Roman authorities , Pompey was nominated his successor as commander of a special naval task force to campaign against them . It supposedly took Pompey just forty days to clear the western portion of the western Mediterranean of pirates , and restore communication between Iberia , Africa , and Italy . Plutarch describes how Pompey first swept their craft from the Mediterranean in a series of small actions and through the promise of honouring the surrender of cities and craft . He then followed the main body of the pirates to their strongholds on the coast of Cilicia , and destroyed them there in the naval Battle of Korakesion . 
 = = = = Caesar 's early campaigns ( 59 – 50 BC ) = = = = 
 During a term as praetor in Iberia , Pompey 's contemporary Julius Caesar of the Roman Julii clan defeated the <unk> and Lusitani in battle . Following a consular term , he was then appointed to a five @-@ year term as Proconsular Governor of Transalpine Gaul ( current southern France ) and Illyria ( the coast of Dalmatia ) . Not content with an idle governorship , Caesar strove to find reason to invade Gaul , which would give him the dramatic military success he sought . To this end he stirred up popular nightmares of the first sack of Rome by the Gauls and the more recent spectre of the Cimbri and <unk> . When the Helvetii and Tigurini tribes began to migrate on a route that would take them near ( not into ) the Roman province of Transalpine Gaul , Caesar had the barely sufficient excuse he needed for his Gallic Wars , fought between 58 BC and 49 BC . After slaughtering the Helvetii tribe , Caesar prosecuted a " long , bitter and costly " campaign against other tribes across the breadth of Gaul , many of whom had fought alongside Rome against their common enemy the Helvetii , and annexed their territory to that of Rome . Plutarch claims that the campaign cost a million Gallic lives . Although " fierce and able " the Gauls were handicapped by internal disunity and fell in a series of battles over the course of a decade . 
 Caesar defeated the Helvetii in 58 BC at the Battle of the Arar and Battle of Bibracte , the Belgic confederacy known as the Belgae at the Battle of the <unk> , the <unk> in 57 BC at the Battle of the <unk> , the <unk> , <unk> , Tencteri , <unk> and <unk> in unknown battles , and the Veneti in 56 BC . In 55 and 54 BC he made two expeditions to Britain . In 52 BC , following the Siege of <unk> and a string of inconclusive battles , Caesar defeated a union of Gauls led by Vercingetorix at the Battle of Alesia , completing the Roman conquest of Transalpine Gaul . By 50 BC , the entirety of Gaul lay in Roman hands . Caesar recorded his own accounts of these campaigns in Commentarii de Bello Gallico ( " Commentaries on the Gallic War " ) . 
 Gaul never regained its Celtic identity , never attempted another nationalist rebellion , and remained loyal to Rome until the fall of the Western Empire in 476 AD . However , although Gaul itself was to thereafter remain loyal , cracks were appearing in the political unity of Rome 's governing figures – partly over concerns over the loyalty of Caesar 's Gallic troops to his person rather than the state – that were soon to drive Rome into a lengthy series of civil wars . 
 = = = = <unk> , Caesarian ascension , and revolt ( 53 – 30 BC ) = = = = 
 By 59 BC an unofficial political alliance known as the First Triumvirate was formed between Gaius Julius Caesar , Marcus Licinius Crassus , and Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus to share power and influence . It was always an uncomfortable alliance given that Crassus and Pompey intensely disliked one another . In 53 BC , Crassus launched a Roman invasion of the Parthian Empire . After initial successes , he marched his army deep into the desert ; but here his army was cut off deep in enemy territory , surrounded and slaughtered at the Battle of Carrhae in " the greatest Roman defeat since Hannibal " in which Crassus himself perished . The death of Crassus removed some of the balance in the Triumvirate and , consequently , Caesar and Pompey began to move apart . While Caesar was fighting against Vercingetorix in Gaul , Pompey proceeded with a legislative agenda for Rome that revealed that he was at best ambivalent towards Caesar and perhaps now covertly allied with Caesar 's political enemies . In 51 BC , some Roman senators demanded that Caesar would not be permitted to stand for Consul unless he turned over control of his armies to the state , and the same demands were made of Pompey by other factions . Relinquishing his army would leave Caesar defenceless before his enemies . Caesar chose Civil War over laying down his command and facing trial . The triumvirate was shattered and conflict was inevitable . 
 Pompey initially assured Rome and the senate that he could defeat Caesar in battle should he march on Rome . However , by the spring of 49 BC , when Caesar crossed the Rubicon river with his invading forces and swept down the Italian peninsula towards Rome , Pompey ordered the abandonment of Rome . Caesar 's army was still under @-@ strength , with certain units remaining in Gaul , but on the other hand Pompey himself only had a small force at his command , and that with uncertain loyalty having served under Caesar . Tom Holland attributes Pompey 's willingness to abandon Rome to waves of panicking refugees as an attempt to stir ancestral fears of invasions from the north . Pompey 's forces retreated south towards Brundisium , and then fled to Greece . Caesar first directed his attention to the Pompeian stronghold of Iberia but following campaigning by Caesar in the Siege of Massilia and Battle of <unk> he decided to tackle Pompey in Greece . Pompey initially defeated Caesar at the Battle of Dyrrachium in 48 BC but failed to follow up on the victory . Pompey was decisively defeated in the Battle of Pharsalus in 48 BC despite outnumbering Caesar 's forces two to one . Pompey fled again , this time to Egypt , where he was murdered in an attempt to ingratiate the country with Caesar and avoid a war with Rome . 
 Pompey 's death did not see the end of the civil wars since initially Caesar 's enemies were manifold and Pompey 's supporters continued to fight on after his death . In 46 BC Caesar lost perhaps as much as a third of his army when his former commander Titus Labienus , who had defected to the Pompeians several years earlier , defeated him at the Battle of <unk> . However , after this low point Caesar came back to defeat the Pompeian army of Metellus Scipio in the Battle of Thapsus , after which the Pompeians retreated yet again to Iberia . Caesar defeated the combined forces of Titus Labienus and Gnaeus Pompey the Younger at the Battle of Munda in Iberia . Labienus was killed in the battle and the Younger Pompey captured and executed . 
 Despite his military success , or probably because of it , fear spread of Caesar , now the primary figure of the Roman state , becoming an autocratic ruler and ending the Roman Republic . This fear drove a group of senators naming themselves The Liberators to assassinate him in 44 BC . Further civil war followed between those loyal to Caesar and those who supported the actions of the Liberators . Caesar 's supporter Mark Antony condemned Caesar 's assassins and war broke out between the two factions . Antony was denounced as a public enemy , and Octavian was entrusted with the command of the war against him . In the Battle of Forum Gallorum Antony , besieging Caesar 's assassin Decimus Brutus in Mutina , defeated the forces of the consul Pansa , who was killed , but Antony was then immediately defeated by the army of the other consul , Hirtius . At the Battle of Mutina Antony was again defeated in battle by Hirtius , who was killed . Although Antony failed to capture Mutina , Decimus Brutus was murdered shortly thereafter . 
 Octavian betrayed his party , and came to terms with <unk> Antony and Lepidus and on 26 November 43 BC the Second Triumvirate was formed , this time in an official capacity . In 42 BC <unk> Mark Antony and Octavian fought the indecisive Battle of Philippi with Caesar 's assassins Marcus Brutus and Cassius . Although Brutus defeated Octavian , Antony defeated Cassius , who committed suicide . Brutus also committed suicide shortly afterwards . 
 Civil war flared again when the Second Triumvirate of Octavian , Lepidus and Mark Antony failed just as the first had almost as soon as its opponents had been removed . The ambitious Octavian built a power base and then launched a campaign against Mark Antony . Together with Lucius Antonius , Mark Antony 's wife Fulvia raised an army in Italy to fight for Antony 's rights against Octavian but she was defeated by Octavian at the Battle of Perugia . Her death led to partial reconciliation between Octavian and Antony who went on to crush the army of Sextus Pompeius , the last focus of opposition to the second triumvirate , in the naval Battle of <unk> . 
 As before , once opposition to the triumvirate was crushed , it started to tear at itself . The triumvirate expired on the last day of 33 BC and was not renewed in law and in 31 BC , war began again . At the Battle of Actium , Octavian decisively defeated Antony and Cleopatra in a naval battle near Greece , using fire to destroy the enemy fleet . 
 Octavian went on to become Emperor under the name Augustus and , in the absence of political assassins or usurpers , was able to greatly expand the borders of the Empire . 
 = = Empire = = 
 = = = Early to Middle ( 30 BC – 180 AD ) = = = 
 = = = = Imperial expansion ( 40 BC – 117 AD ) = = = = 
 Secure from interior enemies , Rome achieved great territorial gains in both the East and the West . In the West , following humiliating defeats at the hands of the <unk> , Tencteri and <unk> tribes in 16 BC , Roman armies pushed north and east out of Gaul to subdue much of Germania . The Pannonian revolt in 6 AD forced the Romans to cancel their plan to cement their conquest of Germania . Despite the loss of a large army almost to the man of Varus ' famous defeat at the hands of the Germanic leader Arminius in the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest in 9 AD , Rome recovered and continued its expansion up to and beyond the borders of the known world . Roman armies under Germanicus pursued several more campaigns against the Germanic tribes of the Marcomanni , <unk> , Chatti , Cherusci , Bructeri , and Marsi . Overcoming several mutinies in the armies along the Rhine , Germanicus defeated the Germanic tribes of Arminius in a series of battles culminating in the Battle of the Weser River . 
 After Caesar 's preliminary low @-@ scale invasions of Britain , the Romans invaded in force in 43 AD , forcing their way inland through several battles against British tribes , including the Battle of the Medway , the Battle of the Thames , the Battle of Caer Caradoc and the Battle of Mona . Following a general uprising in which the Britons sacked Colchester , St Albans and London , the Romans suppressed the rebellion in the Battle of Watling Street and went on to push as far north as central Scotland in the Battle of Mons Graupius . Tribes in modern @-@ day Scotland and Northern England repeatedly rebelled against Roman rule and two military bases were established in Britannia to protect against rebellion and incursions from the north , from which Roman troops built and manned Hadrian 's Wall . 
 On the continent , the extension of the Empire 's borders beyond the Rhine hung in the balance for some time , with the emperor Caligula apparently poised to invade Germania in 39 AD , and <unk> Domitius Corbulo crossing the Rhine in 47 AD and marching into the territory of the Frisii and <unk> . Caligula 's successor , Claudius , ordered the suspension of further attacks across the Rhine , setting what was to become the permanent limit of the Empire 's expansion in this direction . 
 Further east , Trajan turned his attention to Dacia , an area north of Macedon and Greece and east of the Danube that had been on the Roman agenda since before the days of Caesar when they had beaten a Roman army at the Battle of <unk> . In 85 AD , the Dacians had swarmed over the Danube and pillaged Moesia and initially defeated an army the Emperor Domitian sent against them , but the Romans were victorious in the Battle of Tapae in AD 88 and a truce was drawn up . 
 Emperor Trajan recommenced hostilities against Dacia and , following an uncertain number of battles , defeated the Dacian general Decebalus in the Second Battle of Tapae in 101 AD . With Trajan 's troops pressing towards the Dacian capital <unk> , Decebalus once more sought terms . Decebalus rebuilt his power over the following years and attacked Roman garrisons again in 105 AD . In response Trajan again marched into Dacia , besieging the Dacian capital in the Siege of <unk> , and razing it to the ground . With Dacia quelled , Trajan subsequently invaded the Parthian empire to the east , his conquests taking the Roman Empire to its greatest extent . Rome 's borders in the east were indirectly governed through a system of client states for some time , leading to less direct campaigning than in the west in this period . 
 The Kingdom of Armenia between the Black Sea and Caspian Sea became a focus of contention between Rome and the Parthian Empire , and control of the region was repeatedly gained and lost . The Parthians forced Armenia into submission from 37 AD but in 47 AD the Romans retook control of the kingdom and offered it client kingdom status . Under Nero , the Romans fought a campaign between 55 and 63 AD against the Parthian Empire , which had again invaded Armenia . After gaining Armenia once more in 60 AD and subsequently losing it again in 62 AD , the Romans sent Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo in 63 AD into the territories of Vologases I of Parthia . Corbulo succeeded in returning Armenia to Roman client status , where it remained for the next century . 
 = = = = Year of the Four Emperors ( 69 AD ) = = = = 
 In 69 AD , Marcus Salvius Otho , governor of Lusitania , had the Emperor Galba murdered and claimed the throne for himself . However , Vitellius , governor of the province of Germania Inferior , had also claimed the throne and marched on Rome with his troops . Following an inconclusive battle near Antipolis , Vitellius ' troops attacked the city of Placentia in the Assault of Placentia , but were repulsed by the Othonian garrison . 
 Otho left Rome on March 14 , and marched north towards Placentia to meet his challenger . In the Battle of Locus <unk> the <unk> had the better of the fighting , and Vitellius ' troops retreated to Cremona . The two armies met again on the Via <unk> , in the First Battle of Bedriacum , after which the Othonian troops fled back to their camp in Bedriacum , and the next day surrendered to the Vitellian forces . Otho decided to commit suicide rather than fight on . 
 Meanwhile , the forces stationed in the Middle East provinces of Judaea and Syria had acclaimed Vespasian as emperor and the Danubian armies of the provinces of Raetia and Moesia also acclaimed Vespasian as emperor . Vespasian 's and Vitellius ' armies met in the Second Battle of Bedriacum , after which the Vitellian troops were driven back into their camp outside Cremona , which was taken . Vespasian 's troops then attacked Cremona itself , which surrendered . 
 Under pretence of siding with Vespasian , Civilis of Batavia had taken up arms and induced the inhabitants of his native country to rebel . The rebelling Batavians were immediately joined by several neighbouring German tribes including the Frisii . These forces drove out the Roman garrisons near the Rhine and defeated a Roman army at the Battle of Castra <unk> , after which many Roman troops along the Rhine and in Gaul defected to the Batavian cause . However , disputes soon broke out amongst the different tribes , rendering co @-@ operation impossible ; Vespasian , having successfully ended the civil war , called upon Civilis to lay down his arms , and on his refusal his legions met him in force , defeating him in the Battle of Augusta Treverorum . 
 = = = = Jewish revolts ( 66 – 135 AD ) = = = = 
 The first Jewish @-@ Roman War , sometimes called The Great Revolt , was the first of three major rebellions by the Jews of Judaea Province against the Roman Empire . Judea was already a troubled region with bitter violence among several competing Jewish sects and a long history of rebellion The Jews ' anger turned on Rome following robberies from their temples and Roman insensitivity – Tacitus says disgust and repulsion – towards their religion . The Jews began to prepare for armed revolt . Early successes , including the repulse of the First Siege of Jerusalem and the Battle of Beth @-@ Horon , only attracted greater attention from Rome and Emperor Nero appointed general Vespasian to crush the rebellion . Vespasian led his forces in a methodical clearance of the areas in revolt . By the year 68 AD , Jewish resistance in the North had been crushed . A few towns and cities held out for a few years before falling to the Romans , leading to the Siege of Masada in 73 AD and the Second Siege of Jerusalem . 
 In 115 AD , revolt broke out again in the province , leading to the second Jewish @-@ Roman war known as the <unk> War , and again in 132 AD in what is known as Bar Kokhba 's revolt . Both were brutally crushed . 
 = = = = Struggle with Parthia ( 114 – 217 AD ) = = = = 
 By the 2nd century AD the territories of Persia were controlled by the Arsacid dynasty and known as the Parthian Empire . Due in large part to their employment of powerful heavy cavalry and mobile horse archers , Parthia was the most formidable enemy of the Roman Empire in the east . As early as 53 BC , the Roman general Crassus had invaded Parthia , but he was killed and his army was defeated at the Battle of Carrhae . In the years following Carrhae , the Romans were divided in civil war and hence unable to campaign against Parthia . Trajan also campaigned against the Parthians from 114 – 117 AD and briefly captured their capital Ctesiphon , putting the puppet ruler Parthamaspates on the throne . However , rebellions in Babylonia and the Jewish revolts in Judea made it difficult to maintain the captured province and the territories were abandoned . 
 A revitalised Parthian Empire renewed its assault in 161 AD , defeating two Roman armies and invading Armenia and Syria . Emperor Lucius Verus and general Gaius Avidius Cassius were sent in 162 AD to counter the resurgent Parthia . In this war , the Parthian city of Seleucia on the Tigris was destroyed and the palace at the capital Ctesiphon was burned to the ground by Avidius Cassius in 164 AD . The Parthians made peace but were forced to cede western Mesopotamia to the Romans . 
 In 197 AD , Emperor Septimius Severus waged a brief and successful war against the Parthian Empire in retaliation for the support given to a rival for the imperial throne Pescennius Niger . The Parthian capital Ctesiphon was sacked by the Roman army , and the northern half of Mesopotamia was restored to Rome . 
 Emperor Caracalla , the son of Severus , marched on Parthia in 217 AD from Edessa to begin a war against them , but he was assassinated while on the march . In 224 AD , the Parthian Empire was crushed not by the Romans but by the rebellious Persian vassal king Ardashir I , who revolted , leading to the establishment of Sassanid Empire of Persia , which replaced Parthia as Rome 's major rival in the East . 
 Throughout the Parthian wars , tribal groups along the Rhine and Danube took advantage of Rome 's preoccupation with the eastern frontier ( and the plague that the Romans suffered from after bringing it back from the east ) and launched a series of incursions into Roman territories , including the Marcomannic Wars . 
 = = = Late ( 180 – 476 AD ) = = = 
 = = = = Migration period ( 163 – 378 AD ) = = = = 
 After Varus ' defeat in Germania in the 1st century , Rome had adopted a largely defensive strategy along the border with Germania , constructing a line of defences known as limes along the Rhine . Although the exact historicity is unclear , since the Romans often assigned one name to several distinct tribal groups , or conversely applied several names to a single group at different times , some mix of Germanic peoples , Celts , and tribes of mixed Celto @-@ Germanic ethnicity were settled in the lands of Germania from the 1st century onwards . The Cherusci , Bructeri , Tencteri , <unk> , Marsi , and Chatti of Varus ' time had by the 3rd century either evolved into or been displaced by a confederacy or alliance of Germanic tribes collectively known as the Alamanni , first mentioned by Cassius Dio describing the campaign of Caracalla in 213 AD . 
 In around 166 AD , several Germanic tribes pushed across the Danube , striking as far as Italy itself in the Siege of Aquileia in 166 AD , and the heartland of Greece in the Sack of Eleusis . 
 Although the essential problem of large tribal groups on the frontier remained much the same as the situation Rome faced in earlier centuries , the 3rd century saw a marked increase in the overall threat , although there is disagreement over whether external pressure increased , or Rome 's ability to meet it declined . The Carpi and Sarmatians whom Rome had held at bay were replaced by the Goths and likewise the Quadi and Marcomanni that Rome had defeated were replaced by the greater confederation of the Alamanni . 
 The assembled <unk> of the Alamanni frequently crossed the limes , attacking Germania Superior such that they were almost continually engaged in conflicts with the Roman Empire , whilst Goths attacked across the Danube in battles such as the Battle of <unk> and Battle of Philippopolis in 250 AD and the Battle of <unk> in 251 AD , and both Goths and Heruli ravaged the Aegean and , later , Greece , Thrace and Macedonia . However , their first major assault deep into Roman territory came in 268 AD . In that year the Romans were forced to <unk> much of their German frontier of troops in response to a massive invasion by another new Germanic tribal confederacy , the Goths , from the east . The pressure of tribal groups pushing into the Empire was the end result of a chain of migrations with its roots far to the east : Huns from the Russian steppe attacked the Goths , who in turn attacked the Dacians , Alans and Sarmatians at or within Rome 's borders . The Goths first appeared in history as a distinct people in this invasion of 268 AD when they swarmed over the Balkan peninsula and overran the Roman provinces of Pannonia and Illyricum and even threatened Italia itself . 
 The Alamanni seized the opportunity to launch a major invasion of Gaul and northern Italy . However , the Visigoths were defeated in battle that summer near the modern Italian @-@ Slovenian border and then routed in the Battle of Naissus that September by Gallienus , Claudius and Aurelian , who then turned and defeated the Alemanni at the Battle of Lake <unk> . Claudius ' successor Aurelian defeated the Goths twice more in the Battle of Fanum <unk> and the Battle of Ticinum . The Goths remained a major threat to the Empire but directed their attacks away from Italy itself for several years after their defeat . By 284 AD , Gothic troops were serving on behalf of the Roman military as federated troops . 
 The Alamanni on the other hand resumed their drive towards Italy almost immediately . They defeated Aurelian at the Battle of Placentia in 271 AD but were beaten back for a short time after they lost the battles of Fano and Pavia later that year . They were beaten again in 298 AD at the battles of <unk> and Vindonissa but fifty years later they were resurgent again , making incursions in 356 AD at the Battle of Reims , in 357 AD at the Battle of Strasbourg , in 367 AD at the Battle of <unk> and in 378 AD at Battle of <unk> . In the same year the Goths inflicted a crushing defeat on the Eastern Empire at the Battle of Adrianople , in which the Eastern Emperor Valens was massacred along with tens of thousands of Roman troops . 
 At the same time , Franks raided through the North Sea and the English Channel , Vandals pressed across the Rhine , <unk> against the Danube , <unk> , Carpi and Taifali harassed Dacia , and Gepids joined the Goths and Heruli in attacks round the Black Sea . At around the same time , lesser @-@ known tribes such as the <unk> , <unk> and <unk> raided Africa . 
 At the start of the 5th century , the pressure on Rome 's western borders was growing intense . However , it was not only the western borders that were under threat : Rome was also under threat both internally and on its eastern borders . 
 = = = = Usurpers ( 193 – 394 AD ) = = = = 
 An army that was often willing to support its general over its emperor , meant that if commanders could establish sole control of their army , they could usurp the imperial throne from that position . The so @-@ called Crisis of the Third Century describes the turmoil of murder , usurpation and in @-@ fighting that followed the murder of the Emperor Alexander Severus in 235 AD . However , Cassius Dio marks the wider imperial decline as beginning in 180 AD with the ascension of Commodus to the throne , a judgement with which Gibbon concurred , and Matyszak states that " the rot ... had become established long before " even that . 
 Although the crisis of the 3rd century was not the absolute beginning of Rome 's decline , it nevertheless did impose a severe strain on the empire as Romans waged war on one another as they had not done since the last days of the Republic . Within the space of a single century , twenty @-@ seven military officers declared themselves emperors and reigned over parts of the empire for months or days , all but two meeting with a violent end . The time was characterized by a Roman army that was as likely to be attacking itself as it was an outside invader , reaching a low point around 258 AD . Ironically , while it was these usurpations that led to the breakup of the Empire during the crisis , it was the strength of several frontier generals that helped reunify the empire through force of arms . 
 The situation was complex , often with three or more usurpers in existence at once . Septimius Severus and Pescennius Niger , both rebel generals declared to be emperors by the troops they commanded , clashed for the first time in 193 AD at the Battle of Cyzicus , in which Niger was defeated . However , it took two further defeats at the Battle of Nicaea later that year and the Battle of Issus the following year , for Niger to be destroyed . Almost as soon as Niger 's <unk> had been ended , Severus was forced to deal with another rival for the throne in the person of Clodius Albinus , who had originally been allied to Severus . Albinus was proclaimed emperor by his troops in Britain and , crossing over to Gaul , defeated Severus ' general <unk> Lupus in battle , before being in turn defeated and killed in the Battle of Lugdunum by Severus himself . 
 After this turmoil , Severus faced no more internal threats for the rest of his reign , and the reign of his successor Caracalla passed uninterrupted for a while until he was murdered by Macrinus , who proclaimed himself emperor . Despite Macrinus having his position ratified by the Roman senate , the troops of Varius Avitus declared him to be emperor instead , and the two met in battle at the Battle of Antioch in 218 AD , in which Macrinus was defeated . However , Avitus himself , after taking the imperial name Elagabalus , was murdered shortly afterwards and Alexander Severus was proclaimed emperor by both the Praetorian Guard and the senate who , after a short reign , was murdered in turn . His murderers were working on behalf of the army who were unhappy with their lot under his rule and who raised in his place Maximinus Thrax . However , just as he had been raised by the army , Maximinus was also brought down by them and despite winning the Battle of Carthage against the senate 's newly proclaimed Gordian II , he too was murdered when it appeared to his forces as though he would not be able to best the next senatorial candidate for the throne , Gordian III . 
 Gordian III 's fate is not certain , although he may have been murdered by his own successor , Philip the Arab , who ruled for only a few years before the army again raised a general , Decius , by their proclamation to emperor , who then defeated Philip in the Battle of Verona . Several succeeding generals avoided battling usurpers for the throne by being murdered by their own troops before battle could commence . The lone exception to this rule was Gallienus , emperor from 260 to 268 AD , who confronted a remarkable array of usurpers , most of whom he defeated in pitched battle . The army was mostly spared further infighting until around 273 AD , when Aurelian defeated the Gallic usurper Tetricus in the Battle of <unk> . The next decade saw an incredible number of usurpers , sometimes three at the same time , all vying for the imperial throne . Most of the battles are not recorded , due primarily to the turmoil of the time , until Diocletian , a usurper himself , defeated Carinus at the Battle of the Margus and become emperor . 
 Some small measure of stability again returned at this point , with the empire split into a Tetrarchy of two greater and two lesser emperors , a system that staved off civil wars for a short time until 312 AD . In that year , relations between the tetrarchy collapsed for good and Constantine I , Licinius , Maxentius and Maximinus jostled for control of the empire . In the Battle of Turin Constantine defeated Maxentius , and in the Battle of <unk> , Licinius defeated Maximinus . From 314 AD onwards , Constantine defeated Licinius in the Battle of Cibalae , then the Battle of <unk> , and then again at the Battle of Adrianople , the Battle of the Hellespont and the Battle of Chrysopolis . 
 Constantine then turned upon Maxentius , beating him in the Battle of Verona and the Battle of Milvian Bridge in the same year . Constantine 's son Constantius II inherited his father 's rule and later defeated the usurper Magnentius in first the Battle of <unk> Major and then the Battle of Mons Seleucus . 
 Successive emperors Valens and Theodosius I also defeated usurpers in , respectively , the Battle of <unk> , and the battles of the Save and the <unk> . 
 = = = = Struggle with the Sassanid Empire ( 230 – 363 AD ) = = = = 
 After overthrowing the Parthian confederacy , the Sassanid Empire that arose from its remains pursued a more aggressive expansionist policy than their predecessors and continued to make war against Rome . In 230 AD , the first Sassanid emperor attacked Roman territory first in Armenia and then in Mesopotamia but Roman losses were largely restored by Severus within a few years . In 243 AD , Emperor Gordian III 's army retook the Roman cities of Hatra , Nisibis and Carrhae from the Sassanids after defeating the Sassanids at the Battle of <unk> but what happened next is unclear : Persian sources claim that Gordian was defeated and killed in the Battle of <unk> but Roman sources mention this battle only as an insignificant setback and suggest that Gordian died elsewhere . 
 Certainly , the Sassanids had not been cowed by the previous battles with Rome and in 253 AD the Sassanids under Shapur I penetrated deeply into Roman territory several times , defeating a Roman force at the Battle of <unk> and conquering and plundering Antiochia in 252 AD following the Siege of Antiochia . The Romans recovered Antioch by 253 AD , and Emperor Valerian gathered an army and marched eastward to the Sassanid borders . In 260 AD at the Battle of Edessa the Sassanids defeated the Roman army and captured the Roman Emperor Valerian . 
 By the late 3rd century , Roman fortunes on the eastern frontier improved dramatically . During a period of civil upheaval in Persia , emperor Carus led a successful campaign into Persia essentially uncontested , sacking Ctesiphon in 283 AD . During the reign of the Tetrarchy , emperors Diocletian and Galerius brought a decisive conclusion to the war , sacking Ctesiphon in 299 AD and expanding the Roman eastern frontier dramatically with the Treaty of Nisibis . The treaty brought lasting peace between Rome and the Sassanids for almost four decades until the end of Constantine the Great 's reign . In 337 AD , Shapur II broke the peace and began a 26 @-@ year conflict , attempting with little success to conquer Roman fortresses in the region . After early Sassanid successes including the Battle of Amida in 359 AD and the Siege of <unk> in 363 AD , Emperor Julian met Shapur in 363 AD in the Battle of Ctesiphon outside the walls of the Persian capital . The Romans were victorious but were unable to take the city , and were forced to retreat due to their vulnerable position in the middle of hostile territory . Julian was killed in the Battle of Samarra during the retreat , possibly by one of his own men . 
 There were several future wars , although all brief and small @-@ scale , since both the Romans and the Sassanids were forced to deal with threats from other directions during the 5th century . A war against Bahram V in 420 AD over the persecution of the Christians in Persia led to a brief war that was soon concluded by treaty and in 441 AD a war with Yazdegerd II was again swiftly concluded by treaty after both parties battled threats elsewhere . 
 = = = = Collapse of the Western Empire ( 402 – 476 AD ) = = = = 
 Many theories have been advanced in way of explanation for decline of the Roman Empire , and many dates given for its fall , from the onset of its decline in the 3rd century to the fall of Constantinople in 1453 . Militarily , however , the Empire finally fell after first being overrun by various non @-@ Roman peoples and then having its heart in Italy seized by Germanic troops in a revolt . The historicity and exact dates are uncertain , and some historians do not consider that the Empire fell at this point . 
 The Empire became gradually less Romanised and increasingly Germanic in nature : although the Empire buckled under Visigothic assault , the overthrow of the last Emperor Romulus Augustus was carried out by federated Germanic troops from within the Roman army rather than by foreign troops . In this sense had Odoacer not renounced the title of Emperor and named himself " King of Italy " instead , the Empire might have continued in name . Its identity , however , was no longer Roman – it was increasingly populated and governed by Germanic peoples long before 476 AD . The Roman people were by the 5th century " bereft of their military ethos " and the Roman army itself a mere supplement to federated troops of Goths , Huns , Franks and others fighting on their behalf . 
 Rome 's last gasp began when the Visigoths revolted around 395 AD . Led by Alaric I , they attempted to seize Constantinople , but were rebuffed and instead plundered much of Thrace in northern Greece . In 402 AD they besieged Mediolanum , the capital of Roman Emperor Honorius , defended by Roman Gothic troops . The arrival of the Roman Stilicho and his army forced Alaric to lift his siege and move his army towards Hasta ( modern Asti ) in western Italy , where Stilicho attacked it at the Battle of <unk> , capturing Alaric 's camp . Stilicho offered to return the prisoners in exchange for the Visigoths returning to Illyricum but upon arriving at Verona , Alaric halted his retreat . Stilicho again attacked at the Battle of Verona and again defeated Alaric , forcing him to withdraw from Italy . 
 In 405 AD , the Ostrogoths invaded Italy itself , but were defeated . However , in 406 AD an unprecedented number of tribes took advantage of the freezing of the Rhine to cross en masse : Vandals , <unk> , Alans and Burgundians swept across the river and met little resistance in the Sack of Moguntiacum and the Sack of <unk> , completely overrunning Gaul . Despite this grave danger , or perhaps because of it , the Roman army continued to be wracked by usurpation , in one of which Stilicho , Rome 's foremost defender of the period , was put to death . 
 It is in this climate that , despite his earlier setback , Alaric returned again in 410 AD and managed to sack Rome . The Roman capital had by this time moved to the Italian city of Ravenna , but some historians view 410 AD as an alternative date for the true fall of the Roman Empire . Without possession of Rome or many of its former provinces , and increasingly Germanic in nature , the Roman Empire after 410 AD had little in common with the earlier Empire . By 410 AD , Britain had been mostly denuded of Roman troops , and by 425 AD was no longer part of the Empire , and much of western Europe was beset " by all kinds of calamities and disasters " , coming under barbarian kingdoms ruled by Vandals , <unk> , Visigoths and Burgundians . 
 The remainder of Rome 's territory , if not its nature , was defended for several decades following 410 AD largely by Flavius Aëtius , who managed to play off each of Rome 's barbarian invaders against one another . In 436 AD he led a Hunnic army against the Visigoths at the Battle of Arles , and again in 436 AD at the Battle of Narbonne . In 451 AD he led a combined army , including his former enemy the Visigoths , against the Huns at the Battle of the <unk> Plains , beating them so soundly that although they later sacked Concordia , <unk> , Mediolanum , Ticinum , and <unk> , they never again directly threatened Rome . Despite being the only clear champion of the Empire at this point Aëtius was slain by the Emperor Valentinian III 's own hand , leading Sidonius Apollinaris to observe , " I am ignorant , sir , of your motives or provocations ; I only know that you have acted like a man who has cut off his right hand with his left " . 
 Carthage , the second largest city in the empire , was lost along with much of North Africa in 439 AD to the Vandals , and the fate of Rome seemed sealed . By 476 AD , what remained of the Empire was completely in the hands of federated Germanic troops and when they revolted , led by Odoacer and deposed the Emperor Romulus Augustus there was nobody to stop them . Odoacer happened to hold the part of the Empire around Italy and Rome but other parts of the Empire were ruled by Visigoths , Ostrogoths , Franks , Alans and others . The Empire in the West had fallen , and its remnant in Italy was no longer Roman in nature . The Eastern Roman Empire and the Goths continued to fight over Rome and the surrounding area for many years , though by this point Rome 's importance was primarily symbolic . 
 = = = Secondary and tertiary sources = = = 
 = Battle of Alton = 
 The Battle of Alton ( also Storm of Alton ) , of the First English Civil War , took place on 13 December 1643 in the town of Alton , Hampshire , England . There , Parliamentary forces serving under Sir William Waller led a successful surprise attack on a winter garrison of Royalist infantry and cavalry serving under the Earl of Crawford . In the context of the First English Civil War , the Battle of Alton was the first decisive defeat of Sir Ralph Hopton , leader of Royalist forces in the south , and the event had a significant psychological effect on him as commander . More important to Hopton was the loss of men , however , as he was already short @-@ handed in much @-@ needed infantry . The successful Parliamentarians were able , after their victory , to attack and successfully besiege Arundel , a larger and more formidable Royalist outpost in the south of England . 
 At dawn on the 13th , as Waller 's army approached Alton , Crawford fled with the cavalry to Winchester , leaving Colonel <unk> Boles to defend Alton with only the infantry . Outnumbered and overpowered , Boles 's men were soon forced to seek refuge in the Church of St Lawrence , where they made a desperate last stand . Boles was killed , along with most of his remaining men . The Parliamentarians won a clear victory , losing only a few men and taking many prisoners . 
 Boles 's fight is also notable for its demonstrated drama and heroism . Stories boast of Boles , who is said to have killed a number of his enemies before falling himself . The battle of Alton is known as one of the " most savage encounters " of the English Civil War . Indeed , musket holes from this fierce fight can still be seen in the south door to the church and inside , where so many cornered men were killed and captured . The Battle of Alton was notably the first battle in the English Civil War to use leather guns , employed effectively by Waller before and during the battle proper . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 13 September 1643 , English Parliament ordered Major General William Waller to muster forces for the " protection " of Hampshire County . In November , he was given control of forces stationed in Farnham , a major Parliamentary staging ground , in order to take control of Kent , Surrey , Sussex and Hampshire . These forces were supplemented by the Red Regiment ( from Westminster ) and the Green and Yellow regiments ( from London ) . Also at Waller 's disposal were a personal regiment of foot soldiers and surviving cavalry from the Battle of Roundway Down . 
 Waller marched from Farnam for Odiham and Alton , intending to occupy these towns while gradually approaching his objective , Basing . While not of great strategic importance , Basing 's proximity to the main road between London , Salisbury , and Winchester made it worthy of attention . Marching toward Alton , Waller halted at Bentley Green on 3 November , where he determined his capabilities . He marched further that day , but later retreated to Farnham . On 2 November , Waller attacked one hundred men of Bennett 's at Alton . From 7 – 9 November , Waller laid siege to Basing House , but withdrew to Basingstoke in failure , with his soldiers near mutiny from poor weather conditions . He tried again on the night of 11 November , but retreated to Farnham to await Hopton 's army . 
 Hopton arrived on 27 November , given by King Charles 1 @,@ 580 horse , but only around 2 @,@ 000 conscripted infantry and 500 troops recently returned from fighting in Munster , Ireland . Hopton had been ordered in late September to make secure Dorset , Wiltshire and Hampshire , and to push as far as possible toward London . Toward this end , Hopton spread his men across Hampshire County , quartering them for the winter at Winchester , Alresford , Petersfield and Alton . He did so to alleviate the burden on any one town , and because winter was approaching quickly . However , this left his army vulnerable . Hopton placed Crawford in charge of Alton , and on 1 December Crawford began to fortify the small town as quickly as he could . Crawford had at his disposal one cavalry regiment and one infantry regiment , though his exact number of men is unknown ; it was likely around 1 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 During the week prior to the Battle of Alton , Waller scouted the town and planned his attack . He confided his intent to only a few of his senior men , maintaining secrecy . Waller did make another raid on the evening of 9 December , where a small party of his forces struck at Crawford 's lodging but fell back after the minor attack . During the morning hours of 12 December , Crawford sent a missive to Farnham , requesting of Waller that he be sent a " <unk> of sack " , promising an ox in exchange . When the wine was sent , Crawford refused to send the ox , challenging Waller to fetch it himself . 
 Reverend G.N. Godwin 's Civil War in Hampshire ( 1882 ) 
 During this exchange , Waller , eager to repair his reputation after Roundway Down , promptly decided to attack Alton , the nearest Royalist outpost to Farnham and only ten miles away . According to the Mercurius <unk> , a contemporary publication , Crawford was watching only the main road from Farnham at this time . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Waller mustered his men in Farnham Park near 10 : 30 p.m. , on 12 December . At around midnight , 5 @,@ 000 of Waller 's men marched west from Farnham toward Basing House . The Parliamentarians marched about two miles in this direction ( in order to confuse Royalist scouts ) , until around 1 : 00 a.m. , before abruptly turning south toward Alton . The march was quick and quiet , owing to a long frost which had hardened the roads and Waller 's judicious use of wooded areas . Also helpful in Waller 's advance was his use of leather guns , here employed for the first time in the English Civil War . Unlike heavier artillery , a leather gun could be led by a single horse , transported efficiently over difficult terrain , and still be an effective tool for bombardment . 
 Waller 's forces reached the western side of Alton at around 9 : 00 a.m. , capturing six of Crawford 's sentries posted in the north . One Royalist sentry , however , managed to raise the alarm just before dawn , leading Crawford and his horse to quit Alton and head for Winchester at a gallop , as Waller approached the town . It is reported that they had promised the remaining infantry men that they would return soon with reinforcements . Initially , Crawford and his cavalry attempted to flee from the eastern border of Alton , but were routed back into town and to the south ( heading directly for Winchester ) by Parliamentary horse . The fleeing Royalists were chased for a half @-@ mile by Waller 's heavy cavalry ( these under Sir Arthur Haslerig and nicknamed the " Lobsters " ) , losing a few men and some number of horses . Haslerig , forfeiting pursuit , guarded the entrances to the town . 
 Meanwhile , Boles 's men concentrated to the north @-@ west corner of town , before the Church of St Lawrence . A regiment of Waller 's infantry , five companies of Haslerig 's , and five companies of Kentish Men attacked Alton from the north and north @-@ west . The Royalist infantry , however , took effective cover inside buildings , out of which they fired quickly ; they particularly favoured a large brick house near the church . This house , however , was soon abandoned as Waller 's artillery , positioned at the foot of the hill to the west , fired upon it , forcing these defenders to retreat to the church . The Parliamentary regiments from London and four companies from Farnham Castle descended the hill : Waller 's Red Regiment attacked a lunette and breastwork which the Royalists had built and which they were using as an effective fortification . The Green Regiment flanked the Royalists which were behind these fortifications forcing them out , while marching through town under the cover of smoke from a thatch house which they had set on fire . Soon after , the rest of Waller 's men entered the town en masse , flying their colours and pushing Boles 's men back to the Church of St Lawrence . From the church and nearby fortifications ( including a large earthwork on its north side ) , the Royalists held their ground for two hours . The Royalists fired from the windows of the church , and employed a scaffolding inside the church proper to fire from greater heights . 
 Eventually , the Parliamentarians forced the Royalists to abandon the south @-@ east part of the wall around the church . However , since the retreating men had left their muskets sticking up , the Parliamentarians were temporarily unaware that the Royalists had left . After some time it was concluded that the defenders had gone , and the Parliamentary army promptly attacked the churchyard , driving the last of Boles 's men into the church itself . Waller 's forces threw hand grenades into the windows while working to enter the church themselves . Inside the building , Boles declared he would , " run his sword through him which first called for quarter . " There had been no time for the Royalists to barricade the church doors , and the Parliamentarians soon managed to gain entry . Inside , the Royalists shot from behind a jury @-@ rigged breastwork of dead horses . Some of Boles 's men were killed ; other surrendered . Boles did not give up , and he killed as many as seven men before being killed himself . With Boles killed , all but a few of the Royalists requested quarter . 
 Inscribed in Boles 's honour was this epitaph : 
 Alton will tell you of that famous Fight 
 Which ys man made , and bade this world good @-@ night . 
 His <unk> Life fear 'd not Mortality , 
 His body must , his Vertues cannot die , 
 Because his <unk> was there so nobly spent , 
 This is his Tombe ; that Church his Monument . 
 Ricardus Boles , <unk> in Art . Mag . 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> . An . Domi 1679 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 During and after the battle , Waller captured at least 500 men , around 100 of these re @-@ enlisting with him . Additionally , more than 100 Royalist soldiers were killed . Together , the men lost represented nearly half of Hopton 's infantry forces in the south . Waller , on the other hand , lost around ten men and gained much reputation for his success . Waller put his prisoners to work dragging the horse carcasses from the church , dismantling the scaffoldings inside , and burying their fallen comrades near the northern wall of the building . All of the captured men were then marched to Farnham tied together in pairs . 
 Waller ordered his men to demolish the town 's fortifications , and had survivors that did not re @-@ enlist paraded through the streets of London to mark his victory . Crawford 's hat , cloak and gifted wine were all left behind in Alton . From then on , it was said that Crawford , in fleeing , " left his sack at Alton " . King Charles , upon hearing of Boles 's death , called for a mourning scarf , lamenting at the loss of what he considered to be one of " the best Commanders in this Kingdome " . In the following weeks , letters were sent from Crawford and Hopton to Waller : 
 Sir , your servant , Crawford 
 Winton , 16 December . Ralf Hopton . 
 Hopton was severely depressed by his defeat at Alton , more than seemed appropriate given its military import . On the Parliamentarian side , the morale boost enjoyed by Waller was significant , and on 15 December , the House of Commons of England ordered Sir Arthur Haslerig and Sir Gilbert Gerard to draft a letter to Waller commending him for his success . The Parliamentary victory at the Battle of Alton allowed Waller to advance south @-@ east , and upon Arundel where he began a successful siege on the Royalists garrisoned there . Hopton was unable to break the siege with his few remaining foot soldiers , and the 1 @,@ 000 horse he received from Oxford were unhelpful . After the Siege of Arundel , both armies were forced to retire for the winter due to the harsh weather . 
 = Trams in Rouen = 
 There have been two separate generations of trams in Rouen . The first generation tramway was a tram network built in Rouen , Normandy , northern France , that started service in 1877 , and finally closed in 1953 . There were no trams at all in Rouen between 1953 and 1994 , when the modern Rouen tramway opened . 
 Horse @-@ drawn carriages and omnibuses had started at the end of the 18th century and progressively improved , but were no longer enough to provide urban services in an age of industrial and demographic growth . Local officials therefore adopted the tramway as a new mode of transport . At first they were horse @-@ drawn , and later steam @-@ powered ; the tramway was electrified in 1896 . 
 The network spread quickly through various city @-@ centre districts on the right bank of the Seine , to reach the suburbs of the northern plateau , the hills of Bonsecours in the east , skirting around the textile valley of the River <unk> in the west , crossing the river and serving , in the south , the suburbs and industrial districts of the left bank . 
 At its largest it covered 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) of route , the longest network in France during the Belle Époque , and contributed to the success of events in the town 's history , such as the Colonial Exhibition of 1896 and the Norman Millennium Festival of 1911 . 
 Although the 1920s saw a slight growth in traffic , the network 's expansion slowed to a halt . Private motoring had arrived to put an end to its monopoly . The rising power of buses and trolleybuses , the Great Depression in France , and above all the Second World War that ravaged Rouen and Normandy , condemned the tramway to death . The last trams stopped running in 1953 , after seventy @-@ six years of service . However , in 1994 , a new Rouen tramway came to the Norman capital . 
 = = The first tramways = = 
 = = = Horse and steam = = = 
 Rouen was integrated into the French Kingdom after Philip II of France annexed Normandy in 1204 , and it continued as one of the largest cities in the kingdom under the Ancien Régime . It prospered during the 19th century , with the traditional trades of textiles and Rouen manufactory ( <unk> ) alongside the newer chemical and papermaking industries . The navigable Seine , emptying at Rouen , had been Parisians ' route to the sea ever since the Middle Ages . Napoleon Bonaparte said " Rouen , Le Havre <unk> une même ville dont la Seine est la grand @-@ rue " ( " Rouen and Le Havre form a single town of which the Seine is the High Street " ) . Rouen and Orléans were the first large cities to be connected by rail to Paris , on 3 May 1843 . After the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 1871 , the economy of the First Industrial Revolution under the Second Empire , and the ever @-@ growing population , obliged the Rouen city authorities to rethink the travel facilities both within the city centre and between it and the expanding suburbs . 
 Urban services — always horse @-@ drawn , either carriages or omnibuses on the most profitable routes — were not enough to satisfy the needs of a town that already numbered , with its suburbs , more than 170 @,@ 000 people . From 1873 to 1875 the city fathers commissioned a study into building railways connecting the most populous areas of Rouen . A decree was signed on 5 May 1876 , committing to a publicly owned standard gauge ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ( 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ) ) network , and to horse @-@ drawn carriages . Nine lines stretching 27 @,@ 500 m ( 90 @,@ 200 ft ) , or 1 @,@ 370 chains were decreed : 
 The town was authorised to tender construction and operation to one or more contractors . It quickly chose the only serious candidate , Gustav Palmer Harding , a British citizen . He was the continental representative of Merryweather & Sons , builders of steam tram engines . This decision knitted the close railway links between the city and Great Britain that remained for nearly half a century . Naturally , Mr Harding wanted to promote his company 's machines , so he long made his views known to the municipal authorities . Finally convinced , they authorised him to use steam power from Maromme ( Line 1 ) , entering service on 29 December 1877 . Merryweather & Sons , whose depot was on the Avenue du Mont @-@ Riboudet , provided the tram units . Small and light — 4 @.@ 7 tonnes ( 4 @.@ 6 long tons ; 5 @.@ 2 short tons ) — these reversible locomotives had two coupled axles , fully covered by a wooden body . They looked the same as a normal carriage so as not to frighten the horses . These steam carriages had enclosed lower decks ; the upper decks were roofed but had open sides . 
 The first steam trams of Léon <unk> 's design soon appeared on the Maromme line and coexisted with the horse @-@ drawn tramways that served the city centre . 
 = = = Success and doubts = = = 
 The successful first line was soon extended to the Place Saint @-@ Hilaire , opening on 1 June 1878 . Harding then founded the Compagnie des Tramways de Rouen ( " Rouen Tramways Company " ) ( CTR ) and started building new sections from the Town Hall to Mont @-@ Riboudet ( Line 8 ; opened 3 September 1878 ) . He also started steam traction from <unk> ( Line 2 ; started 23 June 1879 ) . On the other hand , the lines that went through narrow local streets remained horse @-@ drawn when first opened : Line 4 ( opened 3 October 1878 ) , Line 5 , ( opening 12 December 1878 ) , Line 6 ( opened 6 February 1879 ) , and Line 3 ( opened 27 September 1879 ) . Line 9 was not constructed because of technical difficulties . 
