 Chains of Olympus has been praised for " fantastic " graphics and " tight and responsive " controls . In 2008 , IGN awarded Chains of Olympus the " Best PSP Action Game " , and in September 2010 , it was listed as the best PSP game by GamePro . God of War III received praise for its graphics , in particular of Kratos ; IGN stated that Kratos is " perhaps the single most impressive @-@ looking character ever in videogames . " IGN also said that God of War III " redefines what the word ' scale ' means with regards to videogames , as it throws you into scenes with Titans that are larger than entire levels in some other games . " God of War III received awards for " Most Anticipated Game of 2010 " and " Best PS3 Game " at the 2009 and 2010 Spike Video Game Awards , respectively . The game also won the " Artistic Achievement " award at the 2011 BAFTA awards . Ghost of Sparta was praised for its graphics and story , with Chris Pereira of 1UP saying that it was " a more personal story than the other GOW games . " It received several awards at E3 2010 including " Best Handheld Game " , " Best PSP Game " , and " PSP Game of Show " , and won " Best Handheld Game " at the 2010 Spike Video Game Awards . 
 The series has also received criticism because of problems with puzzles , weapons , and technical issues . Chains of Olympus was criticized by G4 , who stated that the game " occasionally suffers from screen tearing and framerate drops " , and that some of the puzzles " are so maddeningly difficult to solve " . The game was also criticized for its lack of variety in enemies , its continued use of puzzles that require players to move boxes , and its relatively short story . God of War III also received some criticism . GameFront 's Phil Hornshaw said it had an overly cruel antagonist , and the game assumed that the players reveled in the misery and violence as much as Kratos did . IGN complained about the game 's weapons , and said " that two of the three additional weapons that you 'll earn are extremely similar to your blades . They have unique powers and slightly different moves , but by and large , they 're more of the same . " Ghost of Sparta received criticism from Eurogamer , which said that the " game 's primary problem ... is in its in @-@ built focus " and that " there is a sense that Ghost of Sparta is a step back for the series if you 've played [ God of War III ] . " Some reviewers stated that <unk> 's story was not as compelling as previous installments , with IGN stating that in comparison to Zeus and Ares , " the Furies don ’ t quite cut it " . The multiplayer received a mixed response . Although reviewers claimed gameplay translated well into the multiplayer , they were critical of the balance and depth of combat . Edge magazine approved of the multiplayer , stating it is an " evolutionary step " with " some fine ideas ... that will form part of this genre 's future template . " 
 The collections have also received praise . IGN ( 9 @.@ 4 / 10 ) awarded God of War Collection ( PS3 ) the " Editor 's Choice " Award and praised the enhanced resolutions , lower price point and smoother frame rates , and stated it was the " definitive way to play the game [ s ] " . Due to the success of God of War Collection , Sony announced that further titles would receive similar treatment for release under its new " Classics HD " brand . The Origins Collection was similarly well received . IGN ( 9 / 10 ) stated " Sony succeeded at making good games better " , although GamePro criticized it for its lack of new bonus content . God of War Saga also received praise . Ryan Fleming of Digital Trends wrote that the collection " is perhaps the best value buy for any console available , " although the collection is not likely for fans of the series , but rather inexperienced players or newcomers . God of War III Remastered was met with generally favorable reception . Praise was given to the smoother textures and improved frame rate , though because the original already had remarkable graphics , the changes were not major , and reviewers said these changes were not a strong enough argument to rebuy the game for $ 40 USD . 
 = Spooks ( series 1 ) = 
 The first series of the British spy drama television series Spooks ( known as MI @-@ 5 in the United States ) began broadcasting on 13 May 2002 on BBC One , before ending on 17 June 2002 . It consists of six episodes . Spooks follows the actions of Section D , a counter @-@ terrorism division of the British Security Services ( MI5 ) . Among the storylines , main character Tom Quinn faces dilemmas living a double life with his girlfriend , who at first does not know he is really a spy , and Tessa Phillips is running phantom agents for monetary gain . Matthew Macfadyen , Keeley Hawes , David Oyelowo , Peter Firth , Jenny Agutter , Lisa Faulkner , Esther Hall , Heather Cave , Hugh Simon and <unk> Mearns are listed as the main cast . 
 Kudos Film and Television developed Spooks after releasing Channel 4 medical drama Psychos in 1999 , though the company initially faced friction from television networks which saw no potential in a post @-@ Cold War spy show . The producers later successfully pitched the series to the BBC after the networks ' commissioning teams were replaced . Four episodes were being written when the September 11 attacks took place , and the some scenes were rewritten to take the event into account to show the audience Spooks 's goal of fighting terrorism . Throughout production , the producers were advised by former intelligence officers from the Security Service , KGB and Central Intelligence Agency . Filming took place from November 2001 to March 2002 . 
 The first series was seen by an average of 7 @.@ 49 million , and received generally favourable reviews from critics , with some comparing the series to American espionage @-@ based series such as 24 . The second episode attracted controversy after a scene which depicted the brutal death of main character Helen Flynn ( Lisa Faulkner ) attracted more than 250 complaints . As a result of the series , MI5 's website saw a surge in a number of applications to the organisation by viewers . Spooks was awarded a British Academy Television Awards ( BAFTA ) for Best Drama Series , and was nominated for two other BAFTAs and three Royal Television Society Awards . The first series was released on DVD on 16 June 2003 in Region 2 , 18 August 2003 in Region 4 , and 13 January 2004 in Region 1 . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ten main cast members are listed in the first series . Matthew Macfadyen plays primary protagonist and senior case officer Tom Quinn . Creator David Wolstencroft found Tom to be the most fun , yet hardest character to write for due to him being the main character . When portraying the character , Macfadyen did what he was told to do ; he did not want to create a backstory for the character as he did not find merit in doing so . Keeley Hawes plays junior case officer Zoe Reynolds . Hawes was attracted to the parallels between acting and spying . The actress described Zoe as " a feisty little number . She can be quite cold and you don 't really know her , " and the series sees " flashes of how she can be " . David Oyelowo plays fellow junior case officer Danny Hunter . Oyelowo first became aware of the show when his agent brought him the script , and was quickly intrigued by the project , and wanted a part to play in it . He downplayed his enthusiasm in order to get the part . Macfadyen , Hawes and Oyelowo were initially wary of playing the lead characters even though the actors were in their mid @-@ twenties , but eventually felt that they earned the right to be in the series . 
 Peter Firth plays the head of the counter @-@ terrorism department , Harry Pearce . Firth was interested in the series after hearing of Brenton 's involvement in the project , and thought Spooks was " special " and " different " from British television at the time . Firth would " pepper " the dialogue with quotations from famous classical works , with moral and religious philosophies . Jenny Agutter plays Tessa Philips , senior case officer for Section K. The actress described Tessa as " hard edged " and " not a nice person " , but straightforward and not initially expected to be corrupt . She realised that although Tessa would start off as a peripheral character , her role would build as the series continued . Tessa 's story was described by a BBC press release as being about " the dangers of corruption from within " . Lisa Faulkner portrays admin support officer Helen Flynn . Esther Hall plays Tom 's girlfriend and restaurant owner Ellie Simm , while Heather Cave plays her eight @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Maisie . Hall felt that Ellie was the character the audience could identify with . The producers created Maisie because they believed that children are often " the best spies of all " . Hugh Simon plays technical officer Malcolm Wynn @-@ Jones , and <unk> Mearns plays MI5 officer Jed Kelley . 
 The first series also sees a number of recurring characters and guest appearances . Rory MacGregor appears in two episodes as Colin Wells , an MI5 technical officer . American actress Megan Dodds appears in the first episode as CIA liaison Christine Dale . The producers were impressed enough by Dodds ' performance that they wished to see her return in the second series . Kevin McNally appears as Robert Osbourne , the antagonist of the second episode . The producers felt the actor was suitable for the role , as was the case with Debra Stephenson , who played his wife Claire . In the fourth and fifth episodes , Hugh Laurie appears as Jools Siviter , a department head of MI6 , an organisation depicted as " old school " compared with MI5 . Laurie based his performance on Barry Foster 's portrayal of the head of MI6 in Sweeney ! . Meanwhile , also in episode four , Anthony Head , best known for his work on Buffy the Vampire Slayer at the time , played Peter Salter . Despite his status as a former Buffy regular , Head still had to earn the role from his audition . 
 In episode five , Tim Pigott @-@ Smith plays Hampton Wilder , a character who was based on Richard Nixon and Jeffrey Archer . In the same episode , Naoko Mori appeared as a lover of Danny 's ; Mori previously appeared in Psychos , another series produced by Kudos . In the finale , Irish actor <unk> <unk> plays Irish splinter group terrorist Patrick McCann . <unk> had previously appeared in several other dramas as Provisional Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) operators . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 The first series of Spooks was produced by Kudos Film and Television for the BBC . David Wolstencroft was credited as the series creator , Simon Crawford Collins as the producer , and Jane Featherstone as the series producer . The executive producers of the first series were Kudos director Stephen Garrett and Head of Independent Drama Commissioning for the BBC , Gareth Neame . The series includes three writers , and three directors . Wolstencroft wrote the first two episodes and finale of series one . Simon Mirren wrote the third episode . Howard Brenton wrote the last three episodes , co @-@ writing the finale with Wolstencroft . The producers hired Brenton for his " radical " and " provocative " style . By the time he was hired it had been sixteen years since he last wrote for television . 
 The producers from Kudos spent up to three months meeting several potential directors to work on the show , but none shared their views about the show 's style until Bharat Nalluri . The style the director used was inspired by Bollywood films , as well as American television . According to Wolstencroft , Nalluri " directs as I see . " Three directors were chosen , each working on two episodes ; Nalluri directed the first two episodes , Rob Bailey directed the next two episodes , and Andy Wilson directed the last two episodes . Sue Gibson and Sean Bobbitt served as the directors of photography , with Mark Goddard and Francesco Reidy serving as first assistant directors . Colin Green and Soren B. Ebbe were the series editors , while David Crozier and Andrew <unk> served as sound recordists . Leila Kirkpatrick was the line producer and Linda <unk> was the production designer , while Andrea <unk> was the costume designer , and Alison Davies was the make @-@ up designer . The casting director for the first series was Gail Stevens . Karen Wilson was the script editor , and Ralph Cameron and Malcolm <unk> were the location managers . 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Kudos began to develop the show after producing the Channel 4 medical drama series Psychos in 1999 . Kudos wished to explore series ideas that saw beyond typical " precinct @-@ based dramas " ( crime and medical ) . Stephen Garrett decided on developing a spy drama after coming across John le Carré novels at a Waterstone 's bookstore , and came to realise that MI5 or MI6 had not been featured as the setting for shows before . He felt the benefit of a spy show is that rather than in a crime drama where the protagonists take their work home with them , spies are given the added dimension that they cannot reveal their work even to their loved ones . In the meantime , Wolstencroft , who wrote Psychos , was also developing a spy drama , albeit as a film . When Kudos contacted him , they agreed they should work together to create a television series based on his idea , which was not to <unk> the world of spies , instead showing the audience that spies work in a " shitty job " . Kudos later pitched the show to all the major British television networks ; however none of them were as enthusiastic as Kudos , as they did not see the potential of a post @-@ Cold War spy series . After the commissioning teams from the networks were replaced , Kudos again pitched the show , albeit reinvented , and as a result Lorraine Heggessey , controller of BBC One , commissioned the show after planning to introduce " braver " , " dynamic " and " pacier " shows to attract a younger audience for the channel . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The two main writers , Brenton and Wolstencroft , had different styles and influences in their scripts . Wolstencroft was influenced by American television to make the episodes pacier . His chosen writing style was a mixture of the " <unk> " of le Carré 's works and James Bond @-@ like fantasies . While writing the series , the writer introduced a set of " MI5 terminology " , terms used by the main characters in the series . According to Oyelowo , Wolstencroft 's scripts included more spy terms , stating " we curse David Wolstencroft often . His dialogue tends to be the most chewy , " and the actors had to learn them as if they spoke as such on a daily basis . Brenton , meanwhile , adopted the same writing style based on early episodes of Taggart , a Scottish @-@ based crime drama ; the writer was impressed by the show 's ability to add more to the plot halfway through . He also took inspirations from novels including le Carré 's Tinker , Tailor , Soldier , Spy . Mirren wrote " One Last Dance " , which he felt was difficult to write as he had to tie two main storylines together . Brenton and Wolstencroft collaborated to write " Lesser of Two Evils " due to timing constraints . Wolstencroft pitched the story , and then each writer wrote 30 pages of dialogue . 
 The pilot originally underwent 30 rewrites and four separate story ideas before the BBC was satisfied with it . Similarly , the second episode went through four rewrites . After four episodes were written , the September 11 attacks took place , resulting in three thousand deaths in the United States . As a result , the episodes were rewritten to take account of the events to assure the audience that the show is about fighting terrorism . According to Wolstencroft , the attacks " <unk> " the show , " perversely made it as relevant as can be , " and " commuted a great sense of responsibility " on Spooks . 
 Throughout the writing , and also the filming stages of the series , the writers were advised by ex @-@ MI5 officers who gave insight into how the characters operate and how their personal lives would be affected by it . Among the advisors were Nick Day , who worked in counter @-@ terrorism in the Security Services , Viktor <unk> , a UK @-@ based former KGB officer , and Mike Baker , an ex @-@ CIA agent . When including terrorists , the BBC often has the responsibility to portray people with as much balance as possible for both sides . The first series finale was heavily researched , as the episode was based on real life instances in which terrorists agreed to work with the authorities in Colombia . Meanwhile , a scene in which Tom and Patrick strip naked to ensure they are not bugged came from the producers ' sources . The sources also advised the producers how to tail targets without being spotted . 
 The second episode included the death of a main character . The idea was originally going to be used in the series finale . However , the producers did not know how to fill in episode two , so the death was moved up . According to Wolstencroft , the inclusion of Helen 's death was to give the audience the message that " the world of Spooks isn 't the world where the cavalry always arrive , because in reality these people [ MI5 ] do risk their lives on our behalf and they do get into sticky situations with genuinely nasty people . " The producers also wanted main characters to die on occasion rather than on a weekly or bi @-@ weekly basis ; otherwise it would show MI5 officers as not doing their jobs properly . Although Spooks is a serious show , the writers add occasional humour from the characters . According to Wolstencroft , he felt that anybody who works in such an occupation with high responsibilities tends to have humour around , and that those people make jokes even though they have seen " heinous things " . This became the basis for creating Jools Siviter . 
 The first series of Spooks saw various storylines involving the main characters . Among these were Danny 's obsession with money and spending , by hacking into a credit card database in order to fool it to give him a better credit rating , and the discovery that Tessa is running phantom agents to pocket their money . Those storylines were intended by Brenton and Wolstencroft to show the audience that the MI5 officers are tempted by money . A principle story arc is Tom dealing with the complexities of his relationship with Ellie , who at first does not know he is a spy . This storyline was based on Mike Baker , whose wife did not know he was a spy for the first six months they were together . As the series progressed , there were more difficulties with the relationship ; Brenton wrote Tom 's position as if the character did not see the problem . The same episode also introduced the sexual tension between Danny and Zoe . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The first series began filming in November 2001 , and continued until March 2002 . Shooting took place almost entirely in London , with many rural scenes filmed around South East England . Each episode took approximately 12 to 14 days to shoot , although they do not follow on the order of the script ; the production crew would film all scenes set at a certain location first , and then move on to the rest . Between 40 and 50 cuts were made in the first 10 minutes of the pilot episode to quickly introduce the main characters . Filming was usually done with long lens cameras , which proved difficult for the crew as many filming location were short on space . The scenes where Tom reveals he is a spy to Ellie in " Traitor 's Gate " were filmed using hand @-@ held cameras , the first time they were used in the series . By the time the crew filmed the series finale , hand @-@ held cameras were mostly used . The cameras allowed for more intimate filming as opposed to shoulder @-@ operated cameras . The downside to the hand @-@ held cameras was that they can only shoot four minutes worth of footage from each film stock . In addition , the operators at first hated using the cameras . 
 The episodes of the first series were not filmed in the order they were broadcast ; " Traitor 's Gate " was the third episode to be filmed , while " One Last Dance " was the fourth . While filming " One Last Dance " and " The Rose Bed Memoirs " , Macfadyen had a bloodshot left eye . To cover it , sometimes Macfadyen had to hide the left side of his face from the camera . At other times , the actor wore sunglasses . The series made use of real firearms that were decommissioned from service . Certain cast members , including Oyelowo , handled firearms at some point in the series . In order to maintain gun safety , two weapons experts were on hand to train the actors during rehearsal . 
 The producers chose the exterior and some interior of Freemasons ' Hall in Camden as the stand @-@ in for Thames House , the real @-@ life headquarters of MI5 , as they felt both buildings shared a similar architecture . However the Grid set , the offices of the protagonists , was filmed in a closed medical school in Kensington . Sometime after filming concluded for the first series , the building was demolished . Several other locales around London were used as filming locations . The scenes leading up to Mary 's apprehension in " Thou Shalt Not Kill " were filmed at Borough Market in Southwark . The same episode made use of Covent Garden . " One Last Dance " had scenes filmed in Roehampton and New Zealand House . In the latter 's case , the actors were filmed on the top floors , where the wind forced the actors to raise their voices so the sound unit could hear them . Scenes were filmed in Hampstead Heath in " Traitor 's Gate " , while one scene was filmed in Trafalgar Square and at London Bridge for " The Rose Bed Memoirs " . The last two episodes held several scenes filmed at a high @-@ end house in Highgate owned by a silk merchant , in particular the opera house and bar Jools frequents , and the DG 's ( Director General of MI5 ) office . Rural scenes were filmed across the South East of England , including in areas in Surrey , and outside Maidstone in Kent . In the series finale , the exterior of Sizewell nuclear power stations in Suffolk was used as a double for the fictional Sefton B power station . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Each episode took approximately two months to edit , and editing usually began as the episodes were still being shot . The editors would work on two episodes simultaneously . Following the completion of the episodes , Muskett added the score for them . The episodes include split screen sequences . Although the sequences were presented in a similar vein to the American action series 24 , the split screen idea did not come from the show itself ; Nalluri thought of it independently after visiting a pub one night after filming wrapped up . The series also introduced the premise of not including any production credits . The producers agreed that adding credits would be a waste of time , and that the viewers would pay no attention to them . However , they also saw this as an opportunity ; as Spooks is a spy show , Wolstencroft had the idea that it would be " cool " to have a show that was anonymous , and it would fit the spirit of the series . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast , ratings and impact = = = 
 Before broadcasting began , the BBC considered airing the show on a Saturday night timeslot as its research found that any potential viewers were less likely to watch television on Saturdays than most other nights of the week ; the BBC hoped that Spooks would boost its timeslot . However , the series instead broadcast on Mondays . The series began broadcasting on 13 May 2002 on BBC One during the 9 to 10 pm timeslot , and continued on every Monday night until 17 June 2002 , with the exception of the fourth episode , which was viewed on Tuesday 4 June starting at 10 pm , due to an overrun of the coverage of Elizabeth II 's Golden Jubilee . The episodes were also repeated on the digital channel BBC Choice . In the US , the first series aired in mid @-@ 2003 on A & E. However , each episode had approximately ten minutes edited out in order to accommodate for advert breaks . The DVD release of the series in America contained the uncut episodes . The first series was later repeated on BBC America , alongside the second series starting in June 2007 . 
 The Spooks producers were hoping the ratings for the pilot would achieve at least six million viewers ; at the time this was considered acceptable ratings by the BBC , as it would allow them to further consider Spooks ' future . The first episode ended up with an overnight rating of 9 @.@ 2 million viewers , with a 41 per cent audience share , easily winning its time slot , and nearly doubling the numbers of ITV1 's Helen West , which was viewed by 4 @.@ 8 million at the same slot . The second episode dropped to 7 @.@ 8 million , but was still the most seen series in the timeslot . Although the series won its timeslot again in the third episode , " One Last Dance " faced competition from The Kumars at No. 42 on BBC Two , and was down to seven million . The different timeslot for episode four meant that it dipped below six million ; however , ratings recovered to over seven million by the series finale . With consolidated figures factored in , the first series was seen by an average of 7 @.@ 49 million viewers . After two episodes aired , the BBC began considering renewing the show for a longer second series as it had proved popular among the key demographics of viewers aged 16 to 34 years . The renewal was officially announced by the BBC 's Head of Drama Commissioning Jane Tranter in December 2002 . 
 Within the fortnight of the show 's launch , MI5 noted a surge in a number of applications to the organisation as a result of the series . Out of the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ plus applications per week to MI5 's website , more than 2 @,@ 500 people applied following the end of a Spooks episode , while before the episodes broadcast , only a handful of new applications were entered . MI5 welcomed the show 's impact on the public , despite the officers ' views that Spooks was " unrealistic and far @-@ fetched " , and could give viewers a false impression of how the organisation operates . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The first series received generally favourable reviews . Joe Joseph of The Times stated that it " bears a closer resemblance [ to ] 24 , " which " shaded the pleasure of this opening episode " , but felt that by the end of the episode , Spooks had " established a voice of its own . " Gerard O 'Donovan of The Telegraph thought that the series " proved thoroughly entertaining " , and praised Wolstencroft 's writing , which O 'Donovan felt was " confident enough to be playful with its subject – especially regarding Britain 's poor @-@ relation relationship with America . " Alison Graham of the Radio Times called the first series " a tremendous pieces of hokum , which is only slightly po @-@ faced ( but in a knowing kind of way ) and which manages to stay just on the right side of self @-@ parody . " Thomas <unk> of The Independent felt it was a " different kind of spy drama " with " a literal description , derived from the sort of rueful story you could imagine being told at an MI5 staff social " , and " a lot of bullshit too , naturally . This is one of those dramas where colleagues never make small talk but instead launch straight into an urgent purposive shorthand . " 
 Nancy Banks @-@ Smith of The Guardian stated the series is " one of those shiny and insubstantial series , " adding that " all that leaping out of bed at dawn on the pretext that you have to go and sell a house tends to wear thin . " Banks @-@ Smith also called the story " slightly unexpected " and stated , " Spooks appears to plume itself on its authenticity , and there are moments , well one moment , so stupid it has to be true . " Fellow Guardian reviewer Gareth McLean stated that Spooks is " so good it makes you want to be a spy . " Dennis Landmann of <unk> rated the series eight out of ten , calling it " thrilling , dramatic , and fast " , while " much more concise " than many American series . Landmann added ; " Each story is complex and convincing , plus the scripts are very well written . A lot goes on in each episode , and it 's detrimental for a show like this to keep the action and tension going as fast as possible . " The reviewer also noted that having only six episodes worked as an advantage over American television , stating " while this seems incredibly short , the idea is actually very good . This ensures that each episode is strong in content and execution . American shows tend to run for 20 – 25 episodes a season , and while developments occur , there are always the filler episodes . With [ Spooks ] there is nothing like it , no filler material at all . In fact , the first season sees a lot of development . " 
 Matthew Millheiser of DVD Talk agreed . Of the series , Millheiser called it a " great show , " with " plotlines that are fast @-@ paced and gripping throughout " , adding , " It lacks the slick , candy @-@ coated escapism and romanticism of Alias , or the white @-@ knuckled , thrill @-@ a @-@ minute intensity of 24 . [ Spooks ] is its own beast altogether : a smart , thrilling series that pulls no punches and maintains a consistent level of quality and intelligence throughout its running time . " Bryan Byun of DVD Verdict had an issue with the storylines , stating , " At times it takes the entire length of an episode to figure out precisely what 's going on . While that frenetic pace makes for challenging viewing , it might prevent the show from reaching a broader audience . " However , Byun thought the first series was a " solid , gripping entertainment that pulls few punches . While it 's a little <unk> and more reliant on suspense and mystery than trigger @-@ happy American action shows , [ Spooks ] should please any fan of cloak @-@ and @-@ dagger antics . " Michael Mackenzie of The Digital Fix rated the series eight out of ten , stating that although Spooks " may not be perfect " , " it is an imaginative and intriguing series . " 
 = = = Helen Flynn controversy = = = 
 The first series attracted controversy for its second episode , which saw the demise of a main character after her hand and head were forced into a deep fryer . The scene attracted over 250 complaints , 154 of them to the television watchdog , the Broadcasting Standards Commission , the highest number of complaints for a television programme in 2002 . Following the complaints , the BBC admitted that the scene " clearly disturbed " several viewers , but defended it as it was showing the audience " the kind of threat which might be faced by agents engaged in the fight against terrorism . " The Broadcasting Standards Commission stated the scene was shocking , but " in the context was acceptable and important for the later narrative " . However the watchdog still criticised the BBC for failing to warn viewers of the violence to come in the scene . The controversy sparked a response from comedian Charlie Brooker in his Guardian column , stating : " The moment her head was forced into the deep @-@ fat @-@ fryer , viewers reared on the formulaic , it 'll @-@ be @-@ alright @-@ in @-@ the @-@ end blandness of cookie @-@ cutter populist dramas like Casualty and Merseybeat sat up and blinked in disbelief : here was a major BBC drama series that actually had the nerve to confound expectation . " 
 = = = Accolades and viewer polls = = = 
 The first series of Spooks was nominated for six awards , one of which it won . It was nominated for three British Academy Television Awards ( BAFTA ) awards , two of which were Craft nominations . The series won the Best Drama Series category over Clocking Off , Cutting It and Teachers . Colin Green was nominated for his editing work , and Jennie Muskett for Original Television Music in the Craft awards , but lost to Daniel Deronda and The Forsyte Saga respectively . The first series was also nominated for three Royal Television Society Awards , including Drama Series , although it lost out to Clocking Off . Howard Brenton and David Wolstencroft were nominated for the Writer award , but lost to Peter Bowker 's work on television film Flesh and Blood . In the Craft awards , Julian Slater , Nigel Heath , Michael <unk> and Dan Morgan were nominated in Best Sound in Drama . 
 The first series was well received by fans . At the end of 2002 , the BBC released a " Best of " viewer polls on its website . Spooks was voted the third best drama , beaten only by lesbian period drama Tipping the Velvet , which starred Keeley Hawes , and American action series 24 . However , Spooks was also voted the third worst drama . Firth and Macfadyen were listed in the " Best Actor " category , being voted twenty @-@ first , and fifth , respectively . Macfadyen was also voted the sixth " <unk> male " . Meanwhile , in the " Best Actress " category , Agutter and Hawes were voted twenty @-@ sixth and second , respectively . Agutter , Faulkner and Hawes were also respectively voted the thirtieth , sixteenth and second " most <unk> females " . The Tom and Ellie relationship was seen by viewers as the fourth best couple in television for the year , and Patrick McCann as the sixth best villain . The closing scenes of the series finale were voted the second " Favourite Moment " , behind the reveal of Nina Myers as a mole in 24 . 
 = = Home video release = = 
 The first series is available on DVD box set . It was first released in the United Kingdom ( Region 2 ) on 16 June 2003 . It was later released in Australia ( Region 4 ) on 18 August 2003 , and in the United States ( Region 1 , where it is known as MI @-@ 5 : Volume 1 ) on 13 January 2004 . The box set consists of all six episodes of the first series over three discs and 1 @.@ 78 : 1 Anamorphic PAL widescreen format . The box set includes an array of special features . Each episode has its own audio commentary track . In addition there are numerous interviews with the cast and crew members of the series , discussing the origins and development of the show and the purpose of the main characters . There are also deleted scenes , image galleries , an explained list of MI5 terms , series credits ( Spooks is a programme that does not include credits in its episodes ) , and scripts of the episodes , the latter of which are found on DVD @-@ ROM . In the United Kingdom , the box set was released with a " 15 " British Board of Film Classification ( BBFC ) certificate ( meaning it is unsuitable for viewing by those under the age of 15 years ) . 
 = O. G. S. Crawford = 
 Osbert Guy Stanhope Crawford ( 28 October 1886 – 28 November 1957 ) , better known as O. G. S. Crawford , was a British archaeologist who specialised in the study of prehistoric Britain and the archaeology of Sudan . Working for most of his career as the archaeological officer of the Ordnance Survey , he wrote a range of books on archaeological subjects and was a keen proponent of aerial archaeology . 
 Born in Bombay , British India to a wealthy middle @-@ class Scottish family , Crawford moved to England as an infant and was raised by his aunts in London and Hampshire . He studied geography at Keble College , Oxford and worked briefly in that field before devoting himself professionally to archaeology . Employed by the philanthropist Henry Wellcome , Crawford oversaw the excavation of Abu Geili in Sudan before returning to England shortly before the First World War . During the conflict he served in both the London Scottish Regiment and the Royal Flying Corps , where he was involved in both ground and aerial reconnaissance along the Western Front . After an injury forced a period of convalescence in England , he returned to the Front , where he was captured by the German Army in 1918 and held as a prisoner of war until the end of the conflict , when he returned to Britain . 
 In 1920 he was employed by the Ordnance Survey . In this position he toured Britain to plot the location of archaeological sites in the landscape , in the process identifying a number of previously unknown sites . Increasingly interested in aerial archaeology , he obtained aerial photographs produced by the Royal Air Force and identified the extent of the Stonehenge Avenue , excavating it in 1923 . With the archaeologist Alexander Keiller he conducted an aerial survey of many counties in southern England and raised the finances to secure the land around Stonehenge for The National Trust . In 1927 , he established the scholarly journal Antiquity , which contained contributions from many of Britain 's most prominent archaeologists , and in 1939 he became president of The Prehistoric Society . An internationalist and socialist , he came under the influence of Marxism and for a time became a Soviet sympathiser . During the Second World War he worked with the National Buildings Record , photographically documenting Southampton . After retiring in 1946 , he refocused his attention on Sudanese archaeology and wrote several further books prior to his death . 
 While friends and colleagues remembered Crawford as a cantankerous and irritable individual , his contributions to British archaeology – namely in the form of Antiquity and his promotion of aerial archaeology – have been widely acclaimed , with some referring to him as one of the great pioneering figures in the field . His photographic archive remained of use to archaeologists into the 21st century . A biography of Crawford by Kitty Hauser was published in 2008 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood : 1886 – 1904 = = = 
 O. G. S. Crawford was born on 28 October 1886 at Breach Candy , a suburb of Bombay in British India . His father , Charles Edward Gordon Crawford , was a civil servant who had been educated at Marlborough College and Wadham College , Oxford prior to his move to India , where he became a High Court Judge at Thane . The Crawford family hailed from Ayrshire in Scotland , and the child 's great @-@ uncle was the politician Robert Wigram Crawford . Crawford 's mother , Alice Luscombe Mackenzie , was the daughter of a Scottish army doctor and his Devonshire wife . Alice died a few days after her son 's birth , and so when he was three months old , Crawford was sent to England aboard the P & O liner <unk> . During the journey he was entrusted to the care of his paternal aunt Eleanor , an Anglican nun who was the head of the Poona Convent of the Community of St Mary the Virgin . 
 After his arrival in Britain , he spent the next seven years with two paternal aunts who lived together near to Portland Place in the Marylebone district of central London . Like his father , they were devout Christians , having been the children of a Scottish clergyman . Under their guardianship Crawford had little contact with other children or with men . Crawford saw his father on the few occasions that the latter visited England , prior to his death in India in 1894 . In 1895 , Crawford and his two aunts moved to a rural house in East <unk> in Hampshire . Initially educated at Park House School , which he enjoyed , he was subsequently moved to Marlborough College , his father 's alma mater ; he was unhappy there , complaining about bullying and enforced sporting activities , and characterising it as a " detestable house of torture " . 
 At the school , Crawford was influenced by his housemaster , F. B. Malim , who presided over the archaeological section of the college 's Natural History Society and encouraged the boy 's interest in the subject . It has been suggested that Malim provided something of a father figure for the young Crawford . With the society , Crawford visited such archaeological sites as Stonehenge , West Kennet Long Barrow , Avebury , and <unk> . It was also through the society that he obtained Ordnance Survey maps of the landscape , allowing him to explore the downs near to his aunts ' home . He began excavation of a barrow near to Bull 's Copse , thus attracting the attention of the antiquarian Harold Peake , who was then involved in compiling the Victoria County History of Berkshire . Peake and his wife lived a Bohemian lifestyle , being vegetarians and social reformers , and their ideas had a strong impact on Crawford . Under the <unk> ' influence , Crawford rejected his religious upbringing in favour of a rationalist world @-@ view based in science . Moreover , from Peake , Crawford gained an appreciation for the understanding of past societies through an examination of the geographical landscape rather than simply through texts or artefacts . 
 = = = University and early career : 1905 – 1914 = = = 
 Following his schooling , Crawford won a junior scholarship to study at Keble College , Oxford . There he began reading <unk> <unk> in 1905 but – after gaining only a third @-@ class score in his second year exams – he switched courses to study geography in 1908 . In 1910 he gained a distinction for his diploma , for which he had conducted a study of the landscape surrounding Andover . Reflecting his interest in the relationship between geography and archaeology , during a walking tour of Ireland he had also written a paper on the geographic distribution of Bronze Age flat bronze axes and beakers in the British Isles . It was presented to the Oxford University Anthropological Society before being published in The Geographical Journal . The archaeologist Grahame Clark later related that the paper " marked a milestone in British Archaeology ; it was the first real attempt to deduce prehistoric events from the geographical distribution of archaeological objects " . Crawford 's fellow archaeologist Mark Bowden stated that while archaeological distribution maps had been previously produced , " archaeological data had never before been married with environmental information " in the way that Crawford did in this article . 
 After Crawford graduated , Professor A. J. Herbertson offered him a job as a junior demonstrator in the university 's geography department ; Crawford agreed , and served in the position , which largely entailed teaching students , over the following year . Through Herbertson , Crawford was introduced to Patrick Geddes . Crawford however decided that he wanted to focus his attentions on archaeology rather than geography ; attempts to find a professional position in the field were hindered by the fact that very few existed in Britain at the time . Looking elsewhere for archaeological employment , he unsuccessfully applied for a Craven Fellowship and for a post at Bombay Museum . 
 On the recommendation of Herbertson , on 1913 Crawford joined William Scoresby Routledge and Katherine Routledge 's expedition to Easter Island as an assistant ; the expedition was put on with the intent of learning more about the island 's first inhabitants and its Moai statues . However , after the team departed from Britain aboard the schooner Mana , Crawford quarrelled with the <unk> – informing them that they exhibited an " extraordinary lack of courtesy " and " appalling stinginess " toward him and other crew members – and he then left the ship at Cape Verde and returned to Britain . He subsequently gained employment from the wealthy philanthropist Henry Wellcome , who sent him to gain training in archaeological excavation from G. A. Reisner in Egypt before sending him on to Sudan , where Crawford was given charge of the excavation of the <unk> site at Abu Geili ; he remained there from January to June 1914 . On his return to England , where he was planning on sorting through the artefacts found in Sudan , he and his friend Earnest Hooton began excavation of a long barrow on <unk> Down in Wiltshire . 
 = = = First World War : 1914 – 1918 = = = 
 It was while Crawford was engaged in this excavation that the United Kingdom entered the First World War . At Peake 's encouragement , Crawford enlisted to serve in the British Army , joining the London Scottish Regiment which was sent to reinforce the First Battalion in France . The regiment marched to Béthune to relieve the British line , there fighting on the Western Front at Givenchy . Afflicted with influenza and malaria , in February Crawford was invalided back to England , being stationed at Birmingham for his recuperation . After recovery , he applied to join the Royal Flying Corps ( RFC ) but was deemed too heavy . In July 1915 he was successful in his application to join the Royal Berkshire Regiment as part of the Third Army , being stationed at Beauval and then St. Pol . Utilising his existing skills , he served as the regiment 's maps officer , responsible for mapping the areas around the front line , including the German Army positions . He also took various photographs which were used for British propaganda purposes , and in 1916 he guided the writer H. G. Wells around the trenches on the latter 's visit to the Front . 
 In January 1917 , Crawford successfully applied to join the RFC as an observer with the 23rd Squadron , as part of which he flew over enemy lines to make observations and draw maps . On his maiden flight , the German Army opened fire on his aircraft , in which his right foot was pierced by bullets and badly injured . To recuperate , he spent time at various hospitals in France and England before eventually being sent to the RFC Auxiliary Hospital at the Heligan estate in Cornwall . During this time in England he spent a weekend at Wells 's home in Dunmow , Essex , embracing the latter 's desire for a united world government and the idea that writing about global history was a contribution to that cause . While at Heligan , Crawford began working on a book , Man and his Past , which examined a broad sweep of human history from an archaeological and geographical perspective . 
 In September 1917 , Crawford – who had been promoted to the position of squadron intelligence officer – joined the 48th Squadron , during which he again took aerial photographs during flying reconnaissance trips . While on one flight in February 1918 , Crawford 's aircraft was shot at and forced to land in German @-@ held territory ; he and his co @-@ pilot were taken as prisoners of war . He was initially imprisoned at Landshut in Bavaria , from where he tried to escape by swimming down the River Isar ; the river current proved too strong and he was soon recaptured . He was then transferred to Holzminden prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp , where he was aware of an escape plan involving tunnelling out of the camp , but did not take part . Instead he spent much of his time reading works by Wells , Carl Jung , and Samuel Butler , and working on Man and his Past . Crawford remained in the camp for seven months , until the declaration of armistice , at which he returned to Britain and was demobilised . 
 = = Career : 1920 – 1945 = = 
 = = = Ordnance Survey and Antiquity = = = 
 Back in England , Crawford finished writing Man and his Past , which was published by Oxford University Press in 1921 . According to the historian of archaeology Adam Stout , the book was " a manifesto , a rallying @-@ cry for a new generation of archaeologists who shared in the idealism and the faith in the potential of Progress " . Bowden suggested that it could be seen as a " manifesto for <unk> , environmental archaeology and economic archaeology . The unifying theme is that all these topics should be approached through the compilation of maps " . The work fitted within the theoretical trend of culture @-@ historical archaeology by discussing geographical methods for delineating cultures although it did not attempt to apply the concept of culture in a systematic fashion . He also returned to field work , carrying out archaeological excavation for the Cambrian Archaeological Association in both Wiltshire and Wales . During the summer of 1920 , he then excavated at Roundwood in Hampshire and on the Isle of Wight for Sir William Portal . 
 His expertise resulted in his being invited by Charles Close , the Director @-@ General of the Ordnance Survey ( OS ) , to join that organisation as their first archaeological officer . Accepting the position , Crawford moved to Southampton and began work at the project in October 1920 . His arrival at the OS generated some resentment , with co @-@ workers often seeing his post as superfluous and deeming archaeology to be unimportant . His job entailed correcting and updating information on archaeological monuments as the OS maps were revised , and involved him undertaking much fieldwork , travelling across the British landscape , checking the location of previously recorded sites and discovering new ones . He began in Gloucestershire in the autumn and winter of 1920 , visiting 208 sites around the Cotswolds and adding 81 previously unknown barrows to the map . As a result of his research in this region , in 1925 he published his book Long Barrows and the Stone Circles of the Cotswolds and the Welsh Marches . 
 As part of his job , he travelled around Britain , from Scotland in the north to the Scilly Isles in the south , often conducting his fieldwork by bicycle . On his visits he took photographs of archaeological sites , which were stored in his archive , and he also obtained aerial photographs of archaeological sites taken by the Royal Air Force . In this he was aided by regional antiquarian societies and by his correspondents , whom he called his " ferrets " . In 1921 , the Ordnance Survey published Crawford 's work , " Notes for Beginners " , in which he explained how amateur archaeologists could identify traces of old monuments , roads , and agricultural activity in the landscape . He also began producing " period maps " in which archaeological sites were marked ; the first of these was on Roman Britain , and featured Roman roads and settlements . First published in 1924 , it soon sold out , resulting in a second edition in 1928 . He followed this with a range of further maps in the 1930s : ' England in the Seventeenth Century ' , ' Celtic Earthworks of Salisbury Plain ' , ' Neolithic Wessex ' , and ' Britain in the Dark Ages ' . Although his position had initially been precarious , in 1926 it was made permanent , despite the reluctance of the Treasury , which financed the OS at the time . By 1938 , he had been able to persuade the OS to employ an assistant , W. F. Grimes , to aid him in his work . 
 Crawford became particularly interested in the new technique of aerial archaeology , claiming that this new process was to archaeology what the telescope was to astronomy . He produced two OS leaflets containing various aerial photographs , printed in 1924 and 1929 respectively . Through these and other works he was keen to promote aerial archaeology , coming to be firmly identified with the technique . His association with it reached the extent that in his 1939 novel The Shape of Things to Come , Wells named a survey aeroplane that discovers an ancient archaeological device " Crawford " . 
 Using RAF aerial photographs , Crawford determined the length of the Avenue at Stonehenge before embarking on an excavation of the site with A. D. Passmore in the autumn of 1923 . This project attracted press attention , resulting in Crawford being contacted by the marmalade magnate and archaeologist Alexander Keiller . Keiller invited Crawford to join him in an aerial survey , financed by Keiller himself , in which they flew over Berkshire , Dorset , Hampshire , Somerset , and Wiltshire in the spring and summer 1924 , taking photographs of archaeological traces in the landscape . Many of these images were published in Crawford and Keiller 's Wessex from the Air in 1928 . In 1927 Crawford and Keiller helped raise the finances to buy the land around Stonehenge and present it to The National Trust in order to prevent it facing agricultural or urban development . Previously , in 1923 , Crawford had assisted Keiller in campaigning to prevent a radio mast being erected on the archaeologically significant Windmill Hill in Wiltshire , with Keiller later purchasing the hill and the surrounding Avebury area . Despite this working relationship , the two never became friends , perhaps a result of their highly divergent interests and opinions . 
 In 1927 , Crawford founded Antiquity ; A Quarterly Review of Archaeology , a quarterly journal designed to bring together the work of archaeologists working across the world to supplement the variety of regional antiquarian periodicals that were then available . Although designed to have an international scope , the journal exhibited a clear bias towards the archaeology of Britain , with its release coinciding with the blossoming of British archaeology as a field of study . It contained contributions from a variety of young archaeologists who came to dominate the field of British archaeology , among them V. Gordon Childe , Grahame Clark , Cyril Fox , Christopher Hawkes , T. D. Kendrick , Stuart Piggott , and Mortimer Wheeler . Crawford himself was known as " Ogs " or " Uncle Ogs " to a number of these individuals , who shared his desire to professionalise the field and take it in a more scientific direction and away from the domination of antiquarian hobbyists . In particular , Crawford saw Antiquity as a rival to the Antiquaries Journal published by the Society of Antiquaries , an organisation that Crawford was contemptuous of , disliking their neglect of prehistory and believing that they did little valuable research . 
 The journal proved influential from the start . Although not initially using a process of peer review , Crawford asked his friends to read through submissions that he was unsure about . As well as seeking to shape and define the discipline , Antiquity sought to spread news of archaeological discoveries to a wider public , thereby being more accessible than pre @-@ existing scholarly journals . However , it resulted in Crawford receiving letters from proponents of various pseudo @-@ archaeological ideas , such as the ley line theory of Alfred Watkins ; he filed these letters under a section of his archive titled " <unk> " and was annoyed that educated people believed such ideas when they were demonstrably incorrect . He refused to publish an advert for Watkins ' The Old Straight Track in Antiquity , with Watkins becoming very bitter towards him . In 1938 , Crawford served as President of the Prehistoric Society ; in this position he instigated a series of excavations , inviting the German archaeologist Gerhard <unk> – persecuted in Germany by the Nazi authorities – to move to England to oversee the excavation of Little Woodbury . 
 = = = Foreign visits and Marxism = = = 
 Crawford enjoyed foreign travel and left Britain on a number of occasions . In 1928 the OS sent him to the Middle East , there to collect aerial photographs that had been produced during the First World War and which were stored at Baghdad , Amman , and Heliopolis . In the summer of 1931 he visited Germany and Austria , there furthering his interest in interest in photography through the purchase of a <unk> . He later visited Italy with the intent of examining the possibility of producing OS maps pinpointing the country 's archaeological sites ; in November 1932 he met with the Italian leader Benito Mussolini , who was interested in Crawford 's ideas about creating an OS map of archaeological sites in Rome . This was part of a wider project to produce a series of maps covering the entirety of the Roman Empire , for which Crawford visited various parts of Europe during the late 1920s and 1930s . Holiday destinations included Germany , Austria , Romania , Corsica , Malta , Algeria , and Tunisia , and in 1936 he purchased a plot of land in Cyprus on which he had a house built . During these vacations , he visited archaeological sites and met with local archaeologists , encouraging them to contribute articles to Antiquity . 
 Crawford believed that society would progress with the growth of internationalism and the increased application of science , and politically he had moved toward socialism under the influence of Childe , who had become a close friend . He expressed the view that socialism was " the natural corollary of science in the regulation of human affairs " . He attempted to incorporate Marxist ideas into his archaeological interpretations , for instance in an article on " The Dialectical Process in the History of Science " that was published in The Sociological Review journal . He became enthusiastic about the Soviet Union , a state governed by the Marxist Communist Party , viewing it as the forerunner of a future world state . 
 With his friend Neil Hunter , he travelled to the Soviet Union in May 1932 , sailing to Leningrad aboard the Smolny . Once there , they followed a prescribed tourist itinerary , visiting Moscow , <unk> Novgorod , Stalingrad , Rostov @-@ on @-@ Don , Tiflis , Armenia , Batum , and <unk> . Crawford admired what he perceived as the progress that the Soviet Union had made since the fall of the Tsarist regime , the increasingly classless and gender @-@ equal status of its population , and the respect accorded to scientists in planning its societal development . He described his holiday with glowing praise in a book , A Tour of <unk> , stating that he did so in order to " hasten the downfall of capitalism " while at the same time making " as much money as possible " out of capitalists . The book was rejected by the publisher Victor Gollancz , after which Crawford decided not to approach other publishers , instead giving typed copies of the work to his friends . Although he became involved with the Friends of the Soviet Union and wrote several articles for the Daily Worker newspaper , he never joined the Communist Party of Great Britain or became involved in organised politics , perhaps fearing that to do so would jeopardise his employment in the civil service . 
 In Britain , he photographed a number of sites associated with the prominent Marxists Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin , as well as photographing the signs erected by landowners and religious groups , believing that in doing so he was documenting the traces of capitalist society before they would be swept away by socialism . Both in Britain and on a visit to Germany he photographed both pro @-@ fascist and anti @-@ fascist propaganda and graffiti , and like many leftists at the time , he believed that fascism was a temporary , extreme expression of capitalist society that would soon be overcome by socialism . He nevertheless expressed admiration for the German archaeological establishment under the Nazi government , highlighting that the British state lagged far behind in terms of funding excavations and encouraging the study of archaeology in universities ; he refrained from commenting on the political agenda that the Nazis had in promoting archaeology . 
 Despite his socialist and pro @-@ Soviet beliefs , Crawford believed in collaborating with all foreign archaeologists , regardless of political or ideological differences . In the spring of 1938 , he lectured on aerial archaeology at the German Air Ministry ; they published his lecture as Luftbild und <unk> , and Crawford was frustrated that the British government did not publish his work with the same enthusiasm . From there , he visited Vienna , to meet with his friend , the archaeologist Oswald <unk> , who took him to an event celebrating the Anschluss , at which he met the prominent Nazi Josef Bürckel . Shortly after , he holidayed in Schleswig @-@ Holstein , where German archaeologists took him to see the Danevirke . 
 In the late 1930s he began work on a book titled Bloody Old Britain , which he described as " an attempt to apply archaeological methods to the study of contemporary society " and in which he was heavily critical of his homeland . It examined 1930s Britain through its material culture , with Crawford reaching the judgement that it was a society in which appearances were given greater importance than value , with clothing for instance emphasising bourgeois respectability over comfort . He attributed much of this to the impact of capitalism and consumerism on British culture . The work fitted within an established genre of 1930s publications which lamented the state of British society , in particular the quality of its food and manufactured products as well as its increasing suburbanisation . However , by the outbreak of the Second World War the work had become less marketable due to its unpatriotic nature , and when he proposed it to Methuen Publishing in 1943 they turned it down ; he gave copies to a few friends , but never published it . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 In anticipation of the Second World War , Crawford expressed the view that he would " remain neutral " and not take sides , not because he favoured fascism over liberal democracy but because he saw both as repugnant forms of capitalist society which would ultimately be swept away by a socialist revolution ; in his words the war would be " a clash of imperialisms , a gangsters ' feud " . After war broke out , he decided that in the event of a German invasion of Britain he would destroy all of his leftist literature lest he be persecuted for possessing it . 
 In November 1940 , the German Luftwaffe began bombing Southampton , where the OS offices were located . Crawford removed some of the old OS maps and stored them in the garage of his house at Nursling , while also unsuccessfully urging the Director @-@ General to remove the OS ' archives of books , documents , maps and photographs to a secure location . Subsequently , the OS headquarters were destroyed in the bombing , resulting in the loss of most of their archive . The refusal of the OS administration to take his warnings seriously infuriated Crawford , exacerbating his anger about the civil service 's red tape and bureaucracy . In his words , " trying to get a move on in the Civil Service was like trying to swim in a lake of glue " . Resigning his membership of various British societies , he unsuccessfully tried to find employment abroad . 
 With little for an archaeology officer to do at the OS in wartime , in the summer of 1941 Crawford was seconded to the Royal Commission on the Historical Monuments of England " for special duties during wartime " . They assigned him to carry out a project of photographic documentation in Southampton for the National Buildings Record , producing images of many old buildings or architectural features that were threatened by the Luftwaffe 's bombing campaign . He appreciated the value of this work , taking 5000 photographs over the course of the war . In 1944 , the Council for British Archaeology was founded , and while Crawford was invited to serve on its first council , he declined to do so , being lukewarm about the project . 
 = = Later life : 1946 – 1957 = = 
 In 1946 , at the earliest possible opportunity , Crawford resigned his post at the OS , where he was replaced by Charles Philips . He nevertheless retained his interest in Southampton and its architecture , in particular that of the Middle Ages , and in 1946 was a founding member of a lobby group , Friends of Old Southampton , which sought to protect the city 's historic architecture from destruction amid post @-@ war development . During the post @-@ war period he also came to be preoccupied and terrified by the prospect of a nuclear war , urging archaeological authorities to make copies of all their information and disperse it in different locations to ensure that knowledge survived any forthcoming Third World War . Retaining his left @-@ wing interests , in 1945 and 1946 he had some involvement with the Labour Party , although elsewhere he mocked the " ignorant " who thought that Labour " genuinely " represented socialism . In the latter part of the 1940s he became increasingly disillusioned with the Soviet Union after reading Arthur Koestler 's Darkness at Noon , a book about Joseph Stalin 's Great Purge and Moscow show trials , as well as learning of how Soviet scientists who did not support the ideas of Trofim Lysenko had been persecuted . In 1950 , after reading the memoir of Margarete Buber @-@ Neumann , he declared himself to be " fanatically anti @-@ Soviet [ and ] anti @-@ communist " . 
 In 1949 , Crawford was elected a Fellow of the British Academy , and in 1950 he became a Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire . In 1952 he was made an honorary Doctor of Letters by the University of Cambridge for his contributions to aerial archaeology . 
 Crawford returned his attention to Sudanese archaeology , describing Sudan as " an escape @-@ land of the mind at a time when the island of Britain was an austere prison " . At the invitation of the Sudanese government , he visited the country on an archaeological reconnaissance trip in January 1950 , before visiting the Middle Nile in 1951 . At Nursling , he wrote a book on the northern Sudanese Funj Sultanate of <unk> , which appeared in the same year as his long @-@ delayed report on the Abu Geili excavation , co @-@ written with Frank Addison . He followed this with the 1953 book Castles and Churches in the Middle Nile Region . Another of Crawford 's book projects in this period was a short history of Nursling , as well as an introductory guide to landscape studies , Archaeology in the Field , published in 1953 . In 1955 he then published his autobiography , Said and Done , which G. E. Daniel and Mark <unk> — the authors of Crawford 's entry in the Dictionary of National Biography — described as " a vivacious and amusing autobiography in which his character comes clearly through . " 
 After the discovery of prehistoric rock art on Stonehenge in 1953 , Crawford decided to examine the megalithic monuments in Brittany to examine the engravings there . Inspired by this subject , in 1957 he then published The Eye Goddess , a book in which he argued for the existence of a religion devoted to a Mother Goddess that was found across the Old World from the Palaeolithic through to the period of Christianisation , and which he believed was evidenced through various abstract depictions of eyes in prehistoric rock art . Similar ideas of a Neolithic religion devoted to a great goddess were also espoused in the works of Childe and Glyn Daniel that same decade , resulting in the observation from the later historian Ronald Hutton that " whether or not there was ever an ' Age of the Goddess ' in Neolithic Europe , there certainly was one among European intellectuals in the mid twentieth century " . Crawford 's book was nevertheless not well received academically . 
 Another of Crawford 's interests were cats , and he learned how to mimic cat noises , performing these on a BBC broadcast , " The Language of Cats " , which proved popular and resulted in his receiving a range of fan letters . A publisher in the United States invited him to write a book on the subject , but Crawford never completed it . In the mid @-@ 1950s , Crawford began to take an interest in astronomy and cosmological ideas about the origin of the universe , favouring Fred Hoyle 's steady state theory about an eternal universe with no beginning or end . 
 In 1951 , an edited volume , Aspects of Archaeology in Britain and Beyond : Essays Presented to O. G. S. Crawford , was published , having been edited by Grimes and brought out to mark Crawford 's 65th birthday . Reviewing the anthology for Antiquity , J. v. d . Waals and R. J. Forbes described it as " an exquisite birthday present " . Many of Crawford 's associates worried about him , aware that he lived alone – with only the company of his elderly housekeeper and cats – at his cottage in Nursling , lacking either a car or telephone . It was there that he died in his sleep on the night of 28 – 29 November 1957 . He had arranged for some of his letters and books to be destroyed , while others were to be sent to the Bodleian Library , with the proviso that some of them would not be opened until the year 2000 . His body was buried in the church graveyard at Nursling . In accordance with his instructions , the title " Editor of Antiquity " was inscribed on his gravestone , reflecting his desire to be remembered primarily as an archaeologist . On Crawford 's death , editorship of Antiquity was taken on by Daniel . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Crawford 's socialist beliefs were known to his colleagues and associates , as was his antipathy toward religion . While he became an atheist during his time at Marlborough College , it is not known exactly when he embraced socialism . He placed a strong emphasis on personal self @-@ sufficiency , and openly expressed contempt for those who required social interaction for their own happiness . His adult life was a solitary one , with no family and no dependents . His sexual orientation remains unknown , with Bowden noting that Crawford 's interactions with women were " cordial but not significant . " He was fond of cats , and kept several as pets , also rearing pigs for food as well as growing vegetables in his garden at Nursing . A heavy smoker , he was known for rolling his own cigarettes . 
 Crawford was often irritable and some colleagues found him exasperating to work with . He was known for his lack of patience , and when angry or frustrated was known to fling his hat to the floor in a gesture of rage . His biographer Kitty Hauser noted that " apparently trifling events left an indelible mark on him " , for he would remember a perceived slight for decades . However , Bowden expressed the view that while Crawford " had a quick temper , which he strove to control ... he was essentially a friendly man " , adding that he could be " clubbable , hospitable and kind " . 
 Jonathan Glancey referred to Crawford as " a compelling if decidedly cantankerous anti @-@ hero " and an " essentially Victorian eccentric " . Hauser characterised him as " a very British combination of a snob and a rebel " , also noting that he was " no great intellectual " . Similarly , Clark expressed the view that " Crawford 's achievements " stemmed from his " moral integrity and singleness of mind " rather than " any outstanding intellectual brilliance " , while the journalist Neal Ascherson described Crawford as " not conventionally intellectual " . Ascherson added that Crawford was " withdrawn , generally ill at ease with other members of the human species except on paper , and suspicious of personal celebrity " , in this way Ascherson contrasting him with his " gregarious " contemporaries Wheeler and Daniel . 
 Daniel characterised Crawford as having a " messianic desire " to promote archaeology " to the people of the world " . However , he was opinionated and dogmatic and expressed disdain for those who viewed the past in a different manner to himself . Piggott noted that Crawford was unable to sympathise with the perspectives of those studying past societies through a discipline other than archaeology , such as history or art history , and that he moreover could not sympathise with " anyone not as passionately concerned as himself in field antiquities " . For example , in one of his publications , Crawford dismissed historians as being " bookish " and " clean @-@ booted " . The archaeologist Jacquetta Hawkes commented that in Crawford 's editorials for Antiquity , he directed " righteous indignation " toward " everybody from the State , Dominion and Colonial Governments , Universities and Museums , to tardy reviewers and careless proof @-@ correctors . " 
 Wheeler – who considered Crawford to be " one of my closest friends " – claimed that the latter was " an outspoken and uncompromising opponent " and a man who had a " boyish glee in calling the bluff of convention " . He added that Crawford exhibited the " divine impatience of the pioneer " and that he had an " inability to work in harness . If he joined a committee or a <unk> , he did so only to resign at the first opportunity . " Piggott described Crawford as a mentor who " was encouraging , helpful , and unconventional : his racy outspoken criticism of what then passed for the archaeological Establishment was music to a schoolboy 's ear " . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Crawford was much respected by his peers . According to Hauser , at the time of his death Crawford had " acquired an almost mythical status among British archaeologists as the uncompromising – if eccentric – progenitor of them all . " In 1999 , the archaeologist John Charlton referred to Crawford as " one of the pioneers of British archaeology this century " , while nine years later Ascherson described him as " beyond question one of the great figures of the ' modern ' generation which transformed British archaeological practice and its institutions between 1918 and – say – 1955 . " Ascherson noted that Crawford 's contributions to archaeology had little to do with archaeological theory and more to do with " the institutions and tools ... which he bequeathed to his profession " , including Antiquity . Crawford devoted little time to interpreting the archaeological record , and when he did so usually embraced functionalist interpretations , believing that people in traditional societies devoted almost all of their time to survival rather than behaving according to religious or symbolic concepts ; in his he was typical of his time and was influenced by Marxist materialism . 
 Crawford was recognised for his contributions to bringing archaeology to a wide sector of the British public . The archaeologist Caroline Malone stated that many viewed Crawford as " an ' amateur 's ' archaeologist , providing the means to publish and comment outside the restrictions of local journals and to offer a vision of a new and universal discipline " . Clark expressed the view that Crawford " always hankered to restore the flesh and blood and to make the past a reality to the living generation " , and in doing so helped to attract a greater public audience for British archaeology than many of his colleagues . Wheeler remarked that " he was our greatest archaeological publicist ; he taught the world about scholarship , and scholars about one another . " Commenting on Crawford 's editorship of Antiquity , Hawkes expressed the view that his " skill in steering between over @-@ simplification and over @-@ specialization has enabled the Magazine to succeed admirably in its role as go @-@ between for experts and public . " 
 Crawford 's system of documenting archaeological sites in the OS ' Archaeological Record provided the blueprint on which both the later National Archaeological Records in England , Scotland , and Wales , and the local sites and monuments records were based . In the 21st century , Crawford 's photographic archive stored at Oxford University 's Institute of Archaeology was still consulted by archaeologists seeking to view how various sites appeared during the first half of the 20th century . In 2008 , Kitty Hauser 's biography , Bloody Old Britain , was published . Reviewing her work for The Guardian , Glancey described it as " a truly fascinating and unexpected book " . Writing in Public Archaeology , Ascherson characterised it as " full of clever perception and sympathetic insight " but was critical of its lack of references and " occasional mistakes of fact " . 
 = U.S. Route 5 in Connecticut = 
 U.S. Route 5 ( US 5 ) , a north – south U.S. Highway that is generally paralleled by Interstate 91 , begins at the city of New Haven in Connecticut and heads north through western Massachusetts and eastern Vermont to the international border with Canada . Within Connecticut , US 5 proceeds north from New Haven and passes through Meriden and Hartford towards Springfield , Massachusetts . 
 US 5 begins at Exit 5 of I @-@ 91 northeast of downtown New Haven , heading north through the suburbs of New Haven . It crosses the Quinnipiac River in North Haven , shifting eastward to a different road . US 5 continues north through the town of Wallingford before entering the city of Meriden . North of Meriden , it becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway known as the Berlin Turnpike , where a long overlap with Route 15 also begins . US 5 continues through the southern suburbs of Hartford along the Berlin Turnpike , shifting just south of the city line to the Wilbur Cross Highway , a limited access highway . The Wilbur Cross Highway bypasses downtown Hartford and crosses the Connecticut River on the Charter Oak Bridge into East Hartford . From here , US 5 exits the Wilbur Cross Highway and runs along a four @-@ lane , divided surface road to South Windsor before returning to a two @-@ lane road the rest of the way to the Massachusetts state line in Enfield . 
 US 5 roughly follows the route used by the Upper Boston Post Road , an early colonial highway for transporting mail between New York City and Boston . The route was first improved in 1798 as the Hartford and New Haven Turnpike , which ran in a nearly straight line between the court houses of New Haven and Hartford . In 1922 , the Upper Boston Post Road corridor was designated as Route 2 of the New England road marking system , crossing to the east of the Connecticut River in Hartford before continuing north to the Massachusetts state line . In 1926 , Route 2 was redesignated as U.S. Route 5 . Several realignments have been made in the cities of New Haven and Hartford with the opening of several expressways in these areas . Because it is closely paralleled by Interstate 91 between New Haven and Hartford , US 5 serves mainly as a secondary route today . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = New Haven area = = = 
 US 5 begins on State Street at exit 5 of Interstate 91 in New Haven . State Street continues southwest into downtown as a local , unnumbered street . US 5 starts out as an undivided four @-@ lane road becoming two lanes just before crossing into Hamden . State Street continues north through Hamden and the industrial section of North Haven , closely paralleling the Amtrak railroad tracks on the west side of the Quinnipiac River . It has an interchange with Route 40 in this area . US 5 then turns right at the intersection with Bishop Street in North Haven and crosses the Quinnipiac River , the railroad tracks , and I @-@ 91 ( at Exit 11 ) overlapped with Route 22 on a four @-@ lane wide road . 
 The bridge ends at a four @-@ way intersection where US 5 turns left on Washington Avenue , Route 22 continues straight on Clintonville Road , and Route 103 begins on the right along Washington Avenue . The four @-@ lane Washington Avenue runs through the commercial areas of North Haven still paralleling the railroad tracks , crosses under I @-@ 91 ( at Exit 12 ) and continues into Wallingford as South Colony Street . At the town line is the Wharton Brook State Park just north of which is a short expressway connector ( Wharton Brook Connector ) to I @-@ 91 ( at Exit 13 ) . South Colony Street narrows to two lanes within the Wallingford town center . 
 After crossing Center Street ( Route 150 ) near the Wallingford train station , the road becomes North Colony Street and heads out of the town center . The road crosses Route 68 at a grade @-@ separated junction about two miles ( three km ) later , followed by a series of junctions about half a mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) apart each : an interchange with the Wilbur Cross Parkway ( at Exit 66 ) , a split to the left where Route 71 begins and a merge from the left where Route 150 ends . 
 At the merge with Route 150 just before the town line , US 5 then follows South Broad Street ( the alignment of the old Hartford and New Haven Turnpike ) into the city of Meriden . South Broad Street becomes Broad Street after the intersection with Hall Avenue as it passes by the eastern part of the city , avoiding the downtown area . Past Olive Street , the road becomes divided with a wide grassy median . At the north end of the divided section , it has an intersection with East Main Street , the main east – west business route through the city . About 0 @.@ 7 miles ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) north of East Main Street , US 5 has an interchange with I @-@ 691 ( at Exit 8 ) . At the intersection with Brittania Street , the road becomes North Broad Street , which climbs up on a slope as it meets with the north end of the Wilbur Cross Parkway . The northbound roadway overpasses the Parkway and then merges onto it from the right . This is the beginning of a 15 @-@ mile ( 24 km ) overlap with Route 15 . Southbound at the beginning of the Parkway , US 5 is signed as an exit ( with no number ) from the main roadway . North Broad Street continues north from the merge as a divided 4 @-@ lane arterial road for another 1 @.@ 1 miles ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) up to the Berlin town line , where the road becomes the Berlin Turnpike . 
 = = = Hartford area = = = 
 US 5 and Route 15 run for 10 miles ( 16 km ) along the Berlin Turnpike within the towns of Berlin , Newington , and Wethersfield . The Berlin Turnpike is mostly a four @-@ lane divided arterial road with some six @-@ lane sections and is the alignment of the old Hartford and New Haven Turnpike . In Berlin , it has an interchange with the Route 9 expressway . In Wethersfield , Routes 5 and 15 leave the Berlin Turnpike to travel along the Wilbur Cross Highway , an expressway bypass along the south of downtown Hartford . The Wilbur Cross Highway runs through Wethersfield and Hartford , then crosses the Connecticut River into East Hartford on the Charter Oak Bridge . Just prior to the river crossing in Hartford , the Wilbur Cross Highway runs parallel to and interconnects with I @-@ 91 near the vicinity of Brainard Airport . Just after the crossing , US 5 exits from the Wilbur Cross Highway on Exit 90 , ending the long overlap with Route 15 . US 5 continues north to East Hartford center along Main Street . 
 From East Hartford northward to the Massachusetts state line , US 5 runs along the east bank of the Connecticut River . Main Street in East Hartford is mostly a 4 @-@ lane divided highway . It crosses under I @-@ 84 about 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) north of the split with Route 15 with access to the westbound direction only . Main Street continues through the town center , intersecting ( and briefly overlapping ) U.S. Route 44 . North of the town center , US 5 leaves Main Street to go on Ellington Road ( via a short segment of King Street ) until the South Windsor town line , where the road becomes known as John Fitch Boulevard ( still a four @-@ lane divided arterial road ) . About half a mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) further north , US 5 has an interchange with I @-@ 291 ( at Exit 4 ) that also includes access to Route 30 , the main road to the South Windsor town center . John Fitch Boulevard continues through the rest of South Windsor , passing through the village of East Windsor Hill near the East Windsor town line . 
 After crossing into the town of East Windsor , the roadway becomes two lanes wide with auxiliary left turn lanes and is known as South Main Street . It intersects with Route 191 ( Phelps Street ) , which leads to the East Windsor town center . About half a mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) north of this junction , US 5 leaves Main Street to go on Prospect Hill Road , bypassing the Warehouse Point area . There is also a partial interchange with I @-@ 91 in this area ( at Exit 44 ) . Just south of the Enfield town line , US 5 intersects with Route 140 , which crosses the Connecticut River into the town of Windsor Locks and Bradley International Airport . 
 In Enfield , the road becomes known as King Street , crossing over I @-@ 91 with a full interchange ( Exit 46 ) . As it approaches the town center , the road becomes known as Enfield Street . It has a grade @-@ separated intersection with Route 190 in this area . Just before going across the state line , US 5 crosses over I @-@ 91 again ( at Exit 49 ) and becomes Longmeadow Street as it enters the town of Longmeadow , Massachusetts . 
 = = History = = 
 The Upper Boston Post Road was established in 1673 between New York and Boston via New Haven , Hartford , Springfield , and Worcester . From New Haven to Hartford , it ran at various times via Middletown ( now roughly Route 17 and Route 99 ) and via Meriden ( now very roughly US 5 ) . North of Hartford , the road remained on the west side of the Connecticut River , following the general path of present Route 159 . 
 Along this route between New Haven and Hartford , the Hartford and New Haven Turnpike was chartered in 1798 and opened in 1799 , beginning at Grove Street in New Haven and leaving on Whitney Avenue , passing via Meriden and Berlin , and entering Hartford on Maple Avenue . This was one of the first turnpikes to be built on a straight line rather than along existing roads . 
 In the 1910s , Connecticut and Massachusetts adopted a system of marking major roads by colors . The route from New Haven to Springfield , crossing the Connecticut River at Hartford , was marked with blue bands , signifying a major north – south route . This route crossed the Quinnipiac River in New Haven , heading north along an old road ( now Route 103 and US 5 ) to Tracy , crossing the turnpike and running through downtown Meriden on Old Colony Road , Cook Avenue , and Colony Street . It then used the turnpike alignment from Lamentation State Park into Hartford . From East Hartford north to Springfield , another older road was used . 
 When the New England road marking system was adopted in 1922 , Route 2 was assigned to a route from New Haven north via Hartford and Springfield towards Sherbrooke , Quebec . This route followed the older blue @-@ banded route from New Haven north to Hartford . At Hartford , Route 2 crossed the Connecticut River on the Bulkeley Bridge and ran north from East Hartford to Springfield on the east side of the river . 
 U.S. Route 5 was designated in 1926 along the Route 2 alignment . Between 1926 and 1932 , U.S. Route 5 and Route 2 were co @-@ signed throughout the length of the route . In the 1932 state highway renumbering , the Route 2 designation was removed , leaving only the US 5 designation . Only a small number of changes have been made since then , the most prominent being in the cities of New Haven and Hartford . 
 US 5 initially used Temple Street , Whitney Avenue , Edwards Street and upper State Street in New Haven , beginning at U.S. Route 1 ( Chapel Street ) . By the 1940s , it had been moved onto a bypass of the downtown area , consisting of Edwards Street , Hillside Place , Munson Street , Henry Street , Sherman Avenue , Winthrop Avenue , and Davenport Avenue , ending at US 1 west of downtown . At the time , it still crossed the river on Middletown Avenue ; the route leaving to the north on State Street was signed as an alternate route . The main and alternate routes were swapped by the mid @-@ 1950s , and US 5 was sent down East Street to US 1 . ( The alternate is now Route 103 . ) The old bypass became extensions of Route 80 and Route 10 , but is now unnumbered . The final changes truncated US 5 to I @-@ 91 when I @-@ 91 opened in 1966 in New Haven , and relocated US 5 to the new Route 22 Connector across I @-@ 91 in North Haven in 1973 , leaving the old route on Broadway as unsigned State Road 729 . 
 In Hartford , the original alignment of US 5 entered the city on Maple Avenue and made its way to the Bulkeley Bridge via Main Street , Central Row , and Columbus Boulevard . The route was shifted slightly eastward to Wyllys Street and Columbus Boulevard by 1941 . The opening of the Charter Oak Bridge and Hartford Bypass on September 5 , 1942 led to US 5 bypassing downtown Hartford on its current alignment ; U.S. Route 5A , an alternate route on the west side of the Connecticut River to Springfield , was extended south along Main Street to the beginning of the bypass . 
 In the early 1940s , several sections of US 5 in the Hartford area were upgraded to four @-@ lane boulevards . The Berlin Turnpike segment was reconstructed as a divided four @-@ lane highway , with several segments also straightened out . In East Hartford and South Windsor , a new four @-@ lane divided highway , John Fitch Boulevard , was also constructed . Both of these roadways opened in 1942 . In 1948 , Route 15 was designated on the Berlin Turnpike and Hartford Bypass segments of US 5 in order to connect the Merritt Parkway and Wilbur Cross Parkway to the Wilbur Cross Highway , providing a continuous high @-@ speed route between New York and Massachusetts . 
 = = Special designations = = 
 Many sections of various state highways in Connecticut have commemorative designations for various veterans organizations or groups , as well as military servicemen and Connecticut State Troopers killed in the line of duty . In the case of U.S. Route 5 , most of its non @-@ expressway alignment except for the Berlin Turnpike has been given a commemorative designation by the Connecticut General Assembly over the years . The following segments of U.S. Route 5 have such designations : 
 The portion from the Hamden @-@ North Haven line to Devine Street ( SR 720 ) in North Haven is also known as the " Korean War Veterans Chapter 204 Memorial Highway " . 
 The portion from Devine Street ( SR 720 ) to Bishop Street in North Haven is also known as the " VFW Post <unk> Memorial Highway " . 
 The Route 5 / 22 connector between State Street and Washington Avenue in North Haven is also known as the " Officer Timothy W. Laffin Memorial Highway " . Timothy Laffin was a North Haven Police officer who lost his life in a motor vehicle accident while pursuing a wanted suspect . 
 South Colony Street in Wallingford , running from the North Haven @-@ Wallingford line to Route 150 in Wallingford center , is also known as the " American Legion Shaw @-@ <unk> Post 73 Memorial Highway " . 
 South Broad Street from the northern Route 150 junction in Wallingford to the Meriden town line is also known as the " VFW Connecticut Ladies Auxiliary Highway " . 
 The portion from the I @-@ 84 junction in East Hartford to the East Windsor @-@ Enfield line is also known as the " Purple Heart Highway " . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = Fun Home ( musical ) = 
 Fun Home is a musical adapted by Lisa Kron and Jeanine Tesori from Alison Bechdel 's 2006 graphic memoir of the same name . The story concerns Bechdel 's relationship with her gay father and her attempts to unlock the mysteries surrounding his life . It is the first Broadway musical with a lesbian protagonist . 
 The musical was developed at the Ojai Playwrights Conference in 2009 and at the Sundance Theatre Lab and The Public Theater 's Public Lab in 2012 . It opened Off @-@ Broadway at the Public Theater in September 2013 to positive reviews . Its run was extended several times , and it ran until January 2014 . The Public Theater production of Fun Home was nominated for nine Lucille Lortel Awards ( winning three , including Outstanding Musical ) , two Obie Awards and eight Drama Desk Awards , among others . 
 The original Broadway production began previews at the Circle in the Square Theatre on March 27 , 2015 and opened on April 19 , 2015 . It was nominated for twelve Tony Awards and won five , including Best Musical . The show 's cast album received a nomination for the 2016 Grammy Award for Best Musical Theater Album . The production is set to close on September 10 , 2016 . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Writer / artist Alison Bechdel 's book Fun Home , a memoir in comics format , was published in 2006 to critical acclaim . Its subject is Alison Bechdel 's coming of age , with particular emphasis on her relationship to her father , Bruce Bechdel . Alison 's coming out as a lesbian is complicated by the revelation that Bruce had also had homosexual relationships , including encounters with males below the age of consent . Four months after Alison comes out to her parents , Bruce is killed by an oncoming truck ; although the evidence is equivocal , Alison concludes that he committed suicide . 
 Bechdel 's book was adapted into a musical with book and lyrics by Lisa Kron and music by Jeanine Tesori . Writing in Slate , June Thomas called the play " the first mainstream musical about a young lesbian " . The adaptation was developed over the course of five years . It was first workshopped at the Ojai Playwrights Conference in August 2009 . A staged reading was performed at The Public Theater in 2011 . ( Of the cast of that staged reading , only Judy Kuhn and Beth Malone continued in their roles to the full Off @-@ Broadway production . ) The musical had another workshop as part of the Sundance Institute 's Theater Lab in July 2012 , featuring Raul Esparza . Following that it ran for three weeks as part of the Public Theater 's Public Lab series in October and November 2012 . On April 8 , 2013 , musical selections from the play were performed by Maggie Gyllenhaal , Judy Kuhn , David Hyde Pierce and others at an event for the Sundance Institute . A final Public Theater workshop was held in May 2013 . 
 The musical 's development process entailed extensive changes and rewrites . Beth Malone said that the original workshop script " doesn 't resemble this current play at all " . In early versions , the production was structured around Bechdel 's drawings , but the creators later removed most of this element , save for one image of Bruce and young Alison which is used at the musical 's conclusion . Revisions continued through the preview period of the Off @-@ Broadway production , requiring the actors to perform new material every night . 
 = = Productions = = 
 Fun Home premiered Off @-@ Broadway at The Public Theater in previews on September 30 , 2013 , and opened officially on October 22 , 2013 . Originally scheduled to run through November 3 , 2013 , the run was extended several times , and the musical closed on January 12 , 2014 . The production was directed by Sam Gold , with sets and costumes by David Zinn , lighting by Ben Stanton , projections by Jim Findlay and Jeff Sugg , and choreography by Danny Mefford . In response to a controversy in which the legislature of South Carolina attempted to financially punish the College of Charleston for choosing the original graphic novel of Fun Home as a reading selection for incoming freshmen , the off @-@ Broadway cast presented a concert of songs from the musical to a full house in Charleston , South Carolina , in April 2014 . Bechdel , Kron , Tesori and musical director Chris Fenwick accompanied the cast . 
 The musical began previews at Broadway 's Circle in the Square Theatre on March 27 , 2015 , with an official opening on April 19 , 2015 . Gold directed the show on Broadway , with the same production team as the Off @-@ Broadway production , including Zinn , Mefford and Stanton . The Off @-@ Broadway cast reprised their roles on Broadway , except for the actors playing Medium Alison , John and Christian Bechdel . In December 2015 , eight months after opening on Broadway , the show recouped its capitalization and began to make a profit . Costs for the show were relatively low due to a small cast and orchestra . The production is set to close on September 10 , 2016 , after 26 previews and 582 regular performances . 
 A year long national tour of the show is scheduled to begin in the fall of 2016 . The first international production of Fun Home is planned to premiere in Manila , Philippines , in late 2016 , with Lea Salonga as Helen . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 As she works on her memoir in the present day , successful middle @-@ aged cartoonist Alison Bechdel recalls two time periods in her life . The first is her childhood , around age 10 ( Small Alison ) , when she struggles against her father Bruce 's obsessive demands and begins to identify her inchoate sexuality . The second is her first year in college ( Medium Alison ) , when she begins her first relationship and comes out of the closet as a lesbian . 
 Alison remembers herself , as a child , demanding that her father play " airplane " with her , while Bruce sorts through a box of junk and valuables he has salvaged from a barn ( " It All Comes Back " ) . Bruce tells the family that a visitor from the local historical society is coming to see their ornate Victorian home that he has restored , and his wife Helen prepares the house to Bruce 's demanding aesthetic standard ( " Welcome to Our House on Maple Avenue " ) . In a phone call with her father and a journal entry , Medium Alison expresses her anxiety about starting college ( " Not Too Bad " ) . At the Bechdel Funeral Home , Small Alison and her brothers John and Christian hide in caskets while Bruce talks to Pete , a mourning young man . The children perform an imaginary advertisement for the funeral home ( " Come to the Fun Home " ) . Medium Alison hesitates outside the door of the college 's Gay Union , and is flummoxed when she meets Joan , a confident young lesbian . Bruce invites into the house Roy , a young man whom he has hired to do yard work . Bruce begins to seduce Roy in the library while Helen is playing the piano upstairs , trying her best to ignore it ( " Helen 's Etude " ) . 
 Medium Alison writes a letter to her parents but does not mention Joan or the Gay Union . Bruce orders Small Alison to put on a dress , but she would rather wear a jean jacket . Bruce tells her that she would be the only girl without a dress and that the other children would laugh at her ; she leaves on the dress ( " Party Dress " ) . Medium Alison proudly tells Joan that she has written a letter to her parents telling them that she is a lesbian , but begins to second @-@ guess herself ( beginning to wonder if she 's asexual ) until Joan kisses her . That night , she is excited and joyful at having had sex with Joan ( " Changing My Major " ) . 
 Alison considers the connection between her coming out and her father 's death . Small Alison has a homework assignment to draw a map of places her family has lived , but Bruce aggressively takes over , drawing it the way he thinks it should look . Alison realizes that despite having traveled and lived in Europe , her father 's place of birth , life , work and death can all be placed in a small circle in Beech Creek , Pennsylvania ( " Maps " ) . Bruce offers a ride and a beer to an underage boy , and it is later implied that they had sexual intercourse . Medium Alison writes to her parents , asking for a response to her coming @-@ out letter . Small Alison watches The Partridge Family , but Bruce switches it off . Small Alison talks to him , and finds out that he is going to see a psychiatrist because he is " bad " and not good like her . Alison expresses annoyance that he lied to her ; the actual reason he was going was because he was arrested for what he did to the underage boy . Helen tells Small Alison that the psychiatrist will help her father , and attempts to reassure her . Bruce starts a vicious argument with Helen and breaks several of her possessions along with some library books . Small Alison fantasizes about her family as the happy family singing together on television ( " Raincoat of Love " ) . 
 Alison remembers a time when Bruce took her and her brothers to New York City and stayed in a borrowed Greenwich Village apartment . After a long day , Small Alison , Christian and John settle into sleeping bags . Small Alison wakes up and catches Bruce sneaking out . Bruce sings a lullaby ( " Pony Girl " ) . He reassures his daughter that he 's just going out for a paper , but he leaves to go cruising . Medium Alison is angered by a noncommittal letter from Bruce , responding to her coming out . At a luncheonette with her father , Small Alison notices a butch delivery woman and feels an inexplicable kinship with her ( " Ring of Keys " ) . 
 Medium Alison calls home to demand a fuller response from her parents and is astonished when her mother tells her that her father has had sexual relationships with men and boys . Alison explores the tensions her family was under at this time and watches a heated argument between her parents . Medium Alison returns home for vacation with Joan in tow . Helen confesses to Medium Alison her devastation at spending her life in an unfulfilling marriage with Bruce ( " Days and Days " ) . Medium Alison , Joan and Bruce have an unexpectedly pleasant evening around the piano . Bruce asks Alison if she 'd like to go for a drive , and ( adult ) Alison realizes that Medium Alison is gone ; she joins her father in the car , breaking the boundaries of time . On the drive , she and Bruce struggle to express themselves to each other ( " Telephone Wire " ) . 
 Bruce , manically engaged in a new restoration project , tries and fails to find a way to hold his life together . He steps in front of a truck and is killed ( " Edges of the World " ) . Alison , newly reconciled to her past , remembers and draws a moment of perfect balance : playing " airplane " with her father , while reminiscing about the past with the other <unk> ( " Flying Away " ) . 
 = = Characters and original casts = = 
 The character of Alison Bechdel is portrayed by three actors . 43 @-@ year @-@ old " Alison " is the play 's narrator who reviews her family and early life , 19 @-@ year @-@ old " Medium Alison " who is an Oberlin student discovering her sexuality , and 8 @-@ year @-@ old " Small Alison " who is a child struggling against her father 's expectations . 
 The original casts are as follows : 
 In November 2013 , Alexandra Socha left the off @-@ Broadway production and was replaced in the role of Medium Alison by her understudy , Emily Skeggs . Skeggs plays Medium Alison in the Broadway production . In October 2015 , Lucas was replaced in the role of Small Alison by her understudy , Gabriella Pizzolo , who had previously shared the title role in Matilda . 
 Rebecca Luker played the role of Helen Bechdel from April 5 through May 22 , 2016 , while Judy Kuhn underwent hip <unk> . Kuhn returned to the role on May 24 . 
 = = Songs and recordings = = 
 Since the songs in Fun Home are closely integrated into the script , no list of songs was provided in the program . 
 The original cast album , released in 2014 , opened at # 2 on the Billboard Top Cast Album Chart , a remarkable feat for an Off @-@ Broadway cast album . After the musical opened on Broadway in 2015 , new portions of the show were recorded , and parts were re @-@ recorded , especially to feature Emily Skeggs in the role of Medium Alison . It also includes more dialogue to help the listener follow the story . The song " Party Dress " was added , while a song for Small Alison in place of " Al for Short " , as the latter has been removed from the Broadway show . A dialogue scene , " Clueless in New York " , replaced " I need more coffee " . Bruce 's short a capella bedtime song , " Pony Girl " was added , as was the scene " A flair for the dramatic ... " . The album was released in May 2015 . 
 The track list of the 2015 release , which reflects the musical numbers in the Broadway production , is as follows : 
 1 . " It All Comes Back ( Opening ) " – Small Alison , Bruce , Alison & Company 
 2 . " Sometimes my father appeared to enjoy having children ... " – Alison , Bruce & Helen 
 3 . " Welcome to Our House on Maple Avenue " – Helen , Alison , Small Alison , Christian , John , Bruce & Roy 
 4 . " Not Too Bad " – Medium Alison 
 5 . " Just had a good talk with Dad ... " – Alison , Medium Alison , Bruce , Pete , Small Alison , John & Christian 
 6 . " Come to the Fun Home " – John , Christian & Small Alison 
 7 . " Helen ’ s Etude " – Alison , Roy , Bruce , Small Alison , Helen , John , Christian & Medium Alison 
 8 . " Thanks for the care package ... " – Medium Alison , Joan , Small Alison & Bruce 
 9 . " Party Dress " – Small Alison , Bruce , Medium Alison , Alison 
 10 . " Changing My Major " – Medium Alison 
 11 . " I leapt out of the closet ... " – Alison , Small Alison , Bruce & Helen 
 12 . " Maps " – Alison 
 13 . " Read a book ... " – Bruce , Small Alison , Alison & Helen 
 14 . " Raincoat of Love " – Bobby Jeremy & Company 
 15 . " Clueless in New York … " – Alison , Small Alison & Bruce 
 16 . " Pony Girl " – Bruce 
 17 . " A flair for the dramatic … " – Alison , Joan , Medium Alison & Bruce 
 18 . " Ring of Keys " – Small Alison & Alison 
 19 . " Let me introduce you to my gay dad ... " – Joan , Medium Alison , Alison , Bruce & Small Alison 
 20 . " Shortly after we were married ... " – Helen & Medium Alison 
 21 . " Days and Days " – Helen 
 22 . " You ready to go for that drive ? ... " – Bruce & Alison 
 23 . " Telephone Wire " – Alison & Bruce 
 24 . " It was great to have you home ... " – Bruce & Alison 
 25 . " Edges of the World " – Bruce 
 26 . " This is what I have of you ... " – Alison 
 27 . " Flying Away ( Finale ) " – Alison , Medium Alison & Small Alison 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The Off @-@ Broadway production opened on October 22 , 2013 , to positive reviews . Ben Brantley of The New York Times spoke of the musical 's emotional impact , artistry and universality , calling it a " beautiful heartbreaker of a musical " . " Fun Home isn ’ t just a coming out story or a coming @-@ of @-@ age story . Its universality comes from its awareness of how we never fully know even those closest to us , and of the undercurrent of grown @-@ up secrets , intuited by children , that exists to some degree in every family . Fun Home finds a shining clarity that lights up the night . " Brantley praised both writer Kron and composer Tesori for their work . Of Kron he says : " her book and resonantly precise lyrics give this show its essential spine " , and of Tesori 's score " her best and most varied score to date ... [ which ] captures [ the story 's ] haunting ambiguity . " Brantley later listed Fun Home as one of his top 15 shows of 2013 . 
 Joe Dziemianowicz of the New York Daily News called the musical " achingly beautiful " and said that it " speaks to one family and all families torn by secrets and lies " . Dziemianowicz listed Fun Home at the top of his Top 10 in Theater for 2013 list . 
 Charles McNulty of the Los Angeles Times , though mildly critical of a few of the show 's elements still was impressed with Fun Home , saying " There have been plenty of new American musicals better put together than Fun Home , but I can 't think of one in recent years that has touched me as much with its tender , ironic and courageous vulnerability . " He states that the show 's seeming weaknesses are part of the reason it succeeds , saying that it " gets off to a choppy start , takes unnecessary musical detours and is staged in a rough @-@ hewn style that sometimes seems more accidental than intentional " but that it " succeeds not despite these flaws but in large measure because of them . Bechdel 's ironically self @-@ aware and inwardly searching sensibility is honored by a musical that isn 't afraid to reveal its awkward side . " 
 Though less positive than Brantley , Dziemianowicz or McNulty , Miriam Krule of Slate still said " there are also moments of pure joy , and the musical shines during these " . Krule felt , however , that " it 's not clear that a musical is the best second format for the material " . 
 Adam Hetrick , editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Playbill.com , described Fun Home as " the best musical of the year " , calling it " an emotionally @-@ packed piece of theatre , full of joy , heart , sorrow and uncomfortable reality " . Reviewing the cast album for Playbill , Steven Suskin praised Kron 's " marvelous set " of lyrics , called Tesori " a master of musical styles ... [ who ] matches Kron 's tone with a mix of sensitivity and humor . " Suskin singled out " Days and Days " for especial praise , calling it " a staggering piece of musical theatre writing " . He also lauded the performances of Judy Kuhn ( " stunning " ) , Michael Cerveris ( " one of his finest performances ever " ) and the three <unk> , Beth Malone , Alexandra Socha and Sydney Lucas ( calling the last " one of the most assured child actors we 've seen " ) . Suskin called Fun Home " the best musical on the New York stage of 2013 — far outclassing the competition — and ... thus far the best musical of the 2013 @-@ 14 season . " 
 New York Times music critic Anthony Tommasini praised Tesori 's score as a " masterpiece " , noting that the " vibrant pastiche songs " and " varied kinds of music ... a jazzy number for the young Alison in the middle of a rescue fantasy ; Sondheim @-@ influenced songs that unfold over insistent rhythmic figures and shifting , rich harmonies " come together to create " an impressively integrated entity " . Tommasini also praised the show 's ensemble numbers , calling them " complex yet texturally transparent , engrossingly dramatic " . 
 Anticipating the play 's move to Broadway , David Levesley of online magazine Mic heralded Fun Home 's focus on the individual experience of a lesbian , calling it " the most daring , relentless analysis of homosexual identity on the New York stage right now " . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 The Public Theater production of Fun Home was nominated for the 2014 Edward M. Kennedy Prize for Drama Inspired by American History , nine Lucille Lortel Awards ( winning three , including Outstanding Musical ) , seven Outer Critics Circle Awards ( winning Outstanding New Off @-@ Broadway Musical ) , three Drama League Awards and eight Drama Desk Awards , and it won the Off Broadway Alliance Award for Best New Musical . Many critics predicted that Fun Home would win the 2014 Pulitzer Prize for Drama . The musical was a finalist for the Pulitzer , but The Flick by Annie Baker won the award . The Pulitzer committee called the musical " A poignant musical adaptation of a graphic memoir " . The production won the New York Drama Critics ' Circle Award for Best Musical and the Obie Award for Musical Theater , and 10 @-@ year @-@ old Sydney Lucas won an Obie in the Performance category , becoming the youngest performer ever to win an Obie . 
 The original Broadway production was nominated for 12 Tony Awards , winning five , including Best Musical . Jeanine Tesori & Lisa Kron were the first female writing team to win the Tony Award for Best Original Score . Kron won for Best Book , Cerveris won for Best Leading Actor , and Gold won for Best Direction . Both Lucas and Skeggs won Theatre World Awards . 
 = = = Original Off @-@ Broadway production = = = 
 = = = Original Broadway production = = = 
 = Ring the Alarm = 
 " Ring the Alarm " is a song recorded by American singer Beyoncé Knowles for her second studio album , B 'Day ( 2006 ) . It was composed by Knowles , Kasseem " Swizz Beatz " Dean and Sean Garrett . Columbia Records released " Ring the Alarm " as the second single from B 'Day in the United States on October 17 , 2006 , while " Irreplaceable " ( 2006 ) was serviced as the album 's second international and third US single . The song 's development was motivated by Knowles ' role in the Broadway musical adaptation Dreamgirls ( 2006 ) . The cover art of " Ring the Alarm " proved controversial because Knowles used alligators during the photography session . People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) , declared that Knowles ' posing with a baby alligator was arguably abusive to an animal . 
 " Ring the Alarm " is an R & B song with punk rock influences . Its introduction features a blaring siren , which sets an aggressive tone . The song 's lyrics revolve a woman who feels threatened , and is unwilling to allow another woman to profit from the protagonist 's efforts to improve her lover 's life . The lyrics were rumored to be about Barbadian recording artist Rihanna 's relationship with Jay @-@ Z ; Knowles refuted the allegation in an interview with Seventeen magazine . The song was received with mixed reception for contemporary music critics , who noted that it was different from Knowles ' previous work . While some commended her willingness to take risks , others were polarized about her aggressive vocals . " Ring the Alarm " was nominated for Best Female R & B Vocal Performance at the 49th Grammy Awards . 
 The single debuted at number 12 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , becoming Knowles ' highest US debut at the time . It reached number 11 on the chart , becoming her first solo single to peak below the top 10 . Its accompanying music video was inspired by the 1992 film Basic Instinct and was directed by Sophie Muller . It was filmed inside a cavernous hangar on the Brooklyn waterfront in New York City . The video garnered generally mixed reviews critics , who universally thought that it was eccentric . Knowles promoted " Ring the Alarm " through various live performances on televised shows and awards ceremonies , including the 2006 MTV Video Music Awards . The song was included on her set list on The Beyoncé Experience ( 2007 ) in Los Angeles and her world tour , I Am ... Tour . ( 2009 – 10 ) 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 After six months of filming for the Broadway musical adaptation of Dreamgirls , Knowles was on vacation . Inspired by her role in the film , she said : " [ When filming ended , ] I had so many things bottled up , so many emotions , so many ideas " . After contacting American songwriters and record producers Sean Garrett along with Rodney Jerkins , Rich Harrison , and Kasseem " Swizz Beatz " Dean , Knowles rented Sony Music Studios to begin working on her second solo album B 'Day . Garret said : " I came to the studio and saw the zone ... everybody in here is banging out . Rodney Jerkins had his session , Rich Harrison had his session going on ... I started banging out some shit . " " Ring the Alarm " was produced by Knowles , Garrett and Swizz Beatz ; its lyrics were being written at the same time by the trio . Swizz Beatz stated : " [ ' Ring the Alarm ' is ] just one of the many presents I gave [ Knowles ] for her B 'Day . I have the most tracks on her album as a single producer " . " Ring the Alarm " was co @-@ arranged by Knowles and recorded in the same studio . She said about her collaboration with Swizz Beatz , " I love working with Swizz . He 's challenging . His beats are so complex it 's hard to find a melody . But [ ' Ring the Alarm ' ] just clicked " . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Ring the Alarm " is an R & B song that incorporates elements of punk rock , According to the sheet music published by EMI Music Publishing , it is composed in the key of A minor but changes to E major in the bridge and changes to A minor , and set in common time at a moderately slow tempo of 85 beats per minute . The instrumentation of " Ring the Alarm " includes drums , clattering percussion instrument , treble synthesizers , and bass instrument . It also makes use of a slapping backbeat , an air horn , titanic handclaps , <unk> , and breathing noises . A blaring siren is used as the song 's introductory sound , setting an aggressive tone , which is augmented by Knowles ' throaty mezzo @-@ soprano growl . Tim Finney of Pitchfork Media described her vocals as " thrillingly sharp with anxiety and paranoia " , and Tom Breihan of The Village Voice commented that she sings with " a frantic intensity " . Knowles ' vocals range from the note of A3 to F5 . Her strong shout vocal styling is meshed with the grooves , and enhanced with echo and shimmer , which overlap with one another , creating a neo @-@ warm vibe . 
 Knowles commented on the song , " It 's energetic , aggressive and filled with hard beats " . She explained that the album was completed in three weeks , which is the reason most of the record , including " Ring the Alarm " sounds aggressive . She further clarified that she did not intend to write an angry song , " Swizz 's [ ' Ring the Alarm ' ] had that tough vibe , like the guy had cheated , and I wanted to write something honest . If you 're in a relationship , even if the man 's cheating and you end up not wanting him , the thought of another woman benefiting from the lessons you taught him . " " Ring the Alarm " features Knowles as the female protagonist impersonating a threatened woman involved in a love triangle . She is unwilling to allow another woman to profit from all the efforts she put on to make her lover a better man . Frances Romero of Time magazine noted that Knowles ' anger is due to her man 's wandering eye , her desire to leave , and the thought of having to give him up to some unworthy woman . 
 Tamara Coniff of Billboard magazine noted that the verses of " Ring the Alarm " resemble those of Aretha Franklin 's songs . Tom Breihan commented that Knowles " [ wails ] with force and purpose on the verses " . As the song opens , she tells her lover , " I can 't let you go " , and that she will not allow another woman to take everything she owns , including the chinchilla coats and the house on the coast . Knowles screams the refrain — " Ring the alarm , I 've been doin [ g ] this too long / But I 'll be damned if I see another chick on your arm " — " through a thick fog of distortion " , as noted by Jody Rosen of Entertainment Weekly . Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe added that she chants the lines with grit and urgency , while Breihan wrote that she sings them " with a frantic intensity " . Knowles later declares that her relationship is " not the picture perfect movie everyone would assume " . 
 = = Single selection and release = = 
 In June 2006 , Knowles invited Tamara Coniff of Billboard magazine to a New York recording studio where she played " Ring the Alarm " and " Freakum Dress " ( 2006 ) for the prospect of the next US single , and she also had plans for " Green Light " ( 2007 ) and " Get Me Bodied " ( 2007 ) to hit international markets . However , she ultimately opted for " Ring the Alarm " to be released as the second single of the album in the US , following " Déjà Vu " ( 2006 ) . On September 10 , 2006 , it was added to US urban contemporary radio playlists . A two @-@ track CD single was released on October 3 , 2006 , and a five @-@ track remix CD was later made available on October 17 , 2006 . Knowles approached English production team Freemasons to remix " Ring the Alarm " . A club @-@ oriented version was produced and included on the band 's debut album , Shakedown , released in 2007 . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 The lyrics of " Ring the Alarm " were rumored to be about singer Rihanna 's relationship with rapper Jay @-@ Z. According to media speculation , Knowles , Rihanna and Jay @-@ Z were part of a love triangle in 2006 . It was rumored that Jay @-@ Z had always been faithful to Knowles until he met Rihanna , whose popularity grew considerably during that year . She tempted Jay @-@ Z to live a romantic relationship with her while he was still with Knowles . As commented by Tom Breihan of The Village Voice , Knowles took advantage of " [ people 's ] sympathy and unleash [ ed ] a burst of public rage in the form of [ ' Ring the Alarm ' ] " . In an interview for Seventeen magazine , she however clarified that the lyrics had no connection with Rihanna , before adding that she was unaware of the rumors that had been circulating . Concerned that someone was trying to sabotage Knowles ' second studio album , Knowles ' father and manager , Mathew Knowles , released an official statement : 
 It is apparent that there is a consistent plan by some to create chaos around Beyoncé 's B 'Day album release on September 4 in the US . First , it was a petition against the single , ' Déjà Vu ' , then a rumor regarding conflict between Beyoncé and Rihanna , seizures caused by the ' Ring the Alarm ' video , putting out a single to compete with LeToya 's album and now to add to all the ridiculous rumors , is my plan to postpone the release of her ' B 'Day ' album . What will be next ? Beyoncé 's cut off all her hair ? <unk> it green ? Maybe she 's singing the songs in reverse with some hidden subliminal message ! 
 The cover art of " Ring the Alarm " , caused controversy because alligators were used during the photography session . Knowles affirmed that using the animal , and taping their mouths shut , was her idea . People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) , which had previously confronted her after she used furs for her fashion line 's clothing design , contacted a biologist who wrote a letter to Knowles , " As a specialist in reptile biology and welfare , I 'm concerned about your posing with a terrified baby alligator for your new album cover . Humans and alligators are not natural bedfellows , and the two should not mix at events such as photo shoots . In my view , doing so is arguably abusive to an animal . " 
 = = Critical response = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Ring the Alarm " received polarized responses from contemporary music critics , who noted that it was a marked departure from Knowles ' previous material . Eb Haynes of AllHipHop wrote that the song is " emotionally high @-@ powered . The Boston Globe 's Sarah Rodman noted that it finds Knowles in " full hell @-@ hath @-@ no @-@ fury mode " , singing with grit and urgency that feel genuine . A critic of Billboard magazine viewed " Ring the Alarm " as a memorable release even though he wrote that it is not as good as Knowles ' 2003 single " Crazy in Love " . He praised her distorted vocals and the " ranting assault of a lyric " , which she uses to convince her love interest . Jody Rosen of Entertainment Weekly called " Ring the Alarm " torrid , and wrote that Knowles " sounds positively horrified by the prospect of relinquishing the luxury goodies her boyfriend has bought her " . Brian Hiatt of Rolling Stone stated that she sings with " enough frantic , quavering intensity to make you believe she really is crazy in love " . Marcos Chin of Vibe magazine described " Ring the Alarm " as " both a sexual invitation and a threat " . Darryl Sterdan of Jam ! described " Ring the Alarm " as a " shrill tantrum of green @-@ eyed <unk> " , and Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times described it as a " canny display of emotional vulnerability " . Tom Breihan of The Village Voice commented that " Ring the Alarm " may become Knowles ' " You Oughta Know " . 
 Spence D. of IGN Music commented that the best examples of Knowles vocal stylings come on " Ring The Alarm " , adding that it is one of the few tracks on the album where she goes for a throaty growl . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine wrote that it was a bold choice for a single Dave de Sylvi of Sputnikmusic noted that " Ring the Alarm " was a brave choice for a single , called it " angry and lyrically incendiary " , and noted that Swizz Beatz 's beats are " unusually intricate " . Norman Meyers of Prefix Magazine noted that the song is evidence of Knowles ' willingness to take chances . Calling " Ring the Alarm " a " bunny @-@ boiling bonanza " and a " killer club track " , <unk> Read of <unk> wrote that it is a definite highlight and that " it 's great to see an artist at the top of her game prepared to take risks with a track as unhinged as this . " Chris Richards of The Washington Post defined Knowles ' character in the song as a " jealousy @-@ crazed ex " , and expressed his disappointment that it could not manage a " more convincing refrain " . Andy Kellman of Allmusic called it " an angered , atonal , and out @-@ of @-@ character song " . Tim Finney of Pitchfork Media wrote , " the siren @-@ assisted caterwaul of second single ' Ring the Alarm ' sounds genuinely ( and marvelously ) incoherent . " Bernard Zuel of The Sydney Morning Herald described " Ring the Alarm " as a " posturing and eventually annoying " track . 
 = = = Recognition and accolades = = = 
 Vibe magazine ranked " Ring the Alarm " at number forty @-@ eight on its list of the Top 60 Songs of 2006 , complimenting the vocal distortion and the way Knowles shouts on the chorus and the hook . Frances Romero of Time magazine listed " Ring the Alarm " at number nine on her list of the Top 10 Angry Breakup Songs of the 2000s decade , writing : " Critics had mixed feelings about the song ... In the end , what it does show is that Beyoncé will have her way . " Staff members of Pitchfork Media ranked the song on their list of The Top 100 Tracks of 2006 at number 85 . The song was nominated for Best Female R & B Vocal Performance at the 49th Grammy Awards but lost to Mary J. Blige 's 2005 single " Be Without You " . Jody Rosen from The New Yorker credited the jarring timbral and tonal variations on the song for giving a new musical sound that didn 't exist in the world before Knowles . He further wrote , " If they sound ' normal ' now , it 's because Beyoncé , and her many followers , have retrained our ears . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 For the week ending September 23 , 2006 , " Ring the Alarm " debuted at number 12 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , following its entry at number seven on the US Hot Digital Songs chart , selling around 56 @,@ 000 digital downloads . It was the highest US debut that week , and was the highest debuting song of Knowles ' career until " Formation " and " Sorry " debuted at numbers 10 and 11 , respectively , in May 2016 . The song peaked at number 11 on the Hot 100 chart issue dated September 30 , 2006 , and was Knowles ' lowest peaking single until " Get Me Bodied " , which peaked at number 68 . Several weeks after leaving the Hot 100 chart , " Ring the Alarm " re @-@ entered it for the week ending January 13 , 2007 , at number 81 ; it remained on the chart for 14 non @-@ consecutive weeks . 
 " Ring the Alarm " was more successful on Billboard 's component charts . It topped the US Hot Dance Music / Club Play chart , US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles Sales chart and US Hot 100 Singles Sales chart , and reached number three on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . The song additionally charted at number 21 on the US Rhythmic Top 40 chart and at number 19 on the US Pop 100 chart . Though not released outside the US , " Ring the Alarm " charted at number 57 on January 15 , 2007 , in Sweden . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Ring the Alarm " was the second video of Knowles ' to be directed by Sophie Muller , who worked on " Déjà Vu " . The video was filmed inside a cavernous hangar located on the waterfront in Brooklyn , New York City . It remakes a scene from the 1992 film Basic Instinct , referred to by Natalie More of In These Times as an infamous scene . Knowles wears a white skirt and turtleneck to emulate Sharon Stone . She told Elysa Gardner of USA Today that she considered the video to be a movie scene ; " I put six months aside , worked with a coach for two months . And that carried through to my music . I treated the video for ' Ring the Alarm ' like a movie scene . I was thinking , ' I 've got to make my acting coach proud . " The video premiered at Yahoo ! Music on August 16 , 2006 and was released to US iTunes Store on November 21 , 2006 . It debuted on MTV 's Total Request Live at number 10 on August 22 , 2006 , reached number one , and remained on the show for 35 days until it was replaced by the music video for " Irreplaceable " ( 2006 ) . 
 The video starts with Knowles laying on a table , lit with a flashing bright red light . While a siren is blaring , she half @-@ stands and sings while dancing on the table . She proceeds to an interrogation room similar to the one in the film Basic Instinct . Knowles sings the first verse in a house with a seashore backdrop . She wants to escape , and struggles with masked and uniformed guards in a hallway . She is then returned to the interrogation room . In between cuts , she sings in a corner of a room , is seen reflected in a mirror while screaming , and among a group of reporters . As the song closes , Knowles is shown crying . The video ends with a close @-@ up view of Knowles putting on red lipstick . The scene shows only her lips . 
 The music video gained mostly mixed reviews from critics . Andy Kellman of Allmusic wrote that it " invited all kinds of perplexed analysis " . Jose Antonio Vargas of The Washington Post described Knowles ' persona as a " ranting , angry woman " . Elizabeth Goodman of Rolling Stone speculated that the use of guards in riot gear is a reference to Alias . Tom Breihan of The Village Voice described the clip as a " quick @-@ and @-@ dirty " video and a " fast montage of disconnected and disconnecting images " . Roger Friedman of Fox News called it a " bizarre video depicting a wildly angry and unappealing Beyoncé telling off someone ( maybe Jay @-@ Z ? ) for cheating as if she were an enraged guest on Maury Povich . " The staff members of Pitchfork Media included the music video at number 21 on the list of Top 25 Music Videos of 2006 . Ryan Dombal further wrote that it was " Almost as good as Basic Instinct 2 : Risk Addiction " . In 2013 , John Boone and Jennifer Cady of E ! Online placed the video at number 6 on their list of Knowles ' 10 best music videos . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Knowles performed " Ring the Alarm " at the 2006 MTV Video Music Awards on August 31 , 2006 , wearing a flowing trench coat , a corset and hotpants . The performance referenced Janet Jackson 's " Rhythm Nation " routine . James Montgomery of MTV News commented that as Knowles sang , she " ... stripped and stalked . " Jocelyn Vena of the same publication , wrote that she had a " frantic performance " of the song along with a " fiercely choreographed breakdown " at the end . Erika Ramirez of Billboard magazine put the performance at number five on her list of " Beyonce 's 5 Biggest TV Performances " saying that Knowles " kill [ ed ] " the live performance . She later performed the song on the American morning news and talk show , Good Morning America . " Ring the Alarm " was included on Knowles ' set list for her The Beyoncé Experience concert in Los Angeles , and I Am ... Tour venues . 
 During a performance of " Ring the Alarm " in Orlando , Florida on July 26 , 2007 , Knowles fell down a flight of stairs on stage and was <unk> by several fans . She told her audience that it " hurt so bad " and requested , " Don 't put [ the footage ] on YouTube . " However , the next morning , several clips of Knowles ' fall were available on YouTube , and reported in the media . The videos were quickly removed from YouTube because users had transgressed the website 's terms of use . " A representative from YouTube said that users posting their footage of the incident were guilty of infringement because " even if [ they ] took the video [ themselves ] , the performer controls the right to use his / her image in a video , the songwriter owns the rights to the song being performed and sometimes the venue prohibits filming without permission . " After being removed , clips of Knowles ' fall were later reposted on YouTube and other video @-@ sharing sites like <unk> 's World and Dailymotion . Jay @-@ Z later stated on radio that even though Knowles is " ... a great performer who 's on point 99 percent of the time , she 's still human . " 
 Knowles performed " Ring the Alarm " on August 5 , 2007 , at Madison Square Garden in Manhattan , wearing a long red overcoat . Jon Pareles of The New York Times praised her performance , stating : " Beyoncé needs no distractions from her singing , which can be airy or brassy , tearful or vicious , rapid @-@ fire with staccato syllables or sustained in curlicued melismas . But she was in constant motion , strutting in costumes . " In Los Angeles , Knowles performed song , dressed in a long red overcoat . She was accompanied by several backup dancers and live instrumentation . When she sang " Ring the Alarm " in Sunrise , Florida on June 29 , 2009 , Knowles was wearing a glittery gold leotard . Animated graphics of turntables , faders and other club equipment were projected behind her , the dancers and the musicians . Knowles was accompanied by two drummers , two keyboardists , a percussionist , a horn section , three backup vocalists and a lead guitarist . " Ring the Alarm " was included on her 2007 live album The Beyoncé Experience Live . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from B 'Day liner notes . 
 Recorded by : Jim Caruana 
 Assisted by : Rob Kinelski 
 Mixed by : Jason Goldstein and Swizz Beatz 
 Assisted by Steve Tolle 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 " Ring the Alarm " has featured in the third series premiere of popular UK teen drama Skins . 
 = Nitro ( Adlabs Imagica ) = 
 Nitro is a steel Floorless Coaster at the Adlabs Imagica amusement park located in <unk> , Mumbai , India . Manufactured by Bolliger & Mabillard , the roller coaster reaches a maximum height of 132 feet ( 40 m ) and a maximum speed of 65 @.@ 2 miles per hour ( 104 @.@ 9 km / h ) . The coaster also features five inversions . Nitro opened to the public in October 2013 . 
 = = History = = 
 As construction progressed with the theme park in early 2013 , the owners of the park gave no details about the roller coaster other than that it would be the largest roller coaster in India . Even after the Roller Coaster Database reported that a Bolliger & Mabillard Floorless Coaster would be built at the park , the owners still released no details . In April 2013 , the first pieces of the roller coaster were erected . By the end of August , all of the coaster 's track was installed . Then in the third quarter of 2013 , Adlabs Imagica released the details of Nitro . 
 Nitro was originally scheduled to open in May 2013 , however , it did not open until October . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 Once the train is loaded and secured , the steel floor is retracted and the gate in front of the train opens . After being dispatched , the train immediately begins to climb the 132 @-@ foot ( 40 m ) chain lift hill . At the top , the train drops down a small straight section before finishing the drop with a sharp turn to the right . When the train reaches the bottom of the drop , it reaches its maximum speed of 65 @.@ 2 miles per hour ( 104 @.@ 9 km / h ) and enters a vertical loop , followed by a dive loop . After making a slight turn to the right , the train makes a banked right turn through the loop it passes through before . Then , the train passes through a trim brake ( to slow the train down ) before entering a zero @-@ gravity roll . The train then makes a banked turn to the left leading into the first of the interlocking corkscrews . After a banked turn to the right and a slight turn to the left , the train goes through the second corkscrew . The train then enters an approximate 180 @-@ degree downward banked turn to the left before making a final right turn into the brake run which leads directly back to the station . When the train arrives back to the station , the floors come back up , the front gate closes , and the next riders board . One cycle of the ride lasts about 2 minutes and 30 seconds . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Track = = = 
 Designed by Bolliger & Mabillard , the steel track of Nitro is approximately 2 @,@ 800 feet ( 850 m ) long , and the height of the lift is 132 @-@ foot ( 40 m ) high . The roller coaster also features five inversions . The track is painted red with yellow rails and blue supports . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Nitro operates with two steel and fiberglass trains . Each train has six cars that can seat four rides in a single row , for a total of 24 riders per train ; each seat has its own individual over the shoulder restraint . The structure of the trains are coloured blue , red , and yellow ; the seats are black and the restraints are yellow . Also , unlike traditional steel roller coasters , Nitro has no floor on its trains . 
 With the trains reaching a top speed of 65 @.@ 2 miles per hour ( 104 @.@ 9 km / h ) , Nitro is the second fastest Bolliger & Mabillard Floorless Coaster . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Neha <unk> from the Indiatimes said , " [ The roller coaster ] almost kills you , because it twirls , twists , and turns at a rapid speed , which reminds you of speed from the movies like ' Final Destination ' and ' The Fast and the Furious ' . 
 = François Antoine Louis Bourcier = 
 François Antoine Louis Bourcier was a French cavalry officer and divisional general of the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars . 
 Born 23 February 1760 in La Petite @-@ Pierre , Alsace , Bourcier was a cavalry lieutenant when the French Revolution began . He fought with the Army of the Rhine in the War of the First Coalition . By the War of the Second Coalition , he had been promoted to brigadier general , and served in the Army of the Danube as inspector general of cavalry . In the Napoleonic Wars , he fought at major campaigns on the Danube against Austria and Russia , including the battles of Elchingen , Austerlitz and the Battle of Wagram . He also participated in the campaign against Prussia , which culminated in the Battle of Jena @-@ Auerstadt and the battles of Heilsberg and Friedland . Following the campaign in Prussia , he served briefly in the Peninsular War after he which he was transferred back to northern Europe and participated in the French Invasion of Russia in 1812 . 
 Following the defeat of Napoleon in 1815 , he retained his titles and honors . After serving in the Chamber of Deputies , Bourcier died 8 May 1828 at his chateau in Ville @-@ au @-@ Val in Meurthe @-@ et @-@ Moselle . 
 = = Career = = 
 Antoine Louis Francois Bourcier was born on 23 February 1760 near Phalsbourg , in La Petite Pierre , a small town , in the Bas @-@ Rhin district , 24 kilometers ( 15 mi ) north of Saverne and 56 kilometers ( 35 mi ) northwest of Strasbourg . The son of a former sergeant of the guard of King Stanislas <unk> , he proved himself a bright student in school , and was placed in a cavalry regiment . At the beginning of the French Revolution in 1789 , he was lieutenant in the 1st Regiment of Cavalry . From this time , his prospects rose quickly . Appointed aide @-@ de @-@ <unk> to the Duke of Aiguillon ( 9 June 1792 ) , he later he transferred to the staff of General Adam Philippe , Comte de Custine . A general of brigade in 1793 , he became Chief of Staff of the Army of the Rhine , and was raised the following year to the rank of major general . 
 Bourcier commanded a division of cavalry under General Jean Victor Marie Moreau , who had taken an interest in his career , and he was appointed Inspector of Cavalry on 3 August 1797 . When Jean Baptiste Jourdan formed the Army of the Danube , he appointed Bourcier as inspector of cavalry for both his force and the Army of Switzerland , under command of André Masséna . With command of a brigade , and as inspector of cavalry , Bourcier participated in the campaigns of the War of the Second Coalition in southwestern Germany , Switzerland , and northern Italy . In Italy , he also commanded a column of cavalry that routed a group of rebels near Andrea . 
 In the 1805 War of the Third Coalition , as commander of a division of dragoons , he participated in the Battle of Elchingen and later the Battle of Ulm . Six weeks later , at the Battle of Austerlitz , he made several brilliant and timely charges , including one observed by several parishioners of the town of <unk> , who had climbed the church tower to watch the action . The French infantry had been surrounded by Austrian cavalry , which pursued them down the road . Bourcier approached from the other direction with three regiments of dragoons , having left the rest of his division behind to preserve his communication lines in <unk> . Seeing the infantry beleaguered by cavalry , he led his men in a charge , giving the infantry time to escape . His own dragoons were fired upon with cannon and grapeshot , killing or wounding several men and horses , but , as he wrote later , " [ the Russian cannon fire ] would have done more harm had they been directed better , being within half range . " 
 After the French victory at the Battle of Jena @-@ Auerstadt , Bourcier was placed in charge of the several thousands of horses confiscated from the Prussians . This influx of horses improved the capacity of the French cavalry , as Joachim Murat 's 11 @,@ 000 @-@ strong cavalry reserve demonstrated later at the Battle of Eylau in February 1807 . 
 After the defeat of Prussia in 1807 , Bourcier was sent to Spain to support the French efforts there , but he returned to the northern European theater in time for the Battle of Wagram in July 1809 . He was also part of Napoleon 's Russian campaign , but escaped the rigors of the retreat from Moscow , having been previously sent back to Berlin to reorganize the French cavalry . 
 The First Restoration awarded him the Cross of St. Louis . He retired in 1816 , but the following year he was recalled to the State Council and served as commissioner for the management of military supply depots . 
 = = Family and post @-@ military life = = 
 In 1809 , he acquired the Chateau de Ville @-@ au @-@ Val at Meurthe @-@ et @-@ Moselle . In 1816 , he was elected to the Chamber of Deputies by the Department of the Meurthe . He married Marie Isabelle Van <unk> ( died in Nancy , 13 June 1855 ) . They had a daughter , Adelaide Ernestine Josephine , born 11 October 1805 , who married to Louis Henry Gau , the son of Charles Louis Joseph Gau of <unk> . 
 He died 8 May 1828 in Ville @-@ au @-@ Val and was buried , as were his descendants after him , in the family vault near the chateau chapel . His name is engraved on the Arc d <unk> . 
 = Intimidator ( roller coaster ) = 
 Intimidator is a steel roller coaster built by Bolliger & Mabillard at Carowinds . The roller coaster is located in the Carowinds Plaza section of the park . Intimidator is the thirteenth roller coaster installed at Carowinds and is located near the entrance of the theme park . It is currently one of the tallest , fastest and longest roller coasters in the Southeast with a 232 @-@ foot ( 71 m ) lift hill , a top speed of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) and a track length of 5 @,@ 316 feet ( 1 @,@ 620 m ) . It was announced on August 26 , 2009 and opened March 27 , 2010 . The roller coaster 's name comes from the nickname of NASCAR driver Dale Earnhardt . 
 = = History = = 
 Construction on Intimidator began during the summer of 2009 with land clearing and footings being constructed . Track pieces first began to arrive at Carowinds on August 7 , 2009 . About 3 weeks later , Intimidator was officially announced on August 26 , 2009 by Carowinds . Along with the announcement , Carowinds reached a licensing agreement with Dale Earnhardt , Inc. to utilize the Dale Earnhardt brand as part of the ride . One of Earnhardt 's sons , Kerry Earnhardt , was on @-@ hand for the press conference announcing the attraction and endorsed the ride on behalf of the family . The first supports and track for Intimidator were installed on September 1 , 2009 . The lift hill was erected on October 1 , 2009 and was completed on October 13 , 2009 . In order to install the last lift piece , 3 cranes were required . Construction on the roller coaster layout continued through November and December with the final track piece installed on December 21 , 2009 . Construction on the station , mechanics , and landscaping of Intimidator took place during the months of January and February . On February 4 , 2010 , testing of Intimidator commenced with the new roller coaster officially opening to the public on March 27 , 2010 . 
 Seat belts were added to the ride in the spring of 2014 as a supplement to the original lap @-@ bar restraint system . 
 = = = First Rider Auction = = = 
 On January 14 , 2010 , Carowinds launched a " First Rider Auction " in which people from anywhere in the world would bid against each other in order to be one of the first public riders on Intimidator , with ninety – six seats being made available to bid on . The bidders that fell in the top 96 were given the opportunity to be the first public riders on Intimidator on March 27 , 2010 , before the ride opened to the general public . All money raised during the auction went to the Dale Earnhardt Foundation . The highest bid for a single seat was US $ 500 . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 Intimidator features eight drops , seven camelback hills , a panoramic u @-@ turn , and a diving spiral . One cycle lasts about 3 minutes and 33 seconds . 
 Before the train leaves the station , a short message is played , " Gentlemen , start your engines ! " After departing from the station , the train heads straight to the chain lift hill . Once the train reaches the top of the 232 @-@ foot ( 71 m ) lift , it drops back down to the ground at a 74 degree angle reaching speeds of up to 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) . Following the first drop , the train then goes over the first camelback hill which stands at 178 feet ( 54 m ) tall . After the camelback hill , the train makes a sharp right hand turn back to the ground followed by a left hand turn . After the turn , the train goes over the second camelback hill which is 151 feet ( 46 m ) tall . Following the hill , the train enters a 121 @-@ foot ( 37 m ) panoramic u @-@ turn . The train then goes over a third 105 @-@ foot ( 32 m ) camelback hill , immediately followed by another camelback hill at 90 feet ( 27 m ) . Next , the train makes a left hand turn into the mid @-@ course brake run which slows the train down . After the train exits the brake run , it goes over the fifth camelback hill which stands at 62 feet ( 19 m ) and makes a sharp right hand turn into an element known as a Diving Spiral . The train goes through two more camelback hills standing at 52 feet ( 16 m ) and 48 feet ( 15 m ) , respectively , before entering the final brake run which leads into the station . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Intimidator operates with three open @-@ air stadium style steel and fiberglass trains . Each train has eight cars that have four seats each for a total of 32 riders per train . Additionally , the trains are themed after Dale Earnhardt ’ s 1998 RCR No. 3 Chevrolet Monte Carlo . 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The steel track is 5 @,@ 316 feet ( 1 @,@ 620 m ) in length and the height of the lift is approximately 232 feet ( 71 m ) . The angle of the first descent is approximately 74 degrees . Also , the roller coaster includes trim brakes and magnetic brakes for speed control . 
 = = Awards = = 
 ^ No Steel Roller Coaster Poll was held in 2011 . 
 = Overdrive ( Shonen Knife album ) = 
 Overdrive is the 19th studio album by pop punk trio Shonen Knife . It was released on April 14 , 2014 in Europe , and on April 16 , 2014 in Japan . According to band leader Naoko Yamano , because their album Free Time ( 2010 ) was heavily influenced by punk rock , and Pop Tune ( 2012 ) had explored a more pop @-@ oriented sound , Overdrive was a chance for the band to explore a more hard rock sound . The album 's lyrics cover a wide array of topics , from green tea , fortune cookies , and cats . 
 The CD album artwork was created by Masahiko Ohno ; three different color variations were released , with each corresponding to either Japan , North America , or Europe . The album received moderately positive reviews from critics , with many applauding the band 's dabbling in more harder rock , whereas others were critical of its musical and lyrical simplicity . 
 = = Production = = 
 While Shonen Knife 's usual sound is Ramones @-@ inspired pop punk , the band branched out musically and listened to harder rock bands for Overdrive , such as such as Black Sabbath , Thin Lizzy , Bad Company , Deep Purple , Judas Priest , Boston , ZZ Top , and The Doobie Brothers — for inspiration . <unk> described the album 's sound as a combination of " edgy guitar riffs with psychedelic 70s @-@ esque enchanting nostalgia " . Naoko Yamano reasoned that because Free Time ( 2010 ) was heavily influenced by punk rock , and Pop Tune ( 2012 ) explored a more pop @-@ oriented sound , Overdrive represented an opportunity for the band to explore harder rock . Because of the band 's exploration , the album 's name references the overdrive pedal , which , in Yamano 's mind , conjured up images of 1970s rock music . 
 In an interview with <unk> , Yamano explained that her process for writing and recording has not changed substantially from the band 's early days : " I ’ m lazy and I don ’ t start writing songs until we book recording studio [ sic ] , but once we booked the studio , I can write songs quickly with concentration . Then I send my demo to our members and we rehearse . At the recording studio , we start to record from basic tracks then overdub . " On this album , every member of the band also sings a unique song about a food item ; Yamano sings " Fortune Cookie " , the band 's bassist Ritsuko <unk> lends her vocals to " Ramen Rock " , and drummer Emi Morimoto can be heard on " Green Tea " . The first song was inspired by Yamano fondness for eating a fortune cookie after a meal of Chinese food in America ; after learning that the cookies were actually invented in Japan , Yamano decided to pen the song . " Ramen Rock " was inspired by <unk> 's habit of eating ramen after every show . Finally , Yamano asked Morimoto to sing " Green Tea " because she is from Kyoto , which is known for its green tea . 
 Other lyrical themes include on the album include tennis in " Jet Shot " , and cats in " Like a Cat " . Regarding the former , Yamano expressed in an interview that she had always wanted to write a song about tennis , but felt that , being a sport , it did not fit well with the style of the band 's music ; however , while watching a tennis match featuring Kei Nishikori on television , the announced called a move he had made a " great jet shot " . Yamano was struck by the term , and used it as inspiration for a song about wanting to be a more aggressive tennis player . " Like a Cat " joins the long canon of Shonen Knife songs about cats . Yamano explained , " I just like cats . Dogs are sometimes too earnest , but cats are so free . " The band released a music video for the song , featuring cat videos submitted by their fans the world over . For the non @-@ Japan releases of the album , all songs were recorded with English lyrics . However , for the domestic release of the album , " Dance to the Rock " , " Shopping " , and " Like a Cat " were recorded with Japanese lyrics . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Overdrive received moderately positive reviews from critics ; Metacritic , a review aggregator website , gave the album an average score of 67 out of 100 from 17 reviews , which indicates " generally favourable reviews " . NME awarded the album 7 out of 10 stars , with reviewer Stuart Huggett arguing that the album contained " personal and political lyrics far smarter than Shonen Knife ’ s cartoon image suggests . " Zachary Houle of Pop Matters awarded the album six out of ten stars , and mused that Shonen Knife 's fusing of punk and classic rock on the album " somehow work [ s ] " . Houle , however , was critical of the band 's penchant for bordering closely on copying other artists ' music ; he argued that " Bad Luck Song " and " Black Crow " are strikingly similar to Thin Lizzy 's " The Boys Are Back in Town " and Kiss 's " Black Diamond " , respectively , but felt that " the album gets better as it goes along " . 
 Mark Deming of AllMusic awarded the album three out of five stars , commenting on the band 's musical shift ; he wrote , " By Shonen Knife 's standards , Overdrive does sound like some sort of hard rock album , and the attempts to make like Kiss , Thin Lizzy , or Deep Purple come off better than one might expect , though Yamano 's guitar skills are less impressive than those of the average metal axe slinger . " Deming complimented the charm of the album , but criticized Yamano 's lyrics as " run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill " , ill @-@ fitting the change in musical direction . The site selected " Black Crow " , " Ramen Rock " , and " Green Tea " as album highlights . Joe Goggins of Drowned in Sound awarded the album 6 out of 10 stars , and complimented the band for successfully managing to release nineteen studio albums . However , he was slightly critical of the " derivative " nature of the band 's sound , as well as their " one @-@ dimensional guitar playing and unrelentingly trivial lyrics " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = Cambridge Castle = 
 Cambridge Castle , locally also known as Castle Mound , is located in Cambridge , Cambridgeshire , England . Originally built after the Norman conquest to control the strategically important route to the north of England , it played a role in the conflicts of the Anarchy , the First and Second Barons ' Wars . Hugely expanded by Edward I , the castle then fell rapidly into disuse in the late medieval era , its stonework recycled for building purposes in the surrounding colleges . Cambridge Castle was refortified during the English Civil War but once again fell into disuse , used primarily as the county gaol . The castle gaol was finally demolished in 1842 , with a new prison built in the castle bailey . This prison was demolished in 1932 , replaced with the modern Shire Hall , and only the castle motte and limited earthworks still stand . The site is open to the public daily and offers views over the historic buildings of the city . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 11th century = = = 
 Cambridge Castle was one of three castles built across the east of England in late 1068 by William the Conqueror in the aftermath of his northern campaign to capture York . Cambridge , or <unk> as it was then known , was on the old Roman route from London to York and was both strategically significant and at risk of rebellion . The initial building work was conducted by Picot , the high sheriff , who later founded a priory beside the castle . The castle was built in a motte and bailey design , within the existing town , and 27 houses had to be destroyed to make space for it . 
 = = = 12th @-@ 13th centuries = = = 
 The castle was held by the Norman kings until the civil war of the Anarchy broke out in 1139 . Castles played a key role in the conflict between the Empress Matilda and King Stephen , and in 1143 Geoffrey de Mandeville , a supporter of the Empress , attacked Cambridge ; the town was raided and the castle temporarily captured . Stephen responded with a counter @-@ attack , forcing Geoffrey to retreat into the Fens and retaking the castle . Cambridge Castle remained exposed , however , and Stephen decided to build a supporting fortification at Burwell to provide additional protection . Geoffrey died attacking Burwell Castle the following year , leaving Cambridge Castle secure . 
 Under Henry II the castle was adequately maintained , but little additional work was undertaken to improve it . A castle @-@ guard system was established , under which lands around Cambridge were granted to local lords on the condition that they provide guard forces for the castle , and the castle was primarily used to hold the sheriff 's court and records . King John expanded the castle in the years before the First Barons ' War of 1215 to 1217 , but this work was concentrated on constructing a new hall and chamber , at the cost of £ 200 . During the war , the rebel barons , supported by Prince Louis of France , captured much of eastern England ; Cambridge Castle fell in 1216 . The castle was returned to royal control after the war , but Henry III only conducted basic maintenance of the fortification . Cambridge was attacked again during the Second Barons ' War in 1266 . This time the town and castle held long enough to be relieved by Henry 's forces , but the king reinforced the city defences with a large ditch , later known as King 's Ditch . 
 Cambridge Castle remained only a basic fortification until 1284 when Edward I decided to undertake major expansion works . Over the next 14 years the king spent at least £ 2 @,@ 630 on rebuilding the castle in stone . Edward 's castle was four @-@ sided , with circular towers at each corner , guarded by a gatehouse and a barbican . A circular stone keep was built on the motte . The result was a " major fortress in the latest fashion " , albeit never quite completed . Edward stayed at the castle for two nights in 1294 . 
 = = = 14th @-@ 17th centuries = = = 
 During the 14th century the castle was allowed to fall into disrepair . From Edward III onwards , little money was spent on maintaining the property and by the 15th century the castle was in ruins . The castle hall and chamber were roofless by the 15th century , and Henry VI ordered these buildings to be destroyed and the stone reused for constructing King 's College in 1441 , with other parts of the castle being used to help build Trinity College 's chapel . More stonework was given away by Mary I in the 16th century for building a mansion at nearby <unk> in the Fens , and other grants of stone given to Emmanuel and Magdalene colleges . By 1604 only the gatehouse , used as a gaol , and the keep remained intact , with the surrounding walls described by contemporaries as " <unk> and utterly ruinated " . 
 Civil war broke out in England in 1642 between the rival factions of the Royalists and Parliament . Cambridge Castle was occupied by Parliamentary forces in the first year of the war . Oliver Cromwell ordered emergency work to be conducted to repair the defences , resulting in two new earthwork bastions being added to the castle and a brick barracks constructed in the old bailey . The governor of Cambridge described in 1643 that " our town and castle are now very strongly fortified ... with breastworks and bulwarks " . The castle saw no further fighting during the war , and in 1647 parliament ordered the remaining fortifications to be slighted , damaged beyond further use . 
 = = = 18th @-@ 19th centuries = = = 
 The castle rapidly deteriorated after the slighting and the remaining walls and bastions were taken down in 1785 , leaving only the gatehouse and the earth motte . The gatehouse remained in use as the county gaol into the 19th century , being run , like other similar prisons , as a private business — the keeper of the castle gaol was paid £ 200 ( equivalent to £ 13 @,@ 100 in 2009 prices ) a year by the county in 1807 . 
 This came to an end when a new county prison was built in the grounds of the castle 's former bailey . The new prison was built by G. Byfield between 1807 to 1811 with an innovative octagonal structure , influenced by the designs of the prison reformer John Howard ; the castle gatehouse was then destroyed to make way for a new county court building . 
 = = Today = = 
 The only remaining parts of the medieval castle left today is the 10 metre ( 33 feet ) high motte , which rests on the highest point in the city , and some fragments of the surrounding earthworks . It is open to the public daily with no admission fee , and offers views over the historic buildings of the city . Both the motte and earthworks are Scheduled Ancient Monuments . The site of the castle bailey and the 19th century prison is now occupied by the Cambridgeshire County Council 's headquarters at Shire Hall , built in 1932 . 
 = Supernature ( Goldfrapp album ) = 
 Supernature is the third studio album by English electronic music duo Goldfrapp , released on 17 August 2005 by Mute Records . The album received generally favourable reviews , with most critics complimenting its blend of pop and electronic music . It debuted at number two on the UK Albums Chart with first @-@ week sales of 52 @,@ 976 copies , and was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry . Supernature has sold one million copies worldwide . 
 The album 's lead single , " Ooh La La " , reached number four on the UK Singles Chart , becoming the duo 's highest @-@ peaking single to date . The album spawned three further singles : " Number 1 " , " Ride a White Horse " and " Fly Me Away " . In North America , where " Number 1 " was promoted as the first single , the album was released on 7 March 2006 , but did not perform well on the charts . Supernature was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Electronic / Dance Album in 2007 . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Supernature contains music in the same pop and electronic dance styles featured on Goldfrapp 's previous studio album , Black Cherry ( 2003 ) — especially its singles " Strict Machine " and " Twist " — although it focuses on subtle hooks instead of large choruses . Lead singer Alison Goldfrapp described the album 's writing process as " an electronic / glam cross between Berlin , New York and North @-@ East Somerset " . 
 Goldfrapp and Will Gregory recorded the bulk of Supernature in late 2004 in the countryside of Bath , England — the same place they recorded Black Cherry . They had rented a small house and spent some months writing music ; they later explained that the unpopulated location kept them from distractions and that the majority of the process was " very basic " . Goldfrapp called their writing relationship a " democracy " , playing off one another while in the recording studio . The lyrical content of the song " Number 1 " , which became the album 's second single , is about the importance and meaning of relationships , even though they do not necessarily last . 
 In an interview with The Daily Telegraph , Goldfrapp explained that they had never intended to create pop music . However , the singles released from Black Cherry became successes across nightclubs in North America , and as a result , they decided to write a more dance @-@ oriented album . Although this made the duo nervous , " Ooh La La " was the group 's first song to feature the electric guitar . Before its composition , the duo avoided the use of the guitar because of the guitar 's overly recognisable rhythm . Four @-@ on @-@ the @-@ floor bass drums are also present on several of the album 's tracks , and the piano ballad " Let It Take You " features evening @-@ effects composed on a synthesiser . " You Never Know " begins with Alison Goldfrapp executing a synthesised voice , supported by both pads and synthesisers . Goldfrapp and Gregory have cited " Satin Chic " as their favourite song on Supernature . 
 Alison Goldfrapp named the Roland String synth as one of her favourite keyboards . " Number 1 " features an old synth and a bass arrangement that the group began to use frequently after recording the song . Another Roland String model , the SH @-@ 09 , is another favourite ; she played the duo 's song " Train " ( 2003 ) on it and enjoys the sounds that it makes . Goldfrapp was also impressed by a Russian synth , enamored with its Russian @-@ language writing . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Ooh La La " , Supernature 's opening track , inspired by T. Rex , was chosen as its lead single " because it was up and in your face and it carried on the theme of the glammy , <unk> beat from the last album " . It was the duo 's first song to feature the electric guitar , and received positive reviews , often being noted as a highlight of the album . " Ooh La La " became Goldfrapp 's most successful single on the UK Singles Chart to date when it peaked at number four , while topping the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play chart in the United States . The second track , " Lovely 2 C U " , received mixed reviews from critics , with one reviewer stating that it was the " worst offender of sounding by @-@ numbers , its lazy glam affectations sounding all the worse amid a chorus striking only in its complete dullness " . 
 " Ride a White Horse " , the third single , was inspired by the disco era . Like previous singles from the album , the song was another top @-@ 20 single in the UK , where it peaked at number 15 . The ballads " You Never Know " and " Let It Take You " have minimal background electronics , and were generally well received by critics , who drew comparisons to Goldfrapp 's debut album Felt Mountain . " Fly Me Away " , another synth ballad , had an associated music video which featured Goldfrapp as an animated doll ; the video , however , was never released . Serving as the fourth and final single from Supernature , the song was not heavily promoted and was less commercially successful than the other singles , peaking at number 26 on the UK chart . " Slide In " , an electroclash song about sex , and " Koko " were compared to Gary Numan 's early compositions . 
 " Satin Chic " is a disco song with glam rock and cabaret influences , similar to early Elton John . Cited by Goldfrapp and Gregory as their favourite song on Supernature , it was remixed by The Flaming Lips , and issued as a limited @-@ edition single on 4 September 2006 . The 10th track , " Time Out from the World " , features an orchestra and whispered vocals by Goldfrapp . Critics liked the song , writing that it was an " exception to the prevailing style of Supernature " due to its " haunting , yet glamorous , atmospherics " . The album 's closing track and second single " Number 1 " is about the importance and meanings of relationships . The song , which is based around a synth and bass arrangement , reached number nine on the UK Singles Chart and number one on the US Hot Dance Club Play chart . 
 = = Release and artwork = = 
 The album was released in two versions : a single @-@ disc version , which used <unk> technology to offer extras via a website , and a double @-@ disc version which included the album in surround sound on both discs . The first disc is a hybrid SACD with 5 @.@ 1 multichannel SACD audio , stereo SACD audio and stereo CD audio . The second disc , a DVD @-@ Video , contains the multichannel version of the album in DTS 96 / 24 as well as a documentary and music videos for " Ooh La La " and " Number 1 " . 
 The album cover , photographed by Ross Kirton , is a rear @-@ view shot of Alison against a black curtain , looking over her shoulder while covering her breast with her hand . The regular edition cover shows her from the waist up , whereas the US special edition shows the cover art in its entirety , with Alison wearing a long plume of peacock feathers and golden platform shoes . In late 2005 , the album ranked number eight on the annual Best Art Vinyl poll . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Supernature received positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 79 , based on 27 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . In a review for PopMatters , Adrien Begrand said that " [ a ] lthough Supernature lacks the imagination of Felt Mountain and the saucy brilliance of Black Cherry , it doesn 't pander to the pop crowd . " Lauren Gitlin of Rolling Stone said the album was " [ t ] <unk> and delicious " and that " Supernature will make you do bad things — and like it . " However , Pitchfork Media reviewer Nitsuh Abebe was less impressed , and wrote that the album 's songs " keep feeling like exercises : too thick and melodic to work like dance music , but with melodies that refuse to stick as satisfyingly as pop . " Michael Hubbard of musicOMH wrote a review for every song on Supernature , and although he felt that it was a " curious , rather than classic , record " , he criticised it for " fading out early on , with poor , low quality songs at the end which leave the listener feeling cheated " . AllMusic critic Heather Phares called Supernature " Goldfrapp 's most accessible album " and named " Ooh La La " as its best song . 
 In a review for Canadian @-@ based website Jam ! , Andrew Carver praised the different sounds on Supernature , which range from " a blend of future noise " to " crushed velvet corruption " ; he described the album as " one sharp recording " . Jessica Suarez of Spin magazine compared " Ooh La La " to Black Cherry 's " Strict Machine " , saying that " Ooh La La " sounds " so simplistic that [ its ] minimalist repetition occasionally teeters over into redundancy " . She praised " Ride a White Horse " and " Fly Me Away " for featuring Alison Goldfrapp 's " velvet @-@ soft vocals , which stay that way even when heavily processed " . A less favourable reception came from Stylus Magazine reviewer Edward <unk> , who stated " Supernature is not a great album " and called several of its tracks too " dull " . 
 Rolling Stone magazine ranked the album at number 32 on its list of The Top 50 Albums of 2006 . In January 2008 , the album was included on The Daily Telegraph 's list of the 120 essential pop albums . At the 2007 Grammy Awards , Goldfrapp received nominations for Best Electronic / Dance Album and Best Dance Recording for " Ooh La La " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Supernature debuted on the UK Albums Chart at number two ( blocked from the top position by James Blunt 's Back to Bedlam ) , selling 52 @,@ 976 copies in its first week . The album was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry on 13 January 2006 . By 20 December 2010 , the album had sold 500 @,@ 000 copies in the United Kingdom . The album attained moderate success across Europe , reaching the top 10 in Ireland , the top 20 in Belgium , the top 30 in Germany and Switzerland , and the top 40 in Austria , Italy , the Netherlands and Norway . In Oceania , it peaked at number 23 in Australia and number 35 in New Zealand . 
 Supernature became Goldfrapp 's first album to chart on the Billboard 200 chart in the United States , where it peaked at number 138 . It reached number three on the Top Heatseekers chart and number five on the Top Electronic Albums chart . The album had sold 49 @,@ 000 copies in the US as of August 2006 . Supernature was also the duo 's first release in Canada , reaching number 88 on the Canadian Albums Chart . The album had sold one million copies worldwide as of February 2008 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Alison Goldfrapp and Will Gregory , except where noted . 
 European special edition bonus DVD 
 Supernature in 5 @.@ 1 & Stereo 
 Little Bits of Goldfrapp : Documentary 
 Jakko & the Poet in <unk> – animation by Andreas Nilsson 
 Photo gallery 
 US special edition bonus DVD 
 Supernature in 5 @.@ 1 & Stereo ( excluding bonus track " Beautiful " ) 
 Little Bits of Goldfrapp : Documentary 
 Jakko & the Poet in <unk> – animation by Andreas Nilsson 
 " Ooh La La " ( video ) 
 " Number 1 " ( video ) 
 " Ride a White Horse " ( live in London ) 
 " Satin Chic " ( special performance film ) 
 " Ooh La La " : Little Pictures 
 Photo gallery 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Supernature . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Malcolm X = 
 Malcolm X ( / <unk> <unk> / ; May 19 , 1925 – February 21 , 1965 ) , born Malcolm Little and later also known as el @-@ Hajj Malik el @-@ Shabazz ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , was an African @-@ American Muslim minister and human rights activist . To his admirers he was a courageous advocate for the rights of blacks , a man who indicted white America in the harshest terms for its crimes against black Americans ; detractors accused him of preaching racism and violence . He has been called one of the greatest and most influential African Americans in history . 
 Malcolm X was effectively orphaned early in life . His father was killed when he was six and his mother was placed in a mental hospital when he was thirteen , after which he lived in a series of foster homes . In 1946 , at age 20 , he went to prison for larceny and breaking and entering . While in prison , Malcolm X became a member of the Nation of Islam , and after his parole in 1952 , quickly rose to become one of the organization 's most influential leaders . He served as the public face of the controversial group for a dozen years . In his autobiography , Malcolm X wrote proudly of some of the social achievements the Nation made while he was a member , particularly its free drug rehabilitation program . The Nation promoted black supremacy , advocated the separation of black and white Americans , and rejected the civil rights movement for its emphasis on integration . 
 By March 1964 , Malcolm X had grown disillusioned with the Nation of Islam and its leader Elijah Muhammad . Expressing many regrets about his time with them , which he had come to regard as largely wasted , he embraced Sunni Islam . After a period of travel in Africa and the Middle East , which included completing the Hajj , he repudiated the Nation of Islam , disavowed racism and founded Muslim Mosque , Inc. and the Organization of Afro @-@ American Unity . He continued to emphasize Pan @-@ Africanism , black self @-@ determination , and black self @-@ defense . 
 In February 1965 , he was assassinated by three members of the Nation of Islam . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Malcolm Little was born May 19 , 1925 , in Omaha , Nebraska , the fourth of seven children of Grenada @-@ born Louise Helen Little ( née Norton ) and Georgia @-@ born Earl Little . Earl was an outspoken Baptist lay speaker , and he and Louise were admirers of Pan @-@ African activist Marcus Garvey . Earl was local leader of the Universal Negro Improvement Association ( UNIA ) and Louise served as secretary and " branch reporter " , sending news of local UNIA activities to Negro World ; they inculcated self @-@ reliance and black pride in their children . Malcolm X later said that white violence killed three of his father 's brothers . 
 Because of Ku Klux Klan threats — ​ ​ Earl 's UNIA activities were " spreading trouble " — ​ ​ the family relocated in 1926 to Milwaukee , Wisconsin , and shortly thereafter to Lansing , Michigan . There the family was frequently harassed by the Black Legion , a white racist group . When the family home burned in 1929 , Earl accused the Black Legion . 
 When Little was six , his father died in what was officially ruled a streetcar accident , though his mother Louise believed Earl had been murdered by the Black Legion . Rumors that white racists were responsible for his father 's death were widely circulated , and were very disturbing to Malcolm X as a child . As an adult , he expressed conflicting beliefs on the question . After a dispute with creditors , Louise received a life insurance benefit ( nominally $ 1 @,@ 000 — ​ ​ about $ 16 @,@ 000 in 2015 dollars ) in payments of $ 18 per month ; the issuer of another , larger policy refused to pay , claiming her husband Earl had committed suicide . To make ends meet Louise rented out part of her garden , and her sons hunted game . 
 In 1937 a man Louise had been dating — ​ ​ marriage had seemed a possibility — ​ ​ vanished from her life when she became pregnant with his child . In late 1938 she had a nervous breakdown and was committed to Kalamazoo State Hospital . The children were separated and sent to foster homes . Malcolm and his siblings secured her release 24 years later . 
 Malcolm Little excelled in junior high school but dropped out after a white teacher told him that practicing law , his aspiration at the time , was " no realistic goal for a nigger " . Later Malcolm X recalled feeling that the white world offered no place for a career @-@ oriented black man , regardless of talent . 
 From age 14 to 21 , Little held a variety of jobs while living with his half @-@ sister Ella Little @-@ Collins in Roxbury , a largely African @-@ American neighborhood of Boston . 
 After a short time in Flint , Michigan , he moved to New York City 's Harlem neighborhood in 1943 , where he engaged in drug dealing , gambling , racketeering , robbery , and pimping . According to recent biographies , he also occasionally had sex with other men , usually for money . His daughter , Ilyasah Shabazz , and Ta @-@ Nehisi Coates questioned the accuracy of these accounts . Malcolm X was referred to as " Detroit Red " because of the reddish hair he inherited from his Scots maternal grandfather . 
 Little was declared " mentally disqualified for military service " after he told draft board officials he wanted to be sent down south to " organize them nigger soldiers … steal us some guns , and kill us [ some ] crackers " . 
 In late 1945 , Little returned to Boston , where he and four accomplices committed a series of burglaries targeting wealthy white families . In 1946 , he was arrested while picking up a stolen watch he had left at a shop for repairs , and in February began serving an eight @-@ to @-@ ten @-@ year sentence at Charlestown State Prison for larceny and breaking and entering . 
 = = Nation of Islam period = = 
 = = = Prison = = = 
 When Little was in prison , he met fellow convict John Bembry , a self @-@ educated man he would later describe as " the first man I had ever seen command total respect … with words " . Under Bembry 's influence , Little developed a voracious appetite for reading . 
 At this time , several of his siblings wrote to him about the Nation of Islam , a relatively new religious movement preaching black self @-@ reliance and , ultimately , the return of the African diaspora to Africa , where they would be free from white American and European domination . He showed scant interest at first , but after his brother Reginald wrote in 1948 , " Malcolm , don 't eat any more pork and don 't smoke any more cigarettes . I 'll show you how to get out of prison " , he quit smoking and began to refuse pork . After a visit in which Reginald described the group 's teachings , including the belief that white people are devils , Little concluded that every relationship he 'd had with whites had been tainted by dishonesty , injustice , greed , and hatred . Little , whose hostility to religion had earned him the prison nickname " Satan " , became receptive to the message of the Nation of Islam . 
 In late 1948 , Little wrote to Elijah Muhammad , the leader of the Nation of Islam . Muhammad advised him to renounce his past , humbly bow in prayer to Allah , and promise never to engage in destructive behavior again . Though he later recalled the inner struggle he had before bending his knees to pray , Little soon became a member of the Nation of Islam , maintaining a regular correspondence with Muhammad . 
 In 1950 , the FBI opened a file on Little after he wrote a letter from prison to President Truman expressing opposition to the Korean War and declaring himself a Communist . That year , Little also began signing his name " Malcolm X " . He explained in his autobiography that the Muslim 's " X " symbolized the true African family name that he could never know . " For me , my ' X ' replaced the white <unk> name of ' Little ' which some blue @-@ eyed devil named Little had imposed upon my paternal forebears . " 
 = = = Early ministry = = = 
 After his parole in August 1952 , Malcolm X visited Elijah Muhammad in Chicago . In June 1953 he was named assistant minister of the Nation 's Temple Number One in Detroit . Later that year he established Boston 's Temple Number 11 ; in March 1954 , he expanded Temple Number 12 in Philadelphia ; and two months later he was selected to lead Temple Number 7 in Harlem , where he rapidly expanded its membership . 
 In 1953 , the FBI began surveillance of him , turning its attention from Malcolm X 's possible communist associations to his rapid ascent in the Nation of Islam . 
 During 1955 , Malcolm X continued his successful recruitment of members on behalf of the Nation of Islam . He established temples in Springfield , Massachusetts ( Number 13 ) ; Hartford , Connecticut ( Number 14 ) ; and Atlanta , Georgia ( Number 15 ) . Hundreds of African Americans were joining the Nation of Islam every month . 
 Beside his skill as a speaker , Malcolm X had an impressive physical presence . He stood 6 feet 3 inches ( 1 @.@ 91 m ) tall and weighed about 180 pounds ( 82 kg ) . One writer described him as " powerfully built " , and another as " mesmerizingly handsome … and always <unk> well @-@ groomed " . 
 = = = Marriage and family = = = 
 In 1955 , Betty Sanders met Malcolm X after one of his lectures , then again at a dinner party ; soon she was regularly attending his lectures . In 1956 she joined the Nation of Islam , changing her name to Betty X. One @-@ on @-@ one dates were contrary to the Nation 's teachings , so the couple courted at social events with dozens or hundreds of others , and Malcolm X made a point of inviting her on the frequent group visits he led to New York City 's museums and libraries . 
 Malcolm X proposed during a telephone call from Detroit in January 1958 , and they married two days later . They had six daughters : Attallah ( b . 1958 , named after Attila the Hun ) ; Qubilah ( b . 1960 , named after Kublai Khan ) ; Ilyasah ( b . 1962 , named after Elijah Muhammad ) ; <unk> Lumumba ( b . 1964 , named after Patrice Lumumba ) ; and twins <unk> and <unk> ( b . 1965 after their father 's death , and named in his honor ) . 
 = = = Hinton Johnson incident = = = 
 The American public first became aware of Malcolm X in 1957 , after Hinton Johnson , a Nation of Islam member , was beaten by two New York City police officers . 
 On April 26 , Johnson and two other passersby — ​ ​ also Nation of Islam members — ​ ​ saw the officers beating an African @-@ American man with nightsticks . When they attempted to intervene , shouting , " You 're not in Alabama ... this is New York ! " one of the officers turned on Johnson , beating him so severely that he suffered brain contusions and subdural hemorrhaging . All four African @-@ American men were arrested . 
 Alerted by a witness , Malcolm X and a small group of Muslims went to the police station and demanded to see Johnson . Police initially denied that any Muslims were being held , but when the crowd grew to about five hundred , they allowed Malcolm X to speak with Johnson . Afterward , Malcolm X insisted on arranging for an ambulance to take Johnson to Harlem Hospital . 
 Johnson 's injuries were treated and by the time he was returned to the police station , some four thousand people had gathered outside . Inside the station , Malcolm X and an attorney were making bail arrangements for two of the Muslims . Johnson was not bailed , and police said he could not go back to the hospital until his arraignment the following day . Considering the situation to be at an impasse , Malcolm X stepped outside the station house and gave a hand signal to the crowd . Nation members silently left , after which the rest of the crowd also dispersed . One police officer told the New York Amsterdam News : " No one man should have that much power . " Within a month the New York City Police Department arranged to keep Malcolm X under surveillance ; it also made inquiries with authorities in other cities in which he had lived , and prisons in which he had served time . A grand jury declined to indict the officers who beat Johnson . In October , Malcolm X sent an angry telegram to the police commissioner . Soon the police department assigned undercover officers to infiltrate the Nation of Islam . 
 = = = Increasing prominence = = = 
 By the late 1950s , Malcolm X was using a new name , Malcolm Shabazz or Malik el @-@ Shabazz , although he was still widely referred to as Malcolm X. His comments on issues and events were being widely reported in print , on radio , and on television , and he was featured in a 1959 New York City television broadcast about the Nation of Islam , The Hate That Hate Produced . 
 In September 1960 , at the United Nations General Assembly in New York City , Malcolm X was invited to the official functions of several African nations . He met Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt , Ahmed Sékou Touré of Guinea , and Kenneth Kaunda of the Zambian African National Congress . Fidel Castro also attended the Assembly , and Malcolm X met publicly with him as part of a welcoming committee of Harlem community leaders . Castro was sufficiently impressed with Malcolm X to suggest a private meeting , and after two hours of talking , Castro invited Malcolm X to visit Cuba . 
 = = = Advocacy and teachings while with Nation = = = 
 From his adoption of the Nation of Islam in 1952 until he broke with it in 1964 , Malcolm X promoted the Nation 's teachings . These included the beliefs : 
 that black people are the original people of the world 
 that white people are " devils " 
 that blacks are superior to whites , and 
 that the demise of the white race is imminent . 
 Many whites and some blacks were alarmed by Malcolm X and the statements he made during this period . He and the Nation of Islam were described as hatemongers , black supremacists , racists , violence @-@ seekers , segregationists , and a threat to improved race relations . He was accused of being antisemitic . One of the goals of the civil rights movement was to end disenfranchisement of African Americans , but the Nation of Islam forbade its members from participating in voting and other aspects of the political process . Civil rights organizations denounced him and the Nation as irresponsible extremists whose views did not represent African Americans . 
 Malcolm X was equally critical of the civil rights movement . He labeled Martin Luther King , Jr . , a " chump " and other civil rights leaders " stooges " of the white establishment . He called the 1963 March on Washington " the farce on Washington " , and said he did not know why so many black people were excited about a demonstration " run by whites in front of a statue of a president who has been dead for a hundred years and who didn 't like us when he was alive " . 
 While the civil rights movement fought against racial segregation , Malcolm X advocated the complete separation of African Americans from whites . He proposed that African Americans should return to Africa and that , in the interim , a separate country for black people in America should be created . He rejected the civil rights movement 's strategy of nonviolence , expressing the opinion that black people should defend and advance themselves " by any means necessary " . His speeches had a powerful effect on his audiences , who were generally African Americans in northern and western cities . Many of them — ​ ​ tired of being told to wait for freedom , justice , equality and respect — ​ ​ felt that he articulated their complaints better than did the civil rights movement . 
 = = = Effect on Nation membership = = = 
 Malcolm X is widely regarded as the second most influential leader of the Nation of Islam after Elijah Muhammad . He was largely credited with the group 's dramatic increase in membership between the early 1950s and early 1960s ( from 500 to 25 @,@ 000 by one estimate ; from 1 @,@ 200 to 50 @,@ 000 or 75 @,@ 000 by another ) . 
 He inspired the boxer Cassius Clay ( later known as Muhammad Ali ) to join the Nation , and they soon formed a relationship which Clay 's cornerman Ferdie Pacheco later described as " like very close brothers " . When Malcolm X left the Nation of Islam and converted to Sunni Islam , he tried to convince Clay to join him , but Clay declined and refused to speak to him again . When Ali left the group in 1975 and became a Sunni Muslim , he wrote , " [ t ] <unk> my back on Malcolm was one of the mistakes that I regret most in my life . " 
 Malcolm X mentored and guided Louis X ( later known as Louis Farrakhan ) , who eventually became the leader of the Nation of Islam . Malcolm X also served as a mentor and confidant to Elijah Muhammad 's son , Wallace D. Muhammad ; the son told Malcolm X about his skepticism toward his father 's " unorthodox approach " to Islam . Wallace Muhammad was excommunicated from the Nation of Islam several times , although he was eventually readmitted . 
 = = Disillusionment and departure = = 
 During 1962 and 1963 , events caused Malcolm X to reassess his relationship with the Nation of Islam , and particularly its leader , Elijah Muhammad . 
 = = = NOI lack of response to LAPD violence = = = 
 In late 1961 , there were violent confrontations between NOI members and police in South Central Los Angeles , and numerous Muslims were arrested . They were acquitted , but tensions had been raised . Just after midnight on April 27 , 1962 , LAPD officers raided Temple Number 27 , randomly beating NOI members . Seven Muslims were shot ; one , Ronald Stokes , a Korean War veteran , was shot fatally after surrendering to police . A number of Muslims were indicted after the event , but no charges were made against the police . To Malcolm X , the desecration and violence demanded action , and he used what Farrakhan later called his " <unk> past " to rally the more hardened of the New York members to go to Los Angeles for direct action against the police . He also spoke of the NOI starting to work with civil rights organizations , local black politicians , and religious groups . Elijah Muhammad did not support him in any of these initiatives , claiming the other organizations would turn to NOI in time , and saying " … you don 't go to war over a provocation . " Malcolm X was stunned by this response . Louis X saw this as an important turning point in the deteriorating relationship between Malcolm X and Muhammad . 
 = = = Sexual misbehavior by Elijah Muhammad = = = 
 Rumors were circulating that Muhammad was conducting extramarital affairs with young Nation secretaries — ​ ​ which would constitute a serious violation of Nation teachings . After first discounting the rumors , Malcolm X came to believe them after he spoke with Muhammad 's son Wallace and with the women making the accusations . Muhammad confirmed the rumors in 1963 , attempting to justify his behavior by referring to precedents set by Biblical prophets . 
 = = = NOI response to his remarks on Kennedy assassination = = = 
 On December 1 , 1963 , when asked for a comment about the assassination of President John F. Kennedy , Malcolm X said that it was a case of " chickens coming home to roost " . He added that " chickens coming home to roost never did make me sad ; they 've always made me glad . " The New York Times wrote , " in further criticism of Mr. Kennedy , the Muslim leader cited the murders of Patrice Lumumba , Congo leader , of Medgar Evers , civil rights leader , and of the Negro girls bombed earlier this year in a Birmingham church . These , he said , were instances of other ' chickens coming home to roost ' . " The remarks prompted a widespread public outcry . The Nation of Islam , which had sent a message of condolence to the Kennedy family and ordered its ministers not to comment on the assassination , publicly censured their former shining star . Malcolm X retained his post and rank as minister , but was prohibited from public speaking for 90 days . 
 = = = Media coverage of him , rather than Muhammad = = = 
 Malcolm X had by now become a media favorite , and some Nation members believed he was a threat to Muhammad 's leadership . Publishers had shown interest in Malcolm X 's autobiography , and when Louis Lomax wrote his 1963 book about the Nation , When the Word Is Given , he used a photograph of Malcolm X on the cover . He also reproduced five of his speeches , but featured only one of Muhammad 's — ​ ​ all of which greatly upset Muhammad and made him envious . 
 = = = Departure from NOI = = = 
 On March 8 , 1964 , Malcolm X publicly announced his break from the Nation of Islam . He was still a Muslim , he said , but felt that the Nation had " gone as far as it can " because of its rigid teachings . He said he was planning to organize a black nationalist organization to " heighten the political consciousness " of African Americans . He also expressed a desire to work with other civil rights leaders , saying that Elijah Muhammad had prevented him from doing so in the past . 
 = = Activity after leaving NOI = = 
 After leaving the Nation of Islam , Malcolm X founded Muslim Mosque , Inc . , a religious organization , and the Organization of Afro @-@ American Unity , a secular group that advocated Pan @-@ Africanism . On March 26 , 1964 he met Martin Luther King , Jr . , for the first and only time — ​ ​ and only long enough for photographs to be taken — ​ ​ in Washington , D.C. , as both men attended the Senate 's debate on the Civil Rights bill . In April , Malcolm X gave a speech titled " The Ballot or the Bullet " , in which he advised African Americans to exercise their right to vote wisely but cautioned that if the government continued to prevent African Americans from attaining full equality , it might be necessary for them to take up arms . 
 In the weeks after he left the Nation of Islam , several Sunni Muslims encouraged Malcolm X to learn about their faith . He soon converted to the Sunni faith . 
 = = Pilgrimage to Mecca = = 
 In April 1964 , with financial help from his half @-@ sister Ella Little @-@ Collins , Malcolm X flew to Jeddah , Saudi Arabia , as the start of his Hajj , the pilgrimage to Mecca obligatory for every Muslim who is able to do so . He was delayed in Jeddah when his U.S. citizenship and inability to speak Arabic caused his status as a Muslim to be questioned . He had received Abdul Rahman Hassan Azzam 's book The Eternal Message of Muhammad with his visa approval , and he contacted the author . Azzam 's son arranged for his release and lent him his personal hotel suite . The next morning Malcolm X learned that Prince Faisal had designated him as a state guest . Several days later , after completing the Hajj rituals , Malcolm X had an audience with the prince . 
 Malcolm X later said that seeing Muslims of " all colors , from blue @-@ eyed <unk> to black @-@ skinned Africans , " interacting as equals led him to see Islam as a means by which racial problems could be overcome . 
 = = Traveling abroad = = 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 Malcolm X had already visited the United Arab Republic , Sudan , Nigeria , and Ghana in 1959 to make arrangements for a tour of Africa by Elijah Muhammad . After his journey to Mecca in 1964 , he visited Africa a second time . He returned to the United States in late May and flew to Africa again in July . During these visits he met officials , gave interviews , and spoke on radio and television in Egypt , Ethiopia , Tanganyika , Nigeria , Ghana , Guinea , Sudan , Senegal , Liberia , Algeria , and Morocco . In Cairo , he attended the second meeting of the Organization of African Unity as a representative of the Organization of Afro @-@ American Unity . By the end of this third visit , he had met with essentially all of Africa 's prominent leaders ; Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana , Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt , and Ahmed Ben Bella of Algeria had all invited Malcolm X to serve in their governments . After he spoke at the University of Ibadan , the Nigerian Muslim Students Association bestowed on him the honorary Yoruba name <unk> ( " the son who has come home " ) . He later called this his most treasured honor . 
 = = = France and United Kingdom = = = 
 On November 23 , 1964 , on his way home from Africa , Malcolm X stopped in Paris , where he spoke in the Salle de la <unk> . A week later , on November 30 , Malcolm X flew to the United Kingdom , and on December 3 took part in a debate at the Oxford Union Society . The motion was taken from a statement made earlier that year by U.S. presidential candidate Barry Goldwater : " Extremism in the Defense of Liberty is No Vice ; Moderation in the Pursuit of Justice is No Virtue " . Malcolm X argued for the affirmative , and interest in the debate was so high that it was televised nationally by the BBC . 
 On February 5 , 1965 , Malcolm X flew to Britain again , and on February 8 he addressed the first meeting of the Council of African Organizations in London . The next day he tried to return to France , but was refused entry . 
 On February 12 , he visited Smethwick , near Birmingham , where the Conservative Party had won the parliamentary seat in the 1964 general election . The town had become a byword for racial division after Conservative supporters used the slogan , " If you want a nigger for a neighbour , vote Labour . " In Smethwick he compared the treatment of colored residents with the treatment of Jews under Hitler , saying : " I would not wait for the fascist element in Smethwick to erect gas ovens . " 
 = = Return to United States = = 
 After returning to the U.S. , Malcolm X addressed a wide variety of audiences . He spoke regularly at meetings held by Muslim Mosque , Inc . , and the Organization of Afro @-@ American Unity , and was one of the most sought @-@ after speakers on college campuses . One of his top aides later wrote that he " welcomed every opportunity to speak to college students . " He also addressed public meetings of the Socialist Workers Party , speaking at their Militant Labor Forum . He was interviewed on the subjects of segregation and the Nation of Islam by Robert Penn Warren for Warren 's 1965 book Who Speaks for the Negro ? 
 = = Death threats and intimidation from Nation of Islam = = 
 Throughout 1964 , as his conflict with the Nation of Islam intensified , Malcolm X was repeatedly threatened . 
 In February , a leader of Temple Number Seven ordered the bombing of Malcolm X 's car . In March , Muhammad told Boston minister Louis X ( later known as Louis Farrakhan ) that " hypocrites like Malcolm should have their heads cut off " ; the April 10 edition of Muhammad Speaks featured a cartoon depicting Malcolm X 's bouncing , severed head . 
 On June 8 , FBI surveillance recorded a telephone call in which Betty Shabazz was told that her husband was " as good as dead . " Four days later , an FBI informant received a tip that " Malcolm X is going to be bumped off . " ( That same month the Nation sued to reclaim Malcolm X 's residence in East Elmhurst , Queens , New York . His family was ordered to vacate but on February 14 , 1965 — ​ ​ the night before a hearing on postponing the eviction — ​ ​ the house was destroyed by fire . ) 
 On July 9 Muhammad aide John Ali ( suspected of being an undercover FBI agent ) referred to Malcolm X by saying , " Anyone who opposes the Honorable Elijah Muhammad puts their life in jeopardy . " In the December 4 issue of Muhammad Speaks , Louis X wrote that " such a man as Malcolm is worthy of death . " 
 The September 1964 issue of Ebony dramatized Malcolm X 's defiance of these threats by publishing a photograph of him holding a rifle while peering out a window . 
 = = Assassination = = 
 On February 19 , 1965 , Malcolm X told interviewer Gordon Parks that the Nation of Islam was actively trying to kill him . On February 21 , 1965 , he was preparing to address the Organization of Afro @-@ American Unity in Manhattan 's Audubon Ballroom when someone in the 400 @-@ person audience yelled , " Nigger ! Get your hand outta my pocket ! " As Malcolm X and his bodyguards tried to quell the disturbance , a man rushed forward and shot him once in the chest with a sawed @-@ off shotgun and two other men charged the stage firing semi @-@ automatic handguns . Malcolm X was pronounced dead at 3 : 30 pm , shortly after arriving at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital . The autopsy identified 21 gunshot wounds to the chest , left shoulder , arms and legs , including ten buckshot wounds from the initial shotgun blast . 
 One gunman , Nation of Islam member Talmadge Hayer ( also known as Thomas Hagan ) , was beaten by the crowd before police arrived . Witnesses identified the other gunmen as Nation members Norman 3X Butler and Thomas <unk> Johnson . All three were convicted of murder in March 1966 and sentenced to life in prison . At trial Hayer confessed , but refused to identify the other assailants except to assert that they were not Butler and Johnson . In 1977 and 1978 , he signed affidavits reasserting Butler 's and Johnson 's innocence , naming four other Nation members as participants in the murder or its planning . These affidavits did not result in the case being reopened . 
 Butler , today known as Muhammad Abdul Aziz , was paroled in 1985 and became the head of the Nation 's Harlem mosque in 1998 ; he maintains his innocence . In prison Johnson , who changed his name to Khalil Islam , rejected the Nation 's teachings and converted to Sunni Islam . Released in 1987 , he maintained his innocence until his death in August 2009 . Hayer , today known as Mujahid Halim , was paroled in 2010 . 
 A CNN Special Report , Witnessed : The Assassination of Malcolm X , was broadcast on February 17 , 2015 . It featured interviews with several people who worked with him , including A. Peter Bailey and Earl Grant , as well as the daughter of Malcolm X , Ilyasah Shabazz . 
 = = = Funeral = = = 
 The public viewing , February 23 – 26 at Unity Funeral Home in Harlem , was attended by some 14 @,@ 000 to 30 @,@ 000 mourners . For the funeral on February 27 , loudspeakers were set up for the overflow crowd outside Harlem 's thousand @-@ seat Faith Temple of the Church of God in Christ , and a local television station carried the service live . 
 Among the civil rights leaders attending were John Lewis , Bayard Rustin , James Forman , James Farmer , Jesse Gray , and Andrew Young . Actor and activist Ossie Davis delivered the eulogy , describing Malcolm X as " our shining black prince " : 
 There are those who will consider it their duty , as friends of the Negro people , to tell us to revile him , to flee , even from the presence of his memory , to save ourselves by writing him out of the history of our turbulent times . Many will ask what Harlem finds to honor in this stormy , controversial and bold young captain — ​ ​ and we will smile . Many will say turn away — ​ ​ away from this man , for he is not a man but a demon , a monster , a <unk> and an enemy of the black man — ​ ​ and we will smile . They will say that he is of hate — ​ ​ a fanatic , a racist — ​ ​ who can only bring evil to the cause for which you struggle ! And we will answer and say to them : Did you ever talk to Brother Malcolm ? Did you ever touch him , or have him smile at you ? Did you ever really listen to him ? Did he ever do a mean thing ? Was he ever himself associated with violence or any public disturbance ? For if you did you would know him . And if you knew him you would know why we must honor him . 
 Malcolm X was buried at Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale , New York . Friends took up the gravediggers ' shovels to complete the burial themselves . 
 Actor and activist Ruby Dee and Juanita Poitier ( wife of Sidney Poitier ) established the Committee of Concerned Mothers to raise money for a home for his family and for his children 's educations . 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 Reactions to Malcolm X 's assassination were varied . In a telegram to Betty Shabazz , Martin Luther King , Jr . , expressed his sadness at " the shocking and tragic assassination of your husband . " He said , 
 While we did not always see eye to eye on methods to solve the race problem , I always had a deep affection for Malcolm and felt that he had a great ability to put his finger on the existence and root of the problem . He was an eloquent spokesman for his point of view and no one can honestly doubt that Malcolm had a great concern for the problems that we face as a race . 
 Elijah Muhammad told the annual Savior 's Day convention on February 26 , " Malcolm X got just what he preached " , but denied any involvement with the murder . " We didn 't want to kill Malcolm and didn 't try to kill him " , Muhammad said . " We know such ignorant , foolish teachings would bring him to his own end . " 
 Writer James Baldwin , who had been a friend of Malcolm X 's , was in London when he heard the news of the assassination . He responded with indignation towards the reporters interviewing him , shouting , " You did it ! It is because of you — the men that created this white supremacy — that this man is dead . You are not guilty , but you did it .... Your mills , your cities , your rape of a continent started all this . " 
 The New York Post wrote that " even his sharpest critics recognized his brilliance — ​ ​ often wild , unpredictable and eccentric , but nevertheless possessing promise that must now remain unrealized . " The New York Times wrote that Malcolm X was " an extraordinary and twisted man " who " turn [ ed ] many true gifts to evil purpose " and that his life was " strangely and pitifully wasted " . TIME Magazine called him " an unashamed demagogue " whose " creed was violence . " 
 Outside of the U.S. , and particularly in Africa , the press was sympathetic . The Daily Times of Nigeria wrote that Malcolm X " will have a place in the palace of martyrs . " The Ghanaian Times likened him to John Brown and Patrice Lumumba , and counted him among " a host of Africans and Americans who were martyred in freedom 's cause " . The Guangming Daily , published in Beijing , stated that " Malcolm was murdered because he fought for freedom and equal rights " ; in Cuba , El Mundo described the assassination as " another racist crime to eradicate by violence the struggle against discrimination " . 
 = = = Allegations of conspiracy = = = 
 Within days , the question of who bore responsibility for the assassination was being publicly debated . On February 23 , James Farmer , the leader of the Congress of Racial Equality , announced at a news conference that local drug dealers , and not the Nation of Islam , were to blame . Others accused the NYPD , the FBI , or the CIA , citing the lack of police protection , the ease with which the assassins entered the Audubon Ballroom , and the failure of the police to preserve the crime scene . 
 In the 1970s , the public learned about COINTELPRO and other secret FBI programs established to infiltrate and disrupt civil rights organizations during the 1950s and 1960s . John Ali , national secretary of the Nation of Islam , was believed to have been an FBI undercover agent . Malcolm X had confided to a reporter that Ali exacerbated tensions between him and Elijah Muhammad , and that he considered Ali his " archenemy " within the Nation of Islam leadership . Ali had a meeting with Talmadge Hayer , one of the men convicted of killing Malcolm X , the night before the assassination . 
 The Shabazz family are among those who have accused Louis Farrakhan of involvement in Malcolm X 's assassination . In a 1993 speech Farrakhan seemed to acknowledge the possibility that the Nation of Islam was responsible : 
 Was Malcolm your traitor or ours ? And if we dealt with him like a nation deals with a traitor , what the hell business is it of yours ? A nation has to be able to deal with traitors and cutthroats and turncoats . 
 In a 60 Minutes interview that aired during May 2000 , Farrakhan stated that some things he said may have led to the assassination of Malcolm X. " I may have been complicit in words that I spoke " , he said . " I acknowledge that and regret that any word that I have said caused the loss of life of a human being . " A few days later Farrakhan denied that he " ordered the assassination " of Malcolm X , although he again acknowledged that he " created the atmosphere that ultimately led to Malcolm X 's assassination . " 
 No consensus has been reached on who was responsible for the assassination . In August 2014 , an online petition was started using the White House online petition mechanism to call on the government to release without alteration any files they still held relating to the murder of Malcolm X. The petition failed to attract enough signatures to mandate a White House response . 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 Except for his autobiography , Malcolm X left no published writings . His philosophy is known almost entirely from the many speeches and interviews he gave from 1952 until his death . Many of those speeches , especially from the last year of his life , were recorded and have been published . 
 = = = Beliefs of the Nation of Islam = = = 
 While he was a member of the Nation of Islam , Malcolm X taught its beliefs , and his statements often began with the phrase " The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that ... " It is virtually impossible now to discern whether Malcolm X 's personal beliefs at the time diverged from the teachings of the Nation of Islam . After he left the Nation in 1964 , he compared himself to a ventriloquist 's dummy who could only say what Elijah Muhammad told him to say . 
 Malcolm X taught that black people were the original people of the world , and that white people were a race of devils who were created by an evil scientist named Yakub . The Nation of Islam believed that black people were superior to white people , and that the demise of the white race was imminent . When questioned concerning his statements that white people were devils , Malcolm X said : " history proves the white man is a devil . " " Anybody who rapes , and plunders , and enslaves , and steals , and drops hell bombs on people ... anybody who does these things is nothing but a devil . " 
 Malcolm X said that Islam was the " true religion of black mankind " and that Christianity was " the white man 's religion " that had been imposed upon African Americans by their slave @-@ masters . He said that the Nation of Islam followed Islam as it was practiced around the world , but the Nation 's teachings varied from those of other Muslims because they were adapted to the " uniquely pitiful " condition of black people in America . He taught that Wallace Fard Muhammad , the founder of the Nation , was Allah incarnate , and that Elijah Muhammad was his Messenger , or Prophet . 
 While the civil rights movement fought against racial segregation , Malcolm X advocated the complete separation of blacks from whites . The Nation of Islam proposed the establishment of a separate country for African Americans in the southern or southwestern United States as an interim measure until African Americans could return to Africa . Malcolm X suggested the United States government owed reparations to black people for the unpaid labor of their ancestors . He also rejected the civil rights movement 's strategy of nonviolence , advocating instead that black people should defend themselves . 
 = = = Independent views = = = 
 After leaving the Nation of Islam , Malcolm X announced his willingness to work with leaders of the civil rights movement , though he advocated some changes to their policies . He felt that calling the movement a struggle for civil rights would keep the issue within the United States , while changing the focus to human rights would make it an international concern . The movement could then bring its complaints before the United Nations , where Malcolm X said the emerging nations of the world would add their support . 
 Malcolm X argued that if the U.S. government was unwilling or unable to protect black people , black people should protect themselves . He said that he and the other members of the Organization of Afro @-@ American Unity were determined to defend themselves from aggressors , and to secure freedom , justice and equality " by whatever means necessary " . 
 Malcolm X stressed the global perspective he gained from his international travels . He emphasized the " direct connection " between the domestic struggle of African Americans for equal rights with the independence struggles of Third World nations . He said that African Americans were wrong when they thought of themselves as a minority ; globally , black people were the majority . 
 In his speeches at the Militant Labor Forum , which was sponsored by the Socialist Workers Party , Malcolm X criticized capitalism . After one such speech , when he was asked what political and economic system he wanted , he said he did not know , but that it was no coincidence the newly independent countries in the Third World were turning toward socialism . When a reporter asked him what he thought about socialism , Malcolm X asked whether it was good for black people . When the reporter told him it seemed to be , Malcolm X told him , " Then I 'm for it . " 
 Although he no longer called for the separation of black people from white people , Malcolm X continued to advocate black nationalism , which he defined as self @-@ determination for the African @-@ American community . In the last months of his life , however , Malcolm X began to reconsider his support for black nationalism after meeting northern African revolutionaries who , to all appearances , were white . 
 After his Hajj , Malcolm X articulated a view of white people and racism that represented a deep change from the philosophy he had supported as a minister of the Nation of Islam . In a famous letter from Mecca , he wrote that his experiences with white people during his pilgrimage convinced him to " rearrange " his thinking about race and " toss aside some of [ his ] previous conclusions " . In a conversation with Gordon Parks , two days before his assassination , Malcolm said : 
 [ L ] <unk> to leaders like Nasser , Ben Bella , and Nkrumah awakened me to the dangers of racism . I realized racism isn 't just a black and white problem . It 's brought <unk> to about every nation on earth at one time or another . 
 Brother , remember the time that white college girl came into the restaurant — ​ ​ the one who wanted to help the [ Black ] Muslims and the whites get together — ​ ​ and I told her there wasn 't a ghost of a chance and she went away crying ? Well , I 've lived to regret that incident . In many parts of the African continent I saw white students helping black people . Something like this kills a lot of argument . I did many things as a [ Black ] Muslim that I 'm sorry for now . I was a zombie then — ​ ​ like all [ Black ] Muslims — ​ ​ I was hypnotized , pointed in a certain direction and told to march . Well , I guess a man 's entitled to make a fool of himself if he 's ready to pay the cost . It cost me 12 years . 
 That was a bad scene , brother . The sickness and madness of those days — ​ ​ I 'm glad to be free of them . 
 Up until one week before his death , Malcolm X continued to publicly advocate that black people should achieve advancement " by any means necessary " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Malcolm X has been described as one of the greatest and most influential African Americans in history . He is credited with raising the self @-@ esteem of black Americans and reconnecting them with their African heritage . He is largely responsible for the spread of Islam in the black community in the United States . Many African Americans , especially those who lived in cities in the Northern and Western United States , felt that Malcolm X articulated their complaints concerning inequality better than did the mainstream civil rights movement . One biographer says that by giving expression to their frustration , Malcolm X " made clear the price that white America would have to pay if it did not accede to black America 's legitimate demands . " 
 In the late 1960s , increasingly radical black activists based their movements largely on Malcolm X and his teachings . The Black Power movement , the Black Arts Movement , and the widespread adoption of the slogan " Black is beautiful " can all trace their roots to Malcolm X. 
 In 1963 Malcolm X began a collaboration with Alex Haley on his life story , The Autobiography of Malcolm X. He told Haley , " If I 'm alive when this book comes out , it will be a miracle . " Haley completed and published it some months after the assassination . 
 During the late 1980s and early 1990s , there was a resurgence of interest in his life among young people . Hip @-@ hop groups such as Public Enemy adopted Malcolm X as an icon , and his image was displayed in hundreds of thousands of homes , offices , and schools , as well as on T @-@ shirts and jackets . This wave peaked in 1992 with the release of the film Malcolm X , an adaptation of The Autobiography of Malcolm X. 
 In 1998 TIME named The Autobiography of Malcolm X one of the ten most influential nonfiction books of the 20th century . 
 = = = Portrayals in film and on stage = = = 
 Denzel Washington played the title role in Malcolm X — ​ ​ named one of the ten best films of the 1990s by both critic Roger Ebert and director Martin Scorsese . Washington had previously played the part of Malcolm X in the 1981 Off @-@ Broadway play When the Chickens Came Home to Roost . Other portrayals include : 
 James Earl Jones , in the 1977 film The Greatest . 
 Dick Anthony Williams , in the 1978 television miniseries King and the 1989 American Playhouse production of the Jeff Stetson play The Meeting . 
 Al Freeman , Jr . , in the 1979 television miniseries Roots : The Next Generations . 
 Morgan Freeman , in the 1981 television movie Death of a Prophet . 
 Ben Holt , in the 1986 opera X , The Life and Times of Malcolm X at the New York City Opera . 
 Gary Dourdan , in the 2000 television movie King of the World . 
 Joe Morton , in the 2000 television movie Ali : An American Hero . 
 Mario Van Peebles , in the 2001 film Ali . 
 Lindsay Owen Pierre , in the 2013 television movie Betty and Coretta . 
 Nigel Thatch , in the 2014 film Selma . 
 = = = Memorials and tributes = = = 
 The house that once stood at <unk> Pinkney Street in North Omaha , Nebraska , was the first home of Malcolm Little with his birth family . The house was torn down in 1965 by new owners who did not know of its connection with Malcolm X. The site was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1984 and is now identified by a historic marker . In 1987 the site was added to the Nebraska register of historic sites and marked with a state plaque . 
 In Lansing , Michigan , where Malcolm Little spent his early , formative years , a Michigan Historical Marker was erected in 1975 to mark his homesite . The city is also home to El @-@ Hajj Malik El @-@ Shabazz Academy , a public charter school with an Afrocentric focus . The school is located in the building where Little attended elementary school . 
 In cities around the world , Malcolm X 's birthday ( May 19 ) is commemorated as Malcolm X Day . The first known celebration of Malcolm X Day took place in Washington , D.C. , in 1971 . The city of Berkeley , California , has recognized Malcolm X 's birthday as a citywide holiday since 1979 . 
 Many cities have renamed streets after Malcolm X. In 1987 , New York mayor Ed Koch proclaimed Lenox Avenue in Harlem to be Malcolm X Boulevard . The name of Reid Avenue in Brooklyn , New York , was changed to Malcolm X Boulevard in 1985 . In 1997 , Oakland Avenue in Dallas , Texas , was renamed Malcolm X Boulevard . Main Street in Lansing , Michigan , was renamed Malcolm X Street in 2010 . 
 Dozens of schools have been named after Malcolm X , including Malcolm X Shabazz High School in Newark , New Jersey , Malcolm Shabazz City High School in Madison , Wisconsin , and Malcolm X College in Chicago , Illinois . Malcolm X Liberation University , based on the Pan @-@ Africanist ideas of Malcolm X , was founded in 1969 in North Carolina . 
 In 1996 , the first library named after Malcolm X was opened , the Malcolm X Branch Library and Performing Arts Center of the San Diego Public Library system . 
 The U.S. Postal Service issued a Malcolm X postage stamp in 1999 . In 2005 , Columbia University announced the opening of the Malcolm X and Dr. Betty Shabazz Memorial and Educational Center . The memorial is located in the Audubon Ballroom , where Malcolm X was assassinated . Collections of Malcolm X 's papers are held by the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture and the Robert W. Woodruff Library . 
 = = Published works = = 
 = Sounds of the Season : The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection = 
 The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection - EP , or simply The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection , is the first extended play ( EP ) released by American country recording artist Taylor Swift . The EP was first released on October 14 , 2007 by Big Machine Records exclusively to Target stores in the United States and online . The release was originally a limited release for the 2007 holiday season , but was re @-@ released to iTunes and Amazon.com on December 2 , 2008 and again in October 2009 to Target stores . The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection features cover versions of Christmas songs and two original tracks written by Swift , " Christmases When You Were Mine " and " Christmas Must Be Something More " , all of which have a country pop sound . Like their first album , this one also features CDVU + technology that includes more than 30 pages of bonus features with an exclusive video performance , 60 printable photos , complete album lyrics , downloadable graphics , and hidden links . In addition , the packaging of the album is made from 100 % recycled materials . 
 Music critics received the album with favorable responses , where some would have preferred a full album . The EP was a commercial success , peaking at number twenty on the Billboard 200 and at number one on Top Holiday Albums . Songs from The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection have been performed at several venues . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 For the original release of The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection , Swift partnered with the American retail company Target ; it was made available as an exclusive limited release at Target stores in the United States and online , at <unk> The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection 's cover art is from Swift 's music video for " Teardrops on My Guitar " ( 2007 ) . On October 6 , 2009 , the EP was re @-@ released by Target and made available as a digital download on the iTunes Store and Amazon.com , both making minor adjustments to its cover art and removing " Sounds of the Seasons " , leaving it as The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection . 
 The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection is holiday music with a country pop inclination . The EP is mainly composed of cover versions of holiday hits and Christmas carols . The EP 's opening track is a cover version of " Last Christmas " by Wham ! from their 1986 album Music from the Edge of Heaven . The original song " Christmases When You Were Mine " was written by Swift , Liz Rose , and Nathan Chapman . Lyrically , the track fixates on prior Christmases , in which the song 's protagonist , was happier . The lyrics also express that the current Christmas is much harder to cheer for than previous ones . It is the only song to date that Swift has ever recorded in which Chapman is credited as a co @-@ writer , in all of their other collaborations , Chapman is only credited as a producer , while Swift and sometimes other songwriters are credited . Swift covered " Santa Baby " , a 1953 song originally performed by Eartha Kitt . " Silent Night " is a Christmas carol cover that is musically performed differently , replacing the instrumentation from piano to acoustic guitar ; Swift 's vocals are also faster than traditionally recorded for the song . " Christmas Must Be Something More " is the second original song from The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection , self @-@ penned by Swift . The lyrics attempt for audiences to recognize the reason for the celebration of Christmas , the commemoration of Jesus Christ 's birth . The closing track is a rendition of Irving Berlin 's " White Christmas " , which was popularized by Bing Crosby on his 1942 album of the same name . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The EP received generally positive critical reception . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic said the songs on The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection were " all crisp , cheerful arrangements that are suitably seasonal but also faithful to her bright country @-@ pop . " Craig Shelburne of CMT said , " Thanks to this teen star , a new generation of sensitive girls may discover the melancholy but oh @-@ so @-@ melodic ' Last Christmas ' . She also includes two original holiday songs . " An uncredited review in Deseret News felt that the release was too short , with only 6 songs , yet fulfilled its task . Dan <unk> of Country Standard Time concluded , " Swift is a fine singer , who finds ways to inject sincere emotion into every line she sings . They say the best things come in small packages . And that saying holds true for Swift 's new one . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 On the week ending December 8 , 2007 , The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection debuted at number eighty @-@ eight on the Billboard 200 . The following week , the EP rose to a new peak at number forty @-@ six on the Billboard 200 . Following its 2009 re @-@ release , The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection re @-@ entered the Billboard 200 at number twenty , its peak , and extended its run on the chart to twenty @-@ four weeks . For the 2007 holiday season , the EP peaked at number eighteen on Top Country Albums and at number twenty @-@ two on Top Holiday Albums , and for the 2009 holiday season , it peaked at number fourteen on both Top Country Albums and Top Holiday Albums . For the 2010 holiday season , The Taylor Holiday Collection re @-@ entered the Top Holiday Albums Chart at number one . As of December 2014 , the EP has sold 1 @,@ 040 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Swift first performed a song from The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection , " Silent Night " , on November 28 , 2007 in New York City , at the Rockefeller Center , which was broadcast by The Today Show ; Swift dressed in a long black dress and a white winter coat and performed while playing a rhinestoned acoustic guitar . She then performed " Christmases When You Were Mine " on November 29 , 2007 in St. Charles , Missouri , at the Family Arena , as part of her set for WIL 's <unk> 2007 , and " Santa Baby " in Bloomington , Minnesota , at the Mall of America on December 8 , 2007 . Swift appeared on The Today Show again on Christmas Day of 2007 , performing " Christmases When You Were Mine " and " Silent Night " . 
 All of the tracks except " Christmas Must Be Something More " received airplay on several country radio stations and therefore each charted on Billboard 's Hot Country Songs : " Last Christmas " peaked at number twenty @-@ eight , " Christmases When You Were Mine " peaked at number forty @-@ eight , " Santa Baby " peaked at number forty @-@ three , " Silent Night " peaked at number fifty @-@ four , and " White Christmas " peaked at number fifty @-@ nine . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 As listed in liner notes . 
 = Battle of Vrbanja Bridge = 
 The Battle of Vrbanja Bridge was an armed confrontation which occurred on 27 May 1995 between United Nations ( UN ) peacekeepers from the French Army and elements of the Bosnian Serb Army of Republika Srpska ( VRS ) . It occurred after the VRS seized French @-@ manned United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) observation posts on both ends of the Vrbanja Bridge crossing of the Miljacka river in Sarajevo , Bosnia and Herzegovina during the Bosnian War . Upon seizing the bridge , the VRS took the French peacekeepers hostage . A platoon of 30 French peacekeepers subsequently re @-@ captured the bridge with the support of 70 French infantrymen and direct fire from armoured vehicles , in an action which saw the first French Army bayonet charge since the Korean War . During the French assault , elements of the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( ARBiH ) opened fire on the VRS @-@ held observation posts , accidentally wounding one French hostage . 
 Two French soldiers were killed during the battle , 10 were wounded , and one died of wounds later that day . VRS casualties were four killed , three wounded and four captured . Following the battle , VRS forces were observed to be less likely to engage French UN peacekeepers deployed in the city . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the Siege of Sarajevo , Vrbanja Bridge was located in no @-@ man 's @-@ land ; it was surrounded by tall buildings , which made it a target of sniper @-@ fire from the beginning of the Bosnian War . On 5 April 1992 , six protestors were shot on the bridge by Serb snipers ; two women , <unk> <unk> and Olga <unk> , died as a result of the sniper @-@ fire and are considered by Croats and Bosniaks to be the first victims of the siege . 
 In March 1995 , while NATO was planning a new strategy to support peacekeeping operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina , a ceasefire brokered by former US President Jimmy Carter between the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( Armija Republike Bosne i Hercegovine ; ARBiH ) and the Army of Republika Srpska ( Vojska Republike Srpske ; VRS ) forces expired and fighting resumed . As the struggle gradually widened , the ARBiH launched a large @-@ scale offensive in the area of Sarajevo . In response to this attack , the VRS seized heavy weapons from a UN @-@ guarded depot , and began shelling targets around Sarajevo , prompting the UN commander in Bosnia , Lieutenant General Rupert Smith , to request NATO air strikes against the VRS . NATO responded on 25 and 26 May 1995 by bombing a VRS ammunition dump in the Bosnian Serb capital , Pale . The mission was carried out by USAF F @-@ 16s and Spanish Air Force EF @-@ 18A Hornets armed with laser @-@ guided bombs . In response , the VRS seized 377 UNPROFOR hostages and used them as human shields for a variety of potential targets in Bosnia and Herzegovina , forcing NATO to end the air strikes . 
 Facing a second hostage crisis , General Smith and other top UN commanders began to shift strategy . The UN began to redeploy its forces to more defensible locations , so that they would be harder to attack and so that it would be more difficult to take UN personnel hostage . General Michael Rose , on the other hand , established the UN Rapid Reaction Force , a heavily armed land unit with more aggressive rules of engagement , designed to take offensive action if necessary to prevent hostage @-@ taking and enforce peace agreements . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = VRS attack = = = 
 On 27 May 1995 at 4 : 30 am , VRS soldiers posing as French troops captured the UN observation posts on both ends of the bridge without firing a shot . They wore French uniforms , flak jackets , helmets , and personal weapons and drove a French armoured personnel carrier ( APC ) – all stolen from UN troops detained outside the city . The Serbs disarmed the 12 peacekeepers on the bridge at gunpoint . Ten were taken to an unknown destination while two remained on the site as human shields . According to Colonel Erik Sandahl , commander of the 4th French Battalion ( FREBAT4 ) which was at that time provided by the 3rd Marine Infantry Regiment , " when the Serbs took our soldiers under their control by threat , by dirty tricks , they began to act as terrorists , you cannot support this . You must react . The moment comes when you have to stop it . Full stop . And we did . " 
 = = = French reaction = = = 
 The first evidence that something was wrong at Vrbanja Bridge was radio silence from the French post . About 05 : 20 on 27 May , platoon commander Captain Francois Lecointre had lost radio contact with the posts , and drove to the bridge to find out what was happening ; he was met by a Serb sentry in French uniform who attempted to take him prisoner . Lecointre quickly turned around and drove to <unk> stadium , the headquarters of FREBAT4 . 
 The French responded by sending a platoon of 30 FREBAT4 troops from the 3rd Marine Infantry Regiment to re @-@ capture the northern end of the bridge , backed by another 70 French infantry , six ERC 90 <unk> armoured cars and several VAB APCs . The assault force was led by Lecointre , who approached the northern edge of the bridge following the usual route of the UN convoys . The French marines overran a <unk> held by the VRS , at the cost of the life of one Frenchman , Private Jacki Humblot . The action marked the first French bayonet charge since the Korean War . The assault was supported by 90 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) direct fire from the armoured cars , and heavy machine @-@ gun fire . The Serbs responded with mortar bombs and fire from anti @-@ aircraft weapons . Five French were wounded in the clash , while four VRS soldiers were killed and four were taken prisoner . 
 ARBiH snipers joined the fight , accidentally shooting and wounding one French hostage . At the conclusion of the 32 @-@ minute long firefight , the VRS remained in control of the southern end of the bridge , while the French occupied the northern end . The VRS then asked for a truce to recover their dead and wounded , under the threat of killing the French hostages . The wounded French soldier was immediately released and evacuated to a UN hospital . The VRS eventually gave up and abandoned the southern end of the bridge . The last French soldier held as hostage , a corporal , managed to escape . The second French soldier to die in the battle , Private Marcel Amaru , was killed by a sniper while supporting the assault from Sarajevo 's Jewish cemetery . One of the wounded French soldiers died of wounds later that day . The VRS soldiers captured in the action were treated as prisoners of war and detained at an UNPROFOR facility . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 According to the top French officers involving in the operation , the action on Vrbanja Bridge showed the VRS that UNPROFOR 's attitude had changed . Following the battle , VRS forces were observed to be less likely to engage French UN peacekeepers deployed in the city . Lieutenant Colonel Erik Roussel , an officer from FREBAT4 who had participated in the operation , stated later that " since the incident , the Serbs are strangely quiet towards us . " A memorial to the French soldiers killed in action was unveiled on 5 April 1996 , along with a plaque commemorating <unk> and <unk> . That day , the bridge was renamed in memory of the two women . 
 = Lord Kitchener Wants You = 
 Lord Kitchener Wants You was a 1914 advertisement by Alfred Leete which was developed into a recruitment poster . It depicted Lord Kitchener , the British Secretary of State for War , above the words " <unk> YOU " . Kitchener , wearing the cap of a British Field Marshal , stares and points at the viewer calling them to enlist in the British Army against the Central Powers . The image is considered one of the most iconic and enduring images of World War I. A hugely influential image and slogan , it has also inspired imitations in other countries , from the United States to the Soviet Union . 
 = = Development = = 
 Prior to the institution of conscription in 1916 , the United Kingdom relied upon volunteers for military service . Until the outbreak of the First World War , recruiting posters had not been used in Britain on a regular basis since the Napoleonic Wars . UK government advertisements for contract work were handled by His Majesty 's Stationery Office , who passed this task onto the publishers of R. F. White & Sons in order to avoid paying the government rate to newspaper publishers . As war loomed in late 1913 the number of advertising contracts expanded to include other firms . J. E. B. Seely , then the Secretary of State for War , awarded Sir Hedley Le Bas , Eric Field , and their Caxton Advertising Agency a contract to advertise for recruits in the major UK newspapers . Eric Field designed a prototype full @-@ page advertisement with the Coat of Arms of King George V and the phrase " Your King and Country Need You . " Britain declared war on the German Empire on 4 August 1914 and the first run of the full @-@ page ran the next day in those newspapers owned by Lord Northcliffe . 
 Prime Minister of the United Kingdom H. H. Asquith had appointed Kitchener as Secretary of State for War . Kitchener was the first currently serving soldier to hold the post and was given the task of recruiting a large army to fight Germany . Unlike some of his contemporaries who expected a short conflict , Kitchener foresaw a much longer war requiring hundreds of thousands of enlistees . According to Gary S. Messinger , Kitchener reacted well to Field 's advertisement although insisting " that the ads should all end with ' God Save the King ' and that they should not be changed from the original text , except to say ' Lord Kitchener needs YOU . ' " In the following months Le Bas formed an advisory committee of ad men to develop further newspaper recruiting advertisements , most of which ran vertically 11 inches ( 28 cm ) , two columns wide . 
 Alfred Leete , one Caxton 's illustrators , designed the now @-@ famous image as a cover illustration for the 5 September 1914 issue of London Opinion , a popular weekly magazine , taking cues from Field 's earlier recruiting advertisement . At the time , the magazine had a circulation of 300 @,@ 000 . In response to requests for reproductions , the magazine offered postcard @-@ sized copies for sale . The Parliamentary Recruiting Committee obtained permission to use the design in poster form . A similar poster used the words " YOUR COUNTRY <unk> YOU " . 
 Kitchener , a " figure of absolute will and power , an emblem of British masculinity " , was a natural subject for Leete 's artwork as his name was directly attached to the recruiting efforts and the newly @-@ forming Kitchener 's Army . Le Bas of Caxton Advertising ( for whom Leete worked ) chose Kitchener for the advertisement because Kitchener was " the only soldier with a great war name , won in the field , within the memory of the thousands of men the country wanted . " Kitchener made his name in the Sudan Campaign , avenging the death of General Gordon with brutality and efficiency . He became a hero of " New Imperialism " alongside other widely regarded figures in Britain like Field Marshal Wolseley and Field Marshal Roberts . Kitchener 's appearance including his bushy mustache and court dress jacket was reminiscent of romanticized Victorian era styles . Kitchener , 6 ft 2 in ( 188 cm ) tall and powerfully built , was for many the personification of military ethos so popular in the present Edwardian era . After the scorched earth tactics and hard @-@ fought victory of the Second Boer War , Kitchener represented a return to the military victories of the colonial era . The fact that Kitchener 's name is not used in the poster demonstrates how easily he was visually recognized . David Lubin opines that the image may be one of the earliest successful celebrity endorsements as the commercial practice expanded greatly in the 1920s . Keith Surridge posits that Kitchener 's features evoked the harsh , feared militarism of the Germans which bode well for British fortune in the war . Kitchener would not see the end of the war ; he died onboard HMS Hampshire in 1916 . 
 = = Original versions by Alfred Leete = = 
 = = Impact = = 
 Leete 's drawing of Kitchener was the most famous image used in the British Army recruitment campaign of World War I. It continues to be considered a masterful piece of wartime propaganda as well as an enduring and iconic image of the war . 
 Recruitment posters in general have often been seen as a driving force helping to bring more than a million men into the Army . September 1914 , coincident with publication of Leete 's image , saw the highest number of volunteers enlisted . The Times recorded the scene in London on 3 January 1915 ; " Posters appealing to recruits are to be seen on every hoarding , in most windows , in omnibuses , tramcars and commercial vans . The great base of Nelson 's Column is covered with them . Their number and variety are remarkable . Everywhere Lord Kitchener sternly points a monstrously big finger , exclaiming ' I Want You ' " . One contemporaneous publication decried the use of advertising methods to enlist soldiers : " the cold , basilisk eye of a <unk> @-@ lithographed Kitchener rivets itself upon the possible recruit and the outstretched finger of the British Minister of War is levelled at him like some revolver , with the words , ' I want you . ' The idea is stolen from the advertisement of a 5c . American cigar . " Although it became one of the most famous posters in history , its widespread circulation did not halt the decline in recruiting . 
 The use of Kitchener 's image for recruiting posters was so widespread that Lady Asquith referred to the Field Marshal simply as " the Poster . " 
 The placement of the Kitchener posters including Alfred Leete 's design has been examined and questioned following an Imperial War Museum publication in 1997 . The War Museum suggested that the poster itself was a " non event " and was made popular by postwar advertising by the war museum , perhaps conflating Leete 's design with the so @-@ called " 30 @-@ word " poster , an official product from the Parliamentary Recruitment Committee . The 30 @-@ word design was the most popular recruitment poster at the time having been printed ten times the volume of Leete 's image . Leete 's image has been praised for being more arresting while his accompanying text is also far less verbose . The official wording , taken from a Kitchener speech , may seem more fitting for a character in a Henry James novel . The 30 @-@ word recruiting poster was developed as Britons ' collective hopes of the war being over by Christmas were dashed in January 1915 and volunteer enlistments fell . A 2013 book researched by James Taylor counters the popular belief that the Leete design was an influential recruitment tool during the war . He claims the original artwork was acquired by the Imperial War Museum in 1917 and catalogued as a poster in error . Though the image of Kitchener ( Britain 's most popular soldier ) inspired several other poster designs , Taylor says he can find no evidence in photographs of the time that the Leete poster was used , although a photograph from 15 December 1914 taken at the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway station in Liverpool clearly depicts Leete 's depiction among other recruiting posters . 
 The effectiveness of the image upon the viewer is attributed to what E. B. Goldstein has called the ' differential rotation effect . ' Because of this effect , Kitchener 's eyes and his foreshortened arm and hand appear to follow the viewer regardless of the viewer 's orientation to the artwork . Historian Carlo Ginzburg compared Leete 's image of Kitchener to similar images of Christ and Alexander the Great as depicting the viewer 's contact with a powerful figure . Pearl James commented on Ginzburg 's analysis agreeing that the strength of the connotation lies with a clever use of discursive psychology and that art historical methods better illuminate why this image has such resonance . The capitalized word " YOU " grabs the reader , bringing them directly to Kitchener 's message . The textual focus on " you " engages the reader about their own participation in the war . Nicholas <unk> differs in that Leete 's portrayal of Kitchener is less about immediate recruiting statistics but the myth that has grown around the image , including ironic parodies . Leete 's Kitchener poster caught the attention of a then eleven @-@ year @-@ old George Orwell , who may have used as it the basis for his description of the " Big Brother " posters in his novel 1984 . 
 In 1997 the British Army created a recruiting ad re @-@ using Leete 's image substituting Kitchener 's face with that of a British Army non @-@ commissioned officer of African descent . Leete 's image of Kitchener is featured on a 2014 £ 2 coin produced by sculptor John Bergdahl for the Royal Mint . The coin was the first of a five @-@ year series to commemorate the centennial of the war . Use of Leete 's image of Kitchener has been criticized by some for its pro @-@ war connotation in light of the human losses of the First World War and the violence of Kitchener 's campaign in Sudan . In July 2014 , one of only four original posters known to exist went to auction for more than £ 10 @,@ 000 . The other three originals exist on display in State Library of Victoria , the Museum of Brands , Packaging and Advertising , and the Imperial War Museum . Leete 's design was also used for a corn maze in the Skylark Garden Centre in <unk> to mark the centenary of World War I. 
 = = Imitations = = 
 The image of Lord Kitchener with his hand pointing directly at the viewer has inspired numerous imitations : 
 = Court of King 's Bench ( England ) = 
 The Court of King 's Bench ( or Court of Queen 's Bench during the reign of a female monarch ) , formally known as The Court of the King Before the King Himself , was an English court of common law in the English legal system . Created in the late 12th to early 13th century from the curia regis , initially following the monarch on his travels , the King 's Bench finally joined the Court of Common Pleas and Exchequer of Pleas in Westminster Hall in 1318 , making its last travels in 1421 . As one of the two principal common law courts along with the Common Pleas , the King 's Bench 's jurisdiction and caseload was significantly challenged by the rise of the Court of Chancery and equitable doctrines in the 15th and 16th centuries . To recover , the King 's Bench undertook a scheme of revolutionary reform , creating less expensive , faster and more versatile types of pleading in the form of bills as opposed to the more traditional writs . Although not immediately stemming the tide , in the long term it helped the King 's Bench not only recover but increase its workload . While there was a steep decline in business from 1460 to 1540 , as the new reforms began to take effect the King 's Bench 's business was significantly boosted ; between 1560 and 1640 , it rose tenfold . 
 While good for the King 's Bench , the Common Pleas became suspicious of the new developments , as legal fictions such as the Bill of Middlesex damaged its own business . Fighting against the King 's Bench in a reactionary and increasingly conservative way , an equilibrium was eventually reached in the 17th century . Reaching an acceptable medium with the Common Pleas and Exchequer of Pleas proved to be the downfall of all three courts ; with several courts of near @-@ identical jurisdiction , there was little need for separate bodies , and the superior courts of Westminster were merged by the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873 into a single High Court of Justice . The King 's Bench thus ceased to exist , except as the King 's Bench ( now Queen 's Bench ) Division of the High Court . 
 During its existence the King 's Bench 's jurisdiction initially covered a wide range of criminal matters , something significantly reduced later on , along with any business not claimed by the other courts , and any cases which concerned the monarch . It also acted as a court of appeal for the Exchequer of Pleas and Common Pleas , although it was not a court of last resort and required Parliament to sign off on its decisions . The creation of the Court of Exchequer Chamber in 1585 created a court from which King 's Bench decisions could be appealed to , and with the expansion of the Exchequer Chamber 's jurisdiction in 1830 the King 's Bench ceased to be an appellate court . Thanks to the Bill of Westminster and other legal fictions , the King 's Bench gained much of the Common Pleas 's jurisdiction , although the Common Pleas remained the sole place where real property claims could be brought . The King 's Bench was staffed by one Chief Justice , now the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales , and a variable number of puisne justices ; normally three , there were five serving when the King 's Bench was dissolved . Those who chose not to retire became Justices of the High Court on the King 's Bench 's dissolution . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Originally , the sole " court " was the curia regis , one of the three central administrative bodies along with the Exchequer and Chancery , from which the Court of Chancery formed . This curia was the King 's court , composed of those advisers and courtiers who followed the King as he travelled around the country . This was not a dedicated court of law , instead a descendant of the witenagemot . In concert with the curia regis , eyre circuits staffed by itinerant judges dispensed justice throughout the country , operating on fixed paths at certain times . These judges were also members of the curia , and would hear cases on the King 's behalf in the " lesser curia regis " . Because the curia travelled with the King , it caused problems with the dispensation of justice ; if the King went out of the country , or as Richard I did spent much of his career there , the curia followed . To remedy this a central " bench " was established , with the Court of Common Pleas , initially split from the Exchequer of Pleas , receiving official recognition in Magna Carta so that common pleas could be heard in " some fixed place " . There were thus two common law courts ; the curia , which followed the King , and the Common Pleas , which sat in Westminster Hall . The curia eventually became known as the King 's Bench , with the King himself required for the court to sit . 
 There is some controversy over whether the original fixed court was the Common Pleas or King 's Bench . In 1178 , a chronicler recorded that when Henry II : 
 learned that the land and the men of the land were burdened by so great a number of justices , for there were , eighteen , chose with the counsel of the wise men of his Kingdom five only , two clerks three and laymen , all of his private family , and decreed that these five should hear all complaints of the Kingdom and should do right and should not depart from the king 's court but should remain there to hear the complaints of men , with this understanding that , if there should come up among them any question which could not be brought to a conclusion by them , it should be presented to a royal hearing and be determined by the king and the wiser men of the kingdom " . 
 This was originally interpreted as the foundation of the King 's Bench , with the Court of Common Pleas not coming into existence until the signing of the Magna Carta . The later theory was that Henry II 's decree created the Court of Common Pleas , not the King 's Bench , and that the King 's Bench instead split from the Common Pleas at some later time . The first records of an independent King 's Bench come from 1234 , when distinct plea rolls are found for each court . Modern academics give 1234 as the founding date for the King 's Bench as a fully independent tribunal , considering it part of the law reform which took place from 1232 to 1234 . Under Edward I , the presence of the King in the court became more and more irregular , and by 1318 the court sat independent of the monarch . Its last travels around the country were in 1414 to Leicestershire , Staffordshire and Shropshire , and a visit to Northamptonshire in 1421 . From then onwards , the King 's Bench became a fixed court rather than one that followed the King . Like the Common Pleas , the King 's Bench sat in Westminster Hall until its dissolution . 
 = = = Reform = = = 
 During the 15th century , the traditional superiority of the common law courts was challenged by ecclesiastical courts and the equitable jurisdiction of the Lord Chancellor , exercised through the Court of Chancery . These courts were more attractive to the common lawyers because of their informality and the simple method used to arrest defendants . The bills of complaint and subpoena used by the Chancery made court procedure far faster , and from 1460 to 1540 there was a steep decline in the number of cases in the common law courts , coinciding with a sharp increase in cases in the newer courts . This loss of business was quickly recognised by the King 's Bench , which was urged by Fairfax J in 1501 to develop new remedies so that " subpoenas would not be used as often as they are at present " . From 1500 the King 's Bench began reforming to increase its business and jurisdiction , with the tide finally turning in their favour by 1550 . 
 The recovery of the King 's Bench was thanks to its use of Chancery @-@ like procedure ; centrally , the system of bills . Prior to this , a writ would have to be issued , with different writs depending on the issue . If A wished to sue B for trespass , debt and detinue , the court would have to issue an individual writ for each action , with associated time delays and costs for A , and then ensure that B appeared in court . Bills , on the other hand , were traditionally used against court officials and the court 's prisoners ; as such , the defendant was assumed to already be in the court 's custody and presence in court was not needed . Thus a legal fiction arose ; if A wished to sue B for trespass , debt and detinue , he would have a writ issued for trespass . B would be arrested as a result , and the covenant , detinue and debt actions undertaken by bill after he had been detained . Eventually it became even more fictitious ; if A wished to sue B merely for debt and detinue , a trespass writ would be obtained and then quietly dismissed when B was detained in custody . This was originally undertaken through getting a writ of trespass from the Chancery , but eventually a shorter workaround was used ; since the King 's Bench retained criminal jurisdiction over Middlesex , the trespass ( which was fictitious anyway ) would be said to have occurred there , allowing the King 's Bench to issue a bill of arrest on its own . This became known as the Bill of Middlesex , and undermined the jurisdiction of the Court of Common Pleas , which would normally deal with such civil cases . 
 The advantages to this method were that bills were substantially cheaper , and unlike writs did not tie the plaintiff down ; once the case came to court the bill could be amended to include any action or actions the plaintiff wanted to enforce . In addition , by avoiding the Chancery writ , the case was substantially cheaper . The result of this was substantial ; between 1560 and 1640 , the King 's Bench 's business rose tenfold . This period also saw a substantial broadening of the remedies available in the common law . The main remedy and method was action on the case , which justices expanded to encompass other things . In 1499 it enabled the enforcement of parol promises , which rendered Chancery subpoenas obsolete ; later developments included the recovery of debts , suing for defamatory words ( previously an ecclesiastical matter ) and action on the case for <unk> and conversion . Most of this reform took place under <unk> CJ , who never lived to see the results of his work ; it took over 100 years for the reforms to fully reverse the decline in business . 
 = = = Struggle with the Common Pleas = = = 
 While these reforms succeeded in forming an equilibrium between the old common law courts and the new courts , they were viewed with suspicion by the Common Pleas , who became highly reactionary to the changes the King 's Bench attempted to introduce . While the King 's Bench was more revolutionary , the Common Pleas became increasingly conservative in its attempts to avoid ceding cases . The disparity between the reformist King 's Bench and conservative Common Pleas was exacerbated by the fact that the three Common Pleas <unk> could not agree on how to cut costs , leaving the court both expensive and of limited malleability while the King 's Bench became faster , cheaper and more varied in its jurisdiction . 
 The troubles during this period are best illustrated by Slade 's Case . Under the medieval common law , claims seeking the repayment of a debt or other matters could only be pursued through a writ of debt in the Common Pleas , a problematic and archaic process . By 1558 the lawyers had succeeded in creating another method , enforced by the Court of King 's Bench , through the action of assumpsit , which was technically for deceit . The legal fiction used was that by failing to pay after promising to do so , a defendant had committed deceit , and was liable to the plaintiff . The conservative Common Pleas , through the appellate court the Court of Exchequer Chamber , began to overrule decisions made by the King 's Bench on assumpsit , causing friction between the courts . In Slade 's Case , the Chief Justice of the King 's Bench , John Popham , deliberately provoked the Common Pleas into bringing an assumpsit action to a higher court where the Justices of the King 's Bench could vote , allowing them to overrule the Common Pleas and establish assumpsit as the main contractual action . After the death of Edmund Anderson , the more activist Francis Gawdy became Chief Justice of the Common Pleas , which briefly led to a less reactionary and more revolutionary Common Pleas . 
 The struggle continued even after this point . The Interregnum granted some respite to the Common Pleas , which abolished fines on original writs , hurting the King 's Bench , but in 1660 the fines were reinstated and " then the very attorneys of the Common Pleas boggled at them and carried all their finable business to the King 's Bench " . In 1661 the Common Pleas attempted to reverse this by pushing for an Act of Parliament to abolish <unk> based on legal fictions , forbidding " special bail " in any case where " the true cause of action " was not expressed in the process . The King 's Bench got around this in the 1670s ; the Act did not say that the process had to be true , so the court continued to use legal fictions , simply ensuring that the true cause of action was expressed in the process , regardless of whether or not it was correct . The Bill of <unk> disclosed the true cause of action , satisfying the 1661 statute , but did not require a valid complaint . This caused severe friction within the court system , and Francis North , Chief Justice of the Common Pleas , eventually reached a compromise by allowing such legal fictions in the Common Pleas as well as the King 's Bench . 
 = = = Dissolution = = = 
 The unintended outcome of these compromises was that by the end of Charles II 's reign , all three common law courts had a similar jurisdiction over most common pleas , with similar processes . By the 18th century , it was customary to speak of the " twelve justices " of the three courts , not distinguishing them , and assize cases were shared equally between them . In 1828 , Henry Brougham complained that : 
 [ t ] he jurisdiction of the Court of King 's Bench , for example , was originally confined to pleas of the Crown , and then extended to actions where violence was used - actions of trespass , by force ; but now , all actions are admissible within its walls , through the medium of a legal fiction , which was adopted for the purpose of enlarging its authority , that every person sued is in the custody of the marshal of the court and may , therefore , be proceeded against for any personal cause of actions . Thus , by degrees , this court has drawn over to itself actions which really belong to ... the Court of Common Pleas . The Court of Common Pleas , however ... never was able to obtain cognizance of - the peculiar subject of King 's Bench jurisdiction - Crown Pleas ... the Exchequer has adopted a similar course for , though it was originally confined to the trial of revenue cases , it has , by means of another fiction - the supposition that everybody sued is a debtor to the Crown , and further , that he cannot pay his debt , because the other party will not pay him , - opened its doors to every suitor , and so drawn to itself the right of trying cases , that were never intended to be placed within its jurisdiction . 
 The purpose of Brougham 's speech was to illustrate that three courts of identical jurisdiction were unnecessary , and further that it would create a situation where the best judges , lawyers and cases would eventually go to one court , overburdening that body and leaving the others near useless . In 1823 , 43 @,@ 465 actions were brought in the King 's Bench , 13 @,@ 009 in the Common Pleas and 6 @,@ 778 in the Exchequer of Pleas . Not surprisingly , the King 's Bench judges were " immoderately over burdened " , the Common Pleas judges were " fully occupied in term , and much engaged in vacation also " and the Barons of the Exchequer were " comparatively little occupied either in term or vacation " . 
 In response to this and the report of a committee investigating the slow pace of the Court of Chancery , the Judicature Commission was formed in 1867 , and given a wide remit to investigate reform of the courts , the law , and the legal profession . Five reports were issued , from 25 March 1869 to 10 July 1874 , with the first ( dealing with the formation of a single Supreme Court of Judicature ) considered the most influential . The report disposed of the previous idea of merging the common law and equity , and instead suggested a single Supreme Court capable of utilising both . In 1870 the Lord Chancellor , Lord Hatherly , attempted to bring the recommendations into law through an Act of Parliament , but did not go to the trouble of consulting the judiciary or the leader of the Conservatives , who controlled the House of Lords . The bill ran into strong opposition from lawyers and judges , particularly Alexander Cockburn . After Hatherly was replaced by Lord Selborne in September 1872 , a second bill was introduced after consultation with the judiciary ; although along the same lines , it was far more detailed . 
 The Act , finally passed as the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873 , merged the Common Pleas , Exchequer , King 's Bench and Court of Chancery into one body , the High Court of Justice , with the divisions between the courts to remain . The King 's Bench thus ceased to exist , holding its last session on 6 July 1875 , except as the King 's Bench Division of the High Court . The existence of the same courts under one unified head was a quirk of constitutional law , which prevented the compulsory demotion or retirement of Chief Justices . By sheer chance , both the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas and Chief Baron of the Exchequer died in 1880 , allowing for the abolition of the Common Pleas Division and Exchequer Division by Order in Council on 16 December 1880 . The High Court was reorganised into the Chancery Division , King 's Bench Division and the Probate , Divorce and Admiralty Division ; the King 's Bench ( now Queen 's Bench ) division remains to this day as lord . 
 = = Jurisdiction = = 
 Due to a misunderstanding by Sir Edward Coke in his Institutes of the Lawes of England , academics thought for a long time that the King 's Bench was primarily a criminal court . This was factually incorrect ; no indictment was tried by the King 's Bench until January 1323 , and no record of the court ordering the death penalty is found until halfway through Edward II 's reign . The court did have some criminal jurisdiction , with a royal ordinance in 1293 directing conspiracy cases to be brought to the King 's Bench and the court 's judges acting in <unk> commissions around the country . A.T. Carter , in his History of English Legal Institutions , defines the early King 's Bench jurisdiction as " to correct all crimes and misdemeanours that amounted to a breach of the peace , the King being then plaintiff , for such were in derogation of the Jura regalia ; and to take cognizance of everything not parcelled out to the other courts " . By the end of the 14th century much of the criminal jurisdiction had declined , although the court maintained a criminal jurisdiction over all cases in Middlesex , the county where Westminster Hall stood . The King 's Bench 's main jurisdiction was over " pleas of the crown " ; cases which involved the King in some way . With the exception of revenue matters , which were handled by the Exchequer of Pleas , the King 's Bench held exclusive jurisdiction over these cases . 
 The Court of King 's Bench did act as an appellate body , hearing appeals from the Court of Common Pleas , eyre circuits , assize courts and local courts , but was not a court of last resort ; its own records were sent to Parliament to be signed off on . The creation of the Court of Exchequer Chamber in 1585 created a court from which King 's Bench decisions could be appealed to , and with the expansion of the Exchequer Chamber 's jurisdiction in 1830 the King 's Bench ceased to be an appellate court . Thanks to the Bill of Westminster and other legal fictions , the King 's Bench gained much of the Common Pleas 's jurisdiction , although the Common Pleas remained the sole place where real property claims could be brought . 
 = = Officials = = 
 The head of the court was the Chief Justice of the King 's Bench , a position established by 1268 . From the 14th century onwards , the Chief Justice was appointed by a writ , in Latin until 1727 and in English from then on . The Chief Justice was the most senior judge in the superior courts , having superiority over the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas and Chief Baron of the Exchequer , and from 1612 the Master of the Rolls . Unlike other Chief Justices , who were appointed to serve " during the King 's Pleasure " , the appointment as Chief Justice of the King 's Bench " did not usually specify any particular tenure " . This practice ended in 1689 , when all of the Chief Justices became appointed to serve " during good behaviour " . The initial salary was £ 40 a year , with an additional £ 66 in 1372 and an increase to a total of £ 160 in 1389 . An ordinance of 1646 set a fixed salary of £ 1 @,@ 000 , increased to £ 2 @,@ 000 in 1714 , £ 4 @,@ 000 in 1733 , and finally peaked at £ 10 @,@ 000 a year in 1825 . Pension arrangements were first made in 1799 , peaking at £ 4 @,@ 000 a year in 1825 . The position remains to this day ; after the dissolution of the Court of King 's Bench , the Chief Justice has instead been the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales , now the head of the Judiciary of England and Wales . 
 A Chief Justice of the King 's Bench was assisted in his work by a number of Justices of the King 's Bench . Occasionally appointed before 1272 , the number fluctuated considerably between 1 and 4 ; from 1522 , the number was fixed at 3 . Provisions for a fourth were established in 1830 , and a fifth in 1868 . Following the dissolution of the Court of King 's Bench , the remaining Justices because Justices of the Queen 's Bench Division of the High Court of Justice . Justices were originally paid £ 26 a year , increasing to £ 66 in 1361 , and £ 100 in 1389 . An ordinance of 1645 increased this to £ 1 @,@ 000 , with the salary peaking at £ 5 @,@ 500 in 1825 . As with the Chief Justice , pension arrangements were formally organised in 1799 , starting at £ 2 @,@ 000 a year and peaking at £ 3 @,@ 500 in 1825 . 
 = 2011 Tucson shooting = 
 On January 8 , 2011 , U.S. Representative Gabrielle Giffords and eighteen others were shot during a constituent meeting held in a supermarket parking lot in Casas Adobes , Arizona , in the Tucson metropolitan area . Six people died , including federal District Court Chief Judge John Roll ; Gabe Zimmerman , one of Rep. Giffords ' staffers ; and a nine @-@ year @-@ old girl , Christina @-@ Taylor Green . Giffords was holding the meeting , called " Congress on Your Corner " in the parking lot of a Safeway store when Jared Lee Loughner drew a pistol and shot her in the head before proceeding to fire on other people . One additional person was injured in the immediate aftermath of the shooting . News reports identified the target of the attack as Giffords , a Democrat representing Arizona 's 8th congressional district . She was shot through the head at point @-@ blank range , and her medical condition was initially described as " critical " . 
 Loughner , a 22 @-@ year @-@ old Tucson man who was fixated on Giffords , was arrested at the scene . Federal prosecutors filed five charges against him , including the attempted assassination of a member of Congress and the assassination of a federal judge . Loughner previously had been arrested ( but not convicted ) once on a minor drug charge and had been suspended by his college for disruptive behavior . Court filings include notes handwritten by Loughner indicating he planned to assassinate Giffords . The motive for the shooting remains unclear ; Loughner did not cooperate with authorities , invoking his right to remain silent . He was held without bail and indicted on 49 counts . In January 2012 , Loughner was found by a federal judge to be incompetent to stand trial based on two medical evaluations , which diagnosed him with paranoid schizophrenia . Judged still incompetent to stand trial on May 25 , finally on August 7 , Loughner had a hearing at which he was judged competent . He pleaded guilty to 19 counts , and in November 2012 was sentenced to life in prison . 
 Following the shooting , American and international politicians expressed grief and condemnations . Gun control advocates pushed for increased restrictions on the sale of firearms and ammunition , specifically high @-@ capacity ammunition magazines . Some commentators criticized the use of harsh political rhetoric in the United States , with a number blaming the political right wing for the shooting ; in particular , Sarah Palin was criticized for a poster by her political action committee that featured stylized crosshairs on an electoral map . Palin rejected claims that she bore responsibility for the shooting , and others defended her by noting that Loughner hated all politicians regardless of their affiliation . President Barack Obama led a nationally televised memorial service on January 12 , and other memorials took place . 
 = = Shooting = = 
 The shooting took place on January 8 , 2011 , at 10 : 10 am MST ( 17 : 10 UTC ) . A United States Representative from Arizona , Gabrielle Giffords , was holding a constituent meeting called " Congress on Your Corner " at the Safeway supermarket in La Toscana Village mall , which is in Casas Adobes , an unincorporated area north of Tucson , Arizona . Giffords had set up a table outside the store and about 20 to 30 people were gathered around her when Jared Lee Loughner drew a pistol and shot Giffords in the head . The shooting was caught on video by a store security camera but has not yet been released to the public . 
 Loughner proceeded to fire apparently randomly at other members of the crowd . He reportedly used a 9 × 19mm Glock 19 semi @-@ automatic pistol with a 33 @-@ round magazine . A nearby store employee said he heard " 15 to 20 gunshots " . Loughner stopped to reload , but dropped the loaded magazine from his pocket to the sidewalk , from where bystander Patricia Maisch grabbed it . Another bystander clubbed the back of the assailant 's head with a folding chair , injuring his elbow in the process , representing the fourteenth injury . Loughner was tackled to the ground by Bill Badger , a 74 @-@ year @-@ old retired United States Army Colonel who had also been shot himself . Loughner was further subdued by Maisch and bystanders Roger <unk> and Joseph Zamudio . Zamudio , a concealed weapon ( CCW ) permit holder , had a weapon on his person , but arrived after the shooting had stopped and did not draw his firearm . Thirty @-@ one shell casings were found at the scene by investigators . 
 The first call from the scene to emergency services was received at 10 : 11 am . While waiting for help to arrive , Giffords ' intern Daniel Hernández , Jr. applied pressure to the gunshot wound on her forehead , and made sure she did not choke on her blood . Hernández was credited with saving Giffords ' life . David and Nancy Bowman , a married doctor and nurse who were shopping in the store , immediately set up triage and attended to nine @-@ year @-@ old Christina @-@ Taylor Green . Police arrived on the scene at 10 : 15 am , with paramedics arriving at 10 : 16 am . Badger observed the assailant attempting to discard a small bag containing money and identification , which was recovered by the officers . Following the shooting , the police shut down roads surrounding the shopping center until late in the day . The intersection was cordoned off and most of the businesses in the shopping center were closed throughout the weekend during the initial investigation . The Safeway store reopened a week later , with a makeshift memorial erected near the front of the store . 
 Five people died at the scene , including Chief Judge John Roll and Giffords ' community outreach director Gabe Zimmerman . Most of the injured were taken to University Medical Center in Tucson . Christina @-@ Taylor Green was later pronounced dead on arrival at the hospital . 
 When Loughner 's parents arrived at their home , unaware of the shootings , they found police tape and police cars around their house . Their neighbor Wayne Smith said Loughner 's mother " almost passed out right there , " while his father sat in the road and cried . Smith described the family as " devastated " , feeling guilty , and wondering " where did they fail ? " Loughner 's parents released a statement three days later expressing remorse for the victims and saying , " We don 't understand why this happened . " 
 = = Investigation = = 
 Jared Lee Loughner , the suspect , was described as a white male in his mid @-@ 20s with short hair and " dressed in a shabby manner " . He was arrested after being detained by bystanders , and police later released his name and details . The FBI attempted to question Loughner , but he reportedly refused to cooperate with authorities and invoked his Fifth Amendment right . Authorities said that Loughner 's motive was unknown . They said that evidence seized from a safe in Loughner 's home included an envelope marked with notes reading " I planned ahead " , " My assassination " , and " Giffords " , as well as a letter from Giffords 's office thanking him for attending a similar event in 2007 . 
 Federal officials charged Loughner the next day with killing federal government employees , attempting to assassinate a member of Congress and attempting to kill federal employees . Police reports reveal he had purchased a Glock pistol at a Sportsman 's Warehouse store , after passing the required FBI background check , less than six weeks before and attempted to buy additional ammunition for the pistol at a Walmart on the morning of the shooting , but the clerk refused to sell it to him based on his appearance and demeanor . 
 As the shooting occurred outside the Tucson city limits in unincorporated Casas Adobes , the Pima County Sheriff 's Department started the initial investigation with assistance from the Tucson Police Department and the Arizona Department of Public Safety . The Federal Bureau of Investigation director Robert Mueller was ordered to the location by President Obama , and the FBI took over the investigation . The United States Capitol Police also conducted an investigation . 
 = = = Perpetrator = = = 
 Jared Lee Loughner , then age 22 , lived with his parents Randy and Amy Loughner in Tucson , about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) from the site of the shooting . His mother worked for the City Parks Department ; his father 's work was not known . Loughner had been attending Pima Community College . Former classmates stated Loughner ( at the time ) cared about his education due to his appreciation of knowledge . Because of teacher and student complaints about Loughner 's increasingly disruptive behavior in classes , the college suspended him on September 29 , 2010 , and he dropped out of the school in October . Loughner chose not to return , as the college required him to have a mental health evaluation and clearance to be readmitted . 
 Before the shooting , Loughner had two previous offenses , one of which was for drug possession . He had become obsessed with Giffords , and had previously met her at a " Congress on your Corner " event in a Tucson mall in August 2007 . 
 U.S. Army officials said that Loughner had attempted to enlist in 2008 , but his application had been rejected as " unqualified " for service . They declined further disclosure due to confidentiality rules . An administration official indicated to the media that Loughner had failed a drug test . 
 Loughner had been posting material online for some time via his Myspace account and on YouTube under the name " <unk> " . He gave his views on terrorism , federal laws , and his belief that the government was brainwashing the citizenry with language . Hours before the incident , Loughner 's Myspace page was updated with posts from his account stating , " Goodbye " , and said to friends : " Please don 't be mad at me . " 
 Earlier on the day of the shooting , Loughner reportedly had an altercation with his father regarding a black bag the younger man took from a car trunk . A bag matching the description was later found in a nearby desert area containing 9mm ammunition , and it is believed to belong to Loughner . Later that morning , at approximately 7 : 30 am , Loughner was stopped by an Arizona Game and Fish Department officer after running a red light , but was released with a reminder when it was determined that he did not have any outstanding warrants . 
 = = = Legal proceedings = = = 
 Loughner was held in the Federal Correctional Institution at Phoenix without bail . All Arizona @-@ based federal judges recused themselves from the case because of their ties to Judge Roll , who was killed in the attack . The federal case was assigned to a San Diego @-@ based jurist , federal Judge Larry Alan Burns from the United States District Court for the Southern District of California . The public defender Judy Clarke , also based in San Diego , was appointed to represent Loughner in federal court . 
 On January 19 , 2011 , a federal grand jury handed down an indictment for three counts against Loughner for the attempt to assassinate Representative Giffords , and attempting to kill two federal employees , her aides Ron Barber and Pamela Simon . Loughner was indicted on additional charges of murder and attempted murder on March 3 , for a total of 49 counts . 
 Prosecutors representing the State of Arizona filed murder and attempted murder charges on behalf of the victims who were not federal employees . Under Arizona 's speedy trial statutes , Arizona state prosecutors normally have ten days from the time a suspect is taken into custody to file charges , but time spent in federal custody does not count toward this limitation . Conviction in either federal or state court meant that Loughner could face the death penalty . 
 On May 25 , 2011 , Judge Burns found Loughner incompetent to stand trial based on two medical evaluations . These had diagnosed him as suffering from paranoid schizophrenia . Loughner was ordered to be forcibly medicated following his diagnosis of schizophrenia . A new evaluation was ordered for January 25 , 2012 . 
 On February 6 , 2012 , his stay at the Springfield , Missouri facility was extended by four months . A request by Loughner 's lawyers to end forced medication was denied . Another competency hearing was set for June 27 , 2012 but later rescheduled . 
 On August 7 , 2012 , Loughner 's competency hearing began with testimony from Dr. Christina Pietz , Loughner 's forensic psychologist , who testified that she believed Loughner was competent to stand trial . After hearing the evidence , Judge Burns ruled that Loughner was competent to stand trial , whereupon Loughner pleaded guilty to 19 counts , sparing himself the death penalty . 
 On November 8 , 2012 , Loughner appeared for sentencing , with several of his victims as well as relatives of those he killed in attendance . Judge Burns sentenced Loughner to seven consecutive life terms plus 140 years in prison without parole . 
 = = Victims = = 
 Six people were killed in the attack ; all but Christina @-@ Taylor Green died at the scene of the shooting : 
 Christina @-@ Taylor Green , 9 , of Tucson . Green was accompanied to the meeting by neighbor Susan <unk> . As her date of birth was September 11 , 2001 , she had appeared in the book Faces of Hope : Babies Born on 9 / 11 ( page 41 ) . She was the granddaughter of former Major League Baseball player and manager Dallas Green and the second cousin of actress Sophia Bush . 
 Dorothy " Dot " Morris , 76 , a retired secretary from Oro Valley ; wife of George , who was wounded . 
 John Roll , 63 , chief judge of the U.S. District Court for Arizona , named to the federal bench by President George H. W. Bush in 1991 . 
 Phyllis Schneck , 79 , homemaker from Tucson . 
 <unk> Stoddard , 76 , retired construction worker , died from a gunshot wound to the head ; his wife <unk> was wounded . 
 Gabriel " Gabe " Zimmerman , 30 , community outreach director for Giffords , and a member of Giffords ' staff since 2006 . Zimmerman was the first Congressional staffer killed in the line of duty . 
 In addition to the six dead , thirteen other people were wounded by gunshot in the attack , while a fourteenth person was injured subduing Loughner . Gabrielle Giffords and two other members of her staff were among the surviving gunshot victims . <unk> Ron Barber , shot in the thigh and face , would later succeed Giffords in her House seat . 
 = = = Gabrielle Giffords = = = 
 Gabrielle Giffords was reported to be the target of the shootings . Some news organizations initially reported that she had been killed , but these statements were quickly revised to reflect that she had survived with a gunshot wound to the head . Daniel Hernandez Jr . , one of Giffords ' interns , assisted her after she was wounded and is credited with saving her life . Giffords was taken to University Medical Center in critical condition , though she was still conscious . Within 38 minutes , Giffords underwent emergency surgery , and part of her skull was removed to prevent further brain damage caused by swelling . She was placed into a medically induced coma to allow her brain to rest . During a memorial ceremony on January 12 , President Obama announced that earlier that day Giffords had opened her eyes for the first time since the attack . 
 As Giffords ' status improved , she began simple physical therapy and music therapy . On January 21 , 2011 , less than two weeks after the attack , her condition was deemed sufficiently stable for her to be released to Houston 's Memorial Hermann Medical Center . A few days later she was moved to the center 's Institute for Rehabilitation and Research to undergo a program of physical therapy and rehabilitation . After examination , her Houston doctors were optimistic , saying she has " great rehabilitation potential " . Medical experts expect Giffords ' recovery to take from several months to more than one year . 
 On August 1 , 2011 , she made her first public appearance on the House floor to vote in favor of raising the debt limit ceiling . She was met with a standing ovation and accolades from her fellow members of Congress . Giffords engaged in intensive rehabilitation treatments in Asheville , North Carolina from October 25 through November 4 . In 2011 , Mark Kelly , Giffords ' husband , published a memoir , Gabby : A Story of Courage and Hope , crediting her with joint authorship . He wrote that Giffords vows to return to Congress , although she continues to struggle with language and has lost 50 percent of her vision in both eyes . 
 On January 22 , 2012 , Giffords announced that she would resign from her congressional seat in order to concentrate on her recovery , but promised to return to public service in the future . She submitted her resignation on January 25 on the floor of the House in an emotional appearance ; colleagues and the House leadership offered their tributes to her courage and strength . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 = = = Political = = = 
