 Trains began running on the line again on 12 March subject to a speed restriction of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) at the crash site . The first train was the 05 : 10 Manchester to Glasgow . 
 = = Prior incidents = = 
 The Grayrigg derailment was not the first British railway accident to feature a train or locomotive named City of Glasgow on the West Coast Mainline . In the Harrow and Wealdstone railway accident on 8 October 1952 , the locomotive of the sleeper train from Perth to London Euston , whose crew was responsible for the incident , was Class 8P No. <unk> City of Glasgow . 
 In the area near the accident , south of Tebay in Cumbria , on 15 February 2004 another fatal incident had occurred , the Tebay rail accident , when four rail workers were killed by a runaway track maintenance trailer . Also close by was a collision on the Lambrigg Crossing on 18 May 1947 . 
 = = Prosecution = = 
 On 13 January 2012 , the Office of Rail Regulation announced that Network Rail were to be prosecuted under Section 3 ( 1 ) of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 for " the company 's failure to provide and implement suitable and sufficient standards , procedures , guidance , training , tools and resources for the inspection and maintenance of fixed stretcher bar points " . At the first hearing at Lancaster Magistrates ' Court on 28 February 2012 , Network Rail indicated an intention to plead guilty to the charges . On 4 April 2012 , Network Rail were fined a total of £ 4 @,@ 118 @,@ 037 including costs following the court case . 
 Critical commentary appeared in the media concerning the knighthood awarded to John Armitt in the 2012 New Year Honours for services to engineering and construction . Armitt had been Chief Executive of Network Rail at the time of the Grayrigg derailment , and the family of a victim of the accident criticised the award , which coincidentally was conferred on the same day that Network Rail were prosecuted for the accident . 
 After a two @-@ week hearing one of the issues Coroner Ian Smith announced that he would be issuing a rule 43 report . The intention of the report is to raise concerns with authorities to prevent similar incidents occurring again . 
 = The Rocky Mountains , Lander 's Peak = 
 The Rocky Mountains , Lander 's Peak is an 1863 landscape oil painting by the German @-@ American painter Albert Bierstadt . It is based on sketches made during Bierstadt 's travels with Frederick W. Lander 's Honey Road Survey Party in 1859 . The painting shows Lander 's Peak in the Wyoming Range of the Rocky Mountains , with an encampment of Native Americans in the foreground . It has been compared to , and exhibited with , The Heart of the Andes by Frederic Edwin Church . Lander 's Peak immediately became a critical and popular success and sold in 1865 for $ 25 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Hudson River School landscape painter Albert Bierstadt ( 1830 – 1902 ) was born in Germany , and , though his family moved to New Bedford , Massachusetts , when he was two , he spent many of his formative years in Europe . He made his debut in an 1858 exhibition , but his breakthrough came in the aftermath of a journey he made the following year . In the spring of 1859 , Bierstadt joined the Honey Road Survey Party led by then @-@ colonel Frederick W. Lander . He traveled as far as the Wind River Range in the Rocky Mountains , and made studies for numerous paintings along the way . Bierstadt was greatly impressed by the landscape he encountered , and described the Rocky Mountains as " the best material for the artist in the world . " He had a habit of doing extensive preparation for his work , on occasion making as many as fifty sketches for a single painting . In 1860 , he exhibited Base of the Rocky Mountains , Laramie Peak at the National Academy of Design . His greatest success , however , came with The Rocky Mountains , Lander 's Peak , which he exhibited in 1863 at the Tenth Street Studio Building , where he also had a studio . 
 = = Composition and theme = = 
 The painting shows Lander 's Peak , a mountain with a summit of 10 @,@ 456 feet ( 3 @,@ 187 m ) in the Wyoming Range in modern @-@ day Wyoming . The peak was named after Frederick W. Lander on Bierstadt 's initiative , after Lander 's death in the Civil War . In one description of the painting , " <unk> pointed granite peaks and fantastically illuminated clouds float above a tranquil , wooded genre scene . " The foreground is dominated by the campsite of a tribe of Native Americans . The landscape in the painting is not the actual landscape as it appears at Lander 's Peak , but rather an ideal landscape based on nature , altered by Bierstadt for dramatic effect . 
 Bierstadt 's painting hit a nerve with contemporary Americans , by portraying the grandeur and pristine beauty of the nation 's western wilderness . It was a reference to the idea of Manifest Destiny , where the Rocky Mountains represented both natural beauty , and an obstacle to westward expansion . In the words of historian Anne F. Hyde : " Bierstadt painted the West as Americans hoped it would be , which made his paintings vastly popular and reinforced the perception of the West as either Europe or sublime Eden . " At the same time , the Native Americans in the foreground gave the scene authenticity , and presented it as a timeless place , untouched by European hands . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Lander 's Peak was an immediate success ; twelve hundred people were invited for the exhibition , and almost a thousand showed up . Bierstadt was a shrewd self @-@ promoter as well as a gifted artist , and this was the first of his paintings to be widely promoted with a single @-@ picture exhibition , accompanied by a pamphlet , engravings and a tour . The painting , with its ten @-@ foot width , was intended both for exhibition halls and the homes of America 's emergent millionaire class . In 1865 it was purchased by British railway entrepreneur James McHenry for the ( at the time ) high price of $ 25 @,@ 000 . Bierstadt later bought it back , and gave or sold it to his brother Edward , before it was eventually acquired for the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York in 1907 . 
 Comparisons were made between Lander 's Peak and The Heart of the Andes , a contemporary painting by one of Bierstadt 's main rivals in the landscape genre , Frederic Edwin Church . The two works represented the two great mountain ranges spanning North and South America . At the New York Metropolitan Fair in 1864 , held by the United States Sanitary Commission to raise money for the Union war effort , the two paintings were exhibited opposite each other . Lander 's Peak and The Heart of the Andes are still exhibited on opposite walls at their current location at the Metropolitan . 
 Most reviews of the painting were positive ; one review called it " beyond question one of the finest landscapes ever painted in this country " , adding , " Its artistic merits are in some respects unrivalled : and added to these it has the advantage of being a representative painting of a portion of the most sublime and beautiful scenery on the American Continent . " The painting won a prize at the Exposition Universelle in Paris in 1867 . At the same time , there were also critical voices ; in particular , some American Pre @-@ Raphaelites found his brushwork wanting . One such critic complained that it would have been better " if the marks of the brush had , by dexterous handling , been made to stand for scrap and fissure , crag and cranny , but as it is , we have only too little geology and too much bristle . " 
 = 2010 Korean Grand Prix = 
 The 2010 Korean Grand Prix ( formally the 2010 Formula 1 Korean Grand Prix ) was a Formula One motor race held on 24 October 2010 at the Korea International Circuit in <unk> , South Jeolla , South Korea . It was the seventeenth round of the 2010 Formula One season and the first Korean Grand Prix . The 55 @-@ lap race was won by Ferrari driver Fernando Alonso , who started from third position . Lewis Hamilton finished second for McLaren and Alonso 's teammate Felipe Massa was third . 
 The race began behind the safety car but was stopped after three laps because of a large amount of standing water on the circuit . After a 45 @-@ minute delay , the race was restarted and the safety car pulled into the pit lane after thirteen laps . Pole sitter Sebastian Vettel maintained his lead going into the first corner . A second safety car deployment caused by the collision of Mark Webber and Nico Rosberg on lap nineteen closed up the field but Vettel retained the lead . Alonso maintained second position until a botched pit stop during a third safety @-@ car period caused him to drop to third . At the restart on lap thirty @-@ five , Hamilton ran wide at the first corner , allowing Alonso back into second place . Vettel 's engine failed eleven laps later , allowing Alonso to move into the lead , which he maintained to win the race . 
 The victory was Alonso 's fifth of the season ; the result put him into the lead of the Drivers ' Championship , eleven points ahead of Webber , who had dropped to second after failing to finish the race . Hamilton moved into third and Vettel 's retirement meant he slipped to fourth . Jenson Button remained in fifth position . In the World Constructors ' Championship , McLaren reduced the points deficit to Red Bull to be twenty @-@ seven points behind . With two races of the season remaining , Ferrari was a further twenty @-@ five points adrift . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by twelve teams with two drivers each . The teams ( also known as constructors ) were Red Bull , Mercedes , McLaren , Ferrari , Renault , Williams , Force India , Sauber , Toro Rosso , Lotus , Hispania and Virgin . Tyre supplier Bridgestone provided four types of tyres to the race ; two dry compounds ( soft " options " and hard " primes " ) and wet @-@ weather compounds ( intermediate and full wet ) . The soft compounds were denoted by a green stripe on their side @-@ walls ; the wet compound tyres were identified by a green line at the bottom of their central groove . The rules of the 2010 Grands Prix races stipulated that all cars should use both types of tyre during the race unless the driver used any one of the two wet @-@ weather compounds . Each driver was limited to eleven sets of dry tyres for the weekend . 
 Before the race , Red Bull driver Mark Webber led the Drivers ' Championship with 220 points ; he was ahead of Fernando Alonso and Sebastian Vettel , who were tied for second place on 206 points . Lewis Hamilton was in fourth place with 192 points and Hamilton 's teammate Jenson Button was in fifth on 189 points . Seventy @-@ five points were available for the three remaining races , which meant Hamilton or Button could still win the title . Both drivers would mathematically stay in contention if Alonso or Vettel won the race and neither McLaren driver finished in points @-@ scoring positions . Red Bull were leading the Constructors ' Championship with 426 points ; McLaren and Ferrari were second and third with 381 and 334 points respectively , while Mercedes on 176 points and Renault on 133 contended for fourth place . Red Bull , McLaren and Ferrari had so far won races in the previous sixteen rounds of the season . Felipe Massa ( twice ) and Robert Kubica had finished in second place , and Nico Rosberg , Massa ( twice ) , Kubica ( once ) had all finished in third . 
 With three races remaining in the Championship and a fourteen @-@ point advantage , Webber said he would continue his pursuit of the title ; " I need to keep racing hard and going for victories . Clearly , if my rivals have a rough weekend it makes it a bit harder for them and it gives me a bit more scope , but I 'm not looking to abuse that because it can all go pear @-@ shaped very fast . " Vettel said his season had been fraught with car problems but he remained positive about his chances ; " I think it ’ s normal to have ups and downs – and sometimes you have more , sometimes less – but , as I said , the expectation was probably to be in a position to fight for the championship and I think we ’ re in a very strong and very good position . " Alonso urged his teammate Massa to help him in his title bid and said the Korean Grand Prix could become " decisive " for his championship rivals . He favoured Hamilton to win the Korean Grand Prix . With Hamilton twenty @-@ eight points behind Webber and with Button a further three points behind his teammate , McLaren 's team principal Martin Whitmarsh said his drivers would keep their focus in the season 's remaining three races and produce consistent performances . Karun <unk> , who raced for Hispania in the first ten races of the season , said Red Bull were the favourites to win , and that he thought the circuit 's three long straights would suit the McLaren cars . 
 Following increased hostilities between North Korea and South Korea in the wake of the sinking of the South Korean corvette Cheonan in March 2010 , Formula One Group chief executive Bernie Ecclestone had said the race would be in jeopardy if political tensions continued to escalate , and it would be abandoned if the North Korean army crossed the border . The revival of the French Grand Prix at the Circuit de Nevers Magny @-@ Cours was mooted as an alternative if the Korean Grand Prix was cancelled . Although hostilities between the two nations eventually relaxed , the race was further threatened by delayed construction . On 27 September 2010 , Ecclestone said he doubted the circuit would be ready despite the tarmac having been laid . A final inspection of the circuit took place on 11 October ; Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) safety delegate Charlie Whiting certified that the circuit was ready on 12 October . The top layer of the track was completed ten days before the race ; there was not enough time for the elements to remove the oils and bitumen chemicals in the tarmac . Circuit designer Hermann Tilke said the surface would be slippery , making the race challenging for drivers and exciting for fans . 
 The layout of the track received a mostly positive response from the drivers . Adrian Sutil of Force India said he felt it was a " real pleasure " to be racing on the track and praised it for having " a lot of character " . Mercedes driver Michael Schumacher said the asphalt improved during the Friday free practice sessions and that the track was " very demanding and tricky which provides a challenge that I like a lot " . Kubica said although the first sector was " boring " he felt the entire track layout was " ten times better than Abu Dhabi " . The drivers raised concerns about the entry of the pit lane at turn seventeen — a corner taken at 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) . Kubica said , " It might be quite tight if someone 's pitting " and Lotus driver Jarno Trulli said he was " worried about someone going into the back of him " when he was forced to pit because his car 's gears were stuck in position . He also said the drivers would raise the point with Whiting . 
 Some teams modified their cars in preparation for the event . Red Bull and Williams revised their brake ducts . Williams ' changed their brake ducts at the front to improve airflow inside the tyres and direct the duct towards their car 's central section more efficiently . Red Bull 's brake ducts , which had been changed for the third successive Grand Prix , reintroduced a small fin seen at the Singapore Grand Prix ; for Korea two aerodynamic fins were fitted and a larger duct was introduced . McLaren modified a version of their front wings first introduced in Singapore . The team added a vertical gurney flap and an additional vertical slot at the front wing endplate to improve airflow outside the front tyres and increase the amount of downforce and therefore grip produced by the bodywork . The team also brought a new rear wing and tested a new revision of their F @-@ duct system that débuted at the Japanese Grand Prix in Suzuka . Ferrari revised their diffuser with curved profiles and one large middle plate designed to improve the extraction of air from the bottom of the F10 . As in Suzuka , Toro Rosso ran an F @-@ duct system in the Friday practice sessions . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying sessions = = = 
 Three practice sessions — two on Friday and a third on Saturday — were held before the main Sunday race . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted ninety minutes . The third session was held on Saturday morning and lasted an hour . The track was dusty when the first practice sessions were held ; grip was poor and some drivers were forced onto the run @-@ off areas after they slid off the track . Hamilton set the pace in the first practice session with a time of 1 : 40 @.@ 887 ; almost one @-@ tenth of a second quicker than Kubica . Rosberg and Michael Schumacher set the third- and sixth @-@ fastest times respectively for Mercedes ; they were separated by Vettel and Button . Webber was seventh quickest , ahead of Nick Heidfeld . The two Williams drivers completed the top ten ; Nico Hülkenberg was ahead of Rubens Barrichello . Hispania driver Bruno Senna spun at turn nine after his left rear suspension broke and stopped on the track without hitting the barriers . Grip was improved for the second practice session , in which Webber set a time of 1 : 37 @.@ 942 — the quickest of the day — despite spinning late in the session . Alonso was second @-@ quickest and Hamilton was third . Kubica set the fourth @-@ quickest time . Button , who was sidelined for most of the session with an overheated exhaust , was fifth . Massa , Vettel , Vitaly Petrov , Rosberg and Kamui Kobayashi made up the rest of the top ten . Sakon Yamamoto in the other Hispania car caused the session to be suspended after spinning and stopping his car at turn sixteen . 
 After discussions with Whiting during the Friday night drivers ' briefing , the height of the apex at turn sixteen was increased and the wall around that area was moved back . A new apex kerb at turn eighteen was built to stop dirt and stones from accumulating on the circuit , and the track was extensively cleaned . Drivers were told they could drive into the pit lane from the racing line without incurring a penalty . Bridgestone had reported heavy tyre graining during the Friday practice sessions ; their Motorsport Tyre Development director Hirohide Hamashima said drivers would face a challenge of looking after their tyres if track conditions had not changed before the race . Kubica was quickest in the final practice session ; his late lap of 1 : 37 @.@ 354 was 0 @.@ 048 seconds quicker than Hamilton 's in second . Alonso was third @-@ quickest and Webber was fourth . Rosberg , who was fifth , slowed at turn fifteen during the session 's closing stages ; he narrowly avoided a collision with Alonso . The incident was subject to a stewards ' investigation ; the stewards decided not to penalise Rosberg . Massa , Button , Hülkenberg , Schumacher and Sutil completed the top ten ahead of qualifying . Vettel was sixteenth ; the result of running onto the grass . 
 The qualifying session held on Saturday afternoon was split into three parts . The first part ran for twenty minutes and eliminated the cars that finished the session eighteenth or lower from qualifying . The second part of qualifying lasted fifteen minutes and eliminated cars that finished in positions eleven to seventeen . The final part of qualifying determined the positions from first to tenth and decided pole position . Cars which competed in the final session of qualifying were not allowed to change tyres before the race ; these started the race fitted with the tyres with which they set their quickest lap times . It was held in overcast weather conditions . Tyre degradation on the soft compound tyres was heavy ; the drivers set their laps on the hard tyres during the first session and switched to <unk> for the two remaining sessions . 
 With a lap of 1 : 35 @.@ 585 , Vettel set the fastest time in the final session on his second timed run at the end of the period , achieving his ninth pole position of the season — his first at the Korea International Circuit . Although he was delighted to get pole position , he felt he lost time in the middle sector after making a mistake . Vettel 's teammate Webber was also the front row of the grid ; he recorded a lap time 0 @.@ 076 seconds slower than Vettel 's and was pleased they would start the race alongside each other . Webber was not happy with his first set of option tyres ; he chose to do two more timed laps on a new set of option tyres in the third session . Alonso qualified third ; he said his starting position had realised Ferrari 's " maximum potential " . He also aimed to ensure that he finished the race because rain had been forecast . Alonso had been the fastest driver during most of the third session until Vettel set his pole position lap . Hamilton set the first session 's fastest time of 1 : 37 @.@ 113 ; he almost did not challenge for the pole position because he avoided making contact with the wall at the pit lane entry . He fell to fourth overall in the final part of qualifying . In the faster of the two Mercedes , Rosberg secured fifth place ; Massa in the slower Ferrari placed sixth . Massa was not happy because he would start the race on the dirty side of the grid , having encountered traffic during the third session . Button complained about the lack of grip and that he could not get his types to the <unk> temperature ; he managed seventh position but was happy to start on the clean side of the grid . Kubica recorded the eighth @-@ fastest time and struggled with oversteer , which prevented him from setting a faster lap time . Schumacher in the slower Mercedes took ninth place ahead of Barrichello in tenth . Barrichello was angry with Schumacher because he had blocked Barrichello during the second qualifying session . Schumacher went to Barrichello to apologise and was subsequently summoned by the stewards , who issued Schumacher with a reprimand . 
 Hülkenberg , who qualified eleventh , was the fastest driver not to advance into the final session . His best time of 1 : 37 @.@ 620 was 1 @.@ 5 seconds slower than Webber 's pace in the second session . He said eleventh place was a " good position to start from " despite losing the rear of his car in turn twelve , which caused him to abort one of his quick laps . Hülkenberg was followed in the times by the BMW Sauber drivers Kobayashi in twelfth and Heidfeld in thirteenth , followed by Sutil in the quickest of the two Force India cars . Petrov , who qualified in fifteenth , was penalised five positions on the grid because he had caused an avoidable accident with Hülkenberg at the start of the previous race at Suzuka . Petrov was aiming for a top ten grid position to minimise the effects of his grid penalty but he spun on his final timed lap after hitting a kerb ; he was unable to set a quicker lap time because his tyres had become dirty . As a result , Jaime Alguersuari inherited 15th position , ahead of his teammate Sébastien Buemi who opted to run one flying lap with a light fuel load for his last run of the second session but made minor mistakes which cost him time . Vitantonio Liuzzi , Trulli and Timo Glock were the quickest drivers unable to advance beyond the first part of qualifying . Liuzzi complained the tyre wear on his soft compound tyres was so excessive it had caused him to struggle with a large amount of oversteer through the last two sectors of the track . The tenth row of the grid was filled by Heikki Kovalainen ( Lotus ) and Lucas di Grassi ( Virgin ) . The two Hispania drivers completed the final two positions on the grid ; Yamamoto in twenty @-@ third was 0 @.@ 8 seconds faster than his teammate Senna in twenty @-@ fourth . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The track was wet before the race because rain had fallen the previous night . The air temperature was 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) and the track temperature was 18 ° C ( 64 ° F ) . Approximately 80 @,@ 000 people attended the race . Ferrari discovered a water leak in Alonso 's car , which was repaired in the hour before the event started . While on their reconnaissance laps , Massa , Senna and Glock left the circuit but avoided damage to their cars as drivers tested wet tyre compounds . The race was scheduled to start at 15 : 00 KST ( UTC + 9 ) but rain continued to fall . A new start time of 15 : 10 local time was planned . Standing water on the track caused heavy spray and impaired visibility , meaning the race would start behind the safety car . All cars were required to use the full wet tyres . 
 The race began without a formation lap and despite the slow speed , drivers struggled for grip on the wet surface . After three laps under the safety car , conditions were unchanged ; drivers reported on the circuit 's condition via radio and the race was suspended . Light rain prevented the resumption of the Grand Prix for over forty @-@ five minutes until the marshals and road sweeping trucks removed some of the excess water and dirt on the track . Resin on the newly laid track surface had prevented water from soaking into the ground . The rain had eased slightly during the suspension . Teams were allowed to change the set @-@ up of their cars , which were largely optimised for dry weather conditions . 
 The race was restarted behind the safety car with the drivers in the positions held before the suspension . The safety car remained out for fourteen laps , during which the standing water was reduced as the cars circulated the track . Schumacher , Liuzzi and Yamamoto left the circuit during this period but were all able to rejoin . Di Grassi made a pit stop for new tyres three times under safety car and Senna made a pit stop at the end of the first lap . Once the safety car drove into the pit lane , cars were allowed to overtake . Vettel maintained his pole @-@ position lead going into the first turn with Webber close behind . Further back , Schumacher passed Kubica for eighth place . Senna and Trulli spun off onto the run @-@ off area but both drivers were able to continue . Rosberg passed Hamilton by taking the inside line to take fourth place at the third corner . Button tried to overtake Massa heading into turn four but ran wide . He momentarily lost the advantage and fended off Schumacher 's attempts to pass him . 
 At the end of the first racing lap , Vettel led by 2 @.@ 8 seconds from Webber , who was followed by Alonso , Rosberg , Hamilton , Massa , Button , Schumacher , Kubica , Hülkenberg , Sutil , Barrichello , <unk> , Heidfeld , <unk> , Liuzzi , Buemi , Glock , Petrov , Kovalainen , Yamamoto , Trulli , Senna and di Grassi . Alonso chose a cautious approach and lost four to five seconds while building up his pace slowly in the early stages . Sutil ran off the circuit but continued after losing his position to both Williams drivers . Webber lost grip on the next lap after running across the outside <unk> and spinning across the track onto the wall between turns twelve and thirteen ; he slid back onto the circuit and collected Rosberg , forcing both drivers to retire . The debris on @-@ track from the accident called the safety car to be deployed . Kobayashi , Petrov , Heidfeld and Buemi all made pit stops for intermediate tyres during the safety car period . 
 The safety car pulled off the track at the end of lap twenty @-@ three and the race resumed with Vettel leading from Alonso and Hamilton . Vettel began to gradually pull clear from the rest of the field . On the twenty @-@ fourth lap while battling with Senna for twenty @-@ first place , Trulli collided with the Hispania driver after attempting a passing manoeuvre around the inside ; Trulli 's front wing was knocked off . Trulli drove to his garage for repairs . Button , who was in fifth , started to place Massa under pressure on the same lap . Kobayashi passed Yamamoto on lap twenty @-@ six but ran wide and fell down the order , while Trulli rejoined the race . Di Grassi lost control of his car at turn fourteen after trying to pass Yamamoto on lap twenty @-@ seven ; he made light contact with the wall which caused him to retire . 
 Schumacher moved up a position as he passed Button for fifth position at turn three on the same lap . On lap twenty @-@ eight , Trulli drove back to his garage to retire with a hydraulics failure that was caused by his power steering becoming heavy during the safety car period . Vettel set a new fastest lap of the race of 1 : 54 @.@ 098 , extending his lead over Alonso to 3 @.@ 5 seconds . Button , who was under pressure from Hülkenberg and Kubica , made a pit stop at the end of lap twenty @-@ eight for intermediate tyres and rejoined in fifteenth place . Kovalainen was sent into a spin by Buemi , having been passed by Petrov two laps later . 
 On lap thirty @-@ one , Buemi tried to pass Glock on the outside down into turn three but lost control of his car under braking and rammed into the side of Glock . Buemi sustained a broken left , front suspension and front wing damage , causing him to retire . The incident called for the race 's third safety car period . During the safety car deployment , most of the drivers made pit stops for intermediate tyres . Alonso , who was called in by Ferrari when Vettel changed his strategy , had a pit stop that proved problematic . He arrived into his pit box sideways after locking his tyres . One of his mechanics could not fit his front right wheel because he dropped a wheel nut ; he was required to fit a spare wheel nut onto the tyre , causing Alonso to be stationary for longer than usual . He lost third place to Hamilton . 
 Ferrari ordered Massa to slow down on his out @-@ lap to help Alonso minimise the effects of losing second position . Glock drove back to his pit box where his mechanics examined his car for damage and decided to retire him from the race . Kubica avoided making contact with Sutil when his lollipop man stopped him before he could drive away from his pit box . It was the second time that season Kubica and Sutil were involved in an incident in a pit lane ; Kubica had made contact with Sutil when the latter was driving into his pit box in the Hungarian Grand Prix . The safety car drove into the pit lane at the end of the thirty @-@ fourth lap and Vettel led at the restart . Hamilton ran deep , heading into the first corner and allowing Alonso to retake second position and immediately came under attack from Massa . Kubica took eighth place from Hülkenberg by taking the inside line at the third corner . Sutil took to the inside line and passed Button for twelfth on lap thirty @-@ six . Button was pushed wide onto the run @-@ off area and fell to fifteenth position . 
 As Vettel maintained his lead , the stewards informed the Lotus team that Kovalainen had been caught speeding in the pit lane , for which he was served with a ten @-@ second stop @-@ and @-@ go penalty that was taken on lap thirty @-@ nine . Alonso set a new fastest lap and closed the gap to 1 @.@ 2 seconds behind Vettel at the start of lap thirty @-@ seven . Further back , Sutil overtook Heidfeld for twelfth on the following lap . Sutil tried to pass Kobayashi on lap thirty @-@ eight at turn three but out @-@ braked himself , allowing Kobayashi to retake the position . He passed the Sauber driver because of his higher straight line speed , but Sutil braked later and slid off the track , rejoining in fourteenth . One lap later , Alonso was told by his team to drive less aggressively through turns seven and eight in an effort to preserve tyre life because he was spinning his tyres under acceleration . At the conclusion of lap thirty @-@ nine , all of the drivers had made pit stops . Vettel was leading Alonso , who was followed by Hamilton , Massa , Schumacher , Barrichello , Petrov , Hülkenberg , Kubica , Liuzzi , Kobayashi , Heidfeld , <unk> , Sutil , Button , Senna , Kovalainen and Yamamoto . A dry line began to emerge on lap forty @-@ one as Petrov lost control of the rear @-@ end of his car between turns seventeen and eighteen ; he slid sideways into the tyre barrier at the pit lane entry . 
 Alonso had reduced Vettel 's lead to 1 @.@ 1 seconds as Alonso set the event 's fastest lap of 1 : 50 @.@ 257 on lap 42 . By lap forty @-@ four , darkness was beginning to fall and Vettel complained he could not see the braking point in turn one , while Hamilton told his team the light level was " fine " . Drivers were dazzled and blinded by the gear @-@ shift lights on their steering wheels as a consequence . Vettel lost half of his engine capacity while driving through turn seventeen on lap 45 and felt strong vibrations . At the start of the forty @-@ sixth lap , Vettel started to slow with his engine problems and Alonso passed him around the inside to take the lead . Vettel then pulled into a gap at the main straight wall with smoke billowing from his engine , and retired . Sutil tried to overtake Kobayashi on lap forty @-@ seven but he slid into the side of the Sauber ; Sutil went off the track to retire with suspension damage . Kobayashi continued . Hülkenberg spun off the track on lap fifty @-@ two and made a pit stop for new tyres because his engineer on the pit @-@ wall told him one of his tyres had developed a slow puncture . Barrichello ran wide on the same lap and fell down to seventh behind Kubica and Liuzzi . 
 Alonso opened a gap of fourteen seconds to Hamilton , who was suffering from wear on his tyres , as the drivers struggled for grip and crossed the finish line on lap fifty @-@ five ; it was Alonso 's fifth victory of the season in a time of 2 ' 48 : 20 @.@ 810 , at an average speed of 68 @.@ 349 miles per hour ( 109 @.@ 997 km / h ) . Hamilton finished in second place , 14 @.@ 9 seconds behind , ahead of Massa in third . Schumacher , who explored the best places on the circuit for grip , equalled his best result of the season with fourth at the Spanish Grand Prix and the Turkish Grand Prix . He was followed by Kubica in fifth , Liuzzi in sixth , Barrichello in seventh , Kobayashi eighth , Heidfeld ninth and Hülkenberg passed Alguersuari on the final lap to round out the points @-@ scoring positions in tenth . Button was the last driver on the lead lap , with Kovalainen in thirteenth . Hispania teammates Senna and Yamamoto were the last of the classified finishers in fourteenth and fifteenth , which was the team 's best race finish of the season . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three drivers appeared on the podium to collect their trophies and at a later press conference . Alonso said the Grand Prix was " one of the best races of the year " for the Ferrari team and that the wet weather conditions made the victory more difficult ; " I think it ’ s one of the most tricky conditions ' victories I ’ ve ever had , probably , because we started with very extreme conditions , red flag , then a couple of laps behind the safety car " . Alonso said he would not be changing his approach to driving in the final two rounds of the season . Hamilton said finishing in second was " a great result " and that he was " very happy " . He also said he lost time to his rivals in the final sector of the track because of problems with his brakes . Massa said that despite the poor visibility he endured he was happy to finish third . He also said he struggled with his rear tyres , which caused him to run more slowly than the drivers in front of him . 
 Petrov said he had mixed feelings after the race , having been in seventh position before his race @-@ ending crash on lap forty @-@ one . The Renault driver stated , " I am disappointed to end the race in the wall and not in the points , but it was encouraging to be running in the top ten " . Barrichello , placed fifth before he ran wide on lap fifty @-@ two and was passed by Kubica and Liuzzi , said , " I was lucky with the timing of the safety car and we were running in a good position right up until the closing stages . Unfortunately , I just ran out of tyre in the last five laps which cost us two places in the end . " 
 Webber said he was at fault for causing the accident between himself and Rosberg on lap nineteen ; " I thought I 'd managed to catch it but I lost the car and made contact with the wall . Then Nico hit me , which wrecked his race as well . It was my mistake and it wasn 't my day . " Rosberg was puzzled over the incident ; he said , " I don 't understand why Webber didn 't hit the brakes . It was crazy to roll back across the track like that . " Gerhard Berger , who raced in Formula One for thirteen years , courted controversy when he accused Webber of causing the incident deliberately and said the Red Bull driver planned to take out either Alonso or Hamilton . Red Bull team principal Christian Horner defended Webber in an interview with The Daily Telegraph , saying it was " <unk> " that Webber attempted to take out another competitor and stated the car suffered heavy damage with the collision with the wall . Webber later went to Rosberg and apologised for the crash on the Friday before the Brazilian Grand Prix . 
 Vettel said Red Bull " did more or less , a perfect job " in the race until his retirement from an engine failure on the forty @-@ sixth lap . Renault principal engineer Fabrice Lom apologised to Red Bull for Vettel 's engine failure . It was later revealed by Vettel that the engine was not to have been used in future races had it not failed . Horner subsequently said Red Bull would not be favouring Vettel or Webber for the Drivers ' Championship . In 2011 , Red Bull advisor Helmut Marko said he had considered retirement from the sport after Vettel and Webber failed to finish the race because he believed Red Bull had lost the possibility to win the title in 2010 . After Webber and Vettel retired , members of the McLaren and Ferrari teams celebrated the events . Sauber team principal Peter Sauber told Blick it was " very unsporting " and that " they were scenes that didn 't please me at all " . Button said he had problems with his front tyres , which locked up under braking . He later described his race as " sad " . Button also told journalists he believed he was unable to defend the Drivers ' Championship but said he would not assist Hamilton unless Button was mathematically ruled out . 
 Buemi and Sutil were summoned to the stewards for the roles in their respective accidents and were given five @-@ place grid <unk> for the next race at Interlagos . Sutil was fined $ 10 @,@ 000 ( £ 6 @,@ 400 ) for driving in the manner that was performed , despite knowing of a problem with his brakes . Sutil said he struggled with excessive brake force , which caused him to lock his tyres ; he was unhappy with his performance . Kobayashi said he saw Sutil in his mirror and believed he would not complete the manoveure . Buemi said his accident with Glock was caused by the Toro Rosso driver braking late and said he felt " sorry " for Glock . 
 The use of a safety car to start the race had a mixed response within the sport . Massa thanked Whiting in the media ; he said he felt Whiting " did an excellent job of managing the situation , making the right decisions as to when to start the race and when to bring in the Safety Car at the right moment " . Schumacher , Petrov , Sutil and Buemi also agreed with the decision to start under safety @-@ car conditions . Hamilton said he felt the length of time under safety @-@ car conditions was not " good for the spectators and it ’ s not fun for the drivers " . He additionally felt the track was dry enough for a normal restart . BBC commentator and former driver Martin Brundle said he felt the race should have started at an earlier time , while Button said he thought the event should have been stopped before visibility became poor . Nevertheless , the Grand Prix was awarded the Race Promoters Trophy at the FIA Gala Awards held in Monte Carlo in December 2010 . 
 As a consequence of the race , Alonso moved back into the lead of the Drivers ' Championship on 231 points . Webber 's failure to score meant he fell to second , eleven points behind Alonso . Hamilton 's second @-@ place finish resulted in him moving ahead of Vettel , with Button remaining in fifth . Red Bull still led the Constructors ' Championship despite not getting both cars to the finish . McLaren remained in second with 399 points ; Ferrari had caught up to McLaren , the gap between the two teams reduced to 25 points with two races of the season remaining . Given Alonso 's new lead , Vettel acknowledged his team had the fastest car in the season 's two remaining races and remained confident of winning the drivers ' championship . After the conclusion of the championship in Vettel 's favour by four points , Webber 's manager Flavio Briatore highlighted the Korean Grand Prix as one of Webber 's most obvious lost opportunities in his bid to win the title . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Notes : 
 ^ – Renault 's Vitaly Petrov was given a retroactive five @-@ place grid penalty for causing an avoidable accident with Williams 's Nico Hülkenberg at the start of the Japanese Grand Prix . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Bold text indicates who still has a theoretical chance of becoming World Champion . 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Risk ( Megadeth album ) = 
 Risk is the eighth studio album by American thrash metal band Megadeth , released on August 31 , 1999 by Capitol Records . It is also the band 's last album to be released by that label . The first Megadeth album since 1990 to feature a lineup change , Risk marks the studio debut of drummer Jimmy DeGrasso with the band , as well as the final appearance of long @-@ time guitarist Marty Friedman , who announced his departure a year later . 
 Meant to be a breakthrough on alternative rock radio , Risk received a mixed response because of the great deviation from the band 's traditional sound . The resulting backlash ultimately caused the band to return to a heavier , more typical style with their next album , The World Needs a Hero . Megadeth frontman Dave Mustaine has blamed the record 's lack of success on the fact that it was released under the " Megadeth " name : " if anybody else 's name was on ' Risk ' , it would have sold " . 
 Despite this , the album debuted at number 16 on the Billboard 200 chart and was certified gold in 1999 by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipping a half million copies in the United States . As with the rest of Megadeth 's studio records released by Capitol Records , the album was remixed and remastered in 2004 , and included several bonus tracks . This reissue also featured a different cover . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Risk followed the band 's 1997 release Cryptic Writings , which according to Nielsen Soundscan , had sold 850 @,@ 000 copies and won widespread praise from rock radio programmers . Referring to the upcoming record , Rob Gordon , a VP of marketing at Capitol Records , stated that " before the last record , we 'd maybe had one track at rock radio , and it would be over . With this record , like the last one , I think we 'll have four @-@ plus again . " 
 The title stems from a comment by Dave Mustaine 's former Metallica bandmate Lars Ulrich , who suggested to Mustaine that he should take more " risks " with his music . According to Mustaine , he was also encouraged to experiment by Marty Friedman ’ s desire to indulge in his pop sensibilities . On the other hand , newcomer Jimmy DeGrasso wanted to do a " heavy record " , unlike the rest of the band who wanted to try out something different . As bassist David Ellefson recalls , the band 's manager Bud Prager had told them that they needed " to do something that will make all of their contemporaries knock themselves on the head and say , ' Why didn 't we think of that ' ? " . This decision resulted in mixed reviews for both the band and the album ; a good portion did not favor the new sound and image , while others were more receptive to the band 's attempts at experimenting with their sound and trying something different . 
 Megadeth chose to produce the album once again with Dann Huff in Nashville , satisfied with the success of their previous record . The band started writing the songs right after finishing the tour in support of Cryptic Writings . It took them five to six weeks to write the songs , and they went to Nashville in January 1999 to record the album . The recording process lasted four months , and according to Ellefson , it was a " long haul " . The original American pressing of the album was released as an Enhanced CD , and featured a brief documentary about the making of the album as bonus content . Several European editions of the album contained a " No Risk Disk " as a bonus item , featuring one song from each of Megadeth 's previous six major label albums . Lastly , the Japanese version of the album includes a bonus track , which is the theme from Duke Nukem . 
 In 2004 , a remixed and remastered version of the album was released , featuring three bonus tracks , all different mixes of songs on the album . The cover for the remaster was noticeably different from the original , featuring a scene from the music video for " Insomnia " . In addition , a couple of tracks have slightly different song durations — some shorter , some longer — with the most noticeable one being " I 'll Be There , " which features an additional 53 seconds . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The album received a mixed response from music critics . AllMusic 's reviewer Steve Huey gave a sympathetic , if not exactly favorable review of the remixed and remastered 2004 pressing of Risk . Huey stated that the album had " aged gracefully , " compared to Metallica 's Load ( 1996 ) and ReLoad ( 1997 ) . However , he did note that the band had lost their edge on the album . Entertainment Weekly reviewer Laura Morgan compared " Insomnia " to Broken @-@ era Nine Inch Nails and gave the album a B- , though she criticized Mustaine 's vocal performance on the album . The New Rolling Stone Album Guide gave the album three stars out of five and noted that the album " had its moments " . Mike Stagno of Sputnikmusic , taking into account that the album has a different appeal , was somewhat positive in his review . Stagno cited the first few tracks as the album 's " harder edge " . However , he noted that some of the following softer tracks were " standout tracks " as well . Stagno did note , however , that some of the emotion on the album was " cheesy " . Amy Sciarretto of CMJ New Music Report noted that Risk marked another significant change in Megadeth 's sound and called it a " logical stylistic progression " from their previous album . According to her , Mustaine 's " biting lyrics " and " power riffs " were toned down , finding Megadeth " traveling out of thrash metal territory " . 
 In a retrospective review , Jeff Treppel from Decibel wrote that Risk was " definitely Megadeth ’ s most adventurous record " and characterized it as a " decent hard rock album that should have never been put out under the Megadeth name " . Dave Mustaine has since expressed that , although he believes that Risk is a great record , it " should not have had the name Megadeth on it , because if anybody else 's name was on ' Risk , ' it would have sold " . However , Mustaine has also stated that " Crush ' Em " was " probably the dumbest " song that the band has ever recorded and said that he was " not too fond of " it . 
 = = Songs = = 
 Three singles were released in support of the album : " Insomnia " , " Crush ' Em " , and " Breadline " . All three received music videos . Additionally , " Crush ' Em " was featured in Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme 's 1999 movie Universal Soldier : The Return . Mustaine originally wrote the song hoping that it would be adopted at arenas nationwide as a new sports anthem . After its release as a single , the song has been broadcast during NHL games and pro wrestling events . 
 Jeff Treppel spoke positively about the album 's opener " Insomnia " , naming it " one of the best Megadeth songs of the past 15 years " . The song features swirling Middle Eastern strings , crunching guitar line and , according to Treppel , some of Mustaine ’ s most demented lyrics . Treppel further described " Ecstasy " as " grunge ballad " and noted that it sounds like a " reject from Cryptic Writings " . He had mixed feelings about " Seven " , and observed " The Doctor Is Calling " like a tune that " aims for creepy , but hits cheesy instead " . By contrast , DeGrasso felt that " The Doctor Is Calling " along with " Prince of Darkness " were " definitely heavy songs " with " really dark lyrics on them " . Ellefson described the tracks " Breadline " and " Wanderlust " as " melodic " with " very modern @-@ sounding " grooves . Neil Arnold from Metal Forces opined that " Breadline " is " as melodic and commercial as Megadeth gets " , while noting that " Wanderlust " and " I 'll Be There " are " probably two of the band 's most underrated songs " . 
 All of the released singles charted on the Billboard 's Mainstream Rock Chart , with " Crush ' Em " and " Breadline " breaking into the Top 10 . Aside from just being released as a conventional single , " Breadline " was also released as its own EP in Japan featuring several versions of the song , and remixes of other songs from Risk and Megadeth 's back catalog . After leaving Megadeth , Friedman would later cover this song on his solo album Future Addict . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Dave Mustaine except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = No. 2 Service Flying Training School RAAF = 
 No. 2 Service Flying Training School ( No. 2 SFTS ) was a flying training school of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) that operated during World War II . It was formed in July 1940 , under the command of Wing Commander Frederick Scherger . Responsible for intermediate and advanced instruction of pilots under the Empire Air Training Scheme ( EATS ) , the school was based at RAAF Station Forest Hill near Wagga Wagga , New South Wales , and operated CAC Wirraway and Avro Anson aircraft . The Ansons were phased out in July 1941 , and the school became an all @-@ Wirraway unit . In 1942 the RAAF divided the personnel and equipment of No. 2 SFTS between Nos. 5 and 7 Service Flying Training Schools at Uranquinty and Deniliquin , respectively . No. 2 SFTS was disbanded that April , and the base facilities taken over by No. 5 Aircraft Depot . 
 = = History = = 
 RAAF aircrew training expanded dramatically following the outbreak of World War II , in response to Australia 's participation in the Empire Air Training Scheme ( EATS ) . The Air Force 's pre @-@ war flight training facility , No. 1 Flying Training School at RAAF Station Point Cook , Victoria , was supplanted in 1940 – 41 by twelve Elementary Flying Training Schools ( EFTS ) , eight Service Flying Training Schools ( SFTS ) , and Central Flying School ( CFS ) . While CFS turned out new flight instructors , the EFTS provided basic training to prospective pilots who , if successful , would go on to SFTS for further instruction that focussed on operational ( or " service " ) flying . The course at SFTS typically consisted of two streams , intermediate and advanced , and included such techniques as instrument flying , night flying , advanced aerobatics , formation flying , dive bombing , and aerial gunnery . The total duration of training varied during the war as demand for aircrew rose and fell . Initially running for 16 weeks , the course was cut to 10 weeks ( which included 75 hours flying time ) in October 1940 . A year later it was raised to 12 weeks ( including 100 hours flying time ) , and again to 16 weeks two months later . It continued to increase after this , peaking at 28 weeks in June 1944 . 
 No. 2 Service Flying Training School ( No. 2 SFTS ) was formed at RAAF Station Forest Hill , near Wagga Wagga , New South Wales , on 1 July 1940 , and came under the control of No. 2 Training Group . Along with No. 5 Service Flying Training School and the later No. 1 Basic Flying Training School , at the neighbouring RAAF Station Uranquinty , No. 2 SFTS was one of the so @-@ called " Wagga Flying Training Schools " , which together graduated over 3 @,@ 000 pilots in the 1940s and ' 50s . The unit 's inaugural commanding officer was Wing Commander ( subsequently Group Captain ) Frederick Scherger , whose strict discipline and German ancestry quickly earned his establishment the nickname " Scherger 's Concentration Camp " . Scherger also served as station commander . One of the school 's instructors was Flying Officer Bill Newton , later to be awarded the Victoria Cross for bombing raids in New Guinea . 
 Forest Hill was a new air base , and roads and buildings were still under construction when its first course of flying training commenced with Avro Ansons on 29 July 1940 . One of the Ansons crashed in August , killing its instructor and a student . Later that month the second flying course began , on CAC Wirraways . The school was then reorganised into Initial and Advanced Squadrons . On 29 September , two Ansons collided in mid @-@ air and became locked together . Both navigators bailed out , to be followed shortly afterwards by the injured pilot of the lower aircraft . The pilot of the upper Anson , however , found that he was able to control the interlocked aircraft using his ailerons and flaps , coupled with the engine power of the Anson underneath . He then managed to make a successful emergency landing in a paddock near the town of Brocklesby . 
 No. 2 SFTS was reported as having achieved its nominal strength of 1 @,@ 100 personnel , including 160 students , in October 1940 . By this time up to 2 @,@ 000 flights per month were said to be taking place , 150 of them at night , with instructors completing up to 90 hours flying time per week . The school underwent further reorganisation in February 1941 with the establishment of Intermediate Squadron ; successful students from this unit were awarded their wings before proceeding to Advanced Squadron . Another new unit , Maintenance Squadron , formed in March . From this point on , No. 2 SFTS phased out its Ansons , as single @-@ engined and multi @-@ engined aircraft training was split up on orders of the RAAF Air Board . By the end of July , only Wirraways were in operation , their numbers eventually reaching 96 . A Wirraway crashed during an instrument training flight on 29 August , killing both pilots . In October , Scherger was posted to take over RAAF Station Darwin , Northern Territory , from Group Captain Charles " Moth " Eaton , who in turn assumed command of No. 2 SFTS . Like Scherger , Eaton also served as Forest Hill 's station commander . 
 Following the outbreak of the Pacific War in December 1941 , the school 's Wirraways were classified as Second Line ( Reserve ) aircraft in the defence of Australia , while the base was fortified with sandbags , trenches , and gun pits . On 1 January 1942 , No. 60 Squadron was established at Forest Hill from No. 2 SFTS aircraft and personnel . Equipped with 18 Wirraways , the unit formed part of the expansion of the Australian military in response to the rapid Japanese advance in the first month of the Pacific War . A contingent of 68 <unk> also began arriving at Forest Hill in January . 
 The Air Board subsequently rationalised EATS facilities in southern New South Wales , dividing the staff and aircraft of No. 2 SFTS between Nos. 5 and 7 Service Flying Training Schools at nearby RAAF Stations Uranquinty and Deniliquin , respectively . Eaton remained in command of the school until shortly before its disbandment on 3 April 1942 . No. 2 SFTS had suffered a total of four serious accidents in Ansons and eleven in Wirraways , resulting in the deaths of three instructors and four students . Out of some 600 entrants , just over 550 pilots graduated from the school , among them Clive Caldwell , later to become Australia 's leading fighter ace of the war , and future Prime Minister John Gorton . No. 60 Squadron was also disbanded on 3 April , after a brief career during which its activities had been limited to training exercises . The base facilities were taken over by No. 5 Aircraft Depot , responsible for maintenance of RAAF airframes , engines and other equipment . 
 = Cary Grant = 
 Cary Grant ( born Archibald Alexander Leach ; January 18 , 1904 – November 29 , 1986 ) was a British @-@ American actor , known as one of classic Hollywood 's definitive leading men . He began a career in Hollywood in the early 1930s , and became known for his transatlantic accent , light @-@ hearted approach to acting and comic timing , and debonair demeanor . He became an American citizen in 1942 . 
 Born in Horfield , Bristol , Grant became attracted to theatre at a young age , and began performing with a troupe known as " The <unk> " from the age of six . After attending Bishop Road Primary School and Fairfield Grammar School in Bristol , he toured the country as a stage performer , and decided to stay in New York City after a performance there . He established a name for himself in vaudeville in the 1920s and toured the United States before moving to Hollywood in the early 1930s . He initially appeared in crime films or dramas such as Blonde Venus ( 1932 ) and She Done Him Wrong ( 1933 ) , but later gained renown for his appearances in romantic comedy and screwball comedy films such as The Awful Truth ( 1937 ) , Bringing Up Baby ( 1938 ) , His Girl Friday ( 1940 ) , The Philadelphia Story ( 1940 ) . Along with the later Arsenic and Old Lace ( 1944 ) and I Was a Male War Bride ( 1949 ) ; these films are frequently cited as among the all @-@ time great comedy films . Having established himself as a major Hollywood star , he was nominated twice for the Academy Award for Best Actor , for Penny Serenade ( 1941 ) and None but the Lonely Heart ( 1944 ) . 
 In the 1940s and 1950s , Grant forged a working relationship with the director Alfred Hitchcock , appearing in films such as Suspicion ( 1941 ) , Notorious ( 1946 ) , To Catch a Thief ( 1955 ) and North by Northwest ( 1959 ) . Hitchcock considered Grant to have been the only actor that he had ever loved . Towards the end of his film career , Grant was praised by critics as a romantic leading man , and received five Golden Globe Award for Best Actor nominations , including Indiscreet ( 1958 ) with Ingrid Bergman , That Touch of Mink ( 1962 ) with Doris Day , and Charade ( 1963 ) with Audrey Hepburn . He is remembered by critics for his unusually broad appeal , as a handsome , suave actor who did not take himself too seriously , possessing the ability to play with his own dignity in comedies without sacrificing it entirely . His comic timing and delivery made Grant what Premiere considers to have been " quite simply , the funniest actor cinema has ever produced " . 
 Grant was married five times ; three of his marriages were <unk> with actresses — Virginia Cherrill ( 1934 – 35 ) , Betsy Drake ( 1949 – 62 ) and Dyan Cannon ( 1965 – 68 ) . He has one daughter with Cannon , Jennifer Grant ( born 1966 ) . After his retirement from film acting in 1966 , Grant pursued numerous business interests , representing cosmetics firm Fabergé , and sitting on the board of MGM and others . He was presented with an Honorary Oscar by his friend Frank Sinatra at the 42nd Academy Awards in 1970 , and in 1981 , he was accorded the Kennedy Center Honors . In 1999 , the American Film Institute named Grant the second greatest male star of Golden Age Hollywood cinema , after Humphrey Bogart . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Grant was born Archibald Leach on January 18 , 1904 at 15 Hughenden Road in the northern Bristol suburb of Horfield . He was the second child of Elias James Leach ( 1873 – 1935 ) and Elsie Maria Leach ( née Kingdon ; 1877 – 1973 ) . Elias , the son of a potter , worked as a tailor 's <unk> at a clothes factory , while Elsie , who was from a family of shipwrights , worked as a seamstress . Grant 's elder brother , John William Elias Leach ( 1899 – 1900 ) , died of tuberculous meningitis . Grant considered himself to have been partly Jewish . He had an unhappy upbringing ; his father was an alcoholic , and his mother suffered from clinical depression . 
 Wanting the best for her son , Elsie taught Grant song and dance when he was four , and was keen on him having piano lessons . She would occasionally take him to the cinema where he enjoyed the performances of Charlie Chaplin , Chester Conklin , Fatty Arbuckle , Ford Sterling , Mack Swain and Broncho Billy Anderson . Grant entered education when he was four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half and was sent to the Bishop Road Primary School , Bristol . 
 Grant 's biographer Graham McCann mentions that Maureen Donaldson , a lover of Grant in the 1970s , claimed in her book that his mother " did not know how to give affection and did not know how to receive it either . " Another biographer , Geoffrey Wansell , notes that Elsie blamed herself bitterly for the death of Grant 's older brother John , and never recovered from it . Grant later acknowledged that his negative experiences with his fiercely independent mother affected his relationships with women later in life . She frowned on alcohol and tobacco , and would reduce pocket money for minor mishaps . Grant later attributed her behavior towards him as down to her being overprotective , fearing that she would lose him as she did John . 
 Grant 's father later placed his mother in Glenside Hospital ( a mental institution ) and told the 9 @-@ year @-@ old that she had gone away on a " long holiday " , later declaring that she had died . Grant grew up resenting his mother , particularly after she left the family . After Elsie was gone , Grant and his father moved into the home of his grandmother in Bristol . When Grant was 10 , his father remarried and started a new family that did not include his son . Grant did not learn that his mother was still alive until he was 31 , when his father confessed to the lie , shortly before his own death . Grant made arrangements for his mother to leave the institution in June 1935 , shortly after he learned of her whereabouts . He visited her during a break to England in October 1938 , after filming for Gunga Din was completed . 
 Due to alienation from his parents , he found it difficult to socialize and had a nervous disposition . He enjoyed the theatre , particularly pantomimes at Christmas which he would attend with his father . Grant befriended a troupe of acrobatic dancers , known as " The <unk> " or the " Bob Pender Stage Troupe " . He subsequently trained as a stilt walker and began touring with them . During a two @-@ week stint at the <unk> theatre in Berlin circa 1914 he was noticed by Jesse Lasky , who was a Broadway producer at the time . 
 In 1915 , Grant won a scholarship to attend Fairfield Grammar School in Bristol , although his father could barely afford to pay for the uniform . With his good looks and acrobatic talents Grant became a popular figure among both girls and boys . Though he was able at most academic subjects He excelled at sports , particularly fives , and developed a reputation for mischief ; he frequently refused to do his homework . A former classmate referred to him as a " scruffy little boy " , while an old teacher remembered " the naughty little boy who was always making a noise in the back row and would never do his homework " . His evenings were spent working backstage in Bristol theatres , and in 1917 , at the age of 13 , he was responsible for the lighting for the magician David Devant at the Hippodrome . Grant began hanging around backstage at the theatre at every opportunity . In the summer he volunteered for work as a messenger boy and guide at the military docks in Southampton , to escape the unhappiness of his home life . The time spent at Southampton strengthened his desire to travel ; he was eager to leave Bristol and tried to sign on as a ship 's cabin boy , but learned he was too young . 
 On March 13 , 1918 , Grant was expelled from Fairfield . Several explanations were given , including being discovered in the girls ' lavatory , and assisting two other classmates with theft in the nearby town of Almondsbury . Wansell claims that Grant had set out to intentionally get himself expelled from school to pursue a career in entertainment with the troupe . 
 Grant rejoined Pender 's troupe three days after being expelled from Fairfield . Elias now had a better paying job in Southampton ; Grant 's expulsion from the school brought local authorities to his door with questions about why his son was living in Bristol and not with his father in Southampton . Upon learning that his son was once again with the Pender troupe , Elias co @-@ signed a three @-@ year contract between his son and Pender . The contract stipulated Grant 's weekly salary along with room and board , as well as dancing lessons and other training for his profession until the age of 18 . There was also a provision in the contract for salary rises based on job performance . 
 = = Vaudeville and performing career = = 
 Without school to attend , Grant rejoined the Pender Troupe , and accepted a salary of 10 shillings a week from Pender . The group began touring the county , and Grant developed the ability in pantomime to broaden his physical acting skills . On July 21 , 1920 , at the age 16 , Grant travelled with the group on the RMS Olympic to conduct a tour of the United States , arriving a week later . Biographer Richard Schickel claims that Douglas Fairbanks and Mary Pickford were aboard the same ship , returning from their honeymoon , and that Grant played shuffleboard with him . He was so impressed with Fairbanks that the actor became an important role model . After arriving in New York , the group performed at the New York Hippodrome — the largest theatre in the world at the time with a capacity of 5 @,@ 697 — for nine months , putting on twelve shows a week ; their production of Good Times was successful . 
 Grant became a part of the vaudeville circuit and began touring . After performing in places such as St. Louis , Missouri , Cleveland and Milwaukee , he made the decision to stay in the US with several of the other members , while the rest of the troupe returned to Britain . He remembered becoming fond of the performances of the Marx Brothers during this period and Zeppo Marx was an early role model for him . In July 1922 , Grant performed in a group with seven others , the " <unk> Comedians " , at the Palace Theatre on Broadway . He formed a group that summer , " The Walking Stanleys " , with several of the former members of the Pender Troupe , and starred in a variety show named " Better Times " at the Hippodrome towards the end of the year . After meeting George C. <unk> , the owner of the Steeplechase Park racecourse on Coney Island at a party , Grant was hired to appear there on stilts and attracted large crowds , wearing a bright @-@ great coat and a sandwich board which advertised the race @-@ track . 
 Grant spent the next couple of years touring the United States with " The Walking Stanleys " . He visited Los Angeles for the first time in 1924 , which left a lasting impression upon him . After the group split up he returned to New York , where he began living and performing at the National Vaudeville Artists Club on West 46th Street , juggling , performing acrobatics and comic sketches and having a short spell as a unicycle rider known as " Rubber Legs " . The experience was a particularly demanding one , but gave Grant the opportunity to improve his comic technique and develop skills which would benefit him later in Hollywood . 
 Grant became a leading man alongside Jean Dalrymple , and decided to form the " Jack Janis Company " , which began touring vaudeville . He was sometimes mistaken for an Australian during this period , and was nicknamed " Kangaroo " or " Boomerang " . Grant 's accent seems to have changed as a result of moving to London with the Pender troupe and working in many music halls in the UK and the US , eventually becoming what some term a transatlantic or mid @-@ Atlantic accent . In 1927 he was cast as an Australian in Reggie Hammerstein 's musical , Golden Dawn , for which he earned $ 75 a week . Although the show was not well received , it lasted for 184 performances , and several critics started to notice the " pleasant new juvenile " or " competent young newcomer " . The following year he joined the William Morris Agency and was offered another juvenile part by Hammerstein , in his play Polly , an unsuccessful production . One critic wrote that Grant " has a strong masculine manner , but unfortunately fails to bring out the beauty of the score . " Wansell notes that the pressure of a failing production began to make him fret , and he was eventually dropped from the run after six weeks of poor reviews . Despite the set back , Hammerstein 's rival Florenz Ziegfeld made an attempt to buy Grant 's contract , but Hammerstein sold it to the Shubert Brothers instead . J. J. Shubert cast him in a small role as a Spaniard opposite Jeanette MacDonald in the French risqué comedy production of Boom @-@ Boom at the Casino Theatre on Broadway , which premiered on January 28 , 1929 . MacDonald later admitted that he was " absolutely terrible in the role " , but exhibited a charm which endeared him to people and effectively saved the show from failure . The play ran for 72 shows , and Grant earned $ 350 a week before moving to Detroit , then Chicago . 
 To console himself , Grant bought a 1927 Packard sport phaeton . He visited his half @-@ brother , Eric , in England , and upon returning to New York later in the year , he played the role of Max Grunewald in a Shubert production of A Wonderful Night . It premiered at the Majestic Theatre on October 31 , 1929 , two days after the Wall Street Crash , and lasted for 125 shows until February 1930 . The play received mixed reviews ; one critic criticized his acting , likening it to a " mixture of John Barrymore and cockney " , while another announced that he had brought a " breath of elfin Broadway " to the role . Though he began to gain recognition , Grant still found it difficult forming relationships with women , remarking that " In all those years in the theatre , on the road and in New York , surrounded by all sorts of attractive girls , I never seemed able to fully communicate with them . " 
 In 1930 , Grant toured for nine months in a production of the musical , The Street Singer . After the production came to end in the spring of 1931 , the Shuberts invited him to spend the summer performing on the stage at The <unk> in St. Louis , Missouri ; he appeared in twelve different productions , putting on 87 shows . He received praise from local newspapers for these performances , gaining a reputation as a romantic leading man . Significant influences on his acting in this period were Sir Gerald du Maurier , A. E. Matthews , Jack Buchanan and Ronald Squire . He later admitted that he was drawn to acting because of a " great need to be liked and admired " . Grant was eventually fired by the Shuberts at the end of the summer season when he refused to accept a pay cut because of financial difficulties caused by the Depression . His unemployment was short lived ; impresario William B. Friedlander offered him the lead romantic part in his new musical , Nikki , in which Grant starred opposite Fay Wray as a soldier in post @-@ World War I France . The production opened on September 29 , 1931 in New York , but was stopped after just 39 performances due to the effects of the Depression . 
 = = Film career = = 
 = = = Early roles ( 1932 – 36 ) = = = 
 Grant 's role in Nikki was praised by Ed Sullivan of The New York Daily News , who noted that the " young lad from England " had " a big future in the movies " . The review led to another screen test by Paramount Publix , resulting in appearance as a sailor in Singapore Sue ( 1932 ) , a ten @-@ minute short film by Casey Robinson . Grant delivers his lines " without any conviction " according to McCann . Through Robinson , Grant met with Jesse L. Lasky and B. P. Schulberg , the co @-@ founder and general manager of Paramount Pictures respectively . After a successful screen @-@ test directed by Marion <unk> . Schulberg signed a contract with the 27 @-@ year @-@ old Grant on December 7 , 1931 for five years , at a starting salary of $ 450 a week . Schulberg demanded that he change his name to " something that sounded more all @-@ American like Gary Cooper " , and they eventually agreed on Cary Grant . 
 Cary Grant set out to establish himself as what McCann calls the " epitome of masculine glamour " , and made Douglas Fairbanks his first role model . McCann notes that Grant 's career in Hollywood immediately took off because he exhibited a " genuine charm " , which made him stand out among the other good looking actors at the time , making it " remarkably easy to find people who were willing to support his embryonic career " . He made his feature film debut with the Frank Tuttle @-@ directed comedy This is the Night ( 1932 ) , playing an Olympic javelin thrower opposite Thelma Todd and Lili Damita . Grant disliked his role and threatened to leave Hollywood , but to his surprise a critic from Variety praised his performance , and thought that he looked like a " potential femme rave " . 
 In 1932 Grant played a wealthy playboy opposite Marlene Dietrich in Blonde Venus , directed by Josef von Sternberg . Grant 's role is described by William Rothman as projecting the " distinctive kind of <unk> masculinity that was to enable him to incarnate a man capable of being a romantic hero " . Grant found that he conflicted with the director during the filming and the two often argued in German . He played a suave playboy type in a number of films : Merrily We Go to Hell opposite Frederic March and Sylvia Sidney , Devil and the Deep alongside Gary Cooper , Charles Laughton and Tallulah Bankhead , Hot Saturday opposite Nancy Carroll and Randolph Scott , and Madame Butterfly with Sidney . According to biographer Marc Eliot , while these films did not make Grant a star , they did well enough to establish him as one of Hollywood 's " new crop of fast @-@ rising actors " . 
 In 1933 , Grant gained attention for appearing in the pre @-@ Code films She Done Him Wrong and I 'm No Angel opposite Mae West . West would later claim that she had discovered Cary Grant . Pauline Kael noted that Grant did not appear confident in his role as a Salvation Army director in She Done Him Wrong , which made it all the more charming . The film was a box office hit , earning more than $ 2 million in the United States , and has since won much acclaim . For I 'm No Angel , Grant 's salary was increased from $ 450 to $ 750 a week . The film was even more successful than She Done Him Wrong , and saved Paramount from bankruptcy ; Vermilye cites it as one of the best comedy films of the 1930s . 
 After a string of financially unsuccessful films , which included roles as a president of a company who is sued for knocking down a boy in an accident in Born to Be Bad ( 1934 ) for 20th Century Fox , a cosmetic surgeon in Kiss and Make @-@ Up ( 1934 ) , and a blinded pilot opposite Myrna Loy in Wings in the Dark ( 1935 ) , successive poor box office takings and press reports of his fledging marriage to Cherrill , led Paramount to form the conclusion that Grant was now expendable . 
 Grant 's prospects picked up in the latter half of 1935 when was loaned to RKO Pictures . Producer Pandro Berman agreed to take him on in the face of failure because " I 'd seen him do things which were excellent , and [ Katharine ] Hepburn wanted him too . " For his first venture with RKO , playing a raffish cockney swindler in George Cukor 's Sylvia Scarlett ( 1935 ) , he began the first of four collaborations with Hepburn . Though a commercial failure , his dominating performance was praised by critics , and Grant always considered the film to have been the breakthrough for his career . When his contract with Paramount ended in 1936 with the release of Wedding Present , Grant decided not to renew it and wished to work freelance . Grant claimed to be the first freelance actor in Hollywood and the lack of central contract helped increase his salary to $ 300 @,@ 000 per picture . His first venture as a freelance actor was The Amazing Quest of Ernest Bliss ( 1936 ) , which was shot in England . The film was a box office bomb and prompted Grant to reconsider his decision . Critical and commercial success with Suzy later that year in which he played a French airman opposite Jean Harlow and Franchot Tone , led to him signing joint contracts with RKO and Columbia Pictures , enabling him to choose the stories that he felt suited his acting style . His Columbia contract was a four @-@ film deal over two years , guaranteeing him $ 50 @,@ 000 each for the first two and $ 75 @,@ 000 each for the others . 
 = = = Hollywood stardom and Oscar recognition ( 1937 – 44 ) = = = 
 In 1937 , Grant began the first film under his contract with Columbia Pictures , When You 're in Love , portraying a wealthy American artist who eventually woos a famous opera singer ( Grace Moore ) . His performance received positive feedback from critics , with Mae Tinee of The Chicago Daily Tribune describing it as the " best thing he 's done in a long time " . After a commercial failure in his first RKO venture The Toast of New York , Grant was loaned to Hal Roach 's studio for Topper , a screwball comedy film distributed by MGM , which became his first major comedy success . Grant played one half of a wealthy , freewheeling married couple with Constance Bennett , who wreak havoc on the world as ghosts after dying in a car accident . Topper became one of the most popular movies of the year , with a critic from Variety noting that both Grant and Bennett " do their assignments with great skill " . Vermilye described the film 's success as " a logical springboard " for Grant to star in The Awful Truth that year , his first film made with Irene Dunne and Ralph Bellamy . Though McCarey reportedly disliked Grant , who had mocked the director by enacting his mannerisms in the film , he recognized Grant 's comic talents and encouraged him to improvize his lines and draw upon his skills developed in vaudeville . The film was a critical and commercial success and made Grant a top Hollywood star , establishing a screen persona for him as a sophisticated light comedy leading man in screwball comedies . 
 The Awful Truth began what film critic Benjamin Schwarz of The Atlantic later called " the most spectacular run ever for an actor in American pictures " for Grant . In 1938 he starred opposite Katharine Hepburn in the screwball comedy Bringing Up Baby , featuring a leopard and frequent bickering and verbal jousting between Grant and Hepburn . He was initially uncertain how to play his character , but was told by director Howard Hawks to think of Harold Lloyd . Grant was given more leeway in the comic scenes , the editing of the film and in educating Hepburn in the art of comedy . Despite losing over $ 350 @,@ 000 for RKO , the film earned rave reviews from critics . He again appeared with Hepburn in the romantic comedy Holiday later that year , which did not fare well commercially , to the point that Hepburn was considered to be " box office poison " at the time . 
 Despite a series of commercial failures , Grant was now more popular than ever and in high demand . According to Vermilye , in 1939 Grant played roles that were more dramatic , albeit with comical undertones . He played a British army sergeant opposite Douglas Fairbanks , Jr. in the George Stevens @-@ directed adventure film Gunga Din , set at a military station in India . Roles as a pilot opposite Jean Arthur and Rita Hayworth in Hawks 's Only Angels Have Wings , and a wealthy landowner alongside Carole Lombard in In Name Only followed . 
 In 1940 , Grant played a callous newspaper editor who learns that his ex @-@ wife and former journalist , played by Rosalind Russell , is to marry an insurance officer in the comedy His Girl Friday , which was praised for its strong chemistry and " great verbal athleticism " between Grant and Russell . Grant reunited with Irene Dunne in My Favorite Wife , a " first rate comedy " according to Life magazine , which became RKO 's second biggest picture of the year , with profits of $ 505 @,@ 000 . After playing a Virginian backwoodsman in the American Revolution @-@ set The Howards of Virginia , which McCann considers to have been Grant 's worst film and performance , his last film of the year was in the critically lauded romantic comedy The Philadelphia Story , in which he played the ex @-@ husband of Hepburn 's character . Grant felt his performance was so strong that he was bitterly disappointed not to have received an Oscar nomination , and joked " I 'd have to blacken my teeth first before the Academy will take me seriously " . 
 The following year Grant was considered for the Academy Award for Best Actor for Penny Serenade — his first nomination from the academy . Wansell claims that Grant found the film to be an emotional experience , because he and wife @-@ to @-@ be Barbara Hutton had started to discuss having their own children . Later that year he appeared in the romantic psychological thriller Suspicion , the first of Grant 's four collaborations with director Alfred Hitchcock . Grant did not warm to co @-@ star Joan Fontaine , finding her to be temperamental and unprofessional . Film critic Bosley Crowther of The New York Times considered that Grant was " <unk> irresponsible , boyishly gay and also oddly mysterious , as the role properly demands " . Hitchcock later stated that he thought the ending of the film in which Grant is sent to jail instead of committing suicide " a complete mistake because of making that story with Cary Grant . Unless you have a cynical ending it makes the story too simple " . Geoff Andrew of Time Out believes Suspicion served as " a supreme example of Grant 's ability to be simultaneously charming and sinister " . 
 In 1942 Grant participated in a three @-@ week tour of the United States as part of a group to help the war effort and was photographed visiting wounded marines in hospital . He appeared in several routines of his own during these shows and often played the straight @-@ man opposite Bert Lahr . In May 1944 , the ten @-@ minute propaganda short Road to Victory was released , in which he appeared alongside Bing Crosby , Frank Sinatra and Charles Ruggles . On film , in 1942 Grant played Leopold Dilg , a convict on the run in The Talk of the Town , who escapes after being wrongly convicted of arson and murder . He hides in a house with characters played by Jean Arthur and Ronald Colman , and gradually plots to secure his freedom . Crowther praised the script , and noted that Grant played Dilg with a " casualness which is slightly disturbing " . After a role as a foreign correspondent opposite Ginger Rogers and Walter Slezak in the off @-@ beat comedy Once Upon a Honeymoon , in which he was praised for his scenes with Rogers , the following year he appeared in Mr. Lucky , playing a gambler in a casino aboard a ship . The commercially successful submarine war film Destination Tokyo ( 1943 ) was shot in just six weeks in the September and October , which left him exhausted ; the reviewer from Newsweek thought it was one of the finest performances of his career . 
 In 1944 , Grant starred alongside Priscilla Lane , Raymond Massey and Peter Lorre , in Frank Capra 's dark comedy Arsenic and Old Lace , playing the manic Mortimer Brewster , who belongs to a bizarre family which includes two murderous aunts and an uncle claiming to be President Roosevelt . Grant took up the role after it was originally offered to Bob Hope , who turned it down owing to schedule conflicts . Grant found the macabre subject matter of the film difficult to contend with and believed that it was the worst performance of his career . That year he received his second Oscar nomination for a role , opposite Ethel Barrymore and Barry Fitzgerald in the Clifford Odets @-@ directed film None but the Lonely Heart , set in London during the Depression . Late in the year he featured in the CBS Radio series Suspense , playing a tormented character who hysterically discovers that his amnesia has affected masculine order in society in " The Black Curtain " . 
 = = = Post @-@ War success and slump ( 1946 – 54 ) = = = 
 After making a brief cameo appearance opposite Claudette Colbert in Without Reservations , Grant portrayed Cole Porter in the musical Night and Day ( 1946 ) . The production proved to be problematic , with scenes often requiring multiple takes , frustrating the cast and crew . Grant next appeared with Ingrid Bergman and Claude Rains in the Hitchcock @-@ directed film Notorious ( 1946 ) , playing a government agent who recruits the American daughter of a convicted Nazi spy ( Bergman ) to infiltrate a Nazi organization in Brazil after World War II . During the course of the film Grant and Bergman 's characters fall in love and share one of the longest kisses in film history at around two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes . Wansell notes how Grant 's performance " underlined how far his unique qualities as a screen actor had matured in the years since The Awful Truth " . 
 In 1947 , Grant played an artist who becomes involved in a court case when charged with assault in The Bachelor and the Bobby @-@ <unk> , opposite Myrna Loy and Shirley Temple . The film was praised by the critics , who admired the picture 's slapstick qualities and chemistry between Grant and Loy ; it became one of the biggest @-@ selling films at the box office that year . Later that year he starred opposite David Niven and Loretta Young in the comedy The Bishop 's Wife , playing an angel who is sent down from heaven to straighten out the relationship between the bishop ( Niven ) and his wife ( Loretta Young ) . The film was a major commercial and critical success , and was nominated for five Academy Awards . Life magazine called it " intelligently written and competently acted " . The following year , Grant played neurotic Jim Blandings , the title @-@ sake in the comedy Mr. Blandings Builds His Dream House , again with Loy . Though the film picture lost a lot of money for RKO , Philip T. Hartung of Commonweal thought that Grant 's role as the " frustrated advertising man " was one of his best screen portrayals . In Every Girl Should Be Married , an " airy comedy " , he appeared with Betsy Drake and Franchot Tone , playing a bachelor who is trapped into marriage by Drake 's conniving character . He finished the year as the fourth most popular film star at the box office . 
 In 1949 Grant starred alongside Ann Sheridan in the comedy I Was a Male War Bride in which he appeared in scenes dressed as a woman , wearing a skirt and a wig . During the filming he was taken ill with infectious hepatitis and lost weight , affecting the way he looked in the picture . The film proved to be successful , becoming the highest @-@ grossing film for 20th Century Fox that year with over $ 4 @.@ 5 million in takings and being likened to Hawks 's screwball comedies of the late 1930s . By this point he was one of the highest paid Hollywood stars , commanding $ 300 @,@ 000 per picture . 
 The early 1950s marked the beginning of a slump in Grant 's career . His roles as a top brain surgeon who is caught in the middle of a bitter revolution in a Latin American country in Crisis , and as a medical @-@ school professor and orchestra conductor opposite Jeanne Crain in People Will <unk> were poorly received . Grant had become tired of being Cary Grant after twenty years , being successful , wealthy and popular , and remarked : " To play yourself , your true self , is the hardest thing in the world " . In 1952 , Grant starred in the comedy Room for One More , playing an engineer husband who with his wife ( Betsy Drake ) adopt two children from an orphanage . He reunited with Howard Hawks to film the off @-@ beat comedy Monkey Business , co @-@ starring with Ginger Rogers and Marilyn Monroe . Though the critic from Motion Picture Herald wrote <unk> that Grant had given a career 's best with an " extraordinary agile and performance " , which was matched by Rogers , it received a mixed reception overall . Grant had hoped that starring opposite Deborah Kerr in the romantic comedy Dream Wife would salvage his career , but it was a critical and financial failure upon release in July 1953 . Though he was considered for the leading part in A Star is Born , Grant believed that his film career was over , and briefly left the industry . 
 = = = A romantic leading man and final roles ( 1955 – 66 ) = = = 
 In 1955 Grant agreed to star opposite Grace Kelly in To Catch a Thief , playing a retired jewel thief nicknamed " The Cat " , living in the French Riviera . Grant and Kelly worked well together during the production , and marked one of the most enjoyable experiences of Grant 's career . He found <unk> and Kelly to be very professional , and later stated that Kelly was " possibly the finest actress I 've ever worked with " . Grant was one of the first actors to go independent by not renewing his studio contract , effectively leaving the studio system , which almost completely controlled all aspects of an actor 's life . He decided which films he was going to appear in , often had personal choice of directors and co @-@ stars , and at times negotiated a share of the gross revenue , something uncommon at the time . Grant received more than $ 700 @,@ 000 for his 10 % of the gross of the successful To Catch a Thief , while Hitchcock received less than $ 50 @,@ 000 for directing and producing it . Though critical reception to the overall film was mixed , Grant received high praise for his performance , with critics commenting on his suave , handsome appearance in the film . 
 In 1957 Grant starred opposite Kerr in the romance An Affair to Remember , playing an international playboy who becomes the object of her affections . Schickel sees the film as one of the definitive romantic pictures of the period , but remarks that Grant was not entirely successful in trying to supersede the film 's " gushing sentimentality " . That year , Grant also appeared opposite Sophia Loren in The Pride and the Passion . He had expressed an interest in playing William Holden 's character in The Bridge on the River Kwai at the time , but found that it was not possible because of his commitment to The Pride and the Passion . The film was shot on location in Spain and was problematic , with co @-@ star Frank Sinatra irritating his colleagues and leaving the production after just a few weeks . Grant 's attempts to woo Loren during the production proved fruitless , which led to him expressing anger when Paramount cast her opposite him in Houseboat ( 1958 ) as part of her contract . The sexual tension between the two was so great during the making of Houseboat that the producers found it almost impossible to make . Later in 1958 , Grant starred opposite Bergman in the romantic comedy Indiscreet , playing a successful financier who has an affair with a famous actress ( Bergman ) while pretending to be a married man . During the filming he formed a closer friendship and gained new respect for her as an actress . Schickel stated that he thought the film was possibly the finest romantic comedy film of the era , and that Grant himself had professed that it was one of his personal favorites . Grant received his first of five Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy nominations for his performance and finished the year as the most popular film star at the box office . 
 In 1959 Grant starred in the Hitchcock @-@ directed film North by Northwest , playing an advertising executive who becomes embroiled in a case of mistaken identity . Like Indiscreet , it was warmly received by the critics and was a major commercial success , and is now often listed as one of the greatest films of all time . Weiler , writing in The New York Times , praised Grant 's performance , remarking that the actor " was never more at home than in this role of the advertising @-@ man @-@ on @-@ the @-@ lam " and handled the role " with professional aplomb and grace " . Grant wore one of his most iconic suits in the film which became very popular , a fourteen @-@ gauge , mid @-@ gray , worsted wool one custom @-@ made on Savile Row . Grant finished the year playing a U. S. Navy Rear Admiral aboard a submarine opposite Tony Curtis in the comedy Operation Petticoat . The reviewer from Daily Variety saw Grant 's comic portrayal as a classic example of how to attract the laughter of the audience without lines , remarking that " In this film , most of the gags play off him . It is his reaction , blank , startled , etc . , always underplayed , that creates or releases the humor " . The film was major box office success , and in 1973 Deschner ranked the film as the highest earning film of Grant 's career at the US box office , with takings of $ 9 @.@ 5 million . 
 In 1960 Grant appeared opposite Robert Mitchum , Jean Simmons and Deborah Kerr in The Grass Is Greener , which was shot in England at Osterley Park and Shepperton Studios . McCann notes that Grant took great relish in " mocking his aristocratic character 's over @-@ refined tastes and mannerisms " , though the film was panned and was seen as his worst since Dream Wife . In 1962 , Grant starred in the romantic comedy That Touch of Mink , playing suave , wealthy businessman Philip Shayne romantically involved with an office worker , played by Doris Day . He invites her to his apartment in Bermuda , but her guilty conscience begins to take hold . The picture was praised by critics , and it received three Academy Award nominations , and won the Golden Globe Award for Best Comedy Picture , in addition to another Golden Globe Award for Best Actor nomination . Deschner ranked the film has the second highest grossing of Grant 's career . 
 Producers Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman originally sought Grant for the role of James Bond in Dr. No ( 1962 ) but discarded the idea as Grant would be committed to only one feature film ; therefore , the producers decided to go after someone who could be part of a franchise . In 1963 , Grant appeared in his last typically suave , romantic role opposite Audrey Hepburn in Charade . Grant found the experience of working with Hepburn " wonderful " and believed that their close relationship was clear on camera , though according to Hepburn , he was particularly worried during the filming that he would be criticized for being far too old for her and seen as a " cradle snatcher " . Author Chris Barsanti writes : " It 's the film 's canny flirtatiousness that makes it such ingenious entertainment . Grant and Hepburn play off each other like the pros that they are " . The film , well received by the critics , is often called " the best Hitchcock film Hitchcock never made " . 
 In 1964 , Grant changed from his typically suave , distinguished screen persona to play a grizzled <unk> Walter <unk> who is hired by a Commander ( Trevor Howard ) to serve as a lookout on <unk> Island for invading Japanese planes in the World War II romantic comedy , Father Goose . The film was a major commercial success , and upon its release at Radio City at Christmas 1964 it took over $ 210 @,@ 000 at the box @-@ office in the first week , breaking the record set by Charade the previous year . Grant 's final film , Walk , Don 't Run ( 1966 ) , a comedy co @-@ starring Jim Hutton and Samantha Eggar , was shot on location in Tokyo , and is set amid the backdrop of the housing shortage of the 1964 Tokyo Olympics . Newsweek concluded : " Though Grant 's personal presence is indispensable , the character he plays is almost wholly superfluous . Perhaps the inference to be taken is that a man in his 50s or 60s has no place in romantic comedy except as a catalyst . If so , the chemistry is wrong for everyone " . Hitchcock had asked Grant to star in Torn Curtain that year only to learn that he had decided to retire . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Grant retired from the screen at 62 , when his daughter Jennifer was born , to focus on bringing her up and to provide a sense of permanency and stability in her life . He had become increasingly disillusioned with cinema in the 1960s , rarely finding a script that he approved of . He remarked : " I could have gone on acting and playing a grandfather or a bum , but I discovered more important things in life " . Grant knew after he had made Charade that the " Golden Age " of Hollywood was now over . He expressed little interest in making a career comeback , and continued to respond to invites or mention of it with " fat chance " . He did , however , briefly appear in the video documentary for Elvis 's 1970 Las Vegas concert Elvis : That 's the Way It Is , in the audience . When he was gifted with the negatives from a number of his films in the 1970s , Grant sold them to television for a sum of over two million dollars in 1975 . 
 Morecambe and Stirling argue that Grant 's abstinence from film after 1966 was " not the actions of a man who had irrevocably turned his back on the film industry , but one who was caught between a decision made and the temptation to a eat a bit of humble pie and re @-@ announce himself to the cinema @-@ going public " . In the 1970s , MGM were keen on remaking Grand Hotel ( 1932 ) , and hoped to lure Grant into coming out of retirement to star . Hitchcock had long wanted to make a film based on the idea of Hamlet , with Grant in the lead role . Grant stated that Warren Beatty had made a big effort to try to get him to play the role of Mr. Jordan in Heaven Can Wait ( 1978 ) , which eventually went to James Mason . Morecambe and Stirling claim that Grant had also expressed an interest in appearing in A Touch of Class ( 1973 ) , The Verdict ( 1982 ) and a film adaptation of William Goldman 's 1983 novel Adventures in the Screen Trade . 
 In the late 1970s and early 1980s Grant became troubled by the deaths of so many of his close friends , including Howard Hughes in 1976 , Howard Hawks in 1977 , Lord Mountbatten and Barbara Hutton in 1979 , Alfred Hitchcock in 1980 , Grace Kelly and Ingrid Bergman in 1982 and David Niven in 1983 . At the funeral of Mountbatten he was quoted as remarking to a friend : " I 'm absolutely pooped , and I 'm so goddamned old ... I 'm going to quit all next year . I 'm going to lie in bed ... I shall just close all doors , turn off the telephone , and enjoy my life " . Kelly 's death was the hardest hitting on Grant , as the death was unexpected , and the two remained close friends after filming To Catch a Thief . Grant visited Monaco three or four times each year during his retirement , and showed his support for Kelly by joining the board of the Princess Grace Foundation . 
 In 1980 , the Los Angeles County Museum of Art put on a two @-@ month retrospective of over 40 of Grant 's films . In 1982 he was honored with the " Man of the Year " award by the New York Friars Club at the Waldorf @-@ Astoria Hotel . He turned 80 in 1984 ; Peter Bogdanovich noticed that a " serenity " had come over the actor . Grant was in good health until suffering a mild stroke in October that year . In the last few years of his life , he undertook tours of the United States in a one @-@ man show , A Conversation with Cary Grant , in which he would show clips from his films and answer audience questions . He made some 36 public appearances in his last four years , from New Jersey to Texas , and found his audiences changed from elderly film buffs to enthusiastic college students discovering his films for the first time . Grant admitted that he thought the appearances were " ego @-@ fodder " , remarking that " I know who I am inside and outside , but it 's nice to have the outside , at least , substantiated " . 
 = = Business interests = = 
 Stirling refers to Grant as " one of the shrewdest businessmen ever to operate in Hollywood " . His long @-@ term friendship with Howard Hughes from the 1930s onward saw him invited into the most glamorous circles in Hollywood and their lavish parties . Biographers Morecambe and Stirling state that Hughes played a major role in the development of Grant 's business interests , so that by 1939 , he was " already an astute operator with various commercial interests " . Scott also played a role , encouraging Grant to invest his money in shares , making him a wealthy man by the end of the 1930s . In the 1940s , Grant and Barbara Hutton invested heavily in real estate development in Acapulco at a time when it was little more than a fishing village , and teamed with Richard Widmark , Roy Rogers , and Red Skelton to buy a hotel there . Behind his business interests was a particularly intelligent mind , to the point that his friend David Niven once said : " Before computers went into general release , Cary had one in his brain " . Film critic David Thomson believes that Grant 's intelligence came across on screen , and stated that " no one else looked so good and so intelligent at the same time " . 
 After Grant retired from the screen , he became more active in business . He accepted a position on the board of directors at Fabergé . This position was not honorary , as some had assumed ; Grant regularly attended meetings and travelled internationally to support them . His pay was modest in comparison to the millions of his film career , a salary of a reported $ 15 @,@ 000 a year . Such was Grant 's influence on the company that George Barrie once claimed that Grant had played a role in the growth of the firm to annual revenues of about $ 50 million in 1968 , a growth of nearly 80 % since the inaugural year in 1964 . The position also permitted use of a private plane , which Grant could use to fly to see his daughter wherever her mother , Dyan Cannon , was working . 
 In 1975 , Grant was an appointed director of MGM . In 1980 , he sat on the board of MGM Films and MGM Grand Hotels following the division of the parent company . He played an active role in the promotion of MGM Grand Hotel in Las Vegas when opened in 1973 and he continued to promote the city throughout the 1970s . When Allen Warren met Grant for a photo shoot that year he noticed how tired Grant looked , and his " slightly melancholic air " . Grant later joined the boards of Hollywood Park , the Academy of Magical Arts ( The Magic Castle , Hollywood , California ) , and Western Airlines ( acquired by Delta Air Lines in 1987 ) . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 One of the wealthiest stars in Hollywood , Grant owned houses in Beverly Hills , Malibu , and Palm Springs . Immaculate in his personal grooming , Edith Head , the renowned Hollywood costume designer , appreciated his " meticulous " attention to detail and considered him to have had the greatest fashion sense of any actor she had worked with . McCann attests his " almost obsessive maintenance " with tanning , which deepened the older he got , to Douglas Fairbanks , who also had a major influence on his refined sense of dress . McCann notes that because Grant came from a working @-@ class background and was not well educated , he made a particular effort over the course of his career to mix with high society and absorb their knowledge , manners and etiquette to compensate and cover it up . His image was meticulously crafted from the early days in Hollywood , where he would frequently sunbathe and avoid being photographed smoking , despite smoking two packs a day at the time . Grant quit smoking in the early 1950s through hypnotherapy . He remained health conscious , staying very trim and athletic even into his late career , though Grant admitted he " never crook [ ed ] a finger to keep fit " . He confessed that he did " everything in moderation . Except making love " . 
 Grant 's daughter Jennifer stated that her father made hundreds of friends from all walks of life , and that their house was frequently visited by the likes of Frank and Barbara Sinatra , Quincy Jones , Gregory Peck and his wife Veronique , Johnny Carson and his wife , Kirk Kerkorian and Merv Griffin . She said that Grant and Sinatra were the closest of friends and that both men were remarkably similar in that they both shared a similar radiance and " indefinable incandescence of charm " , and were eternally " high on life " . While raising Jennifer , Grant archived artefacts of her childhood and adolescence in a bank @-@ quality , room @-@ sized vault he had installed in the house . Jennifer attributed this meticulous collection to the fact that artefacts of his own childhood had been destroyed during the Luftwaffe 's bombing of Bristol in the Second World War ( an event that also claimed the lives of his uncle , aunt , cousin , and the cousin 's husband and grandson ) , and he may have wanted to prevent her from experiencing a similar loss . 
 Grant lived with actor Randolph Scott off and on for 12 years , which several authors have claimed was a gay or bisexual relationship . The two had first met early on in Grant 's career in 1932 at the Paramount studio when Scott was filming Sky Bride at the same time as Grant was shooting Sinners in the Sun , and moved in together soon afterwards . Scott 's biographer Robert Nott states that there is no evidence that Grant and Scott were homosexual , and blames rumors on material written about them in other books , which was assumed true by historians . Grant 's daughter , Jennifer , denied the claims . When Chevy Chase joked on television in 1980 that Grant was a " homo . What a gal ! " , Grant sued him for slander , and Chase was forced to retract his words . Grant became a fan of Morecambe and Wise in the 1960s , and remained friends with Eric Morecambe until his death in 1984 . 
 Grant began experimenting with the drug LSD in the late 1950s , before it become commercially popular . His wife , Betsy Drake , displayed a keen interest in psychotherapy , and through her Grant developed a considerable knowledge of the field of psychoanalysis . <unk> Mortimer Hartman began treating him with LSD in the late 1950s , with Grant optimistic that the treatment could make him feel better about himself and rid of all of his inner turmoil stemming from his childhood and his failed relationships . He had an estimated 100 sessions over several years . For a long time , Grant viewed the drug positively , and stated that it was the solution after many years of " searching for his peace of mind " , and that for first time in his life he was " truly , deeply and honestly happy " . Cannon claimed during a court hearing , in which she claimed he was an " apostle of LSD " , that he was still taking the drug in 1967 as part of a remedy to save their relationship . Grant later admitted that " taking LSD was an utterly foolish thing to do but I was a self @-@ opinionated boor , hiding all kinds of layers and defences , hypocrisy and vanity . I had to get rid of them and wipe the slate clean " . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Grant was married five times . He wed Virginia Cherrill on February 9 , 1934 at Caxton Hall registry office in London . She divorced him on March 26 , 1935 , following charges that Grant had hit her . The two were involved in a bitter divorce case which was widely reported in the press , with Cherrill demanding $ 1000 a week from her husband in benefits from his Paramount earnings . After the demise of the marriage , he dated actress Phyllis Brooks from 1937 . They had considered marriage , and vacationed together in Europe in the summer of 1939 , visiting the Roman villa of Dorothy di Frasso in Italy , before the relationship ended later that year . 
 Grant became a naturalized United States citizen on June 26 , 1942 , at which time he also legally changed his name from " Archibald Alexander Leach " to " Cary Grant " . That year he married Barbara Hutton , one of the wealthiest women in the world following a $ 50 million inheritance from her grandfather , Frank Winfield Woolworth . The couple was derisively nicknamed " Cash and Cary " , although in an extensive prenuptial agreement Grant refused any financial settlement in the event of a divorce , to avoid the accusation that he married for money . Towards the end of their marriage they lived in a white mansion at <unk> Bellagio Road in Bel Air . After divorcing in 1945 , they remained the " fondest of friends " . After dating Betty Hensel for a period , on December 25 , 1949 , Grant married Betsy Drake , the co @-@ star of two of his films . This would prove to be his longest marriage , ending on August 14 , 1962 . 
 Grant married Dyan Cannon on July 22 , 1965 , at friend Howard Hughes 's Desert Inn in Las Vegas . Their daughter , Jennifer , was born on February 26 , 1966 . Jennifer is Grant 's only child . He frequently called Jennifer his " best production " . He said of fatherhood : " My life changed the day Jennifer was born . I 've come to think that the reason we 're put on this earth is to procreate . To leave something behind . Not films , because you know that I don 't think my films will last very long once I 'm gone . But another human being . That 's what 's important . " Grant and Cannon divorced in March 1968 . On March 12 that month he was involved in a car accident on Long Island when a truck struck the side of his limousine . Grant was hospitalized for 17 days with three broken ribs and bruising . 
 Grant had a brief affair with self @-@ proclaimed actress Cynthia Bouron in the late 1960s , Grant , who had been at odds with the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences since 1958 , was named as the recipient of an Academy Honorary Award in 1970 . Grant announced that he would attend the awards ceremony to accept his award , thus ending his twelve @-@ year boycott of the ceremony . Two days after this announcement , Ms. Bouron filed a paternity suit against Grant and publicly stated he was the father of her seven @-@ week @-@ old daughter . Bouron named Grant as the father on the child 's birth certificate . Grant challenged her to a blood test and Bouron failed to provide one , and the court ordered her to remove his name from the certificate . Between 1973 and 1977 he dated British photojournalist Maureen Donaldson , followed by the much younger Victoria Morgan . 
 On April 11 , 1981 , Grant married Barbara Harris , a British hotel public relations agent who was 47 years his junior . The two had met at the Royal Lancaster Hotel in London five years earlier where Harris was working at the time and Grant attending a Fabergé conference . The two became friends , but it wasn 't until 1979 that she moved to live with him in California . Friends of Grant considered her to have had an extremely positive impact on Grant , and Prince Rainier of Monaco remarked that he had " never been happier " than he was in his last years with her . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Grant was at the Adler Theatre in Davenport , Iowa , on the afternoon of November 29 , 1986 , preparing for his performance for the Conversation with Cary Grant when he was taken ill . Though his close friend Roderick Mann recalled that he had met up with Grant at the Hollywood Park Racetrack earlier that month and he had been in a jovial state and in good health , Grant had been feeling unwell as he arrived at the theatre . Basil Williams , who photographed him there , thought that though Grant still looked his usual suave self , he noticed that he seemed very tired and that he stumbled once in the auditorium . Williams recalls that Grant rehearsed for half an hour before " something seemed wrong " all of a sudden , and he disappeared backstage . Grant was taken back to the Blackhawk Hotel where he and his wife Barbara had checked in , and a doctor was called and discovered that Grant was having a massive stroke , with a blood pressure reading of 210 over 130 . Grant refused to be taken to hospital . The doctor recalled that " The stroke was getting worse . In only fifteen minutes he deteriorated rapidly . It was terrible watching him die and not being able to help . But he wouldn 't let us " . By 8 : 45 p.m. Grant had slipped into a coma and was taken to St. Luke 's Hospital . He spent 45 minutes in emergency before being transferred to intensive care , where he was pronounced dead at 11 : 22 p.m. He was 82 . 
 The New York Times reported : " Cary Grant was not supposed to die . Cary Grant was supposed to stick around . Our perpetual touchstone of charm and elegance and youth " . Grant 's body was taken back to California , where it was cremated and his ashes scattered in the Pacific Ocean . He refused a funeral , which Roderick Mann remarked was appropriate for " the private man who didn 't want the nonsense of a funeral " . The bulk of his estate , worth in the region of 60 to 80 million dollars , went to his wife Barbara Harris and his daughter Jennifer Grant . He also gave goods valued at $ 150 @,@ 000 to beloved employees , $ 50 @,@ 000 to the Motion Picture Relief Fund , $ 25 @,@ 000 to Variety Clubs International , $ 20 @,@ 000 to the John Tracy Clinic for deafness , $ 10 @,@ 000 to LSD doctor Mortimer Hartman , and his clothes and personal belongings to Frank Sinatra , Roderick Mann , Stanley Donen , Kirk Kerkorian and others . 
 = = Screen persona = = 
 McCann notes that one of reasons that Grant was so successful with his film career is that he was not conscious of how handsome he was on screen , acting in a fashion which was most unexpected and unusual from a Hollywood star of that period . George Cukor once stated : " You see , he didn 't depend on his looks . He wasn 't a narcissist , he acted as though he were just an ordinary young man . And that made it all the more appealing , that a handsome young man was funny ; that was especially unexpected and good because we think , ' Well , if he 's a Beau Brummel , he can 't be either funny or intelligent ' , but he proved otherwise " . Jennifer Grant acknowledged that her father neither relied on his looks nor was a character actor , and said that he was just the opposite of that , playing the " basic man " . 
 Grant 's appeal was unusually broad , among both men and women ; Kael remarked that men wanted to be him and women dreamed of dating him . She noticed that Grant treated his female co @-@ stars differently to most of the leading players at the time , regarding them as subjects with multiple qualities rather than " treating them as sex objects " . For writer David Shipman , he seemed to meet the requirement for every figure to aspire to be , whether it was an uncle , best friend or lover , and " more than most stars he belonged to the public " . A number of critics have argued that Grant had the rare star ability to turn a mediocre picture into a good one . Philip T. Hartung of The Commonweal in his review for Mr. Lucky ( 1943 ) stated that if it " weren 't for Cary Grant 's persuasive personality the whole thing would melt away to nothing at all " . For McCann Hollywood had " found its ideal gentleman , a gentleman for a democratic culture . He was an amalgam of tradition and modernity , wealth and virtue , elite and mass , high and low , great and good " . He states that Grant 's delivery should " not have worked , but somehow it did " , commenting : " As he sits and faces the camera during that early scene in The Awful Truth , he looks at us with an expression that suggests he knows as well as we do that the audacious trick has , against all the odds , actually come off . He smiles at us , sharing with us his extraordinary good fortune . He smiles a smile like <unk> 's smile . " Political theorist C. L. R. James saw Grant as a " new and very important symbol " , a new type of Englishman who differed from the Leslie Howard and Ronald Coleman gentleman types , who represented the " freedom , natural grace , simplicity and directness which characterise such different American types as Jimmy Stewart and Ronald Reagan " , which ultimately symbolized the growing relationship between Britain and America . 
 McCann notes that Grant typically played " wealthy privileged characters who never seemed to have any need to work in order to maintain their glamorous and hedonistic lifestyle . He became a star whose characters were good looking , quick witted , funny and athletic , a star whose characters seemed to win the hearts of women without even trying " . Martin Stirling , commenting in the biography Cary Grant : In Name Only , thought that Grant had an acting range which was " greater than any of his contemporaries , but understood why a number of critics underrated him as an actor . He believes that Grant was always at his " physical and verbal best in situations that bordered on farce " . Charles Champlin , commenting in Donald Deschner 's The Complete Films of Cary Grant ( 1973 ) similarly identifies a paradox in Grant 's screen persona , in his unusual ability to " mix polish and pratfalls in successive scenes " . He remarks that Grant was " refreshingly able to play the near @-@ fool , the fey idiot , without compromising his masculinity or surrendering to camp for its own sake . His ability to play off against his own image as the strong and handsome romantic hero @-@ figure is , as a matter of fact , probably unique among superstars . Nobody else comes even close to mind who could similarly toy with his own dignity without losing it " . Wansell further notes that Grant could , " with the arch of an eyebrow or the merest hint of a smile , question his own image " , managing to " blend irony and romance in a way that few other stars have ever done , by slyly never appearing to take himself too seriously , and mixing his own unique mixture of naïveté and worldliness " . Stanley Donen , a director who had worked with Grant , stated that his real " magic " came from his attention to minute details and always seeming real , which came from " enormous amounts of work " rather than being God @-@ given . Grant remarked of his career : " I guess to a certain extent I did eventually become the characters I was playing . I played at being someone I wanted to be until I became that person , Or he became me " . He would later profess that the real Cary Grant was more like his scruffy , unshaven fisherman in Father Goose than the " well @-@ tailored charmer " of Charade . 
 Grant often poked fun at himself with statements such as , " Everyone wants to be Cary Grant — even I want to be Cary Grant " , and in ad @-@ lib lines — such as in the film His Girl Friday ( 1940 ) , saying , " Listen , the last man who said that to me was Archie Leach , just a week before he cut his throat . " In Arsenic and Old Lace ( 1944 ) , a gravestone is seen bearing the name Archie Leach . According to a famous story now believed to be fictional , after seeing a telegram from a magazine editor to his agent asking , " How old Cary Grant ? " , Grant reportedly responded , " Old Cary Grant fine . How you ? " Despite his strong comedic qualities , Alfred Hitchcock thought that Grant was also very effective in playing darker roles , with a mysterious , dangerous quality , remarking that " there is a frightening side to Cary that no one can quite put their finger on " . Wansell notes that this darker , mysterious side extended to his personal life , which he took great lengths to cover up to retain his debonair image . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Biographers Morecambe and Stirling believe that Cary Grant was the " greatest leading man Hollywood had ever known " . Schickel stated that there are " very few stars who achieve the magnitude of Cary Grant , art of a very high and subtle order " , and thought that he was the " best star actor there ever was in the movies " . David Thomson and directors Stanley Donen and Howard Hawks concurred that Grant was the greatest and most important actor in the history of the cinema . He was a favorite of Hitchcock , who called him " the only actor I ever loved in my whole life " , and remained one of Hollywood 's top box @-@ office attractions for almost 30 years . Wansell wrote : " To millions of movie @-@ goers around the world , Cary Grant will forever epitomize the glamour , and the style , of Hollywood in its golden years . With his dark hair , and even darker eyes , mischievous smile and effortless elegance , he was , is , and always will be indelibly one of the great movie stars . Since his death in 1986 , the incandescence of his screen image has not dimmed for a single moment " . Kael stated that the world still thinks of him affectionately , because he " embodies what seems a happier time − a time when we had a simpler relationship to a performer . " 
 Grant was nominated for two Academy Awards , for Penny Serenade ( 1941 ) and None But the Lonely Heart ( 1944 ) , but never won a competitive Oscar ; he received a special Academy Award for Lifetime Achievement in 1970 . The inscription on his statuette read " To Cary Grant , for his unique mastery of the art of screen acting with respect and affection of his colleagues " . On being presented with the award , his friend Frank Sinatra announced : " It was made for the sheer brilliance of acting ... No one has brought more pleasure to more people for so many years than Cary has , and nobody has done so many things so well " . 
 At the Straw Hat Awards in New York in May 1975 , Grant was awarded a special plaque which recognized the city 's appreciation of him as a " star and superstar in entertainment " . The following August , he was invited by Betty Ford to give a speech at the Republican National Convention in Kansas City and to attend the Bicentenary dinner for Queen Elizabeth II at the White House that same year . He was later invited to attend a royal charity gala at the London Palladium in 1978 . In 1979 , Grant hosted the American Film Institute 's tribute to Alfred Hitchcock , and presented Laurence Olivier with his honorary Oscar . 
 In 1981 , Grant was accorded the Kennedy Center Honors . Three years later , a theatre on the MGM lot was renamed the " Cary Grant Theatre " . In 1995 , when over a hundred leading film directors were asked to reveal their favorite actor of all time in a Time Out poll , Grant came second only to Marlon Brando . On December 7 , 2001 , a statue of Grant was unveiled in Millennium Square , a regenerated area next to Bristol Harbour , Bristol , in the city where he was born . In November 2005 , Grant again came first in Premiere magazine 's list of " The 50 Greatest Movie Stars of All Time " . According to McCann , ten years earlier they had declared that Grant was " quite simply , the funniest actor cinema has ever produced " . 
 = = Filmography and stage work = = 
 = LGBT themes in speculative fiction = 
 LGBT themes in speculative fiction refer to the incorporation of lesbian , gay , bisexual , or transgender ( LGBT ) themes into science fiction , fantasy , horror fiction and related genres . Such elements may include an LGBT character as the protagonist or a major character , or explorations of sexuality or gender that deviate from the hetero @-@ normative . 
 Science fiction and fantasy have traditionally been puritanical genres aimed at a male readership , and can be more restricted than non @-@ genre literature by their conventions of characterisation and the effect that these conventions have on depictions of sexuality and gender . However , speculative fiction also gives authors and readers the freedom to imagine societies that are different from real @-@ life cultures . This freedom makes speculative fiction a useful means of examining sexual bias , by forcing the reader to reconsider his or her heteronormative cultural assumptions . It has also been claimed by critics such as Nicola Griffith that LGBT readers identify strongly with the mutants , aliens , and other outsider characters found in speculative fiction . 
 Before the 1960s , explicit sexuality of any kind was rare in speculative fiction , as the editors who controlled what was published attempted to protect their perceived key market of adolescent male readers . As the readership broadened , it became possible to include characters who were undisguised homosexuals , though these tended to be villains , and lesbians remained almost entirely unrepresented . In the 1960s , science fiction and fantasy began to reflect the changes prompted by the civil rights movement and the emergence of a counterculture . New wave and feminist science fiction authors realised cultures in which homosexuality , bisexuality and a variety of gender models were the norm , and in which sympathetic depictions of alternative sexuality were commonplace . 
 From the 1980s onwards , homosexuality gained much wider mainstream acceptance , and was often incorporated into otherwise conventional speculative fiction stories . Works emerged that went beyond simple representation of homosexuality to explorations of specific issues relevant to the LGBT community . This development was helped by the growing number of openly gay or lesbian authors and their early acceptance by speculative fiction fandom . Specialist gay publishing presses and a number of awards recognising LGBT achievements in the genre emerged , and by the twenty @-@ first century blatant homophobia was no longer considered acceptable by most readers of speculative fiction . There was a concurrent increase in representation of homosexuality within non @-@ literary forms of speculative fiction . The inclusion of LGBT themes in comic books , television and film continues to attract media attention and controversy , while the perceived lack of sufficient representation , along with unrealistic depictions , provokes criticism from LGBT sources . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 As genres of popular literature , science fiction and fantasy often seem more constrained than non @-@ genre literature by their conventions of characterisation and the effects that these conventions have on depictions of sexuality and gender . Science fiction in particular has traditionally been a puritanical genre oriented toward a male readership . Sex is often linked to disgust in SF and horror , and plots based on sexual relationships have mainly been avoided in genre fantasy narratives . On the other hand , science fiction and fantasy can also provide more freedom than realistic literature to imagine alternatives to the default assumptions of heterosexuality and masculinity that permeate many cultures . Homosexuality is now an accepted and common feature of science fiction and fantasy literature , its prevalence due to the influence of lesbian @-@ feminist and gay liberation movements . 
 In speculative fiction , extrapolation allows writers to focus not on the way things are ( or were ) , as non @-@ genre literature does , but on the way things could be different . It provides science fiction with a quality that science fiction critic Darko Suvin has called " cognitive estrangement " : the recognition that what we are reading is not the world as we know it , but a world whose differences force us to reconsider our own with an outsider 's perspective . When the extrapolation involves sexuality or gender , it can force the reader to reconsider his or her heteronormative cultural assumptions ; the freedom to imagine societies different from real @-@ life cultures makes SF an effective tool for examining sexual bias . In science fiction , such estranging features include technologies that significantly alter sex or reproduction . In fantasy , such features include figures such as mythological deities and heroic archetypes , who are not limited by preconceptions of human sexuality and gender , allowing them to be reinterpreted . SF has also depicted a plethora of alien methods of reproduction and sex , some of which can be viewed as <unk> or bisexual through a human binary @-@ gender lens . 
 In spite of the freedom offered by the genres , gay characters often remain contrived and stereotypical , and most SF stories take for granted the continuation of heteronormative institutions . Alternative sexualities have usually been approached allegorically , or by including LGBT characters in such a way as to not contradict mainstream society 's assumptions about gender roles . Works that feature gay characters are more likely to be written by women writers , and to be viewed as being aimed at other women or girls ; big @-@ name male writers are less prone to explore gay themes . 
 Speculative fiction has traditionally been " straight " ; Samuel R. Delany has written that the science fiction community is predominantly made up of white male heterosexuals , but that the proportion of minorities , including gay people , is generally higher than found in a " literary " group . The inclusion of homosexuality in SF has been described in Science Fiction Culture as " sometimes lagging behind the general population , sometimes surging ahead " . Nicola Griffith has written that LGBT readers tend to identify strongly with the outsider status of mutants , aliens , and characters who lead hidden or double lives in science fiction . In comparison , Geoff Ryman has claimed that the gay and SF genre markets are incompatible , with his books being marketed as one or the other , but never both , and David Seed said that SF purists have denied that SF that focuses on soft science fiction themes and marginalised groups ( including " gay SF " ) is " real " science fiction . Gay and lesbian science fiction have at times been grouped as distinct subgenres of SF , and have some tradition of separate publishers and awards . 
 = = Literature = = 
 = = = Proto @-@ SF = = = 
 True History by the Greek writer Lucian ( A.D. 120 – 185 ) has been called the earliest surviving example of science fiction and the first ever " gay science fiction story " . The narrator is suddenly enveloped by a typhoon and swept up to the moon , which is inhabited by a society of men that are at war with the sun . After the hero distinguishes himself in combat , the king gives him his son the prince in marriage . The all male society reproduces ( male children only ) by giving birth from the thigh or by growing a child from a plant produced by planting the left testicle in the moon 's soil . 
 In other proto @-@ SF works , sex itself , of any type , was equated with base desires or " beastliness " , as in Gulliver 's Travels , which contrasts the animalistic and overtly sexual <unk> with the reserved and intelligent <unk> . The frank treatment of sexual topics of pre @-@ nineteenth century literature was abandoned in most speculative fiction , although Wendy Pearson has written that issues of gender and sexuality have been central to SF since its inception but were ignored by readers and critics until the late twentieth century . Early works that contained LGBT themes and showed the gay characters to be morally impure include the first lesbian vampire story " Carmilla " ( 1872 ) by Sheridan Le Fanu and The Picture of Dorian Gray ( 1890 ) by Oscar Wilde , which shocked contemporary readers with its sensuality and overtly homosexual characters . 
 An Anglo @-@ American Alliance , a 1906 novel by Gregory <unk> , was the first SF @-@ themed novel to openly portray a lesbian romantic relationship . 
 = = = The pulp era ( 1920 – 30s ) = = = 
 During the pulp era , explicit sexuality of any kind was rare in genre science fiction and fantasy . For many years , the editors who controlled what was published felt that they had to protect the adolescent male readership that they identified as their principal market . Although the covers of some 1930s pulp magazines showed scantily clad women menaced by tentacled aliens , the covers were often more lurid than the magazines ' contents . In such a context , writers like Edgar <unk> , who featured passionate male friendships in his work , were exceptional ; almost until the end of their careers , including so much as a kiss would have been too much . Implied or disguised sexuality was as important as that which was openly revealed . As such , genre SF reflected the social mores of the day , paralleling common prejudices ; This was particularly true of pulp fiction , more so than literary works of the time . 
 As the demographics of the readership broadened , it became possible to include characters who were more or less undisguised homosexuals , but these , in accordance with the attitudes of the times , tended to be villains : evil , demented , or effeminate stereotypes . The most popular role for the homosexual was as a ' decadent slaveholding <unk> ' whose corrupt tyranny was doomed to be overthrown by the young male heterosexual hero . During this period , lesbians were almost entirely unrepresented as either heroes or villains . 
 One of the earliest examples of genre science fiction that involves a challenging amount of unconventional sexual activity is the early novel Odd John ( 1935 ) , by Olaf Stapledon . John is a mutant with extraordinary mental abilities who will not allow himself to be bound by many of the rules imposed by the ordinary British society of his time . The novel strongly implies that he seduces an older boy who becomes devoted to him but also suffers from the affront that the relationship creates to his own morals . 
 = = = The Golden Age ( 1940 – 50s ) = = = 
 In the Golden Age of Science Fiction , the genre " resolutely ignored the whole subject " of homosexuality , according to Joanna Russ . As the readership for science fiction and fantasy began to age in the 1950s , however , writers like Philip Jose Farmer and Theodore Sturgeon were able to introduce more explicit sexuality into their work . Until the late 1960s , however , few other writers depicted alternative sexuality or revised gender roles , or openly investigated sexual questions . The majority of LGBT characters were depicted as caricatures , such as " man @-@ hating amazons " , and attempts at portraying homosexuals sympathetically or non @-@ stereotypically were met with hostility . 
 Sturgeon wrote many stories during the Golden Age of Science Fiction that emphasised the importance of love , regardless of the current social norms . In his short story " The World Well Lost " ( 1953 ) , first published in Universe magazine , homosexual alien fugitives and unrequited ( and taboo ) human homosexual love are portrayed . The tagline for the Universe cover was " [ His ] most daring story " ; its sensitive treatment of homosexuality was unusual for science fiction published at that time , and it is now regarded as a milestone in science fiction 's portrayal of homosexuality . According to an anecdote related by Samuel R. Delany , when Sturgeon first submitted the story , the editor ( John W. Campbell ) not only rejected it but phoned every other editor he knew and urged them to reject it as well . Sturgeon would later write Affair with a Green Monkey , which examined social stereotyping of homosexuals , and in 1960 published Venus Plus X , in which a single @-@ gender society is depicted and the protagonist 's homophobia portrayed unfavourably . 
 Images of homosexual male societies remained strongly negative in the eyes of most SF authors . For example , when overpopulation drives the world away from heterosexuality in Charles Beaumont 's short story " The Crooked Man " ( 1955 ) , first published in Playboy , inhumane homosexuals begin to oppress the heterosexual minority . In Anthony Burgess 's The Wanting Seed ( 1962 ) homosexuality is required for official employment ; Burgess treats this as one aspect of an unnatural state of affairs which includes violent warfare and the failing of the natural world . 
 Although not usually identified as a genre writer , William S. Burroughs produced works with a surreal narrative that estranged the action from the ordinary world as science fiction and fantasy do . In 1959 he published Naked Lunch , the first of many works such as The Nova Trilogy and The Wild Boys in which he linked drug use and homosexuality as anti @-@ authoritarian activities . 
 = = = The New Wave era ( 1960 – 70s ) = = = 
 By the late 1960s , science fiction and fantasy began to reflect the changes prompted by the civil rights movement and the emergence of a counterculture . Within the genres , these changes were incorporated into a movement called " the New Wave , " a movement more sceptical of technology , more liberated socially , and more interested in stylistic experimentation . New Wave writers were more likely to claim an interest in " inner space " instead of outer space . They were less shy about explicit sexuality and more sympathetic to <unk> of gender roles and the social status of sexual minorities . Under the influence of New Wave editors and authors such as Michael Moorcock ( editor of the influential New Worlds ) , sympathetic depictions of alternative sexuality and gender multiplied in science fiction and fantasy , becoming commonplace . The introduction of gay imagery has also been attributed to the influence of lesbian @-@ feminist and gay liberation movements in the 1960s . In the 1970s , lesbians and gay men became a more visible presence in the SF community and as writers ; notable gay authors included Joanna Russ , Thomas M. Disch and Samuel R. Delany . 
 Feminist SF authors imagined cultures in which <unk> and bisexuality and a variety of gender models were the norm . Joanna Russ 's The Female Man ( 1975 ) and the award winning story " When It Changed " , showing a female @-@ only lesbian society that flourished without men , were enormously influential . Russ is largely responsible for introducing radical lesbian feminism into science fiction ; she has stated that being openly lesbian was bad for her career and sales . Similar themes are explored in James Tiptree Jr . ' s award @-@ winning " Houston , Houston , Do You Read ? " , which presents a female @-@ only society after the extinction of men from disease . The society lacks stereotypically " male " problems such as war , but is stagnant . The women reproduce via cloning and consider men to be comical . Tiptree was a closeted bisexual woman writing secretly under a male pseudonym , and explored the sexual impulse as her main theme . 
 Other feminist utopias do not include lesbianism : Ursula K. Le Guin 's The Left Hand of Darkness ( 1969 ) depicts trans @-@ species sexuality , in which individuals are neither " male " nor " female " but can have both male and female sexual organs and reproductive abilities , making them in some senses bisexual . In The Language of the Night , a collection of Le Guin 's criticism , she admits to having " quite unnecessarily locked the Gethenians into heterosexuality ... the omission [ of the homosexual option ] implies that sexuality is heterosexuality . I regret this very much . " Le Guin often explores alternative sexuality in her works , and has subsequently written many stories that examine the possibilities SF allows for non @-@ traditional homosexuality , such as the bisexual bonding between clones in " Nine Lives " . Sexual themes and fluid genders also figure in the works of John Varley , who came to prominence in the 1970s . Many of his stories contain mentions of same @-@ sex love and gay and lesbian characters . In his " Eight Worlds " suite of stories and novels , humanity has achieved the ability to change sex on a whim . Homophobia is shown to initially inhibit uptake of this technology , as in his story " Options " , as it engenders drastic changes in relationships , with bisexuality eventually becoming the norm for society . His Gaea trilogy features lesbian protagonists , and almost all the characters are to some degree bisexual . 
 Samuel R. Delany was one of the first openly gay science fiction authors ; in his earliest stories the gay sexual aspect appears as a " sensibility " , rather than in overt sexual references . In some stories , such as Babel @-@ 17 ( 1966 ) , same @-@ sex love and same @-@ sex intercourse are clearly implied but are given a kind of protective colouration because the protagonist is a woman who is involved in a three @-@ person marriage with two men . The affection all three characters share for each other is in the forefront , and sexual activity between or among them is not directly described . In <unk> ( 1975 ) , his most famous science fiction novel , Delany peoples his large canvas with characters of a wide variety of sexualities . Once again , sexual activity is not the focus of the novel although there are some of the first explicitly described scenes of gay sex in SF and Delany depicts characters with a wide variety of motivations and behaviours . 
 Delany 's Nebula @-@ winning short story " Aye , and Gomorrah " posits the development of neutered human astronauts and then depicts the people who become sexually oriented toward them . By imagining a new gender and resultant sexual orientation , the story allows readers to reflect on the real world while maintaining an estranging distance . Further award winning stories featuring gay characters , such as " Time Considered as a Helix of Semi @-@ Precious Stones " , were to follow , all collected in Delany 's short story retrospective Aye , and Gomorrah , and other stories . Delany faced censorship from book distribution companies for treatment of these topics . In later works , gay themes become increasingly central to Delany 's works , attracting controversy , and some blur the line between science fiction and gay pornography . Delany 's SF series Return to <unk> was the first novel from a major US publisher to deal with the impact of AIDS , and he later won the William Whitehead Memorial Award for lifetime achievement in gay and lesbian writing . 
 Other big name SF authors approached LGBT themes in individual works : In Time Enough for Love ( 1973 ) by Robert A. Heinlein , the main character argues strongly for the future liberty of homosexual sex , but sex for the purpose of procreation remains held as the ideal . The female bisexuality in Stranger in a Strange Land ( 1961 ) has been described as mere titillation and male homosexuality in the same work was a " wrongness " deserving pity . Heinlein 's use of sexuality is discussed in an essay entitled " The <unk> of Science Fiction " by SF writer Thomas Disch . Disch was publicly gay from 1968 ; this came out occasionally in his poetry and particularly in his novel On Wings of Song ( 1979 ) . His other major SF novels also contained bisexual characters : in his mosaic novel 334 , gay people are referred to as " republicans " in contrast to the straight " democrats " . However , he did not try to write to a particular community : " I 'm gay myself , but I don 't write ' gay ' literature . " 
 Michael Moorcock was one of the first <unk> authors to depict positive portrayals of homosexual , lesbian and bisexual relationships and sex in his novels . For example , in his 1965 novel , The Final Programme , most of the leading characters , including the central ' hero ' Jerry Cornelius , engage in same sex relationships on multiple occasions and same sex relationships are depicted as entirely normal and without any moralising , negative consequences or gratuitous titillation , this is the case in the whole Jerry Cornelius series and in Moorcock 's fiction generally ( particularly in the Dancers at the End of Time series ) sexuality is seen as polymorphic and fluid rather than based in fixed identities and gender roles . 
 Elizabeth Lynn is an openly lesbian science fiction and fantasy writer who has written numerous works featuring positive gay protagonists . Her Chronicles of <unk> novels ( 1979 – 80 ) , the first of which won the World Fantasy Award , were among the first fantasy novels to have gay relationships as an unremarkable part of the cultural background , and included explicit and sympathetic depictions of same @-@ sex love ; the third novel is of particular lesbian interest . Her SF novel A Different Light ( 1978 ) featured a same @-@ sex relationship between two men , and inspired the name of the LGBT bookstore and chain " A Different Light " . The " magical lesbian tale " " The Woman Who Loved the Moon " also won a World Fantasy Award and is the title story in the Lynn 's The Woman Who Loved the Moon , a collection also containing other gay speculative fiction stories . 
 = = = Modern SF ( post New Wave ) = = = 
 After the pushing back of boundaries in the 1960s and 1970s , homosexuality gained much wider acceptance , and was often incorporated into otherwise conventional SF stories with little comment . This was helped by the growing number of openly gay or lesbian authors , such as David Gerrold , Geoff Ryman , Nicola Griffith and Melissa Scott , and transgender writers such as Jessica Amanda <unk> , an author who chronicled the progress of her gender change in the pages of The Literary Magazine of Fantasy and Terror . In the 1980s , blatant homophobia was no longer considered acceptable to most readers . However , depictions of unrealistic lesbians continue to propagate for the titillation of straight men in genre works . In the 1990s , stories depicting alternative sexualities experienced a resurgence . 
 Uranian Worlds , by Eric Garber and Lyn Paleo , was compiled in 1983 and is an authoritative guide to science fiction literature featuring gay , lesbian , transgender , and related themes . The book covers science fiction literature published before 1990 ( 2nd edition , 1990 ) , providing a short review and commentary on each piece . 
 In Lois McMaster Bujold 's Ethan of Athos ( 1986 ) , the titular " unlikely hero " is gay obstetrician Dr. Ethan Urquhart of the single @-@ gender world Athos , whose dangerous adventure alongside the first woman he has ever met presents both a future society where homosexuality is the norm and the lingering sexism and homophobia of our own world . 
 Cyberpunk , a genre arising in the mid @-@ 1980s , has been seen as heteronormative and masculine to a large extent , although feminist and " queer " interpretations are mooted by some critics . Melissa Scott , a lesbian writer , has written several cyberpunk works that prominently feature LGBT characters , including Lambda @-@ award winning Trouble and Her Friends ( 1994 ) and Shadow Man ( 1995 ) , the latter having also been inducted into the Gaylactic Spectrum Hall of Fame . Scott has reported that reviewers called some of these works " too gay " for mixing cyberpunk clichés with political themes . Many of Scott 's other SF works also contain LGBT themes ; she said that she chooses to write about gay themes using SF because these genres allow her to explore situations in which LGBT people are treated better or worse than in reality , and that it also gives an estranging distance for readers averse to such themes , who might otherwise feel accused of similar discriminatory practices as those in the books . 
 A number of LGBT @-@ themed anthologies of speculative short fiction have been published since the 1980s , the first being the science fiction @-@ themed Kindred Spirits ( 1984 ) , edited by Jeffrey M. Elliot . These anthologies often focus on particular sexual identities , such as the New Exploits of Lesbians series with titles in the fantasy ( Magical lesbians , Fairy @-@ tale lesbians ) and horror ( Twilight lesbians ) areas . Others are grouped around particular genres , such as the award @-@ winning Bending the Landscape series edited by Nicola Griffith and Stephen Pagel , in which each of the three volumes focus upon science fiction , fantasy or horror ; or the horror @-@ oriented Queer Fear anthologies , edited by Michael Rowe . 
 Gay characters became common enough that Diana Wynne Jones ' The Tough Guide To Fantasyland contains an entry on gay mages as a fantasy cliché . Such characters are found in Mercedes Lackey 's works , such as the Lambda award winning The Last Herald Mage trilogy ( 1989 ) , in which the protagonists are gay and have magical powers . Their relationships are an integral part of the story , which takes places in the fictional country of Valdemar . Much of the extended series provides non @-@ heterosexual role @-@ models for younger readers . 
 David Gerrold is an openly @-@ gay science fiction writer with a number of LGBT themed works . The Man Who Folded Himself ( 1973 ) examines the narcissistic love of a time @-@ traveler who has gay orgies with alternate versions of himself , including female and lesbian versions . Gerrold 's multi @-@ award winning Jumping Off the Planet ( 2000 ) is the first book in a young adult series , in which a father kidnaps his three sons and goes to the moon ; one son is gay , and rejected from college as he is ineligible for a scholarship available to straight people who agree to have their sexual orientation changed to prevent overpopulation . Gerrold received a Nebula award for a semi @-@ autobiographical short story " The Martian Child " ( 1994 ) , in which a gay man adopts a child . The story was later expanded to book length , and a feature film was produced in which the protagonist was straight , causing criticism . 
 Geoff Ryman wrote several award @-@ winning novels and short stories that prominently feature LGBT characters : The protagonist of The Child Garden ( 1989 ) , an outsider because of her resistance to genetic manipulation and her lesbianism , enters into a relationship with a similarly outcast lesbian polar bear . Lust ( 2001 ) follows a gay man who finds that his sexual fantasies are magically coming true . Was ( 1992 ) includes a gay actor with AIDS and a mentally @-@ challenged abused child , linked by their connection to The Wizard of Oz books and film . In a Locus magazine interview Ryman claimed that the gay and SF genre markets are incompatible : “ In 1990 , if you had asked me which was the worst thing to be labeled as , gay or an SF writer , I 'd have said gay : kills you stone @-@ dead in the market . Then Was came out .... They had it in the gay section of bookstores and they had stuff in gay magazines , but they didn 't say SF — at which point I realized that being a science fiction writer is worse than being gay . " 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 Larissa Lai 's novel Salt Fish Girl ( 2002 ) depicts lesbian relationships in the context of a dystopian corporate future . The novel features Asian @-@ Canadian characters in these lesbian relationships , incorporating racial and ethnic identity into a queer understanding of speculative fiction . Salt Fish Girl engages queer ideas in regards to procreation and bodies , as characters are able to give birth without sperm by eating the durian fruit . It was shortlisted for the James Tiptree Jr. award in 2002 . 
 Elizabeth Bear 's Carnival ( 2006 ) revisits the trope of the single @-@ gender world , as a pair of gay male ambassador @-@ spies attempt to infiltrate and subvert the predominately lesbian civilization of New Amazonia , whose matriarchal rulers have all but enslaved their men . In 2007 , J.K. Rowling 's statement that Albus Dumbledore , a character in her Harry Potter series , was gay caused some controversy . Sarah Hall 's dystopian novel The <unk> Army ( 2007 ) , published in the US under the title Daughters of the North , matter of factly features lesbians as primary characters . The novel won the 2007 John Llewellyn Rhys Prize and James Tiptree , Jr . Award , and was shortlisted for the 2008 Arthur C. Clarke Award . It is perhaps telling of the evolution of public perception of same sex relationships that the relationships are unmentioned or only peripherally noted in reviews . 
 Rafael <unk> dystopian novel <unk> Love ( 2008 ) describes the twenty @-@ third century . USA . The world is homosexual . The author describes an inverted world in which mixed @-@ sex marriages are forbidden . Conception occurs in test tubes . In lesbian families , one of the women carries the child . Gay male couples turn to surrogate mothers to bring their children to term . The Netherlands is the only country where mixed @-@ sex marriages are permitted . In this world intimacy between the opposite sexes is rejected , world history and the classics of world literature have been falsified in order to support the ideology of the homosexual world . The author paints a grotesque situation , but underlying this story is the idea that society should be tolerant and accepting and respect the right of every person to be themselves . 
 Reviewing the field of lesbian romance speculative fiction in 2012 , Liz Bourke concluded that it remained a niche subgenre of uneven quality , but mentioned Jane Fletcher , Chris Anne Wolfe , Barbara Ann Wright , Sandra Barret and Ruth Diaz as contributors of note . More recently in Rick Riordan 's 2013 teen @-@ fantasy novel The House of Hades , character Nico di Angelo professes romantic feelings for protagonist Percy Jackson . In terms of gender identity , Kim Stanley Robinson 's 2012 novel <unk> depicts a world of fluid gender , where " self @-@ images for gender " include feminine , masculine , androgynous , <unk> , hermaphrodite , ambisexual , bisexual , intersex , neuter , eunuch , nonsexual , undifferentiated , gay , lesbian , queer , invert , homosexual , polymorphous , poly , labile , <unk> , hijra , and two @-@ spirit . In 2013 , <unk> <unk> 's lesbian fantasy debut novel The Queen 's Curse became an Amazon best @-@ seller , and in her The <unk> Series the main female character is bi @-@ sexual and falls in love with a lesbian character . The <unk> are a supernatural / paranormal bi @-@ sexual species . 
 Within the realm of tie @-@ in speculative fiction , there was also an increase in LGBT representation . In particular , from 2001 onwards there was a concerted effort to explore this in licensed Star Trek literature . In the Star Trek : Deep Space Nine relaunch , the post @-@ series novels following the end of the eponymous television series , a passing line in one series to a certain species , the Andorians , marrying in fours allowed the exploration of a <unk> @-@ gendered species , who partnered in broadly two ' male ' and two ' female ' species . Andrew J. Robinson 's Garak novel , A Stitch in Time , suggested the <unk> of his character , which was followed up in subsequent novels , in particular Una McCormack 's 2014 novel , The Crimson Shadow . In the original series Star Trek : Vanguard , created by Marco Palmieri and David Alan Mack , two of the main characters were a lesbian Vulcan officer and a lesbian Klingon intelligence agent . 
 = = Comics and manga = = 
 For much of the 20th century , gay relationships were discouraged from being shown in comics which were seen mainly as directed towards children . Until 1989 , the Comics Code Authority ( CCA ) , which imposed de facto censorship on comics sold through news stands in the United States , forbade any suggestion of homosexuality . Artists had to drop subtle hints while not stating directly a character 's orientation . Overt gay and lesbian themes were first found in underground and alternative titles which did not carry the CCA 's seal of approval . 
 The CCA came into being in response to Fredric Wertham 's Seduction of the Innocent , in which comic book creators were accused of attempting to negatively influence children with images of violence and sexuality , including subliminal homosexuality . Wertham claimed Wonder Woman 's strength and independence made her a lesbian , and stated that " The Batman type of story may stimulate children to homosexual fantasies . " 
 In recent years the number of LGBT characters has increased greatly in mainstream superhero comics ; however , LGBT characters continue to be relegated to supporting roles , and generate criticism for the treatment gay characters receive . 
 = = = Marvel = = = 
 Alpha Flight 's Northstar was the first major gay character in the Marvel universe and remains the most famous gay character in mainstream comics . Created by Marvel Comics in 1979 as a member of the original Alpha Flight superhero team , Northstar 's sexual identity was hinted at early in his history , in 1983 in issues 7 and 8 of Alpha Flight , but not openly stated ; his apparent lack of interest in women was chalked up to his obsessive drive to win as a ski champion . The character was finally revealed to be gay in 1992 's Alpha Flight issue 106 and his outing made national headlines . 
 In 2002 , Marvel Comics revived The Rawhide Kid in their Marvel MAX imprint , introducing the first openly gay comic book character to star in his own magazine . The first edition of the Rawhide Kid 's gay saga was called Slap Leather . According to a <unk> com article , the character 's sexuality is conveyed indirectly , through euphemisms and puns , and the comic 's style is campy . Conservative groups quickly protested the gay take on the character and claimed that children would be corrupted by it , and the covers carried an " Adults only " label . 
 Marvel 's policy had stated that all series emphasizing solo gay characters must carry an " Adults Only " label , in response to conservative protests . But in 2006 , Marvel editor @-@ in @-@ chief Joe Quesada claimed that this policy was no longer in force , and Marvel received GLAAD 's 2005 Best Comic Book Award for its superhero comic book Young Avengers , which included gay characters but was published as a mainstream book with no warning label . In 2012 , despite protests , Marvel published an issue of Astonishing X @-@ Men in which Northstar married his partner , Kyle . 
 = = = DC = = = 
 DC often still draws criticism for its use of stereotypes for LGBT characters . Firebrand , a superhero debuting in 1941 , is thought by some to be an early example , with his pink or transparent costume . Writer Roy Thomas penned thought balloons that suggested Firebrand had been involved in a gay relationship with his sidekick and bodyguard Slugger Dunn , although these hints never moved beyond subtext . A more modern example is the violent vigilante superhero Midnighter . The Batman @-@ like Midnighter was shown as being in a relationship with the Superman @-@ like Apollo during their time as members of the superhero team The Authority . Midnighter and Apollo are now married and have an adopted daughter – Midnighter has gone on to star in his own title . In 2006 , DC Comics could still draw widespread media attention by announcing a new , lesbian incarnation of the well @-@ known character Batwoman , even though openly lesbian minor characters such as Gotham City police officer Renee Montoya already existed in the franchise . 
 In addition to true LGBT characters , there has been controversy over various homosexual interpretations of the most famous superhero comic book characters . Batman 's relationship with Robin has famously come under scrutiny , in spite of the majority of creators associated with the creator denying that the character is gay . Psychologist Fredric Wertham , who in Seduction of the Innocent asserted that " Batman stories are psychologically homosexual " , claimed to find a " subtle atmosphere of homoeroticism which pervades the adventures of the mature ' Batman ' and his young friend ' Robin ' " . It has also been claimed that Batman is interesting to gay audiences because " he was one of the first fictional characters to be attacked on the grounds of his presumed homosexuality , " and " the 1960s TV series remains a touchstone of camp . " Frank Miller has described the relationship between Batman and the Joker as a " homophobic nightmare " , he views the character as sublimating his sexual urges into crime fighting . 
 Some continue to play off the homosexual interpretations of Batman . One notable example occurred in 2000 , when DC Comics refused to allow permission for the reprinting of four panels ( from Batman # 79 , 92 , 105 and 139 ) to illustrate Christopher York 's paper All in the Family : Homophobia and Batman Comics in the 1950s . Another happened in the summer of 2005 , when painter Mark Chamberlain displayed a number of watercolors depicting both Batman and Robin in suggestive and sexually explicit poses . DC threatened both artist and the Kathleen Cullen Fine Arts gallery with legal action if they did not cease selling the works and demanded all remaining art , as well as any profits derived from them . 
 Many of DC 's gay characters , such as Obsidian and Renee Montoya , were changed or essentially erased in The New 52 reboot . Meanwhile , others , such as Kate Kane , were given far less attention than before the reboot . In 2012 DC announced that an " iconic " character would now be gay in the new DC universe . It was then revealed that Alan Scott , the original Green Lantern was that character . This led to fan outcry because his status as " iconic " is debatable , and he does not actually exist in the mainstream DC universe . This also effectively meant that the already gay character , Obsidian , could not exist as he was Alan Scott 's child . 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Yaoi and Yuri ( also known as Boys ' Love and Girls ' Love , respectively , as well as Shōnen @-@ ai and Shōjo @-@ ai in the West , although these are not used in Japan due to pedophilic undertones ) are Japanese genres which have homosexual romance themes , across a variety of media . Yaoi and yuri have spread beyond Japan : both translated and original yaoi and yuri is now available in many countries and languages . The characters of yaoi and yuri do not tend to self @-@ identify as homosexual or bisexual . As with much manga and anime , SF and fantasy tropes and environments are common : For example , Ai no <unk> , a 1980s yaoi light novel series described as a " magnum opus " of the Boys Love genre , involves a science fictional caste system . <unk> has been described as being " a wonderful sci fi series " which does not have to rely on its yuri content to appeal to the audience . 
 Yaoi has been criticised for stereotypical and homophobic portrayals of its characters , and failing to address gay issues . Homophobia , when it is presented as an issue at all , is used as a plot device to " heighten the drama " , or to show the purity of the leads ' love . Matt Thorn has suggested that as BL is a romance narrative , having strong political themes may be a " turn off " to the readers . Critics state that the genre challenges heteronormativity via the " queer " bishōnen . 
 There is also a style of manga called Bara , which is typically written by gay men for a gay male adult audience . Bara often has more realistic themes than yaoi and is more likely to acknowledge homophobia and the taboo nature of homosexuality in Japan . While western commentators sometimes group bara and yaoi together , writers and fans consider them separate genres . 
 = = Film and television = = 
 In general , speculative fiction on television and film has lagged behind literature in its portrayals of homosexuality . Sexual relationships in major speculative fiction franchises have generally been depicted as heterosexual in nature . Inter @-@ species and inter @-@ ethnic relationships have been commonly depicted , while homosexual relationships and transgender characters are more rare . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 LGBT characters in films began to appear more regularly only in the 1980s . Films in the late 1920s and early 1930s reflected the liberal attitudes of the day and could include sexual innuendos and references to homosexuality , but from the 1930s until 1968 the film industry in the US followed the Production Code . The code spelled out what was morally acceptable for a public audience ; references to sexual " perversions " such as homosexuality were forbidden . Virtually all motion pictures produced in the United States adhered to the code , and similar censorship was common in other countries , for example an early version of the first lesbian vampire film Dracula 's Daughter , a film described in The Celluloid Closet as presenting " homosexuality as a predatory weakness " , was rejected by the British Board of Film Censors in 1935 , who said in part " ... Dracula 's Daughter would require half a dozen ... languages to adequately express its beastliness . " . Horror author Anne Rice has named Dracula 's Daughter as a direct inspiration for her own homoerotic vampire fiction , naming a bar in her novel Queen of the Damned " Dracula 's Daughter " in honor of the film . Films produced under such censorship could only introduce homosexuality as a disguised undercurrent , and still flirted with controversy in doing so , such as in the cult horror film White Zombie . 
 The less stringent rules of the post @-@ Hayes film industry allowed sexuality to be more open , and cinema as a whole became more sexually explicit from the 1980s in particular , but aimed to purely to entertain rather than exploring underlying sexual dynamics . Much of the sex in speculative fiction film is merely intended to titillate ; a review of fantasy films identified 10 – 15 % as softcore <unk> but it remained rare to see gay characters in speculative fiction films . Horror films , that had sex as one of their major preoccupations , continued to be more leniently censored , due to the perception of being unserious and lightweight . Vampires in particular have been described as obvious erotic metaphors and as a result , numerous vampire films since the 1970s strongly imply or explicitly show lesbianism , following the inspiration of lesbian vampire story Carmilla . The prototypical Hollywood vampire , Dracula , was shown to be openly gay in the spoof film Does Dracula Suck ? in 1969 . 
 Gay genre films remain rare , and science fiction films ' inclusion of gay characters continues to relegate them to supporting roles , such as the " stereotypical , limp @-@ <unk> , frantic homosexual " minor character in the 1996 blockbuster Independence Day , a film whose main theme has been described as being the anxiety surrounding male friendships and homosexual panic . It is also interesting to note that the film 's director , Roland Emmerich , is openly gay . Still there are some curious cases like Cthulhu ( 2007 ) a horror / thriller film based on the works of H. P. Lovecraft , in which the main character is gay but it isn 't the main thing , although it is important in the development of the character 's psychology . The film is plagued with monsters and disturbing happenings . Also , in V for Vendetta there are two secondary characters – one gay , one lesbian – shown as victims of the totalitarian dystopia . 2012 saw the light of the epic Wachowskis + Tom Tykwer blockbuster , Cloud Atlas , featuring in one of the six stories a couple of gay characters . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 LGBT characters began appearing on television with increasing frequency only in the 1990s . The 1994 television science fiction show , Babylon 5 introduced a bisexual character , Susan Ivanova whose relationship with a fellow female telepath was revealed in season 2 ( 1995 ) . Advocate magazine called this relationship out as the closest that the Star Trek franchise or any " Star Trek clone , " as he called the show , had come to a " gay creature — much less a gay human being . " Babylon 5 continued to explore the state of same @-@ sex relationships in the future with the introduction of a male @-@ male marriage and subsequent honeymoon as cover for two of the main characters who were on a covert mission to a Mars colony in season 4 . 
 The Xena : Warrior Princess fantasy television series introduced its main characters , Xena and Gabrielle , as close companions ; fan speculation about lesbian overtones led to them becoming lesbian icons , although the lesbian content remained at the subtext level . The series has been cited as " trail @-@ blazing " and breaking down barriers , allowing the production of subsequent programming such as Buffy the Vampire Slayer , which introduced a number of LGBT characters . The most famous is the major character , Willow and her partners Tara and Kennedy . Although praised for their " healthy relationship " and being the first lesbian relationship between major characters on prime @-@ time television , others criticised the use of witchcraft as a metaphor for lesbian sex . Tara 's death directly after reconciliatory sex with Willow caused an outcry among the LGBT community , who saw it as a " homophobic cliché " . Andrew Wells , a recurring villain and eventual ally , was strongly implied to be gay , although closeted . The series was influential on subsequent television speculative fiction , including Torchwood . The series won a number of LGBT themed awards , and was regarded as groundbreaking in its portrayal of gay youth . 
 Torchwood is a British science fiction drama television programme , part of the long @-@ running Doctor Who franchise , which began airing in 2006 on BBC Three . The series explores several themes in its narrative , in particular LGBT themes . Various characters are portrayed as sexually fluid ; through those characters , the series examines homosexual and bisexual relationships . Although the nature of their sexual flexibility is not explicitly discussed , the characters offer varying perspectives on orientation , with The Sun describing all of the characters on Torchwood as bisexual . Series creator Russell T Davies has said that he hopes to defy audience expectations of <unk> characters : " Without making it political or dull , this is going to be a very bisexual programme . I want to knock down the barriers so we can 't define which of the characters is gay . We need to start mixing things up , rather than thinking , ' This is a gay character and he 'll only ever go off with men . ' " Davies has also described Jack Harkness as omnisexual : " He 'll shag anything with a hole . Jack doesn 't categorise people : if he fancies you , he 'll do it with you . " 
 The inclusion of significant LGBT characters in modern speculative fiction television series has not been universal . For example , the Star Trek franchise 's lack of same @-@ sex relationships has long been a sore spot with LGBT fandom , some of whom have organised boycotts against the franchise to protest its failure to include LGBT characters . They also point out that Gene Roddenberry had made statements in later life favourable to acceptance of homosexuality and the portrayal of same @-@ sex relationships in Star Trek , but that the franchise 's coverage has remained meagre . 
 Within the Star Trek canon , there have been no officially recognized LGBT characters in the television spin @-@ offs . The International Review of Science Fiction ran a feature entitled " Prisoners of Dogma and Prejudice : Why There Are no G / L / B / T Characters in Star Trek : Deep Space 9 " However , gender identity has occasionally been treated as an " issue " within the new Star Trek series , to be dealt with as a theme in individual episodes , such as the 1995 Star Trek : Deep Space Nine episode " Rejoined " , which was the first episode of the show to feature a same @-@ sex relationship and romantic same @-@ sex kiss between women . Subsequently , the Star Trek franchise has portrayed a few same @-@ sex kisses , but always in the context of either the evil " mirror universe " ( " The Emperor 's New Cloak " ) or body possession ( " Warlord " and others ) , and often for comedic purposes between otherwise heterosexual characters . In a 2000 Fandom interview , Star Trek screenwriter Ronald D. Moore suggested that the reason why no gay characters existed in the television franchise was because someone wanted it that way , and no amount of support from fans , cast or crew was going to make any difference . In recent years , a few of the Star Trek novels and comics , which are officially licensed but not considered canon , have featured serious direct same @-@ sex relationships , including portraying a minor canon character as gay . 
 In 2005 the television series Dante 's Cove premiered on the here ! cable station . The series included both gay and lesbian couples dealing with supernatural situations in the coastal town of the same name . The following year , Syfy premiered the series Eureka . The series spotlighted a fictional town in Oregon that consisted almost entirely of geniuses . This included the town 's café owner Vincent , who also happened to be gay . 
 HBO brought then new series True Blood to the forefront of gay genre television , introducing a variety of omnisexual characters to the small screen in 2008 including : Lafayette Reynolds ( played by <unk> Ellis ) , Jesus Velasquez ( played by Kevin Alejandro ) , Tara Thornton ( played by Rutina Wesley ) , Pam Swynford De Beaufort ( played by Kristin Bauer van Straten ) , Eddie Gauthier ( played by Stephen Root ) , Russell <unk> ( played by Denis O 'Hare ) , and Rev. Steve Newlin ( played by Michael McMillian ) . 
 Stargate Universe in 2009 became the first space @-@ based science fiction show to feature an openly gay character in its primary cast , which was " Camille Wray " played by Ming @-@ Na . " Wray " was also the first gay character in the franchise and the first primary lesbian Asian @-@ American character on primetime television . Wray 's storyline featured a committed long @-@ term relationship with her Earth @-@ bound partner Sharon ( played by Reiko Aylesworth ) , the lifelike portrayal of which was very positively received by the lesbian community and press . Stargate Universe was cancelled after a two @-@ season run . 
 In 2009 the series Warehouse 13 premiered on the Syfy cable network . The series later introduced a character named Steve Jinks , played by actor Aaron Ashmore , a gay government agent assigned to assist in the containment of bizarre artifacts . 
 In 2010 a cable series prequel to Battlestar Galactica was introduced titled Caprica . The series highlighted a world in which same @-@ sex marriage was common . One of the central characters named Sam Adama , played by Sasha Roiz , had a husband named Larry , played by Julius Chapple . 
 In 2011 the cable station Syfy premiered the series Being Human , an Americanized version of the previously released British series of the same name . A lesbian character named Emily Levison , played by actress Alison Louder , was introduced as the sister to one of the main characters . That same year the FX cable series American Horror Story highlighted gay ghost couple Chad Warwick and Patrick , played by Zachary Quinto and Teddy Sears . The HBO cable station premiered Game of Thrones , based on the book series of the same name . The series included gay couple Renly Baratheon and Loras Tyrell , played by actors Gethin Anthony and Finn Jones . MTV also premiered the cable series Teen Wolf that same year . One of the characters depicted is an out gay high school lacrosse player named Danny <unk> , played by <unk> <unk> . 
 In the American TV series The Fosters , two of the main characters , Stef and Lena Adams @-@ Foster are a married same @-@ sex couple . One of the other main characters , Jude Adams @-@ Foster is portrayed as questioning his sexuality as he falls in love with his best friend Connor Stevens . In the episode " Now Hear This " , the characters shared what is believed to be the youngest LGBT kiss ever in US television history . Following the kiss , the show developed a romantic relationship between the two . 
 = = = Slash fiction = = = 
 The platonic close male relationships in television and film science fiction have been reinterpreted by fans as slash fiction – Kirk / Spock being the earliest example . Slash cannot be commercially distributed due to copyright , and until the 1990s was either undistributed or published in zines . With the advent of the internet , the slash fiction community of fans and writers began to cluster at sites such as <unk> , and websites and fanzines dedicated to popular speculative fiction franchises such as X @-@ files and Star Trek have become common . The use of characters from major SF franchises in " gay readings " has caused legal action : LucasFilm has sent cease and desist orders to prevent gay reinterpretations of Star Wars characters , and Anne Rice is notorious for attempts to stop production of slash fiction based on her Vampire Chronicles characters , although many of the characters are bisexual in canon . Slash fiction has been described as important to the LGBT community and the formation of queer identities , as it represents a resistance to the expectation of compulsory heterosexuality , but has also been noted as being unrepresentative of the gay community , being more a medium to express feminist <unk> with SF . According to polls , most of slash fandom is made up of heterosexual women with a college degree . These demographics are older than the yaoi fans and they tend to be more easily disturbed about slash depicting underage sexuality , but this is becoming less true due to the popularity of Harry Potter @-@ inspired slash fiction . 
 <unk> is a subgenre of slash fiction which focuses on romantic and / or sexual relationships between female fictional characters , Typically , characters featured in femslash are heterosexual in the canon universe ; however , similar fan fiction about lesbian characters are commonly labeled as femslash for convenience . There is less femslash than there is slash based on male couples – it has been suggested that heterosexual female slash authors generally do not write femslash , and that it is rare to find a fandom with two sufficiently engaging female characters . Janeway / Seven is the main Star Trek femslash pairing , as only they have " an on @-@ screen relationship fraught with deep emotional connection and conflict " . There is debate about whether fanfiction about canon lesbians such as Willow and Tara of Buffy the Vampire Slayer counts as " slash " , their relationship storylines are more coy than heterosexual ones , which entices Willow / Tara femslash authors to fill in the gaps in the known relationship storyline . It is " relatively recently " that male writers have begun writing femslash . 
 = = Reaction of the speculative fiction community = = 
 There has been a long history of tolerance of LGBT people in SF fandom . The presence of gay members was noted by attendees of early conventions , but generally not discussed — the idea that gay or lesbian members would seek recognition within the SF community was " unthinkable , " and an accusation in the 1940s by a fanzine editor that the Los Angeles Science Fiction Association was " full of gay members " caused a scandal in fan circles . Prominent SF fan Forrest Ackerman is regarded as one of the first members of fandom to openly support the gay and lesbian movements . He was known for writing early lesbian fiction and aided in the publication of The Ladder , the journal of the recently formed lesbian group the Daughters of Bilitis . He claims the group named him an honorary lesbian for his support , and to have pseudonymously written the earliest work of " lesbian SF " in 1947 in Vice Versa , the lesbian fanzine edited by Lisa Ben . 
 As the number of works featuring LGBT characters increased , so did the visibility of LGBT fans . At least as early as the 1980 Worldcon ( <unk> Two ) , there were gatherings of gay and gay @-@ friendly members of the SF community , including Samuel R. Delany , Marion Zimmer Bradley and Melissa Scott . However , such meetings did not necessarily indicate whole @-@ hearted acceptance within the fan community , and gay and lesbian fans were not regarded as a unified interest group . Informal gatherings at conferences and the attempted creation of a newsletter for LGBT fans drew little notice . 
 Networking between gay fans continued , finally coalescing at the 1986 Worldcon into a plan of action . This led to the first Gaylaxicon science fiction convention being held in 1988 and subsequently to the creation of the Gaylactic Network and the Gaylactic Spectrum Awards by the science fiction community . Gay @-@ themed discussions are now a staple at conventions such as <unk> ; for example , <unk> 30 featured a panel discussing " Why Women Write About Gay Men " , and the 38th World Science Fiction Convention in Boston had a discussion panel entitled " The Closed Open Mind – Homophobia in Science Fiction and Fantasy Stories " . 
 Other SF authors , such as Orson Scott Card , have been criticised by the LGBT community for their works or opinions , which have been described as homophobic . 
 Some lesbian science fiction is targeted specifically to a lesbian audience , rather than science fiction fans , and published by small feminist or lesbian fiction presses such as Bella Books , Bold Strokes Books , <unk> Publishing , Regal Crest Enterprises , Bedazzled Ink , Intaglio Publications , and <unk> Ink . A notable author writing science fiction published by lesbian presses is Katherine V. Forrest . 
 = = LGBT speculative fiction awards = = 
 A number of awards exist that recognise works at the intersection of LGBT and speculative fiction : 
 The Gaylactic Spectrum Awards honour works in science fiction , fantasy and horror which include positive explorations of gay , lesbian , bisexual or transgender characters , themes , or issues . The awards were instituted in 1999 and are given for best novel , short fiction and other works of the previous year . Works produced before the awards ' inception are eligible for entry into the Hall of Fame . 
 The Lambda Literary Awards include awards for science fiction , fantasy and horror . The awards were first presented in 1989 , with separate categories for speculative fiction for lesbians and gay men . In 1993 these categories were merged and the combined award has undergone several name changes since then . Although the awards are given based on the quality of the writing and the LGBT themes , the author 's sexual orientation is also a factor . 
 The James Tiptree , Jr . Award honours works of science fiction or fantasy that expand or explore one 's understanding of gender . Thus , it often goes to works which deal directly or tangentially with gay , lesbian , bisexual or transgender issues . 
 Golden Crown Literary Society Awards ( or " <unk> " ) are given to works containing lesbian themes or depictions of lesbian characters . Awards are given in numerous categories , including speculative fiction ( or " SciFi / Fantasy / Horror " ) and paranormal romance . 
 = History of Shaktism = 
 The roots of Shaktism – a Hindu denomination that focuses worship upon Shakti or Devi , the Hindu Divine Mother – penetrate deeply into India 's prehistory . From the Devi 's earliest known appearance in Indian Paleolithic settlements more than 20 @,@ 000 years ago , through the refinement of her cult in the Indus Valley Civilization , her partial eclipse during the Vedic period , and her subsequent resurfacing and expansion in Sanskrit tradition , it has been suggested that , in many ways , " the history of the Hindu tradition can be seen as a reemergence of the feminine . " 
 Shaktism as it exists today began with the literature of the Vedic Age , further evolved during the formative period of the Hindu epics , reached its full flower during the Gupta Age ( 300 @-@ 700 CE ) , and continued to expand and develop thereafter . Devi Mahatmya , an important text in Shaktism , was composed around fifth or sixth century CE . Here , for the first time , " the various mythic , cultic and theological elements relating to diverse female divinities were brought together in what has been called the ' crystallization of the Goddess tradition . ' " Other important texts include the Lalita Sahasranama , the Devi Gita , Adi Shankara 's Saundaryalahari and the Tantras . 
 Recent developments related to Shaktism include the emergence of Bharat Mata ( " Mother India " ) symbolism , the increasing visibility of Hindu female saints and gurus , and the prodigious rise of the " new " goddess Santoshi Mata following release of the Indian film Jai Santoshi Maa ( " Hail to the Mother of Satisfaction " ) in 1975 . As one commentator notes : 
 " Today just as 10 @,@ 000 years ago , images of the Goddess are everywhere in India . You 'll find them painted on the sides of trucks , pasted to the dashboards of taxis , <unk> on the walls of shops . You 'll often see a color painting of the Goddess prominently displayed in Hindu homes . Usually the picture is hung high on the wall so you have to crane your neck backward , looking up toward her feet . [ ... ] In India , Goddess worship is not a ' cult , ' it 's a religion , [ ... ] an extraordinarily spiritually and psychologically mature tradition . Millions of people turn every day with heartfelt yearning to the Mother of the Universe . " 
 = = Early Origins = = 
 To date , the earliest Mother Goddess figurine unearthed in India ( near Allahabad ) belongs to the Upper Paleolithic , and carbon @-@ dates to approximately 20 @,@ 000 - 23 @,@ 000 BCE . Also belonging to that period are some collections of colorful stones marked with natural triangles . Discovered near Mirzapur in Uttar Pradesh , they are similar to stones still worshiped as Devi by tribal groups in the area . Moreover , they " may demonstrate connections to the later Tantric use of <unk> , in which triangles manifest a vital symbolism connected with fertility . " 
 Thousands of female statuettes dated as early as c . 5500 BCE have been recovered at Mehrgarh , one of the most important Neolithic sites in world archeology , and a precursor to the great Indus Valley Civilization . In Harappa and Mohenjo @-@ daro , major cities of the Indus valley civilization , female figurines were found in almost all households indicating the presence of cults of goddess worship . Most figurines are naked and have elaborate <unk> . Some figurines have ornaments or horns on the head and a few are in poses that expose the genitals . Several small circular objects with holes in middle , possibly representing yoni , were also found . The objects and images found suggest that the goddess cults of Indus valley civilization were associated with fertility . A seal shows a male figure standing over a seated female figure with a sickle . It probably suggests an association between the female figure and crops , and possibly implies a ritual sacrifice where the blood of the victim was offered to the goddess for ensuring agricultural productivity . 
 Bhattacharya links the archaeological discoveries of Indus valley civilization to present @-@ day Shaktism of later Hindu religion . Other scholars like David Kinsley and Lynn Foulston acknowledge some similarities between the cult of goddess in Indus valley civilization and Shaktism , but think that there is no conclusive evidence that proves a link between them . 
 According to Bhattacharya : 
 The later Indus Valley population centers of Harappa and Mohenjo @-@ daro ( c . 3300 - 1600 BCE ) " sheltered a mixed population , the major section of which came from the adjacent villages to seek their fortune in the great cities . They also brought with them their own cults and rituals , the Female Principle of the agricultural communities , which formed the basis of Harappan [ i.e. , Indus Valley ] religion . Some of the cults and rituals of the simpler peoples were adopted by the higher , but probably not in the original , unsophisticated form . They were given an aristocratic colour [ that reflected their worshipers ' more ] elevated position in the society . " 
 As these philosophies and rituals evolved in the northern reaches of the subcontinent , additional layers of Goddess @-@ focused tradition were expanding outward from the sophisticated Dravidian civilizations of the south . The " cult of the Female Principle was a major aspect of Dravidian religion , " Bhattacharyya notes . " The concept of Shakti was an integral part of their religion and their female deities eventually came to be identified with the Puranic Parvati , Durga or Kali . [ ... ] The cult of the Sapta Matrika , or Seven Divine Mothers , which is an integral part of the Shakta religion , may [ also ] be of Dravidian inspiration . " 
 = = Philosophical Development = = 
 Shaktism as we know it began with the literature of the Vedic Age ; further evolved during the formative period of the Hindu epics ; reached its full flower during the Gupta Age ( 300 @-@ 700 CE ) , and continued to expand and develop thereafter . 
 = = = Vedas = = = 
 As the Indus Valley Civilization slowly declined and dispersed , its peoples mixed with other groups to eventually give rise to the Vedic Civilization ( c . 1500 - 600 BCE ) . Female divinity continued to have a place in belief and worship , but generally in a more subordinate role , with goddesses serving principally as consorts to the great gods . 
 The most important of the female deities mentioned in the Vedas is <unk> . Number of hymns in the Vedas are dedicated exclusively to her . The three divine mothers mentioned in the Rig Veda from whom the Vedic gods took their birth are Aditi , Prithvi and Saraswati . Prithvi continued to exist in later Hinduism as Bhudevi ( goddess of the earth ) . According to Bhattacharyya , " it may be said that Aditi was the most ancient mother of the gods , whose features [ had already become ] obscure even in the Vedic Age . [ ... ] The Harappan [ Mother Goddess ] was probably reflected in [ the Vedic ] conception of Aditi , thought to be a goddess of yore even in the Rigveda itself . " Indeed , Vedic descriptions of Aditi are vividly reflected in the countless so @-@ called <unk> Gauri idols ( depicting a faceless , lotus @-@ headed goddess in birthing posture ) that have been worshiped throughout India for millennia : 
 " In the first age of the gods , existence was born from non @-@ existence . The quarters of the sky were born from she who crouched with legs spread . The earth was born from she who crouched with legs spread , and from the earth the quarters of the sky were born . " 
 The historically recurrent theme of the Devi 's all @-@ encompassing , pan @-@ sexual nature arises explicitly for the first time in such declarations as : " Aditi is the sky , Aditi is the air , Aditi is all gods . [ ... ] Aditi is the Mother , the Father , and the Son . Aditi is whatever shall be born . " 
 Also significant is the appearance , in the famous Rig Vedic hymn Devi Sukta , of two of Hinduism 's most widely known and beloved goddesses : <unk> , identified with the present @-@ day Saraswati ; and <unk> , now better known as Lakshmi . In the hymn , still recited by thousands of Hindus each day , the Goddess unambiguously declares : 
 " I am the Sovereign Queen ; the treasury of all treasures ; the chief of all objects of worship ; whose all @-@ pervading Self manifests all gods and goddesses ; whose birthplace is in the midst of the causal waters ; who in breathing forth gives birth to all created worlds , and yet extends beyond them , so vast am I in greatness . " 
 = = = Upanishads = = = 
 The great Kena Upanishad ( c . 750 @-@ 500 BCE ) tells an early tale in which the Devi appears as the shakti , or essential power , of the Supreme Brahman . It begins with the Vedic trinity of Agni , Vayu and Indra boasting and posturing in the flush of a recent victory over a demon hoard – until they suddenly find themselves bereft of divine power in the presence of a mysterious yaksha , or forest spirit . When Indra tries to approach and question the yaksha , it disappears , replaced by the Devi in the form of a " highly adorned " yakshini : 
 It was Uma , the daughter of <unk> . Indra said to her , ' Who was that yaksha ? ' She replied , ' It is Brahman . It is only through the victory of Brahman that you have thus become great . ' After that Indra and the devas realized the Truth [ ... ] having known Brahman through such direct experience . 
 Significantly , Bhattacharyya notes that " a study of the extant yaksha and yakshini images [ of this period ] shows that the later images of the gods and goddesses were shaped after them . " 
 The canonical Shakta Upanishads are much more recent , most dating between the 13th and 18th centuries , and generally relate to sectarian matters of Srividya worship . While their archaic Sanskrit usages " tend to create the impression that [ they ] belong to a hoary past , not one of the verses cast in the Vedic mold can be traced to a Vedic source . " 
 = = = Epic Period = = = 
 While " no goddess of a purely Shakta character " is mentioned in the great Vaishnava epic Ramayana ( c . 200 BCE - 200 CE ) , the Mahabharata ( c . 400 BCE - 400 CE ) is full of references that confirm the ongoing vitality of Shakta worship . 
 Devi is also mentioned in <unk> <unk> , <unk> , and there are many verses in vedas regarding various forms of <unk> main <unk> of the pantheon held as Durga the central <unk> The Great Epic thus refers to the goddess residing in the <unk> , the goddess who is fond of wine and meat ( <unk> ) and worshiped by the hunting peoples . " The ongoing process of Goddess @-@ worshiping indigenous peoples " coming into the fold of the caste system [ also brought with it ] a religious reflex of great historical consequence . " 
 However , it is in the Epic 's Durga <unk> that " the Devi is first revealed in her true character , [ comprising ] numerous local goddesses combined into one [ ... ] all @-@ powerful Female Principle . " Meanwhile , the great Tamil epic , Silappatikaram ( c . 100 CE ) was one of several literary masterpieces amply indicating " the currency of the cult of the Female Principle in South India " during this period – and , once again , " the idea that Lakshmi , Saraswati , Parvati , etc . , represent different aspects of the same power . " 
 = = = Puranas = = = 
 Taken together with the Epics , the vast body of religious and cultural compilations known as the Puranas ( most of which were composed during the Gupta period , c . 300 - 600 CE ) " afford us greater insight into all aspects and phases of Hinduism – its mythology , its worship , its theism and pantheism , its love of God , its philosophy and superstitions , its festivals and ceremonies and ethics – than any other works . " 
 Some of the more important Shakta @-@ oriented Puranas include the Devi Purana and the Kalika Purana , in which Devi is described as " the <unk> Prakriti " to whom the world owes its origin , " while she does not owe her origin to anything . " By far , however , the most important Puranas from the Shakta standpoint are the Markandeya Purana , the Brahmanda Purana , and the Devi @-@ Bhagavata Purana , from which the key Shakta scriptures are drawn . 
 = = = = Devi Mahatmya = = = = 
 By far , the most important text of Shaktism is the Devi Mahatmya ( also known as the Durga Saptashati , Chandi or Chandi @-@ Path ) , found in the Markandeya Purana . Composed some 1 @,@ 600 years ago , the text " wove together the diverse threads of already ancient memory and created a dazzling verbal tapestry that remains even today the central text of the Hindu Goddess . " Here , for the first time , " the various mythic , cultic and theological elements relating to diverse female divinities were brought together in what has been called the ' crystallization of the Goddess tradition . ' " 
 As the earliest Hindu scripture " in which the object of worship is conceptualized as Goddess , with a capital G " , the Devi Mahatmya also marks the birth of " independent Shaktism " ; i.e. the cult of the Female Principle as a distinct philosophical and denominational entity . 
 " The influence of the cult of the Female Principle [ had already ] placed goddesses by the sides of the gods of all systems as their consorts , and symbols of their energy or shakti . But the entire popular emotion centering round the Female Principle was not exhausted . So need was felt for a new system , entirely female @-@ dominated , as system in which even the great gods like Vishnu or Shiva would remain subordinate to the goddess . This new system – containing vestiges of hoary antiquity , varieties of rural and tribal cults and rituals , and strengthened by newfangled ideas of different ages – came to be known as Shaktism . " 
 = = = = Lalita Sahasranama = = = = 
 Within the Hindu genre of <unk> ( literally , " thousand @-@ name " hymns , extolling the names , deeds and associations of a given deity ) , the Sri Lalita Sahasranama Stotra , or " Hymn to the Thousand Names of the Auspicious Goddess Lalita " , is " a veritable classic , widely acknowledged for its lucidity , clarity and poetic excellence . " 
 The Lalita Sahasranama is part of the Brahmanda Purana , but its specific origins and authorship are lost to history . Based upon textual evidence , it is believed to have been composed in South India not earlier than the 9th or later than the 11th century CE . The text is closely associated with another section of the Brahmanda Purana entitled <unk> ( " The Great Narrative of Lalita " ) , which extols the deeds of the Goddess in her form as Lalita @-@ Tripurasundari , in particular her slaying of the demon <unk> . 
 The text operates on a number of levels , containing references not just to the Devi 's physical qualities and exploits but also an encoded guide to philosophy and esoteric practices of kundalini yoga and Srividya Shaktism . In addition , every name and group of names within the Sahasranama is considered to have high mantric value independent of its content , and are often prescribed in sadhanas or <unk> to accomplish particular purposes . 
 = = = = Devi Gita = = = = 
 The late Puranic age saw the beginnings of Bhakti – " new religious movements of <unk> , theistic devotionalism " that would come to full fruition between 1200 and 1700 CE , and still in many ways define the mainstream of Hindu religious practice . The Devi Gita is an important milestone , as the first major Shakta " theistic work [ to be ] steeped in bhakti . " 
 The Devi Gita is the final and best @-@ known portion of the vast 11th @-@ century scripture known as the Devi Bhagavata Purana , a text exclusively dedicated to the Devi " in her highest iconic mode , as the supreme World @-@ Mother Bhuvaneshvari , beyond birth , beyond marriage , beyond any possible subordination to Shiva . " Indeed , the Purana 's " most significant contribution to the Shakta theological tradition is the ideal of a Goddess both single and benign . " 
 The Devi @-@ Bhagavata Purana retells the tales of the Devi Mahatmya in much greater length and detail , embellishing them with Shakta philosophical reflections , while recasting many classic tales from other schools of Hinduism ( particularly Vaishnavism ) in a distinctly Shakta light : 
 " The Devi @-@ Bhagavata was intended not only to show the superiority of the Goddess over various male deities , but also to clarify and elaborate on her nature on her own terms . [ ... ] The Goddess in the Devi @-@ Bhagavata becomes less of a warrior goddess , and more a <unk> and comforter of her devotees , and a teacher of wisdom . This development in the character of the Goddess culminates in the Devi Gita , which " repeatedly stresses the necessity of love for the goddess , with no mention of one 's gender , as the primary qualification , " a view " inspired by the devotional ideals of Shaktism . " 
 = = = Samkhya and Vedanta = = = 
 As the first millennium wound to an end , " religious movements of the South began to exert tremendous influence on the North " – and the Southern contribution to Shaktism 's emergence was significant : 
 " Korravai , the Tamil goddess of war and victory , was easily identified with Durga , [ who ] was also identified with the <unk> of Kerala and the eternal virgin enshrined in Kanyakumari . She was invoked in one or another of her nine forms , Navadurga , or as Bhadrakali . The Tamil tradition also associates her with Saraswati or <unk> , as also with <unk> and Lakshmi . Thus in Durga the devotee visualised the triple aspects of power , beneficence and wisdom . In addition , many southern temples included shrines to the Sapta Matrika and " from the earliest period the South had a rich tradition of the cult of the village mothers , concerned with the facts of daily life . " 
 The dualistic metaphysics of Tantric traditions indicates the influence of Samkhya on Tantra . Dasgupta speculates that the Tantric image of a wild Kali standing on a slumbering Shiva was inspired from the <unk> conception of Prakriti as a dynamic agent and Purusha as a passive witness . Shakta philosophy also elaborated Samkhya theory on the phases of cosmic evolution ( tattvas ) by expanding the number of phases from 25 to 36 tattvas . " It is worthy of note that this scheme of tattvas enables the Shakta philosophy to solve the conundrum ... as to how the changeless Brahman becomes the changing universe , and how the One can become the Many . In the Shakta cosmogony the central idea is that Shakti issues out of the Absolute and is not different from Brahman , being [ rather ] the kinetic aspect of Brahman . " 
 = = = Tantras = = = 
 In most schools of Shaktism , the Tantras – a large genre of ritual manuals dating from as early as the 7th century CE and as late as the 19th century – are central scriptures . The Tantras " devised two main <unk> ( paths of sadhana ) to reach the same goal " : 
 <unk> lineages generally favor external worship ( puja , murtis , etc . ) and permit use of the panchamakara ( lit . " five substances " , referencing certain controversial forms of worship ) at various levels under controlled circumstances ; and 
 <unk> lineages generally prefer internal worship ( meditative techniques , etc . ) and essentially disapprove of the panchamakara under any circumstances . 
 The proper path is generally determined by the guru based upon a given devotee 's personal nature – i.e. , as a tamasic <unk> ( i.e. , an ordinary person not particularly given to spiritual pursuits , and mainly preoccupied with worldly matters ) ; a <unk> vira ( an active and vigorous spiritual seeker , qualified to " heroically " engage more intensive forms of sadhana ) ; or a <unk> <unk> ( a holy @-@ natured person , having already achieved an extremely high level of spiritual maturity ) – and various other factors . 
 Around 800 CE , Adi Shankara , the legendary sage and preceptor of the Advaita Vedanta system , implicitly recognized Shakta philosophy and Tantric liturgy as part of mainstream Hinduism in his powerful ( and still hugely popular ) hymn known as Saundaryalahari or " Waves of Beauty " . Shankara , while " not a Shakta in the sectarian sense , [ ... ] had a soft corner for Shakta religion , perhaps due to its popularity among the masses . " Another important Shakta text often attributed to Shankara is the hypnotically exquisite Mahishasura <unk> Stotra , a 21 @-@ verse hymn derived from the Devi Mahatmya that constitutes " one of the greatest works ever addressed to the supreme feminine power . " 
 By the thirteenth century , " the Tantras had assimilated a very large number of cults of various origins – regional , tribal and sectarian – [ and ] had assumed a completely Shakta character . " From the fourteenth century onward , " the Shakta @-@ Tantric cults had [ ... ] become woven into the texture of all the religious practices current in India , " their spirit and substance infusing regional and sectarian vernacular as well as Sanskrit literature . 
 = = Rise of Popular Shaktism = = 
 In the 18th and 19th centuries , " a good number of Shakta @-@ Tantric works were composed " that " attempted to make the Tantric ideas popular among the masses . " Notable examples include the <unk> Tantra , characterized by its " special modernism " and " liberal outlook , especially towards women . " Works of the prolific and erudite Bhaskararaya , the most " outstanding contributor to Shakta philosophy , " also belong to this period and remain central to Srividya practice even today . 
 The great Tamil composer Muthuswami Dikshitar ( 1775 – 1835 ) , a Srividya adept , set one of that tradition 's central mysteries – the majestic <unk> Puja – to music in a <unk> classical song cycle known as the <unk> <unk> <unk> . " Dikshitar thus [ threw ] open the doors of [ Srividya ] to all those who are moved to approach the Divine Mother through devotional music . " In the meantime an even greater wave of popular Shaktism was swelling in eastern India with the passionate Shakta lyrics of Ramprasad Sen ( 1720 – 1781 ) , which " opened not only a new horizon of the Shakti cult but made it acceptable to all , irrespective of caste or creed . " More than 80 Shakta poets appeared in Bengal after Ramprasad [ and ] by 1900 the number of Shakta lyrics exceeded 4 @,@ 000 . And the tradition still survives . " 
 From this point onward , " Shaktism was evolving as a liberal , universal religion " that touched nearly every aspect of Indian life . The evolution " achieved a completeness " in the great Shakta saint Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa ( 1836 – 1886 ) , " who held from his Shakta experience that the aim of all religions was the same and that the difference between the personal and the impersonal god was no more than that between ice and water . " 
 Another major advocate of Shaktism in this period was Sir John Woodroffe ( 1865 – 1936 ) , a High Court judge in British India and " the father of modern Tantric studies , " whose vast oeuvre " bends over backward to defend the Tantras against their many critics and to prove that they represent a noble , pure , ethical system in basic accord with the Vedas and Vedanta . " His complete works are still in print and remain influential to this day . 
 Ramakrishna 's chief disciple Swami Vivekananda ( 1863 – 1902 ) " inherited from Ramakrishna the Shakta @-@ oriented , synthetic outlook which insisted on the cult of Shakti in the programme of national regeneration , " and in fact " regarded the country as the living image of the Divine Mother " – an image that resonated throughout India 's struggle for independence . 
 Another of India 's great nationalists , Sri Aurobindo ( 1872 – 1950 ) , later reinterpreted " the doctrine of Shakti in a new light " by drawing on " the Tantric conception of transforming the mortal and material body into [ something ] pure and divine , " and setting a goal of " complete and unconditional surrender to the will of the Mother . " 
 = = Modern Developments = = 
 In certain regards , Bhattacharyya notes , Shaktism has so infused mainstream Hinduism that it has " ceased to be a sectarian religion , " and presents " no difficulty for anyone to accept its essence . " 
 Shakta @-@ oriented temples and pilgrimage sites draw ever @-@ growing crowds and recognition . For example , in 2004 the monumental Meenakshi Amman Temple was shortlisted in the " New Seven Wonders of the World " competition . Meanwhile , the Vaishno Devi shrine in Jammu and Kashmir attracts record numbers of pilgrims – five million in the 2007 as of September . 
 The Indian film industry turns out scores of Shakta devotional films , perhaps none more famous than 1975 's Jai Santoshi Maa ( " Hail to the Mother of Satisfaction " ) , a low @-@ budget box @-@ office phenomenon that propelled a previously unknown deity , Santoshi Mata , to dizzying heights of devotional fervor . A 36 @-@ episode television miniseries in 2003 and a successful 2006 remake of the original film suggest that this " new " goddess 's following continues to expand . 
 " As her film brought her to life , Santoshi Ma quickly became one of the most important and widely worshiped goddesses in India , taking her place in poster @-@ art form in the altar rooms of millions of Hindu homes . [ ... ] Yet it is hard to conceive that Santoshi Ma could have granted such instant satisfaction to so many people had she not been part of a larger and already well @-@ integrated culture of the Goddess . Her new devotees could immediately recognize many of her characteristic moods and attributes , and feel them deeply , because she shared them with other goddesses long since familiar to them . " 
 Some scholars also identify a Shakta influence in the increasing visibility of Hindu female saints and gurus " through Web sites , world tours , ashrams and devotional groups across the globe , devotional publications and videos . " While some of these teachers represent conservative and patriarchal lineages of mainstream Hinduism , <unk> notes that others – for example Mata <unk> and Mother Meera – operate in a strongly " feminine mode " that is distinctly <unk> and Shakta in nature . She observes : 
 " Female gurus are understood by Hindu tradition and by their followers alike to be manifestations of the Goddess ; that is , as perfect embodiments of shakti . [ ... ] The nature , presence , and teaching of the Hindu female gurus is universal . As gurus , they distinctively blend the formality and authority of classical tradition with the spontaneity of interactive encounter , harmonizing personal experience and the ultimate . " 
 = Treehouse of Horror XXI = 
 " Treehouse of Horror XXI " is the fourth episode of The Simpsons ' twenty @-@ second season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 7 , 2010 . This is the 21st Treehouse of Horror episode , and , like the other " Treehouse of Horror " episodes , consisted of three self @-@ contained segments : In " War and Pieces " , Bart and Milhouse discover a real @-@ life board game that they must win to return home ; in " Master and Cadaver " , Marge and Homer go on a honeymoon on a sailboat , and rescue a mysterious castaway named Roger ; and in " Tweenlight " , Lisa falls in love with a vampire named Edmund . 
 " Treehouse of Horror XXI " was written by Joel H. Cohen and directed by Bob Anderson . Daniel Radcliffe and Hugh Laurie both guest starred in the episode . The first segment references Jumanji , the second is a loose parody of Dead Calm and the third satirizes the Twilight novel and film series . The episode also contains references to The Office , A Clockwork Orange and Sesame Street . 
 In its original airing on the Fox Network during the November sweeps period , the episode had a 3 @.@ 7 Nielsen rating viewed in approximately 8 @.@ 2 million homes . Critical opinion of the episode was mixed , with " Tweenlight " generally being regarded as the best of the three segments . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While carving pumpkins , Bart takes a knife and etches a smile into Homer 's pants . Homer responds by choking Bart , and Bart puts a flaming pumpkin on Homer 's head . Professor Frink then welcomes the audience and warns them of the content of the show , presenting a TiVo remote control to fast forward through the scary stuff . But after accidentally fast forwarding to the end of the special , and exposing spoilers , a shameful Frink uses the remote on himself and fast forwards his life until he is turned to a pile of dust . The Frankenstein 's Monster who was created by Frink makes a reference to The Office , and remembers his days working at " Monster Mifflin " with the Mummy , the Wolf Man , a zombie and a witch . 
 = = = " War and Pieces " = = = 
 In a parody of Jumanji , Marge , worried about the effects of excessively violent video games , encourages Bart and Milhouse to try playing some of the classic board games in the attic . After rejecting the " lame " ones , they discover an old board game called " Satan 's Path . " Upon playing it , all the rejected games come to life turning the town into a giant game board . Lisa reads the instructions , which are in Latin , and says the two must beat all the games to finish Satan 's Path and restore everything to normal . Milhouse dies during the game of Scrabble , but Bart manages to finish it , returning everything back to normal ( even bringing Milhouse back to life ) . Bart and Milhouse state that they will just play hangman but the game brings the hangman to life . With only one more letter remaining ( <unk> _ F F _ <unk> ) , Milhouse guesses the number 3 , which results in Bart and Milhouse being hanged . 
 = = = " Master and Cadaver " = = = 
 In a parody of Dead Calm , Homer and Marge set sail on a romantic second honeymoon . Their time together is interrupted when they rescue a castaway . Introducing himself as Roger , the castaway explains that he was a chef on a yacht called the Albatross , and was knocked out after attempting to stop a poisoning on his ship . Roger makes them a pie , but Homer becomes convinced that Roger poisoned the guests on the Albatross . He grabs the pie from Marge and throws it out the window . Marge chastises Homer , but looks out a window and sees a dead shark with the pie pan in its mouth . Homer and Marge take matters into their own hands as they seemingly kill Roger using a metal pole , and knock his body overboard . However , finding the Albatross , they realize Roger was telling the truth and that some of the passengers are still alive , as one of the people administered an antidote . Roger appears and explains that the shark they saw had died from a fuel leakage from Homer and Marge 's boat . Homer then kills Roger , the surviving Albatross crew , and a pelican , to cover their tracks . However , unable to bear the guilt , Marge eats the poisoned pie , much to Homer 's horror . The story is then revealed to be Maggie 's imagination while she is taking a bath . Homer asks Marge what Maggie thinks about while bathing , which she responds , " Just sugar plums and buttercups . " Maggie then <unk> moves her eyes ( revealing eyeliner over one eye ) , puts on a hat , and drinks milk like Alex from A Clockwork Orange as the theme from the movie briefly plays in the background . 
 = = = " Tweenlight " = = = 
 In a parody of Twilight , Lisa falls in love with a mysterious new student named Edmund . After saving Lisa from a bus , two cars , a bicycle and a Segway PT , Edmund reveals he is a vampire . Lisa is not frightened by this and the two begin a romance , much to the dismay of Milhouse , who turns into a were @-@ poodle . Marge invites Edmund and his father , Count Dracula , to dinner . Edmund and Lisa are both embarrassed by their fathers and decide to leave . Homer and Dracula track them down to a cathedral in " Dracula @-@ la Land " . They see Edmund climbing up a tower with Lisa , so Homer forces Dracula to carry him up . Lisa wants to become a vampire , but has second thoughts after learning that she would be eight years old forever . Edmund says that " the blood @-@ lust is upon him " and he has to bite something . Homer stops Dracula with a cross , and is amazed to learn vampires love their kids also . Edmund and his father reconcile , and Homer saves Lisa by offering himself up in her place as the two vampires feast on him . However , they both die from the bad cholesterol in Homer 's blood as he is turned into a vampire . Transforming into a bat to fly home , Homer 's fat causes him to fall to his death . His body is carried off by were @-@ poodle Milhouse while Lisa watches in dismay . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Joel H. Cohen , and it was his first sole writing credit for a Treehouse of Horror episode . He previously wrote the " Hex and the City " segment of season 13 's " Treehouse of Horror XII " . Bob Anderson served as director . It was his third Treehouse of Horror episode , the first two being season seven 's " Treehouse of Horror VI " and season 20 's " Treehouse of Horror XIX " . Daniel Radcliffe , star of the Harry Potter film series , guest starred as Edmund in the third segment which parodies the Twilight novel and film series . Radcliffe said that he is a fan of the show and guest starring is " a huge honour . The Halloween episode has become a big tradition in The Simpsons so I 'm very excited to be part of it . There was a time when I was 12 or 13 when 50 percent of everything I knew about the world came from The Simpsons , so this is a big deal . " Hugh Laurie of Blackadder and House guest starred as Roger in " Master and Cadaver " . 
 The episode aired November 7 , 2010 , making it the tenth Treehouse of Horror episode to air after Halloween . The previous year 's episode had aired October 18 . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The opening segment ends with a parody of opening credits of The Office , featuring various monsters like the Frankenstein 's monster , the Mummy and the Wolf Man among others working in " Monster Mifflin " . 
 The plot of " War and Pieces " references the film Jumanji . Some of the board games referenced include Chutes and Ladders and Mouse Trap . Milhouse 's death , where he lets go of a ledge and sinks into water , is a reference to Jack Dawson 's death in Titanic . The answer for the hangman game Bart and Milhouse played is Wheel of Fortune . 
 The second segment , " Master and Cadaver " , is based on the film Dead <unk> the title is a reference to the film Master and Commander : The Far Side of the World . At the end of the segment , Maggie imitates Alex from the film A Clockwork Orange . 
 " Tweenlight " parodies the Twilight novel and film series . Edmund is based on Edward Cullen , the character portrayed by Robert Pattinson in Twilight and its sequels . Edmund 's father is Count Dracula . Count von Count from Sesame Street and Yogi Bear also have cameo appearances in the segment . Other famous vampires with cameo appearance are : Dracula from Bram Stoker 's Dracula , Grandpa Munster , Count <unk> , Blacula , Selene , Elvira , Mistress of the Dark and Count <unk> . At one point Edmund yells " You 're tearing me apart ! " to his father . This could be a reference to James Dean 's character in the 1955 film Rebel Without a Cause or Tommy Wiseau 's character in the 2003 film The Room . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original airing on the Fox Network during the November sweeps period , the episode had a 3 @.@ 7 Nielsen rating and 9 % share of the audience in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic , and was viewed in approximately 8 @.@ 2 million homes . The episode was up 23 % in viewership compared with the previous episode , " MoneyBART " , which aired October 10 . 
 The episode received mixed critical reviews , with " Tweenlight " generally being regarded as the best segment . John Griffiths of Us Weekly gave the episode three stars , writing that " the three oddball tales run from mildly amusing to flat @-@ out inspired . In one goofy vignette , Homer and a bikini @-@ wearing Marge pluck a scary mystery man from the sea . However , watching Lisa crush on a brooding vampire in a dead @-@ on poke at Twilight is the hilarious treat here . " Fred Topel of Screen Junkies wrote , " The best jokes in all the segments are actually not the spoofs . They ’ re the cartoon physical comedy , the references to mundane frustrations like having to be the thimble when playing Monopoly . It ’ s also super gory . [ .. ] I think “ The Simpsons ” are still on the creative upswing since The Simpsons Movie and this “ Treehouse of Horrors ” would hold up with classics like " The Shinning " and " The <unk> Man . " Brad Trechak of TV Squad felt that it was one of the best Treehouse of Horrors in years . He wrote , " Of the three vignettes , the first segment ' War and Pieces , ' while not the best , was the most original despite being a variation of the plot of ' Jumanji . ' Unlike that book / movie , instead of the game coming into the real world , the game brings other board games into the real world . The satire on this show remains sharp as none of the games had the same name as their real world counterparts to prevent toy company litigation against Fox . [ .. ] The final segment ' Tweenlight ' ... was the best of the three . It felt a little less dated than the first two . " 
 Robert Bianco of USA Today was critical of the episode , writing " It is possible [ that The Simpsons ] has worn out the Treehouse franchise . [ The ] three installments just seem to be reaching for jokes that aren 't there , and falling in the attempt . [ ... ] As you 'd hope from The Simpsons , the segments all boast a few clever moments that will make you smile if not laugh . But they 're not scary , they 're not particularly funny , and outside of some tepid Twilight jokes , they 're no longer even trying to be real parodies of the original stories . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club also gave the episode a negative review , and felt that " There were laughs in all three segments , but the episode as a whole left something to be desired . The first [ ... ] eventually descended into a long string of mostly lame board game jokes , as if the writers had been coming up with board game puns for the last 15 seasons or something and wanted an excuse to unload a bunch of them all at once . The idea of Bart and Milhouse playing with a Ouija board ripoff was promising , so to see it descend into gags about Marge getting sucked into Clue was disappointing . There were fewer good gags [ in " Master and Cadaver " ] than in the board game segment , but it was balanced out by a fairly solid Hugh Laurie performance . Fortunately , the last segment , the inevitable Twilight parody , was funny across the board , both in how it took the piss out of the Twilight films and how it satirized vampire mania . [ ... ] Still , it wasn 't the best " Treehouse " ever , and you could make a good claim for it being the worst , particularly if the Twilight segment wasn 't in there . " 
 Alf Clausen 's score for the episode received a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Music Composition for a Series at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 = Gaara = 
 Gaara ( <unk> ) is a fictional character in the Naruto manga and anime series created by Masashi Kishimoto . Kishimoto designed Gaara as a foil to the series ' eponymous character , Naruto Uzumaki , as the two were born through similar circumstances , but develop vastly different personalities as <unk> upbringing . Initially introduced as an antagonist , Gaara is a shinobi affiliated with Sunagakure , and is the son of Sunagakure 's leader , the Fourth Kazekage . He was born a demon 's host as part of his father 's intention to have a weapon to restore their village . However , a combination of being ostracized by the Sunagakure villagers , his early inability to control the Tailed Beast , and the notion that his deceased mother called him her curse on the village caused Gaara to become a ruthless killer who believes his own purpose is to kill his enemies . It is only after meeting Naruto Uzumaki that Gaara <unk> a change of perspective as he eventually becomes Sunagakure 's Fifth Kazekage and gains acceptance by his people . 
 Gaara has appeared in several pieces of Naruto media , including two of the featured films in the series , the third original video animation , and several video games . Numerous anime and manga publications have commented on Gaara 's character . IGN labeled the disparity between Naruto and Gaara as " emotional " and " a tad creepy " . Anime News Network called Naruto 's fight against Gaara the high point of the entire series . Among the Naruto reader base , Gaara has been popular , placing high in several popularity polls , and always making it to the top ten characters . Numerous pieces of merchandise have been released in Gaara 's likeness , including plush dolls , key chains and action figures . 
 = = Creation and conception = = 
 Naruto author Masashi Kishimoto created Gaara as a foil to the series ' protagonist , Naruto Uzumaki . He and Naruto have a similar background : he was rejected by his peers and fellow villagers for being the host of a tailed beast , Shukaku , a situation that Kishimoto describes as " very much like Naruto 's " . Gaara 's development from this state into a highly withdrawn , sadistic character was intended to induce sympathy for him from readers , as it was contrasted against Naruto 's development into a cheerful troublemaker . Additionally , his design was designed to look like the <unk> since Kishimoto thought that it would make him a good rival for Naruto 's Nine @-@ tailed Demon Fox since several parts from the Shukaku were considered by Kishimoto to be opposite ones from the Demon Fox . Gaara 's backstory became one of Kishimoto 's favorite stories from Part I ; Kishimoto had to revise his illustrations in such chapters in as he wanted readers to understand more Gaara 's mental state . 
 Gaara 's initial attire , along with the costumes of his siblings , was difficult for Kishimoto to draw on a weekly basis . Because of this , Kishimoto gave the three of them simpler costumes towards the end of Part I ; Gaara received an outfit with an upright collar . In addition to being easier to draw , it was used to demonstrate the change in relationship between Gaara and Naruto following their previous fight . Kishimoto cites The Matrix , one of his favorite movies , as an inspiration for Gaara 's new costume , and he considers it to be his favorite costume of the three siblings . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In Naruto = = = 
 Before he was born , Gaara 's father , the Fourth Kazekage Rasa , had Chiyo make Gaara into the Jinchuriki for the tailed beast Shukaku the One Tail ( <unk> , <unk> no Shukaku , English TV : " Shukaku the Sand Spirit " ) while he was still in his mother 's womb before she died giving birth to him . Though believed at the time to be Shukaku 's power in action , Gaara can manipulate sand , which subconsciously protects him . Rasa intended to use Gaara as the village 's personal weapon , but Shukaku 's bloodlust proved too much for Gaara as he suffered night terrors brought about by the tailed beast 's influence . With Gaara 's sand adding to his inability to control Shukaku , the boy became feared to the point his father decided to have him assassinated . After his maternal uncle ( who was the only person that Gaara thought cared for him ) tried to finish that very job in an attempted murder @-@ suicide , Gaara adopted the belief that he could only rely upon himself and Shukaku , and that he had to kill others in order to confirm the value of his own existence . He thus became narcissistic , even permanently scarring his left temple with the kanji for " love " ( 愛 , ai ) for his new drive . 
 Gaara first appears in the series when he is sent to Konohagakure , an allied ninja village , to take part in the Chunin Exams alongside his older siblings Kankuro and Temari . In truth , he is sent in order to infiltrate Konohagakure in preparation for an invasion by Sunagakure and its ally , Otogakure . There , he and his teammates and older siblings , Kankuro and Temari , easily pass both the first and second phases . In the third phase , Gaara is set to fight against Rock Lee . Lee is able to pass Gaara 's defenses , provoking an enraged Gaara into breaking Lee 's arm and leg , claiming victory . During the one @-@ month training period , he kills several other <unk> who make attempts on his life . He also tries to kill a hospitalized Lee , but is stopped by Naruto Uzumaki and Shikamaru Nara ; he reveals his past to the two boys , causing Naruto to sympathize with their similar backgrounds . He later fights Sasuke Uchiha in the finals of the Chunin Exams . Sasuke manages to give Gaara the first injury he has ever received , causing Gaara to suffer a mental breakdown and nearly manifest his <unk> powers . This begins the invasion , with his older siblings carrying him off as he could not participate in his current state of mind . But when Sasuke pursues him , Gaara 's Jinchuriki powers take effect as he manages to defeat Sasuke . Naruto then arrives , however , and defeats him . Seeing that Naruto 's outlook on reaching out to people with love is making him more powerful than himself , Gaara is redeemed . Later , Sunagakure sends Gaara to help in preventing Sasuke from defecting to Otogakure , which became enemy of Sunagakure once learning that Orochimaru murdered Rasa prior to the attack . While he is able to help Rock Lee fight Kimimaro , Gaara is unable to prevent Sasuke from escaping . He makes amends with the many characters he had alienated , apologizing to those he hurt and improving his relationship with his family . At the same time , Gaara 's fundamental characteristic becomes the desire to protect as many people as he can , as in doing so he believes , like Naruto , he will be able to find true strength . This culminates in his replacing his father as the Fifth Kazekage during Part II of the series . 
 In Part II of the series , three years after the failed attempt to retrieve Sasuke , Deidara , a member of the criminal organization Akatsuki , is sent to Sunagakure to capture Gaara . Gaara fights Deidara to protect the village , but Deidara manages to capture Gaara by destroying a large portion of the village , then tricking Gaara and catching him in an explosion . The members of the Akatsuki then kidnap him and extract Shukaku from his body . Gaara dies in the process , his body being recovered by Naruto and Kakashi Hatake . Naruto weeps over Gaara 's life , provoking Chiyo into sacrificing her own life to revive Gaara after coming to acknowledge Naruto and Sakura Haruno 's resolve . 
 Sometime later , he goes to the Five Kage Summit , where the Akatsuki 's leader Tobi , claiming to be Madara Uchiha , breaks into the meeting and announces the Fourth Great Ninja War to capture the last two Tailed @-@ Beasts . Sasuke , now a member of the Akatsuki , arrives there as well , intending to kill the de facto Hokage , Danzo . Sasuke engages the <unk> in conflict , but Gaara intervenes and tries to reason with Sasuke much like Naruto did with him . Sasuke refuses , and under Kankuro and Temari 's persuasion , Gaara reluctantly attacks him before Tobi spirits Sasuke away . Soon after , Gaara attempts to convince Naruto that Sasuke is beyond saving but decides to let him do what he must as Sasuke 's friend while rejuvenating Naruto 's spirits . Gaara later joins the new Shinobi Alliance as its field commander to protect Naruto and Killer Bee , using Naruto 's philosophy of love and the Akatsuki 's philosophy of hatred to unite the army when it nearly imploded from internal conflict . On the second day of the war , Gaara encounters his reanimated father , who is shocked by his development . Rasa reveals the truth to <unk> that his uncle 's final action were his doing and that the truth that Gaara 's mother always loved him , moving Gaara to tears after learning his mother 's will is the force behind his sand . Rasa recognizes his son has surpassed him and entrusts Sunagakure to him after being defeated . Gaara later defeats and seals the revived Second Mizukage and joins the rest of the five Kage to fight the real Madara Uchiha who was reanimated by Kabuto , nearly getting killed as a result . Later healed by Tsunade with Orochimaru 's help , Gaara departs with the other Kage to site of their side 's battle with Madara and Obito . There , after using his former Jinchuriki status to free him , Gaara is reunited with Shukaku as they assist Naruto and the other tailed beasts against Madara . Before watching him be absorbed by the Gedo Statue again , Gaara manages to make his peace with Shukaku while thanking the tailed beast for ensuring that he would meet Naruto . Gaara then witnesses the Nine @-@ Tails get extracted from Naruto , and desperately brings him to Sakura . They take him to Minato Namikaze and Gaara holds off Madara before Might Guy takes over prior Naruto being successfully revived . Once the Infinite Tsukiyomi is activated , Gaara is caught in the illusion of being with his entire family and Naruto as his friend before being freed by Naruto and Sasuke . By the series epilogue , having the Hidden Leaf Village 's Nara Clan as in @-@ laws through Temari , Gaara remains active as the Kazekage . In Boruto : Naruto the Movie , Gaara and the other Kage attend the Chunin exam in Konoha before they engage in combat against Momoshiki and Kinshiki in a rescue mission after Naruto was kidnapped . 
 = = = Appearances in other media = = = 
 Gaara has made several appearances outside of the Naruto anime and manga . He is present in the second and sixth Naruto feature films , Naruto the Movie 2 : Legend of the Stone of <unk> and Naruto Shippuden the Movie : The Will of Fire . In the former , he protects the Land of Wind from an assault by Haido , the antagonist of the film , and later battles the lightning user Ranke , one of Haido 's subordinates , and defeats her , while in the latter , he temporarily becomes enemies of Konohagakure as they are the prime suspect of a pitfall attack on him while he is about to attend a meeting with Tsunade , in reality being done by a missing nin , Hiruko , and briefly battles Naruto , although after the confusion is cleared , he allies himself with them again . Gaara is also present in the third original video animation released in the series , in which he participates in a tournament of various characters from across the series . Naruto video games commonly feature Gaara , including the Clash of Ninja and Ultimate Ninja series . In some games , he uses his Shukaku form for combat , as well as other moves not seen in the anime or manga . Naruto Shippūden : Gekitou Ninja Taisen EX marks the first appearance of Gaara in his Part II appearance in a video game . An upcoming light novel titled Gaara Hiden will focus on the character . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Gaara has ranked highly in the popularity polls for the series , continuously placing in the top ten . The last such poll was in 2011 , in which Gaara was in 4th place . Several pieces of Gaara merchandise has been released ; including key chains , plush dolls and action figures of his Part I and Part II appearance . AnimeCentral listed him as eighth best villain in anime with comments focused on how flashbacks made him a tragic character and at the same time similar to Naruto Uzumaki . Additionally , his fight against Rock Lee was listed as the second best one in anime for exchanges in moves and its conclusion . 
 Anime and manga publications have mostly praised Gaara 's character . IGN noted that Gaara was an " anti @-@ Naruto " , possessing a " dark , solemn character " as opposed to Naruto 's continuous cheer and excitement . In another review , IGN also called Gaara 's background " emotional " and " a tad creepy " due to the disparity between the development of Naruto 's and Gaara 's personalities . Anime News Network celebrated the " depth and emotion " that Naruto 's and Gaara 's similarities added to the plot , and commented that " nowhere in the entire series run does Naruto shine brighter than in the peak period of his battle against Gaara " . They also complimented Kishimoto 's visual presentation of Gaara in the manga , referring to " chilling [ glimpses ] of Gaara 's crazed , exposed face " . Mania Entertainment noted that Gaara and Sasuke 's first fight shows how the former has a " fragile " psyche despite his violent attitude . His backstory was also praised by Mania Entertainment since it includes " a ton of legitimate emotion " allowing viewers from the series to understand more Gaara 's personality . Liam O 'Brien , Gaara 's voice actor in the English dubbed version of the anime , has been praised . IGN noted that he did an " excellent job " of making Gaara sound terrifying to the viewer , and Anime News Network noted him as one of the best voice actors in the series . 
 Gaara 's promotion to leader from Sunagakure in Part II of the series was deemed as the most surprising development in the series by Briana Lawrence from Mania Entertainment . UK Anime Network 's Kevin Leathers stated that while in the first part of the series , Gaara was a fearsome villain , in the following one he became " much more three @-@ dimensional . " Similarly , Todd Douglass Jr. from DVD Talk praised Gaara 's development in later episodes from Naruto : Shippuden owing to his relationship 's expansion with Naruto . His fight against Deidara has also received positive response , with critics <unk> the revisit of Gaara 's popular moves and the strategy both fighters employed . 
 = Viva Piñata : Trouble in Paradise = 
 Viva Piñata : Trouble in Paradise is a 2008 simulation video game in the Viva Piñata series for the Xbox 360 . Developed by Rare and published by Microsoft Studios , the game builds atop its predecessor , in which the player tends a garden and the piñata creatures that come to live there . New features to the series include a cooperative multiplayer mode , a new plot , additional types of piñata creatures , Xbox Live Vision Camera support , and two new areas for capturing piñatas . 
 Microsoft considered Viva Piñata a success and the sequel 's development team sought to make a more definitive version of the original . The team re @-@ used many of the development infrastructure set up for its predecessor and exhausted their gameplay ideas for the piñata gardening concept . The game released to generally favorable reviews in September 2008 . Critics considered the game more accessible to newcomers and a worthwhile improvement on the original , but altogether closer to an expansion than a unique sequel . Reviewers praised its game design tweaks but were mixed on its multiplayer modes and camera integration . Critics were mixed on whether the sequel would attract new players to the franchise . Trouble in Paradise was later included in the developer 's 2015 Xbox One retrospective compilation , Rare Replay . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Apart from a few new features , Trouble in Paradise is nearly identical to its predecessor , the 2006 Viva Piñata , in gameplay : The player acts as a gardener whose land is visited by piñata creatures . The creatures are stylized like piñatas but have the qualities of animals . Creature types include ladybugs , crabs , geckos , gorillas , and vultures , among others . The player plants seeds , tends to plants , and digs ponds within the garden 's boundaries . New types of piñata creatures visit and eventually come to reside in the garden when certain prerequisites are met . For instance , a piñata might be attracted to a garden with a specific plant , type of piñata , or amount of soil . The player uses an in @-@ game encyclopedia to learn each piñata type 's preferences , which grow in complexity : advanced creatures require more transformative changes to the garden or many other piñatas to eat . When multiple piñatas are satisfied , the player can " romance " two to make a baby piñata . The player continues to cultivate the garden and the piñata creatures to grow in experience level and unlock upgrades in garden size and gardening tools . An in @-@ game store sells seeds , items , and upgrades . Both games are rendered in the same engine and their supporting casts are the same . The first game 's online piñata gifting feature returns in Trouble in Paradise . 
 Atop the previous formula is a new plot , a cooperative multiplayer mode , Xbox Live Vision Camera support , 32 new types of piñata creatures , and two separate areas to trap piñatas . These latter areas — the Dessert Desert and <unk> — let the player set traps for wandering piñatas to bait , capture , and return to the garden . At a later player experience level , the player can add sand and ice to their main garden for the piñatas . In the new plot , the player must repopulate a database of piñata information that has been maliciously erased . Trouble in Paradise includes new challenges in which the player finds and indulges a specific piñata with actions it likes such that the piñata can be sent happily to a party somewhere around the world . The game also adds fashion show and side @-@ scrolling racing minigames . A new " Trick Stick " lets players teach piñatas to perform new tricks . Up to four players can join together on Xbox Live to garden in the same plot . The plot 's owner can set restrictions on what other players can access . Up to two players can join together locally on the same Xbox 360 . The game 's additional " Just for Fun " mode is designed for younger children by eliminating monetary restrictions , evil piñatas , and ruffian characters that might otherwise frustrate the player . These malicious " sour " piñatas , who try to poison the other piñatas , can be tamed to peaceably join the player 's garden . Players can use the Xbox Live Vision Camera to scan collectible cards and unlock piñatas and items . New controls were added to streamline the player 's interface interactions , and a leaderboard added for players to compare their progress . 
 = = Development = = 
 As Rare released the original Viva Piñata for the Xbox 360 in 2006 , its development team saw it as incomplete . The developers had cut partial ideas from the release to meet their deadlines . Rare 's Gregg Mayles said that the game sold well and steadily on par with their expectations and Xbox 's Phil Spencer added that the game was considered a success inside the company . The team incorporated player feedback and worked towards a " more definitive version " of the original . Mayles left the team to work on Banjo @-@ Kazooie : Nuts & Bolts and Justin Cook became the team 's lead designer . The sequel was built atop the original and the developers re @-@ used many of the tools from the original game 's development . In both the sequel and the original , the development team volunteered to record the sounds used for the piñatas . One of the team 's new ideas was " Piñata Vision " , a feature that detects printed cards via the Xbox camera to change the in @-@ game environment ( e.g. , adding piñatas or altering the weather ) . Near the time of the sequel 's release , Rare 's Mayles figured that the team would likely not have enough new gameplay ideas to warrant a sequel to Trouble in Paradise , though Cook said that he would work on the game 's shop interface had he more time . Trouble in Paradise released in early September 2008 . The two Viva Piñata console games were later re @-@ released in the 2015 compilation of Rare games , Rare Replay , but the server that handled their piñata sharing features had been shut down by that time . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . Critics had found its predecessor surprisingly engaging , and thought that Trouble in Paradise 's additions made it the definitive Viva Piñata release . Critics agreed that the changes made the game friendlier for new players and children . They appreciated the new game 's improvements , but some were disappointed that the base game was essentially unchanged . Reviewers considered Trouble in Paradise to be an expansion of the original game rather than a unique sequel . 
 Critics praised Trouble in Paradise 's new features . Mc Shea ( GameSpot ) thought that the sequel 's in @-@ game challenges resolved the core issue of the original game — the lack of motivation to continue breeding new species , whereas the challenges direct players to collect new species . He appreciated the two new trap areas for adding to the game 's variety of characters , though he did not find the actual laying of traps and transport of piñatas interesting . Geddes ( IGN ) thought that it felt wrong but oddly satisfying to put piñatas in captivity . He considered the trap areas a good idea but unwelcome as another obstacle in the animal acquisition process . Geddes praised Trouble in Paradise 's cooperative features , but found local cooperative to lose most of the benefits of efficient multitasking . Mc Shea ( GameSpot ) on the other hand felt that it was strange to be on either side of the cooperative gardening experience , which lacks the game 's creative element when the visitor is directed by the garden 's owner . Bramwell ( Eurogamer ) saw a lack of depth in the online gameplay , both in feelings of connections with others and in how online matchmaking became a brief " show and tell " of a garden instead of a cross @-@ exchange like in Animal Crossing or Spore . Reviewers agreed that cooperative was useful for introducing new players to the game . 
 Reviewers considered some of the smaller additions useful and others gimmicky . Critics appreciated the release 's time @-@ saving interface tweaks and overall pacing , but thought , for instance , that the vision camera integration added little to the game . While Electronic Gaming Monthly had wanted more development of the story , Mc Shea ( GameSpot ) was grateful that the story remained in the background of the game . While Electronic Gaming Monthly wrote that loading times had been improved , Geddes ( IGN ) considered them " frustratingly long " . Considering the previous game 's slow start , Tom Bramwell ( Eurogamer ) thought that Trouble in Paradise did a better job of introducing the player to the world by pre @-@ loading player gardens with animals , plants , and decorations , and offering a tutorial . He wondered whether the game went too far , from too slow to hyperactive . 
 Reviewers praised Trouble in Paradise 's bright visuals and cute characters . Mc Shea ( GameSpot ) was impressed by the game 's visuals and wrote that players would continue playing the game if only to unlock nuanced , animated video of piñatas acting cute during major life milestones . Mc Shea recalled the human helper characters as an exception , who were off @-@ putting with creepy masks and " offensive " voice acting . IGN praised the game 's surround sound but not its soundtrack 's composition , and Mc Shea ( GameSpot ) considered the voice acting harsh against the game 's otherwise tranquil mood . 
 Mc Shea ( GameSpot ) called Trouble in Paradise " a safe sequel to a great game " . Ultimately , Geddes ( IGN ) wrote that an expansion pack on the original game would have served the same function . Even with Trouble in Paradise 's upgraded controls , Bramwell ( Eurogamer ) preferred the precision of the Nintendo DS version 's stylus or of a computer mouse , and thought the game could be further simplified . However , he saw the new release as a more polished opportunity to attract an audience that was not originally convinced by the reception of the first game . Electronic Gaming Monthly said that players that hated the original game would not be swayed by the sequel . GameSpot 's 2008 year in review staff nominated Trouble in Paradise as the " Best Game No One Played " , which it did not win . 
 = Renewable energy in Scotland = 
 The production of renewable energy in Scotland is an issue that has come to the fore in technical , economic , and political terms during the opening years of the 21st century . The natural resource base for renewable energy is extraordinary by European , and even global standards , with the most important potential sources being wind , wave , and tide . 
 At the end of 2015 , there was 7 @,@ 723 megawatts ( MW ) of installed renewable electricity capacity in Scotland , an increase of 5 @.@ 5 % ( or 406 MW ) from the end of 2014 . Renewable electricity generation in Scotland was 21 @,@ 983 GWh in 2015 , up 15 @.@ 2 % on 2014 . 57 @.@ 7 per cent of Scotland 's electricity came from renewables in 2015 . Scottish renewable generation makes up approximately 26 @.@ 4 % of total UK renewable generation ( down from 32 % in 2014 ) . In 2014 , Scotland exported over 24 per cent of generation . 
 Continuing improvements in engineering and economics are enabling more of the renewable resources to be utilised . Fears regarding peak oil and climate change have driven the subject high up the political agenda and are also encouraging the use of various biofuels . Although the finances of many projects remain either speculative or dependent on market incentives , it is probable that there has been a significant , and in all likelihood long @-@ term change , in the underpinning economics . 
 In addition to planned increases in large @-@ scale generating capacity and <unk> using renewable sources , various related schemes to reduce carbon emissions are being researched . Although there is significant support from the public , private and community @-@ led sectors , concerns about the effect of the technologies on the natural environment have been expressed . There is also an emerging political debate about the relationship between the siting , and the ownership and control of these widely distributed resources . 
 = = Realisation of the potential = = 
 The natural resource base for renewables is extraordinary by European , and even global standards . In addition to an existing installed capacity of 1 @.@ 3 <unk> ( GW ) of hydro @-@ electric schemes , Scotland has an estimated potential of 36 @.@ 5 GW of wind and 7 @.@ 5 GW of tidal power , 25 % of the estimated total capacity for the European Union and up to 14 GW of wave power potential , 10 % of EU capacity . The renewable electricity generating capacity may be 60 GW or more , considerably greater than the existing capacity from all Scottish fuel sources of 10 @.@ 3 GW . Scotland exceeded its renewable energy target , set in 2007 , for 31 % of total power generation coming from renewables by 2011 , and the 2020 target for the renewable share of total electricity generation has been raised from 50 % to 80 % . 
 In January 2006 the total installed electrical generating capacity from all forms of renewable energy was less than 2 GW , about a fifth of the total electrical production . By January 2007 wind power capacity , which has been growing rapidly , reached 1 GW capacity , and the total for renewables had grown to over 2 @.@ 3 GW . By August 2009 wind power capacity was a fraction short of 1 @.@ 5 GW and total renewables capacity had reached over 3 @.@ 1 GW . By mid @-@ 2011 these figures were 2 @.@ 76 GW and 4 @.@ 6 GW respectively . 
 In 2012 , over 40 per cent of Scotland 's electricity came from renewable energy , and Scotland contributed almost 40 per cent of the UK 's renewables output . At the end of 2012 , there was 5 @,@ 801 megawatts ( MW ) of installed renewables electricity capacity in Scotland , an increase of 20 @.@ 95 per cent ( 1 @,@ 005 MW ) on the end of 2011 . Renewable electricity generation in 2012 was a record high at 14 @,@ 756 GWh – an increase of 7 @.@ 3 per cent on 2011 , the previous record year for renewables output . The bulk of electricity production is derived from gas and oil . 2002 figures used in RSPB Scotland et al . ( 2006 ) are gas ( 34 % ) , oil ( 28 % ) , coal ( 18 % ) and nuclear ( 17 % ) , with renewables 3 % ( principally hydro @-@ electric ) , prior to the substantial growth in wind power output . It should be borne in mind that electricity production is only part of the overall energy use budget . In 2002 , Scotland consumed a total of 175 <unk> @-@ hours ( TWh ) of energy in all forms , some 2 % less than in 1990 . Of this , only 20 % was consumed in the form of electricity by end users , the great majority of energy utilised being from the burning of oil ( 41 % ) and gas ( 36 % ) . 
 The renewable energy industry supports more than 11 @,@ 500 jobs in Scotland , according to a 2013 study by Scottish Renewables . However a 2011 study by 4 @-@ Consulting calculated that there was probably a small net loss in jobs in Scotland from government support for renewable energy . They estimated that the offshore wind industry might create between 300 – 2 @,@ 200 long @-@ term jobs by 2020 . With 20 GW of renewable energy projects in the pipeline , the sector has the potential to grow quickly in the years ahead creating more jobs in the region . Glasgow , Fife and Edinburgh are key centres of offshore wind power development , and the emerging wave power and tidal power industries are centred around the Highlands and Islands . Rural job creation is being supported by bioenergy systems in areas such as Lochaber , Moray and Dumfries and Galloway . 
 Scotland also has significant quantities of fossil fuel deposits , including 62 @.@ 4 % of the EU 's proven reserves of oil , 12 @.@ 5 % of the EU 's proven reserves of gas and 69 % of UK coal reserves . Nonetheless , the Scottish Government has set ambitious targets for renewable energy production . In 2005 the aim was for 18 % of Scotland 's electricity production to be generated by renewable sources by 2010 , rising to 40 % by 2020 . In 2007 this was increased to 50 per cent of electricity from renewables by 2020 , with an interim target of 31 per cent by 2011 . The following year new targets to reduce overall greenhouse gas emissions by 80 % by 2050 were announced and then confirmed in the 2009 Climate Change Delivery Plan . <unk> Smith , director of the Sustainable Development Commission in Scotland said " Governments across the world are shying away from taking the necessary action . The Scottish Government must be commended for its intention to lead the way " . 
 An important reason for this ambition is growing international concern about human @-@ induced climate change . The Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution 's proposal that carbon dioxide emissions should be reduced by 60 % was incorporated into the UK government 's 2003 Energy White Paper . The 2006 Stern Review proposed a 55 % reduction by 2030 . The recent Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 's Fourth Assessment Report has further increased the profile of the issue . 
 = = Hydro @-@ electric power = = 
 Scotland has 85 % of the UK 's hydro @-@ electric energy resource , much of it developed by the North of Scotland Hydro @-@ Electric Board in the 1950s . The " Hydro Board " , which brought " power from the glens " , was a nationalised industry at the time although it was privatised in 1989 and is now part of Scottish and Southern Energy plc . 
 Current capacity is 1 @.@ 54 GW and includes major developments such as the 120 MW Breadalbane scheme and the 245 MW <unk> system . Several of Scotland 's hydro @-@ electric plants were built to power the aluminium smelting industry . These were built in several " schemes " of linked stations , each covering a catchment area , whereby the same water may generate power several times as it descends . Numerous remote <unk> were flooded by these schemes , many of the largest of which involved tunnelling through mountains as well as damming rivers . Emma Wood , the author of a study of these pioneers wrote : 
 I heard about drowned farms and hamlets , the ruination of the salmon @-@ fishing and how Inverness might be washed away if the dams failed inland . I was told about the huge veins of crystal they found when they were tunnelling deep under the mountains . 
 It is estimated that as much as another 1 @.@ 2 GW of capacity remains available to exploit , mostly in the form of micro and small @-@ hydro developments such as the existing one in Knoydart and a system planned for Kingussie . In reality , environmental constraints and given that the most easily available catchment areas have already been exploited it is unlikely that the full 1 @.@ 2 GW will exploited . There is also further potential for new pumped storage schemes ( at present used to meet peak demand ) that would work with intermittent sources of power such as wind and wave . Examples include the 440 MW Cruachan Dam and 300 MW Falls of <unk> schemes . The 100 MW <unk> Project which opened in 2009 was the first large scale scheme in Scotland for almost fifty years but is likely to be one of the last of its kind . A 2011 report calculated that pumped storage hydro capacity could supply 2 @.@ 8 GW of electricity for 5 hours , then drop to 1 @.@ 1 GW and run out of water in 22 hours . The report concluded that even with projected new schemes at Loch Ness and Loch <unk> , pumped storage would not be able to replace wind electricity during extended windless periods . 
 = = Wind power = = 
 Wind power in Scotland is the country 's fastest growing renewable energy technology , with <unk> MW of installed capacity as of 2015 . The Robin Rigg Wind Farm is a 180 MW development completed in April 2010 , which is Scotland 's first offshore wind farm , sited on a sandbank in the Solway Firth . The United Kingdom 's largest onshore wind farm ( 539 MW ) is at <unk> in East Renfrewshire . The Clyde Wind Farm is a 548 MW wind farm under construction near Abington , South Lanarkshire , Scotland , which will be Europe 's largest onshore wind farm when completed . Two very large offshore wind turbines ( 5 MW each ) are located in the Moray Firth . There are many other large onshore wind farms including some , both planned and operating , which are in community ownership . 
 The siting of turbines is sometimes an issue , but surveys have generally shown high levels of community acceptance for wind power in Scotland . Wind farm developers sometimes offer " community benefit funds " to help address any disadvantages faced by those living adjacent to wind farms . There is further potential for expansion , especially offshore given the high average wind speeds , and a number of large offshore wind farms are planned . 
 It is estimated that 11 @.@ 5 GW of onshore wind potential exists , enough to provide 45 TWh of energy . More than double this amount exists on offshore sites where mean wind speeds are greater than on land . The total offshore potential is estimated at 25 GW , which although more expensive to install , could be enough to provide almost half the total energy used in Scotland . Plans to harness up to 4 @.@ 8 GW of the potential in the inner Moray Firth and Firth of Forth were announced in January 2010 . Moray Offshore Renewables and <unk> Wind Energy were awarded development contracts by the Crown Estate as part of a UK @-@ wide initiative . Also in 2010 , discussions were held between the Scottish Government and Statoil of Norway with a view to developing a 5 @-@ turbine floating windfarm , possibly to be located off Fraserburgh . In July 2016 , RSPB challenged development in the Firth of Forth and Firth of Tay . 
 = = Wave power = = 
 Various systems are under development at present aimed at harnessing the enormous potential available for wave power off Scotland 's coasts . Pelamis Wave Power ( previously Ocean Power Delivery ) are an Edinburgh @-@ based company whose Pelamis system has been tested off Orkney and Portugal . Their second generation P2 Pelamis machines are 180 metres ( 591 ft ) long and 4 metres ( 13 @.@ 1 ft ) diameter . Five tubes joined together by hinged joints float semi @-@ submerged on the surface of the ocean and move relative to each other as waves pass down the length of the machine . This motion is resisted by hydraulic cylinders which drive generators inside the machine to produce electricity . Future wave farm projects around Scotland could involve an arrangement of interlinked 1 MW machines connected to shore by a subsea transmission cable . 
 Another approach was used by the LIMPET 500 ( Land Installed Marine Power Energy Transformer ) energy converter which was installed on the island of Islay by Wavegen Ltd . It was a shore @-@ based unit and generated power when waves run up the beach , creating pressure inside an inclined oscillating water column . This in turn creates pneumatic power which drives the twin 250 kW generators . Islay LIMPET was opened in 2001 and was the world 's first commercial scale wave @-@ energy device . In March 2013 Voith Hydro decided to close down Wavegen choosing to concentrate on tidal power projects . 
 Funding for the UK 's first wave farm was announced by the then Scottish Executive on 22 February 2007 . It will be the world 's largest , with a capacity of 3 MW generated by four Pelamis machines at a cost of over £ 4 million . The funding is part of a new £ 13 million funding package for marine power projects in Scotland that will also support developments to Aquamarine 's Oyster and Ocean Power Technologies ' <unk> wave systems , AWS Ocean Energy 's sub @-@ sea wave devices , <unk> ' 1 @.@ 2 MW floating rotor device , <unk> 's tidal surge plans for the Churchill barriers between various Orkney islands , the Open Hydro tidal ring turbines , and further developments to the Wavegen system proposed for Lewis as well as a further £ 2 @.@ 5 million for the European Marine Energy Centre ( EMEC ) based in Orkney . This is a Scottish Executive @-@ backed research facility that has installed a wave testing system at Billia Croo on the Orkney mainland and a tidal power testing station on the nearby island of Eday . At the official opening of the Eday project the site was described as " the first of its kind in the world set up to provide developers of wave and tidal energy devices with a purpose @-@ built performance testing facility . " 
 The <unk> Wave Energy Project was announced in 2009 . This 4 MW system was planned by npower Renewables and Wavegen for a site 400 metres off the shore of <unk> Bay , in Lewis . However , in July 2011 holding company RWE announced they were withdrawing from the scheme , and Wavegen are seeking new partners . In early 2010 two areas were identified for substantial offshore wind development , in the Moray Firth basin and outer Firth of Forth . Shortly afterwards the Government earmarked eleven sites they expected to benefit from the construction of up to 8 @,@ 000 offshore turbines by 2020 . These included Campbeltown and Hunterston , four sites previously used for offshore oil fabrication at <unk> , Nigg Bay , Arnish and <unk> and five east coast locations from Peterhead to Leith . In May 2010 the " <unk> <unk> P2 " Pelamis 750 kW system was launched for testing by EMEC . The device weighs 1 @,@ 500 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 500 long tons ; 1 @,@ 700 short tons ) and is 180 metres ( 590 ft ) long . 
 = = Tidal power = = 
 Unlike wind and wave , tidal power is an inherently predictable source . However the technology is in its infancy and numerous devices are in the prototype stages . Today it is known that a tall tubular tower with three blades attached to it is the typical profile of a wind turbine , but twenty @-@ five years ago there were a wide variety of different systems being tested . This is the current situation with regard to tidal power . Some systems capture energy from the tides in a vertical direction . The tide comes in and raises the water level in a basin . As the tide lowers the water in the basin is discharged through a turbine . Tidal stream power captures energy from the flow of tides , usually using underwater plant resembling a small wind turbine . An example is Marine Current Turbines <unk> 1 @.@ 2 MW device at Strangford Lough in Northern Ireland , which is the largest tidal stream turbine in the world . To date the only installed tidal power plant of any size is the 240 MW rated barrage scheme at the Rance Estuary in Brittany , which has been operating successfully for more than 25 years , although there are a number of other much smaller projects around the world . 
 The Pentland Firth between Orkney and mainland Scotland has been described as the " Saudi Arabia of tidal power " and may be capable of generating up to 10 GW although a more recent estimate suggests an upper limit of 1 @.@ 9 GW . In March 2010 a total of ten sites in the area , capable of providing an installed capacity of 1 @.@ 2 GW of tidal and wave generation were leased out by the Crown Estate . Several other tidal sites with considerable potential exist in the Orkney archipelago . Tidal races on the west coast at Kylerhea between Skye and Lochalsh , the Grey Dog north of <unk> , the Dorus Mòr off Crinan and the Gulf of Corryvreckan also offer significant prospects . 
 In August 2010 the Atlantis Resources Corporation 's AK @-@ 1000 turbine , which has 18 @-@ metre ( 59 ft ) blades was unveiled at Invergordon . It is claimed to be the largest tidal turbine ever built and will be tested by EMEC off Eday . In October 2010 <unk> , a consortium of Morgan Stanley , Atlantis Resources Corporation and International Power , received a 25 @-@ year operational lease from the Crown Estate for a 400 MW tidal power project in the Pentland Firth . However , in 2011 the plans were in difficulty after Norwegian partners <unk> pulled out of the project . In December 2014 , Atlantis announced that onshore construction at the project site for connection to the electricity transmission grid would commence in January 2015 . The first power to the national grid is expected to be delivered in 2016 . 
 In 2010 it was announced that 10 Hammerfest Strom <unk> Norwegian turbines , capable of generating 1 MW each , could be installed in the Sound of Islay and that the <unk> yard at Arnish had won a £ 2 million contract to build some of the structures ' components . The following March this project , which will become the largest tidal array in the world , was approved by the Scottish Government with 10 planned tidal turbines predicted to generate enough power for over 5 @,@ 000 homes . The Sound of Islay offers both high currents and shelter from storms . A single 1 MW <unk> was installed at EMEC off Eday , Orkney by the end of 2011 . 
 The " world 's first community @-@ owned tidal power generator " became operational in <unk> Sound off Yell , Shetland in early 2014 . This 30 kW Nova Innovation device feeds into the local grid . At the opposite end of the country a 2010 consultants ' report into the possibility of a scheme involving the construction of a Solway Barrage , possibly south of Annan , concluded that the plans " would be expensive and environmentally sensitive . " In 2013 an alternative scheme using the <unk> Renewable Energy spectral marine energy converter was proposed for a plan involving the use of a bridge along the route of an abandoned railway line between Annan and Bowness @-@ on @-@ Solway . 
 = = Biofuels = = 
 = = = Biodiesel = = = 
 Various biodiesel schemes exist at present , and as with most renewables , interest is growing in the subject . Westray Development Trust operate a biodiesel vehicle fuelled by the residual vegetable oils from the Orkney archipelago fish and chip outlets . On a larger scale Argent Energy 's plant in Motherwell recycles tallow and used cooking oil to produce 50 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 litres ( 13 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US gal ) of biodiesel per annum . 
 A major benefit of biodiesel is lower carbon emissions , although the energy balance of liquid biofuels is a matter of controversy . Research is being undertaken into converting rapeseed oil into biodiesel , and the European biofuels directive intends to ensure that 5 @.@ 75 % Europe 's transport fuel comes from renewable sources by 2010 . However , there is only enough used vegetable oil in the UK to contribute 0 @.@ 38 % of current road fuel demand and if all the arable land in the UK were turned over to biofuel crops this would still only satisfy 22 % of the existing requirement for road transport . Serious concerns regarding the ethics of growing biodiesel in developing countries and importing the fuel to Europe have been raised on the grounds that they may replace much needed food crops . Converting any mainstream transport system to a renewable one also involves the conundrum that for consumers to use it the infrastructure must be in place , but high levels of use may be required to finance the infrastructure . Developments are thus slow at present and <unk> powered vehicles very much the exception . 
 Due to the relatively short growing season for sugar producing crops , ethanol is not commercially produced as a fuel in Scotland at present . However , there are encouraging developments in cellulosic decomposition that might enable grass or tree crops to be used to this end in future and which may prove to have lower net carbon emissions than other production techniques . 
 = = = <unk> , anaerobic digestion and landfill gas = = = 
 <unk> , or landfill gas , is a biofuel produced through the intermediary stage of anaerobic digestion consisting mainly of 45 – 90 % biologically produced methane and carbon dioxide . In early 2007 a thermophilic anaerobic digestion facility was commissioned in Stornoway in the Western Isles . The Scottish Environment Protection Agency ( SEPA ) and the Renewable Energy Association are also leading the way towards the establishment of a <unk> standard to facilitate the use of solid outputs from <unk> on land . Anaerobic digestion and mechanical biological treatment facilities have been planned at a number of other locations in Scotland , such as Westray . 
 It has been recognised that biogas ( mainly methane ) – produced from the anaerobic digestion of organic matter – is potentially a valuable and prolific feedstock . It is estimated that 0 @.@ 4 GW of generating capacity might be available from agricultural waste in Scotland . The Scottish Executive and SEPA has funded seven small scale farm trial plants with the British anaerobic digestion company <unk> in Southwest Scotland . Landfill sites have the potential for a further 0 @.@ 07 GW with sites such as the Avondale Landfill in Falkirk already utilising their potential . 
 = = = Solid biomass = = = 
 A 2007 report concluded that wood fuel exceeded hydroelectric and wind as the largest potential source of renewable energy . Scotland 's forests , which made up 60 % of the UK resource base , were forecast to be able to provide up to 1 million tonnes of wood fuel per annum . The biomass energy supply in Scotland was forecast to reach 450 MW or higher , ( predominantly from wood ) , with power stations requiring 4 @,@ 500 – 5 @,@ 000 oven dry tonnes per annum per megawatt of generating capacity . However a 2011 Forestry Commission and Scottish government follow @-@ up report concluded that : " ... there is no capacity to support further large scale electricity generation biomass plants from the domestic wood fibre resource . " A plan to build in Edinburgh a 200 MW biomass plant which would have imported 83 % of its wood , was withdrawn by Forth Energy in 2012 . The energy company <unk> has constructed a 44 MW biomass power station at Lockerbie using locally sourced crops while the smaller EPR Westfield power plant in Fife produces 9 @.@ 8 MW of output using chicken litter as fuel . The Scottish Executive and the Forestry Commission issued a Scottish Biomass Action Plan in 2007 . The Scottish Government set up the Scottish Biomass Support Scheme in 2006 with a £ 7 @.@ 5 million grant , later increased to £ 10 @.@ 5 million , to support biomass energy . £ 6 million of grants were drawn down by the time the scheme finished in March 2008 and a 2009 review of results concluded that the scheme had " ... achieved limited success against its strategic aims objectives . " A 2007 article by Renew Scotland claimed that automatic wood pellet boilers could be as convenient to use as conventional central heating systems . These boilers might be cheaper to run and , by using locally produced wood fuel , could try to be as carbon neutral as possible by using little energy for transportation . 
 There is also local potential for energy crops such as short @-@ rotation willow or poplar coppice , miscanthus energy grass , agricultural wastes such as straw and manure , and forestry residues . These crops could provide 0 @.@ 8 GW of generating capacity . 
 = = Micro systems = = 
 The Energy Savings Trust has estimated that micro @-@ generation could provide a significantly increased proportion of the UK 's electricity demand by 2050 although only a fraction of this would come from renewable sources . The current Scottish output is negligible . In May 2006 the then Communities Minister Malcolm Chisholm launched a Planning Advice Note aimed at promoting micro @-@ renewables . Small @-@ scale ' <unk> ' projects , which use wind turbines to power electrical storage heaters directly , have proven to be successful in remoter rural areas ; as have various other local schemes such as air source heat pumps . 
 Whisky distilleries may have a locally important part to play . Caithness Heat and Power have announced plans to tackle fuel poverty in Wick by utilising a wood chip CHP scheme in partnership with the Old Pulteney Distillery . On the island of Islay , a swimming pool is heated using waste heat from the Bowmore distillery . In Edinburgh , Tynecastle High School , due to be completed in 2010 , will be heated by waste heat from the neighbouring North British Distillery . In 2009 the Diageo Cameron Bridge distillery announced plans for a £ 65 million facility to generate energy from the spent " wash " created in the manufacturing process , which will aim to replace 95 % of the plan 's existing fossil fuel use . 
 There are also a growing number of micro hydro systems on smaller watercourses , especially in more remote rural locations . 
 The Inner Hebrides island Eigg is not connected to the National Grid , and has an integrated renewable power supply with wind , hydro and solar and battery storage , and diesel backup ( which is rarely used ) . 
 = = = Solar energy = = = 
 Despite Scotland 's relatively low level of sunshine hours , solar thermal panels can work effectively as they are capable of producing hot water even in cloudy weather . The technology was developed in the 1970s and is well @-@ established with various installers in place , although AES Solar based in Forres ( who provided the panels for the Scottish Parliament building ) are Scotland 's only manufacturer . 
 Since the introduction of feed @-@ in tariffs there has been a growth in the volume of installed photovoltaic panels , which generate electricity . In 2004 , the largest installation in Scotland was a 21 <unk> system at the Sir E. Scott secondary school in Tarbert , Harris although larger systems have been completed since then . The UK 's practicable resource is estimated at 7 @.@ 2 TWh per annum , which in the Scottish context is the approximate equivalent of 70 MW or less of installed capacity . 
 The " road energy system " uses water pipes buried beneath a layer of tarmac . In the summer , the dark asphalt is heated by the sun which in turn heats the water in the pipes . This water can be stored in an underground aquifer and the heat extracted in winter using a heat pump . The system can be used to warm or cool down roads , keeping them ice @-@ free and / or preventing softening due to overheating . Alternatively , the stored energy can be used for cooling buildings . The system was developed in the Netherlands and has been licensed by Ullapool @-@ based Invisible Energy Systems , who have installed the technology in their car park . 
 = = = Geothermal energy = = = 
 Geothermal energy is obtained by tapping the heat of the earth itself . Most systems in Scotland provide heating through a ground source heat pump which brings energy to the surface via shallow pipe works . An example is the Glenalmond Street project in <unk> , which uses a combination of solar and geothermal energy to heat 16 houses . Water in a coal mine 100 metres ( 328 ft ) below ground level is heated by geothermal energy and maintained at a temperature of about 12 ° C ( 54 ° F ) throughout the year . The warmed water is raised and passed through a heat pump , boosting the temperature to 55 ° C ( 131 ° F ) , and is then distributed to the houses providing heating to radiators . 
 Although the pumps may not be powered from renewable sources , up to four times the energy used can be recovered . Installation costs can vary from £ 7 @,@ 000 to £ 10 @,@ 000 , and grants may be available from the Scottish Community and Householders Renewables Initiative operated by Community Energy Scotland for domestic properties up to a maximum of £ 4 @,@ 000 . Perhaps up to 7 @.@ 6 TWh of energy is available on an annual basis from this source . 
 There is also potential for geothermal energy production from decommissioned oil and gas fields . 
 = = Other means of reducing carbon emissions = = 
 It is clear that if carbon emissions are to be reduced , a combination of increased production from renewables and decreased consumption of energy in general and fossil fuels in particular will be required . On the latter front , Gordon Brown , the then UK Chancellor of the Exchequer , announced in November 2006 that within a decade all new houses would have to be ' zero carbon ' . A variety of other options exist , most of which may affect development of renewable technologies even if they are not means of producing energy from renewable sources themselves . 
 = = = Other renewable options = = = 
 Various other ideas for renewable energy in the early stages of development , such as ocean thermal energy conversion , deep lake water cooling , and blue energy , have received little attention in Scotland , presumably because the potential is so significant for less speculative technologies . 
 = = = Carbon offsetting = = = 
 Carbon offsetting involves individuals or organisations compensating for their use of fossil fuels by making payments to projects that aim to neutralise the effect of these carbon emissions . Although the idea has become fashionable , the theory has received serious criticism of late . 
 Nonetheless , a credible option may be to plant trees within the local bioregion and maintain the forest on a permanent basis , thus locking up carbon produced by burning fossil fuels . In British growing conditions this method can compensate for carbon at a rate of 200 tonnes per square kilometre ( 0 @.@ 89 tons / acre ) planted over a 100 @-@ year period . Thus a 4 @-@ square @-@ kilometre ( 988 @-@ acre ) plantation could uptake 200 tonnes ( 220 tons ) of carbon over twenty @-@ five years . This is the equivalent of 10 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 11 @,@ 000 short tons ) of carbon dioxide . The weaknesses of the approach include uncertainty as to whether the planting might have occurred anyway and who , in the future , will ensure permanence . However , there is likely to be a greater level of credibility inherent in a nearby and visible scheme than in a far @-@ distant one . 
 = = = Challenges and opportunities offered by non @-@ renewables = = = 
 The following technologies are means of reducing the effect of carbon emissions and form an important aspect of the energy debate in Scotland and are included here for completeness . Their effect is likely to influence the future direction of commercial renewable energy , but they are not renewable forms of energy production themselves . 
 Carbon sequestration : Also known as carbon capture and storage , this technology involves the storage of carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) that is a by @-@ product of industrial processes through its injection into oil fields . It is not a form of renewable energy production , but it may be a way to significantly reduce the effect of fossil fuels whilst renewables are commercialised . It may also be an intermediate step towards a ' hydrogen economy ' ( see below ) , which could either enable further renewable development or conceivably out @-@ compete it . The technology has been successfully pioneered in Norway but is still a relatively untried concept . 
 <unk> coal ' technology : It has been estimated that it will be 2020 to 2025 before any commercial @-@ scale clean coal power stations ( coal @-@ burning power stations with carbon capture and sequestration ) are widely adopted . Moreover , some have criticised the clean coal approach and it is at best a means of ameliorating carbon emissions . It is not a form of renewable energy production , although like carbon sequestration it offers a significant commercial challenge to renewable developments . In 2009 a licence to test underground coal <unk> technology in Fife was granted to Thornton New Energy . However , a plan to build a new " clean coal " power station at Hunterston collapsed in 2009 after financial backing was withdrawn . 
 Nuclear power : Renewable energy as a concept generally excludes nuclear power although this stance has been challenged . 
 Incineration : There is a successful waste @-@ to @-@ energy incineration plant at Lerwick in Shetland which burns 22 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 24 @,@ 250 tons ) of waste every year and provides district heating to over 600 customers . Although such plants generate carbon emissions through the combustion of the biological material and plastic wastes ( which derive from fossil fuels ) , they also reduce the damage done to the atmosphere from the creation of methane in landfill sites . This is a much more damaging greenhouse gas than the carbon dioxide the burning process produces , although other systems which do not involve district heating may have a similar carbon footprint to straightforward landfill degradation . 
 = = = Hydrogen = = = 
 Although hydrogen offers significant potential as an alternative to hydrocarbons as a carrier of energy , neither hydrogen itself nor the associated fuel cell technologies are sources of energy in themselves . Nevertheless , the combination of renewable technologies and hydrogen is of considerable interest to those seeking alternatives to fossil fuels . There are a number of Scottish projects involved in this research , supported by the Scottish Hydrogen & Fuel Cell Association ( <unk> ) . 
 The <unk> project on Unst in Shetland is a ground @-@ breaking training and research centre which uses a combination of the ample supplies of wind power and fuel cells to create a wind hydrogen system . Two 15 kW turbines are attached to a ' <unk> ' fuel cell , which in turn provides power for heating systems , the creation of stored liquid hydrogen and an innovative fuel @-@ cell driven car . The project is community @-@ owned and part of the Unst Partnership , the community 's development trust . 
 In the Western Isles a plan to enable a £ 10 million waste management plant into a hydrogen production facility was announced in June 2006 . The Council have also agreed to purchase hydrogen @-@ fuelled buses and hope the new plant , which will be constructed in partnership with the local Hydrogen Research Laboratory , will supply island filling stations and houses and the industrial park at Arnish . 
 ITI Energy was a division of ITI Scotland and was established with the aim of funding Research and Development programmes in the energy sector . It is a division of ITI Scotland , which also includes a life sciences and digital media division . ITI Energy attracted the <unk> project , a French company that is developing technology for the cost @-@ effective storage of hydrogen . 
 In July 2008 the <unk> announced plans for a " hydrogen corridor " from Aberdeen to Peterhead . The proposal involves running hydrogen powered buses along the A 90 and is supported by Aberdeenshire Council and the Royal Mail . The economics and practical application of hydrogen vehicles are being investigated by the University of Birmingham in England . 
 The " Hydrogen Office " in Methil aims to demonstrate the benefits of improved energy efficiency and renewable and hydrogen energy systems . 
 = = Local vs national concerns = = 
 A significant feature of Scotland 's renewable potential is that the resources are largely distant from the main centres of population . This is by no means coincidental . The power of wind , wave and tide on the north and west coasts and for hydro in the mountains makes for dramatic scenery , but sometimes harsh living conditions . W. H. Murray described the Hebrides as " the Isles on the Edge of the Sea where men are welcome — if they are hard in body and in spirit tenacious . " 
 This happenstance of geography and climate has created various tensions . There is clearly a significant difference between a renewable energy production facility of modest size providing an island community with all its energy needs , and an industrial scale power station in the same location that is designed to export power to far distant urban locations . Thus , plans for one of the world 's largest onshore <unk> on the Hebridean island of Lewis have generated considerable debate . A related issue is the high @-@ voltage Beauly – Denny power line which brings electricity from renewable projects in the north and west to the cities of the south . The matter went to a public inquiry and has been described by Ian Johnston of The Scotsman as a " battle that pitches environmentalists against conservationists and giant energy companies against aristocratic landowners and clan chiefs " . In January 2010 Jim Mather , the Energy Minister , announced that the project would be going ahead , notwithstanding the more than 18 @,@ 000 objections received . <unk> of the <unk> line inside the park was taken down and not replaced . The Beauly – Denny line was energized by Christmas 2015 . 
 There is considerable support for community @-@ scale energy projects . For example , Alex Salmond , First Minister of Scotland , has stated that " we can think big by delivering small " and aspires to have a " million Scottish households with access to their own or community renewable generation within ten years " . The John Muir Trust has also stated that " the best renewable energy options around wild land are small @-@ scale , sensitively sited and adjacent to the communities directly benefiting from them " , although even community @-@ owned schemes can prove controversial . 
 A related issue is the position of Scotland within the United Kingdom . It has been alleged that UK transmission pricing structures are weighted against the development of renewables in Scotland , a debate which highlights the contrast between the sparsely populated north of Scotland and the highly urbanised south and east of England . Although the ecological footprints of Scotland and England are similar the relationship between this footprint and the <unk> of the respective countries are not . Scotland 's biocapacity ( a measure of the biologically productive area ) is 4 @.@ 52 global hectares ( <unk> ) per head , some 15 % less than the current ecological effect . In other words , with a 15 % reduction in consumption , the Scottish population could live within the productive capacity of the land to support them . However , the UK ecological footprint is more than three times the biocapacity , which is only 1 @.@ 6 <unk> head , amongst the lowest in Europe . Thus , to achieve the same end in the UK context , consumption would have to be reduced by about 66 % . 
 The developed world 's economy is very dependent on inexpensive ' point @-@ source ' fossil fuels . Scotland , as a relatively sparsely populated country with significant renewable resources , is in a unique position to demonstrate how the transition to a low @-@ carbon , widely distributed energy economy may be undertaken . A balance will need to be struck between supporting this transition and providing exports to the economies of densely populated regions in the Central Belt and elsewhere , as they seek their own solutions . The tension between local and national needs in the Scottish context may therefore also play out on the wider UK and European stage . 
 = = Promotion of renewables = = 
 Growing national concerns regarding peak oil and climate change have driven the subject of renewable energy high up the political agenda . Various public bodies and public @-@ private partnerships have been created to develop the potential . The Forum for Renewable Energy Development in Scotland , ( <unk> ) is a partnership between industry , academia and Government aimed at enabling Scotland to capitalise on its renewable energy resource . The Scottish Renewables Forum is an important intermediary organisation for the industry , hosting the annual Green Energy Awards . Community Energy Scotland provides advice , funding and finance for renewable energy projects developed by community groups . Aberdeen Renewable Energy Group ( <unk> ) is a public @-@ private partnership created to identify and promote renewable energy opportunities for businesses in the north @-@ east . In 2009 <unk> formed an alliance with North Scotland Industries Group to help promote the North of Scotland as an " international renewable energy hub " . 
 The Forestry Commission is active in promoting the biomass potential . The Climate Change Business Delivery Group aims to act as a way for businesses to share best practice and address the climate change challenge . Numerous universities are playing a role in supporting energy research under the <unk> programme , including fuel cell research at St Andrews , marine technologies at Edinburgh , distributed power systems at Strathclyde and biomass crops at the UHI Millennium Institute 's Orkney College . 
 In 2010 the <unk> student Freshers ' Festivals held in Edinburgh and Glasgow were powered entirely by renewable energy in a bid to raise awareness among young people in Scotland . 
 = = Recent events = = 
 New data appears on a regular basis and milestones in 2007 – 14 include the following . 
 In February 2007 the commissioning of the Braes of Doune wind farm took the UK renewables installed capacity up to 2 GW . Total Scottish capacity in October 2007 was 1 @.@ 13 GW from 760 turbines , and increased to 1 @.@ 3 GW by September 2008 , and 1 @.@ 48 GW by August 2009 . 
 Also during 2007 Scottish and Southern Energy plc in conjunction with the University of Strathclyde began the implementation of a ' Regional Power Zone ' in the Orkney archipelago . This ground @-@ breaking scheme ( that may be the first of its kind in the world ) involves ' active network management ' that will make better use of the existing infrastructure and allow a further 15 MW of new ' non @-@ firm generation ' output from renewables onto the network . Heat and Power Ltd. of Westray are involved in developing an innovative <unk> system that is being trialled at <unk> farm . Designed by Sam <unk> and Colin <unk> , it is capable of handling up to 1 @,@ 500 tonnes of feedstock per annum . Scottish & Southern Energy have been asked to provide for an export capacity of 40 <unk> . The aim is to help move the farm towards being powered by 100 % renewable energy . 
 In January 2008 it was reported that Professor Graeme Walker of the University of <unk> is leading a project aimed at using grain that is a by @-@ product of whisky distilling as a biofuel . In February 2008 plans to build a 10 MW prototype tidal energy plant in the Pentland Firth were announced by <unk> Tidal Energy Ltd. of Wick . Production was expected to commence in 2009 . The following September , Scottish Power announced plans for two tidal projects in the same area , pending successful tests of a £ 6 million prototype . 
 In January 2009 the government announced the launch of a " Marine Spatial Plan " to map the potential of the Pentland Firth and Orkney coasts and agreed to take part in a working group examining options for an offshore grid to connect renewable energy projects in the North Sea to on @-@ shore national grids . The potential for such a scheme has been described as including acting as a " 30 GW battery for Europe 's clean energy " . 
 In July 2009 Friends of the Earth , the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds , World Development Movement and World Wildlife Fund published a study called " The Power of Scotland Renewed . " This study claimed that the country could meet all its electricity needs by 2030 without the requirement for either nuclear or fossil fuel powered installations . 
 In April 2010 permission was granted for four new hydro schemes totalling 6 @.@ 7 MW capacity in the Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park . 
 Sea Energy Renewables Ltd was purchased by Spanish company Repsol in June 2010 . This move paved the way for the Inch Cape 180 wind turbine project offshore from Dundee , scheduled for a 2018 completion . Work is not expected to start before 2015 . 
 In 2013 , a YouGov energy survey concluded that : 
 New YouGov research for Scottish Renewables shows Scots are twice as likely to favour wind power over nuclear or shale gas . Over six in ten ( 62 % ) people in Scotland say they would support large scale wind projects in their local area , more than double the number who said they would be generally for shale gas ( 24 % ) and almost twice as much as nuclear ( 32 % ) . Hydro power is the most popular energy source for large scale projects in Scotland , with an overwhelming majority ( 80 % ) being in favour . 
 In August 2013 Scottish Hydro Electric Power Distribution connected a 2 MW lithium @-@ ion battery at Kirkwall Power Station . This was the UK 's first large scale battery connected to a local electricity distribution network . 
 In September 2013 the Scottish Government granted permission for the commencement of the " largest tidal energy project in Europe " . <unk> intends to install a 9 MW demonstration turbine and then an 86 MW array tidal array in the Pentland Firth , with expected completion in 2020 . 
 In July 2014 the Crown Estate gave approval to four new demonstration wave and tidal sites at the Stronsay Firth , the Mull of Galloway , Islay and Harris . 
 = = Summary of Scotland 's resource potential = = 
 Table notes 
 = = Main references = = 
 = Hrabri @-@ class submarine = 
 The Hrabri class consisted of two submarines built by the Vickers @-@ Armstrong Naval Yard , on the River Tyne , in the United Kingdom , for the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) . Launched in 1927 , the vessels were named Hrabri ( Brave ) and Nebojša ( Fearless ) . Their design was based on that of the British L @-@ class submarine of World War I , and they were built using parts originally assembled for L @-@ class submarines that were never completed . The Hrabri @-@ class were the first submarines to serve in the Royal Yugoslav Navy , and the class was joined by the two smaller French @-@ made Osvetnik @-@ class submarines to make up the pre @-@ war Yugoslav submarine force . They were armed with six bow @-@ mounted 533 mm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes , two 102 mm ( 4 in ) guns and one machine gun , and could dive to 60 metres ( 200 ft ) . 
 Prior to World War II both submarines participated in cruises to Mediterranean ports . Hrabri was captured by Italian forces in April 1941 during the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia . She was never commissioned by the Italians and was subsequently scrapped . Nebojša evaded capture , and served with British submarine forces in the Mediterranean as an anti @-@ submarine warfare training boat until the end of the war . Following the war , she served in the Yugoslav Navy as Tara in a training role until 1954 , when she was stricken . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 Yugoslav naval policy in the interwar period lacked direction until the mid @-@ 1920s , although it was generally accepted that the Adriatic coastline was effectively a sea frontier that the naval arm was responsible for securing with the limited resources made available to it . In 1926 , a modest ten @-@ year construction program was initiated to build up a force of submarines , coastal torpedo boats , torpedo bombers and conventional bomber aircraft to perform this role . The Hrabri @-@ class submarines were one of the first new acquisitions aimed at developing a naval force capable of meeting this challenge . 
 The Hrabri @-@ class was built for the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) by the Vickers @-@ Armstrong Naval Yard on the River Tyne in the United Kingdom . Their design was based on that of the British L @-@ class submarine of World War I , and they were built using parts originally assembled for the Group III boats HMS L @-@ 67 and HMS L @-@ 68 , which were never completed due to the end of the war . The L @-@ class were designed for operations in the North Sea , but during the interwar period the Royal Navy had deployed them around the world , including in the Mediterranean from 1929 onward . The two Yugoslav boats had an overall length of 72 @.@ 05 metres ( 236 ft 5 in ) , a beam of 7 @.@ 32 m ( 24 ft 0 in ) , and a surfaced draught of 3 @.@ 96 m ( 13 ft 0 in ) . Their surfaced displacement was 975 long tons ( 991 t ) or 1 @,@ 164 long tons ( 1 @,@ 183 t ) submerged , and their crews consisted of 45 officers and enlisted men . They had a diving depth of 60 m ( 200 ft ) . 
 They had two shafts driven by two diesel engines ( when surfaced ) or two electric motors ( when submerged ) . The diesel engines were rated at 2 @,@ 400 bhp ( 1 @,@ 800 kW ) and the electric motors at 1 @,@ 600 shp ( 1 @,@ 200 kW ) , and they were designed to reach a top speed of 15 @.@ 7 knots ( 29 @.@ 1 km / h ; 18 @.@ 1 mph ) under diesel power while surfaced , and 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) on their electric motors when submerged . The Hrabri @-@ class were armed with six bow @-@ mounted 533 mm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes and carried twelve torpedoes . They were also equipped with two 102 mm ( 4 in ) guns ( one forward and one aft of the conning tower ) , and one machine gun . Their radius of action was 3 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 000 km ; 4 @,@ 400 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Both submarines were launched in 1927 , and left the Tyne in late January 1928 . In company with the Yugoslav submarine tender Hvar , the submarines arrived in the Bay of Kotor on the southern Adriatic coast on 8 April 1928 . In May and June 1929 , Hrabri , Nebojša , Hvar and six torpedo boats accompanied the light cruiser Dalmacija on a cruise to Malta , the Greek island of Corfu in the Ionian Sea , and Bizerte in the French protectorate of Tunisia . According to the British naval attaché , the ships and crews made a very good impression while visiting Malta . In June and July 1930 , Hrabri , Nebojša and the fleet auxiliary Sitnica again cruised the Mediterranean , visiting Alexandria and Beirut . In 1932 , the British naval attaché reported that Yugoslav ships engaged in few exercises , manoeuvres or gunnery training due to reduced budgets . In 1933 , the attaché reported that the naval policy of Yugoslavia was strictly defensive , aimed at protecting her more than 600 km ( 370 mi ) of coastline . 
 = = = Hrabri = = = 
 The first of the class , Hrabri was involved in a series of visits to Mediterranean ports during the interwar period . She was captured in port by the Italians during the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia , but was not commissioned by them and was scrapped later that year due to her poor condition . 
 = = = Nebojša = = = 
 Nebojša was the second and last of the class . After repairs following an accident in 1930 , she participated in several cruises in the Mediterranean during the interwar period . She evaded capture during the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , and was used by the Royal Navy as an anti @-@ submarine warfare training vessel . After the war she was overhauled by the Yugoslavs and renamed Tara , continuing in a training role until she was stricken in 1954 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Periodicals = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = Mr. and Mrs. Iyer = 
 Mr. and Mrs. Iyer is a 2002 Indian drama film written and directed by Aparna Sen and produced by N. Venkatesan . The film features Aparna Sen 's daughter Konkona Sen Sharma as Meenakshi Iyer , a Tamil Iyer Brahmin who is a Hindu . Rahul Bose portrays the character of Raja Chowdhury , a Bengali Muslim wildlife photographer . The story revolves around these two lead characters during a fateful bus journey amidst the <unk> of a communal strife in India . Zakir Hussain , an Indian tabla maestro , composed the background score and music for the film ; Goutam Ghose , a film director himself , was the cinematographer . 
 Mr. and Mrs. Iyer premiered at the Locarno International Film Festival in Switzerland and was showcased at other prominent film festivals . The film opened to Indian audiences on 19 July 2002 . It was met with critical acclaim upon release , and won several national and international awards , including the Golden Maile award at the Hawaii International Film Festival and the Nargis Dutt Award for Best Feature Film on National Integration in India . The film , which was also released as a DVD , had English as its predominant language with a sporadic use of Hindi , Tamil , and Bengali . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Meenakshi Iyer ( Konkona Sen Sharma ) , with her infant son , Santhanam , embarks on a bus journey to return to her husband , from her parents ' place . At the bus station , Meenakshi and Raja Chowdhury ( Rahul Bose ) get introduced to each other through a common friend . Raja , a wildlife photographer , is requested by Meenakshi 's parents to look after their daughter and baby grandson during the journey . 
 The passengers of the bus include a boisterous group of youngsters , two Sikh men , an elderly Muslim couple , a young couple high on romance , a mentally challenged boy and his mother , and some card @-@ playing men . The bus faces a roadblock and the bus driver attempts a detour , but is stopped by traffic jam caused by sectarian violence between Hindus and Muslims in nearby areas . 
 Raja reveals his Muslim identity to Meenakshi . As someone who comes from a high caste and conservative Hindu Brahmin family , Meenakshi shudders at the very fact that during their travel she drank water offered by Raja , a Muslim . " Please . Don 't touch me " is her shocked reply . Raja contemplates leaving the bus , but is forced to get inside the bus by the patrolling police who informs that a curfew has been declared due to the riot . After the police leaves to scout other areas , a rioting Hindu mob arrives and forcibly enters the bus . They begin interrogating passengers about their religious identities and when in doubt , they even resort to check if the person is circumcised . 
 In order to protect himself from them , one of the passengers — Jewish and hence circumcised — points out the old Muslim couple to divert the mob 's attention . The mob 's leader drags the old couple out of the bus . One teenager resists this , but she is thrashed by the leader . As Raja attempts to rise in revolt , Meenakshi plants Santhanam on his lap , ordering him to hold the baby with an intent to shield Raja 's Muslim identity . The mob asks about their identities , and <unk> tells the leader that Raja and she are Mr. and Mrs. Iyer . After this chilly encounter , the passengers spend the night in the bus . 
 In the morning , the passengers trek to a nearby village to seek accommodation . Raja and Meenakshi , identifying themselves as Mr. and Mrs. Iyer , fail to find any accommodation . However , the police officer , who was patrolling the earlier evening , bails them out by providing shelter at an abandoned forest bungalow . They are provided with the single usable bedroom available in the bungalow . Meenakshi refuses to share the room with Raja , and curses herself for coming along with a stranger . Raja confronts her on her outdated prejudices about caste and religion . After a brief quarrel , Raja allows her the comfort of the bedroom and prefers to sleep outside . The next morning when Meenakshi does not find Raja , she gets worried and angry as to why he left Santhanam and her in such a place . Soon , she feels relieved to find Raja sleeping outside . After they reach a restaurant in the nearby village , they meet the teenagers on the bus . The teenage girls are excited and curious to know about <unk> and Raja 's love story . To keep their farce alive , both of them cook up an impromptu story right from how they met till where they went for their honeymoon . During their stay at the bungalow , they discover each other 's beliefs and understanding of religion . That night , as they witness a horrific murder by one of the mobs , a shocked Meenakshi is comforted by Raja . 
 The next day , they reach a railway station with the army 's help . There , they board the train towards their destination . An unspoken love and a strong attraction is evident between them , keeping behind all their differences . At their destination station , Kolkata , the real Mr. Iyer ( Meenakshi 's husband ) arrives to receive his wife . Meenakshi introduces Raja to her husband as Jehangir Chowdhury , a Muslim man who helped her ( a Hindu woman ) during the curfew . Raja hands over a camera roll to Meenakshi , containing the photos of their journey ; they bid an emotional farewell to each other . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Konkona Sen Sharma as Meenakshi S. Iyer – A traditional Tamil Iyer Brahmin traveling with her year old son , Santhanam , in the bus on her way to meet her husband . She meets a fellow @-@ traveler , Raja Chowdhury , and gets drawn to him due to the surrounding circumstances . 
 Rahul Bose as Jehangir " Raja " Chowdhury – A liberal Muslim by faith , he is a wildlife photographer by profession . With the imminent danger from the rioters , Meenakshi contrives a protective identity for him as her husband . 
 <unk> Sahni as Iqbal Ahmed Khan – An elderly conservative Muslim traveling along with his wife , Najma . He ends up as one of the victims of the sectarian violence . 
 Surekha Sikri as Najma Ahmed Khan – The dutiful and loving wife of Iqbal , Najma perishes in the riots when she comes in defence of her husband . 
 Anjan Dutt as Cohen – He is responsible for diverting the attention of the Hindu mob , in self @-@ defence , towards the old Muslim couple . Thereafter , he is petrified thinking that he may also have been killed by the mob who could wrongly identify him as a Muslim , since he is circumcised . 
 Bharat Kaul as Rajesh Arora – The police officer responsible for controlling and maintaining the law and order in the riot @-@ stricken area . He gets acquainted with the bus passengers and helps the Iyer ' couple ' find a place to stay during the curfew . 
 <unk> Seth , Riddhi Basu , Richa Vyas , Eden Das , <unk> Sengupta as <unk> , Mala , Sonali , Amrita , Akash – An enthusiastic young group of friends riding the bus . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Aparna Sen , a noted actress and director of Bengali cinema , made her debut as a director with the English film 36 Chowringhee Lane ( 1981 ) . Mr. and Mrs. Iyer was her second film in English . She hoped to write a simple romantic story , but it shaped out to be a relationship drama in the backdrop of sectarian violence . Sen came up with the background of the story in the aftermath of 9 / 11 and the 2002 Gujarat riots . In an interview , Sen stated that the omnipresent , circumstantial violence in the film was only to serve as a strain in the script which aimed to show how the relationship evolves between two people who are forced to be together under trying times . She stated that the time frame of the film was set after the attacks on the Parliament of India on 13 December 2001 . 
 In an interview at the screening at the Locarno Film Festival , Sen revealed that Konkona was involved in the pre @-@ production research , and she suggested the title . About the cinematographer Gautam Ghose , Aparna Sen said that they had a good rapport and that Ghose , himself an acclaimed director , was one of the best cinematographers she knew . Ghose , in reply , said that he hoped to give his best for the film and thus contribute to their friendship . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Rahul Bose 's work in English , August ( 1994 ) and Split Wide Open ( 1999 ) made Aparna Sen feel that he was a good , controlled and intelligent actor . After a costume and a makeup test , he was chosen for the character of Raja <unk> . Sen admitted that Bose 's work was up to the mark , and working with him was a wonderful experience . She told in an interview that Konkona Sen Sharma 's abilities as a sensitive actress fetched her the role of Meenakshi Iyer . Konkona said that she chose this film as she was interested in Indian films made in English , and was reluctant to do regular commercial films . Sen had penned the elderly Muslim woman 's character bearing Surekha Sikri in mind . Eventually Sikri and the author and playwright <unk> Sahni were cast to play the roles of the Muslim couple in the film . Santhanam , the infant son of Meenakshi Iyer in the film is Sen 's grand niece . 
 Aparna Sen chose English as the film 's narrative since the characters are linguistically diverse . She had to make sure that the characters spoke in English with their regional accent . Konkona admitted in an interview that playing the role of a Tamil Brahmin did not come easy . The director forced her to visit Chennai ( where the major language is Tamil ) for two weeks to research her character . She also said that she had learned many characteristics , nuances and mannerisms native to Tamilian housewives . She took a close look at Iyer lifestyles and customs in and around Mylapore , a cultural hub in Chennai . She attempted listening to recorded conversations in Iyer households to get a suitable Tamil accent . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The production commenced in December 2001 . Sen chose to keep the geographical setting unstated because she felt that it was a journey that could take place anywhere . The film was shot in the Himalayan foothills of northern West Bengal . The producers provided a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art camera from Chennai 's Prasad Studios to ensure that the shooting crew was technically better equipped . <unk> Mehta , from <unk> Productions , the co @-@ producer oversaw the crew of over 100 complete the production schedule in 50 days . The production team resorted to certain cost @-@ cutting measures to ensure they committed fewer mistakes . For example , they had organised a workshop for the actors to avoid mistakes while filming . 
 While filming in Jalpaiguri , Sen got embroiled in a controversy for damages caused to the forest bungalow , a heritage property , where a portion of filming was done . She admitted that , to give the bungalow a haunted look , they " ... sprayed slush on the walls and plastered cobwebs all over the place . " However , she claimed that the place was cleaned up after the completion of their shoot . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Following objections from the local police , two scenes were removed by producers from the version of the film screened in the city of Mumbai . One scene showed a Hindu man saying — using profanity — that Muslims should be sent back to Pakistan ; the other featured a policeman using obscenities with a communal undertone . The police felt both scenes were too " provocative " for a " communally sensitive " city . However , for the rest of India , the film was screened in its entirety . 
 The film had only modest box office success ; domestically , it made 7 @.@ 3 million rupees in its first release . However , thanks to its low budget and the spread of multiplexes in India , it brought in some revenue . Furthermore , the contemporary trend in the Indian television channels is to showcase films within months of their release . This trend helped modest box @-@ office successes such as Mr. and Mrs. Iyer to get additional thrust to their financial returns . Indeed , Mr. and Mrs. Iyer was one of the first films that led to reworking of the business models for small films in India . In addition , <unk> Productions sold the dubbed version in Italy for $ 20 @,@ 000 . A trade analysis by Rediff.com suggested that small @-@ budget films such as Mr. and Mrs. Iyer did not compromise on marketing budgets , instead they put efforts in marketing themselves more innovatively . 
 = = = Special screenings and awards = = = 
 In 2002 , Mr. and Mrs. Iyer was chosen as India 's official entry at the Locarno International Film Festival . It ran for 3 minutes longer than its runtime of 120 minutes at Locarno . Though it missed out on the Golden Leopard Award at Locarno , it won the <unk> Jury Prize along with two other films . The film won the Golden Maile award at the 22nd Hawaii International Film Festival , the Audience Award for the Best Feature Film at the Philadelphia Film Festival , and the best screenplay award at the 2003 Cinemanila International Film Festival . 
 In 2003 , the Indian Film Festival of Los Angeles chose to open with Mr. and Mrs. Iyer , while New Zealand 's first Asian film festival in 2004 chose to close its 10 @-@ day fest with it . The India International Women 's Film Festival had a special retrospective to Aparna Sen for Mr. and Mrs. Iyer . The film was also showcased at the Pusan International Film Festival , Regus London Film Festival , Mill Valley Film Festival , International Film Festival of India , Braunschweig International Film Festival , and High Falls Film Festival . At the International Film Festival of Las Palmas in the Canary Islands , it won the Gold prize , awarded to the best film screened that year . Rahul Bose said that when the film was showcased at the Geneva festival , it was seen and liked by Kofi Annan , the United Nations Secretary @-@ General . 
 Back home in India , Mr. and Mrs. Iyer won the Golden Lotus Award for best direction , the Silver Lotus Awards for best actress , the best screenplay , and the Nargis Dutt Award for Best Feature Film on National Integration at the 2003 National Film Awards ceremony . 
 Govind Nihalani , an Indian film director wondered if Mr. and Mrs. Iyer could have been sent to the Oscars instead of the regular song @-@ and @-@ dance entries . Eventually , Film Federation of India , the apex organisation that sends the nation 's official entries to the Oscars , did not find any film worth sending for the 76th Academy Awards . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Lawrence van Gelder commented in his review in The New York Times that " The well @-@ acted romance , as the two principal characters are thrown together by unanticipated events , is hard to resist , even though the answer to the crucial question it raises is all too conveniently deferred time and again . " However , he added that Mr. and Mrs. Iyer " ... is not a subtle film ... " The Chicago Reader also said , " Sen is anything but subtle in populating the bus with a cross section of class and ethnic types ... but the friendship that blossoms between the leads is tenderly depicted and hints at a solution to sectarian strife " TIME magazine praised Aparna sen for her " ... attention to detail ... " that " ... skillfully captures the characters ' idiosyncrasies . " The Village Voice said , " The actors appear game , yet director Aparna Sen , who conceived the film in the wake of September 11 , resorts often to hokey pseudo @-@ lyricism and prefers sound @-@ bite <unk> to sociological depth . " Metacritic , a website with a medley of reviews by American critics , gives the film a score of 50 / 100 , meaning mixed or average reviews . 
 In his review , Derek Elley of Variety remarked that the film had " ... the awkward , issue @-@ driven dialogue and wavering direction , showing influences from both the arty and commercial . [ The ] two leads just about scrape through . " Although The Hindu review praised the director for " ... handling ( these ) scenes in an understated , muted fashion ... " giving " ... them the power to disturb and haunt you . " it questioned certain aspects of the film , stating , " Though the flutters of the heart have been treated with finesse — sometimes a little too <unk> , pandering , perhaps , to middle class morality — we are never entirely convinced that love could blossom between Meenakshi Iyer and Raja Chowdhary . " Indeed , Sen was criticised for contriving cinematic situation not quite fitting to the real world , " Can a married woman with a baby in arms fall in love with a total stranger that she meets on a very short bus journey , however extraordinary the situation may have been ? Having decided to drive them to each other 's arms , Sen thinks up situations , which are terribly contrived ... Sen 's story and script are found wanting elsewhere too . The police officer , who plays the good Samaritan , appears so unreal in the world of rancour that Sen creates ... [ She ] , probably in her over enthusiasm , lets her own emotions derail her . " 
 Konkona Sen Sharma , who had not been widely seen outside Bengal before the release of the film , received particular praise for her performance , " ... the movie clearly belongs to Konkona Sen Sharma ... who as Meenakshi [ Iyer ] gets so beautifully into the psyche of a Tamil Brahmin ... she emotes just splendidly : when her eyes well up at the thought of parting with Raja [ Chowdhary ] , when she gently rests her head on his shoulders in the train , and when her expressions suggest the faintest hint of love , we know that here is a great actress . " A Rediff.com review said , " ... Konkana , a youngster , bowls you over with her silently sledge @-@ hammering portrayal of Meenakshi Iyer , a conservative Tamilian Brahmin housewife ... [ Her ] eyes tell a thousand untold stories . " An Australian critic said that the film , with " wonderfully nuanced performances by <unk> and Rahul Bose , whose love affair is as innocent as the lyrical , lingering soundtrack . Mr and Mrs Iyer is a gentle film , whose simple and haunting love story will appeal to the romantic traveller . " 
 The " ... attractive lensing by Gautam Ghose ( a director in his own right ) and atmospheric scoring by Ustad Zakir Hussain ... " were well received . " Looking through the eyes of Gautam Ghose 's illuminating lens , Aparna Sen builds a miniature , but epic , world of tremendous inner strength . In her first seriously politically committed film , Sen takes on the issue of communal conflict with the surging humanism of Gabriel García Márquez , painting words on celluloid ... If [ Zakir ] Hussain creates sounds within the seesaw of silences and screams , cinematographer Gautam Ghose creates a lucid contrast between the silently majestic Himalayan hinterland and the fundamentalists . " 
 = = Home media = = 
 = = = DVD = = = 
 The DVD , which released on 2 June 2004 , has subtitle options in English , Hindi , Punjabi , Tamil and Urdu . It is available in 16 : 9 Anamorphic widescreen , Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 Surround , progressive 24 FPS , widescreen and NTSC format . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 Ustad Zakir Hussain composed music for the film . For the first time in mainstream cinema , he sang for one part of a song . He said this in an interview and added that it was only after the track was recorded , the producers decided to go for Hussain 's voice . Rahul Bose , who introduced Hussain to Aparna and Konkona , was instrumental in influencing Hussain to compose the background score for the film . 
 The soundtrack consists of 5 songs : 
 = J. R. R. Tolkien = 
 John Ronald Reuel Tolkien CBE , FRSL ( / <unk> / ; 3 January 1892 – 2 September 1973 ) , known by his pen name J. R. R. Tolkien , was an English writer , poet , philologist , and university professor who is best known as the author of the classic high @-@ fantasy works The Hobbit , The Lord of the Rings , and The Silmarillion . 
 He served as the Rawlinson and Bosworth Professor of Anglo @-@ Saxon and Fellow of Pembroke College , Oxford , from 1925 to 1945 and Merton Professor of English Language and Literature and Fellow of Merton College , Oxford from 1945 to 1959 . He was at one time a close friend of C. S. Lewis — they were both members of the informal literary discussion group known as the Inklings . Tolkien was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire by Queen Elizabeth II on 28 March 1972 . 
 After Tolkien 's death , his son Christopher published a series of works based on his father 's extensive notes and unpublished manuscripts , including The Silmarillion . These , together with The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings form a connected body of tales , poems , fictional histories , invented languages , and literary essays about a fantasy world called Arda , and Middle @-@ earth within it . Between 1951 and 1955 , Tolkien applied the term legendarium to the larger part of these writings . 
 While many other authors had published works of fantasy before Tolkien , the great success of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings led directly to a popular resurgence of the genre . This has caused Tolkien to be popularly identified as the " father " of modern fantasy literature — or , more precisely , of high fantasy . In 2008 , The Times ranked him sixth on a list of " The 50 greatest British writers since 1945 " . Forbes ranked him the 5th top @-@ earning " dead celebrity " in 2009 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Family origins = = = 
 Tolkien 's paternal ancestors were middle @-@ class craftsmen who made and sold clocks , watches and pianos in London and Birmingham . The Tolkien family had emigrated from Germany in the 18th century but had become " quickly intensely English " . Stories told by his aunt , Grace Tolkien , claimed a relation with the House of Hohenzollern . " More prosaic " members of the family said that the Tolkiens had arrived in England in 1756 , as refugees from Frederick the Great 's invasion of the Electorate of Saxony during the Seven Years ' War . Several families with the surname Tolkien or similar spelling live in northwestern Germany , mainly in Lower Saxony and Hamburg . 
 Tolkien believed his surname derived from the German word <unk> , meaning " foolhardy " , and jokingly inserted himself as a " cameo " into The Notion Club Papers under the literally @-@ translated name <unk> . However , this origin of the name has not been proven . A German writer has suggested that the name is more likely to derive from the village of <unk> near Rastenburg , East Prussia ( now in Poland and known as <unk> ) . Although that village is far from Lower Saxony , its name is derived from the now @-@ extinct Old Prussian language . 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 John Ronald Reuel Tolkien was born on 3 January 1892 in Bloemfontein in the Orange Free State ( now Free State Province in South Africa ) to Arthur Reuel Tolkien ( 1857 – 1896 ) , an English bank manager , and his wife Mabel , née Suffield ( 1870 – 1904 ) . The couple had left England when Arthur was promoted to head the Bloemfontein office of the British bank for which he worked . Tolkien had one sibling , his younger brother , Hilary Arthur Reuel , who was born on 17 February 1894 . 
 As a child , he was bitten by a large baboon spider in the garden , an event some think later echoed in his stories , although Tolkien admitted no actual memory of the event and no special hatred of spiders as an adult . In another incident , a young family servant , who thought Tolkien a beautiful child , took the baby to his kraal to show him off , returning him the next morning . 
 When he was three , he went to England with his mother and brother on what was intended to be a lengthy family visit . His father , however , died in South Africa of rheumatic fever before he could join them . This left the family without an income , so Tolkien 's mother took him to live with her parents in Kings Heath , Birmingham . Soon after , in 1896 , they moved to Sarehole ( now in Hall Green ) , then a Worcestershire village , later annexed to Birmingham . He enjoyed exploring Sarehole Mill and Moseley Bog and the Clent , Lickey and Malvern Hills , which would later inspire scenes in his books , along with nearby towns and villages such as Bromsgrove , Alcester , and Alvechurch and places such as his aunt Jane 's farm of Bag End , the name of which he used in his fiction . 
 Mabel Tolkien taught her two children at home . Ronald , as he was known in the family , was a keen pupil . She taught him a great deal of botany and awakened in him the enjoyment of the look and feel of plants . Young Tolkien liked to draw landscapes and trees , but his favourite lessons were those concerning languages , and his mother taught him the rudiments of Latin very early . 
 He could read by the age of four and could write fluently soon afterwards . His mother allowed him to read many books . He disliked Treasure Island and The Pied Piper and thought Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll was " amusing but disturbing " . He liked stories about " Red Indians " ( Native Americans ) and the fantasy works by George MacDonald . In addition , the " Fairy Books " of Andrew Lang were particularly important to him and their influence is apparent in some of his later writings . 
 Mabel Tolkien was received into the Roman Catholic Church in 1900 despite vehement protests by her Baptist family , which stopped all financial assistance to her . In 1904 , when J.R.R. Tolkien was 12 , his mother died of acute diabetes at Fern Cottage in Rednal , which she was renting . She was then about 34 years of age , about as old as a person with diabetes mellitus type 1 could live without treatment — insulin would not be discovered until two decades later . Nine years after her death , Tolkien wrote , " My own dear mother was a martyr indeed , and it is not to everybody that God grants so easy a way to his great gifts as he did to Hilary and myself , giving us a mother who killed herself with labour and trouble to ensure us keeping the faith . " 
 Prior to her death , Mabel Tolkien had assigned the guardianship of her sons to her close friend , Fr . Francis Xavier Morgan of the Birmingham Oratory , who was assigned to bring them up as good Catholics . In a 1965 letter to his son Michael , Tolkien recalled the influence of the man whom he always called " Father Francis " : " He was an upper @-@ class Welsh @-@ Spaniard Tory , and seemed to some just a <unk> old gossip . He was — and he was not . I first learned charity and forgiveness from him ; and in the light of it pierced even the ' liberal ' darkness out of which I came , knowing more [ i.e. Tolkien having grown up knowing more ] about ' Bloody Mary ' than the Mother of Jesus — who was never mentioned except as an object of wicked worship by the <unk> . " 
 After his mother 's death , Tolkien grew up in the Edgbaston area of Birmingham and attended King Edward 's School , Birmingham , and later St. Philip 's School . In 1903 , he won a Foundation Scholarship and returned to King Edward 's . While a pupil there , Tolkien was one of the cadets from the school 's Officers Training Corps who helped " line the route " for the 1910 coronation parade of King George V. Like the other cadets from King Edward 's , Tolkien was posted just outside the gates of Buckingham Palace . 
 In Edgbaston , Tolkien lived there in the shadow of Perrott 's Folly and the Victorian tower of Edgbaston Waterworks , which may have influenced the images of the dark towers within his works . Another strong influence was the romantic medievalist paintings of Edward Burne @-@ Jones and the Pre @-@ Raphaelite Brotherhood ; the Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery had a large collection of works on public display . 
 = = = Youth = = = 
 While in his early teens , Tolkien had his first encounter with a constructed language , <unk> , an invention of his cousins , Mary and Marjorie <unk> . At that time , he was studying Latin and Anglo @-@ Saxon . Interest in the language soon died away , but Mary and others , including Tolkien himself , invented a new and more complex language called <unk> . The next constructed language he came to work with , <unk> , would be his own creation . 
 In 1911 , while they were at King Edward 's School , Birmingham , Tolkien and three friends , Rob Gilson , Geoffrey Bache Smith and Christopher Wiseman , formed a semi @-@ secret society they called the <unk> The initials stood for Tea Club and <unk> Society , alluding to their fondness for drinking tea in Barrow 's Stores near the school and , secretly , in the school library . After leaving school , the members stayed in touch and , in December 1914 , they held a " council " in London at Wiseman 's home . For Tolkien , the result of this meeting was a strong dedication to writing poetry . 
 In 1911 , Tolkien went on a summer holiday in Switzerland , a trip that he recollects vividly in a 1968 letter , noting that Bilbo 's journey across the Misty Mountains ( " including the <unk> down the slithering stones into the pine woods " ) is directly based on his adventures as their party of 12 hiked from Interlaken to Lauterbrunnen and on to camp in the moraines beyond Mürren . Fifty @-@ seven years later , Tolkien remembered his regret at leaving the view of the eternal snows of Jungfrau and <unk> ( " the <unk> ( <unk> ) of my dreams " ) . They went across the Kleine <unk> to Grindelwald and on across the Grosse <unk> to Meiringen . They continued across the <unk> Pass , through the upper Valais to Brig and on to the Aletsch glacier and Zermatt . 
 In October of the same year , Tolkien began studying at Exeter College , Oxford . He initially studied Classics but changed his course in 1913 to English Language and Literature , graduating in 1915 with first @-@ class honours in his final examinations . 
 = = = Courtship and marriage = = = 
 At the age of 16 , J.R.R. Tolkien met Edith Mary Bratt , who was three years his senior , when he and his brother Hilary moved into the boarding house where she lived in Duchess Road , Edgbaston . According to Humphrey Carpenter , 
 Edith and Ronald took to frequenting Birmingham teashops , especially one which had a balcony overlooking the pavement . There they would sit and throw <unk> into the hats of passers @-@ by , moving to the next table when the sugar bowl was empty . ... With two people of their personalities and in their position , romance was bound to flourish . Both were orphans in need of affection , and they found that they could give it to each other . During the summer of 1909 , they decided that they were in love . 
 His guardian , Father Morgan , viewed Edith as the reason for Tolkien 's having " muffed " his exams and considered it " altogether unfortunate " that his surrogate son was romantically involved with an older , Protestant woman . He prohibited him from meeting , talking to , or even corresponding with her until he was 21 . He obeyed this prohibition to the letter , with one notable early exception , over which Father Morgan threatened to cut short his university career if he did not stop . 
 In a 1941 letter to his son Michael , Tolkien recalled , 
 I had to choose between disobeying and grieving ( or deceiving ) a guardian who had been a father to me , more than most fathers ... and ' dropping ' the love @-@ affair until I was 21 . I don 't regret my decision , though it was very hard on my lover . But it was not my fault . She was completely free and under no vow to me , and I should have had no just complaint ( except according to the unreal romantic code ) if she had got married to someone else . For very nearly three years I did not see or write to my lover . It was extremely hard , especially at first . The effects were not wholly good : I fell back into folly and slackness and misspent a good deal of my first year at college . 
 On the evening of his 21st birthday , Tolkien wrote to Edith , who was living with family friend C.H. Jessop at Cheltenham . He declared that he had never ceased to love her and asked her to marry him . Edith replied that she had already accepted the proposal of George Field , the brother of one of her closest schoolfriends . Edith said , however , that she had agreed to marry Field only because she felt " on the shelf " and had begun to doubt that Tolkien still cared for her . She explained that , because of Tolkien 's letter , everything had changed . 
 On 8 January 1913 , Tolkien travelled by train to Cheltenham and was met on the platform by Edith . The two took a walk into the countryside , sat under a railway viaduct , and talked . By the end of the day , Edith had agreed to accept Tolkien 's proposal . She wrote to Field and returned her engagement ring . Field was " dreadfully upset at first " , and the Field family was " insulted and angry " . Upon learning of Edith 's new plans , Jessop wrote to her guardian , " I have nothing to say against Tolkien , he is a cultured gentleman , but his prospects are poor in the extreme , and when he will be in a position to marry I cannot imagine . Had he adopted a profession it would have been different . " 
 Following their engagement , Edith reluctantly announced that she was converting to Catholicism at Tolkien 's insistence . Jessop , " like many others of his age and class ... strongly anti @-@ Catholic " , was infuriated , and he ordered Edith to find other lodgings . 
 Edith Bratt and Ronald Tolkien were formally engaged at Birmingham in January 1913 , and married at St. Mary Immaculate Roman Catholic Church , Warwick , on 22 March 1916 . In his 1941 letter to Michael , Tolkien expressed admiration for his wife 's willingness to marry a man with no job , little money , and no prospects except the likelihood of being killed in the Great War . 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 In August 1914 the United Kingdom entered the First World War . Tolkien 's relatives were shocked when he elected not to immediately volunteer for the British Army . In a 1941 letter to his son Michael , Tolkien recalled , " In those days chaps joined up , or were scorned publicly . It was a nasty cleft to be in for a young man with too much imagination and little physical courage . " 
 Instead , Tolkien , " endured the obloquy " , and entered a programme wherein he delayed enlistment until completing his degree . By the time he passed his Finals in July 1915 , Tolkien recalled that the hints were " becoming outspoken from relatives " . He was then commissioned as a temporary second lieutenant in the Lancashire Fusiliers on 15 July 1915 . He trained with the 13th ( Reserve ) Battalion on Cannock Chase , Staffordshire , for eleven months . In a letter to Edith , Tolkien complained , " Gentlemen are rare among the superiors , and even human beings rare indeed . " Following their wedding , Lieutenant and Mrs. Tolkien took up lodgings near the training camp . 
 On 2 June 1916 , Tolkien received a telegram summoning him to Folkestone for transportation to France . The Tolkiens spent the night before his departure in a room at the Plough & Harrow Hotel in Birmingham . 
 He later wrote , " Junior officers were being killed off , a dozen a minute . Parting from my wife then ... it was like a death . " 
 = = = = France = = = = 
 On 5 June 1916 , Tolkien boarded a troop transport for an overnight voyage to Calais . Like other soldiers arriving for the first time , Lieutenant Tolkien was sent to the British Expeditionary Force 's ( BEF ) base depot at Étaples . 
 On 7 June , Tolkien was informed that he had been assigned as a signals officer to the 11th ( Service ) Battalion , Lancashire Fusiliers . The battalion was part of the 74th Brigade , 25th Division . While awaiting summons to his new regiment , Tolkien sank into boredom . 
 To pass the time , he composed a poem entitled , The Lonely Isle , which was inspired by his feelings during the sea crossing to Calais . To evade the British Army 's postal censorship , Tolkien also passed time by developing a code of dots with which Edith could track his movements . 
 Lieutenant Tolkien left Étaples on 27 June 1916 and joined his new unit at Rubempré , near Amiens . 
 Tolkien found himself commanding enlisted men who were drawn mainly from the mining , milling , and weaving towns of Lancashire . 
 According to John Garth , Tolkien " felt an affinity for these working class men " , but military protocol forbade him from developing friendships with " other ranks " . Instead , he was required to " take charge of them , discipline them , train them , and probably censor their letters ... If possible , he was supposed to inspire their love and loyalty . " 
 Tolkien later lamented , " The most improper job of any man ... is bossing other men . Not one in a million is fit for it , and least of all those who seek the opportunity . " 
 = = = = Battle of the Somme = = = = 
 Tolkien arrived at the Somme in early July 1916 . In between terms behind the lines at <unk> , he participated in the assaults on the Schwaben Redoubt and the Leipzig Salient . According to the memoirs of the Reverend Mervyn S. Evers , Anglican chaplain to the Lancashire Fusiliers : 
 On one occasion I spent the night with the Brigade Machine Gun Officer and the Signals Officer in one of the captured German dugouts ... We <unk> down for the night in the hopes of getting some sleep , but it was not to be . We no sooner lay down than hordes of lice got up . So we went round to the Medical Officer , who was also in the dugout with his equipment , and he gave us some ointment which he assured us would keep the little brutes away . We anointed ourselves all over with the stuff and again lay down in great hopes , but it was not to be , because instead of discouraging them it seemed to act like a kind of hors d 'oeuvre and the little beggars went at their feast with renewed vigour . 
 Tolkien 's time in combat was a terrible stress for Edith , who feared that every knock on the door might carry news of her husband 's death . To get around the British Army 's postal censorship , the Tolkiens developed a secret code for his letters home . By using the code , Edith could track her husband 's movements on a map of the Western Front . 
 On 27 October 1916 , as his battalion attacked Regina Trench , Tolkien came down with trench fever , a disease carried by lice , which were common in the dugouts . Tolkien was invalided to England on 8 November 1916 . Many of his dearest school friends were killed in the war . Among their number were Rob Gilson of the Tea Club and <unk> Society , who was killed on the first day of the Somme while leading his men in the assault on Beaumont Hamel . Fellow <unk> member Geoffrey Smith was killed during the same battle when a German artillery shell landed on a first aid post . Tolkien 's battalion was almost completely wiped out following his return to England . 
 Tolkien might well have been killed himself , but he had suffered from health problems and had been removed from combat multiple times . 
 According to John Garth : 
 Although Kitchener 's army enshrined old social boundaries , it also chipped away at the class divide by throwing men from all walks of life into a desperate situation together . Tolkien wrote that the experience taught him , ' a deep sympathy and feeling for the Tommy ; especially the plain soldier from the agricultural counties ' . He remained profoundly grateful for the lesson . For a long time , he had been imprisoned in a tower , not of pearl , but of ivory . 
 In later years , Tolkien indignantly declared that those who searched his works for parallels to the Second World War were entirely mistaken : 
 One has indeed personally to come under the shadow of war to feel fully its oppression ; but as the years go by it seems now often forgotten that to be caught in youth by 1914 was no less hideous an experience than to be involved in 1939 and the following years . By 1918 all but one of my close friends were dead . 
 = = = = Home front = = = = 
 A weak and emaciated Tolkien spent the remainder of the war alternating between hospitals and garrison duties , being deemed medically unfit for general service . 
 During his recovery in a cottage in Little Haywood , Staffordshire , he began to work on what he called The Book of Lost Tales , beginning with The Fall of <unk> . Lost Tales represented Tolkien 's attempt to create a mythology for England , a project he would abandon without ever completing . Throughout 1917 and 1918 his illness kept recurring , but he had recovered enough to do home service at various camps . It was at this time that Edith bore their first child , John Francis Reuel Tolkien . In a 1941 letter , Tolkien described his son John as " ( conceived and carried during the starvation @-@ year of 1917 and the great U @-@ Boat campaign ) round about the Battle of Cambrai , when then end of the war seemed as far off as it does now " . 
 Tolkien was promoted to the temporary rank of lieutenant on 6 January 1918 . When he was stationed at Kingston upon Hull , he and Edith went walking in the woods at nearby Roos , and Edith began to dance for him in a clearing among the flowering hemlock . After his wife 's death in 1971 , Tolkien remembered , 
 I never called Edith <unk> – but she was the source of the story that in time became the chief part of the Silmarillion . It was first conceived in a small woodland glade filled with hemlocks at Roos in Yorkshire ( where I was for a brief time in command of an outpost of the Humber Garrison in 1917 , and she was able to live with me for a while ) . In those days her hair was raven , her skin clear , her eyes brighter than you have seen them , and she could sing – and dance . But the story has gone crooked , & I am left , and I cannot plead before the inexorable <unk> . 
 This incident inspired the account of the meeting of Beren and Lúthien . 
 = = = Academic and writing career = = = 
 On 3 November 1920 , Tolkien was demobilized and left the army , retaining his rank of lieutenant . His first civilian job after World War I was at the Oxford English Dictionary , where he worked mainly on the history and etymology of words of Germanic origin beginning with the letter W. In 1920 , he took up a post as Reader in English Language at the University of Leeds , and became the youngest professor there . While at Leeds , he produced A Middle English Vocabulary and a definitive edition of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight with E. V. Gordon , both becoming academic standard works for several decades . He also translated Sir Gawain , Pearl , and Sir Orfeo . In 1925 , he returned to Oxford as Rawlinson and Bosworth Professor of Anglo @-@ Saxon , with a fellowship at Pembroke College . 
 During his time at Pembroke College Tolkien wrote The Hobbit and the first two volumes of The Lord of the Rings , whilst living at 20 Northmoor Road in North Oxford ( where a blue plaque was placed in 2002 ) . He also published a philological essay in 1932 on the name " <unk> " , following Sir Mortimer Wheeler 's unearthing of a Roman <unk> at Lydney Park , Gloucestershire , in 1928 . 
 = = = = Beowulf = = = = 
 In the 1920s , Tolkien undertook a translation of Beowulf , which he finished in 1926 . He never published it . It was finally edited by his son and published in 2014 , more than forty years after Tolkien 's death and almost 90 years since its completion . 
 Ten years after finishing his translation , Tolkien gave a highly acclaimed lecture on the work , entitled " Beowulf : The Monsters and the Critics " , which had a lasting influence on Beowulf research . Lewis E. Nicholson said that the article Tolkien wrote about Beowulf is " widely recognized as a turning point in <unk> criticism " , noting that Tolkien established the primacy of the poetic nature of the work as opposed to its purely linguistic elements . At the time , the consensus of scholarship deprecated Beowulf for dealing with childish battles with monsters rather than realistic tribal warfare ; Tolkien argued that the author of Beowulf was addressing human destiny in general , not as limited by particular tribal politics , and therefore the monsters were essential to the poem . Where Beowulf does deal with specific tribal struggles , as at <unk> , Tolkien argued firmly against reading in fantastic elements . In the essay , Tolkien also revealed how highly he regarded Beowulf : " Beowulf is among my most valued sources " , and this influence may be seen throughout his Middle @-@ earth legendarium . 
 According to Humphrey Carpenter , Tolkien had an ingenious means of beginning his series of lectures on Beowulf : 
 He would come silently into the room , fix the audience with his gaze , and suddenly begin to declaim in a resounding voice the opening lines of the poem in the original Anglo @-@ Saxon , commencing with a great cry of <unk> ! ( The first word of this and several other Old English poems ) , which some undergraduates took to be ' Quiet ! ' It was not so much a recitation as a dramatic performance , an impersonation of an Anglo @-@ Saxon bard in a mead hall , and it impressed generations of students because it brought home to them that Beowulf was not just a set text to be read for the purposes of examination , but a powerful piece of dramatic poetry . 
 Decades later , W.H. Auden wrote to his former professor , 
 " I don 't think that I have ever told you what an unforgettable experience it was for me as an undergraduate , hearing you recite Beowulf . The voice was the voice of Gandalf . " 
 = = = = Second World War = = = = 
 In the run @-@ up to the Second World War , Tolkien was earmarked as a codebreaker . In January 1939 , he was asked whether he would be prepared to serve in the cryptographic department of the Foreign Office in the event of national emergency . He replied in the affirmative and , beginning on 27 March , took an instructional course at the London HQ of the Government Code and Cypher School . A record of his training was found which included the notation " keen " next to his name , although Tolkien scholar Anders <unk> suggested that " In all likelihood , that is not a record of Tolkien 's interest , but a note about how to pronounce the name . " He was informed in October that his services would not be required . 
 In 1945 , Tolkien moved to Merton College , Oxford , becoming the Merton Professor of English Language and Literature , in which post he remained until his retirement in 1959 . He served as an external examiner for University College , Dublin , for many years . In 1954 Tolkien received an honorary degree from the National University of Ireland ( of which <unk> was a constituent college ) . Tolkien completed The Lord of the Rings in 1948 , close to a decade after the first sketches . 
 Tolkien also translated the Book of Jonah for the Jerusalem Bible , which was published in 1966 . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 The Tolkiens had four children : John Francis Reuel Tolkien ( 17 November 1917 – 22 January 2003 ) , Michael Hilary Reuel Tolkien ( 22 October 1920 – 27 February 1984 ) , Christopher John Reuel Tolkien ( born 21 November 1924 ) and Priscilla Mary Anne Reuel Tolkien ( born 18 June 1929 ) . Tolkien was very devoted to his children and sent them illustrated letters from Father Christmas when they were young . Each year more characters were added , such as the North Polar Bear ( Father Christmas 's helper ) , the Snow Man ( his gardener ) , <unk> the elf ( his secretary ) , and various other , minor characters . The major characters would relate tales of Father Christmas 's battles against goblins who rode on bats and the various pranks committed by the North Polar Bear . 
 = = = Retirement and later years = = = 
 During his life in retirement , from 1959 up to his death in 1973 , Tolkien received steadily increasing public attention and literary fame . The sales of his books were so profitable that he regretted that he had not chosen early retirement . At first , he wrote enthusiastic answers to readers ' enquiries , but he became increasingly unhappy about the sudden popularity of his books with the 1960s counter @-@ culture movement . In a 1972 letter , he deplored having become a cult @-@ figure , but admitted that " even the nose of a very modest idol ... cannot remain entirely <unk> by the sweet smell of incense ! " 
 Fan attention became so intense that Tolkien had to take his phone number out of the public directory , and eventually he and Edith moved to Bournemouth , which was then a seaside resort patronized by the British upper middle class . Tolkien 's status as a best @-@ selling author gave them easy entry into polite society , but Tolkien deeply missed the company of his fellow Inklings . Edith , however , was overjoyed to step into the role of a society hostess , which had been the reason that Tolkien selected Bournemouth in the first place . 
 According to Humphrey Carpenter , 
 Those friends who knew Ronald and Edith Tolkien over the years never doubted that there was deep affection between them . It was visible in the small things , the almost absurd degree in which each worried about the other 's health , and the care in which they chose and wrapped each other 's birthday presents ' ; and in the large matters , the way in which Ronald willingly abandoned such a large part of his life in retirement to give Edith the last years in Bournemouth that he felt she deserved , and the degree in which she showed pride in his fame as an author . A principal source of happiness to them was their shared love of their family . This bound them together until the end of their lives , and it was perhaps the strongest force in the marriage . They delighted to discuss and mull over every detail of the lives of their children , and later their grandchildren . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 Edith Tolkien died on 29 November 1971 , at the age of 82 . According to Simon Tolkien : 
 " My grandmother died two years before my grandfather and he came back to live in Oxford . Merton College gave him rooms just off the High Street . I went there frequently and he 'd take me to lunch in the Eastgate Hotel . Those lunches were rather wonderful for a 12 @-@ year @-@ old boy spending time with his grandfather , but sometimes he seemed sad . There was one visit when he told me how much he missed my grandmother . It must have been very strange for him being alone after they had been married for more than 50 years . " 
 Tolkien was appointed by Queen Elizabeth II a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 1972 New Year Honours and received the insignia of the Order at Buckingham Palace on 28 March 1972 . In the same year Oxford University conferred upon him an honorary Doctorate of Letters . 
 Tolkien had the name Lúthien engraved on Edith 's tombstone at Wolvercote Cemetery , Oxford . When Tolkien died 21 months later on 2 September 1973 , at the age of 81 , he was buried in the same grave , with Beren added to his name . The engravings read : 
 In Tolkien 's Middle @-@ earth legendarium , Lúthien was the most beautiful of all the Children of <unk> , and forsook her immortality for her love of the mortal warrior Beren . After Beren was captured by the forces of the Dark Lord Morgoth , Lúthien rode to his rescue upon the talking wolfhound Huan . Ultimately , when Beren was slain in battle against the demonic wolf <unk> , Lúthien , like Orpheus , approached the Valar , the angelic order of beings placed in charge of the world by <unk> ( God ) , and persuaded them to restore her beloved to life . 
 = = Views = = 
 Tolkien was a devout Roman Catholic , and in his religious and political views he was mostly a traditionalist moderate , with libertarian , <unk> , and monarchist leanings , in the sense of favouring established conventions and orthodoxies over innovation and modernization , whilst castigating government bureaucracy ; in 1943 he wrote , " My political opinions lean more and more to Anarchy ( philosophically understood , meaning abolition of control not whiskered men with bombs ) — or to ' unconstitutional ' Monarchy . " 
 Although he did not often write or speak about it , Tolkien advocated the dismantling of the British Empire and even of the United Kingdom . In a 1936 letter to a former student , Belgian linguist Simonne d <unk> , he wrote , " The political situation is dreadful ... I have the greatest sympathy with Belgium – which is about the right size of any country ! I wish my own were bounded still by the seas of the Tweed and the walls of Wales ... we folk do at least know something of mortality and eternity and when Hitler ( or a Frenchman ) says ' Germany ( or France ) must live forever ' we know that he lies . " 
 Tolkien had an intense hatred for the side effects of industrialization , which he considered to be devouring the English countryside and simpler life . For most of his adult life , he was disdainful of cars , preferring to ride a bicycle . This attitude can be seen in his work , most famously in the portrayal of the forced " industrialization " of the Shire in The Lord of the Rings . 
 Many commentators have remarked on a number of potential parallels between the Middle @-@ earth saga and events in Tolkien 's lifetime . The Lord of the Rings is often thought to represent England during and immediately after World War II . Tolkien ardently rejected this opinion in the foreword to the second edition of the novel , stating he preferred applicability to allegory . This theme is taken up at greater length in his essay " On Fairy @-@ Stories " , where he argues that fairy @-@ stories are so apt because they are consistent both within themselves and with some truths about reality . He concludes that Christianity itself follows this pattern of inner consistency and external truth . His belief in the fundamental truths of Christianity leads commentators to find Christian themes in The Lord of the Rings . Tolkien objected strongly to C. S. Lewis 's use of religious references in his stories , which were often overtly allegorical . However , Tolkien wrote that the Mount Doom scene exemplified lines from the Lord 's Prayer . 
 His love of myths and his devout faith came together in his assertion that he believed mythology to be the divine echo of " the Truth " . This view was expressed in his poem and essay entitled <unk> . His theory that myths held " fundamental truths " became a central theme of the Inklings in general . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Tolkien 's devout Roman Catholic faith was a significant factor in the conversion of C. S. Lewis from atheism to Christianity , although Tolkien was dismayed that Lewis chose to join the Church of England . 
 According to his grandson Simon Tolkien , Tolkien in the last years of his life was disappointed by some of the liturgical reforms and changes implemented after the Second Vatican Council : 
 I vividly remember going to church with him in Bournemouth . He was a devout Roman Catholic and it was soon after the Church had changed the liturgy from Latin to English . My grandfather obviously didn 't agree with this and made all the responses very loudly in Latin while the rest of the congregation answered in English . I found the whole experience quite excruciating , but my grandfather was oblivious . He simply had to do what he believed to be right . 
 = = = Politics and race = = = 
 = = = = Anti @-@ Communism = = = = 
 Tolkien voiced support for the Nationalists ( eventually led by Franco during the Spanish Civil War ) upon hearing that communist Republicans were destroying churches and killing priests and nuns . 
 Tolkien was contemptuous of Joseph Stalin . During World War II , Tolkien referred to Stalin as " that bloodthirsty old murderer " . However , in 1961 , Tolkien sharply criticized a Swedish commentator who suggested that The Lord of the Rings was an anti @-@ communist parable and identified Sauron with Stalin . Tolkien said , " I utterly repudiate any such reading , which angers me . The situation was conceived long before the Russian revolution . Such allegory is entirely foreign to my thought . " 
