 An adult version playable on Android devices was released on January 31 , 2013 . A fully voiced version playable as a Blu @-@ ray Disc was released on March 29 , 2013 by <unk> ! BD @-@ Game , a brand of VisualArt 's . Prototype released a PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) port of the game titled Kud Wafter Converted Edition on May 9 , 2013 , which contains additional story events and visuals . Key released an all ages version on June 28 , 2013 for Windows , and it contains the additional content in the PSP version . Prototype released a version of Kud Wafter Converted Edition ported to the PlayStation Vita ( PS Vita ) on December 19 , 2013 . 
 = = Related media = = 
 = = = Printed media = = = 
 A manga adaptation , illustrated by manga artist <unk> and titled Kud Wafter , was <unk> between the May 2010 and February 2014 issues of ASCII Media Works ' Dengeki G 's Magazine . Six tankōbon volumes of the manga were released between February 26 , 2011 and March 27 , 2014 . Two volumes of a manga anthology titled Kud Wafter Comic Anthology were released by Ichijinsha between August and October 2010 . An anthology of a collection of four @-@ panel comic strips titled Kud Wafter 4 @-@ koma Maximum was released by Wedge Holdings in September 2010 . Harvest published Kud Wafter Anthology Comic in November 2010 . <unk> released a manga anthology titled Kud Wafter as the first volume in their Earth Star Comics line in December 2010 . Paradigm released a novel anthology titled Kud Wafter Anthology : It 's Kud Wafter ! in September 2010 . Harvest published a novel anthology titled Kud Wafter Anthology Novel in November 2010 . ASCII Media Works published an art book titled White Fairy : Kudryavka Noumi Photo Album ( White Fairy ― <unk> ) on March 10 , 2011 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The visual novel has two main theme songs : the opening theme " One 's Future " by Miyako Suzuta , the voice actress of Kudryavka , and the ending theme " Hoshikuzu " ( <unk> , Stardust ) by Haruka Shimotsuki . An insert song also sung by Suzuta , " Hoshimori Uta " ( <unk> ) , is featured in the game as well . The single of " One 's Future " was released in April 2010 . Kud Wafter 's original soundtrack was released on June 25 , 2010 , with the original release of the visual novel . The soundtrack contained 24 music tracks : 20 background music tracks , an a cappella version of " Hoshimori Uta " , a remix of " One 's Future " subtitled " Rock Band Mix " , and the original versions of " Hoshikuzu " and " Hoshimori Uta " . A ten @-@ track arrange album remixing music from the game titled Albina : Assorted <unk> Songs was released at Comiket 79 in December 2010 . A remix album titled Deejay Busters ! , featuring tracks from Little Busters ! , Little Busters ! Ecstasy and Kud Wafter , was released in May 2011 . A piano arrange album titled <unk> , which also features tracks from Little Busters ! , Ecstasy and Kud Wafter , was released in April 2013 . Each of the albums released were on Key 's record label Key Sounds Label . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In May 2010 , Kud Wafter ranked first in national PC game pre @-@ orders in Japan . The limited edition version of Kud Wafter ranked first in terms of national sales of PC games in Japan in June 2010 . In addition , Kud Wafter was reported to sell the most copies of any PC game in Japan for the first half of 2010 . At some stores in Akihabara , Kud Wafter was sold at midnight the day of its release , which is cited as not happening very often for games sold in Akihabara . Kud Wafter premiered as the No. 2 game sold on Getchu.com , a major redistributor of visual novel and domestic anime products , during the month of its release , and at No. 26 in July . The game would go on to be the No. 9 game sold for the first half of 2010 , and at No. 15 for the whole year . The PSP port sold 5 @,@ 733 units in its first week of sales . Both the PSP and PS Vita ports were reviewed by the Japanese video game magazine Famitsu , which gave them an overall score of 27 / 40 . 
 = Giant anteater = 
 The giant anteater ( Myrmecophaga tridactyla ) , also known as the ant bear , is a large insectivorous mammal native to Central and South America . It is one of four living species of anteaters and is classified with sloths in the order <unk> . This species is mostly terrestrial , in contrast to other living anteaters and sloths , which are arboreal or <unk> . The giant anteater is the largest of its family , 182 – 217 cm ( 5 @.@ 97 – 7 @.@ 12 ft ) in length , with weights of 33 – 41 kg ( 73 – 90 lb ) for males and 27 – 39 kg ( 60 – 86 lb ) for females . It is recognizable by its elongated snout , bushy tail , long fore claws , and distinctively colored pelage . 
 The giant anteater can be found in multiple habitats , including grassland and rainforest . It forages in open areas and rests in more forested habitats . It feeds primarily on ants and termites , using its fore claws to dig them up and its long , sticky tongue to collect them . Though giant anteaters live in overlapping home ranges , they are mostly solitary except during mother @-@ offspring relationships , aggressive interactions between males , and when mating . Mother anteaters carry their offspring on their backs until weaning them . 
 The giant anteater is listed as Vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature . It has been extirpated from many parts of its former range , including nearly all of Central America . Threats to its survival include habitat destruction , fire , and poaching for fur and bushmeat , although some anteaters inhabit protected areas . With its distinctive appearance and habits , the anteater has been featured in pre @-@ Columbian myths and folktales , as well as modern popular culture . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The giant anteater got its binomial name from Carl Linnaeus in 1758 . Its generic name , Myrmecophaga , and specific name , tridactyla , are both Greek , meaning " anteater " and " three fingers " , respectively . Myrmecophaga <unk> was used as a synonym . Three subspecies have been tentatively proposed : M. t. tridactyla ( ranging from Venezuela and the Guianas to northern Argentina ) , M. t. centralis ( native to Central America , northwestern Colombia , and northern Ecuador ) , and M. t. <unk> ( native to northeastern Colombia and northwestern Venezuela ) . The giant anteater is grouped with the <unk> northern and southern tamanduas in the family <unk> . Together with the family <unk> , whose only extant member is the arboreal silky anteater , the two families comprise the suborder <unk> . 
 Anteaters and sloths belong to order <unk> and share superorder Xenarthra with the <unk> ( whose only extant members are armadillos ) . The two orders of Xenarthra split 66 million years ago ( Mya ) during the Late Cretaceous epoch . Anteaters and sloths diverged around 55 Mya , between the Paleocene and Eocene epochs . The Cyclopes lineage emerged around 30 Mya in the Oligocene epoch , while the Myrmecophaga and <unk> lineages split 10 Mya in the Late Miocene <unk> . During most of the Cenozoic era , anteaters were confined to South America , which was formerly an island continent . Following the formation of the Isthmus of Panama about 3 Mya , anteaters of all three extant genera invaded Central America as part of the Great American Interchange . 
 The fossil record for anteaters is generally sparse . Some known fossils include the Pliocene genus <unk> , a close relative to the silky anteater , Protamandua , the sister taxon to the clade that includes the giant anteater and the tamanduas from the Miocene , and Neotamandua , a sister taxon to Myrmecophaga . Protamandua was larger than the silky anteater , but smaller than a tamandua , while Neotamandua was larger , falling somewhere between a tamandua and a giant anteater . Protamandua did not appear to have feet specialized for terrestrial or arboreal locomotion , but it may have had a prehensile tail . Neotamandua , though , is unlikely to have had a prehensile tail and its feet were intermediate in form between those of the tamanduas and the giant anteater . The species Neotamandua borealis was suggested to be an ancestor of the latter . 
 The giant anteater is the most terrestrial of the living anteater species . Its ancestors may originally have been adapted to arboreal life ; the transition to life on the ground could have been aided by the expansion of open habitats such as savanna in South America and the availability there of colonial insects , such as termites , that provided a larger potential food source . Both the giant anteater and the southern tamandua are well represented in the fossil record of the late Pleistocene and early Holocene . 
 = = Description = = 
 The giant anteater can be identified by its large size , elongated muzzle , and long bushy tail . It has a total body length of 182 – 217 cm ( 5 @.@ 97 – 7 @.@ 12 ft ) . Males weigh 33 – 41 kg ( 73 – 90 lb ) and females weigh 27 – 39 kg ( 60 – 86 lb ) , making the giant anteater the largest extant species in its suborder . The head of the giant anteater , at 30 cm ( 12 in ) long , is particularly elongated , even when compared to other anteaters . Its tubular snout , which ends in its tiny mouth opening and nostrils , takes up most of its head . Its eyes and ears are relatively small . It has poor eyesight , but its sense of smell is 40 times more sensitive than that of humans . Giant anteaters can live around 16 years in captivity . 
 Even for an anteater , the neck is especially thick compared to the back of the head , and a small hump can be found at the back of the neck . The coat is mostly grey and salted with white . The forelimbs are white , with black bands around the wrists , while the hindlimbs are dark . Thick black bands with white outlines stretch from throat to shoulder , ending in triangular points . The body ends in a brown tail . The coat hairs are long , especially on the tail , which makes the tail look larger than it actually is . A stiff mane stretches along the back . The bold pattern was thought to be disruptive camouflage , but a 2009 study suggests it is warning coloration . While adult males are slightly larger and more muscular than females , with wider heads and necks , visual sex determination can be difficult . The penis and testes are located internally between the rectum and urinary bladder in males , and females have a single pair of mammary glands near the armpits . 
 The giant anteater has broad ribs . Despite its specific name , it has five toes on each foot . Four toes on the front feet have claws , which are particularly elongated on the second and third digits . It walks on its front knuckles , similar to the African apes , specifically gorillas and chimpanzees . Doing this allows the giant anteater to keep its claws out of the way while walking . The middle digits , which support most of its weight , are extended at the <unk> joints and bent at the interphalangeal joints . Unlike the front feet , the hind feet have short claws on all five toes and walk plantigrade . As a " hook @-@ and @-@ pull " digger , the giant anteater 's enlarged <unk> fossa gives the teres major more leverage — increasing the front limbs ' pulling power — and the triceps muscle helps power the flexion of the thickened third digit of the front feet . 
 The giant anteater has a low body temperature for a mammal , about 33 ° C ( 91 ° F ) , a few degrees lower than a typical mammalian temperature of 36 – 38 ° C ( 97 @-@ 100 ° F ) . <unk> in general tend to have lower metabolic rates than most other mammals , a trend thought to correlate with their dietary specializations and low mobility . 
 = = = Feeding anatomy = = = 
 The giant anteater has no teeth and is capable of very limited jaw movement . It relies on the rotation of the two halves of its lower jaw , held together by a ligament at the tip , to open and close its mouth . This is accomplished by its masticatory muscles , which are relatively underdeveloped . Jaw depression creates an oral opening large enough for the slender tongue to flick out . It is typically 60 cm ( 24 in ) long and is triangular posteriorly , rounded anteriorly , and ends in a small , rounded tip . The tongue is covered in backward @-@ curving papillae and coated in thick , sticky saliva secreted from its enlarged salivary glands , which allows the giant anteater to collect insects with it . 
 The tube @-@ like rostrum and small mouth opening restrict the tongue to protrusion @-@ retraction movements . During feeding , the tongue moves in and out around 160 times per minute ( nearly three times per second ) . According to biologist Virginia Naples , these movements are powered by the unique musculature of the giant anteater 's long , large , and flexible hyoid apparatus . Conversely , biologist Karen Reiss states that the anteater 's tongue has no attachments to the hyoid and this is what allows it to flick its tongue at such speeds . The animal relies on the orientation of its head for aim . When fully extended , the tongue can reach 45 cm ( 18 in ) , longer than the length of the skull . The <unk> allow it to slide back in without losing attached food and tighten the mouth to prevent food from escaping as it extends . When retracted , the tongue is held in the oropharynx by the secondary palate , preventing it from blocking respiration . This retraction is aided by the long <unk> muscle , which is formed by the fusion of the <unk> and the <unk> , and does not attach to the hyoid . Thus , the tongue is directly anchored to the sternum . 
 Giant anteaters swallow at a much higher rate than most other mammals ; when feeding , they swallow almost continuously . Before being swallowed , insects are crushed against the palate . The giant anteater 's stomach , similar to a bird 's gizzard , has hardened folds and uses strong contractions to grind up the insects . The digestive process is assisted by small amounts of ingested sand and soil . The giant anteater cannot produce stomach acid of its own , but uses the formic acid of its prey for digestion . 
 = = Distribution and status = = 
 The giant anteater is native to Central and South America . Its known range stretches from Honduras to northern Argentina , and fossil remains have been found as far north as northwestern Sonora , Mexico . It is largely absent from the Andes and has been extirpated in Uruguay . It may also be extirpated in Belize , Costa Rica , and Guatemala . The species can be found in a number of habitats including both tropical rainforests and xeric shrublands , provided enough prey is present to sustain it . 
 The species is listed as Vulnerable by the IUCN , due to the number of regional extirpations , and under Appendix II by CITES , tightly restricting trade in specimens of the animal . Between 2000 and 2010 , the total population declined by 30 % . In 1994 , some 340 giant anteaters died due to wildfires at Emas National Park in Brazil . The animal is particularly vulnerable to fires due to its slow movement and flammable coat . 
 Human @-@ induced threats include collision with vehicles , attacks by dogs , and destruction of habitat . The giant anteater is commonly hunted in Bolivia , both for sport and sustenance . The animal 's thick , leathery hide is used to make equestrian equipment in the Chaco . In Venezuela , it is hunted for its claws . Giant anteaters are killed for safety reasons , due to their reputation as dangerous animals . The giant anteater remains widespread . Some populations are stable and the animal can be found in various protected areas in the Amazon and the Cerrado . It is officially protected in some Argentine provinces as a national heritage species . 
 = = Behavior and ecology = = 
 The giant anteater may use multiple habitats . A 2007 study of giant anteaters in the Brazilian Pantanal found the animals generally forage in open areas and rest in forested areas , possibly because forests are warmer than grasslands on cold days and cooler on hot days . Giant anteaters can be either diurnal or nocturnal . A 2006 study in the Pantanal found those anteaters to be mostly nocturnal : they are most active during nighttime and early morning , and retire as the temperature rises . On colder days , they start and end periods of activity earlier , shifting them into daylight hours , and may become diurnal . Diurnal giant anteaters have been observed at Serra da Canastra . <unk> in anteaters may be a response to human disturbances . 
 Giant anteaters typically rest in dense brush , but may use tall grass on cooler days . They carve a shallow cavity in the ground for resting . The animal sleeps curled up with its bushy tail folded over its body . The tail serves both to conserve body heat and as camouflage . One anteater was recorded sleeping with its tail stretched out on a sunny morning with an ambient temperature of 17 ° C ( 63 ° F ) ; possibly it was positioned this way to allow its body to absorb the sun 's rays for warmth . 
 Giant anteaters are good swimmers and are capable of moving through wide rivers . They have been observed to bathe . They are also able to climb and have been recorded ascending both termite mounds and trees while foraging . One individual was observed holding onto a branch with its feet just touching the ground . 
 = = = Spacing = = = 
 Giant anteaters ' home ranges vary in size depending on the location . At Serra da Canastra National Park in Brazil , female anteaters have home ranges around 3 @.@ 67 km2 ( 910 acres ) , while males live in home ranges of 2 @.@ 74 km2 ( 680 acres ) . In other parts of Brazil , anteaters may have 9 km2 ( 2 @,@ 200 acres ) ranges . Anteaters from Venezuela have been recorded living in home ranges as large as 25 km2 ( 6 @,@ 200 acres ) . Individuals mostly live alone , except for females that nurse their young and males courting females . Anteaters communicate their presence , status , and sexual condition with secretions from their anal glands . They also advertise their presence to other individuals though tree markings and urine . They appear to be able to recognize each other 's saliva by scent . 
 Females appear to be more tolerant of females than males are of males , leading to greater overlap in female home ranges . Males are more likely to engage in agonistic behaviors , such as slowly circling each other , chasing , or actual fighting . Circling anteaters may cry a drawn @-@ out " <unk> " . In combat , they slash at each other with their claws and wrestle each other to the ground . Fighting anteaters may emit roars or bellows . Males are possibly territorial . 
 = = = Foraging and predation = = = 
 This animal is an insectivore , feeding mostly on ants or termites . In areas that experience seasonal flooding , like the grassy plains of the Venezuelan llanos , anteaters mainly feed on ants , because termites are less available . Conversely , anteaters at Emas National Park eat mainly termites , which occur in high density on the grasslands . At Serra da Canastra , anteaters switch between eating mainly ants during the wet season ( October to March ) and termites during the dry season ( May to September ) . 
 Anteaters track prey by their scent . After finding a nest , the animal tears it open with its long fore claws and inserts its long , sticky tongue to collect its prey . An anteater spends one minute on average feeding at a nest , visiting up to 200 nests in one day and consuming as many as 30 @,@ 000 insects . The anteater may be driven away from a nest by the chemical or biting attacks of soldiers . Some termite species rely on their fortified mounds for protection and many individuals escape while the predator digs . These modes of defense prevent the entire colony from being eaten in one anteater attack . 
 Other prey include the larvae of beetles and western honey bees that have located their hives in termite mounds . Anteaters may target termite mounds with bee hives . In captivity , anteaters are fed mixtures made of milk , eggs , mealworms , and ground beef . To drink , an anteater may dig for water when no surface water is available , creating waterholes for other animals . Giant anteaters are prey for jaguars and pumas . They typically flee from danger by galloping , but if cornered , will rear up on their hind legs and slash at the attacker . The giant anteater 's front claws are formidable weapons , capable of killing a jaguar . 
 Although they are shy and typically attempt to avoid humans , giant anteaters can inflict severe wounds with their front claws and have been known to seriously injure or kill humans who corner and threaten them . Between 2010 and 2012 , two hunters were killed by giant anteaters in Brazil ; in both cases , the hunters were agitating and wounding cornered animals and the attacks appeared to be defensive behaviors . In April 2007 , an anteater at the Florencio Varela Zoo mauled a zookeeper with its front claws . 
 = = = Reproduction and parenting = = = 
 Giant anteaters can mate throughout the year . During courtship , a male consorts with an estrous female , following and sniffing her . Male and female pairs are known to feed at the same insect nest . While mating , the female lies on her side as the male crouches over her . A couple may stay together for up to three days and mate several times during that period . Gestation lasts around 190 days and ends with the birth of a single pup , which typically weighs around 1 @.@ 4 kg ( 3 @.@ 1 lb ) . Females give birth standing upright . 
 Pups are born with eyes closed and begin to open them after six days . The mother carries its dependent pup on its back . The pup 's black and white band aligns with its mother 's , camouflaging it . The young communicate with their mothers with sharp whistles and use their tongues during nursing . After three months , the pup begins to eat solid food and is fully weaned by ten months . The mother grooms her offspring during rest periods lasting up to an hour . Grooming peaks during the first three months and declines as the young reaches nine months of age , ending by ten months . The decline mirrors that of the weakening bond between mother and offspring ; young anteaters usually become independent by nine or ten months . Anteaters are sexually mature in 2 @.@ 5 – 4 years . 
 = = In culture = = 
 In the mythology and folklore of the indigenous peoples of the Amazon Basin , the giant anteater is depicted as a trickster foil to the jaguar , as well as a humorous figure due to its long snout . In one <unk> tale , an anteater challenged a jaguar to a breath @-@ holding contest under water , which the jaguar accepted . After the two removed their pelts and submerged , the anteater jumped out of the water and stole the jaguar 's pelt , leaving the jaguar with the anteater 's pelt . In a <unk> myth , the evil ogre <unk> is transformed into one by the sun . This myth emphasizes the nearly immobile nature of the anteater 's mouth , which was considered a burden . The Kayapo people wear masks of various animals and spirits , including the anteater , during naming and initiation ceremonies . They believe women who touched anteater masks or men who stumbled while wearing them would die or receive some sort of physical disorder . 
 During the Spanish colonization of the Americas , the giant anteater was one of many native fauna taken to Europe for display . At first , Europeans believed all anteaters were female and mated with their noses , a misconception corrected by naturalist Félix de <unk> . In the 20th century , Salvador Dalí wrote imaginatively that the giant anteater " reaches sizes bigger than the horse , possesses enormous ferocity , has exceptional muscle power , is a terrifying animal . " Dalí depicted an anteater in the style of The Great <unk> . It was used as a bookplate for André Breton , who compared the temptations a man experiences in life to what " the tongue of the anteater must offer to the ant . " 
 The 1940 Max Fleischer cartoon Ants in the Plants features a colony of ants fighting off a villainous anteater . Released during the Phoney War , the film may have alluded to France 's Maginot Line . 
 An anteater is also a recurring character in the comic strip B.C .. This character was the inspiration for Peter the <unk> , the University of California , Irvine team mascot . 
 The Flash cartoon Happy Tree Friends features an anteater named <unk> . 
 In the Stephen King miniseries Kingdom Hospital , the character <unk> appears in the form of an anteater @-@ like creature with razor @-@ sharp teeth . 
 = Halo 4 = 
 Halo 4 is a first @-@ person shooter video game developed by 343 Industries and published by Microsoft Studios for the Xbox 360 video game console . The seventh video game installment in the Halo franchise , the game was released worldwide in November 2012 . Halo 4 's story follows a cybernetically enhanced human supersoldier , Master Chief , and his artificial intelligence construct Cortana , as they encounter unknown threats while exploring an ancient civilization 's planet . The player assumes the role of Master Chief , who battles against rogue remnants of the military alliance of alien races known as the Covenant and warriors of the Forerunner empire known as the Prometheans . The game features a selection of weapons , enemies , and game modes not present in previous titles of the series . 
 Development of Halo 4 began in 2009 and continued until September 2012 . Halo 4 is 343 Industries ' first original title within the Halo series — previously , development of the main series was undertaken by Bungie , the creator of the franchise . In the developmental process , 343 Industries decided to explore the Forerunner fiction within the Halo universe , leading the team to design a new setting , enemies , and main antagonist . Existing characters and assets received visual overhauls and motion capture was used for animation within cutscenes . A goal for Halo 4 's story was to incorporate more human elements ; to achieve this , the developers chose to delve more deeply into the relationship between the two protagonists , Master Chief and Cortana . Several external studios assisted 343 Industries with developing Halo 4 , and over 350 people worked on the game in total . 
 The game was officially announced at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2011 ( E3 ) on June 6 . Prior to launch , Microsoft stated that Halo 4 was the most expensive video game title the company had created so far . The game was marketed with promotional events and videos , including the creation of a live @-@ action film , Halo 4 : Forward Unto Dawn . Halo 4 grossed US $ 220 million on its launch day and $ 300 million in its opening week — a record for the franchise . More than one million people played Halo 4 on Xbox Live within the first 24 hours of its release . The game received generally positive reviews from professional critics and received multiple nominations and awards from the press . It was rereleased as part of Halo : The Master Chief Collection for the Xbox One on November 11 , 2014 . A sequel , Halo 5 : Guardians , was released for the Xbox One on October 27 , 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Halo 4 is a shooter game in which players predominantly experience gameplay from a first @-@ person perspective ; the game perspective switches to third @-@ person when using certain weapons , abilities and vehicles . The player 's head @-@ up display ( HUD ) shows real @-@ time information on the player character 's armor system , such as shield status , information on current weapons and abilities , and waypoints for goals and objectives . The HUD also has a motion tracker that detects allies , enemies , and vehicles within a certain radius of the player . The game sees the return of the alien Covenant as foes , and introduces a new type of enemy called the Prometheans , which are Forerunner constructs . There are three types of Prometheans : Knights serve as leaders of the group and are considered as the deadliest of the Promethean forces ; Crawlers are a weaker class that often attack in packs ; and Watchers offer support and have the ability to shield or revive Promethean allies . 
 Halo 4 features updated versions of many human and Covenant weaponry from previous Halo games , as well as introducing new weapons for the humans , Covenant and Prometheans . The game also features reusable equipment , called armor abilities , introduced in Halo : Reach . New armor abilities are <unk> ; hardlight shield , which activates a protective barrier similar to a riot shield ; Promethean vision , which diminishes environment detail and shows hidden players as silhouettes ; regeneration field , which heals all players in close proximity and can emit a short range kinetic blast ; and thruster pack , which allows the player to launch themselves several feet in a horizontal direction . Returning abilities include active camouflage ; jetpack ; and hologram , which creates a facsimile of the player running towards a target point . Sprinting returns in Halo 4 , however players can now use it independently of their armor ability . New gameplay mechanics introduced to the series include throwing and catching , which has been implemented into the multiplayer game types : <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = = Modes = = = 
 Halo 4 's story or campaign mode can be played alone or cooperatively with one other player on the same console via split screen , and up to three other players through Xbox Live . Unlike in Halo 3 cooperative campaign where each player takes the role of a different character , in Halo 4 all players assume the role of Master Chief . Players can enable " skulls " in the campaign menu which act as gameplay modifiers such as increasing enemy health , changing NPC behavior or removing elements of the player 's HUD . The campaign also features terminals which provide the player with additional backstory via videos viewed in the Halo Waypoint application on the Xbox 360 . 
 In Halo 4 's multiplayer component , titled " Infinity " , players assume the role of a customizable Spartan @-@ IV super @-@ soldier . Players can progress through ranks by earning experience points from completing matches and challenges . Gameplay items such as visual customizations , weapons , armor abilities , and various upgrades are unlocked and can be acquired by players when they gain ranks . Once players attain rank SR @-@ 50 , they can enlist into a " Specialization " , enabling them to unlock further cosmetic and gameplay @-@ enhancing customizations for their Spartan . War Games is a competitive multiplayer matchmaking mode . There are various playlists with different game types ranging from standard deathmatch to objective oriented modes such as capture the flag . War Games can be played with up to sixteen players on Xbox Live and has up to four @-@ player split screen support . In Halo 4 , players are able to join certain multiplayer matchmaking sessions while they are in progress . Spartan Ops is a story @-@ driven episodic game mode , that can be played solo or cooperatively like the campaign mode . It serves as a replacement for the Firefight game mode that featured in Halo : Reach and Halo 3 : ODST . Ten episodes of content were released for Spartan Ops , each featured a cinematic and five objective @-@ based missions . The first five episodes were delivered on a weekly basis following Halo 4 's launch , the final five episodes were released in early 2013 . 
 Other game features include Forge , a map @-@ editing tool first introduced in Halo 3 . Like War Games it has both split screen and Xbox Live support . Using the tool , players can edit default multiplayer maps by adding or modifying spawn points , weapons and items , or create new ones using canvases . Forge in Halo 4 contains a new " magnet " feature for connecting forge pieces together . Theater mode allows players to view films , create video clips , and capture screen shots from recent matches in War Games or custom games . Halo 4 also offers a file sharing system that allows players to upload and share video clips , screenshots , custom maps and game variants . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Halo 4 takes place in a futuristic science fiction setting in the year 2557 , four years after the events of Halo 3 . Backstory details that hundreds of thousands of years before the modern era , humans were one of several interstellar civilizations . Following a war with the parasitic Flood , the humans came into conflict with the Forerunners , a powerful race that upheld a policy of benevolent shepherding of other races known as the Mantle of Responsibility . Humanity had begun an aggressive campaign of destroying any Flood infestations on a planet , which was misinterpreted as a desire for conquest . After centuries of war the Forerunners defeated the humans , ancestors of the contemporary human race , and stripped them of their technology and empire . The Forerunners soon fought the Flood themselves ; after exhausting every other strategic option available to them , the Forerunners activated weapons of mass destruction known as the Halo Array . The Array 's firing killed all sentient life in the galaxy to deprive the Flood of their food . Life that the Forerunners cataloged was then reseeded throughout the galaxy . 
 In the 26th century , space @-@ faring humanity ( organized under the United Nations Space Command , or UNSC ) comes under attack from the Covenant , an alien collective of species that worships the Forerunners as gods . The Covenant believe that activating the Halos will bring about salvation , not destruction . The human supersoldier Master Chief John @-@ 117 , along with his artificial intelligence companion Cortana , are instrumental in stopping the Halos from being activated , and the Flood from once again menacing the galaxy . At the end of Halo 3 , Chief and Cortana are left stranded in unknown space aboard the remains of the vessel Forward Unto Dawn . Much of Halo 4 's campaign and Spartan Ops ' missions take place on or near the Forerunner planet Requiem . Part of the game also takes place on Ivanoff Research Station — a human base in orbit around the Halo ringworld Installation 03 — and in Earth 's orbit . 
 = = = Campaign = = = 
 Four years after the events of Halo 3 , UNSC Forward Unto Dawn drifts towards Requiem from the destroyed ring . Cortana wakes Master Chief from cryonic sleep shortly before rogue post @-@ war Covenant forces board the vessel . The remnants of Forward Unto Dawn are caught in Requiem 's gravity well and pass through an opening to crash @-@ land on its interior . As Chief and Cortana explore Requiem , fighting hostile Covenant and Prometheans , Cortana malfunctions . She reveals that she is experiencing " rampancy " , a declining mental state where AIs past their operating expectancies " think " themselves to death . Chief promises to get Cortana to Earth , believing that Cortana 's creator , Doctor Catherine Halsey , can fix Cortana 's condition . Chief and Cortana pick up garbled transmissions from a human ship , UNSC Infinity , who have picked up Dawn 's distress call . Cortana attempts to warn Infinity away from Requiem 's gravity well and directs the Chief to deactivate what she believes are communications jammers . Instead , the Chief unwittingly releases the Didact , an ancient Forerunner warrior , from imprisonment . The Didact takes control of the Prometheans and Covenant and attacks Infinity after it is dragged into Requiem . 
 Chief makes contact with Infinity and helps repel the Didact 's attack . Chief and Cortana recommend attacking the Didact while he is vulnerable , but Infinity captain Del Rio orders them to destroy the gravity well so their ship can escape . In the process , Chief is contacted by a Forerunner known as the Librarian — the wife of the Didact , as well as ancient humanity 's protector . She explains that the Forerunners were divided on how best to combat the Flood . After failing to discover a way to immunize biological beings from the parasite , the Didact used a device called the Composer to convert the warriors under his command into digital versions immune to infection . Requiring more soldiers , the Didact forcibly converted captured humans into Prometheans , before being stopped and imprisoned by the Librarian . The Librarian , who has guided humanity 's development , accelerates the Chief 's evolution ; this grants him immunity to the Composer . 
 After destroying the gravity well , Del Rio orders a retreat back to Earth , doubting the Chief and Cortana 's testimony . The Master Chief disobeys orders to stand down and relinquish the malfunctioning Cortana , and stays behind to oppose the Didact . Infinity executive officer Commander Lasky gives Chief an armed transport and wishes him luck . Chief and Cortana attempt to sabotage the Didact 's ship before he leaves , but when they are unsuccessful they follow the Didact to a Halo ring , Installation 03 . The Composer has been moved from the ring onto the nearby Ivanoff Research Station , which the Covenant attack . The Chief defends Ivanoff , but the Didact retrieves the Composer and uses it on the station , composing every individual except the Chief . 
 Chief and Cortana use a fighter to follow the Didact 's ship through slipspace towards Earth . Aided by Infinity , now commanded by Lasky , and the UNSC home fleet , the Chief boards the Didact 's ship with a nuclear warhead . Cortana inserts copies of herself into the Didact 's computer systems to overwhelm the Didact 's shield , but not before the Didact directs the Composer at Earth . With the help of Cortana , the Chief defeats the Didact , who falls into a slipspace corridor generated underneath the Composer . The Master Chief activates the bomb but is saved by Cortana , who sacrifices herself . The Chief is found by a UNSC rescue team and is taken back to Infinity , where he , mourning the loss of Cortana , talks with Lasky about Earth , humanity , and what his duty as a soldier means . 
 In a post @-@ credits cutscene , UNSC forces descend on the city of New Phoenix , the location the Didact used the Composer on , to find its inhabitants composed . In a narration , the Didact proclaims the Forerunner 's role as custodians of the galaxy having to bear the Mantle of Responsibility , and humanity as the greatest threat in the galaxy . Master Chief removes his armor aboard Infinity ; if the player completes the game on Legendary difficulty , the Chief 's eyes are briefly shown . 
 = = = Spartan Ops = = = 
 The events of Spartan Ops take place six months after Halo 4 's campaign . Infinity returns to Requiem , where Covenant insurgents — led by Jul ' Mdama , who styles himself as " the Didact 's Hand " — and Prometheans are still active . Sarah Palmer , commander of the Spartan @-@ IVs , deploys Spartan squads to clear out the Covenant and Promethean forces in Requiem 's interior in order to set up research bases . Crimson Squad recovers a mysterious artifact excavated by Covenant ; Infinity scientist Doctor Glassman disappears after studying the device . 
 Catherine Halsey is brought to Infinity due to her knowledge of Forerunner technology . She is kept under guard by marines and Spartans including Gabriel Thorne , who lost his family during the Didact 's attack on New Phoenix . While studying the artifact , Halsey begins receiving messages on her computer from an anonymous sender . The source of the transmissions is ' Mdama , who captures Glassman and forces him to work on a Forerunner device that supposedly contains the Librarian . Pursuing ' Mdama 's troops , Crimson Squad recovers another artifact . When Halsey examines the device , it displays images Thorne recognizes as depicting New Phoenix . Lasky reveals to Halsey and the Spartans that the UNSC knows Prometheans are former humans . Approaching the artifact looking for answers , Thorne is teleported to Requiem and captured by Covenant . Palmer arrests Halsey for communicating with ' Mdama . Thorne escapes captivity outside ' Mdama 's base , and escapes with Glassman ; they are rescued by Majestic Squad . 
 Halsey uses an override code to force Infinity 's AI , Roland , to assist her . Seeking information withheld from her concerning the Librarian , Halsey learns that Master Chief is alive . Halsey contacts M <unk> to try and strike a deal , as they both want to find the Librarian ; Roland breaks free of Halsey 's control and summons guards to apprehend Halsey . Lasky decides to place Halsey in cryogenic sleep to prevent further trouble , but Promethean forces invade Infinity , capture Halsey and teleport her to ' Mdama 's base . Serin Osman , head of the Office of Naval Intelligence ( ONI ) , orders Lasky to kill Halsey , but he is reluctant to do so . Palmer sets off to Requiem to kill Halsey ; Lasky tells Majestic Squad to intervene and rescue Halsey from ' Mdama . 
 Halsey steps into the Forerunner device and makes contact with the Librarian . The Librarian gives Halsey the two pieces of the " Janus Key " , an instrument that provides the location for all Forerunner technology in the galaxy , and instructs Halsey to use the key to advance humankind . Upon receiving the key , Halsey exits the device and ' Mdama takes half of the key from her . Halsey passes the second piece to Thorne as Majestic Squad and Palmer arrive . Palmer wounds Halsey in the arm just before a Promethean teleports ' Mdama and Halsey from the base . ' Mdama sets Requiem to collide with the nearby sun and his forces evacuate the planet . Crimson and Majestic disable devices that anchor Infinity to Requiem , allowing the ship to escape before the installation is destroyed . Meanwhile , Halsey , who lost her wounded arm , tells ' Mdama she has been betrayed by the UNSC and offers to ally herself to exact revenge . 
 = = Development = = 
 In October 2007 , shortly after the release of Halo 3 , Halo developer Bungie split off from parent company Microsoft . Microsoft retained the intellectual property and rights to Halo , and Bungie continued developing Halo games until 2010 . During this period of time Microsoft formed an internal division , 343 Industries , to manage the franchise and develop future games . 
 In 2008 , while 343 Industries was still in formation , Microsoft approached Starlight Runner Entertainment to help assemble the " Halo bible " . Starlight Runner is a New York @-@ based company that specializes in creating and producing transmedia franchises . Their job was to examine all content of the Halo universe , clean it up , and make it coherent and understandable for the people involved with the creation of Halo games and media . Frank O 'Connor , a content manager at Bungie , assisted the team with the creation of the " Halo bible " before moving to 343 Industries to become Halo franchise development director . Unlike the original trilogy , the story for Halo 4 was designed to be part of a multi @-@ game arc from the beginning . In addition , 343 Industries aimed for " a more complete connectivity between all of their future media than before " ; relating Halo 4 's story to the Forerunner Saga and Kilo @-@ Five Trilogy novels as well as using terminals in Halo : Combat Evolved Anniversary to introduce background knowledge on the Forerunners . 
 343 started with a staff of roughly a dozen people , but grew to nearly 200 through development . Halo 4 's development team included former employees of more than 25 triple @-@ A studios . Prospective employees could not be told they were going to be working on Halo 4 . " We had people who we hired who hated Halo because of ' X , ' " said Frank O 'Connor , 343 Industries ' franchise development director . " But what that really meant was , ' I feel like this game could be awesome because of ' Y input ' that I 'm going to bring into it . I want to prove it , and I 'm passionate about proving it . ' So we ended up with a bunch of people who were genuinely passionate about the product . That is a huge advantage , and that helped in hiring and forming our team . " This rapid hiring and growth occurred during development of the game , creating issues ; because the team was committed to a delivery date , Halo 4 executive producer Kiki <unk> said that the team was forced to make " necessary mistakes " , with production difficulties and a team inexperienced with working together contributing to development difficulties . Nine months before shipping , the developers restructured the game 's production pipeline and gave individual teams more control due to bottlenecks in development . With so many developers from different backgrounds , forging a common goal and company culture was different . Creative director Josh Holmes recalled that an " epiphany moment " that proved the team was headed in the right direction was early in development , when the team completed a section of the game that was " very traditional [ Halo ] " . Despite positive feedback from testers , 343 Industries discarded the prototype as too traditional , but felt that it showed the team could work together . 
 Including contractors , 350 people worked on the game . 343 Industries contracted Certain Affinity , an independent video game development studio , to help with the development of Halo 4 ; they started work on the game in early 2011 . Certain Affinity has worked alongside Bungie and 343 Industries on producing multiplayer content for previous Halo titles . The studio developed the Forge mode , co @-@ developed War Games and created a number of maps and multiplayer modes for Halo 4 . 
 Halo 4 and Halo : Combat Evolved Anniversary were both officially announced on June 6 , 2011 , at the E3 2011 . Halo 4 is the first installment in the Reclaimer Saga of Halo games . The studio 's creative team , which included nearly 200 people led by creative director Josh Holmes , started developing the game as early as 2009 . Prior to the release of the game , Microsoft Studios Vice President Phil Spencer stated that the Halo franchise is the " most important entertainment product in the company " and that Halo 4 was the most expensive game that Microsoft had made . A demonstration of the game 's campaign was first shown at E3 2012 . The developers described it as a pivotal moment in development , as it was the first time the game had been shown publicly . The positive reaction was a morale boost for the team , who were unsure how the public would react . On July 7 , 2012 , a pre @-@ release build of Halo 4 's Forge mode was showcased by 343 Industries and Certain Affinity at RTX which took place at the Austin Convention Center . On September 26 , 2012 , O 'Connor announced that the game 's development was complete . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Following Halo 4 's announcement , O 'Connor reported that both Master Chief and Cortana would undergo " radical " changes in appearance for the game , some of them attributed to better graphics and others to story elements . The studio wanted Master Chief 's appearance to convey an imposing mass and weight , to show that one of his characteristics is his 800 @-@ pound ( 360 kg ) armor . They studied the armor changes that were made for the Spartans in Halo : Reach , which were much bulkier than renditions in previous Halo games . Character and concept artists began redesigning the Master Chief by creating sketches ; these sketches would be rendered into 3D models so the team could analyse the design from every possible angle . The team would then return to creating sketches to make adjustments , and repeat the process until the main structure for the Master Chief was created . The team then worked on the finer details of his appearance . 
 During the <unk> process of Halo 4 , O 'Connor decided it would be best for the franchise to explore the Forerunner fiction of the Halo universe , which had remained largely a mystery before 343 Industries ' involvement in the franchise . This ultimately led to the creation of a new race of enemy , the Prometheans , warriors of the Forerunner empire . Given that the Forerunners themselves had never been featured in previous Halo games , the design process for the appearance of the Prometheans was long and tedious . The art team produced a large number of sketches , which were presented to other member 's of the studio to get feedback and reactions . Many variations of different character models were concepted before the team decided on a final design . The main goal when designing their appearance was to make them resonate with the player , and evoke the image of the Forerunner architecture and language that had been portrayed in previous Halo media . Upon death , the Promethean Knight dissolves from the point where it was last shot ; this visual effect also occurs when certain enemies are killed by Promethean weapons . From a gameplay standpoint the design for the Prometheans also needed to fit in well with the sandbox so they would be suitable enemies to fight . A goal when designing their behaviour was to make them highly adaptive from a tactical standpoint . For example , the Promethean Knight can phase in and out of space , allowing it to retreat or charge the player at any given moment ; this changes the way that a player engages in a combat encounter . 
 Holmes explained that one of the goals for Halo 4 's campaign was to incorporate more human elements into the story . To accomplish this the team wrote a B story that explored Master Chief 's relationship with his AI partner , Cortana , who would break down into a dementia like state . The development team realized that Halo 4 's narrative could be dense and hard to approach , making it inaccessible for new players . They found that implementing such a storyline into an action game to be extremely challenging and considered dropping it during development . Holmes was adamant about including it ; he took inspiration from his mother 's battle with dementia , which she was diagnosed with near the start of the game 's development . This led Holmes to want to capture the emotion and tell " a perfect story " . 
 The senior art director for Halo 4 is Kenneth Scott ; he described the visual style of Halo 4 as being more ingrained in the expanded universe fiction , and more " mature " than before . With the game 's increased focus on the Forerunners , the artists invested heavily into the look and feel of Forerunner technology . The game also features more diversity in Forerunner structures , including fully active Forerunner technology as opposed to the mostly inert and abandoned structures seen in the earlier games . The majority of the game is lit statically using lightmaps ; this allowed the art team to achieve realistic lighting effects with full global illumination and ambient occlusion . Image @-@ based lighting is also used to ground scenes and make everything fit together better . 
 The cooperative Spartan Ops mode originally began as a Firefight @-@ type mode , similar to that featured in Halo : Reach , but was composed of different objective @-@ oriented mission types . Over the course of development , changes were made to Spartan Ops to include a narrative that would tie Halo 4 's multiplayer together . The missions were designed primarily for four player co @-@ op . The Spartan Ops development team worked with the narrative team to use ideas and storylines to shape the mode such that the cinematics would tie in with the missions . 
 Glasgow based animation studio , Axis Animation , assisted 343 Industries on the creation of CGI cinematics for the Spartan Ops game mode . Axis have produced animations for numerous video games , including the award @-@ winning announcement trailer for Dead Island . To make each Spartan Ops episode as engaging as possible the team at Axis shot and edited episodes in live action using performance capture . The team then used the reference cameras at the live action shoot to create a performance edit , before shooting with CG cameras to provide more coverage of all scenes and a greater selection of shots for the editorial team . The shading team at Axis made use of the 3D animation package , Houdini , to procedurally generate the environment in the cinematics . Axis worked with Glasgow @-@ based audio post production company Savalas on sound design and the final mix for the Spartan Ops cinematics . Facial motion capture was also utilized to take the movements and facial expressions from actors and apply them to the in @-@ game cinematics for both Spartan Ops and campaign . Performance capture for both campaign and Spartan Ops cutscenes was directed and recorded at Giant Studios . Axis worked in conjunction with Giant Studios and Cubic Motion to develop a special facial motion capture solution that would retain facial expressions from the actors when creating the animation . 
 Visual effects house The Sequence Group , who had previously developed animation for Halo : Combat Evolved Anniversary 's terminals , returned to create additional animation for Halo 4 . The Terminals feature a painterly artistic style , which Sequence president Ian Kirby felt appealed to gamers familiar with the style of concept art . In addition to creating the visuals for the Halo 4 terminals , their work appeared in one of the game 's main cinematics . To save time and expense using traditional motion capture methods to animate the 3D characters , The Sequence Group used twin Microsoft Kinect infrared sensors to create a home @-@ made solution . 
 The game utilizes much of the " sandbox " that has been featured across all six prior Halo games and other media , in addition to introducing new characters , weapons , vehicles , and other elements . The game engine used is a heavily modified version of the engine established by Bungie . Unlike previous games in the Halo series , Halo 4 runs natively in 720p resolution . The game itself comes on two discs and requires <unk> of available storage space either on a <unk> USB flash drive or Xbox 360 hard drive to play the multiplayer component . Disc two is used to install the multiplayer content and disc one is used for launching the game . Due to rendering issues and significant engine changes , Theater support for Halo 4 's campaign and Spartan Ops was not featured in the game on launch ; however 343 Industries expressed that this feature may be implemented in the future . 
 As with previous Halo titles , 343 Industries provides a statistic tracking service for players of Halo 4 . Player data such as game history , character progression , and various statistics can be accessed in game or via the Halo Waypoint website . The web services team at 343 Industries utilized the Windows Azure Service Bus messaging infrastructure to relay data from the Xbox Live network to back @-@ end databases , where player data and information is stored . Halo 4 player data can also be accessed via the Xbox SmartGlass application . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 On April 11 , 2012 , it was announced that British record producer and composer Neil Davidge would be writing the music for Halo 4 . Davidge is best known for his work as a co @-@ writer and producer for the band Massive Attack , and also composed the scores for numerous films . Davidge intended to add " a touch of romance " to the score as well as adding more electronic sounds while keeping Halo 's style . 
 <unk> Tojima , best known for his work on Konami 's Castlevania : Circle of the Moon and Metal Gear Solid 4 : Guns of the Patriots , served as Halo 4 's audio director . The team performed many live audio recording sessions , several of which occurred in Tasmania , Australia . Some of these recording sessions took place in generally inhospitable environments , such as underwater , in fire , and in ice , through the use of specially designed microphones ; other recording sessions have utilized " home made " explosives . Tojima intended for the game 's audio to be clearly grounded in the Halo universe , while also having a more realistic quality than in past titles . 
 Music composer Kazuma Jinnouchi , also formerly from Konami , joined 343 Industries during the production of Halo 4 in 2011 . He contributed several additional tracks for the game . He would later go on to be the sole composer of the game 's sequel , Halo 5 : Guardians , in 2015 . 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 Voice actors returning to reprise their roles in Halo 4 include Steve Downes as Master Chief , and Jen Taylor as both Cortana and Halsey . Voices for new characters include Mark Rolston as Captain Andrew Del Rio , Darren O 'Hare as Thomas Lasky , Jennifer Hale as Sarah Palmer , Adrienne Barbeau as Dr. Tillson , Keith Szarabajka as the Didact , Travis Willingham as Jul ' Mdama , and Lori <unk> as the Librarian . Additional voices provided include Conan O 'Brien , Andy Richter , and Jason Bradbury . Employees of Rooster Teeth Productions ' have cameo roles in Spartan Ops , as characters from the Halo machinima Red vs. Blue . Bruce Thomas was the performance capture actor playing the role of Master Chief and actress Mackenzie Mason played the performance role of Cortana . Taylor served as the motion capture source for Halsey . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 On January 19 , 2012 , McFarlane Toys announced that they would be creating action figures for Halo 4 , bringing new characters , weapons and vehicles from the video game to the fans . McFarlane Toys CEO and founder , Todd McFarlane said that he was " really excited to be working with the all @-@ star team of 343 Industries " . McFarlane also stated that they would continue and expand their previous figure line which would be rebranded as Halo Universe . On February 14 , 2012 , toy company Mega Brands revealed a new product series in their Mega Bloks Halo Universe collector 's line . Both McFarlane Toys and Mega Brands revealed their figures at the 2012 American International Toy Fair . Jada Toys launched a new line of Halo 4 die @-@ cast toys in August 2012 ; Sideshow Collectibles also revealed a Halo 4 Premium Cortana Figure . Toy manufacturer Funko released Master Chief , Cortana and Spartan @-@ IV figures for their Pop ! Vinyl toyline on November 8 , 2012 . On June 11 , 2012 , video game console peripherals manufacturer , Mad Catz Interactive , Inc. announced that they had signed a deal with Microsoft Studios to create a Halo 4 @-@ branded gaming headset ; the product shipped on October 30 , 2012 . 
 343 Industries and Microsoft also created a Halo 4 art book , titled Awakening : The Art of Halo 4 ; it was published by Titan Books and released on November 6 , 2012 . The book contains a collection of concept art and sketches accompanied by commentary from the artists at 343 Industries . A limited edition version of the book was also released with only a thousand copies available worldwide . Another book , Halo 4 : The Essential Visual Guide was created by 343 Industries in collaboration with DK Publishing and was released September 24 , 2013 . It contains annotated artwork and profiles on characters , items , and locations within the Halo universe . 
 Microsoft once again partnered up with PepsiCo , having done so previously while promoting Halo 3 . In the United States players were able to earn double experience in Halo 4 by purchasing Mountain Dew and Doritos and then redeem product codes found on the packaging using an iOS and Android app game called Halo 4 : King of the Hill Fueled by Mountain Dew . Players were able to redeem product codes from October 15 , 2012 , on websites that PepsiCo set up for the promotion . In the United Kingdom , a promotion ran from September 24 , 2012 , until December 4 , 2012 , where purchasers of Mountain Dew were able to redeem codes to have a chance of winning copies of Halo 4 , Xbox 360 avatar items and a trip to Seattle to attend a tour around the studio of 343 Industries . Microsoft also partnered with Pizza Hut branches in the United Kingdom ; people who entered the contest via an official website had a chance of winning Halo 4 @-@ themed prizes . The contest was open from October 22 , 2012 , until December 30 , 2012 ; entering participants also received a free code for a Halo 4 Xbox 360 avatar outfit . Microsoft partnered with American Express to offer a promotion for eligible card holders in the United States and United Kingdom . Card holders who sync their American Express card with their Xbox Live account receive coupons and credits and are also rewarded with additional credits and coupons for obtaining achievements in Halo 4 . Microsoft also offered Halo 4 armor , for Xbox Live avatars , to people who watched at least thirty minutes of footage from the 2012 United States presidential debates on their Xbox 360 . 
 On October 31 , 2012 , Microsoft and government @-@ owned organization Liechtenstein Marketing transformed the countryside of Liechtenstein for a special live action event for fans and members of the press . The Gutenberg Castle was transformed into a military fortification where guests tried out Halo 4 for the first time . A nearby countryside had a United Nations Space Command military camp installed and <unk> Quarry was transformed into a battleground where fifteen actors played out a two @-@ hour @-@ long adventure . 
 = = = Promotional videos = = = 
 Halo 4 was announced with a trailer at E3 2011 , titled " Awakening " . It was directed by Joseph Kosinski and visual effects were created by animation company Digital Domain . Kosinski and Digital Domain had collaborated previously on the Halo 3 " Starry Night " commercial . The trailer is set on the UNSC frigate Forward Unto Dawn during the opening events of Halo 4 . It depicts the Master Chief being awakened from cryonic sleep by Cortana , as the remnants of the frigate drift towards Requiem . The trailer was short @-@ listed in the Visual Effects and Design categories at the 2012 <unk> Show and NEXT Awards . 
 On April 30 , 2012 , it was announced that a web series , titled Halo 4 : Forward Unto Dawn , would play on Machinima Prime and Halo Waypoint during the weeks leading up to the release for Halo 4 . The series debuted on October 5 , 2012 , and contained five 15 @-@ minute live action shorts . It was directed by Stewart Hendler and the project was Microsoft 's largest investment in a live action promotion . The series is set in 2526 , 31 years before the events of Halo 4 at the beginning of the Human / Covenant war . The plot is centered around the character Thomas Lasky , who appears in the video game , he is primarily portrayed by Australian actor Tom Green in the live action series . The series also ties in with the plot of the Halo 4 campaign and Spartan Ops mode . The Master Chief is featured in the latter part of the series , and is played by actor Daniel Cudmore . 
 At E3 2012 , the presentation of Halo 4 was preceded with a live action segment called " The Commissioning " . The video was directed by Nicolai <unk> and filmed over two and a half days , with four weeks of post @-@ production and visual effects were added by Method Studios . Music in the trailer was scored by Neil Davidge . The video shows the UNSC Infinity vessel being pulled within the confines of the planet Requiem . Mark Rolston portrays Captain Andrew Del Rio in the live action video . 
 On October 18 , 2012 , the Halo 4 launch trailer , titled " Scanned " , premiered on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon . The trailer was produced by David Fincher and directed by Tim Miller . The trailer was filmed in Prague and features both CGI and live action sequences . It shows Master Chief , bound by a force shield , being approached by an enemy . The enemy moves toward John , scanning his mind to find the source of his strength and search for weaknesses . A live action sequence proceeds with flashbacks of John 's past ; showing him being kidnapped as a child , the Spartan @-@ II augmentation procedure , and him being suited into his MJOLNIR armor . The trailer then shows John attacking Promethean Knights , before returning to the scene of him bound and being faced by his enemy , the Didact . On October 23 , 2012 , the Halo 4 launch gameplay trailer was revealed ; it featured segments of gameplay footage from the campaign and multiplayer . 
 In October 2012 , visual effects company Framestore assisted advertising agency McCann London in producing live TV adverts for Halo 4 . The adverts aired on November 9 , 2012 ; they featured live data on how many people were playing Halo 4 online , correct to within five minutes of the broadcast . 
 = = Release = = 
 Halo 4 was released worldwide in all territories except Japan on November 6 , 2012 ; the Japanese version was released on November 8 . Microsoft initially released the game in two separate retail versions , branded as " Standard " and " Limited " editions . The Limited Edition includes digital items for Xbox 360 avatars and in @-@ game Spartan @-@ IVs , as well as access to future downloadable content in the form of three competitive multiplayer map packs , containing a total of nine maps . It also includes a 90 @-@ minute extended version of the live action digital series , Halo 4 : Forward Unto Dawn and a UNSC Infinity Briefing Packet . At launch , two Specializations were available to all players ; only owners of the Halo 4 Limited Edition had access to all eight Specializations . However , 343 Industries later granted access to players , in certain countries , who participated in an online multiplayer match during the opening fortnight . For the remaining players , the Specializations were gradually unlocked in the months following launch . 
 Microsoft produced a Xbox 360 Limited Edition Halo 4 console bundle that launched alongside the game . The bundle features two custom designed controllers , a standard edition of Halo 4 , a wired headset , exclusive downloadable content and a Halo 4 @-@ themed Xbox 360 containing a <unk> hard drive . It was also announced that Microsoft would be releasing a standalone Xbox 360 Halo 4 Limited Edition wireless controller featuring a different design to the one included in the console bundle . 
 Microsoft reported that their security teams and law enforcement were investigating the possibility of Halo 4 content being leaked on the internet in October 2012 . Jessica Shea , Community Manager at 343 Industries , warned fans to be wary of Halo 4 spoilers that were posted on the internet . O 'Connor stated at New York Comic Con that leaks of the game and footage would not have any impact on how the game is released or marketed and that unlicensed uploading of high @-@ profile games is inevitable . 
 Over ten thousand stores across forty countries opened for the midnight launch of Halo 4 . On the evening before the release of the game , a fifty @-@ foot diameter illuminated Didact glyph was flown by a helicopter over the River Thames in London , from the Greenwich Peninsula to Tower Bridge . The glyph was created by a team of over fifty designers , engineers and fabricators and took approximately eight weeks to design and construct . Following the release of the game , New Zealand censors declared many copies of Halo 4 illegal , after deciding to label it with an R13 rating , restricting it to buyers aged 13 and over . Many copies of the game had already gone on sale with an unrestricted M certificate , but these copies are in breach of the Films , Videos , and Publications Classification Act 1993 . 
 On February 5 , 2013 , a digital version of the game was released via the Xbox Live Games on Demand service . A game of the year edition of Halo 4 , featuring the season pass and Champion 's Bundle DLC , pre @-@ order bonuses , special avatar prop and the entire first season of Spartan Ops , was released on October 8 . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Halo 4 grossed US $ 220 million on its launch day and $ 300 million in its opening week . The gross was a new record for the franchise , surpassing Halo : Reach 's $ 200 million first @-@ day gross . More than one million people played Halo 4 on Xbox Live within the first 24 hours of release . While Halo 4 debuted at the top of the UK Video Games Chart and became the eighteenth biggest launch ever in the UK , it failed to beat the week one sales records of Halo 3 and Halo : Reach . U.S. retail tracking firm NPD reported that Halo 4 was the second most sold retail video game of November 2012 , the third most sold retail video game of December 2012 , and the third most sold retail video game of the year . In the United States Halo 4 became the best @-@ selling Microsoft Studios title for sales counted during respective launch years . In 2012 , Halo 4 was the third most played game on Xbox Live based on average unique users per day . 
 = = Post @-@ release = = 
 Halo 4 supports downloadable content ( DLC ) , which is available to download via the Xbox Live Marketplace . Three War Games map packs , each containing three maps , can be purchased individually , or bought together with the Halo 4 War Games Pass . The pass is included in the Limited Edition version of the game and is available to purchase on the Xbox Live Marketplace . The first map package , the " Crimson Map Pack " , was released on December 10 , 2012 . Players who were awarded early access to Specializations received complimentary access to the Crimson Map Pack for a limited time . The " Majestic Map Pack " was released on February 25 , 2013 , followed by the " Castle Map Pack " on April 8 . Forge Island , a map designed for Forge mode creations was made available at no cost to Xbox Live users on March 29 . Microsoft released additional DLC on August 20 that could be purchased together as the Champions Bundle or separately . The three DLC packs include : the " Bullseye Pack " containing two multiplayer maps and early access to the Ricochet gametype ; the " Steel Skin Pack " , which offers steampunk @-@ themed skins for weapons ; and the " Infinity Armor Pack " , which includes new armor for customizing the player 's Spartan . 
 Aside from map packs , the game is supported by regular matchmaking playlist updates . These updates make playlist and balance changes , sandbox tweaks and fix minor glitches . A title update to fix various game issues and glitches was released in December 2012 . Spartan Ops went on a mid @-@ season break that December and resumed on January 21 , 2013 ; the back half of the season was made available as a free download from the Xbox Live Marketplace . On January 29 , an in @-@ game search feature was implemented for Halo 4 's file sharing system ; a web version of the Halo 4 file browser was made available on February 27 , 2013 . On April 8 , 343 Industries launched a competitive skill ranking system akin to that featured in Halo 2 and Halo 3 . 
 During Spartan Ops ' mid @-@ season break , a free @-@ to @-@ enter Halo 4 tournament , titled Halo 4 Infinity Challenge , was launched by Microsoft in partnership with Virgin Gaming . Players could register on the Halo 4 Infinity Challenge website to participate in the tournament , giving them the opportunity to win various prizes . On July 3 , 2013 , 343 Industries announced a second tournament in partnership with Virgin Gaming , titled Halo 4 Global Championship . The tournament spanned a period of five weeks with a grand prize of $ 200 @,@ 000 . The tournament began on July 5 at RTX 2013 , and on July 15 on Xbox Live . The tournament finals took place on September 1 at the 2013 Penny Arcade Expo ; the event was streamed live and was hosted by Larry Hryb , Blair Herter , and Jessica Chobot . 
 Halo 4 was re @-@ released as part of Halo : The Master Chief Collection for the Xbox One on November 11 , 2014 . A sequel , Halo 5 : Guardians , was released for the Xbox One on October 27 , 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Halo 4 received positive reviews from critics , with aggregate review websites GameRankings and Metacritic assigning scores of 87 @.@ 61 % and 87 / 100 , respectively . Many reviewers were impressed by 343 Industries ' debut effort and considered it a worthy addition to the series . Ryan McCaffrey of IGN gave Halo 4 a very positive review , considering it to be the best game of the series to date and the best Xbox 360 game of 2012 ; he called it " a bar @-@ raising triumph for the entire first @-@ person shooter genre . " Wesley Yin @-@ Poole of Eurogamer remarked that although he was initially sceptical of changes being made to the formula , 343 's greatest achievement was managing to stay true to what Halo is . He was enthusiastic to see what the developer would do with Halo 5 and expected them to deviate further while retaining the series ' " magic " . 
 Halo 4 's campaign received a varied reception from critics . Reviewers enjoyed Master Chief 's return as the protagonist , and the emotional connection between Master Chief and Cortana was highly praised . Mike <unk> of Game Informer complimented the characterization improvements of Chief and Cortana , calling their evolved love story more " focused " and " relatable " to the player , in comparison to the " cloudy and impersonal " stories from the prior games of the franchise . GameSpot editor , Chris Watters , described the " thrilling and emotional return of Master Chief and Cortana " as the highlight of game . GamesRadar maintained that the narrative was enthralling and the campaign 's structure was much better than its predecessors . IGN 's McCaffrey praised the game 's lighting , movements , animations , and lauded the campaign for its pacing , " deftly mixing on @-@ foot combat , vehicle sequences , quiet story moments , and key Chief @-@ and @-@ Cortana interactions . " Although Neil Davidge 's work on the musical composition was noted as a " bold shift " , McCaffrey claimed the music seemed " complementary rather than additive . " 
 1UP.com reviewer Jose Otero was critical of Halo 4 's story , writing that the ending of the game " doesn 't make a lot of sense " . He also remarked that while the narrative tied the main plot lines together well , it was disappointing to see some of the smaller story points were ignored entirely . Both G4 and Official Xbox Magazine agreed that the plot became convoluted on occasions and might be difficult to understand for new players of the franchise . G4 reviewer , Adam Rosenburg , also stated that while the soundtrack had some memorable moments , he was disappointed that composer Neil Davidge had chosen to ditch the familiar theme of previous games . Michael Gapper of Computer and Video Games drew a comparison between Halo 4 and Halo 2 . He stated that the hardware limitations of the Xbox 360 had negatively impacted Halo 4 's campaign , in the same way that they had throttled Bungie 's ambitions for Halo 2 on the original Xbox . He explained that although the game was visually stunning , this had detracted from the scale and spectacle that was present in Halo 3 's campaign . He found the spaces within the campaign to be narrow and constrained which led to a lack of tactical options in encounters . 
 Competitive multiplayer was well received by critics . Chris Watters of GameSpot welcomed the new armor abilities and gameplay tweaks introduced in multiplayer . He praised the continuing robustness of Custom Game options and the accessibility of level editing in Forge . CVG 's Gapper stated that the new scoring system alone made Halo 4 multiplayer the best in the series , emphasising that recognition for assists and completing objective tasks was a positive change . Polygon writer , Arthur Gies , said that the new game mode Dominion was the best addition to Halo multiplayer since the introduction of Xbox Live . He also thought that the multiplayer component was more approachable to people outside of the core player @-@ base without dumbing anything down . 
 Reception towards Spartan Ops was less favorable than multiplayer and campaign ; some reviewers expressed their disappointment in Spartan Ops replacing the cooperative Firefight mode . Criticisms were aimed at the brevity of missions and lack of replay value . Despite any shortcomings , IGN said the mode was a must @-@ play for the " incredible pre @-@ episode cinematics " which open up " a number of interesting narrative possibilities for future episodes and seasons . " Martin Robinson of Eurogamer complained about the repetition of environments within the first half of the season and noted that missions quickly become a chore . He felt that Spartan Ops was a " weak , bloated alternative " compared to Firefight . 1UP.com found that while the short length felt odd initially , the mode was still fun to play and offered more opportunities to play Halo cooperatively . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = Arizona State Route 96 = 
 State Route 96 ( SR 96 ) , is an east – west , 21 @.@ 79 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 35 @.@ 07 km ) state highway in central part of the U.S. state of Arizona . It runs from Bagdad east to Yavapai County Road 15 ( CR 15 ) near Hillside . The road was built in the late 1930s and logged as a state route from Bagdad to Hillside in 1962 . The section from Bagdad to SR 97 was never officially part of the State Highway system , though the remainder of the highway was officially designated as such at the turn of the century . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 96 begins at an intersection with Old Dick Road in Bagdad . Approximately four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the east is a junction with SR 97 , which heads south to meet U.S. Route 93 ( US 93 ) . From the SR 97 intersection , SR 96 heads east through a desert area . The roadway then turns southward , and after intersecting Santa Maria River Road , it crosses the Santa Maria River and turns slightly southeastward . Through a hilly area , SR 96 turns eastward and passes through a series of hairpin turns . The highway ends at the west end of CR 15 at the intersection with Hillside Road . The road continues east as CR 15 ( Bagdad Road ) towards Prescott . 
 The highway is maintained by the Arizona Department of Transportation ( ADOT ) who is responsible for constructing and maintaining highways in the state . As part of this role , ADOT surveys volumes of traffic on their highways . These surveys are most often presented in the form of annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is the number of vehicles that travel a road during an average day during the year . In 2009 , ADOT calculated that an average of only 450 vehicles used the road daily at both termini . No part of the highway has been listed in the National Highway System , a system of roads in the United States important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 A road connecting Bagdad to Hillside was built by 1939 . The road was logged into the state highway system in 1962 , its extent defined from Hillside to Bagdad . In 1981 , a right @-@ of @-@ way was acquired for the improvement of approaches and bridges on the route . In 2000 , the portion of the route from SR 97 to its eastern terminus was officially added to the State Highway system . Although some signage west of the SR 97 junction exists , that portion is not officially part of the state highway . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in Yavapai County . 
 = Thrasybulus = 
 Thrasybulus ( / <unk> / ; Greek : <unk> , " brave @-@ willed " ; c . 440 – 388 BC ) was an Athenian general and democratic leader . In 411 BC , in the wake of an oligarchic coup at Athens , the pro @-@ democracy sailors at Samos elected him as a general , making him a primary leader of the successful democratic resistance to that coup . As general , he was responsible for recalling the controversial nobleman Alcibiades from exile , and the two worked together extensively over the next several years . In 411 and 410 , Thrasybulus commanded along with Alcibiades and others at several critical Athenian naval victories . 
 After Athens ' defeat in the Peloponnesian War , Thrasybulus led the democratic resistance to the new oligarchic government , known as the Thirty Tyrants , which the victorious Spartans imposed on Athens . In 404 BC , he commanded a small force of exiles that invaded the Spartan ruled Attica and , in successive battles , defeated first a Spartan garrison and then the forces of the oligarchy . In the wake of these victories , democracy was re @-@ established at Athens . As a leader of this revived democracy in the 4th century BC , Thrasybulus advocated a policy of resistance to Sparta and sought to restore Athens ' imperial power . He was killed in 388 BC while leading an Athenian naval force during the Corinthian War . 
 = = Personal life and early career = = 
 Almost nothing is known of Thrasybulus 's background or early life . His father was named Lycus , and he was a native of the deme of <unk> in Athens . He was probably born between 455 and 441 BC , although a date as late as the late <unk> BC cannot be ruled out . He was married , and had two children . Several facts make it clear that he was from a wealthy family ; he held the office of trierarch , which involved significant personal expenditures , on several occasions , and in the 4th century BC , his son was able to pay a substantial fine of 10 talents . 
 By 411 BC , Thrasybulus was clearly established to some degree as a pro @-@ democracy politician , as events discussed below make clear . He is not mentioned in any sources before 411 , so it is impossible to present a picture of his actions . 
 As a politician , Thrasybulus consistently advocated several policies throughout his career . He was an advocate of Athenian imperialism and expansionism , and a strong supporter of Periclean democracy . He seems to have been an unspectacular public speaker , although Plutarch notes that he had " the loudest voice of the Athenians . " During his period of prominence within the democracy , he seems to have led what might now be termed a populist faction . 
 According to the historical account provided by Xenophon , he is murdered as an acting general of a military expedition on its way to Rhodes , on a stopover in Aspendus on the Eurymedon River during the night by angry inhabitants of that area , for his soldiers ' recent transgressions of excess against local farmers and their farmsteads . 
 = = Coup of 411 BC = = 
 In 413 BC , a massive Athenian expedition force was completely obliterated in Sicily . In the wake of this defeat , Athens found itself facing a crisis of unprecedented magnitude . Cities throughout its Aegean empire began to rebel , and a Peloponnesian fleet sailed to assist them . Seeking to contain the crisis , Athens tapped its reserve fund to rebuild its fleet and dispatched what ships it had to establish an advance naval base at Samos . 
 In this general atmosphere of crisis , aristocrats at Athens who had long desired to overthrow the democracy there began to agitate publicly for a change of government , and formed a conspiracy to bring an oligarchy to power in Athens . Their plans included recalling Alcibiades , who had been exiled by the democratic government . These oligarchs initiated their plans at Samos , where they successfully encouraged a number of Samian oligarchs to begin a similar conspiracy . 
 A dispute has arisen among modern historians over Thrasybulus ' involvement in this plot . Donald Kagan has suggested that Thrasybulus was one of the founding members of the scheme and was willing to support moderate oligarchy , but was alienated by the extreme actions taken by the plotters . R. J. Buck , on the other hand , maintains that Thrasybulus was probably never involved in the plot , possibly because he was absent from Samos at the time of its inception . 
 Upon their return to Athens , the conspirators succeeded in ending democratic rule and imposing an oligarchy of 400 rulers . At Samos , however , the coup did not go forward so smoothly . Samian democrats learned of the conspiracy and notified four prominent Athenians , the generals Leon and <unk> , Thrasybulus , and Thrasyllus , at that time a hoplite in the ranks . With the support of these men and the Athenian soldiers in general , the Samian democrats were able to defeat the conspirators when they attempted to seize power . 
 A ship was dispatched to Athens to notify the city of this success against the oligarchs . Upon its arrival , however , the crew was arrested , as the news of a democratic victory was far from welcome to the new oligarchic government . Learning of this , the army at Samos deposed its generals and elected new generals who were believed to be more steadfast in their support of democracy , Thrasybulus and Thrasyllus among them . The army , stating that they had not revolted from the city but that the city had revolted from them , resolved to stand by the democracy while continuing to prosecute the war against Sparta . 
 One of the first actions Thrasybulus took as general was to bring about the recall of Alcibiades , a policy that he had supported since before the coup . After persuading the sailors to support his plan , Thrasybulus sailed to retrieve Alcibiades and returned with him to Samos . The aim of this policy was to win away Persian support from the Spartans , as it was believed that Alcibiades had great influence with Tissaphernes . Alcibiades was elected as general alongside Thrasybulus and the others . Shortly after this , following the revolt of Euboea , the government of the 400 at Athens was overthrown and replaced by a broader oligarchy , which would eventually give way to democracy . 
 = = In command = = 
 In the months following these events , Thrasybulus commanded the Athenian fleet in several major engagements . At the Battle of <unk> , he commanded one wing of the fleet and prevented Athenian defeat by extending his flank to prevent encirclement ; the battle ended in Athenian victory . Shortly afterwards Thrasybulus again commanded a wing of the Athenian fleet at Abydos , another Athenian victory . 
 Thrasybulus was again in command of a squadron of the Athenian fleet at the Battle of Cyzicus , a stunning Athenian victory . In this battle , the Athenians drew the Spartan fleet out to pursue a small force led by Alcibiades ; when the Spartans had gotten a good distance from land , two squadrons under the command of Thrasybulus and Theramenes appeared in their rear to cut off their retreat . The Spartans were forced to flee to a nearby beach , where Alcibiades landed his men in an attempt to seize the Spartan ships . The Spartans , however , with the assistance of a Persian army , began to drive this Athenian force into the sea ; seeing this , Thrasybulus landed his own force to temporarily relieve pressure on Alcibiades , and meanwhile ordered Theramenes to join up with Athenian land forces nearby and bring them to reinforce the sailors and marines on the beach . The Spartans and Persians , overwhelmed by the arrival of multiple forces from several directions , were defeated and driven off , and the Athenians captured all the Spartan ships which were not destroyed . 
 In 409 and 408 , Thrasybulus remained in command , but his actions are difficult to trace . He appears to have spent much of the time campaigning in Thrace , recapturing cities for the empire and restoring the flow of tribute from the region . In 407 BC , he was in command of a fleet sent to besiege Phocaea ; this siege had to be lifted , however , after the Spartans under Lysander defeated the main Athenian fleet at Notium . This defeat led to the downfall and exile of Alcibiades . Thrasybulus was either removed from command on the spot by Alcibiades or not reelected at the end of his term ; either way , he was out of office from then until the end of the war . 
 Thrasybulus did return to action , however , at the Battle of Arginusae in 406 BC . There , he was a trierarch in the Athenian relief fleet sent out to assist the admiral Conon , who was blockaded at Mytilene . That battle was a major Athenian victory ; after the battle , the generals in charge took the majority of their ships to attack the Peloponnesian fleet blockading Conon , leaving behind a force under Thrasybulus and his fellow trierarch Theramenes to rescue the survivors . This operation was thwarted , however , by a sudden storm which drove the rescue force to land , and a great number of Athenians — estimates as to the precise figure have ranged from near 1 @,@ 000 to as many as 5 @,@ 000 — drowned . The result was one of the great Athenian political scandals of the war , which culminated in a vicious debate between Theramenes and the generals at Athens over who was to blame for the disaster , after which the generals were executed . Thrasybulus , for unknown reasons , seems to have had very little involvement in this debate . 
 = = The Thirty Tyrants = = 
 In 404 BC , following a defeat at the Battle of Aegospotami , Athens was forced to surrender , ending the Peloponnesian War . In the wake of this surrender , the Spartan <unk> Lysander imposed a strict oligarchic government on Athens , which came to be known as the Thirty Tyrants . This government executed a number of citizens and deprived all but a few of their rights , eventually growing so extreme that even the moderate oligarch Theramenes fell afoul of the government and was executed . Fearing for their lives , numerous Athenians fled to Thebes . 
 Thrasybulus had been one of the first to oppose the oligarchy and had been exiled to Thebes shortly after its rise to power . There , he was welcomed and supported by the Theban leader Ismenias and his followers , who assisted him in preparing for a return to Athens . In 403 BC , he led a party of 70 exiles to seize Phyle , a defensible location on the border of Attica and Boeotia . A storm prevented the forces of the Thirty from expelling him immediately , and numerous exiles flocked to join him . When the Spartan garrison of Athens , supported by Athenian cavalry , was sent out to oppose him , Thrasybulus led his force , now 700 strong , in a surprise daybreak raid on their camp , killing 120 Spartans and putting the rest to flight . 
 Five days later , Thrasybulus led his force , which had already grown to the point that he could leave 200 men at Phyle while taking 1 @,@ 000 with him , to Piraeus , the port of Athens . There , he fortified the <unk> , a hill that dominated the port , and awaited the coming attack . The forces of the Thirty , supported by the Spartan garrison , marched to Piraeus to attack him . Thrasybulus and his men were outnumbered 5 to 1 , but held a superior position and presumably benefited from consternation amidst the ranks of the oligarchs . In the battle , the exiles put the oligarchic forces to flight , killing Critias , the leader of the Thirty . 
 After this victory , the remainder of the Thirty fled to Eleusis , and the oligarchs within Athens began squabbling amongst themselves . New leaders were selected , but were unable to deal with Thrasybulus , and were forced to send to Sparta for help . From Sparta , however , came not the aggressive Lysander , but the more conservative Pausanias . Pausanias ' force narrowly defeated Thrasybulus ' men , but only with great effort , and , unwilling to push the issue , he arranged a settlement between the forces of Thrasybulus and the oligarchs in the city . Democracy was restored , while those oligarchs who wished to do so withdrew to Eleusis . In power , Thrasybulus pushed through a law which pardoned all but a few of the oligarchs , preventing a brutal reprisal by the victorious democrats . For his actions , Thrasybulus was awarded an olive crown by his countrymen . 
 = = Later actions = = 
 In the revived democracy established in 403 BC , Thrasybulus became a major and prestigious leader , although he was soon superseded at the head of the state by <unk> . Thrasybulus seems to have advocated a more radically democratic policy than the populace was willing to accept at the time ; he called for reinstating pay for political service , and sought to extend citizenship to all the metics and foreigners who had fought alongside him against the Thirty . He was initially cautious about offending Sparta , but , when Persian support became available at the start of the Corinthian War , he became an advocate of aggressive action , and about this time seems to have regained his preeminence in Athenian politics . He initiated the rebuilding of the long walls , which had been demolished at the end of the Peloponnesian War , and commanded the Athenian contingents at Nemea and Coronea ; these two defeats , however , damaged his political stature , and he was replaced at the head of the state by Conon , whose victory at Cnidus had ended Sparta 's dreams of naval empire . 
 Thrasybulus largely faded from view for several years as Conon led the Athenian fleet to a series of victories , but in 392 BC Conon was imprisoned by the Persian satrap Tiribazus while attending a peace conference at Sardis ; although released , he died in Cyprus without returning to Athens . Thrasybulus , leading the faction that sought to reject the peace offer , regained his position atop Athenian politics . In 389 BC , he led a force of triremes to levy tribute from cities around the Aegean and support Rhodes , where a democratic government was struggling against Sparta . On this campaign , Thrasybulus relaid much of the framework for an Athenian empire on 5th century BC model ; he captured Byzantium , imposed a duty on ships passing through the Hellespont , and collected tribute from many of the islands of the Aegean . In 388 BC , as he led his fleet South through the Aegean , his soldiers ravaged the fields of Aspendus . In retaliation , the <unk> raided the Athenian camp by night ; Thrasybulus was killed in his tent . 
 The gains that Thrasybulus made on this campaign were soon reversed , however , by Persian intervention . Alarmed by the sudden reappearance of something resembling the Athenian empire that had driven them from the Aegean in the 5th century BC , the Persians began supporting Sparta , and a Persian fleet was soon in the Hellespont , threatening Athens ' grain supply . Peace was quickly concluded , on the same terms that the Athenians had rejected in 392 BC ; Thrasybulus ' campaigns , though impressively successful in spreading Athenian influence , had little long @-@ term effect , since they prompted Persia to force the Athenians to give up what they had gained . 
 = = Historical opinions = = 
 Thrasybulus has been widely recognized as a successful military commander . Most of the major ancient historians assigned credit for the dramatic Athenian victories of 411 BC to Alcibiades , but a few , such as Cornelius Nepos , pointed to the decisive role that was played in these battles by Thrasybulus . More recent historians , such as Donald Kagan and R. J. Buck , have tended to support this analysis , pointing to the role that Thrasybulus played in crafting Athenian strategy in all these battles , and specifically to the decisive action he took at Cyzicus , which saved Alcibiades 's force from being swamped , and turned a potential Athenian defeat into a stunning victory . R. J. Buck has suggested that Thrasybulus suffered from an " anti @-@ democratic tradition of ancient historiography , " which led many writers to minimize the accomplishments of one of democracy 's strongest advocates . 
 Throughout his career , Thrasybulus defended democracy at Athens against its opponents . He was one of the few prominent citizens whom the Samians trusted to defend their democracy , and whom the fleet selected to lead it through the troubled time of conflict with the 400 . Later , in his opposition to the Thirty Tyrants , Thrasybulus risked his life when few others would , and his actions were responsible for the quick restoration of democracy . In the words of Cornelius Nepos , 
 This most noble action , then , is entirely Thrasybulus 's ; for when the Thirty Tyrants , appointed by the Lacedaemonians , kept Athens oppressed in a state of slavery , and had partly banished from their country , and partly put to death , a great number of the citizens whom fortune had spared in the war , and had divided their confiscated property among themselves , he was not only the first , but the only man at the commencement , to declare war against them . 
 John Fine points to the clemency shown by Thrasybulus and other democrats in the wake of their victory over the Thirty as a key contribution towards reestablishing stable government in Athens . While many city @-@ states throughout the Greek world broke down into vicious cycles of civil war and reprisal , Athens remained united and democratic , without interruption , until near the end of the 3rd century BC , and democracy , albeit interrupted several times by conquest or revolution , continued there until Roman times , several centuries later . 
 The second @-@ century travel writer Pausanias called Thrasybulus " the greatest of all famous Athenians " for overthrowing the Thirty as well as his other exploits , making clear that he thought him greater than even Pericles . 
 Thus Thrasybulus won praise as an Athenian patriot and staunch , principled democrat . He has been criticized by modern historians , however , for failing to recognize that Athens in the 4th century BC could not sustain an imperial policy . R. J. Buck suggests that Thrasybulus , who came of age in the heady days when the democracy and empire under Pericles were at their fullest extent , never accepted that the devastating losses Athens had suffered in the Peloponnesian War made the return of those times impossible . 
 Thrasybulus was a capable general , particularly successful in naval warfare , and a competent speaker , but was frequently overshadowed or pushed aside by more charismatic or spectacularly successful leaders . Buck has compared him to Winston Churchill , another advocate of imperial policies who held fast to his beliefs after the tide of history had turned against him , and who rose to his peak of prominence at his country 's darkest hour . Throughout his two decades of prominence , whether in or out of leadership , Thrasybulus remained a steady advocate of traditional Athenian imperial democracy , and he died fighting for the same cause he was advocating on his first appearance in 411 . 
 = = = Ancient sources = = = 
 Demosthenes . " On the Embassy " . The Public Orations of Demosthenes . Trans . Arthur Wallace Pickard . Wikisource . 
 Diodorus Siculus , Library From the Perseus Project . Translated by C.H. Oldfather . 
 Cornelius Nepos , Lives From <unk> Translated by the Rev. John Selby Watson , MA . 
 Thucydides . History of the Peloponnesian War . Trans . Richard Crawley . Wikisource . 
 Xenophon ( c . 1890s ) . Hellenica . Trans . Henry Graham <unk> . Wikisource . 
 = = = Modern sources = = = 
 Buck , R. J. ( 1998 ) . Thrasybulus and the Athenian Democracy : the Life of an Athenian Statesman . Historia <unk> 120 . Stuttgart : Franz Steiner . ISBN 3 @-@ 515 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 <unk> , Maximilian Otto Bismarck ( 1911 ) . " Thrasybulus " . In Chisholm , Hugh . Encyclopædia Britannica 26 ( 11th ed . ) . Cambridge University Press . 
 Fine , J. V. A. ( 1983 ) . The Ancient Greeks : A Critical History . Cambridge : Harvard University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 674 @-@ 03314 @-@ 0 . 
 Hornblower , S. ; Spawforth , A. ( 2003 ) . The Oxford Classical Dictionary . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Kagan , D. ( 2003 ) . The Peloponnesian War . New York : Penguin Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 670 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 = ( sic ) nesses = 
 ( sic ) nesses is the fourth video album by American metal band Slipknot , released on September 28 , 2010 . The double @-@ disc release features a recording of their headlining performance at the 2009 Download Festival , along with a 45 @-@ minute behind the scenes documentary created by percussionist Shawn Crahan , and the four music videos from All Hope Is Gone . It is the band 's first release since the death of the band 's former bassist Paul Gray and is dedicated in his memory . On September 22 , 2010 , ( sic ) nesses premiered in select theaters across the United States . Entrance to the screenings were free and it included free giveaways . Reception was generally positive , with Artistdirect rewarding the album a perfect five out of five stars , and Blabbermouth.net giving the album eight and a half out of ten stars . The album peaked at number one on four charts : the Australian Top 40 Music DVD Chart , the Finland Top10 Music DVDs , the UK Top10 Music DVD Chart , and the US Top Music Video Chart . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 ( sic ) nesses was recorded when Slipknot headlined the Download Festival in front of 80 @,@ 000 fans on June 13 , 2009 . The show at Donington Park was filmed with 30 cameras . The 45 @-@ minute film audible visions of ( sic ) nesses features Slipknot during and in @-@ between gigs on the All Hope Is Gone World Tour . Shawn Crahan stated that , " Going in and filming this , it just seemed like there was no way it could fail . It was going to be in the top five best shows of our careers , and that 's basically what it was : we got off the stage and all nine of us felt the same thing , we knew that we destroyed 80 @,@ 000 people . Watching it back just brings tears to my eyes . " 
 The DVD was released as a dedication to the band 's former bassist Paul Gray , who died of an accidental drug overdose on May 24 , 2010 . Roadrunner Records said the following about the DVD 's release : " It makes perfect sense that the band … would release ( sic ) nesses … All Slipknot shows are memorable , but this one is particularly memorable , as the band blasted through hits from all of their Platinum albums . On stage is Slipknot in its most natural state and ( sic ) nesses will put you in the front row . " 
 The live performance of " Psychosocial " was premiered on MSN in mid @-@ September . The DVD premiered in a collection of theaters across the United States on September 22 , 2010 , prior to its commercial release . Screenings included Grauman 's Chinese Theatre , Carmike Cinemas , Krikorian Theaters , Rave Motion Pictures , <unk> Cinemas , Studio Movie Grill , Bow Tie , <unk> Theatres , Alamo Drafthouse Cinema , <unk> Entertainment , Cleveland Cinemas , Cinema Café and the Regent Theater . Crahan attended the New York event on September 27 as part of the promotion . <unk> were free and several prizes were given away randomly throughout the night at all three events . Crahan stated that " ( sic ) nesses was one of the single hardest pieces of art for us to complete , given the circumstances ... " It was mixed at Miloco Studios in London , England , and mastered at Sterling Sound in New York . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The album 's reception was generally positive . The album 's description on <unk> stated : " The performance was absolutely electric , in typical Slipknot fashion , especially since it came hot on the heels of one of the strongest years in Slipknot ’ s illustrious career . " Scott Alisoglu from Blabbermouth.net gave the album eight and a half out of ten stars . He called it the " ultimate tribute " to bassist Paul Gray . He also noted that things like display of controlled echos , the 80 @,@ 000 person audience , their energetic performances of songs from their first album , and the " unforgettable anthems " like " Before I Forget " and " Psychosocial " came together to " remind naysayers and fans alike that Slipknot has a dearth of rivals when it comes to live performance . " In its first week the album sold 9 @,@ 300 copies in the United States . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The DVD 's contents can be verified from the band 's official website and the album 's notes . A Blu @-@ ray version was released on July 31 , 2012 . 
 = = = Disc 1 = = = 
 Short Film 
 Audible Visions of ( sic ) <unk> a 40 minute film directed by M. Shawn Crahan 
 " Paul Gray Tribute " 
 = = = Disc 2 = = = 
 = Priory of Sion = 
 The <unk> de Sion , translated from French as Priory of Sion , is the name given to a fringe fraternal organisation , founded and dissolved in France in 1956 ( abiding by the 1901 French Law of Associations ) by Pierre Plantard as part of a hoax . In the 1960s , Plantard created a fictitious history for that organization , describing it as a secret society founded by Godfrey of Bouillon on Mount Zion in the Kingdom of Jerusalem in 1099 , conflating it with a genuine historical monastic order , the Abbey of Our Lady of Mount Zion . In Plantard 's version , the priory was devoted to installing a secret bloodline of the Merovingian dynasty on the thrones of France and the rest of Europe . This myth was expanded upon and popularised by the 1982 pseudohistorical book The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail and later claimed as factual in the preface of the 2003 novel The Da Vinci Code . 
 After becoming a cause célèbre from the late 1960s to the 1980s , the mythical Priory of Sion was exposed as a <unk> created by Plantard as a framework for his claim of being the Great Monarch prophesied by Nostradamus . Evidence presented in support of its historical existence and activities before 1956 was discovered to have been forged and then planted in various locations around France by Plantard and his accomplices . Nevertheless , many conspiracy theorists still persist in believing that the Priory of Sion is an age @-@ old cabal that conceals a subversive secret . 
 The Priory of Sion myth has been exhaustively debunked by journalists and scholars as one of the great hoaxes of the 20th century . Some skeptics have expressed concern that the proliferation and popularity of books , websites and films inspired by this hoax have contributed to the subject of conspiracy theories , pseudohistory and other confusions becoming more mainstream . Others are troubled by the romantic reactionary ideology unwittingly promoted in these works . 
 = = History = = 
 The fraternal organisation was founded in the town of Annemasse , Haute @-@ Savoie in eastern France in 1956 . The 1901 French law of Associations required that the Priory of Sion be registered with the government ; although the statutes and the registration Documents are dated 7 May 1956 , the registration took place at the subprefecture of Saint @-@ Julien @-@ en @-@ Genevois on 25 June 1956 and this was announced in the Journal Officiel de la République Française on 20 July 1956 . The Headquarters of the Priory of Sion and its journal Circuit were based in the apartment of Plantard , in a social housing block known as Sous @-@ <unk> newly constructed in 1956 . The founders and signatories inscribed with their real names and aliases were Pierre Plantard , also known as " Chyren " , and André Bonhomme , also known as " <unk> Bellas " . Bonhomme was the President while Plantard was the Secretary General . The registration documents also included the names of Jean <unk> as the Vice @-@ President and Armand <unk> as the Treasurer . The offices of the Priory of Sion and its journal Circuit were located at Plantard 's apartment . The choice of the name " Sion " was based on a popular local feature , a hill south of Annemasse in France , known as Mont Sion , where the founders intended to establish a retreat center . The accompanying title to the name was " <unk> d <unk> et Règles <unk> d 'Union <unk> et <unk> " : this subtitle forms the acronym <unk> and translates in English as Chivalry of Catholic Rules and Institutions of Independent and Traditionalist Union " . 
 The statutes of the Priory of Sion indicate its purpose was to allow and encourage members to engage in studies and mutual aid . The articles of the association expressed the goal of creating a Traditionalist Catholic chivalric order . Article 7 of the statutes of the Priory of Sion stated that its members were expected " to carry out good deeds , to help the Roman Catholic Church , teach the truth , defend the weak and the oppressed " . Towards the end of 1956 the association had planned to forge partnerships with the local Catholic Church of the area which would have involved a school bus service run by both the Priory of Sion and the church of Saint @-@ Joseph in Annemasse . Plantard is described as the President of the Tenants ' Association of Annemasse in the issues of Circuit . 
 The bulk of the activities of the Priory of Sion , however , bore no resemblance to the objectives as outlined in its statutes : Circuit , the official journal of the Priory of Sion , was indicated as a news bulletin of an " organisation for the defence of the rights and the freedom of affordable housing " rather than for the promotion of chivalry @-@ inspired charitable work . The first issue of the journal is dated 27 May 1956 , and , in total , twelve issues appeared . Some of the articles took a political position in the local council elections . Others criticised and even attacked real @-@ estate developers of Annemasse . 
 According to a letter written by Léon <unk> the Mayor of Annemasse in 1956 , contained in the folder holding the 1956 Statutes of the Priory of Sion in the subprefecture of Saint @-@ Julien @-@ en @-@ Genevois , Plantard was given a six @-@ month sentence in 1953 for fraud . 
 The formally registered association was dissolved some time after October 1956 but intermittently revived for different reasons by Plantard between 1961 and 1993 , though in name and on paper only . The Priory of Sion is considered dormant by the subprefecture because it has indicated no activities since 1956 . According to French law , subsequent references to the Priory bear no legal relation to that of 1956 and no one , other than the original signatories , is entitled to use its name in an official capacity . André Bonhomme played no part in the association after 1956 . He officially resigned in 1973 when he heard that Plantard was linking his name with the association . In light of Plantard 's death in 2000 , there is no one who is currently alive who has official permission to use the name . 
 In 2002 , Gino Sandri ( former secretary to Pierre Plantard ) announced the revival of Priory of Sion . 
 = = Myth = = 
 = = = Plantard 's plot = = = 
 Plantard set out to have the Priory of Sion perceived as a prestigious esoteric Christian chivalric order , whose members would be people of influence in the fields of finance , politics and philosophy , devoted to installing the " Great Monarch " , prophesied by Nostradamus , on the throne of France . Plantard 's choice of the pseudonym " Chyren " was a reference to " Chyren <unk> " , Nostradamus 's anagram for the name for this eschatological figure . 
 Between 1961 and 1984 , Plantard contrived a mythical pedigree for the Priory of Sion claiming that it was the offshoot of a real Roman Catholic religious order housed in the Abbey of Our Lady of Mount Zion , which had been founded in the Kingdom of Jerusalem during the First Crusade in 1099 and later absorbed by the Jesuits in 1617 . The mistake is often made that this Abbey of Sion was a Priory of Sion , but there is a difference between an abbey and a priory . Calling his original 1956 group " Priory of Sion " presumably gave Plantard the later idea to claim that his organisation had been historically founded by crusading knight Godfrey of Bouillon on Mount Zion near Jerusalem during the Middle Ages . 
 Furthermore , Plantard was inspired by a 1960 magazine Les Cahiers de l 'Histoire to center his personal genealogical claims , as found in the " Priory of Sion documents " , on the Merovingian king Dagobert II , who had been assassinated in the 7th century . He also adopted " Et in Arcadia ego ... " , a slightly altered version of a Latin phrase that most famously appears as the title of two paintings by Nicolas Poussin , as the motto of both his family and the Priory of Sion , because the tomb which appears in these paintings resembled one in the Les <unk> area near Rennes @-@ le @-@ Château . This tomb would become a symbol for his dynastic claims as the last legacy of the Merovingians on the territory of <unk> , left to remind the select few who have been initiated into these mysteries that the " lost king " , Dagobert II , would figuratively come back in the form of a hereditary pretender . 
 To give credibility to the fabricated lineage and pedigree , Plantard and his friend , Philippe de Chérisey , needed to create " independent evidence " . So during the 1960s , they created and deposited a series of false documents , the most famous of which was entitled Dossiers Secrets d 'Henri Lobineau ( " The Secret Files of Henri Lobineau " ) , at the Bibliothèque nationale de France in Paris . During the same decade , Plantard commissioned de Chérisey to forge two medieval parchments . These parchments contained encrypted messages that referred to the Priory of Sion . They adapted , and used to their advantage , the earlier false claims put forward by Noël <unk> that a Catholic priest named Bérenger Saunière had supposedly discovered ancient parchments inside a pillar while renovating his church in Rennes @-@ le @-@ Château in 1891 . Inspired by the popularity of media reports and books in France about the discovery of the Dead Sea scrolls in the West Bank , they hoped this same theme would attract attention to their parchments . Their version of the parchments was intended to prove Plantard 's claims about the Priory of Sion being a medieval society that was the source of the " underground stream " of esotericism in Europe . 
 Plantard then enlisted the aid of author Gérard de Sède to write a book based on his unpublished manuscript and forged parchments , alleging that Saunière had discovered a link to a hidden treasure . The 1967 book L 'or de Rennes , ou La vie <unk> de Bérenger Saunière , <unk> de Rennes @-@ le @-@ Château ( " The Gold of Rennes , or The Strange Life of Bérenger Saunière , Priest of Rennes @-@ le @-@ Château " ) , which was later published in paperback under the title Le Trésor Maudit de Rennes @-@ le @-@ Château ( " The Accursed Treasure of Rennes @-@ le @-@ Château " ) in 1968 , became a popular read in France . It included copies of the found parchments ( the originals were of course never produced ) , though it did not provide the decoded hidden texts contained within them . One of the Latin texts in the parchments was copied from the Novum Testamentum , an attempted restoration of the Vulgate by John Wordsworth and Henry White . The other text was copied from the Codex Bezae . Based on the wording used , the versions of the Latin texts found in the parchments can be shown to have been copied from books first published in 1889 and 1895 , which is problematic considering that de Sède 's book was trying to make a case that these documents were centuries old . 
 In 1969 , English actor and science @-@ fiction scriptwriter Henry Lincoln became intrigued after reading Le Trésor Maudit . He discovered one of the encrypted messages , which read " À Dagobert II Roi et à Sion est ce <unk> , et il est là mort " ( " To Dagobert II , King , and to Sion belongs this treasure and he is there dead " ) . This was possibly an allusion to the tomb and shrine of Sigebert IV , a real or mythical son of Dagobert II which would not only prove that the Merovingian dynasty did not end with the death of the king , but that the Priory of Sion has been entrusted with the duty to protect his relics like a treasure . Lincoln expanded on the conspiracy theories , writing his own books on the subject , and inspiring and presenting three BBC Two Chronicle documentaries between 1972 and 1979 about the alleged mysteries of the Rennes @-@ le @-@ Château area . In response to a tip from Gérard de Sède , Lincoln claims he was also the one who discovered the Dossiers Secrets , a series of planted genealogies which appeared to further confirm the link with the extinct Merovingian bloodline . The documents claimed that the Priory of Sion and the Knights Templar were two fronts of one unified organisation with the same leadership until 1188 . 
 Letters in existence dating from the 1960s written by Plantard , de Chérisey and de Sède to each other confirm that the three were engaging in an out @-@ and @-@ out hoax . The letters describe schemes to combat criticisms of their various allegations and ways they would make up new allegations to try to keep the hoax alive . These letters ( totalling over 100 ) are in the possession of French researcher Jean @-@ Luc <unk> , who has also retained the original envelopes . A letter later discovered at the subprefecture of Saint @-@ Julien @-@ en @-@ Genevois also indicated that Plantard had a criminal conviction as a confidence trickster . 
 = = = The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail = = = 
 After reading Le Trésor Maudit , Lincoln persuaded BBC Two to devote three episodes in their Chronicle documentary series to the topic . These became quite popular and generated thousands of responses . Lincoln then joined forces with Michael Baigent and Richard Leigh for further research . This led them to the pseudohistorical Dossiers Secrets at the Bibliothèque nationale de France , which though alleging to portray hundreds of years of medieval history , were actually all written by Plantard and de Chérisey under the pseudonym of " Philippe <unk> du <unk> " . Unaware that the documents had been forged , Lincoln , Baigent and Leigh used them as a major source for their 1982 controversial non @-@ fiction book The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail , in which they presented the following myths as facts to support their hypotheses : 
 there is a secret society known as the Priory of Sion , which has a long history starting in 1099 , and had illustrious Grand Masters including Leonardo da Vinci and Isaac Newton ; 
 it created the Knights Templar as its military arm and financial branch ; and 
 it is devoted to installing the Merovingian dynasty , that ruled the Franks from 457 to 751 , on the thrones of France and the rest of Europe . 
 However , the authors re @-@ interpreted the Dossiers Secrets in the light of their own interest in undermining the Roman Catholic Church 's institutional reading of Judeo @-@ Christian history . Contrary to Plantard 's initial Franco @-@ <unk> claim that the Merovingians were only descended from the Tribe of Benjamin , they asserted that : 
 the Priory of Sion protects Merovingian dynasts because they may be the lineal descendants of the historical Jesus and his alleged wife , Mary Magdalene , traced further back to King David ; 
 the legendary Holy Grail is simultaneously the womb of saint Mary Magdalene and the sacred royal bloodline she gave birth to ; and 
 the Church tried to kill off all remnants of this bloodline and their supposed guardians , the Cathars and the Templars , so popes could hold the episcopal throne through the apostolic succession of Peter without fear of it ever being usurped by an antipope from the hereditary succession of Mary Magdalene . 
 The authors therefore concluded that the modern goals of the Priory of Sion are : 
 the public revelation of the tomb and shrine of Sigebert IV as well as the lost treasure of the Temple in Jerusalem , which supposedly contains genealogical records that prove the Merovingian dynasty was of the Davidic line , to facilitate Merovingian restoration in France ; 
 the re @-@ institutionalization of chivalry and the promotion of pan @-@ European nationalism ; 
 the establishment of a theocratic " United States of Europe " : a Holy European Empire politically and religiously unified through the imperial cult of a Merovingian Great Monarch who occupies both the throne of Europe and the Holy See ; and 
 the actual governance of Europe residing with the Priory of Sion through a one @-@ party European Parliament . 
 The authors also incorporated the antisemitic and anti @-@ Masonic tract known as The Protocols of the Elders of Zion into their story , concluding that it was actually based on the master plan of the Priory of Sion . They presented it as the most persuasive piece of evidence for the existence and activities of the Priory of Sion by arguing that : 
 the original text on which the published version of The Protocols of the Elders of Zion was based had nothing to do with Judaism or an " international Jewish conspiracy " . It issued from a Masonic body practicing the Scottish Rite which incorporated the word " Zion " in its name ; 
 the original text was not intended to be released publicly , but was a program for gaining control of Freemasonry as part of a strategy to infiltrate and reorganise church and state according to esoteric Christian principles ; 
 after a failed attempt to gain influence in the court of Tsar Nicholas II of Russia , Sergei <unk> changed the original text to forge an inflammatory tract in 1903 to discredit the esoteric clique around <unk> by implying they were Judaeo @-@ Masonic conspirators ; and 
 some esoteric Christian elements in the original text were ignored by <unk> and hence remained unchanged in the antisemitic canard he published . 
 In reaction to this <unk> synthesis of investigative journalism with religious conspiracism , many secular conspiracy theorists added the Priory of Sion to their list of secret societies collaborating or competing to manipulate political happenings from behind the scenes in their bid for world domination . Some occultists speculated that the emergence of the Priory of Sion and Plantard closely follows The Prophecies by M. Michel Nostradamus ( unaware that Plantard was intentionally trying to fulfill them ) . Fringe Christian eschatologists countered that it was a fulfilment of prophecies found in the Book of Revelation and further proof of an anti @-@ Christian conspiracy of epic proportions . 
 However , professional historians and scholars from related fields do not accept The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail as a serious dissertation . 
 French authors like Franck Marie ( 1978 ) , Pierre <unk> ( 1985 ) , ( 1988 ) , Jean @-@ Luc <unk> ( 1994 ) , and more recently Marie @-@ France <unk> and Frédéric Lenoir ( 2004 ) , Massimo Introvigne ( 2005 ) , Jean @-@ Jacques Bedu ( 2005 ) , and Bernardo Sanchez Da Motta ( 2005 ) , have never taken Plantard and the Priory of Sion as seriously as Lincoln , Baigent and Leigh . They eventually concluded that it was all a hoax , outlining in detail the reasons for their verdict , and giving detailed evidence that the Holy Blood authors had not reported comprehensively . They imply that this evidence had been ignored by Lincoln , Baigent , and Leigh to bolster the mythical version of the Priory 's history that was developed by Plantard during the early 1960s after meeting author Gérard de Sède . 
 = = = The Messianic Legacy = = = 
 In 1986 , Lincoln , Baigent and Leigh published The Messianic Legacy , a sequel to The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail . The authors assert that the Priory of Sion is not only the archetypal cabal but an ideal repository of the cultural legacy of Jewish <unk> that could end the “ crisis of meaning ” within the Western world by providing a Merovingian sacred king as a messianic figure in which the West and , by extension , humanity can place its trust . However , the authors are led to believe by Plantard that he has resigned as Grand Master of the Priory of Sion in 1984 and that the organisation has since gone underground in reaction to both an internal power struggle between Plantard and an “ Anglo @-@ American contingent ” as well as a campaign of character assassination against Plantard in the press and books written by skeptics . 
 Although Lincoln , Baigent and Leigh remain convinced that the pre @-@ 1956 history of the Priory of Sion is true , they confess to the possibility that all of Plantard 's claims about a post @-@ 1956 Priory of Sion were part of an elaborate hoax to build a cult of personality and cult of intelligence around himself in French esoteric circles . 
 = = = Revised myth = = = 
 In 1989 , Plantard tried but failed to salvage his reputation and agenda as a <unk> in esoteric circles by claiming that the Priory of Sion had actually been founded in 1681 at Rennes @-@ le @-@ Château , and was focused more on harnessing the paranormal power of ley lines and sunrise lines , and a promontory called " Roc Noir " ( Black Rock ) in the area , than installing a Merovingian pretender on the restored throne of France . In 1990 , Plantard revised himself by claiming he was only descended from a cadet branch of the line of Dagobert II , while arguing that the direct descendant was really Otto von Habsburg . 
 = = = Pelat Affair = = = 
 In September 1993 , while investigative judge Thierry Jean @-@ Pierre was investigating the activities of multi @-@ millionaire Roger @-@ Patrice Pelat in the context of the <unk> @-@ Triangle Affair , he was informed that Pelat may have once been Grand Master of an esoteric society known as the Priory of Sion . Pelat 's name had been on Plantard 's list of Grand Masters since 1989 . In fact , Pelat had died in 1989 , while he was being indicted for insider trading . Following a long established pattern of using dead people 's names , Plantard " recruited " the " initiate " Pelat soon after his death and included him as the most recent Priory of Sion Grand Master . Plantard had first claimed that Pelat had been a Grand Master in a Priory of Sion pamphlet dated 8 March 1989 , then claimed it again later in a 1990 issue of <unk> , the revived publication of Alpha <unk> , a pseudo @-@ chivalric order created by Plantard in Vichy France to support the " National Revolution " . 
 Pelat had been a friend of François Mitterrand , then President of France , and at the centre of a scandal involving French Prime Minister Pierre <unk> . As an investigative judge , Jean @-@ Pierre could not dismiss any information brought to his attention pertaining to the case , especially if it might have led to a scandal similar to the one implicating an illegal Masonic lodge named Propaganda Due in the 1982 Banco <unk> bank failure in Italy , Jean @-@ Pierre ordered a search of Plantard 's home . The search turned up a hoard of false documents , including some proclaiming Plantard the true king of France . Plantard admitted under oath that he had fabricated everything , including Pelat 's involvement with the Priory of Sion . Plantard was threatened with legal action by the Pelat family and therefore disappeared to his house in southern France . He was 74 years old at the time . Nothing more was heard of him until he died in Paris on 3 February 2000 . 
 = = = Sandri revival = = = 
 On 27 December 2002 , an open letter announced the revival of the Priory of Sion as an integral traditionalist esoteric society , which stated that : " The <unk> of Saint @-@ Denis , Millau , Geneva and Barcelona are fully operative . According to the Tradition , the first Commanderie is under the direction of a woman " , claiming there were 9 @,@ 841 members . It was signed by Gino Sandri ( who claims to be Plantard 's former private secretary ) under the title of General Secretary , and by " P. Plantard " ( Le <unk> , G. Chyren ) . Sandri is a well @-@ versed occultist who has spent his life infiltrating esoteric societies only to get expelled from them . After interviewing Sandri , independent researcher Laurent <unk> <unk> wrote : 
 I ’ ve personally met this Gino Sandri on one occasion , and I had the opportunity to have a really good talk with him , but I think that he 's simply seeking attention . He seemed to me to be something of a <unk> , which would certainly be an excellent qualification for being Secretary of the Priory of Sion . During our conversation he said something in passing that I found quite extraordinary . He said , “ Ultimately , what is the Priory of Sion ? It 's nothing more than a well @-@ known brand name , but with goodness knows what behind it ? ” He gave a good brief account of the phenomenon of the Priory of Sion . Thanks to Dan Brown , hundreds of millions of people now have “ brand awareness ” , and several million of them seem to take it seriously . 
 = = = The Da Vinci Code = = = 
 As a result of Dan Brown 's best @-@ selling 2003 conspiracy fiction novel The Da Vinci Code and the subsequent 2006 film , there was a new level of public interest in the Priory of Sion . Brown 's novel promotes the mythical version of the Priory but departs from the ultimate conclusions presented in The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail . Rather than plotting to create a Federal Europe ruled by a Merovingian sacred king descended from the historical Jesus , the Priory of Sion initiates its members into a mystery cult seeking to restore the feminist theology necessary for a complete understanding of early Christianity , which was supposedly suppressed by the Roman Catholic Church . The author has presented this speculation as fact in his non @-@ fiction preface , as well as in his public appearances and interviews . 
 Furthermore , in their 1987 sequel The Messianic Legacy , Lincoln , Baigent and Leigh suggested that there was a current conflict between the Priory of Sion and the Sovereign Military Order of Malta , which they speculated might have originated from an earlier rivalry between the Knights Templar and Knights Hospitaller during the Crusades . However , for the dramatic structure of The Da Vinci Code , Brown chose the controversial Roman Catholic prelature Opus Dei as the <unk> @-@ like nemesis of the Priory of Sion , despite the fact that no author had ever argued that there is a conflict between these two groups . 
 = = = The Sion Revelation = = = 
 Further conspiracy theories were reported in the 2006 non @-@ fiction book The Sion Revelation : The Truth About the Guardians of Christ 's Sacred Bloodline by Lynn <unk> and Clive Prince ( authors of the 1997 non @-@ fiction book The Templar Revelation , the principal source for Dan Brown 's claims about hidden messages in the work of Leonardo da Vinci ) . They accepted that the pre @-@ 1956 history of the Priory of Sion was a hoax created by Plantard , and that his claim that he was a Merovingian dynast was a lie . However , they insist that this was part of a complex red herring intended to distract the public from the hidden agenda of Plantard and his " controllers " . They argue that the Priory of Sion was a front organisation for one of the many crypto @-@ political societies which have been plotting to create a " United States of Europe " in line with French occultist Alexandre Saint @-@ Yves d <unk> 's <unk> vision of an ideal form of government . 
 = = = Bloodline movie = = = 
 The 2008 documentary Bloodline by Bruce Burgess , a filmmaker with an interest in paranormal claims , expands on the " Jesus bloodline " hypothesis and other elements of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail . Accepting as valid the testimony of an amateur archaeologist codenamed " Ben <unk> " relating to his discoveries made in the vicinity of Rennes @-@ le @-@ Château since 1999 ; Burgess claims Ben has found the treasure of Bérenger Saunière : a mummified corpse , which they believe is Mary Magdalene , in an underground tomb they claim is connected to both the Knights Templar and the Priory of Sion . In the film , Burgess interviews several people with alleged connections to the Priory of Sion , including a Gino Sandri and Nicolas Haywood . A book by one of the documentary 's researchers , Rob Howells , entitled Inside the Priory of Sion : Revelations from the World 's Most Secret Society - Guardians of the Bloodline of Jesus presented the version of the Priory of Sion as given in the 2008 documentary , which contained several erroneous assertions , such as the claim that Plantard believed in the Jesus bloodline hypothesis . On 21 March 2012 , Ben <unk> confessed and apologised on Podcast interview ( using his real name Bill Wilkinson ) that everything to do with the tomb and related artifacts was a hoax ; revealing that the actual tomb was now destroyed , being part of a full sized set located in a warehouse in England . 
 = = Alleged Grand Masters = = 
 The mythical Priory of Sion was supposedly led by a " <unk> " , an Old French word for a navigator , which means Grand Master in their internal esoteric nomenclature . The following list of Grand Masters is derived from the Dossiers Secrets d 'Henri Lobineau compiled by Plantard under the nom de plume of " Philippe <unk> du <unk> " in 1967 . All those named on this list had died before that date . All but two are also found on lists of alleged “ <unk> ” ( supreme heads ) and “ distinguished members ” of the Ancient Mystical Order <unk> Crucis which circulated in France at the time when Plantard was in touch with this Rosicrucian Order . Most of those named share the common thread of being known for having an interest in the occult or heresy . 
 The Dossiers Secrets asserted that the Priory of Sion and the Knights Templar always shared the same Grand Master until a schism occurred during the " Cutting of the elm " incident in 1188 . Following that event , the Grand Masters of the Priory of Sion are listed in French as being : 
 Jean de Gisors ( 1188 – 1220 ) 
 Marie de Saint @-@ Clair ( 1220 – 1266 ) 
 Guillaume de Gisors ( 1266 – 1307 ) 
 Edouard de Bar ( 1307 – 1336 ) 
 Jeanne de Bar ( 1336 – 1351 ) 
 Jean de Saint @-@ Clair ( 1351 – 1366 ) 
 Blanche d <unk> ( 1366 – 1398 ) 
 Nicolas Flamel ( 1398 – 1418 ) 
 René d 'Anjou ( 1418 – 1480 ) 
 <unk> de Bar ( 1480 – 1483 ) 
 Sandro <unk> ( 1483 – 1510 ) 
 Léonard de Vinci ( 1510 – 1519 ) 
 <unk> de Bourbon ( 1519 – 1527 ) 
 Ferdinand de Gonzague ( 1527 – 1575 ) 
 Louis de Nevers ( 1575 – 1595 ) 
 Robert Fludd ( 1595 – 1637 ) 
 J. Valentin Andrea ( 1637 – 1654 ) 
 Robert Boyle ( 1654 – 1691 ) 
 Isaac Newton ( 1691 – 1727 ) 
 Charles Radclyffe ( 1727 – 1746 ) 
 Charles de Lorraine ( 1746 – 1780 ) 
 Maximilian de Lorraine ( 1780 – 1801 ) 
 Charles Nodier ( 1801 – 1844 ) 
 Victor Hugo ( 1844 – 1885 ) 
 Claude Debussy ( 1885 – 1918 ) 
 Jean Cocteau ( 1918 – 1963 ) 
 A later document , Le Cercle d <unk> , identifies François <unk> @-@ Bourget , a prominent Traditionalist Catholic priest who Plantard had worked for as a sexton during World War II , as the Grand Master following Cocteau 's death . Plantard himself is later identified as the next Grand Master . 
 When the Dossiers Secrets were exposed as a forgery by French researchers , Plantard kept quiet . During his 1989 attempt to make a comeback and revive the Priory of Sion , Plantard sought to distance himself from the discredited first list , and published a second list of Priory Grand Masters , which included the names of the deceased Roger @-@ Patrice Pelat , and his own son Thomas Plantard de Saint @-@ Clair : 
 Jean @-@ Tim Negri d <unk> ( 1681 – 1703 ) 
 François d 'Hautpoul ( 1703 – 1726 ) 
 André @-@ Hercule de Fleury ( 1726 – 1766 ) 
 Charles de Lorraine ( 1766 – 1780 ) 
 Maximilian de Lorraine ( 1780 – 1801 ) 
 Charles Nodier ( 1801 – 1844 ) 
 Victor Hugo ( 1844 – 1885 ) 
 Claude Debussy ( 1885 – 1918 ) 
 Jean Cocteau ( 1918 – 1963 ) 
 François <unk> ( 1963 – 1969 ) 
 John <unk> ( 1969 – 1981 ) 
 Pierre Plantard de Saint @-@ Clair ( 1981 ) 
 Philippe de Chérisey ( 1984 – 1985 ) 
 Roger @-@ Patrice Pelat ( 1985 – 1989 ) 
 Pierre Plantard de Saint @-@ Clair ( 1989 ) 
 Thomas Plantard de Saint @-@ Clair ( 1989 ) 
 In 1993 Plantard acknowledged that both lists were fraudulent when he was investigated by a judge during the Pelat Affair . 
 = Medicinal Fried Chicken = 
 " Medicinal Fried Chicken " is the third episode of the fourteenth season of the American animated television series South Park , and the 198th episode of the series overall . It originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on March 31 , 2010 . In the episode , the South Park KFC is replaced by a medical marijuana dispensary , and Cartman gets involved in black market selling the KFC chicken . Meanwhile , Randy Marsh gets a medical referral for marijuana by giving himself testicular cancer , which makes his testicles grow to grotesquely huge proportions . 
 The episode was written and directed by series co @-@ creator Trey Parker , and was rated TV @-@ MA in the United States . " Medicinal Fried Chicken " was first broadcast when Colorado was considering revising state medicinal marijuana laws and restricting fast food eateries . The episode provided social commentary against both types of laws , and suggested legislating lifestyle choices is ineffective and inevitably leads to black markets . 
 The Cartman drug market subplot was heavily influenced by the 1983 crime film Scarface , with Cartman resembling fictional drug lord Tony Montana and KFC founder Colonel Sanders as antagonist Alejandro Sosa . The episode also included several jokes about Pope Benedict XVI and the child sexual abuse scandals that had been surrounding the Catholic Church at the time . The concept of a former KFC restaurant becoming a marijuana dispensary come from a news story about a real marijuana dispensary in Palms , Los Angeles , built at a site formerly housing a Kentucky Fried Chicken franchise . 
 " Medicinal Fried Chicken " received generally positive reviews , with many commentators praising the social commentary and sophomoric testicle jokes alike . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was seen by 2 @.@ 99 million viewers , making it one of the most successful cable programs of the week . Although a KFC spokesman had a lukewarm response to " Medicinal Fried Chicken " , officials from the KFC hometown of Corbin , Kentucky were pleased the city was featured in the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 New state laws prohibiting fast food restaurants in low @-@ income neighborhoods result in the closure of all KFC eateries in Colorado , much to the dismay of Cartman , who is addicted to the food . When Randy learns that South Park 's KFC outlet is now a medical marijuana dispensary , he attempts to give himself cancer so he can get a doctor 's referral for marijuana ( after first gaining a clean bill of health from his doctor since he had assumed permits are given to the healthy ) . By irradiating his groin with a microwave oven , Randy successfully gives himself testicular cancer , making his testicles so large that he has to use a wheelbarrow to carry them . Randy obtains his medical referral and starts smoking marijuana regularly . Meanwhile , his testicles continue to grow to the point that he uses them as a space hopper for movement . Randy finds that larger testicles are attractive to women , so he encourages his friends to also get testicular cancer . The local doctor , unaware of the men 's self @-@ irradiation , becomes convinced that a recent change in South Park is responsible for the cancer outbreak . 
 Meanwhile , Cartman has literally started to go into withdrawal . He tries to attend a methadone clinic but is disappointed when he only receives a small paper cup full of gravy . Wandering the streets aimlessly , he meets a boy named Tommy , who introduces him to Billy Miller , a local boy who runs a small KFC cartel from his home . After Cartman demonstrates his ruthlessness against a cheating street dealer as well as paying his turf to Billy as promised , Billy sends him to Corbin to buy chicken directly from Colonel Sanders . Tommy accompanies Cartman , but he is revealed to be an informant for healthy foods advocate Jamie Oliver and executed by the Colonel 's men by hanging him from a helicopter exactly like the scene from Scarface . Cartman wins over the Colonel 's trust , but is warned to never betray him : " Just remember , I only tell you one time . Don 't fuck me , Eric . Don 't you ever try to fuck me . " Cartman eventually betrays Billy by telling Billy 's mother that he got an F on his social studies test , and takes over the cartel after Billy is grounded . The Colonel assigns Cartman the task of assassinating Oliver to prevent him from giving a speech in the United Nations . However , Cartman immediately disregards the Colonel 's order and starts eating much of the chicken supplied to him for distribution , putting the operation in danger . The Colonel , furious at Cartman 's betrayal , sends a squad of gunmen to kill him in retaliation . A firefight between the gunmen and police then breaks out at the cartel headquarters , and Billy 's mother is killed in the crossfire , but Cartman escapes unscathed . 
 Randy 's testicles grow so large that he is unable to fit through the doors of the marijuana dispensary . Prohibited by law from purchasing marijuana outside the premises , Randy and the other self @-@ irradiated men begin protesting for larger marijuana dispensary doors . As some politicians present start to discuss ways to get around the problem , the marijuana dispensary owner simply suggests that marijuana be legalized , arguing that " people are just abusing this medicinal system anyway . " The doctor interrupts by claiming the recent ban on KFC had led to the rise in testicular cancer because the chicken somehow prevented the illness . Colorado bans marijuana once again and reopens KFC , which has now been re @-@ branded as " Medicinal Fried Chicken . " Randy has his cancerous testicles removed and replaced with prosthetic ones , and has the skin from his removed enlarged scrotum made into a new coat for Sharon . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Medicinal Fried Chicken " was written by series co @-@ founders Trey Parker and Matt Stone , was directed by Parker , and was rated TV @-@ MA in the United States . It originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on March 31 , 2010 . The episode was first broadcast around the same time a great deal of discussion regarding marijuana laws had been generated in Colorado , where South Park is set and where Parker and fellow series co @-@ creator Matt Stone are from . The state had a medicinal marijuana law that allowed patients to obtain cards to purchase marijuana legally , but as of March 2010 , an average of 1 @,@ 000 people were applying for the cards each day , and many of the applications were of questionable validity and intent . As a result , state officials had been considering whether to revise the medicinal marijuana law , and " Medicinal Fried Chicken " was likely influenced by those discussions . The episode was also based on new Colorado health care laws that threatened to put restrictions on fast food restaurants in the state . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The fried chicken fast food restaurant KFC is featured prominently in " Medicinal Fried Chicken " . The concept of a former KFC restaurant becoming a medicinal marijuana store mirrors that of a real life marijuana dispensary in the Palms community of Los Angeles , California . The store , called Kind for Cures , is abbreviated to be called <unk> on its exterior signs and resembles the KFC fast food eateries in appearance , which has drawn national media attention to the marijuana dispensary . Colonel Harland Sanders , the founder of KFC who died in 1980 but is still used heavily in the chain 's advertisements , is portrayed as a living character in " Medicinal Fried Chicken " , although he is portrayed as a drug kingpin rather than an entrepreneur . Corbin , Kentucky , the home town of the first Kentucky Fried Chicken , is featured in the episode , though here it is portrayed as resembling a South American hacienda / <unk> . 
 " Medicinal Fried Chicken " includes several jokes about Pope Benedict XVI and the child sexual abuse scandals that surrounded the Catholic Church when the episode first aired . On three occasions , Cartman uses expanded and modified versions of idiomatic phrases , such as " is the Pope Catholic ? " , " does a bear shit in the woods ? " , and their combination , " does the Pope shit in the woods ? " , which are rhetorical questions used in response to a question where the answer is an emphatic yes . Thus , Cartman implies an affirmative response to questions such as : " Does the pope help pedophiles get away with their crimes ? " and " Is the Pope Catholic ? And making the world safe for pedophiles ? " These are references to allegations that Pope Benedict XVI ignored warnings and concealed evidence that Rev. Peter <unk> engaged in several acts of child sexual abuse under the future Pope 's watch as Archbishop of Munich and Freising in the 1980s . During another scene , Cartman says , " Does a bear crap in the woods ? And does the Pope crap on the broken lives and dreams of 200 deaf boys ? " This is a reference to reports that Pope Benedict XVI failed to act to reports that Father Lawrence C. Murphy molested up to 200 deaf boys during his time at the St John 's Catholic School for the Deaf . 
 Cartman 's involvement with the fried chicken black market closely mirrors the plot of Scarface , the 1983 crime film about the fictional drug lord Tony Montana . Cartman takes on the role of Montana , and Colonel Sanders resembles the drug kingpin antagonist , Alejandro Sosa . 
 In " Medicinal Fried Chicken " , Cartman travels to a foreign land to meet a dealer , usurps the illegal operation from his local boss , and is ultimately brought down because he becomes addicted to his own product . All of these plot points mirror the developments in Scarface and Montana 's rise and fall as a cocaine dealer . The episode includes several scenes that mirror scenes from Scarface , including one in which Cartman watches a boy get murdered on a helicopter , and the final scene in which Cartman 's compound is attacked by gunmen . The episode also includes references to the 1991 crime film New Jack City . 
 Colonel Sanders orders Cartman to stop Jamie Oliver , a British celebrity chef known for his campaign against fast food , as shown in his show Jamie Oliver 's Food Revolution . On March 23 , 2010 , Jamie Oliver made an appearance on the Late Show with David Letterman , just 8 days before the episode aired , in which Letterman argued against Oliver 's protest of fast food . Throughout the episode , Cartman is critical of fast food fried chicken eateries that compete with KFC . This includes Church 's Chicken , which he said " tastes like cat shit " , and Boston Market , when a dealer unsuccessfully tries to pass Boston Market gravy off as KFC gravy to Cartman . Randy says he wants to induce cancer and get medicinal marijuana in time to attend a concert by reggae singer Ziggy Marley . The song playing whilst the group of men bounce around on their enlarged testicles is " Chicken on the Rocks " , by Jean Jacques Perrey and Dana Countryman , in a poorly recorded quality . After buying marijuana , Randy remarks he has to rush home to watch Caprica , the science fiction drama series from the network SyFy . 
 Whilst transporting his enlarged cancerous scrotum and testicles in a wheelbarrow Randy Marsh appears very similar to the popular Viz character Buster <unk> , a character introduced in 1989 and famous for his " unfeasibly large testicles " which he always <unk> around in a wheelbarrow much like Randy in this episode . While Randy was pushing his swollen testicle to the dispensary for the first time , he was singing Bob Marley 's Buffalo Soldier . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on March 31 , 2010 , " Medicinal Fried Chicken " was watched by 2 @.@ 99 million viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , making it the most watched cable television show of the night , and one of the top performing cable programs of the week . Although a slight drop from the 3 @.@ 24 million viewers of the previous week 's episode , " The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs " , the viewership for " Medicinal Fried Chicken " was considered a strong showing . The episode received an overall 1 @.@ 9 rating / 3 share , meaning that it was seen by 1 @.@ 9 % of the population , and 3 % of people watching television at the time of the broadcast . Among viewers between ages 18 and 49 , it received a 1 @.@ 7 rating / 5 share , and among male viewers between 18 and 34 , it received a 3 @.@ 1 rating / 11 share . 
 The A.V. Club writer Josh Modell said " Medicinal Fried Chicken " served as a good social satire without becoming too preachy . Modell particularly enjoyed that the other South Park men joined Randy in his absurd testicular cancer scheme , but said the Cartman subplot and drug film parody " fell a little flat " . <unk> Isler of IGN said the giant testes jokes were " brilliantly ludicrous " , and did not grow old despite running throughout the length of the episode . Isler praised the ending scene with the scrotum skin coat , and said when Cartman snorted chicken skin like cocaine , " the episode reached a whole new level [ of ] hilarity " . TV Fanatic declared the episode " perfection " and felt it was an improvement over the previous fourteenth season episodes " Sexual Healing " and " The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs " . The site also praised the episode for use gross @-@ out comedy like enlarged testicles for social satire as well as humor . Carlos Delgado of iF Magazine praised the humor , the references to Scarface and the social commentary , of which he said : " The points were smart , articulate , and , in true South Park style , completely off the wall " . 
 When asked how KFC felt about their portrayal in " Medicinal Fried Chicken " , company spokesman Ricky Maynard said only : " As you might expect , KFC Corporation was not contacted by Comedy Central for permission to use our brand in South Park . We had absolutely no say in the show 's content . " However , officials from Corbin , Kentucky , said they were pleased the city was featured in " Medicinal Fried Chicken " , even though it was portrayed as a drug slum . The city has been conducting a campaign to capitalize on its connections to KFC and Colonel Sanders , and <unk> Myers , the city 's Main Street manager , said of the episode : " One thing I think is great is that Corbin got the recognition : that the mecca for KFC is in Corbin . " 
 = = Home release = = 
 " Medicinal Fried Chicken " , along with the thirteen other episodes from South Park 's fourteenth season , were released on a three @-@ disc DVD set and two @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray set in the United States on April 26 , 2011 . 
 = Jacobson v. United States = 
 Jacobson v. United States , 503 U.S. 540 ( 1992 ) , is a case decided by the United States Supreme Court regarding the criminal procedure topic of entrapment . A narrowly divided court overturned the conviction of a Nebraska man for receiving child pornography through the mail , ruling that postal inspectors had implanted a desire to do so through repeated written entreaties . 
 It was the first time the court had considered an entrapment case from outside the realm of controlled @-@ substance enforcement , or one involving conduct that had only recently been criminalized . By relying exclusively on whether the defendant had a predisposition to commit the crime , the court appeared to have finally resolved a lingering issue in its previous decisions on the subject . 
 The decision was seen as a rare triumph for defendants before a conservative court that frequently sided with prosecutors . Guidelines for federal law enforcement agents were changed in its wake , and it was described as having brought entrapment " back from the dead . " 
 = = Background of the case = = 
 = = = U.S. anti @-@ child pornography legislation and early cases = = = 
 Until the late 1970s , there were no federal laws specifically addressing the production , distribution or possession of child pornography , and it was readily available to those who sought it . While most was imported from European countries where it was produced in large quantities , there was also a domestic industry . 
 Media exposés and popular outrage led Congress to pass by unanimous vote the Sexual Exploitation of Children Act of 1977 , which criminalized the production and sale of child porn . This act was signed into law by President Jimmy Carter on February 6 , 1978 . The legislation was supported by a unanimous decision of the Supreme Court in New York v. Ferber , 458 U.S. 747 ( 1982 ) , that images of children need not meet legal definitions of obscenity to be prohibited by the government , since the state 's interest in protecting children from harm trumped First Amendment rights in this instance . 
 Shortly thereafter , an update to the SEOC Act , the Child Protection Act of 1984 , made it illegal to purchase pornographic materials depicting minors through the mail , or possess them , on the grounds that it encouraged child sexual abuse . While popular with voters , civil liberties advocates warned that the expanded scope of these laws could result in prosecutions of entirely innocent people who had little or nothing to do with the child @-@ porn industry , such as parents taking photos or videos of their children in the nude . Nevertheless , investigators forged ahead and had , by the mid @-@ 1980s , shut down almost all domestic child @-@ porn production . The government itself was thereafter the biggest marketer , in the form of materials it created to tempt buyers . 
 = = = Investigation and arrest of Keith Jacobson = = = 
 In January 1985 inspectors for the United States Postal Service ( USPS ) in the Great Plains states began " Project Looking Glass " , a sting operation under the newly enacted Child Protection Act of 1984 , which made it illegal to send pictures of nude minors through the mail for noncommercial purposes ( previously , only those who intended to resell them could be prosecuted ) . Ray Mack , the inspector in charge , meant it to be primarily an intelligence @-@ gathering operation , a way to keep tabs on producers and distributors . It sent mail to those it had known to have ordered such materials while they were legal . Among them were Keith Jacobson , a bachelor 56 @-@ year @-@ old U.S. Army retiree turned farmer living with his elderly parents in Newman Grove , Nebraska , who would later describe himself as bisexual although he said he had never had relations with men . Jacobson had , the previous year , ordered two magazines entitled Bare Boys I and Bare Boys II from Electric Moon , an adult bookstore in San Diego , California , that had been raided and shut down . 
 USPS investigators decided to send him a letter from a fictitious organization , the " American <unk> Society " , which supposedly sought to lobby for " the right to read what we desire , the right to discuss similar interests with those who share our philosophy , and finally that we have the right to seek pleasure without restrictions being placed on us by outdated puritan morality . " Included was a questionnaire attempting to gauge the respondent 's interest in various paraphilias , including pedophilia and <unk> . Jacobson indicated an " above average " interest in the latter , especially between males , but also stated he was opposed to the former . The USPS decided he was not a promising target and left him alone . 
 But some time later , Calvin Comfort , a " prohibited mailing specialist " for the region , found Jacobson 's name in another file , and the government decided to try again , this time as part of an operation aimed at purchasers . In May 1986 , they sent him mail from another fictitious organization , " Midlands Data Research " , which was for those who " believe in the joys of sex and the complete awareness of those lusty and youthful lads and <unk> of the <unk> [ sic ] age " . Jacobson confessed to them that he was " interested in teenage sexuality " , asked for more information and that his name be kept confidential . This led to Jacobson getting mail from the " Heartland Institute for a New Tomorrow " ( <unk> ) , " an organization founded to protect and promote sexual freedom and freedom of choice . We believe that arbitrarily imposed legislative sanctions restricting your sexual freedom should be rescinded through the legislative process . " Jacobson seemed to sympathize , writing in response that sexual freedom and freedom of the press were under attack by " right @-@ wing fundamentalists " . 
 Along with a thank you note from " Jean Daniels " of <unk> also came a supposed list of others in the area with similar interests as possible pen pals . But Jacobson never wrote to any of them . So Comfort , under the pseudonym " Carl Long " , wrote back using a technique called " mirroring " , claiming to have interests calculated to be similar to those believed held by Jacobson , and specifically , to be equally interested in depictions of sex acts between young boys . Jacobson said he , too , liked " good looking young guys ( in their late teens and early 20 's ) doing their thing together " . Neither Jacobson nor Comfort made any more explicit reference to pornographic materials and Jacobson stopped writing back after two letters . With no evidence that he had ever watched or possessed any child pornography , the USPS again dropped its efforts against him . 
 Those were renewed in March 1987 when the United States Customs Service sent similar exploratory material , supposedly from Canada , to Jacobson and others on the USPS 's list , and he responded , placing an order that was never filled . A catalog from a " Far Eastern Trading Company " was sent instead , along with other written material bemoaning the infringement of sexual freedoms . This time Jacobson ordered a publication called Boys Who Love Boys , which the catalog said featured " 11 and 14 year old boys " who " get it on in every way imaginable . Oral , anal and heavy masturbation . If you love boys , " it further read , " you will be delighted with this " . 
 On June 16 , 1987 , Jacobson received a card in his mail telling him to go to the post office and pick up the envelope that supposedly contained Boys Who Love Boys . Comfort observed him doing so and got a search warrant for his home on that basis . He was arrested shortly thereafter , 26 months after the postal inspectors had first contacted him . 
 = = Lower court proceedings = = 
 = = = Criminal trial = = = 
 Jacobson was indicted on one count of knowingly receiving through the mails sexually explicit material depicting a minor in September . At trial in federal court , his attorney , George H. Moyer , noted his exemplary military service record , including a Bronze Star , service in Korea and Vietnam War and lack of a civilian criminal record beyond a drunken @-@ driving conviction in 1958 . He raised the entrapment defense . 
 Jacobson testified that he had been " shocked and surprised " by the contents of the Bare Boys collections when he received them , as he had not expected the photos to depict very young boys : " I thought these were a nudist type publication . Many of the pictures were out in a rural or outdoor setting . There was – I didn 't draw any sexual connotation or connection with that " . 
 The jury convicted him in April 1988 . He was sentenced to three years imprisonment , suspended to two years ' probation and 250 hours of community service , which he discharged by painting a school bus and working at a library . He had to sell his share of the family farm to his sister to pay his legal bills , and was fired from his job driving a school bus in Newman Grove even though there was no evidence he had ever approached children sexually . He lowered his profile , often driving to more distant communities to run routine errands . Nonetheless , his hometown supported him . " Any of us could be caught up in such a sting , " the Newman Grove local newspaper editorialized . 
 = = = Appeals = = = 
 A panel of three appellate judges heard the case for the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals . On January 12 , 1990 , Senior Judge Gerald Heaney and Chief Judge Donald Lay overturned the conviction on the grounds that the government had insufficient grounds to believe that Jacobson was likely to purchase the material it was offering to him . Judge George G. Fagg said in dissent that his colleagues had " declared war on the government 's power to initiate undercover investigations " and that reasonable suspicion need not be present for such operations to take place . 
 He would carry the day after federal prosecutors appealed for an en banc rehearing by the entire court , reiterating that point for an eight @-@ judge majority and saying that unless Jacobson could demonstrate that a specifically protected right had been violated by the investigation , the conviction should stand . The majority also rejected the entrapment defense , arguing that the postal investigators had merely provided Jacobson with opportunities to purchase child pornography and not sought to affect his predisposition ( an important element in entrapment under U.S. law ) to do so in any way . 
 Lay and Heaney were the sole dissenters , and wrote separate opinions based upon two different grounds . The former argued that Jacobson had not in fact shown " predisposition " toward breaking the law throughout his life , since the only known prior purchases and basis for belief by prosecutors , were purchases he had made at a time this was a legal act ; Lay therefore concluded that without evidence of prior disposition to break the law in this way , he had been entrapped . The latter 's dissent was similar to the original panel opinion , arguing that the government had no reasonable belief that Jacobson would purchase child pornography . He also called investigative tactics sufficiently outrageous to justify reversal : " In my view , the government 's investigation and prosecution of Jacobson amount to the deliberate manufacture of a crime that would never have occurred but for the Postal Service 's overzealous efforts to create it " . 
 = = Supreme Court case = = 
 = = = Certiorari petition = = = 
 John Paul Stevens , Associate justice of the Supreme Court supposedly picked Jacobson 's case out of a pile of " hopeless " certiorari petitions . After reading it , Justice Byron White made an argument moving and persuasive enough that Justices Harry Blackmun , Thurgood Marshall , and Stevens changed their minds and agreed to accept it . Regardless of how certiorari was granted , arguments before the Court were limited by the grant to the single issue in question , of whether as a matter of law , Jacobson had been entrapped . 
 = = = Entrapment in federal prosecutions = = = 
 The entrapment defense at the federal level exists entirely in case law . Federal courts first recognized entrapment in Woo Wai v. United States , 223 F 412 ( 9th Circuit 1915 ) , and the Supreme Court followed suit in <unk> v. United States , 287 U.S. 435 ( 1932 ) . 
 The <unk> court grounded the entrapment defense in what has since been called the " subjective " test , in which the prosecution must overcome it by showing the defendant had a " predisposition " to commit the crime in any event . Felix Frankfurter , in a partial dissent , had argued instead for an " objective " standard , which focuses instead on the conduct of the law enforcement personnel involved and whether the crime would have occurred without their involvement , a call repeated by other justices in later decisions . While the majority of states have chosen to use the objective method , the Supreme Court has held firm to the former . 
 = = = Briefings and pre @-@ hearing public awareness = = = 
 Jacobson 's case attracted some national media attention . Civil liberties advocates supported him , worried over what they saw as dangerous growth in government police powers during the Reagan and Bush administrations , when law enforcement cracked down on drugs as well as pornography distribution at the behest of the Religious Right . Operation Looking Glass , the USPS claimed , had netted 147 convictions , but only 35 where evidence was found that the offenders had either been involved in producing child pornography or molested children . Critics claimed that the government was exaggerating the child @-@ porn problem at best and contributing to it at worst , possibly by introducing some consumers to material they might never have developed a taste for otherwise . 
 It was the subject of a 60 Minutes segment , in which Jacobson told Mike Wallace , after pausing for several seconds and looking downward , that he broke down and ordered Boys Who Love Boys because he wanted to see just what it was that he was being so heavily solicited to buy . A postal inspector also admitted to the show that since it had successfully put most child @-@ porn producers out of business , it was now going after consumers with material of its own . 
 Interested parties on both sides filed amici . A group of conservative Republicans in both houses of Congress , including Newt Gingrich , Dick Armey , Henry Hyde and Rick Santorum , and the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children both argued for affirming the conviction , pointing to the invaluable nature of undercover investigations in fighting child pornography , worrying that requiring reasonable suspicion beforehand could make such operations impossible . Americans for Effective Law Enforcement said there had been no entrapment and that reasonable suspicion was not required before starting investigations such as Looking Glass . The American Civil Liberties Union , its Nebraska chapter and the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers weighed in on Jacobson 's behalf . 
 = = = Arguments = = = 
 Moyer , who had never argued before the Supreme Court , continued to represent Jacobson ( who was in the audience ) . In his brief and at oral argument , he said that a mere stated interest in sex among young men did not rise to a level of proving predisposition , that the government should have had evidence in hand that Jacobson was actually willing to break the law to do so . ( Kenneth Starr , then Solicitor General , had maintained in the government 's brief opposing certiorari that his prior purchase of the Bare Boys magazines was all the proof it needed , even if the action were legal at the time . ) Pressed on other undercover investigative techniques , he admitted that a government @-@ run pawn shop would be a permissible way to apprehend thieves despite a lack of evidence of predisposition because the crimes might well have occurred prior to any contact with the government or its operatives . 
 During oral argument , Justice Antonin Scalia responded to this by suggesting that some interests a person might express , such as recreational drugs , signified a willingness to violate social norms regardless of whether the conduct was illegal or not . Paul Larkin , who appeared for the government , had to admit to that there was no case law on entrapment where something that had previously been permitted was now prohibited . At one point , trying to argue that Jacobson did not have access to the defense of entrapment by estoppel ( where the government persuades an actor that it is legal to do something , only to prosecute them for it ) , Scalia told Larkin he 'd lost him . 
 = = = Decision = = = 
 By a 5 – 4 margin , the justices reversed the conviction , agreeing that Jacobson had been entrapped , on April 6 , 1992 . It has since been reported that this was one of the rare cases where the decision changed after arguments . The original poll of the justices showed a 7 – 2 majority for affirmance , with only White and Stevens holding out . But White argued persuasively for reversal to his fellow Justices , and Blackmun and Clarence Thomas , who had replaced Marshall , changed their minds . It has been suggested that Thomas , who later established a reputation for allowing wide latitude to law enforcement similar to other contemporary Republican appointees , was especially sensitive at that time to Jacobson 's situation due to the sexual harassment allegations raised by Anita Hill during his own recent confirmation hearings . 
 Justice David Souter later provided the swing vote , and opinions that White and Sandra Day O 'Connor had already begun drafting had to be rewritten to reflect the changed outcome of the case . 
 = = = = Majority = = = = 
 White , reiterating what he had written in Ferber , acknowledged that child pornography was a social evil and that the government could use undercover investigations to enforce laws against it . After reviewing the previous cases on entrapment , he said that the more than two years in which investigators had tried to get Jacobson to buy various child @-@ porn offerings had suggested he did not have a predisposition to do so : " ... ( I ) t is our view that the Government did not prove that this predisposition was independent , and not the product of the attention that the Government had directed at petitioner since January , 1985 " . 
 Since the Bare Boys purchases were legal at the time , they did not prove that he was willing to break the law to acquire such materials . " ... ( E ) <unk> that merely indicates a generic inclination to act within a broad range , not all of which is criminal , is of little probative value in establishing predisposition " , he wrote . " Evidence of predisposition to do what once was lawful is not , by itself , sufficient to show predisposition to do what is now illegal , for there is a common understanding that most people obey the law even when they disapprove of it " . He also noted that , at trial , the prosecution had not challenged Jacobson 's assertion that he did not know the magazines would contain pictures of minors until he received it . 
 Furthermore , he suggested , the appeals to political action he received may have given him reasons other than prurient interest to order the material , indeed even suggested he had a duty to order them as a way of taking a stand : 
 ... ( T ) he strong arguable inference is that , by waving the banner of individual rights and disparaging the legitimacy and constitutionality of efforts to restrict the availability of sexually explicit materials , the Government not only excited petitioner 's interest in sexually explicit materials banned by law , but also exerted substantial pressure on petitioner to obtain and read such material as part of a fight against censorship and the infringement of individual rights ... The evidence that petitioner was ready and willing to commit the offense came only after the Government had devoted 2 ½ years to convincing him that he had or should have the right to engage in the very behavior proscribed by law . 
 White also dismissed the notion that his responses to the surveys he was sent proved he was willing to order child porn illegally , saying they only indicated " a predisposition to view photographs of preteen sex and a willingness to promote a given agenda by supporting lobbying organizations ... petitioner 's responses hardly support an inference that he would commit the crime of receiving child pornography through the mails " . He noted that twice before the Court had suggested that an individual 's private fantasies are not the government 's business , even if it has a strong interest in proscribing the enactment of those fantasies . 
 " When the Government 's quest for convictions " , he concluded , " leads to the apprehension of an otherwise law @-@ abiding citizen who , if left to his own devices , likely would have never run afoul of the law , the courts should intervene . " 
 = = = = Dissent = = = = 
 O 'Connor made two arguments for the dissenting justices : that predisposition was proven by the fact that Jacobson had ordered materials both times he was actually solicited , and that the Court had usurped the jury 's rightful role in deciding whether he was entrapped . She also expressed fears that the court had so broadened the definition of predisposition as to make it a viable defense in almost any case . 
 She began by stating what was , to the minority , the most relevant aspect of the case . 
 Keith Jacobson was offered only two opportunities to buy child pornography through the mail . Both times , he ordered . Both times , he asked for opportunities to buy more . He needed no Government agent to coax , threaten , or persuade him ; no one played on his sympathies , friendship , or suggested that his committing the crime would further a greater good . In fact , no Government agent even contacted him face to face . 
 She noted also that Jacobson had written , in a note included with his order , that he would be doing more business with the company later and that he wanted to " ( b ) e discreet in order to protect you and me " . 
 The majority , she said , had so greatly expanded the government 's burden of proof in undercover sting operations as to make future such investigations untenable : 
 ... ( A ) fter this case , every defendant will claim that something the Government agent did before soliciting the crime " created " a predisposition that was not there before . For example , a <unk> will claim that the description of the amount of money available was so enticing that it implanted a disposition to accept the bribe later offered . A drug buyer will claim that the description of the drug 's purity and effects was so tempting that it created the urge to try it for the first time . In short , the Court 's opinion could be read to prohibit the Government from advertising the seductions of criminal activity as part of its sting operation , for fear of creating a predisposition in its suspects . 
 She scoffed at White 's claim that the calls to activism were possibly instrumental in creating a predisposition to offend : " The most one finds is letters advocating legislative action to liberalize obscenity laws , letters which could easily be ignored or thrown away ... Nor did the Government claim to be organizing a civil disobedience movement , which would protest the pornography laws by breaking them . " It was up to the jury , she said , to decide what Jacobson meant when he said on the stand that he wanted to see " what all the trouble and hysteria was about " , and they had done so . 
 In Part II , she accused her colleagues of redefining predisposition so that it had to include an awareness that the action to be undertaken was illegal , despite the fact that the CPA did not include specific intent to receive child pornography as an element of the crime . " The elements of predisposition , " she said , " should track the elements of the crime " . The Bare Boys purchases were not , she argued , as dispositive of that as the majority claimed . Her last sentences responded to White 's , saying that there was no question that the jury had been properly instructed on entrapment law and thus , their decision that Jacobson could not claim entrapment should be allowed to stand . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Reaction = = = 
 New York Times ' reporter Linda Greenhouse described the initial verdict as " an anomaly , an extreme misuse of Government power in which an innocent person was led to commit a manufactured crime " and thus not likely to signal a shift back in favor of defendants after a period that had seen a move away from the liberalism of the Warren and Burger Courts towards a more law @-@ and @-@ order – oriented Court . <unk> at newspapers around the country – the Times , the Chicago Tribune , and the Washington Post – praised the court 's decision , as did Jacobson 's hometown paper , the Omaha World @-@ Herald . Columnists on both sides of the political spectrum , from Clarence Page to William Safire joined in celebrating his turn of fate and criticizing the excessive zeal of the postal inspectors . Civil liberties advocates savored what they felt was an overdue triumph against the overreach of law enforcement during the preceding decade . " ... ( W ) hen the State gets behind a moral panic , no one is safe , " wrote Bob <unk> of the political issues committee of the American Writers ' Union , pointing to other zealous prosecutions of people with no demonstrable interest in child pornography who had nevertheless fallen afoul of newer laws by taking or possessing pictures of naked children with no apparent sexual content . 
 Others pointed to what they called the horrific cost of Project Looking Glass . Among its other targets had been another middle @-@ aged Nebraska farmer , Bob <unk> , of Shelby . Like Jacobson , his name had been on the mailing list of a porn distributor , and despite neither having a criminal record nor any interest in child porn he was relentlessly solicited , including letters from the same " Carl Long " . Finally he ordered a videotape and was arrested and indicted . No other prohibited material was found in his house , either . 
 Just before he was to be arraigned , he drove into a field and shot himself , leaving behind a wife and two children . His was one of four suicides by Looking Glass targets . Critics wondered if these suicides , which investigators had said they expected , were worth it . In 1999 , Comfort also took his own life , citing despondency over the stresses of his job . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Jacobson , opined Paul Marcus , a law professor at William & Mary three years later , " brought entrapment back from the ( almost ) dead . " He noted that in its wake , courts were much more willing to allow , and sometimes agree with , entrapment defenses than they had been beforehand . Influential sitting judge Richard Posner had used similar language a year before , writing in an opinion that it had " breathed new life " into the defense . Most significantly , he said , appeals courts were now considering it in cases where the defendant had seemed willing to commit the crime , examining predisposition closely in cases where they would have previously rejected it out of hand . 
 Despite vows by prosecutors and heads of federal law enforcement agencies that the decision would not change the way they did undercover operations , there were some noticeable , at least at the federal level . Later versions of the Attorney General 's Guidelines on FBI Undercover Operations , widely emulated by other federal agencies , show some changes in language from those published before Jacobson . " Entrapment should be avoided " , became " entrapment must be avoided " , and investigators were told it must be apparent to them that the activity they were investigating was illegal , rather than just corrupt . A definition of entrapment was included that used the same language as the decision . 
 Authors Joyce Murdoch and Deb Pryce say another effect of the case was a softening of the Court 's attitude towards the gay community . Jacobson was the first such person to come before the Court to receive even the slightest empathy from it , and even a few years earlier his case might have been doomed from the start on that basis alone . 
 = = = Subsequent lower @-@ court jurisprudence = = = 
 Jacobson remains the Court 's current standard on the issue as it has not considered an entrapment case since . Similar sting operations continue to be widely used against all types of targets and in new ways . Most significantly , the rise of the Internet has led to operations where investigators pose as minors of either sex in chat rooms , trying to entice online predators to come meet them in person and have sex . When they do , they are arrested . These operations have become popular viewing on Dateline NBC 's " To Catch A Predator " segments and other television shows . 
 Most such operations are over very quickly and result in guilty pleas , but entrapment is sometimes alleged , and a protracted investigation of a Florida man led to the first Internet entrapment case to be considered at the appellate level . Writing for a Ninth Circuit majority ( the arrest occurred in California ) in <unk> v United States , 217 <unk> 692 ( 9th Cir 2000 ) , Judge Alex <unk> reversed the conviction , saying the defendant had met the Jacobson standard and shown that the idea of crossing state lines to have sex with a minor had been implanted only after extensive email correspondence with an undercover FBI agent . In 2014 a case resulting from a sting operation was ruled by a Federal court to have been " cut from whole cloth " by ATF operatives and to have constituted as entrapment by the ATF ; the case was thrown out . 
 = = = Other analysis and commentary = = = 
 Kenneth Lord notes that the decision did not address the subjective vs. objective test question at all . He observes that the decision adds two new strictures as part of its general rule that prosecutors must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was predisposed to commit the crime prior to any contact by government agents : 
 Conduct by the defendant which was legal at the time but later made illegal does not suffice to prove predisposition , and 
 The defendant 's predisposition must be evaluated based on his or her conduct prior to the commencement of any investigation . 
 But beyond that , it makes no effort to address the subjective vs. objective question , nor does its discussion of intent delve into the matter of specific vs. general intent . Some appeals courts , however , have developed more specific entrapment tests on their own . 
 University of Arizona law professor Gabriel J. Chin points out that the entire federal entrapment defense rests on statutory construction , which allows for the possibility that Congress could simply repeal or modify it so that operations implanting suggestion of criminal activity such as the one that ensnared Jacobson were specifically authorized by law . Since the majority had shown such distaste for it , how , he wondered , would it rule on the constitutionality of such a law if it were to be challenged ? 
 = Caversham , New Zealand = 
 Caversham / <unk> / is one of the older suburbs of the city of Dunedin , in New Zealand 's South Island . It is sited at the western edge of the city 's central plain at the mouth of the steep Caversham Valley , which rises to the saddle of Lookout Point . Major road and rail routes south lie nearby ; the South Island Main Trunk railway runs through the suburb , and a bypass skirts its main retail area , connecting Dunedin 's one @-@ way street system with the Dunedin Southern Motorway . The suburb is linked by several bus routes to its neighbouring suburbs and central Dunedin . 
 The suburb was founded by wealthy pioneer William Henry Valpy , and its name reflects his family connections with the town of Reading , in the English county of Berkshire . Caversham grew rapidly during the Central Otago Gold Rush of the 1860s because of its location on routes south to the Otago hinterland . By the end of the 19th century , Caversham was heavily industrialised , and its population included many skilled or semi @-@ skilled tradespeople . This , combined with the community 's strong Protestant roots , led to the area 's generally left @-@ leaning political stance . Caversham 's early history has been the subject of the Caversham Project , a major historical and archaeological study by the University of Otago . Caversham was a separate borough until 1904 , when it was amalgamated with Dunedin city . It is currently administered as part of the city 's South Dunedin ward . At a national level , it is part of the Dunedin South electorate . 
 Caversham is now predominantly residential , with some industrial premises in the east ( notably the Hillside Railway Workshops ) and a retail district centred on South Road and Hillside Road . Residents are generally of low socio @-@ economic status . Caversham 's notable buildings include the heritage listed Lisburn House and several prominent church buildings . Another landmark is the suburb 's war memorial , which is the main gate of Caversham School , one of the suburb 's two primary schools . Caversham also contains a special needs school . The nearest secondary schools are located in St Clair , 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) to the south . 
 Caversham has strong sporting connections , and is the location of Carisbrook , until recently one of the city 's main sports venues . The suburb is home to the Southern Rugby Football Club , and gives its name to Caversham Football Club . Several notable sportspeople have associations with Caversham , among them Test cricketer Clarrie Grimmett and father and son rugby union administrators " Old Vic " and " Young Vic " Cavanagh . Other notable people with Caversham connections include politician Thomas Kay Sidey , architect Edmund Anscombe , and surveyor John Turnbull Thomson . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Caversham lies at the mouth and in the lower reaches of a valley in the west of Dunedin 's main urban area , 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) southwest of the city centre , and 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) north of the Pacific coast at St Clair . To the south lies Calton Hill , a spur of Forbury Hill , on which the suburbs of Calton Hill , Corstorphine and Kew are located . 
 The suburbs of Balaclava and Maryhill lie to the north , close to the western end of the ridge that runs along the northern edge of central Dunedin . These hills were all once part of the rim of the Dunedin volcano , the long @-@ extinct crater of which now forms Otago Harbour . Other suburbs nearby include Forbury , South Dunedin , Kensington , and Lookout Point . 
 Caversham Valley has long been the major route out of the central city to the south . The suburb is located close to the start of the Dunedin Southern Motorway ( part of State Highway 1 ) , the main road access to central Dunedin from the south , and close to the South Island Main Trunk railway . The creation of the Dunedin Southern Motorway redirected traffic away from South Road , the main thoroughfare through Caversham . 
 The railway provides the suburb 's most important industry , through the Hillside Railway Workshops , which are located in the southeast of the suburb and in the adjoining suburb of South Dunedin . Despite this , there are no longer any public railway stations or halts in Caversham , the last station having closed in 1962 . 
 The hill slopes to the north of Caversham are less densely populated , and still retain some tree cover . This , along with the steepness of the land , forms a natural barrier between Caversham and the suburb of Maryhill . Only a few winding roads traverse this barrier , most notably Glen Road , at the eastern end of Caversham . At this end , the suburb draws close to the foot of the hills , and a natural valley , known locally as " The Glen " , provides easier road access to the hill ridge . 
 To the northeast of the Glen , a hill spur including a 20 @-@ metre ( 66 ft ) cliff separates Caversham from the central part of the city . Though the name is rarely used , this spur is called <unk> Ridge , named for the mansion of early settler W.H. Reynolds . It is occasionally referred to as " Hillside " , after the house of the city 's founding father Captain William Cargill which was located here . This ridge overlooks " The Flat " , as the plain stretching across to the Pacific coast was ( and is still ) locally known . South Road winds around the spur , connecting with the southern end of Princes Street . One of the city 's older and more historic cemeteries , Dunedin Southern Cemetery , lies on the inner city side of this spur . 
 = = = Lookout Point = = = 
 At the top of Caversham Valley are a ridge and the saddle of Lookout Point . Lookout Point commands views to the southwest past the outer suburbs of Burnside and Green Island to Saddle Hill , as well as providing a view to the east across the southern part of the central city to Otago Harbour and the Otago Peninsula . 
 The most prominent building in Lookout Point is the local fire station , which also serves both Caversham and Green Island . This 1956 structure is located immediately to the north of the saddle and is a prominent landmark upon entering or leaving Dunedin . Not far from the fire station to the north @-@ east is Dunedin 's tallest tree , a eucalyptus measuring an estimated 100 metres . The Dunedin Southern Motorway officially begins at the Lookout Point saddle , between Calton Hill and Maryhill , and sweeps down over broken hill country past Green Island to Mosgiel and the <unk> Plains . 
 Lookout Point is also the home of the former Caversham Industrial School , located to the northeast of the fire station on Mornington Road . Established in 1869 , the school was later a boys ' home , and is now an adult training centre . Lookout Point 's main streets include South Road , Caversham Valley Road , <unk> Road , and Mornington Road . 
 The Māori name for Lookout Point is Ko Raka @-@ a @-@ <unk> @-@ te @-@ <unk> . It was the burial site of chief Rangi @-@ <unk> , a late 18th century Kati Mamoe chief who was largely responsible for joining the Kai Tahu and Kati Mamoe iwi . He was buried here so that " his spirit might see thence his old haunts to the southward . " 
 A 3 @.@ 4 @-@ hectare ( 8 @.@ 4 @-@ acre ) forest reserve is located on the upper slopes of Caversham Valley below Lookout Point . Purchased by the Dunedin City Council in 1994 with the assistance of the Royal Forest and Bird Protection Society , it is home to various native bird and invertebrate species , including one species of velvet worm believed to be endemic to the Dunedin area . 
 = = History = = 
 Caversham was named for Caversham , Berkshire , a suburb of Reading , by William Henry Valpy , a wealthy early settler who farmed the areas around the lower slopes of Forbury Hill ; his initial farm , " The Forbury " , was located in what is now St Clair , close to a street which now bears his name . A member of Valpy 's family was born in the English Caversham . 
 In the early days of Dunedin , it was impossible for a dray to reach the Caversham Valley in wet weather unless it went by a circuitous route around the hills . Valpy solved this problem by hiring men at his own expense to build a crude road from the southern end of Princes Street to his farm at Forbury . This formed the basis for later roads into the suburb . The road curved around the edge of the hills at the Glen to avoid a large swamp , the site of which is currently occupied by Carisbrook sports ground . 
 Settlement in the area was slow , though Caversham Valley was a preferred route south out of the city . The Central Otago Gold Rush of 1861 led to rapid changes when thousands of people began using the road on their way to and from the gold fields . The suburb began to expand rapidly at about this time , and the first public house , the Edinburgh Castle Hotel , was erected in 1861 . By the end of the decade , Caversham had its own school , post office , drill hall ( from the Southern District Rifles ) , and Anglican and Presbyterian churches . A third church , for the Baptist denomination , followed in 1872 . 
 Several charitable organisations have had properties in Caversham , including the Otago Benevolent Institution home for invalids , and an <unk> New Zealand centre at Kew Park . The Royal New Zealand Foundation of the Blind still has its Otago premises in Hillside Road . 
 Early industries in the area included C & W Sheil 's brickworks , which had quarries in Forbury , St Clair and Caversham , and Caversham <unk> , which operated from 1882 until 1909 . The last buildings of the gasworks were a local landmark , and were not removed until the construction of the Caversham bypass in the 1970s and 1980s . Other noted industries in early Caversham included breweries , a tannery , and a match factory . 
 Construction of the South Island Main Trunk railway south of Dunedin that began in 1871 led to the construction of a 865 @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 838 ft ) tunnel beneath Lookout Point , connecting Caversham with Green Island . A second parallel 1 @,@ 407 @-@ metre ( 4 @,@ 616 ft ) tunnel – the first double @-@ track tunnel in the country – was built starting in 1907 , and all rail traffic moved to the new tunnel in 1910 . Caversham was served by its own railway station until its closure in 1962 . There has been a long @-@ running campaign to have the older tunnel converted into a cycleway , though this scheme has never gained wholehearted council support . 
 By the 1870s the population of Caversham was growing rapidly , and in 1877 , with the population at around 4 @,@ 000 , it was declared a borough . It held this status until amalgamation with Dunedin city in 1904 . The borough 's area included much of modern Forbury and St Clair , as well as what is usually regarded as Caversham today . 
 = = = Caversham Project = = = 
 The early history of the suburb and surrounding parts of southern Dunedin has been the subject of a major ongoing archaeological and historical research project into early Dunedin by the University of Otago , known simply as The Caversham Project . Over the course of the last 30 years , a database has been compiled of life in early South Dunedin , focussing on the borough of Caversham . This database is unique in its size for a historical study within New Zealand or Australia , containing some 9 @.@ 4 gigabytes of data , and has allowed for the examination and publication of details relating to the socioeconomic and demographic mix of early Dunedin . 
 The multidisciplinary nature of the study has resulted in information being gathered on subjects ranging from urban planning to gender studies . By using both quantitative and qualitative analyses , and by including considerable amounts of oral history , it has allowed for a vivid recreation of the society of early urban New Zealand . Several books have resulted from the project , among them Sites of Gender : Women , Men and Modernity , 1890 – 1939 , edited by B. Brookes , A. Cooper , and R. Law ( Auckland University Press , 2003 ) and Class and Occupation : The New Zealand Reality by E. <unk> and M. Hickey ( University of Otago Press , 2005 ) . 
 = = Governance = = 
 In its formative days , the Caversham Road Board administered Caversham . This organisation served as a council for Caversham until May 1877 , when it became a borough . The borough of Caversham , which existed until November 1904 , took in a far larger area than the current suburb , including much of Saint Clair , South Dunedin , Kew , and Kensington , and stretched to the Pacific coast in the south and Otago Harbour in the east . The names of several of the borough 's mayors are commemorated in streets within the former borough , among them Robert Rutherford , William Bridgman , and Thomas Kay Sidey . 
 The Dunedin City Council currently administers Caversham ; the suburb is located in the city 's South Dunedin ward , one of the city 's six wards . This ward covers a considerable part of Dunedin 's main urban area , as well as the entirety of the Otago Peninsula . It elects four councillors to Dunedin 's 14 @-@ member city council . 
 At a national level , Caversham was a separate electorate from 1866 to 1908 . MPs for the electorate included Thomas Kay Sidey and future Premier Robert Stout . Since 1908 Caversham has been in various electorates , and is currently part of the Dunedin South electorate . As of 2014 , its MP is Clare Curran ( Labour ) . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Unlike most of Dunedin , which was settled by Scots , many early settlers in Caversham were English . This led to some degree of antagonism by the councils of the city and Caversham borough in the early days of settlement ; Dunedin had been settled by the Presbyterian church , whereas Caversham 's population was largely Anglican , Methodist , and Baptist . There is little evidence of this distinction in modern Caversham , other than the origins of local street names , several of which reflect the names of English counties and early English settlers . 
 Caversham began largely as a lower @-@ middle to working @-@ class suburb . Many of the early residents were skilled or semi @-@ skilled tradespeople . In its early days , Caversham was known as " The carpenters ' borough " , as a high proportion of the skilled workers within the borough were employed in the building trade . The socioeconomic mix of the borough , combined with the Protestant religious make @-@ up of Caversham , led to strong traditions of egalitarian and social humanitarian politics in the borough . 
 The left @-@ leaning politics of the area is still reflected to some extent in local political views . The Dunedin South electorate , of which Caversham is a part , tends to return New Zealand Labour Party Members of Parliament and support this and other left @-@ of @-@ centre parties . In the 2008 New Zealand general election , 54 @.@ 8 % of valid party votes cast in Caversham 's two polling stations were for the Labour Party and 10 @.@ 4 % were for the three other main left @-@ of @-@ centre parties ( Green , Alliance , and Progressive ) . The vote for these parties over the whole Dunedin South electorate was 46 @.@ 7 % and 9 @.@ 4 % respectively . The equivalent figures for New Zealand as a whole were 34 @.@ 0 % and 7 @.@ 7 % respectively . 
 Many residents of Caversham are still of relatively low socio @-@ economic status when compared to those in surrounding hill suburbs . A 2007 Dunedin City Council report indicated that a high proportion ( 39 % ) of the suburb 's houses were one- or two @-@ bedroom dwellings . 
 Caversham 's 2006 population was 5 @,@ 058 . The suburb has a slightly higher proportion of elderly residents than the Otago average , with 15 @.@ 8 % of residents aged 65 and over . It also has a considerably higher proportion of residents of Māori and Pacific island descent than the Otago average ( 10 @.@ 3 % and 4 @.@ 4 % respectively ) . Caversham also has nearly twice the average Otago proportion of one @-@ parent families ( 26 @.@ 5 % ) . Ownership of and access to home telecommunications ( such as the internet ) and to private motor vehicles is considerably lower than the Otago average . 
 = = Education = = 
 Caversham has no secondary schools , although it does contain two primary schools and a special needs school . Caversham Primary School , at the corner of South Road and Surrey Street , has been at its present site since 1921 . The school dates back to the early 1860s , and has a current enrollment of around 80 pupils . The school 's two @-@ storey 1920s brick buildings were pulled down and replaced in 1961 , because of their structural <unk> . The school 's main gate – the only surviving remnant of the earlier structure – is the suburb 's war memorial . 
 College Street School , south of South Road 's retail area , was built on an earlier site of Caversham Primary School . It was officially part of Caversham Primary School until 1959 , when it was declared a separate institution , and now has about 250 pupils . A third school , the Sara Cohen School in Rutherford Street , was established in 1926 . This school caters for special needs pupils from primary school age through adulthood . The school was named for the late wife of Mark Cohen , city councillor , campaigner for women 's rights , and editor of the Evening Star newspaper from 1893 to 1920 . In 1889 , Mark Cohen was a major figure behind the founding of New Zealand 's first kindergarten . 
 There are kindergartens and child @-@ care centres in both Rutherford Street ( by Kew Park ) and South Road ( to the east of the main retail area ) , and there are numerous pre @-@ school facilities and further primary schools in the suburbs of Forbury and Saint Clair , immediately to the south of Caversham . The nearest secondary schools are the single @-@ sex schools of Queen 's High School and King 's High School , located alongside each other close to the boundary between Saint Clair and South Dunedin , 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) to the south . 
 = = Economy = = 
 In its early years , Caversham was heavily industrialised , but also contained a large number of residential properties . The population included a large number of skilled tradespeople and craftspeople , and both large and small industries abounded . Local industries at the beginning of the twentieth century included a brickworks , a gasworks , breweries , a smithy , milliners , several bakeries , a tannery , a <unk> , and Rutherford 's Wax Vesta match factory at Forbury Corner . In 1900 , the South Road @-@ David Street @-@ Forbury Corner area was home to over 50 businesses . 
 Today , the suburb is mainly residential , though it has areas of retail and light industrial businesses . The main retail area is on South Road between the start of the rise up Caversham Valley and David Street , extending into David Street and the western end of Hillside Road ( Forbury Corner , sometimes referred to as Kew Corner ) . A few shops are also located on South Road 0 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 50 mi ) to the east , near Carisbrook . Hillside Road becomes increasingly light industrial as it approaches South Dunedin , with automotive engineers , car sales yards , <unk> , a rope factory , and a funeral parlour . One of Dunedin 's largest industrial sites , the Hillside Railway Workshops , dominates the eastern end of Hillside Road , close to which lie other , smaller , industrial sites . Beyond this is the shopping precinct of South Dunedin . 
 Caversham has four public houses – considerably fewer than in its formative years . These are the Carisbrook Hotel , close to the sports ground for which it is named , Mitchell 's Tavern in the South Road retail area , the Waterloo Hotel at Forbury Corner , and the Fitzroy Hotel on Hillside Road near Bathgate Park . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Carisbrook , the city 's former main rugby union venue and a former Test cricket ground , is at the eastern end of the suburb between The Glen and the Hillside Railway Workshops . It was the home of Otago Rugby Union until a new stadium opened in North Dunedin ( the Forsyth Barr Stadium at University Plaza ) in 2011 . The new stadium is the new home of the Otago Rugby Union and Highlanders Super Rugby franchise , and met with some opposition within Dunedin , with objections focusing largely on the cost . The future of Carisbrook looks bleak , and many of the former facilities are in the process of being dismantled or removed . 
 Other than Carisbrook , the suburb 's main sports ground is Bathgate Park , which lies at the border of Caversham and South Dunedin in the southeast . There are several open areas of recreation ground and parkland , notably Kew Park at Forbury Corner and Sidey Park and adjacent parkland along the northern flank of the by @-@ pass , and there are tennis courts close to Kew Park on Thorn Street , and a croquet club between South Road and the Caversham by @-@ pass . Kew Park is also home to one of the area 's most prominent <unk> clubs . 
 Other sporting links with the suburb include Caversham Football Club , one of Dunedin 's most successful football teams . Caversham has reached the semi @-@ finals of the national knockout competition ( the Chatham Cup ) on three occasions , and was a member of the former New Zealand National Soccer League for several seasons in the 1970s with a highest final position of fourth in 1975 . They also played in the competition 's final season ( 2003 ) . Despite its name , Caversham play at Tonga Park , located in the adjacent suburb of Forbury , a ground they share with the Carisbrook @-@ Dunedin Cricket Club . Caversham is also home to one of Dunedin 's main athletics clubs . 
 The Southern Rugby Football Club , a rugby union club , is located at Bathgate Park to the southeast of Caversham . Southern is consistently among Dunedin 's stronger club sides , and has been Otago club champion on over 20 occasions . It was formed from a merger of the Caversham and Pacific clubs in 1899 . Southern 's players have included over 20 All Blacks , including Stephen <unk> , Stu Forster , Jamie Joseph , Laurie Mains , and Gary Seear . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 Hillside Railway Workshops dominate the southeast of Caversham and the neighbouring suburb of South Dunedin . Established at this site in 1875 , the workshops are the main railway construction and repair shop in the South Island . The workshops cover 8 hectares ( 20 acres ) , of which 3 hectares ( 7 @.@ 4 acres ) are covered floor space . 
 To the north of the workshops is Carisbrook , Dunedin 's former main sports venue . Opened in 1883 , the ground had a capacity of 35 @,@ 000 people , and was floodlit from the 1990s . Used primarily for rugby union , but also for other sports ( notably as a Test cricket venue ) , Carisbrook lost its pre @-@ eminence among the city 's sports arenas with the construction of a new stadium in the northern end of the city in 2011 ; demolition began in 2013 . The ground is named for the former home of early colonial settler James Macandrew , which in turn was named for Carisbrooke Castle on the Isle of Wight in southern England . 
 Lisburn House is one of the finest surviving 1860s townhouses in New Zealand . Now run as a bed and breakfast establishment , this house was built in 1865 for the Fulton family , a pioneer farming family at their " <unk> " property on the <unk> Plains . The house was named for the family 's origins in Lisburn , Northern Ireland , and is Category I heritage listed . William Clayton designed the 12 @-@ room house , notable for its steeply angled slate roof and polychromatic brickwork . Two other Category II heritage buildings are on Fitzroy Street : Faringdon Villa , and an untitled house . 
 Other buildings of note in Caversham include the suburb 's churches . The Presbyterian church is located on Thorn Street , roughly halfway between the South Road retail area and Forbury Corner . It was built in 1883 following the destruction of the previous building by fire . The current building , built in Port Chalmers bluestone with Oamaru stone facings , was designed by T. B. Cameron . 
 Caversham 's Anglican church , St. Peter 's , is located on Hillside Road . Designed by H. F. Hardy , the foundation stone was laid in 1882 . The original design called for the church to have a spire , but because of problems with the tower 's foundations ( which left the tower leaning 6 inches ( 15 cm ) from the perpendicular ) this was never constructed . 
 Caversham Baptist church is located at the corner of South Road and Surrey Street , close to Caversham School . Unusual among Dunedin buildings , this church has a formal Classical style , with its brickwork augmented by pediments and square columns . The foundation stone for the building was laid in 1906 . The former Baptist Church , in Playfair Street , is now used as a Gospel Hall . 
 A further church , located in South Dunedin close to the southeastern edge of Caversham , is the South Dunedin Wesley Methodist Church in Hillside Road . This building , constructed in 1893 , was threatened with demolition in 2009 . 
 Part of the factory of Donaghy 's Industries , adjacent to the eastern edge of Bathgate Park , is notable because of its unusual shape . This structure , which is less than 4 metres ( 13 ft ) wide yet some 380 metres ( 1 @,@ 250 ft ) in length , serves as a ropewalk for Donaghy 's , who have been manufacturing rope and twine at this site since 1876 . 
 A somewhat controversial recent addition to Caversham was the opening , in October 2013 , of <unk> Cannabis Museum , New Zealand 's first museum dedicated to the history of cannabis use . Cannabis , while still a criminalised drug in New Zealand , has moved some way towards grudging acceptance , at least as a subject for open discussion . The museum , run from a former residential house in David Street , is designed to be an information centre on aspects of the history and legislation surrounding the drug , and also a national centre for the Aotearoa <unk> Cannabis Party , a minor single @-@ issue political party . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Noted residents in the Caversham area have included members of the Sidey family , several of whom were local or national politicians . Among these was Thomas Sidey , New Zealand Attorney General 1928 – 31 . Sidey Park , close to the northern edge of the Caversham bypass , and Sidey Street in Corstorphine are both named in his honour . 
 Captain William Cargill , founder of the Otago settlement , lived just to the northeast of Caversham above The Glen ; his house " Hillside " gave its name to Hillside Road , which was at one time called Cargill Road . The area around the site of Cargill 's long @-@ demolished house between The Glen and Kensington is still referred to as Hillside . Cargill 's Corner , the major road junction at the South Dunedin end of Hillside Road , is also named in his honour . 
 Architect Edmund Anscombe was a Caversham resident . Anscombe was responsible for numerous important buildings in early 20th century New Zealand , many of which survive to the present day . Among them are the Sarjeant Art Gallery in Wanganui and the Former Post and Telegraph Building in Wellington . Noted local buildings with work by Anscombe include extensions to the University of Otago Clocktower complex in Dunedin North , the main building of Otago Girls ' High School in central Dunedin , and the Allied Press building in Lower Stuart Street , Dunedin . 
 Another notable local resident was surveyor and architect John Turnbull Thomson . Thomson was Chief Surveyor of the Otago Province from 1856 to 1873 , and Surveyor @-@ General of New Zealand from 1876 to 1879 . During his time as provincial Chief Surveyor , Thomson explored and mapped large sections of the interior of the southern South Island . Many of the place names in this region reflect Thomson 's Northumbrian origins , with prosaic names in the form of a Northumbrian dialectic name for an animal . As a result , the area is still occasionally referred to as " Thomson 's Barnyard " or " The Farmyard Patch " . 
 Among sportspeople with Caversham connections , Australian Test cricketer and 1931 Wisden Cricketer of the year Clarrie Grimmett is perhaps the best known . Grimmett , the first player to take 200 Test wickets , was born in the suburb on Christmas Day , 1891 . Noted rugby union administrators " Old Vic " Cavanagh and " Young Vic " Cavanagh were also born in Caversham . Between them , the father and son were responsible for changes to the way the game of rugby union was played through their innovative coaching methods and tactics . The cricketer , poet , songwriter and teacher Robert J. Pope ( 1865 – 1949 ) was also born in Caversham . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 The suburb 's main road is South Road , which at its eastern ( Glen ) end winds around the flanks of hills before joining with Princes Street and Dunedin 's central business district . A slip road connects South Road with State Highway 1 at the foot of these hills , just above Carisbrook . 
 Hillside Road , which runs parallel with South Road several hundred metres to the south , is an arterial route connecting South Dunedin ( at its eastern end ) with Dunedin 's southwestern suburbs . At its western end is Forbury Corner , a road junction linking Hillside Road with suburban arterial routes to the suburbs of Saint Clair ( Forbury Road ) and Corstorphine ( <unk> Crescent ) , as well as David Street , the major road link between Hillside Road and South Road . Numerous other small residential streets run parallel with David Street between Hillside Road and South Road . The suburb 's other main roads include Caversham Valley Road , Playfair Street , Surrey Street , and Glen Road . The latter of these lies at the Glen at the eastern end of Caversham , providing a link between South Road and the hill suburbs of Maryhill , Balaclava , and Mornington . 
 A Caversham bypass was constructed in the late 1970s and early 1980s , and was officially opened in 1987 . It now carries State Highway 1 away from the retail heart of the suburb , connecting at its northern end with the city 's one @-@ way street system . With the construction of the bypass , Caversham Valley Road was truncated close to its junction with South Road , and the upper stretch of the road continued as part of State Highway 1 , connecting the bypass with Dunedin Southern Motorway . 
 Until the construction of the bypass , South Road and Caversham Valley Road formed the main route out of Dunedin to the south . State Highway 1 followed South Road through the main retail area , then followed Caversham Valley Road to Lookout Point . Above its retail area , South Road winds around the flank of Calton Hill ; Caversham Valley Road forms a straighter , steep route that originally continued from the end of South Road 's retail area . For this reason , the part of South Road running through the retail area is also sometimes referred to as part of Caversham Valley Road . Improvements to Caversham Valley Road to ease congestion and increase safety began in 2011 . A junction at the north end of Caversham 's main retail area connects South Road with the bypass . 
 Caversham was served by a suburban railway station on the " South Line " between Dunedin and Mosgiel . Services ceased on this line in 1982 . The railway station buildings were demolished several years later . 
 Trams served Caversham between 1880 and 1954 , operating in Hillside Road , South Road , and David Street . Several bus routes now serve Caversham , connecting it with the heart of the city . Citibus and Dunedin Passenger Transport run routes from the city centre to Saint Clair and Corstorphine via Hillside Road , and to Lookout Point via South Road . Dunedin passenger transport also runs services between The Octagon and both Mosgiel and Brighton via South Road . Cargill 's Corner , at the South Dunedin end of Hillside Road , is a major suburban bus hub . 
 = Prince 's Palace of Monaco = 
 The Prince 's Palace of Monaco is the official residence of the Prince of Monaco . Built in 1191 as a Genoese fortress , during its long and often dramatic history it has been bombarded and besieged by many foreign powers . Since the end of the 13th century , it has been the stronghold and home of the Grimaldi family who first captured it in 1297 . The Grimaldi ruled the area first as feudal lords , and from the 17th century as sovereign princes , but their power was often derived from fragile agreements with their larger and stronger neighbours . 
 Thus while other European sovereigns were building luxurious , modern Renaissance and Baroque palaces , politics and common sense demanded that the palace of the Monegasque rulers be fortified . This unique requirement , at such a late stage in history , has made the palace at Monaco one of the most unusual in Europe . Indeed , when its fortifications were finally relaxed during the late 18th century , it was seized by the French and stripped of its treasures , and fell into decline , while the Grimaldi were exiled for over 20 years . 
 The Grimaldi 's occupation of their palace is also unusual because , unlike other European ruling families , the absence of alternative palaces and land shortages have resulted in their use of the same residence for more than seven centuries . Thus , their fortunes and politics are directly reflected in the evolution of the palace . Whereas the Romanovs , Bourbons , and Habsburgs could , and frequently did , build completely new palaces , the most the Grimaldi could achieve when enjoying good fortune , or desirous of change , was to build a new tower or wing , or , as they did more frequently , rebuild an existing part of the palace . Thus , the Prince 's Palace reflects the history not only of Monaco , but of the family which in 1997 celebrated 700 years of rule from the same palace . 
 During the 19th and early 20th centuries , the palace and its owners became symbols of the slightly risqué glamour and decadence that were associated with Monte Carlo and the French Riviera . Glamour and theatricality became reality when the American film star Grace Kelly became <unk> of the palace in 1956 . In the 21st century , the palace remains the residence of the current Prince of Monaco . 
 = = Princely Palace = = 
 The palace is a blend of architectural styles ; its ancient origins are indicated by a lack of symmetry . Thus to evaluate the architecture , wings and blocks have to be observed separately . The principal façade appears as a terrace of Renaissance style palazzi from differing periods of the Renaissance era ( Illustrations 1 and 12 ) which — even though they form only one palace — is exactly what they are . These wings are however united by their common rusticated ground floor . This Renaissance architecture seems to mask earlier fortifications , the towers of which rise behind the differing classical façades . These towers — many complete with crenellations and machicolations — were actually mostly rebuilt during the 19th century . At the rear of the palace the original medieval fortifications seem untouched by time . ( Illustration 4 ) . A greater architectural harmony has been achieved within the court of honour around which the palace is built , where two tiers of frescoed open arcades serve as both a ceremonial balcony for the prince 's appearances and a state entrance and corridor linking the formal state rooms of the palace . 
 The most notable of the many rooms are the state apartments . These were laid out from the 16th century onwards , and were enhanced in the style of those at Versailles during the 18th century . In the 19th century and again during the late 20th century , large @-@ scale restoration of the state rooms consolidated the 18th @-@ century style which prevails today . 
 Designed as an enfilade and a ceremonial route to the throne room , the processional route begins with an external horseshoe @-@ shaped staircase which leads from the court of honour to the open gallery known as the Gallery of Hercules . From here guests enter the Mirror Gallery , a long hall inspired by the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles . This gallery leads to the first of the state rooms , the Officer 's Room , where guests are greeted by court officials before an audience with the prince in the Throne Room . From the Officer 's Hall the enfilade continues to the Blue Room . This large drawing room , decorated with blue brocade , is hung with Grimaldi family portraits and has chandeliers of Murano glass . The following room , the largest of the state apartments , is the Throne Room . Its ceiling and frescoes were executed by Orazio de Ferrari and depict the surrender of Alexander the Great . The throne , in the Empire style , is positioned on a dais , beneath a red silk canopy of estate surmounted by a gilt crown . The floors are of Carrara marble . All state ceremonies have been held in this room since the 16th century . 
 Other rooms in the state suite include the Red Room — so called because its walls are covered in red brocade — a large drawing room containing paintings by Jan Brueghel and Charles Le Brun . Like much of the palace the room contains ornate 18th @-@ century French @-@ style furniture . From the Red Room leads the York Room . Furnished as a state bedchamber , this room is frescoed with illustrations of the four seasons by Gregorio de Ferrari . The following room , known as the Yellow Room ( or sometimes as the Louis XV Bedchamber ) , is another state bedroom . 
 The most remarkable room in the suite is the Mazarin Room . This drawing room is lined with Italian gilded and painted polychrome <unk> by craftsmen brought to France by Cardinal Mazarin , who was related by marriage to the Grimaldi . Cardinal Mazarin 's portrait hangs above the fireplace . 
 While the overriding atmosphere of the interior and exterior of the palace is of the 18th century , the palace itself is not . Much of its appearance is a result of a long evolution dating from the 12th century , overshadowed by heavy restoration and refurnishing during the 19th and 20th centuries . 
 = = Grimaldi fortress = = 
 Monaco 's history predates the Roman occupation of AD 122 . Its large natural harbour ensured a steady stream of visitors from Byblos , Tyre , and Sidon . Later the Phoenicians came to trade silk , oil , and spices with the natives . It was the Phoenicians who introduced to this area of the Mediterranean their god <unk> , later known by the Romans as Hercules <unk> . It was after this god that the Romans renamed the area Portus Hercules <unk> , which has evolved to the present name of Monaco . The seat of the Prince of Monaco was established on the Rocher de Monaco ( Illustration 5 ) as a fortress in 1191 when the harbour , that is today lined by Monte Carlo , was acquired by the Republic of Genoa . The harbour and its immediate area were given to the Genoese by the Emperor Henry IV with the proviso that the Genoese protect the coastline from piracy . Further territory was ceded to the new owners by the Council of Peille and the Abbaye de Saint Pons . In 1215 work began on a new fortress , comprising four towers connected by ramparts protected by a curtain wall . This forms the core of the present palace . 
 Genoa was important in the politics of 12th @-@ century Europe . The Genoese were a nation of merchants , and such was their wealth that they frequently fulfilled a role as bankers to the other nation states . However , the Genoese became divided following the rift caused when the Emperor Frederick II challenged the power of Pope Innocent IV . Two distinct camps formed : the Guelphs who supported the pope and the Ghibellines who were loyal to the imperial crown . Siding with the Guelphs were one of the patrician families of Genoa — the Grimaldi . Throughout the 13th century these two groups fought . Finally at the end of the century the Ghibellines were victorious and banished their opponents , including the Grimaldi , from Genoa . The Grimaldi settled in the area today known as the French Riviera . Several castles in the area are still known as Chateau Grimaldi , and testify to the strong presence of various branches of the family in the vicinity . 
 Legend relates that in January 1297 François Grimaldi , disguised as a monk , sought shelter at the castle . On obtaining entry he murdered the guard , whereupon his men appeared and captured the castle . Thus the fortress became the stronghold of the Grimaldi . This event is commemorated by a statue of François Grimaldi in the precincts of the palace ( Illustration 6 ) and in the arms of the House of Grimaldi where François is depicted wielding a sword while in the garb of a monk ( Illustration 2 ) . 
 Charles I , who ruled from 1331 to 1357 , and was the son of François Grimaldi 's cousin Rainier I , significantly enlarged the fortress by adding two large buildings : one against the eastern ramparts and the second looking out over the sea . This changed the appearance of the fortress , making it appear more of a fortified house than a fortress . The fortifications remained very necessary , for during the next three decades the fortress was alternately lost and regained by the Grimaldi to the Genoese . In 1341 the Grimaldi took Menton and then Roquebrune , thus consolidating their power and strength in the area . Subsequently they strengthened not only the defences of the harbour but also their fortress on the Rocher . The Grimaldi 's stronghold was now a power base from which the family ruled a large but very vulnerable area of land . 
 For the next hundred years the Grimaldi defended their territory from attacks by other states which included Genoa , Pisa , Venice , Naples , France , Spain , Germany , England and Provence . The fortress was frequently bombarded , damaged , and restored . Gradually the Grimaldi began to make an alliance with France which strengthened their position . Now more secure , the Grimaldi lords of Monaco now began to recognise the need not only to defend their territory , but also to have a home reflecting their power and prestige . 
 Throughout the 15th century , both the fortress and the Rocher continued to be extended and further defended until it became a garrison accommodating some 400 troops . The slow transformation from fortified house to palace ( Illustration 7 ) began during this era , first with building by <unk> Grimaldi , Lord of Monaco ( who between 1458 and 1494 was " a noteworthy ruler who handled diplomacy and the sword with equal talent " ) , and then by his son Jean II . This period saw the extension of the east side of the fortress with a three – floored wing , guarded by high scalloped walls connecting the bastion towers — St Mary ( M in Illustration 7 ) , Middle ( K ) and South ( H ) . This large new wing contained the palace 's principal room , the State Hall ( today known as the Guard Room ) . Here the princes carried out their official business and held court . Further , more luxurious , rooms complete with balconies and loggias were designed for the private use of the Grimaldi family . In 1505 Jean II was killed by his brother Lucien . 
 = = Fortress to palace = = 
 = = = Lucien I ( 1505 – 1523 ) = = = 
 Jean II was succeeded by his brother Lucien I. Peace did not reign in Monaco for long ; in December 1506 14 @,@ 000 Genoese troops besieged Monaco and its castle , and for five months 1 @,@ 500 <unk> and mercenaries defended the Rocher before achieving victory in March 1507 . This left Lucien I to walk a diplomatic tightrope between France and Spain in order to preserve the fragile independence of the tiny state which was in truth subject to Spain . Lucien immediately set about repairing the ravages of war to the fortified palace which had been damaged by heavy bombardment . To the main wing ( see Illustrations 3 & 7 – H to M ) , built by Prince Lambert and extended during the reign of Jean II , he now added a large wing ( H to C ) which today houses the state apartments . 
 = = = Honoré I ( 1523 – 1581 ) = = = 
 During the reign of Honoré I the internal transformation from fortress to palace was continued . The Treaty of <unk> at the beginning of Honoré 's rule clarified Monaco 's position as a protectorate of Spain , and thus later of the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V. This provided the security to allow the Lord of Monaco to concentrate on the more comfortable side of his residence rather than the constant need to defend it . 
 The courtyard was rebuilt , the architect Dominique Gallo designing two arcades , stretching between points H and C. The arcades , fronting the earlier wing by Lucien I , each have twelve arches , decorated by white marble balustrading on the upper level . Today the upper arcades are known as the Galerie d 'Hercule ( gallery of Hercules ) because their ceilings were painted with scenes depicting the Labours of Hercules by Orazio de Ferrari during the later reign of Honoré II . These arcades or loggias provide corridors to the state rooms in the south wing ( today known as the State Rooms Wings ) . On the other side of the courtyard a new wing was constructed and the Genoese artist Luca <unk> was charged with painting its external walls with frescoes . It is thought that the galleries ( B ) to the north wing overlooking the harbour were built at this time . 
 Further enlargements were carried out in order to entertain the Emperor Charles V in 1529 , when he stayed four nights at the palace during his journey in state to Bologna for his coronation by Pope Clement VII . 
 Architecturally this was an exciting period , but Honoré I was unable to remodel the fortress in the grand style of a Renaissance palazzo . In spite of the Spanish protection , the risk of attack from France was high and defence remained Honoré 's main priority . With this in mind he added two new features : All Saints Tower ( F ) and the Serravalle Bastion ( G ) . All Saints Tower was semi @-@ circular and guarded the end of the rock promontory . Complete with gun platforms and cannon , it was connected to man @-@ made caves in the rock itself . Subterranean passages also linked it to the Serravalle Bastion , which was in essence a three @-@ storey gun tower bristling with cannon . Underneath the courtyard a cistern was installed , providing sufficient water for 1000 troops for a 20 @-@ month siege , with a huge vaulted ceiling supported by nine columns . Monaco was to remain politically vulnerable for another century and little building work took place from 1581 until 1604 , during the reigns of Prince Charles II and Prince Hercule . 
 = = = Honoré II ( 1597 – 1662 ) = = = 
 Monaco 's vulnerability was further brought home in 1605 when the Spanish installed a garrison there . In 1633 Honoré II ( Illustration 8 ) , was officially addressed as " Serene Prince " by the Spanish king , thus recognizing Monaco as a principality for the first time . However , as Spanish troops were currently in occupation , this recognition was seen as little more than a gesture to keep Honoré happy . 
 Honoré II was a francophile . Following his education in Milan , he had been cultivated by the intellectual salons of Paris . Thus , having close affinities with France both culturally and politically , he rebelled against the Spanish presence in Monaco . While he realised that Monaco needed the protection of another power , France was Honoré II 's favoured choice . In 1641 , heavily supported by the French , he attacked the Spanish garrison and expelled the Spanish , declaring " the glorious liberty of Monaco " . The liberty mentioned was entirely dependent on France , as Monaco now entered a period as a protectorate of France which would last until 1814 . As a result of this action Honoré II is today regarded as the hero of Monaco . 
 Highly educated and a patron of the arts , Honoré II , secure on his throne , began collecting works by Titian , Dürer , Raphael , Rubens and Michelangelo which formed the basis of the art collection that furnished the palace slowly evolving from the Monaco fortress . Over the following 30 @-@ year period he transformed it into a palace suitable for a prince ( Illustration 9 ) . 
 He commissioned the architect Jacques Catone not only to enlarge the palace , but also to soften its grim fortified appearance . The main façade facing the square , the " front " of the palace , was given decorative embellishments . The upper loggias ( B ) to the right of the entrance were glazed . Inside the palace the State Rooms Wing was restyled and the enfilade of state apartments created . A new chapel adorned by a cupola ( built on the site marked D ) was dedicated to St John the Baptist . This new work helped conceal the forbidding Serravalle Bastion from the courtyard , to create the lighter atmosphere of a Renaissance palazzo . 
 = = Absentee landlords and revolution ( 1662 – 1815 ) = = 
 During the late 17th century and early 18th century , while Monaco was officially an independent state , it was in reality a province of France . Its rulers spent much of their time at the French court , in this way resembling the absentee landlords so prevalent at the time amongst the French aristocracy . The lure of Versailles was greater than that of their own country . 
 Honoré II was succeeded by his grandson , Prince Louis I. The new prince had an urbane personality and spent much time with his wife at the French court , where he enjoyed the unusual distinction of being both a foreign head of state and a peer of France . Impressed by the palaces of the French king , who had employed the architect Jean du Cerceau to carry out alterations to the palace at Fontainebleau , Louis I used Fontainebleau as the inspiration for enhancements to his palace at Monaco . Thus he was responsible for two of the palace 's most notable features : the entrance — a huge Baroque arch surmounted by a broken pediment bearing the Grimaldi Arms ( Illustration 10 ) — and more memorable still , a double horseshoe staircase modelled on that at Fontainebleau . The thirty steps which compose the staircase are said to have been sculpted from a single block of Carrara marble . Both the architrave of the new entrance and the horseshoe stairs were designed by Antoine <unk> , an architect from Como . 
 A prince noted for the permissiveness of his private life , Louis I 's prodigality was notorious . While visiting England in 1677 he incurred the ire of King Charles II by showering expensive gifts on Hortense Mancini , the king 's mistress . The English and Prince Louis later became political enemies when Louis took part in the Anglo @-@ Dutch Wars against England , leading his own Monaco Cavalry into battles in Flanders and Franche @-@ Comté . These acts earned Louis the gratitude of Louis XIV who made him ambassador to the Holy See , charged with securing the Spanish Succession . However , the cost of upholding his position at the papal court caused him to sell most of his grandfather Honoré II 's art collection , denuding the palace he had earlier so spectacularly enhanced . Louis died before securing the Spanish throne for France , an act which would have earned the Grimaldi huge rewards . Instead Europe was immediately plunged into turmoil as the War of the Spanish Succession began . 
 In 1701 , Prince Antoine succeeded Louis I and inherited an almost bankrupt Monaco , though he did further embellish the Royal Room . On its ceiling , Gregorio de Ferrari and Alexandre Haffner depicted a figure of Fame surrounded by lunettes illustrating the four seasons . Antoine 's marriage to Marie of Lorraine was unhappy and yielded only two daughters . Monaco 's constitution confined the throne to members of the Grimaldi family alone , and Antoine was thus keen for his daughter Princess Louise @-@ Hippolyte ( Illustration 11 ) to wed a Grimaldi cousin . However , the state of the Grimaldi fortunes , and the lack of ( the politically necessary ) approval from King Louis XIV , dictated otherwise . Louise @-@ Hippolyte was married to Jacques de <unk> Matignon , a wealthy aristocrat from Normandy . Louise @-@ Hippolyte succeeded her father as sovereign of Monaco in 1731 but died just months later . The King of France , confirming Monaco 's subservient state to France , ignored the protests of other branches of the Grimaldi family , overthrew the Monégasque constitution , and approved the succession of Jacques de <unk> Matignon as Prince Jacques I. 
 Jacques I assumed the name and arms of the Grimaldi , but the French aristocracy showed scant respect towards the new prince who had risen from their ranks and chose to spend his time absent from Monaco . He died in 1751 and was succeeded by his and Louise @-@ Hippolyte 's son Prince Honoré III . 
 Honoré III married Catherine <unk> in 1757 and later divorced her . Interestingly , before his marriage Honoré III had been conducting an affair with his future mother @-@ in @-@ law . After her divorce Marie <unk> married Louis Joseph de Bourbon , prince de Condé , a member of the fallen French royal house , in 1798 . 
 Ironically , the Grimaldi fortunes were restored when descendants of both Hortense Mancini and Louis I married : Louise d <unk> Mazarin married Honoré III 's son and heir , the future Honoré IV . This marriage in 1776 was extremely advantageous to the Grimaldi , as Louise 's ancestress Hortense Mancini had been the heiress of Cardinal Mazarin . Thus Monaco 's ruling family acquired all the estates bequeathed by Cardinal Mazarin , including the Duchy of <unk> , and the Principality of Château @-@ <unk> . 
 Honoré III was a soldier who fought at both Fontenoy and <unk> . He was happy to leave Monaco to be governed by others , most notably a former tutor . It was on one of Honoré III 's rare visits to the palace in 1767 that illness forced Edward , Duke of York , to land at Monaco . The sick duke was allocated the state bedchamber where he promptly died . Since that date the room has been known as the York Room . 
 Despite its lack of continuous occupancy , by the final quarter of the 18th century the palace was once again a " splendid place " ( Illustration 12 ) . However revolution was afoot , and in the late 1780s Honoré III had to make concessions to his people who had caught the revolutionary ideas from their French neighbours . This was only the beginning of the Grimaldi 's problems . In 1793 the leaders of the French Revolution annexed Monaco . The prince was imprisoned in France and his property and estates , including the palace , were forfeited to France . 
 The palace was looted by the prince 's subjects , and what remained of the furnishings and art collection was auctioned by the French government . Further changes were heaped on both the country and palace . Monaco was renamed Fort d 'Hercule and became a canton of France while the palace became a military hospital and poorhouse . In Paris , the prince 's daughter @-@ in @-@ law Francoise @-@ Thérèse de Choiseul @-@ <unk> ( 1766 – 1794 ) was executed , one of the last to be guillotined during the Reign of Terror . Honoré III died in 1795 in Paris , where he had spent most of his life , without regaining his throne . 
 = = 19th century = = 
 = = = Regaining the palace = = = 
 Honoré III was succeeded by his son Honoré IV ( 1758 – 1819 ) whose marriage to Louise d <unk> Mazarin had done so much to restore the Grimaldi fortunes . Much of this fortune had been depleted by the hardships of the revolution . On 17 June 1814 under the Treaty of Paris , the Principality of Monaco was restored to Honoré IV . 
 The fabric of the palace had been completely neglected during the years in which the Grimaldi had been exiled from Monaco . Such was the state of disrepair that part of the east wing had to be demolished along with Honoré II 's bathing pavilion , which stood on the site occupied today by the Napoleon Museum and the building housing the palace archives . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 Honoré IV died shortly after his throne was restored to him , and structural restoration of the palace began under Honoré V and was continued after his death in 1841 by his brother Prince Florestan . However , by the time of Florestan 's accession , Monaco was once again experiencing political tensions caused by financial problems . These resulted from its position as a protectorate of Sardinia , the country to which it had been ceded by France following the end of the Napoleonic wars . Florestan , an eccentric ( he had been a professional actor ) , left the running of Monaco to his wife , Maria Caroline Gibert de <unk> . Despite her attempts to rule , her husband 's people were once again in revolt . In an attempt to ease the volatile situation Florestan ceded power to his son Charles , but this came too late to appease the <unk> . Menton and Roquebrune broke away from Monaco , leaving the Grimaldi 's already small country hugely diminished — little more than Monte Carlo . 
 Florestan died in 1856 and his son , Charles , who had already been ruling what remained of Monaco , succeeded him as Charles III ( Illustration 15 ) . Menton and Roquebrune officially became part of France in 1861 , reducing Monaco 's size at a stroke by 80 % . With time on his hands , Charles III now devoted his time to completing the restoration of his palace begun by his uncle Honoré V. He rebuilt St Mary 's Tower ( Illustration 14 ) and completely restored the chapel , adding a new altar , and having its vaulted ceiling painted with frescoes , while outside the façade was painted by Jacob <unk> and Deschler with murals illustrating various heroic deeds performed by the Grimaldi . The Guard Room , the former great hall of the fortress ( now known as the State Hall ) , was transformed by new Renaissance decorations and the addition of a monumental chimneypiece . 
 Charles III also made serious attempts to find the various works of art and furniture looted , sold and dispersed during the revolution . Together with new purchases , a fine art collection once again adorned the palace which included not only family portraits such as that of Lucien I by de Predis ; Honoré II by Philippe de <unk> ; the head of Antoine I by Hyacinthe Rigaud , and van Loo 's portrait of Louise @-@ <unk> ( Illustration 11 ) but also such masterpieces as the The Music Lesson by Titian . 
 Charles III was also responsible for another palace in Monte Carlo , one which would fund his restorations , and turn around his country 's faltering economy . This new palace was Charles Garnier 's Second Empire casino , completed in 1878 ( Illustration 16 ) . The first Monaco casino had opened the previous decade . Through the casino Monaco became self @-@ supporting . 
 = = = Decline of Grimaldi power = = = 
 By the time of Charles III 's death in 1889 , Monaco and Monte Carlo were synonymous as one and the same place , and had acquired , through gambling , a reputation as a louche and decadent playground of the rich . It attracted everyone from Russian grand dukes and railway magnates , often with their mistresses , to adventurers , causing the small country to be derided by many including Queen Victoria . In fact so decadent was Monaco considered that from 1882 , when she first began visiting the French Riviera , Queen Victoria refused to make a courtesy social call at the palace . The contemporary writer Sabine Baring @-@ Gould described the <unk> of Monaco as " the moral cesspool of Europe . " 
 The successive rulers of Monaco tended to live elsewhere and visit their palace only occasionally . Charles III was succeeded in 1889 by Albert I. Albert married Lady Mary Victoria Douglas @-@ Hamilton , a daughter of Scotland 's 11th duke of Hamilton , and his German wife , a princess of Baden . The couple had one son , Louis , before their marriage was annulled in 1880 . Albert was a keen scientist and founded the Oceanographic Institute in 1906 ; as a pacifist he then founded the International Institute of Peace in Monaco . Albert 's second wife , Alice Heine , an American banking heiress who was the widow of a French duke , did much to turn Monte Carlo into a cultural centre , establishing both ballet and the opera in the city . Having brought a large dowry into the family she contemplated turning the casino into a convalescent home for the poor who would benefit from recuperation in warm climes . The couple , however , separated before Alice was able to put her plan into action . 
 In 1910 , the palace was stormed during the Monegasque Revolution . The prince pronounced an end to absolute monarchy by promulgating a constitution with an elected parliament the following year . 
 Albert was succeeded in 1922 by his son Louis II . Louis II had been brought up by his mother and stepfather , <unk> Prince <unk> Festetics de Tolna , in Germany , and did not know Monaco at all until he was 11 . He had a distant relationship with his father and served in the French Army . While posted abroad , he met his mistress Marie Juliette <unk> , by whom he had a daughter , Charlotte Louise Juliette , born in Algeria in 1898 . As Prince of Monaco , Louis II spent much time elsewhere , preferring to live on the family estate of Le <unk> close to Paris . In 1911 Prince Louis had a law passed legitimising his daughter so that she could inherit the throne , in order to prevent its passing to a distant German branch of the family . The law was challenged and developed into what became known as Monaco succession crisis . Finally in 1919 the prince formally adopted his illegitimate daughter Charlotte , who became known as Princess Charlotte , Duchess of <unk> . Louis II 's collection of artefacts belonging to Napoleon I form the foundation of the Napoleon Museum at the palace , which is open to the public . 
 During World War II , Louis attempted to keep Monaco neutral , although his sympathies were with the Vichy French Government . This caused a rift with his grandson Rainier , his daughter 's son , and the heir to Louis ' throne , who strongly supported the Allies against the Nazis . 
 Following the liberation of Monaco by the Allied forces , the 75 @-@ year @-@ old Prince Louis did little for his principality and it began to fall into severe neglect . By 1946 he was spending most of his time in Paris , and on 27 July of that year , he married for the first time . Absent from Monaco during most of the final years of his reign , he and his wife lived on their estate in France . Prince Louis died in 1949 and was succeeded by his grandson , Prince Rainier III . 
 = = Rainier III = = 
 Prince Rainier III was responsible for not only turning around the fortune and reputation of Monaco but also for overseeing the restoration of the palace . Upon his accession in 1949 Prince Rainier III immediately began a program of renovation and restoration . Many of the external frescoes on the courtyard were restored , while the southern wing , destroyed following the French revolution , was rebuilt . This is the part of the palace where the ruling family have their private apartments . The wing also houses the Napoleon Museum and the archives . 
 The frescoes decorating the open arcade known as the Gallery of Hercules were altered by Rainier III , who imported works by Pier Francesco Mazzucchelli depicting mythological and legendary heroes . In addition many of the rooms were refurnished and redecorated . Many of the marble floors have been restored in the staterooms and decorated with <unk> designs which include the double R monogram of Prince Rainier III . 
 Together with his wife , the late Grace Kelly , Prince Rainier not only restored the palace , but from the 1970s also made it the headquarters of a large and thriving business , which encouraged light industry to Monaco , the aim of which was to lessen Monaco 's dependence on the income from gambling . This involved land reclamation , the development of new beaches , and high rise luxury housing . As a result of Monaco 's increase in prestige , in 1993 it joined the United Nations , with Rainier 's heir Prince Albert as head of the Monaco delegation . 
 Princess Grace predeceased her husband , dying in 1982 as the result of a car accident . When Rainier III died in 2005 he left both his palace and his country in a stronger and more stable state of repair financially and structurally than they had been for centuries . 
 = = The palace in the 21st century = = 
 Today the palace is home to Prince Rainier 's son and successor , Prince Albert II . The state rooms are open to the public during the summer , and since 1960 , the palace 's courtyard has been the setting for open @-@ air concerts given by Monte @-@ Carlo Philharmonic Orchestra ( formerly known as the Orchestra of the National Opera ) . 
 However , the palace is far more than a tourist attraction and museum : it remains a fully working palace and headquarters of the Monégasque ruler , a fact emphasised by the sentries on constant guard duty at the entrance ( Illustration 17 ) . The sovereign princes , although bound by constitution , are involved with the day @-@ to @-@ day running of Monaco as both a country and a business . Today Monaco covers an area of 197 hectares ( 487 acres ) of which 40 hectares ( 99 acres ) have been reclaimed from the sea since 1980 . 
 For important Monégasque events — such as Grimaldi weddings and births — the palace courtyard is opened and the assembled citizens of Monaco are addressed by the prince from the Gallery of Hercules overlooking the courtyard . The courtyard is also used to host the annual children 's Christmas party . Through such events , the palace continues to play a central role in the lives of the prince and his subjects , as it has done for over 700 years . 
 = Else Christensen = 
 Else Christensen ( 1913 – 2005 ) was a Danish Odinist who established the Odinist Fellowship in the United States , where she lived for much of her life . A Third <unk> ideologue , she espoused the establishment of an anarcho @-@ syndicalist society composed of racially Aryan communities . 
 Born Else <unk> in Esbjerg , Denmark , Christensen developed her anarcho @-@ syndicalist sympathies while living in Copenhagen . From this position she moved toward the Strasserite National Bolshevik faction of the National Socialist Workers ' Party of Denmark , which brought together a far right emphasis on race with a left @-@ wing approach to economics . In 1937 she married fellow Danish Nazi activist Aage Alex Christensen , however because of their National Bolshevik allegiances they were placed under heavy scrutiny amidst the German occupation of Denmark during World War II . After the war they moved to England and then Canada , settling in Toronto in 1951 . Corresponding with various far right activists , she came upon the writings of the American far right ideologue Francis Parker Yockey and the Australian Odinist Alexander Rud Mills , both of whom had a profound influence on her . 
 Christensen recognized the excessive Jewish control of the Western socio @-@ political establishment , and believed that this would prevent the growth of any explicitly political movement to spread racial consciousness among those she deemed to be Aryan . Instead , she believed that Odinism – a variant of the Modern Pagan religion of Heathenry – represented the best way of spreading this racial consciousness . In 1969 , Christensen and her husband founded a group called The Odinist Fellowship . Alex died in 1971 , and Christensen continued her work , relocating to the United States . That year she began publication of a newsletter called The Odinist , which continued for many years . In 1993 she was imprisoned for drug smuggling , although maintained that she had been used as a drug mule without her knowledge . On release , she was deported to Canada , where she lived in Vancouver Island during her final years . 
 Christensen exerted a significant influence over the racially oriented Odinist movement , gaining the moniker of the " Grand Mother " within that community . Her life and activities have been discussed in a number of academic studies of Odinism and the far right in North America by scholars like Nicholas Goodrick @-@ Clarke , Mattias Gardell , and Jeffrey Kaplan . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life : 1913 – 1968 = = = 
 Christensen was born as Else <unk> in 1913 in Esbjerg , western Denmark . She became a professional <unk> and in 1933 moved to Copenhagen . There , she embraced anarcho @-@ syndicalism and became a follower of the anarcho @-@ syndicalist ideologue Christian Christensen . Exposed to the various competing radical groups on both the far right and far left , she came under the increasing influence of the Strasserite wing within the National Socialist Workers ' Party of Denmark ( <unk> ) , a group which had embraced the Nazi ideology of Germany 's Nazi Party . In 1937 she married the woodcarver and unionist Aage Alex Christensen , who had served as the top lieutenant of the <unk> leader Cay <unk> . The <unk> became associated with the Strasserite National Bolshevik faction of the party , but Aage was part of the faction ousted when Fritz Clausen seized control . 
 Following the German invasion of Denmark in 1940 , both Else and Aage were arrested for the latter 's involvement in National Bolshevist armed cells . Christensen was released after three days ' interrogation , but Aage was convicted of illegal weapons ' possession and detained for six months . At that point , Christensen convinced her father 's cousin , who was Minister of Justice , that Aage should be released . Following the end of World War II , the couple left Denmark for England . In 1951 they migrated to Canada , where they settled in Toronto ; here , Elsa worked in various hospitals , a vocation she retained throughout her life . 
 Retaining an interest in class and race @-@ based radicalism , she established contacts with various far right activists in the neighboring United States , including Willis Carto and James K. Warner , the latter being the New York organizer of the American Nazi Party . Warner had earlier attempted to establish Odinism as a religious wing of the American Nazi movement , but having believed this to be a failure he gave Christensen all of his leftover material on Odinism . It was in this material that Christensen came across the Call of Our Ancient Nordic Religion , a pamphlet authored by the Australian Odinist Alexander Rud Mills . Although Christensen believed that many of Mills ' ideas were too heavily influenced by Freemasonry for her liking , she was profoundly influenced by his ideas about reviving the worship of ancient Norse deities . Her approach to the understanding of such deities would be heavily influenced by Jungian psychology , believing that the Norse deities were encoded in a collective unconscious of the white race . 
 She was also influenced by the writing of the far right American theorist Francis Parker Yockey , in particular his 1962 work Imperium , in which he lamented the defeat of Nazi Germany and blamed it on the influence of Jews in Europe and the U.S. Influenced by Yockey , Christensen came to believe that Aryan culture had reached its " senility phase " , personified by the ideologies of Christianity , communism , and capitalism , the belief that all human beings are equal , and the internationalist erosion of the distinct cultures of different races . She also read Oswald Spengler 's Decline of the West , however she rejected Spengler 's pessimistic view that this decline was terminal , instead opining that the Aryan civilization could be rejuvenated through its adoption of a new religion - Odinism . She deemed Odinism to be a religion that had a natural and intrinsic relationship with what she perceived to be a Northern European race , stating that the " primary source " of the faith was " biological : its genesis is in our race , its principles encoded in our genes . " She also believed that this Odinism should use Norse names for the deities rather than Anglo @-@ Saxon or Teutonic ones in order to avoid the post @-@ war animosity between England and Germany . 
 = = = The Odinist Fellowship : 1969 – 2005 = = = 
 Christensen established the Odinist Fellowship in 1969 , then based from her mobile home in Crystal River , Florida . The academic specialist in the far right Jeffrey Kaplan termed it " the first organizational expression of racialist Odinism in the United States " , while the religious studies scholar Stefanie von Schnurbein noted that Christensen created her version of Odinism as " a discrete vehicle to establish her cultural pessimist , anti @-@ Semitic , and radical racial agenda in a religious cloak " . In 1971 , her husband died , after which she began to focus more fully on her Odinist activities . She began touring North America to promote Odinism , and in August 1971 released the first issue of her own magazine , The Odinist , which opened with the banner of " New Values from the Past " . The Odinist focused heavily on right @-@ wing issues , with Kaplan noting that commentaries on right @-@ wing ideas , contemporary news , and anti @-@ semitic ideas were " regular fare " within its pages , while explicit discussions of Odinist theology or Old Norse texts were " few and far between " . The Pagan journalist Margot Adler deemed The Odinist to be " frankly racist , although they probably would have preferred the term ' racialist ' . " 
 Christensen believed that Odinism was the ideal tool for the advancement of Aryan racial consciousness , expressing her opinion that the Jewish @-@ controlled establishment would not permit her to do it a more explicit way , stating that " You cannot repeat the mistake that Hitler made [ of explicitly attacking the Jews ] ... Everybody knows that the Jews rule the whole damned world , so you cannot fight their combined power . You need to watch your step . " A number of The Odinist 's readers wrote letters to the magazine expressing disapproval of what they perceived as the editors ' support of Nazism , to which Christensen publicly responded that such accusations were " the cheapest of all shots that can be aimed against anyone who finds something positive to say about ... National Socialism ... or who merely desires some degree of objectivity in dealing with this grossly maligned movement . " 
 In the early 1970s , Christensen got in contact with <unk> Murray and Elton Hall , Heathens operating a kindred in Arizona , and in 1976 their group would be the first to be certified by the Odinist Fellowship . During the early 1980s she established a prison @-@ outreach program in the hope of attracting incarcerated individuals to Odinism , in doing so getting Odinism legal recognition as a religion from the state of Florida . In the prisons , the Odinist Fellowship organised four seasonal festivals a year that were marked with sumbel as well as commemorating Hitler 's birthday . 
 In 1993 Christensen was arrested , tried , and sentenced to five years , four months imprisonment for trafficking marijuana and heroin . She claimed that she had been driving a car from Texas to Florida as a favor to friends , and had no knowledge that she was being used as a drug mule by them . Many Odinists and <unk> decried the sentence , and claimed that it was a political frame @-@ up ; Murray established a Free Else Christensen Committee and with Stephen McNallen created a defense fund to aid her . Christensen herself did not endorse the claim that the charges were politically motivated , instead blaming her own naivete at being exploited by drug dealers . Before being imprisoned she gave the Odinist Fellowship 's membership list to McNallen for the use of his own Heathen organisation , the Asatru Folk Assembly . 
 After serving her sentence , she was deported to Canada , something which left her feeling bitter . There , Max Hyatt , the <unk> of the Asatru Alliance @-@ affiliated group Wodan 's Kindred , invited her to live at his home in Vancouver Island , British Columbia . However , after personal and political differences surfaced , Christensen left Hyatt 's home and moved into an RV park in <unk> , Vancouver Island , where she lived in a small trailer . Despite being far less involved in Odinic activities than she had been previously , she set about trying to revive the Odinist Fellowship . In 1998 she began publication of Midgard Page , which was produced in both paper and electronic copies , the latter of which was housed on Hyatt 's <unk> Press website . During her later years , she became more moderate in her views , encouraging a cultural change among Aryans rather than political actions . This contrasted with the more radical views of newer groups like Wotansvolk , who embraced militant action to bring about socio @-@ political change . She died on May 4 , 2005 . 
 = = Ideology = = 
 Historian of religion Mattias Gardell believed that Christensen 's Odinism represented a separate Heathen tendency to McNallen 's Asatru , characterising Christensen 's version as " a more political and racial interpretation with notable national socialist influences " . He noted that Christensen viewed the religion as a means through which to bring about " racial unification and rejuvenation " . Her approach to Odinism focused largely on the study of books rather than on spiritual experiences gained through ritual , and she rejected the claims of other Heathens that they are visited by anthropomorphic gods , dismissing these claims as signs of lunacy . 
 Christensen believed that the present power structure of society was going to collapse , and that racial @-@ oriented Odinists should be prepared for this . She believed that revolutionary activity to overthrow oppressive governments was a natural instinct for Aryans , as was reflected " from Jefferson to Hitler . " Although she approved of its attitude to race , she believed that the example of Nazi Germany was not one that should be emulated because of its totalitarian structure and alliance with capitalists . Instead she expressed favorable comments regarding the economically left @-@ wing policies of the early Benito Mussolini government in Italy , and of the Strasserite National Bolshevik factions within Germany 's Nazi Party . She expressed the view that Hitler 's regime did not reach its " true potential " and that instead it should have retained its " original , socialist and folkish agenda " . 
 In espousing an anti @-@ totalitarian and anti @-@ capitalist attitude that favored a de @-@ centralized societal organization , Christensen reflected her anarchist values . Describing her ideal social situation as " tribal socialism " , she envisioned a world in which white people lived in small , self @-@ sufficient " tribal " Odinist rural communes , each of which was autonomous , and in which private enterprise was permitted but resources and social responsibilities were shared . She believed that the societies of ancient Northern Europe had been similarly anarchistic in nature , expressing the view that this anarchist emphasis on freedom was intrinsic to the " nature " of Aryan people ; in this way her attitude differed strongly from the anti @-@ racist perspective of most anarchists . 
 Christensen expressed the opinion that these communities should be racially homogenous and should exhibit " racial consciousness " , opining that in a voluntary social order , no one would want to live alongside those of a different race . Although denying that she was a white supremacist , she was clear about being a white separatist . She argued for a ban on inter @-@ racial marriage , with the intent on keeping the ' Aryan ' race " pure " . This preoccupation with concepts of purity was common within the National Socialist milieu , exhibiting itself not only in racial terms but also environmental ones too . Christensen rejected capitalism , consumerism , and materialism , believing in the need for ecological awareness , a back @-@ to @-@ the @-@ earth ethos , and sustainable production . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 The historian of esotericism Nicholas Goodrick @-@ Clarke described Christensen as " the most public voice of Odinism in the United States from the early 1970s onward " , while in 2003 Gardell stated that the Odinist Fellowship was " the oldest organization " on the Heathen scene . Christensen came to be known as the " Grand Mother " among racially oriented Odinists , with many paying homage to her even if they had sought out a more aggressive approach to racial issues than that which she adopted . Alternately , many in the Odinist community know her as the " Folk Mother " . A number of her ideas proved to be key influences on the American Odinist movement , most notably her political and economic " tribal socialism " , her emphasis on recruiting people through prison ministries , and her emphasis on a Jungian archetypal interpretation of the Norse deities . 
 Christensen had a great importance on the formation of modern Paganism in Spain , in recognition within the Odinist orthodoxy the Spanish Odinist Circle , which became the Comunidad <unk> de España @-@ Asatru , that got official acceptance in 2010 , i.e. , full recognition and equality with other faiths recognized by the Spanish state , was considered by her followers in Spain as " Mother Folk " . The day of her death is an official day of worship in the Odinist faith in Spain 
 = I Am the Club Rocker = 
 I Am the Club Rocker is the second studio album recorded by Romanian recording artist Inna . It was made available for digital download on 19 September 2011 through Roton as a follow @-@ up to her 2009 album , Hot . The complete producing and writing process for the record was handled by Play & Win , with Juan Magan providing producing for the album 's opener , " Un Momento " . Initially known as Powerless , the release of the album led to Inna encouraging her worldwide fanbase to affirm themselves a " Club Rockers " . I Am the Club Rocker was described by Play & Win as their best album so far , while Inna named it very personal to her . 
 Commercially , the record was a success in selected countries . In Mexico , it reached number eight in its second charting week on the Mexican Albums Chart , after debuting at number fifty @-@ three in September 2011 . I Am the Club Rocker as well peaked within the top twenty in Czech Republic and Belgium , while reaching number twenty @-@ three in France . In Japan , the record was her first charting album and managed to achieve number forty @-@ five on the Oricon Albums Chart , with its total shipments of nearly 8 @,@ 000 units . The album was certified Gold in both her native country and Poland for reaching the 10 @,@ 000 sales limit , and it was also listed under the best albums of 2011 by her label , Roton , alongside Wounded Rhymes ( 2011 ) by Lykke Li and Christmas ( 2011 ) by Michael Bublé . 
 In order to promote I Am the Club Rocker , Inna released six tracks from the album as singles . The first , " Sun Is Up " , was certified Gold in Italy and Switzerland , and Silver in the United Kingdom . Furthermore , it was the 17th best @-@ selling single of 2011 in France , with it having since sold more than 100 @,@ 000 copies there . The song as well charted in other European countries , such as Bulgaria , Russia or Germany , where it peaked at number one , number three and number twenty @-@ six , respectively . Other singles from the record , " Club Rocker " and " Un Momento " , were also successful worldwide , while " Endless " and " Wow " both became top ten hits in her native country . For further promotion of the record , Inna embarked on her I Am the Club Rocker Tour ( 2011 @-@ 2012 ) , which visited Europe and the Unites States . One of her most notable <unk> during the tour was in Mexico , where she appeared in many interviews and radio <unk> . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Inna first announced that she would commence work on a new album in June 2011 . Initially , the record was planned to be entitled Powerless before getting its actual title . With the release of the album , Inna encouraged her fanbase to affirm themselves as " Club Rockers " . Particularly , she described I Am the Club Rocker as the record that " describes [ her ] the best " . The entire writing and producing process for the album was handled by Play & Win , while it was additionally produced by Juan Magan at their studios located in Bucharest and Constanţa . 
 The artwork for the album was produced during a photo shoot , which remains the most expensive one to be ever developed in Romania , with the total costs amounting to € 15 @,@ 000 . It was shot by Edward <unk> at the Media Pro Pictures studios in Buftea ; over 50 male and female models were featured in the shooting which consisted of two different images – an uncensored one , leaked onto the internet , and the photograph used to commercialize the album . The artwork portrays Inna standing in the center of a background with semi @-@ nude models . She 's wearing a summer suit , sporting long boots and a French @-@ like bun . 
 The album portrays an europop , dance @-@ pop , techno and house record , with it being <unk> of balearic beats and kaleidoscopic synths . Inna 's vocals are partially processed with Auto Tune . I Am the Club Rocker was influenced by several subgenres , including flamenco used in both " Un Momento " and " Endless " , and <unk> house used in " No Limit " and " House Is Going On " . German online magazine Laut noticed the use of offbeat @-@ keyboards throughout some recordings , while news agency <unk> described the album 's instrumentation as " synth @-@ heavy " . The material for the record featured Inna singing in both English and Spanish . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its release , I Am the Club Rocker became a commercial success in Mexico . It debuted at number fifty @-@ three on the Mexican Albums Chart issued for 26 September 2011 , but climbed up forty @-@ five positions to number eight on the following week . With this performance , the record outperformed her debut studio album , Hot ( 2009 ) , which peaked at number fifty @-@ four in March 2011 . In Poland , I Am the Club Rocker was certified Gold by the ZPAV , while in Belgium , the album entered the top twenty of the Walloon Chart , with it peaking at number twelve . The record as well entered the top forty of the French Albums Chart ; it managed to open at a decent number twenty @-@ three and lasted for a few other weeks within the top 100 , before dropping down towards the bottom fifty positions and then completely exiting the chart . On the Czech Albums Chart , it opened at number twelve , and in Inna 's native country , it was certified Gold by the <unk> for selling over 10 @,@ 000 shipments . I Am the Club Rocker remains her first top fifty album in Japan , where it reached its peak position at number 45 and sold 7 @,@ 691 copies . 
 The record was met with mixed reviews . German online magazine Laut writer , Kai <unk> , was negative towards I Am the Club Rocker , commenting that " the scheme is the same in nearly all the songs : galloping offbeat @-@ keyboards first meet with innovation loose beats , ere Inna 's thin vocal organ moves the next three or four minutes on almost the same pitch " . Furthermore , he described the rhymes of the recordings as being " cobbled together of a sixth graders ' dictionary " . Anna Julia <unk> , writing for the news agency <unk> , as well criticized the album , saying that the singer 's tunes sound " all the same " , with her evaluating the record as " disappointing " . AllMusic 's Jon O 'Brien rated I Am the Club Rocker with 2 @.@ 5 / 5 stars , describing its songs as " sun @-@ soaked Europop tracks that appear destined to blare out of various Club 18 @-@ 30 hotspots until the inevitable 6 @-@ a.m. stagger back to the hotel " . He also criticized the use of Auto Tune throughout the record and noticed similarities between the record 's " Moon Girl " and Katy Perry 's " California Gurls " ( 2010 ) . O 'Brien went on into saying that Inna " is going to have to change the record quickly if she wants to avoid the novelty @-@ act fate of her homeland 's formerly most famous pop export . " He as well confessed that I Am the Club Rocker was the first Romanian major contribution to the international pop music industry after the work of girl band The Cheeky Girls . German radio station BB Radio was amazed about how " harmonious and compatible " her songs fit together on the record . They as well praised the " incredibly danceable and upbeat disco sound " and found Inna remained true to her style . BB Radio praised especially the song " Endless " , which , according to them , distinguished itself positively musically and vocally from the other material on I Am the Club Rocker . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 " Sun is Up " was dropped out from I Am the Club Rocker as its debut release . Following this , it received an overwhelming success , with it remaining <unk> one of her most successful songs worldwide . The track reached the number one spot on the Bulgarian Airplay Chart and number two on the native Romanian Top 100 chart . Additionally , it peaked at number two on the French Singles Chart and at number three both on the Swiss Singles Chart and the Russian Music Charts . The song was certified Gold in both Italy and Switzerland , and Silver in the United Kingdom . An accompanying music video for the track was shot by Alex Herron in the city of Marbella . 
 " Club Rocker " was released as the second single from the album , featuring the appearance of American hip hop artist Flo Rida . It premiered in May 2011 and it was officially released on 30 May 2011 when it entered in the radio playlists of the Los 40 Principales Network and also became available for digital download on the French iTunes . The music video 's production was made , like for her previous single , " Sun Is Up " , by Alex Herron ; the result premiered on Inna 's YouTube account on 26 June 2011 . " Club Rocker " became a moderate chart success , peaking at number thirty @-@ two on the French Singles Chart . It was as well a major hit in Czech Republic and Slovakia , reaching the top forty . 
 " Un Momento " , a collaboration with Spanish performer Juan Magan , premiered as the third single from I Am the Club Rocker . Its accompanying music video was shot in the city of Palma de Mallorca , Spain , by Inna 's frequent collaborator , Alex Herron and debuted on 9 August 2011 on Inna 's YouTube channel . The clip portrays her walking on the roads there and interacting with people ; the video was meant to be " good " and " funny " . Upon the release of " Un Momento " , the track entered the Romanian Top 100 , peaking finally at number twelve . It was successful across the European territory , with it reaching the top ten of the charts in Turkey , number four in Slovakia , number forty @-@ two in France and number forty @-@ six in Spain . 
 " Endless " was made available for digital download as the fourth single from the album . The tracks 's music video came to support an anti @-@ domestic violence campaign , with it showing Inna being verbally abused by her boyfriend with whom she finally breaks up . The song quickly entered the Romanian Airplay 100 , debuting at number ninety @-@ four on 11 December 2011 and reaching number five . " Endless " was as well a hit in Slovakia , achieving a peak position at number 9 . 
 " Wow " was initially released exclusively as a promotional single in her native Romania in order to promote the brand new opening of the Romanian iTunes Store . Finally , it became the fifth single to be premiered from I Am the Club Rocker , with it featuring a cover artwork which was shot on a Romanian beach at the Black Sea shore . An accompanying music video was also made public on Inna 's YouTube channel on 5 April 2012 , with it presenting her playing several roles from famous tales , such as Snow White and The Wonderful Wizard of Oz 's Dorothy . The track entered Inna 's native Airplay 100 at number seventy @-@ seven on 22 April 2012 , with it reaching its peak position at number ten in June 2012 , thereby becoming Inna 's eighth top ten recording there . On the Russian Music Charts , " Wow " only reached number a decent number hundred seventy @-@ one after entering the charts there at number 216 on 29 April 2012 . 
 For one of the album 's tracks , " Put Your Hands Up " , an online video was exclusively released onto Inna 's YouTube channel on 3 September 2011 , with it featuring alumni moments from some of her concerts in Europe . Following this , Inna premiered two fellow promotional singles from I Am the Club Rocker , " Señorita " and " No Limit " . Both of the recordings received a cover artwork for their promotional release . In the cover for " No Limit " , Inna , apparently hurt , is portrayed fighting with a dinosaur with an X @-@ ray device , while the photography for " Señorita " sees only half of her face being pink @-@ colored . Subsequently , a last promotional song was made available for purchase , " July " , whose artwork presents Inna appearing in bikini with a vintage look later compared to Beyoncé Knowles 's appearance in her video for " Why Don 't You Love Me " ( 2010 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of the album . 
 Sample credits 
 " Club Rocker " contains elements from the <unk> recording " Bass Attitude " , written and produced by <unk> . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Washington State Route 220 = 
 State Route 220 ( SR 220 ) was a 27 @.@ 42 @-@ mile ( 44 @.@ 13 km ) long state highway located entirely in the Yakama Indian Reservation , Yakima County , Washington , United States . The highway linked Fort Simcoe State Park in the west to White Swan and Toppenish in the east . The highway had been built sometime between 1915 and 1937 , and was renumbered from Secondary State Highway 3B during the 1964 state highway renumbering . The route was slated to be removed from the state highway system during the 1991 legislative session , and was removed April 1 , 1992 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 220 started at Fort Simcoe State Park , headed easterly along Fort Simcoe Road until it intersected Hawk Road . At the t intersection with Hawk Road , the highway turned north and follows Hawk Road until an intersection with White Swan Road . The highway turned back east along White Swan Road , passing through downtown White Swan , before turning south along Curtis Street . The highway passed over a BNSF Railway rail line , formerly part of the Toppenish , Simcoe & Western Railroad , before Curtis street turned easterly and became Fort Road . Fort Road continued almost perfectly east for about 18 mi ( 29 km ) before intersecting US Route 97 ( US 97 ) . After crossing US 97 , the highway continued as a city street through west Toppenish before terminating at SR 22 . 
 Every year the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 1991 , WSDOT calculated that as few as 340 cars used the highway at the western terminus and as many as 9 @,@ 300 cars at the interchange with SR 22 . 
 = = History = = 
 The highway was first constructed some time between 1915 and 1937 , with a segment linking Fort Simcoe to White Swan completed by 1937 . The highway was signed as Secondary State Highway 3B ( SSH 3B ) between White Swan and Toppenish until the 1964 state highway renumbering when the SR 220 number was applied to the highway . The original eastern terminus was US 97 , but in 1971 the terminus was extended to SR 22 . The highway was de @-@ legislated in 1991 along with eleven other highways , and was removed from the system effective April 1 , 1992 . 
 = = Today = = 
 All of the roads that SR 220 were routed along are still accessible , and have been designated major collector roads by WSDOT . The entirety of the former routing of SR 220 has been designated Classified Route <unk> . The city of Toppenish is eligible to receive hardship funding for the former highway between the junction with SR 22 to near Linden Road , a span of <unk> mi ( 430 m ) . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway was in Yakima County . 
 = ProtoGalaxy = 
 ProtoGalaxy is a cross @-@ genre video game for Microsoft Windows that was released on October 6 , 2010 . In the game 's back @-@ story , a species of powerful , unknown extraterrestrials enters the Milky Way with the intention of enslaving its inhabitants . The player characters must defend Earth from this alien threat and restore human civilization . ProtoGalaxy is a 2.5D game ; the 2D playing field employs 3D graphics . ProtoGalaxy incorporates elements of a variety of gaming genres , such as adventure , arcade , shooter , puzzle , and role @-@ playing genres . 
 This indie PC game is the debut production by Source Studio , a Newfoundland @-@ based company . The idea for the game was originally conceived in 2007 when Alex Brown , Rob Rees , and Albert Chaulk , the three co @-@ founders of Source Studio , were engineering students together at Memorial University . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 ProtoGalaxy is presented from a 2.5D perspective ; the 2D playing field employs 3D graphics . ProtoGalaxy incorporates elements of a variety of gaming genres , such as adventure , arcade , shooter , puzzle , and role @-@ playing genres . In the game 's back @-@ story , a species of powerful , unknown extraterrestrials enters the Milky Way with the intention of enslaving its inhabitants . The player characters , of which there may be up to four at a time , follow a storyline by which they must defend Earth from an alien threat and restore human civilization , rebuilding for the sake of those humans who survive . 
 Players control individual ships , with which they can earn money by defeating enemies and then buy new ship parts . ProtoGalaxy may be played on single @-@ player or multiplayer mode , where players can team up either online or on a single system . Allgame , a video game review website , labelled ProtoGalaxy as an " overhead free @-@ roaming shooter " . One of the features of the game is that it allows players to create their own levels , put them online , and download new levels other players have created . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 ProtoGalaxy was the first product developed by Source Studio , a Newfoundland @-@ based company . The idea for the game was originally conceived in 2007 when Alex Brown , Rob Rees , and Albert Chaulk , the three co @-@ founders of Source Studio , were engineering students together at Memorial University of Newfoundland . Memorial University 's business incubator , the Genesis Centre , accepted Source Studio in 2008 . Brown called the game " an intense space themed dungeon crawler " . ProtoGalaxy was released on October 6 , 2010 on the Steam digital distribution platform along with a demo version . 
 There have been three patches distributed since the game 's initial release . The first patch for the game was released on October 21 , 2010 , while the second came out on October 28 , and the third appeared on December 31 , bringing the game to version 1 @.@ 0 @.@ 5 . These updates improved such elements as gameplay , graphics , and the campaign map . The developers also intended to expand ProtoGalaxy with new features and levels . A party celebrating the game 's launch was held on October 15 , 2010 at Memorial University . On February 25 , 2011 , Source Studio released Proto Defense , which enhanced the level editor and provided gamers with a new tower @-@ defense @-@ style level as downloadable content . On April 28 , 2011 , ProtoGalaxy was released on Impulse , another digital distribution platform . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Harry Hughes of PC MMGN called the game " one of this year 's most polished indie titles " , praising its <unk> and tasteful integration of multiple gaming genres . He also highlighted such features as the extensive campaign , the customizability of levels and visuals , and the wide range of possible configurations for players ' ship parts . Criticism of the game focused on the rough transitions between views , the slow mouse speed on the control menu , and the cumbersome controls for switching between weapons . 
 = Russian Spaniel = 
 The Russian Spaniel is a type of spaniel first standardised in 1951 in the Soviet Union after World War II by cross breeding English Cocker Spaniels , English Springer Spaniels and other spaniel breeds . Physically it is similar to a Cocker Spaniel , but has a shorter , tighter coat and a longer body . Developed and used as hunting dogs , this breed does not suffer from any major health complaints other than those normally associated with spaniels . Popular in its native Russia , the breed was only introduced overseas in the 1990s , and is not yet recognised by any major kennel clubs . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Russian Spaniel is a small , sturdy dog with a short , tight , silky coat with feathering on the ears and legs . Colors can vary greatly , and can include solid colors without white markings , piebald , speckled , black and tan , and combinations . The head and ears are also usually dark . 
 The Russian Spaniel resembles the English Cocker Spaniel , with a body similar to the field lines of that breed though with the longer ears of the show line . The body of the Russian Spaniel tends to be longer than that of the English Cocker however , and the breed has only one line rather than being split into separate specific show and field lines of the same breed . 
 Both the male and females of the breed weigh on average 28 – 40 lb ( 13 – 18 kg ) and are around 15 – 17 inches ( 38 – 43 cm ) at the withers . This makes them similar in size or a little larger than the English Cocker Spaniel which weighs approximately 13 – 14 @.@ 5 kg ( 29 – 32 lb ) and is on average between 15 @.@ 5 and 16 inches ( 39 and 41 cm ) with the females being a little smaller at 15 – 15 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 – 39 cm ) . 
 Bred primarily as hunting dogs , their goal is to find the bird , send it into the air and then to retrieve it on command after the hunter has shot the quarry . The Russian Spaniel is suited for hunting in marshland , fields , woodland , for birds as well as rabbits and other small game . The breed is also popular in their native Russia as their small size makes them suitable to be kept in busy cities , and easily transported to hunting sites . 
 = = Health = = 
 As with all long @-@ eared spaniels , Russian Spaniels require checks to prevent ear infections . The breed does have an inclination to gain weight easily , which can be prevented by controlling food intake . The Russian Spaniel can be prone to food allergies , which are usually identified at between 1 and 5 months of age with the most common allergens being chicken and carrots . There are no other breed @-@ specific health issues currently known . 
 = = Temperament = = 
 It is an energetic , free @-@ spirited breed . Even though it is a gundog , it is also kept as a companion dog because of its easy @-@ going nature and devotion to the cause . It is a cheerful , active dog and is always ready to play , responding to any form of attention with a happily wagging tail . Russian Spaniels are trainable , can make a good watchdog , and are amiable with children . 
 = = History = = 
 The Russian Spaniel is the youngest of the Russian gundogs . It originated mostly from English Cocker Spaniels and English Springer Spaniels . Breeds known as Russian Spaniels have been mentioned as early as 1891 in New Zealand . 
 The first recorded spaniel in Russia was a black Cocker Spaniel owned by hunting enthusiast Grand Duke Nicholas Nikolaevich towards the end of the 19th century . Because of its noble connections , spaniels of various breeds were imported to St. Petersburg and Moscow . Some were used for hunting , but the smaller spaniels were not of much use in Russian bird hunting due to the weather and terrain conditions . It was at the beginning of the 20th century that selective breeding began for longer legged spaniels ; specifically importing Springer Spaniels to create a rather mixed Russian Spaniel . 
 By the late 1930s there were a variety of spaniels in Moscow , Leningrad and Sverdlovsk that did not fit any specific spaniel breed standard , but were not yet standardised into the modern Russian Spaniel . <unk> breeding after World War II led to the original Russian Spaniel standard in 1951 . Further revised standards were issued in 1966 and 2000 . 
 The popularity of the breed in Russia increased after the early 1990s , with Moscow dog shows since that time annually including between 120 and 131 Russian Spaniels , which qualifies the breed as one of the most popular , along with the Irish Setter . In 2002 , the Russian Spaniel Club was set up in the United States to increase the knowledge of the breed outside Russia and to enable owners to register their dogs . 
 = = International recognition = = 
 Although not recognised by any major kennel clubs , the Russian Spaniel is recognised by the Continental Kennel Club , Federation of International <unk> , North American Kennel Club , and Universal Kennel Club International . For recognition by The Kennel Club a breed is required to apply with names and addresses of UK owners / importers , number of dogs bred in the UK , copies of the pedigrees of UK dogs - at least three generations , it must be recognised in its country of origin and statistics on registration figures in that country , statistics on entries in shows in that country and at international level , any inherited health conditions , when the breed registry was closed , the standard from the country of origin and a brief history and details of any working activities . 
 In order to become recognised fully by the American Kennel Club , they must first compete in a Miscellaneous Class . The requirements to compete in that class are to demonstrate a following by having a minimum of 100 active members in a national breed club , a population of 300 to 400 dogs , with third generation pedigrees and for all dogs in those pedigrees to be of the same breed , a distribution across twenty or more states , and the breed standard must be reviewed and approved by the AKC . Currently there are five dogs in the AKC 's Miscellaneous Class which are Dogue de Bordeaux , Redbone Coonhound , Irish Red and White Setter , Norwegian <unk> and Pyrenean Shepherd . Typical stays in that class are between one and three years , and the national club of the breed must have held seminars , shows and judges workshops prior to being fully recognised . 
 = Bravely Default = 
 Bravely Default , known in Japan as Bravely Default : Flying Fairy , is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Silicon Studio for the Nintendo 3DS handheld video game console . Bravely Default was originally released in 2012 , while an expanded edition titled For The Sequel released in 2013 in Japan , Europe and Australia , and 2014 in North America . Square Enix published the game in Japan , while Nintendo handled publishing duties overseas . The gameplay uses a turn @-@ based battle system and job system , in addition to incorporating options to combine job abilities and adjust battle speed and random encounter rates . 
 Bravely Default is set in the world of Luxendarc , which is kept in balance by four elemental crystals protected by the Crystal Orthodoxy , a religious group with influence across the world . Agnès Oblige , vestal of the Wind Crystal , is forced to begin a journey to awaken the crystals after they are consumed by darkness . Allying with Tiz <unk> , the sole survivor from Norende , amnesiac Ringabel , and Eternian defector Edea Lee , Agnès sets out to awaken the crystals and confront a greater evil responsible for events . 
 Starting development as an action role @-@ playing sequel to Final Fantasy : The 4 Heroes of Light , it retained elements from the Final Fantasy series while having its own story and gameplay elements . The producer of The 4 Heroes of Light , Tomoya Asano , returned to produce Bravely Default . The story 's writer was Naotaka Hayashi , who was brought in from 5pb. due to his work on Steins ; Gate . The characters designs were handled by multiple artists , including art director Akihiko Yoshida and Atsushi Ōkubo . The game was influenced by western video games and television series , and individual elements were inspired by aspects of the Dragon Quest series and Higurashi When They Cry . The music , composed by Revo of Sound Horizon , was intended to evoke the feelings of classic series such as Dragon Quest and SaGa . 
 Bravely Default was first announced in September 2011 as part of Nintendo 's 2012 lineup for the platform . In the run @-@ up to release , multiple demos were developed , and the team adjusted the game using feedback from players . For the Sequel was the version chosen for overseas release , being localized without any subtitle . In both Japan and overseas , Bravely Default met with strong sales and critical acclaim . Common praise went to the gameplay 's mixture of traditional mechanics and new elements , along with its storyline , graphics and music . Main points of criticism were its repetitive late @-@ game stages and elements of its social gameplay and audio . Bravely Default spawned multiple media tie @-@ ins and spin @-@ off games . A direct sequel , Bravely Second : End Layer , was released in 2015 in Japan and 2016 overseas . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Bravely Default is a role @-@ playing game ( RPG ) which features a party of four characters navigating the fantasy world of Luxendarc . Navigation in towns , dungeons and the world map environments are done from an angled , third @-@ person overhead view : the character remains still , the camera zooms out to a distant view . These environments are displayed on the top screen of the Nintendo 3DS system , while the bottom screen displays maps of environments , party stats and other information such as item menus . On the world map , a day @-@ night cycle alters the types of enemies present , and after a certain point in the story an airship can be used to speed up travel and access previously inaccessible areas . In towns , players can interact with non @-@ playable characters ( NPCs ) , purchase items or magic at specialized shops , buy or sell weapons and equipment at an armory , or rest at an inn to restore health points ( HP ) and magic points ( MP ) . In all environments , the party can find chests containing items , weapons or equipment . During certain points , a Party Chat option appears , giving players the option of initiating conversations between the party members . During exploration , standard enemies appear through random encounters : outside battle , the counter rate can be adjusted from high to nothing . The game features multiple difficulty levels , which can be adjusted freely outside battle . 
 Outside the main campaign , the game uses networking features powered by the 3DS ' StreetPass functionality . A central element is the campaign to reconstruct the village of Norende , destroyed at the beginning of the game . The village is constructed on new ground after obstacles are removed and an area is prepared . The reconstruction incorporates social game elements : friends encountered by the player through StreetPass and online invites become the village 's residents , and their efforts are used to create various buildings including houses and shops . The amount of time a project takes to complete depends on the number of friends assigned to it , taking anywhere from days to weeks . Increasing the number of people speeds up the towns ' reconstruction . As the reconstruction progresses , the player is awarded with new items and equipment . Individual buildings will gain experience points , granting access to higher @-@ tier rewards , and players have the option of adjusting the types of items rewarded . Special randomly generated optional bosses , known as <unk> , will appear in the region . Defeating them yields special rewards . 
 = = = Battle system = = = 
 Battles come in two types : random counters with standard enemies , and staged boss battles . The battle system revolves around turn @-@ based combat : each side is allowed to perform an action or multiple actions , with each character having independent movements and commands : these actions include attacking with the equipped weapon , using magic , or using an <unk> party can also has the option to escape from most battles . Key to the battle system are the Bravely and Default options . Brave Points ( BP ) dictate the number of actions a character or enemy can take within a turn , along with being needed for the execution of certain abilities . Party members can utilize BP down into negative figures , enabling up to four actions within a single turn . When the BP gauge is into negative figures , they must wait for the BP counter to reach zero before they can act again . BP are naturally recovered once per turn . Alternately , a chosen character can Default , which accumulates BP and reduces the damage taken by enemy strikes . An additional power is Bravely Second , an ability which freezes time for the enemy , allowing a party member to move four times in a single turn with no cost . Bravely Second requires SP , a currency which is either replenished while the 3DS is in sleep mode or through buying regenerative SP Drinks using microtransactions . Battle speed during combat can be sped up or returned to normal by the player 's choice . 
 Tied into the battle system is a Job system : beginning with the Freelancer , the party can gain additional Jobs by obtaining gems called Asterisks from defeated human bosses . Twenty @-@ four Jobs can be found in the game , ranging from the agile Valkyrie , and White and Black Mages that respectively specialize in healing and fighting magic . Each Job has different strengths and weaknesses in battle . Outside battle , characters can be assigned any available Job . In addition to the skills of the equipped Job , the skills of a second Job can be learned , allowing for free customization of parties and the mixing of Job abilities in battle . After obtaining the Summoner Job , characters can use summoned monsters to launch attacks that deal high damage on all enemies . Friend characters can also be summoned from other players ' games : the more a friend summon is used , the more effective their actions become . Defeated enemies , along with story recaps and descriptions of locations , and included in an item called the Notebook of D. 
 Within certain conditions , characters can perform Special Moves , customizable powerful moves tied to Jobs : after a Special Move is performed , the entire party is granted buffs for a limited period . This period is represented with a specific tune that plays over normal battle music . Various elements can be added to Special Moves , such as granting elemental properties , launching status ailments at enemies , recovering HP and MP , and temporary status ailment immunity to the party . The customization of Special Moves is directly tied to the creation of specialist shops during the reconstruction of Norende . Experience points acquired at the end of a battle enable characters and their assigned Jobs to level up , unlocking new abilities and boosting character stats such as available HP and MP . Bonuses are gained if the party fulfilled certain conditions . Job abilities and levels can also be borrowed from online friends , in a feature called Abilink . Any Job can be borrowed from available players regardless of their current level . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Bravely Default is set in the world of Luxendarc , which is kept in balance by four elemental crystals . These crystals are protected and venerated by the Crystal Orthodoxy , a worldwide religious order . One day , the crystals are consumed by darkness , throwing the world into chaos . Agnès Oblige , Vestal of the Wind Crystal , escapes while the rest of the temple 's worshipers perish to protect her . At the same time , a great chasm opens up beneath the village of Norende ; Tiz <unk> , a shepherd of the village , is the only survivor . When he returns to the chasm hoping to find other survivors , he meets Agnès and her fairy companion Airy . The three are then attacked by forces from the hostile Duchy of Eternia , who seek to prevent Agnès from awakening the crystals . After defeating the soldiers , Tiz decides to travel with Agnès as her protector . They return to <unk> , where they are also joined by Ringabel , an amnesiac vagabond who holds a book predicting future events , and Edea Lee , an Eternian soldier who becomes disillusioned and defects after her commanding officer commits war crimes . The party travels to the four temples , and Agnès awakens each of the crystals from darkness while being confronted by the forces of Eternia . During their journey , the group is aided by the ancient Sage Yulyana and observed by the immortal Lord DeRosso . The party eventually reaches Eternia , the home of the Earth Crystal , and are forced to defeat the leader of Eternia , Edea 's father <unk> Lee in battle . A column of light then appears in the chasm , which Airy says can be used to heal it . However , Airy 's ritual instead sends them into a parallel world . 
 The process is repeated multiple times ; in each of the five worlds the group travel through , they find and awaken the corrupted crystals , Airy performs her ritual in the pillar of light , and they are thrown into a new parallel world . In each world , they find variations on the situations they encountered in their own world , and gradually learn several truths about themselves and their adversaries . Nearly all of the Eternian elite they face were taken in by <unk> out of compassion as they were rejected by the Orthodoxy , Ringabel is actually a parallel version of Dark Knight <unk> Dim , a close friend of Edea , and Yulyana and DeRosso were key figures in cleansing the original incarnation of the Orthodoxy of corruption . During their travels , both Yulyana and DeRosso give subtle warnings to Tiz and Agnès about Airy 's intentions ; meanwhile , Ringabel 's memories slowly return , and he recalls Airy turning into a monster and murdering the previous incarnations of the party . In truth , Airy is an agent of Ouroboros , an evil being using the crystals as a means of linking all worlds as an energy sources to reach and conquer the Celestial Realm . 
 Depending on the player 's actions , two different routes play out . In the normal route , triggered if Agnès destroys one of the crystals after figuring out Airy 's scheme , Airy attacks them in a fit of rage . The group then pursue her to the Dark Aurora , a realm of darkness near the chasm , and defeat her ; though she is dead , Ouroboros is still a threat to the world . In the true route , should the player awaken the crystals across four different worlds , Airy reveals herself and is defeated by the party . The group goes to Yulyana and DeRosso , who reveal a message left by an " angel " , a version of Agnès from another world who was betrayed by Airy ; the two have been planning for Ouroboros ' arrival , and the group resolves to destroy both Airy and her master . They travel to the Dark Aurora and defeat Airy , who is then absorbed by Ouroboros . After revealing that Tiz is being kept alive by a being from the Celestial Realm , Ouroboros attacks , and DeRosso sacrifices himself to restrain its ability to regenerate . The party are temporarily stopped when Ouroboros begins consuming worlds to regain strength , but versions of them in other worlds break the links formed by Ouroboros , giving the party a chance to destroy him . Before the path between worlds closes , they return to their own world . In a mid @-@ credits scene , Tiz goes to <unk> 's graveyard and releases the Celestial Being within him , entering a coma . In a special video teasing the second game , Tiz wakes in a life support tank and is rescued from captivity by the mysterious Magnolia Arch . 
 = = Development = = 
 According to producer Tomoya Asano , Bravely Default began development as a sequel to Final Fantasy : The 4 Heroes of Light ( 2009 ) , and would have been part of the Final Fantasy franchise . After completing The 4 Heroes of Light , Asano considered what he wanted to do next . Despite having the option to developing something within Square Enix 's core franchises , he wanted to do something new , establishing a new brand . During this initial phase , the original development team reached out to Silicon Studio , whose previous work was mostly related to development middleware . Silicon Studio developed a well @-@ received demo for the project and were assigned to develop the game . Despite moving away from the Final Fantasy series , it retained a battle system and world setting in common with many Final Fantasy games . According to Asano , this was both a hangover of the project 's original form and a conscious choice to give players from the Final Fantasy series a sense of comfortable familiarity . In later responses to fan questions , Asano confirmed that he designed the Final Fantasy @-@ style story so players would have little trouble entering the world . The story @-@ telling and gameplay was heavily influenced by western video games and television series . Asano described the result as a " Japanese RPG with American content thrown in " . The main challenge for the team was making Bravely Default a traditional RPG without overloading it with nostalgic elements . Despite this , as the team were fans of both Final Fantasy and Dragon Quest , nostalgic features were added for genre veterans and be appreciated by newcomers . Asano wanted to bring together what he considered the three core elements of RPGs ( battles , growth , and connection ) in Bravely Default . An important element was creating a casual experience that anyone could enjoy , even if they had never played an RPG . 
 During development , the team decided to cater for the core Japanese RPG fanbase , as they did not believe the game viable for Western release at the time . At the early stages of development , Bravely Default was going to be an action role @-@ playing game , a genre Silicon Studios had previously worked on with 3D Dot Game Heroes . After developing a prototype build and putting it before Asano , it was decided to make the battle system a traditional turn @-@ based model . The interdependent " Bravely " and " Default " systems underwent changes during the development process . Initially , Asano envisioned a system similar to the Tension stat used in multiple Dragon Quest games , but designer Kensuke Nakahara wanted something more exciting for players . He was also annoyed that the majority of bosses in both Dragon Quest and Final Fantasy got two or more actions per turn while player characters only got one each . After some consideration , Nakahara decided on a system where characters could bank points by not taking actions during a turn for later use , or create loan points to act multiple times in a current turn . The concept of the Notebook of D , which would offer players deeper insights into the world of Bravely Default , was inspired by a similar system from Higurashi When They Cry . During the late stages of the game 's development , the team had to make several last @-@ minute tweaks and changes to ensure the game delivered the best possible performance . Due to the game 's chosen mechanics , balancing the game became a major part of later development . 
 The core concept of Bravely Default was defined by Asano as " everyone can play " , as he wanted to bring positive elements from the growing social game market into Bravely Default . The social gameplay was made up of three different elements : the ability to employ StreetPass friends to help reconstruct Norende , the ability to summon friends ' characters into battle as a summon , and the " Abilink " option which allowed players to borrow each other 's job levels . The initial versions of these functions were not as elaborate as they would become in the final product . Norende Village was initially displayed on a single screen , but at a suggestion from Asano it was enlarged so players needed to slide the display around . The summoning option was initially going to be a simple display of the summoned character , but it was decided to make the summoning sequence more elaborate . The summoning text initially shared fonts with other elements , but as Asano wanted it to have more impact , a more florid font was used . This styling was influenced by a sequence featuring Japanese idol group AKB48 in an unspecified television drama . The usage of StreetPass was incorporated to differentiate Bravely Default from other RPGs of the time , forming part of Asano 's wish to create something new . A notable feature included in the game were augmented reality ( AR ) movies . The AR movies were developed using a software development kit provided by Nintendo and implemented into the game by Silicon Studios . A unique gimmick included in the game was using the platform 's camera to project the player 's image into an area of the arena during the final boss battle . 
 The game 's music was composed by Revo , the leader of Japanese musical group Sound Horizon . Asano contacted Revo concerning a collaboration as he had listened to his 2004 album Chronicle 2nd . During his work , Revo was able to see the game 's ROM , then discuss the game 's vision and development goals with Asano . While the initially @-@ agreed track number was between 20 and 30 , the number of tracks almost doubled during production as Revo saw situations that needed their own music . Revo aimed for a nostalgic musical style , referencing the music and atmosphere of Final Fantasy , Dragon Quest and the SaGa series . During recording , tracks were given descriptive working titles , such as " Scene of Normal Battle " or " Song of Asterisk Holder Warfare " . Multiple battle songs were created for the game , each having a faster tempo depending on the escalating battle situation . Revo 's recording sessions were closely linked with the creation of the game 's sound source , so the music would fit onto the 3DS ' limited storage space without losing too much of its quality . Once the music was recorded , a sound environment was created so that it could be heard clearly through the 3DS system 's speakers . While there were concerns about the 3DS cartridge 's storage space limitations , these ultimately proved to be minimal . 
 = = = Scenario and character design = = = 
 The game 's title represented the game 's main theme of self @-@ reliance : not blindly following the will of others , and following your own will . " Bravely " symbolized courage , while " Default " symbolized denial . The subtitle was one of many proposed by the team , and was chosen by Asano after it helped give an official name to the character Airy : prior to this point , she had gone unnamed and was generally referred to as a " Navi character " . The subtitle was also a coded reference to Airy 's true agenda and the game 's deliberate removal from the Final Fantasy series . The key words created for the initial draft scenario were " large hole " , referring to the Great Chasm beneath Norende , and " parallel world " , which referred to the many versions of Luxendarc encountered by players during their journey . The greater majority of the main scenario and side quest storylines were fully voiced , with the main cast having a huge amount of dialogue compared to other characters . The summons were themed after classical elements , modern machinery and multiple world mythologies . 
 The game 's script was written by Naotaka Hayashi , a staff writer at 5pb. whose most notable work at the time was visual novel Steins ; Gate . After playing through Steins ; Gate on the recommendation of another staff member , Asano decided that Hayashi would be able to create the appealing characters and surprising scenario needed for the story , and asked 5pb. if Hayashi could work on Bravely Default . Another reason Asano wanted Hayashi was due to the plot 's heavy use of parallel worlds . Hayashi 's work on the game involved creating the plot and character settings . While he wrote the majority of the game 's dialogue , more detailed work was given to writers at Square Enix and Silicon Studio . One of the supplementary writers was Silicon Studio 's Keiichi <unk> , who wrote the contents of D 's Notebook . <unk> also created the initial story outline with Asano . The initial story concept was kept deliberately simple , but its complexity increased during the writing process . During his work , Hayashi was given guidelines by Square Enix about the characters and story : for instance , Asano wanted the heroes and villains to be equally compelling , along with raising the game 's targeted age group . Something that Hayashi needed to remember during the writing process was the need to limit the length of dialogue segments . While visual novels had a high leeway for dialogue quantity , Asano would make requests such as a sentence being within a 22 @-@ character limit , and to not overrun into multiple dialogue boxes . 
 The main character designer and art director was Akihiko Yoshida , whose previous notable work included Final Fantasy Tactics and Tactics Ogre : Let Us Cling Together . In contrast to much of his previous artwork , Yoshida created the game 's artwork using a stronger design and coloring style . His artwork for Agnès was designed to represent her solitude and knowledge of her fate while also displaying cuteness and <unk> . Tiz 's design was designed not to convey a strong personality , as he in part represented the player . For the game 's environmental artwork , Yoshida drew on European children 's literature . The in @-@ game environments such as towns and the overworld were created using specially @-@ drawn art mapped to a pseudo @-@ 3D layout . This style was meant to emulate classic picture books . <unk> of the art style took a long period , going through extensive trial and error . Designs for many of the secondary characters were handled by other artists : Atsushi Ōkubo , who had most notably worked on the manga Soul Eater , designed <unk> and the Valkyrie job outfits . <unk> <unk> and the Merchant job designed by Hideki Ishikawa , whose work included character designs for Lord of Vermilion arcade game series . <unk> and the <unk> job were designed by Dorin Makoto , who had most notably worked on the Sengoku Basara series . Red Mage Flore <unk> and the Red Mage job was designed by Take , who worked on the <unk> light novel series . <unk> and the Salve Maker job were designed by Midori Foo , an artist who had worked on multiple light novels and online games . 
 = = Release = = 
 Bravely Default was first announced in September 2011 under its original Japanese title as part of Nintendo 's 2012 lineup for the 3DS , alongside titles such as Monster Hunter 4 and Fire Emblem Awakening . Between February and September 2012 , five different demos were released through Nintendo eShop . The first demo featured Agnès and demonstrated character control . The second , released in March , featured the character Tiz and town exploration . The third demo , released in June , showcased the battle system and introduced Edea . The fourth demo , released in August , featured the character Ringabel and demonstrated the job and character customization systems . The fifth and final demo , released in September , included features from all the previous demos and included elements such as Friend Summons , and the Abilink and Norende reconstruction social elements . With the release of the fifth demo , the sale of the other demos was discontinued . The demos were developed alongside the main game as stand @-@ alone experiences taken from several points within the game . They also ended up providing the team with feedback for gameplay adjustments . Each demo included an AR movie featuring one of the main cast . 
 Bravely Default released on October 11 , 2012 . It was published by Square Enix . Along with the standard edition , Square Enix created a collector 's edition for exclusive sale through their online store . The collector 's edition featured an AR poster , a first print copy of the game 's soundtrack , an art book , and a themed 3DS protective case . Downloadable content in the form of additional character costumes were made available both through promotional codes and post @-@ release content . An updated edition of the game , titled Bravely Default : For The Sequel , was announced in August 2013 in Weekly Shōnen Jump for a release on December 5 that year . For the Sequel was stated to have over a hundred different improvements and adjustments : these included additional save slots , additional difficulty levels , auto saving options , the addition of new <unk> scenes , new gameplay elements such as the " Bravely Second " ability , and subtitles in multiple languages . Many of these alterations were based on questionnaires sent out by the company after the original version 's release . According to staff , For the Sequel was intended as a " trial version " for its sequel , already in development after the success of Bravely Default . 
 = = = Localization = = = 
 Prior to any official announcement of its western release , Bravely Default was cited by multiple journalists as a game that should be localized for western markets . In October 2012 , Asano stated that there were no plans to localize the game , but that fans should continue inquiring so that their wishes were made clear . A localization was officially announced in April 2013 . Nintendo took charge of publishing duties overseas . The western version was based on the For the Sequel expanded version . It released in Europe on December 6 , 2013 . An earlier false report in Nintendo 's financial report indicated that its European release would be in 2014 , but this was later corrected by Nintendo of Europe . In Australia , it released on December 7 . In North America , it released on February 7 , 2014 . Both in North America and the UK , a collector 's edition was created including the soundtrack , an artbook , and over thirty AR cards . The UK edition also included a figurine of Agnès . It was also released in South Korea on April 16 , although it was not localized into Korean , placing it in contrast with other Nintendo releases such as Shin Megami Tensei IV . 
