 The localization itself was handled by Bill Black and his company <unk> <unk> , whose previous work included Demons ' Score for Square Enix and World of Warcraft : The Burning Crusade for Blizzard Entertainment . Another key staff member was Timothy Law , a localization editor from Square Enix who supervised the translation and voice recording for the title . An element of the localization that provided a challenge was creating a sense of wordplay equivalent with that used in the original Japanese . An example of this was the Performer job and its owner , the latter of which needed to have her first name adjusted while taking into consideration European gender perceptions . Another example from the dialogue was the need to create jokes that would not work in Japanese , such as Agnès commenting on finding a " lucky charm " . The subtitle " Flying Fairy " was removed for the western release as it might have given a false impression of family @-@ friendly content due to different cultural perceptions to Japan . The English voice actors were chosen to sound as similar as possible to their Japanese counterparts , and adjustments were made to characters through the actors ' performances : these included making Ringabel more flirtatious , and adjusting Edea 's growl of rage between language versions . The game uses both the English and Japanese dubs , along with subtitles in multiple languages . The Western localization of the game contains censorship related to some sexual material in the original game : the ages of the main characters were increased to no longer be underage by Western standards , with 15 @-@ year @-@ olds being changed to be 18 @-@ year @-@ olds , and two of the female playable characters ' costumes were altered to make them less revealing . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The story was met with positive reviews . Famitsu was highly positive about the story , although the reviewers did not go into specifics . Edge Magazine called the narrative " rich and detailed " , enjoying the twists put on the present genre tropes and the darker narrative elements despite the experience being undermined by the writing quality . Andrew Fitch of Electronic Gaming Monthly found the story and characters enjoyable , and in some cases " stellar " , while Ben Moore of GameTrailers noted the story 's aversion to take risks despite interesting twists , and found that it was bogged down by advanced foreshadowing of major plot twists . Game Informer 's Jeff Marchiafava found the game 's story and characters to be " rife with clichés " , and called the dialogue " excessively wordy " despite the late @-@ game developments improving on both aspects . Simon Parkin , writing for Eurogamer , found the story less " unusual " than other aspects , but praised its willingness to send itself up and enjoyed Hayashi 's subtle subversion of genre tropes . GameSpot 's John Robertson was fairly negative , saying that it started out poorly and never managed to throw off that initial impression . David Evans of IGN praised the characters for their strength , but found that the story 's pacing struggled at times . Danielle Riendeau of Polygon , despite finding many characters appealing , called the story " more like a pastiche of tropes than its own unique take [ on the genre ] " . Chandra Nair of Official Nintendo Magazine called story and character development " extremely impressive " , while Bradly Halestorm of Hardcore Gamer found the story to be solid and the main cast enjoyable . Alex Fuller of RPGamer found the main cast quite enjoyable , praising their Party Chat interactions , and enjoyed the story despite its initial overly straightforward premise . 
 The gameplay was praised overall . The Edge reviewer greatly enjoyed the deceptively simple Bravely and Default mechanics despite a run time they described as " bloated " . Fitch likewise enjoyed the gameplay mechanics , but found the social elements to be less successful despite not actively irritating him . Moore praised the battle system and implementation of the Job system , although the latter necessitated grinding to unlock its full value . He also praised the ability to adjust encounter rates and battle speed , and positively noted the social features as engaging secondary activities . Marchiafava found that the battle and Job systems held up throughout the entire game , and like Moore found the social systems enjoyable . Nair was positive about the depth and strategy the gameplay opened up , despite criticizing the amount of options increasing the amount of time spent in battle . Both Evans and Robertson praised the battle system and general gameplay , with Robertson calling the former innovative within the genre . Riendeau found that the battle system 's depth and quality gave her feelings of elation when she successfully killed opponents , but also saw the need to grind for experience emerging during the later stages of the game negatively impacted the experience . Parkin referred to the Bravely and Default systems as the game 's " central - and brilliant - conceit " . Fuller , while finding the microtransactions a " waste of money " , he greatly enjoyed the battle mechanics and multiple user @-@ friendly features . Halestorm shared the positive opinions of other reviewers on the battle system , alongside praising the game 's amount and quality of content . Many reviewers positively compared the gameplay and style to earlier Final Fantasy games . Multiple western reviewers commented negatively on the repetitive late @-@ game section . 
 The graphics and presentation garnered mixed to positive opinions . Famitsu praised the game 's graphics , while Edge admired the art style and monster design , and was glad that the hardware limitations faced by The 4 Heroes of Light were not present in Bravely Default . Marchiafava called the graphics " beautiful " and praised the soundtrack , though called the English voice acting " hit or miss " . Fuller was less impressed by the visuals , but found the music to be excellent . Halestorm , while he did not think the graphics were the best to be found on the 3DS , praised their stylized appearance and the well @-@ executed 3D effect , and called the soundtrack " downright hypnotizing " . Nair praised the game 's audio despite little variety in the musical score , and called its visuals " gorgeous " . Evens praised the character art for its " simple and striking " appearance , and its stylized background artwork . Riendeau commented that the game 's aesthetic kept her invested when the story failed to do so . Parkin referred to the background artwork as " like nothing else " . Robertson referred to the game 's art style as " striking and engaging " . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 In its debut week , Bravely Default topped gaming charts with sales of 141 @,@ 529 units , noted as being an impressive debut for a new game . It had a sell @-@ through rate of over 85 % . Its sales and sell @-@ through rate were notably higher than those of its predecessor The 4 Heroes of Light . By late January 2013 , shipments and eventually sales of the game reached 300 @,@ 000 copies in Japan . For the Sequel debuted at # 8 in gaming charts , selling 35 @,@ 617 units . By 2014 , For the Sequel had sold 59 @,@ 300 units , making it the 160th best @-@ selling game of that year . In North America , Bravely Default met with strong debut sales , reaching # 10 in NPD Group 's sales charts and selling 200 @,@ 000 copies . In July 2014 , it was reported that Bravely Default had sold one million copies worldwide : 400 @,@ 000 units were sold in Japan , while 600 @,@ 000 were sold overseas . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Famitsu awarded the game its " Rookie Award " at its 2012 Awards event , while it received the 2012 Dengeki Online Consumer Award , the latter award being given while beating Persona 4 Golden ( 2nd ) and Rune Factory 4 ( 3rd ) . At the Japan Game Awards , it received the Future Game Award in 2012 and the Excellence Award in 2013 . It later won GameSpot 's 3DS Game of the Year 2014 award . It was ranked by both IGN and GameSpot as one of the best games on the 3DS in 2013 and 2014 respectively . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The game 's success , which went against what Square Enix assumed would happen due to the title 's identity as a traditional role @-@ playing game , prompted them to reconsider their strategy for game making , which up to that point had been geared towards developing titles tailored for western markets rather than focusing on the Japanese market . According to the developers , none of them believed that the game would be released overseas , and were overwhelmed by the positive fan feedback they had received . A manga titled Bravely Default : Flying Fairy began serialization online through Famitsu . Two compilation volumes were released in 2015 and 2016 respectively . Two supplementary books , released under the title Bravely Default : The <unk> of R , were released in December 2013 . In addition to this , two drama CDs containing supplementary stories were released through 2013 and 2014 . Music from the game was featured Theatrhythm Final Fantasy as DLC . 
 A browser game spin @-@ off titled Bravely Default : Praying Brage , began an open beta on November 11 , 2012 . Developed by <unk> <unk> , Praying Brage takes place 200 years after the original game , and includes a new cast of characters aligned to four forces themed after Luxendarc 's elemental crystals . Another spin @-@ off , Bravely Archive : D 's Report , was released for mobile devices on January 22 , 2015 . Like Praying Brage , it was set far in the future , followed an alternate scenario stemming from the events of Bravely Default , and featured characters from Praying Brage . By August of that year , D 's Report had reached over four million downloads . A sequel was confirmed as being in development as early as 2013 . The new game , Bravely Second : End Layer , was officially announced in December 2013 . It released in Japan in 2015 and overseas in 2016 . In an interview with Japanese magazine Dengeki , Asano said that he would ideally like to release a new Bravely game every year . 
 = Yatton railway station = 
 Yatton railway station , on the Bristol to Exeter Line , is in the village of Yatton in North Somerset , England . It is 12 miles ( 19 km ) west of Bristol Temple Meads railway station , and 130 miles ( 209 km ) from London Paddington . Its three @-@ letter station code is <unk> . It was opened in 1841 by the Bristol and Exeter Railway , and served as a junction station for trains to Clevedon and Cheddar , but these lines closed in the 1960s . The station , which has two platforms , is managed by Great Western Railway , the seventh company to be responsible for the station , and the third franchise since privatisation in 1997 . They provide all train services at the station , mainly hourly services between Bristol Parkway and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , and between Cardiff Central and Taunton . 
 The line is not currently electrified , and there is local support for electrification as an extension of the Great Western Main Line upgrade programme . A community centre and café was opened at the station in 2011 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The station is located in the north end of the village of Yatton , North Somerset , just west of the B3133 road between Clevedon and Congresbury . The station is on the Bristol to Exeter Line , 130 miles 28 chains ( 209 @.@ 78 km ) from London Paddington and 11 miles 77 chains ( 19 @.@ 25 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads . It is the fourth station along the line from Bristol . The station is oriented along an axis at 57 degrees to the meridian . 
 There are two platforms , on either side of the two tracks through the station . The southern platform , platform 1 , is 162 metres ( 177 yd ) long and serves westbound trains ( towards Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare ) ; the northern platform , platform 2 , is 121 metres ( 132 yd ) long and serves eastbound trains ( towards Bristol ) . The line through the station has a speed limit of 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) . Access to the two platforms is step @-@ free from car parks on each side of the station , accessible via short roads from the B3133 . There is an uncovered footbridge between the two platforms , but disabled passengers must go the long way round via the B3133 . A ticket office is provided on platform 2 , staffed every morning except Sundays . Ticket machines are available , allowing the buying of tickets for on @-@ the @-@ day travel , and collection of pre @-@ bought tickets . There are waiting rooms on both platforms , with toilets on platform 2 , but none suitable for wheelchairs . " Next train " dot matrix displays and an automated public @-@ address system announce approaching services . 
 There is a car park on each side of the station , managed by <unk> , with a total of 80 spaces . Parking costs £ 2 @.@ 10 for the day at peak times and bank holidays , £ 1 @.@ 40 at other times , with stays of up to 21 days available at a price of £ 2 @.@ 10 per day . There are bus stops nearby on the B3133 . Cycle storage is available on the access roads . 
 The station is the start point for the Strawberry Line , a foot and <unk> built mostly on old railway land to Axbridge . The start of the path is marked by a 6 @-@ metre @-@ high ( 20 ft ) arch . The Strawberry Line Café , run by a local community group , is located on platform 1 , and is open most days from 7 : 30 am to serve commuters . 
 Just beyond the station , to the west , are a pair of relief lines to allow slower trains to be overtaken . There are also some cross @-@ over points , allowing trains to terminate on the westbound relief line and then return eastwards . 
 = = Services = = 
 The station is managed by Great Western Railway , who also operate all rail services from the station . The basic service consists of two trains in each direction per hour . One is the Bristol Parkway to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare service , calling at all stations ; the second is the faster Cardiff Central to Taunton service , non @-@ stop between Bristol Temple Meads and Nailsea & Backwell . Some westbound services are extended to Exeter St Davids or Plymouth . There is one service to Avonmouth on weekday evenings . Each Sunday there are two services to and from the Severn Beach Line . During summer months these terminate at Severn Beach ; the rest of the year only one does , the other terminating at Avonmouth . The typical journey time to Bristol Temple Meads is 16 – 20 minutes . 
 The local services described above are formed using Class 150 , 153 and 158 diesel multiple @-@ unit trains . Until 2012 , Class 143 Pacer units were a regular sight , but these have been moved south to work in Devon and Cornwall following a cascade of Class 150 / 1 units from London Midland and London Overground . 
 Services between London Paddington and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare call at Yatton in the early morning and evening , running non @-@ stop between Bristol Temple Meads and Nailsea and Backwell . All such services also stop at Nailsea and Backwell , but not always at Worle or Weston Milton . From Monday to Friday there are five morning services and one evening service to London , with seven services from London , all in the evening . Saturday sees three services to London , all in the morning , and four services from London , all in the evening . There are seven services to and six from London on Sundays , spread throughout the day . These intercity services are formed of High Speed Train sets , which are longer than the station , so passengers in the front carriage have to move to a different carriage to get out . Passengers are prevented from getting out onto the tracks by a selective door @-@ opening system . The typical journey time to London is 2 hours 10 minutes . 
 In 2008 , one morning northbound CrossCountry service would make a stop at Yatton to serve as a morning peak service , but this operation has ceased . CrossCountry services still pass through the station , but do not stop . Occasional Great Western Railway intercity services between London and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare or Taunton and Exeter also pass through non @-@ stop . 
 Bakers Dolphin number 66 bus from Nailsea to Congresbury via Portbury , Portishead , Clevedon and Yatton stops at the station , with seven services Monday to Saturday in each direction . There are also services connecting the station with local destinations towards Bristol and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare operated by First Somerset and Avon that leave from the main road outside the station . 
 = = History = = 
 The first section of the Bristol and Exeter Railway 's ( B & ER ) main line opened on 14 June 1841 between Bristol and Bridgwater . " Clevedon Road " ( as it was then known ) was for a while the second station on the line west of Bristol , the first being Nailsea . The line , engineered by Isambard Kingdom Brunel , was built as 7 ft ( 2 @,@ 134 mm ) broad @-@ gauge . The platform buildings at Yatton are of Brunel style , and it is widely believed Brunel himself designed the buildings . There were significant goods facilities , with a large goods yard and shed to the south of the station . A hotel was provided adjacent to the eastbound platform for people travelling to Clevedon . The station buildings themselves included a ticket office and station master 's office on the eastbound platform . A bookstall was in operation from 1888 . Services were initially operated by the Great Western Railway ( GWR ) on behalf of the Bristol & Exeter . 
 = = = Junction station = = = 
 The station was originally built , as the original name suggests , to serve passengers for Clevedon , who would travel on by road . On 28 July 1847 , the B & ER opened a branch line between Yatton and Clevedon , and so renamed Clevedon Road station as Yatton . A bay platform was built on the north side of the station to accommodate branch traffic , with an unusual canopy which covered the entire bay , as well as the eastbound platform . The canopy included louvre ventilation . There was also a connection from the main line , albeit at a 10 miles per hour ( 16 km / h ) speed limit , for the few direct trains from Bristol . This too was built to broad gauge . There were five services each weekday , and two on Sundays . These services were also operated by the Great Western Railway , until 1849 when the Bristol & Exeter took over its own workings . By 1869 the number of weekday services had increased to nine . From 1867 , Yatton was also served by coal trains for the local gasworks . 
 Yatton became even more important on 3 August 1869 when the Bristol & Exeter opened the broad @-@ gauge Cheddar Valley Railway , which became famous for the transport of strawberries from stations such as Axbridge and Cheddar . The line was extended to Wells on 5 April 1870 , where it joined with the East Somerset Railway line from Witham , and through services from Yatton to Witham became normal for this line , with between five and seven services daily . To accommodate this new traffic , another bay platform was built , this time on the south side of the station . A canopy similar to the one for Clevedon trains was built for this bay , and for passengers at the end of the westbound platform . 
 On 1 January 1876 , the Bristol & Exeter was amalgamated into the GWR , who took over the running of the station and services . In 1879 , the Clevedon branch was converted to 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard gauge . This followed a scheme throughout the GWR to convert its tracks from broad gauge to mixed gauge . The last GWR broad @-@ gauge train operated on 20 May 1892 , after which all tracks were converted to standard gauge . The conversion of the Clevedon line coincided with the opening of an engine shed for branch traffic . A turntable for Cheddar Valley trains was built at around the same time . In 1889 , there were 12 weekday trains along the Clevedon branch , and three on Sundays . 
 = = = Heyday and decline = = = 
 By around 1900 , there were between five and seven services operating daily along the Cheddar Valley Line , with a mixed mail train on Sundays . Traffic was to increase from 1901 with the opening of the Wrington Vale Light Railway . Although this line joined the Cheddar Valley Line at Congresbury , most services continued to Yatton . In 1901 there were four passenger trains per day and one goods train , which increased to five passenger trains per day by 1903 . The line was known for the transport of mushrooms . 
 By 1910 , there were 18 daily services along the Clevedon branch , four on Sundays . A GWR pagoda hut was built in the 1910s at the east end of the eastbound platform , but this was removed some ten years later . By the 1920s Yatton had 40 staff employed , including a boy selling chocolate and cigarettes , and issued almost 60 @,@ 000 tickets . Traffic on the Clevedon branch was still climbing , now up to 21 services on weekdays and five on Sundays . However , despite this success , there were some problems . Better road transport was reducing traffic along the Wrington line , and the main line was stretched to capacity . To combat this latter problem , goods loops were laid either side of the station – east for 1 @.@ 25 miles to <unk> from 6 April 1925 and west for 1 @.@ 75 miles to Huish level crossing on 26 May 1925 . The station itself however remained a two @-@ track pinch point . 
 The Wrington Vale line closed in 1931 , with traffic having dropped to only two trains per day with no Sunday service . In 1938 coal traffic to the gas works ended , though there was some through coal traffic along the Clevedon branch . The Cheddar line was not faring well either : the number of tickets sold along the line had decreased dramatically since the early 1900s , although there was still a significant flow of strawberries , milk and cheese to London . The railways were nationalised in 1948 , with the GWR becoming the Western Region of British Railways , but this did not halt the decline . The line was closed to passengers in 1963 , with the only traffic to serve a private siding near Cheddar , but this too closed in 1969 . 
 The Clevedon branch was seeing increased passenger traffic , up to 26 trains daily and 10 on Sundays by 1958 , and in 1956 the unusual canopy was taken down , replaced by a second @-@ hand canopy from <unk> railway station . However , this uptick was not to last : coal traffic along the line ended in 1951 , and by 1963 there were no longer any freight workings . The line closed completely on 3 October 1966 , taking the station 's bookstall with it . The <unk> loops had been closed on 6 September 1964 , and the goods yard at Yatton was closed on 29 November 1965 . The now @-@ redundant bay platforms were converted into car parks , and the canopy on the westbound platform removed along with the two water towers . On 24 January 1972 , the passing loops to the west of the station were cut back to 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) , and the station 's signal box , which had had 129 levers , closed on 31 January the same year . 
 = = = Modern times = = = 
 British Rail was split into business @-@ led sectors in the 1980s , at which time operations at Yatton passed to Regional Railways . In the 1990s , a stop was added at Yatton for a Royal Mail train to provide a more direct link to Bristol Airport . The service was ended in 2004 when the post office stopped transporting mail by train . When the railways were privatised in 1997 , local services at Yatton were franchised to Wales & West , which was in turn succeeded by Wessex Trains , an arm of National Express , in 2001 . The Wessex franchise was amalgamated with the Great Western franchise into the Greater Western franchise from 2006 , and responsibility passed to First Great Western , which was rebranded as Great Western Railway in 2015 . 
 There was somewhat of a revival of fortunes for the Cheddar Valley Line , which has been converted into a foot and cycle path . A 6 @-@ metre @-@ high ( 20 ft ) metal arch was erected in 2000 to mark the start of walk . The station buildings on the westbound platform have now been converted into the Strawberry Line Café , which opened in 2011 , providing employment and training for people with learning disabilities , as well as snacks for commuters , walkers and local residents . 
 In March 2005 , Wessex Trains , the company managing the station at the time , introduced car parking charges . It was noted that this resulted in less use of the car parks , more local street parking and caused people to drive to Nailsea and Backwell railway station , where parking was still free . Following local pressure , the charges were reduced in July 2005 , but were increased to their present levels in 2009 by First Great Western . 
 The eastbound platform buildings were refurbished in 2005 to guard against rising damp . A year later , in 2006 , replica Great Western Railway benches were provided by the National Trust . Hanging baskets were brought to the station in 2011 as a joint effort between the Severnside Community Rail Partnership , Cleve Nurseries and the station 's garden group . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 On 7 May 1842 , a steam locomotive ran away from its train without a driver whilst briefly decoupled at Yatton . The locomotive eventually came to a stop when it ran out of fuel approaching Bridgwater . 
 = = Future = = 
 First Great Western declined a contractual option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise ( of which services at Yatton are a part ) beyond 2013 , citing a desire for a longer @-@ term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line . The franchise was put out to tender , but the process was halted and later scrapped due to the fallout from the collapse of the InterCity West Coast franchise competition . A two @-@ year franchise extension until September 2015 was agreed in October 2013 , and subsequently extended until March 2019 . 
 With the impending upgrade , the main line from London to Bristol is due to be electrified . However , the electrification will not extend beyond Bristol to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , so Yatton will continue to be served by diesel trains . This could entail the removal of direct London services , as electric trains would not be able to operate beyond Bristol . Services could however continue using bi @-@ mode trains . The group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways supports the electrification continuing to Weston , as does MP for Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare John Penrose . Local services will still be diesel @-@ operated , with " Sprinter " units expected to be replaced by Class 165 and 166 " Turbo " units . 
 Yatton is on the Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare / Yate corridor , one of the main axes of the Greater Bristol Metro , a rail transport plan which aims to enhance capacity in the Bristol area . The plan calls for longer and newer trains to prevent overcrowding . 
 = Effects of Hurricane Isabel in Pennsylvania = 
 The effects of Hurricane Isabel in Pennsylvania were primarily related to tropical storm force winds across much of the state . Hurricane Isabel formed from a tropical wave on September 6 , 2003 in the tropical Atlantic Ocean . It moved northwestward , and within an environment of light wind shear and warm waters it steadily strengthened to reach peak winds of 165 mph ( 265 km / h ) on September 11 . After fluctuating in intensity for four days , Isabel gradually weakened and made landfall on the Outer Banks of North Carolina with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) on September 18 . It quickly weakened over land and became extratropical over western Pennsylvania the next day . 
 On September 19 , Tropical Storm Isabel passed through southwestern Pennsylvania , though its large circulation produced tropical storm force winds throughout much of the state . The passage of Hurricane Isabel resulted in $ 160 million in damage ( 2003 USD , $ 187 million 2008 USD ) and two indirect deaths in Pennsylvania . One person suffered from carbon monoxide poisoning , believed to be caused due to improperly ventilated generators in an area affected by the power outages . Moderate winds left about 1 @.@ 4 million customers without power across the state as a result of trees falling into power lines , with dozens of houses and cars damaged by the trees . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 While over the western Atlantic Ocean as a major hurricane , forecasters predicted Isabel would pass through the central portion of the state . Successive forecasts shifted the track slightly further to the west , though its track into Ohio was not anticipated . Hours before it entered the state , the National Hurricane Center continued to predict Isabel would traverse the entire length of the state from south to north and later entering New York before crossing Lake Ontario into Canada . Around 3 % of those who evacuated in North Carolina and in the Eastern Shore of Virginia stayed in Pennsylvania during the storm . The threat of the hurricane canceled some flights in and out of the state . To compensate , Delta Air Lines allowed those flying to or from Philadelphia , Allentown , and Harrisburg to reschedule to a later date . American Airlines offered a similar option . United Airlines and United Express opted to waive charging fees for travelers in and out of the state . 
 Prior to the arrival of Isabel , Governor Ed Rendell declared a state of emergency for the state . The Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency activated a support team to assist Urban Search and Rescue operations as part of the threat from the storm . The state 's National Guard placed 2 @,@ 990 guardsmen on Emergency Condition 5 status to be deployed anywhere in the state for emergency support , with other guardsmen readying equipment such as generators , heavy trucks , water trailers , and engineer equipment for deployment . State police officers were readied for deployment , while the state health department contacted hospitals to ensure generators were in working condition . The state Environmental Protection Agency prepared for the storm by monitoring the status of all dams , water treatment facilities , and nuclear plants . In addition , the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission stationed extra workers to patrol the highways in poor drainage areas , with extra equipment prepared for quick response for potential road blockage . Prior to the arrival of the storm , officials from PECO Energy prepared its largest workforce in its history with 1 @,@ 500 workers , including employees from Commonwealth Edison in Illinois and Detroit Edison . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Upon making landfall , Isabel produced a storm surge that tracked up the Delaware River , with a station along the river in Philadelphia reporting a storm tide of 9 @.@ 47 feet ( 2 @.@ 89 m ) . There , the surge flooded low @-@ lying areas along the river . The large circulation of the hurricane produced moderate winds throughout the state , with wind gusts in the southeastern portion of the state reaching 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) in Forks Township . Philadelphia , Pennsylvania also recorded a wind gust of 49 mph ( 79 km / h ) , which contributed to severe delays at the Philadelphia International Airport . The moderate wind gust downed thousands of trees , tree limbs , and power lines . PECO energy reported their worst power outage on record with about 572 @,@ 425 customers losing electricity . The company estimated it would cost at least $ 20 million ( 2003 USD , $ 23 million 2008 USD ) for it to install about 81 miles ( 130 km ) of new cable and install about 7 @,@ 600 new fuses and circuit breakers . The Metropolitan Edison power company reported 300 @,@ 000 customers without power , with 500 @,@ 000 Pennsylvania Power and Light customers losing electricity . 
 Wind gusts reached 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) in northeastern Pennsylvania , resulting in scattered reports of downed trees and power lines . Tens of thousands were left without power . A few downed trees hit cars and houses , with damage totaling about $ 350 @,@ 000 ( 2003 USD , $ 410 @,@ 000 in 2008 USD ) . The fallen trees also closed some roads . In the central portion of the state , the storm dropped moderate precipitation of over 3 inches ( 75 mm ) , while wind gusts reached 73 mph ( 117 km / h ) at a station in Lancaster County . The combination of the wind gusts and moist grounds from previous rainfalls resulted in hundreds of downed tree limbs , primarily in Dauphin and Lancaster Counties . Lancaster County reportedly suffered the worst wind damage since Hurricane Hazel in 1954 . 
 The falling trees downed power lines and poles , causing power outages and some property damage due to the trees and poles hitting houses . One indirect fatality occurred when a motorist drove into a downed tree . Two other vehicles in Franklin County and a fire truck in York were hit and greatly damaged by trees . Downed wires set a Family Dollar on fire in Paradise Township and was believed to have started a fire in a church in Ringtown . Falling trees hit at least eleven houses , with one tree severely damaging a mobile home in Bellwood . Damage directly from the wind was generally minor , and included a house losing a chimney in Camp Hill , a carport being blown over in New Oxford , and at least four houses reporting roof or siding damage . The hurricane also damaged corn fields near Lancaster . Downed trees closed or disrupted traffic on at least 56 roads in the region , including U.S. Routes 6 and 322 , as well as Interstate 83 in York County . 
 Pittsburgh reported 1 @.@ 24 inches ( 31 mm ) of precipitation from Isabel . The storm produced wind gusts of up to 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) across the southwestern portion of the state , knocking down trees and power lines . Allegheny Energy reported 31 @,@ 184 customers in the southwest portion of the state lost power , primarily in <unk> , State College , and Waynesboro . Damage in southeastern Pennsylvania totaled $ 32 @.@ 2 million ( 2003 USD ; $ 37 @.@ 7 million 2008 USD ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Power workers immediately began repairing the power failures by clearing tree branches and replacing fuses and circuit breakers . Peco energy restored power to 72 % of the affected customers by two days after the storm , with 85 % restored by two nights . By two days after the storm , Pennsylvania Power and Light restored power to about 80 % of its impacted customers , with about 93 % restored by two nights after the storm . By five days after Isabel , most power outages in southeastern Pennsylvania were repaired , with all outages restored by a week after the hurricane . Allegheny Power restored power to about 20 % of its customers by two days after the storm . Most power outages for the company were restored by five days after the hurricane , with all power completely restored by a week after Isabel . 
 On September 26 , President Bush declared Chester County as a disaster area following the damage of previous Henri , Isabel , and severe flooding unrelated to either tropical cyclone . Officials opened a disaster recovery center in West Chester to provide additional information to disaster victims . By a month after the declaration , 342 homeowners and business owners applied for disaster aid , totaling to around $ 600 @,@ 000 ( 2003 USD , $ 703 @,@ 000 2008 USD ) . 
 = Fieldin Culbreth = 
 Fieldin Henry Culbreth III ( born March 16 , 1963 ) is an American umpire in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He umpired in his first MLB game in 1993 and became an American League ( AL ) staff member in 1999 ( MLB merged its two umpire staffs into one the following year ) . 
 Culbreth has umpired in five Division Series , six League Championship Series , two World Series and one All @-@ Star Game , as well as the National League 's single @-@ game playoff in 2007 . He was one of the umpires when a Tampa Bay Rays pitcher threw a no @-@ hitter for the first time in team history , and he was behind the plate when the New York Mets achieved the same distinction . Prior to the 2013 Major League Baseball season , Culbreth , Ted Barrett and Jim Joyce became crew chiefs after the retirements of Ed Rapuano , Tim Tschida and <unk> Cousins . 
 = = Umpiring career = = 
 Culbreth had never umpired prior to attending umpire school , and he began umpiring in 1987 . He did not take long to reach the major leagues , where he made his first umpiring appearance on August 13 , 1993 . On that day , Culbreth umpired at second base in a game played at the Kingdome between the Seattle Mariners and the California Angels . 
 Culbreth became a member of the official AL umpire staff in 1999 , when multiple call – up umpires were hired to take the place of umpires who had participated in a mass resignation . He began his career on the AL staff , but in 2000 MLB merged the umpires from its two leagues . Culbreth wore # 42 as an AL umpire , but he had to stop using that number after it was retired in recognition of Jackie Robinson . 
 Culbreth , Ted Barrett and Jim Joyce were promoted to crew chief positions prior to the 2013 season , after former crew chiefs Ed Rapuano , Tim Tschida and <unk> Cousins retired . At the age of 49 , Culbreth became the second @-@ youngest active crew chief , with only Barrett younger at the age of 47 . Culbreth 's 2013 crew consists of Brian O 'Nora , Bill <unk> and Adrian Johnson . 
 According to <unk> , Culbreth has issued a total of 38 ejections during his major league career through the 2014 season . His highest single @-@ season ejection total was six in 1997 . Through 2012 , he has officiated in a total of 2 @,@ 512 games , and he has served in more than one hundred games each season since 1997 . 
 = = = Notable games = = = 
 Culbreth was a part of the umpiring crew when Cal Ripken , Jr. of the Baltimore Orioles joined the 3 @,@ 000 hit club . He was present when Ripken finally sat out of a game after having played in 2 @,@ 632 consecutive games . Culbreth was the home plate umpire when Baltimore 's Rafael Palmeiro reached the 3 @,@ 000 @-@ hit milestone on July 15 , 2005 with a double against Joel Piñeiro of the Seattle Mariners . 
 Culbreth was the left field umpire for the single @-@ game playoff between the Colorado Rockies and the San Diego Padres that decided the NL 's 2007 wild card team . The game ended in the 13th inning when home plate umpire Tim McClelland called Rockies player Matt Holliday safe at home plate ; the call was controversial and replays did not show clearly whether or not Holliday touched the plate on the play . Colorado won by a score of 9 – 8 . 
 Culbreth has umpired in the American League Division Series in 2002 , 2007 , 2012 , and 2014 ; and the National League Division Series in 2004 and 2008 . He officiated in the American League Championship Series in 2000 , 2009 , 2010 and 2011 ; and the National League Championship Series in 2003 and 2006 . Culbreth umpired in the World Series in 2008 and 2012 . Culbreth has officiated in 67 postseason games through the 2012 season , being the plate umpire for 11 of those contests . He was also a member of the crew for the 2006 MLB All @-@ Star Game in Pittsburgh . The American League defeated the National League , 3 – 2 . 
 In the 2008 World Series , which featured the Philadelphia Phillies and Tampa Bay Rays , Culbreth worked behind home plate for Game 3 . The Phillies claimed a 5 – 4 victory due to a walk – off single by Carlos Ruiz . Philadelphia won the Series in five games . In Game 3 of the 2012 World Series , Culbreth umpired behind the plate for the matchup between the Detroit Tigers and the San Francisco Giants . The Giants shut out the Tigers , 2 – 0 . San Francisco won the World Series in the next game . 
 Culbreth was the first @-@ base umpire for Tampa Bay Rays pitcher Matt Garza 's no @-@ hitter against the Detroit Tigers on July 26 , 2010 . In the third inning , Tigers manager Jim Leyland was ejected from the game by second @-@ base umpire Marty Foster . Garza 's no @-@ hitter was the first by a Rays pitcher . Culbreth was at second base on June 1 , 2012 , when New York Mets pitcher Johan Santana threw a no @-@ hitter against the St. Louis Cardinals . This no @-@ hitter was the first to be thrown by a Mets pitcher . Santana benefited from a close call on the third base line by umpire Adrian Johnson ; the Carlos Beltrán line drive appeared to be fair , but Johnson ruled it foul . 
 During Spring training in 2014 , Culbreth was part of the first use of expanded replay in a MLB game . After Toronto Blue Jays manager John Gibbons elected to challenge a safe call made by Culbreth , who was umpiring at first base , replay umpire Brian O 'Nora upheld the ruling following a video review that lasted 2 minutes and 34 seconds . 
 = = = Incidents = = = 
 During the 2001 season , Culbreth received an email from then – MLB official Sandy Alderson advising the umpire that he was not calling enough strikes and that if he did not make adjustments , he would face criticism from ESPN analysts when he umpired a game that was broadcast by the network . 
 On September 16 , 2005 , Culbreth was involved in a dispute with pitcher Randy Johnson of the New York Yankees . At the time , the Yankees were contending for a playoff spot . After Johnson expressed his displeasure with some of the umpire 's calls on balls and strikes , Culbreth ejected Johnson in the second inning . New York catcher John Flaherty stated that he " was disappointed that Fieldin reacted as quickly as he did " , but Flaherty also admitted that Culbreth " had a legitimate gripe . " Johnson said that he was " deeply regretful " and acknowledged , " I was wrong for letting my emotions get away from me . " Prior to Johnson 's apology , Culbreth was criticized by Yankees announcers John Sterling and <unk> Waldman , neither of whom was aware of what had been said on the field . 
 Earlier in the 2005 season , Culbreth had twice ejected Philadelphia Phillies manager Charlie Manuel from games , once in April and again in August . During the 2001 season , Culbreth had previously ejected Manuel from a contest ; it was held during Manuel 's time as manager of the Cleveland Indians . Culbreth has also thrown former manager Mike Hargrove out of three different games , with two of the ejections taking place while Hargrove was with Cleveland and the third during the manager 's time in Baltimore . 
 During a game in 2013 between the Houston Astros and Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim , Culbreth , acting as the crew chief for the game , made an incorrect call in the 7th inning . He later received a two @-@ game suspension and a fine . Los Angeles had runners on first and second base with two outs when Houston manager Bo Porter made a pitching change , bringing in left @-@ hander Wesley Wright . Los Angeles manager Mike Scioscia called for a pinch @-@ hitter , inserting right @-@ handed batter Luis Jimenez . Porter attempted to make a second pitching change , before Wright threw a single pitch , by calling for Héctor <unk> , a right @-@ handed pitcher . Scioscia immediately argued the second pitching change , pursuant to MLB rule 3 @.@ 05 ( b ) , which states " If the pitcher is replaced , the substitute pitcher shall pitch to the batter then at bat , or any substitute batter , until such batter is put out or reaches first base , or until the offensive team is put out , unless the substitute pitcher sustains injury or illness which , in the umpire @-@ in @-@ chief 's judgment , incapacitates him for further play as a pitcher " . After discussing the call with his umpiring crew , Culbreth allowed the pitching change , violating the rule . The three other umpires working the game ( Brian O 'Nora , Bill <unk> , and Adrian Johnson ) received unspecified fines for the incident , while Culbreth was suspended and fined by MLB . He did not serve his suspension immediately , and he continued working regular games in the weeks following the incident . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Fieldin Culbreth was born and raised in Inman , South Carolina . He attended Mabry Middle School . A former pitcher and outfielder , Culbreth graduated from Chapman High School and attended Spartanburg Methodist College . He studied at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte , where he played baseball . He began umpiring in college following an arm injury . He and his wife Claire have three children : Fieldin IV , Celina and Shannon . As a member of an organization called BLUE for Kids , Culbreth has visited and brought presents to hospitalized children on multiple occasions . 
 Culbreth is five feet and eleven inches tall and weighs 225 pounds . Culbreth and his family adopted a shelter dog in 2010 . 
 = SS Suevic = 
 SS Suevic was a steamship built by Harland and Wolff in Belfast for the White Star Line . Suevic was the fifth and last of the " Jubilee Class " ocean liners , built specifically to service the Liverpool @-@ Cape Town @-@ Sydney route . In 1907 she was shipwrecked off the south coast of England , but in the largest rescue of its kind , all passengers and crew were saved . The ship herself was deliberately broken in two , and a new bow was attached to the salvaged stern portion . Later serving as a Norwegian whaling factory ship carrying the name Skytteren , she was scuttled off the Swedish coast in 1942 to prevent her capture by ships of Nazi Germany . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 When White Star inaugurated service from Liverpool to Sydney in 1899 , they commissioned three steam ships to be built for that route : <unk> , Medic and Persic . All three were single @-@ funnel liners which measured just under 12 @,@ 000 gross register tons ( GRT ) and were configured to carry 320 steerage or third class passengers . Because these ships were launched in the last year of the 19th century , they were referred to as the " Jubilee Class " , reflecting the popular mood regarding the coming of the new century . With the popularity of this route amongst immigrants to Australia , White Star quickly decided to order two more of the class , both of which would be slightly larger than the first three . The first of these was Runic ( the second ship of that name ) , launched on 25 October 1900 . The second , and largest of the class , was Suevic , at 12 @,@ 531 GRT . Runic and Suevic had several minor design changes , the most noticeable of which were the lengthening of the poop deck , and the moving of the bridge closer to the bow . These ships could carry 400 passengers and had seven cargo holds , some of which were refrigerated . 
 = = White Star service = = 
 Suevic was launched on 8 December 1900 , and set sail on her maiden voyage to Sydney on 23 March 1901 . Shortly thereafter , Suevic and her four sisters were pressed into service carrying troops to fight in the Boer War in South Africa . In August 1901 she made her one and only voyage from Liverpool to New York City . Once the Boer War was over , White Star was finally able to institute regular monthly service to Australia using the Jubilee @-@ class ships . 
 On one 1903 voyage , a young officer named Charles Lightoller was assigned to crew Suevic as a punishment . During the voyage , he met an 18 @-@ year @-@ old woman who was returning to her home in Sydney , and after a shipboard courtship , the two were married in Sydney on 15 December 1903 . Lightoller would later become the second officer on board the RMS Titanic , and the most senior of her crew to survive the disaster . 
 = = Shipwreck = = 
 = = = Navigational errors = = = 
 Suevic 's first six years of service were uneventful , but then disaster struck . On 2 February 1907 she left Melbourne with scheduled stops at Cape Town , Tenerife , Plymouth , London and finally Liverpool , under the command of Thomas Jones . On 17 March 1907 , she was inbound to Liverpool with 382 passengers , 141 crew members and a nearly @-@ full cargo , including thousands of sheep carcasses worth £ 400 @,@ 000 . 
 By noon , she was 140 miles off the southwest coast of England . This section of the English coast was hazardous , due to shallow waters , sharp rocks , and often @-@ dense fog , so it was normally avoided by ships . By the afternoon Suevic had entered a typically dense fog bank . By 10 pm , the ship 's officers were not able to fix their position using stellar navigation , so they intended to use instead the Lizard lighthouse on Lizard Point , Cornwall ( known simply as " The Lizard " ) , which they soon spotted . Upon seeing the light , they calculated that it was at least 10 miles away , and thus thought themselves safe . Despite the fog , they pressed ahead at full speed , without using the sounding line to ensure they were not approaching the shore . 
 Twenty minutes after sighting the lighthouse , the ship ran aground violently at full speed amongst the rocks of <unk> Reef , a quarter of a mile off The Lizard . Suevic was about 16 miles closer to the shore than her command crew believed . 
 = = = Rescue = = = 
 Jones first made several attempts to back the ship off the rocks , running the engines at full astern , to no avail . Despite her position , the ship did not appear to be in danger of sinking . The captain ordered the distress rockets to be fired , and a local rescue effort ensued , with all the passengers and crew escaping to shore safely . 
 The rescue was led by the Royal National Lifeboat Institution ( RNLI ) , and it became the largest rescue in that institution 's 190 @-@ year history . RNLI lifeboats , manned by local volunteers from stations at the Lizard , Cadgwith , Coverack and Porthleven , rescued all the passengers , including 70 babies , as well as the crew . The operation took 16 hours to complete . As a result of the successful efforts of the rescuers , four silver RNLI medals were awarded to various volunteers and two were awarded to Suevic crew members for their actions . In March 2007 a ceremony was held to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the rescue . 
 The Cadgwith lifeboat was Minnie Moon . Two silver RNLI gallantry medals were awarded to members of the Cadgwith Lifeboat crew : Edwin Rutter , Coxswain Superintendent and Rev. ‘ Harry ’ Vyvyan , Honorary Secretary . 
 = = = Salvage = = = 
 The bow section was badly damaged , but not irreparably so , and the rest of the ship , including the boilers and engines , were not damaged at all . It was determined that if the ship could be lightened , the tide would then lift her off the bottom and she could be sailed to port . With this in mind , three days later , on 20 March , the cargo was unloaded into small coastal freighters . Initially , it appeared that the attempt would succeed , but a week later , after various other vessels had attempted to pull Suevic off the rocks , the weather deteriorated , and waves drove her farther onto shore , from whence she could not be moved . 
 With the bow now irretrievably stuck , and the threat of even worse weather coming which could completely destroy the ship , White Star officials decided to attempt an unorthodox method of saving the stern half of the ship , which was not grounded nor damaged , by separating it from the damaged bow . Suevic , like other White Star liners , had been built with watertight compartments as a safety precaution . Depending on the integrity of this design , engineers used carefully placed charges of dynamite to sever the bow at a bulkhead just aft of the bridge on 4 April . This move was successful , and the aft half of the ship floated free . The watertight compartments held their integrity , and Suevic was able to steam under her own power , in reverse and guided by tugs , to Southampton . The damaged bow was left to break up on the rocks . 
 = = = Rebuilding = = = 
 White Star then ordered a new 212 @-@ foot bow section from Harland and Wolff in Belfast , which was launched head @-@ first in October 1907 . It was popularly said at the time that Suevic was the longest ship in the world , with her bow in Belfast and her stern in Southampton . The new bow was then towed to the shipyard of J.I. Thornycroft in Southampton , where it arrived on 26 October . By mid @-@ November it was in position and being joined to the rest of the ship . The bow was a good fit , a testimony to the craftsmanship of the Harland and Wolff shipwrights . Ten months later , after the largest ship rebuilding effort ever undertaken at the time , on 14 January 1908 , Suevic was completed and returned to service . 
 = = War service = = 
 When the First World War began , many British ships were pressed into war service . The ability to carry frozen meat in their refrigerated holds meant that the " Jubilee Class " liners were left in commercial service so that they could bring provisions for the war effort , although they also carried troops on their normal route . Suevic did make one dedicated war run , in March 1915 , carrying British troops to Moudros , as a part of the Dardanelles Campaign . From that point , until 1919 , Suevic operated under the Royal Navy 's Liner Requisition Scheme rather than under White Star management , although she continued on her commercial route to Australia . 
 = = Skytteren = = 
 Following the war , White Star refitted Suevic , adding the capacity for 266 second @-@ class passengers , after which she returned to her Australian route . In March 1924 , she completed her 50th voyage on that route . In 1928 , though , Suevic was showing her age , and White Star sold her to <unk> <unk> 's <unk> A / S for £ 35 @,@ 000 , who renamed her Skytteren and sent her to Germaniawerft at Kiel to be converted into a whaling factory ship . She served with the Norwegian whaling fleets in Antarctic waters . 1936 AS <unk> came under control of the Norwegian shipping agent Jørgen Krag who handled on behalf of the German <unk> Union . So until the war her hunting results were delivered to Germany . 
 When Nazi Germany invaded Norway in the Second World War , Skytteren was interned in the neutral port of Gothenburg , Sweden , with several other Norwegian ships in April 1940 . The exiled Norwegian government claimed these ships as its property , which was contested by the collaborationist Nasjonal Samling government in occupied Norway . However , a court ruling favoured the exiled government 's claim . 
 On 1 April 1942 , 10 Norwegian ships at Gothenburg made an attempt to escape into Allied @-@ controlled waters , where they would be met and protected by a group of British warships . However , Sweden would not allow the Norwegian ships to use their neutral waters for this , and Swedish ships steered the escapees towards waiting German warships . Of the 10 , two made it through to the British , six were sunk by the Germans or scuttled by their crew , of which Skytteren was one , two turned back to Gothenburg . Skytteren was scuttled in the waters off <unk> , Sweden . Her crew were taken as prisoners of war . The wreck of Skytteren remains in those waters , with her bow facing to the west . 
 = Callie and Her Sister = 
 " Callie and Her Sister " is the second episode of the second season of the American animated television series Ugly Americans , and the sixteenth overall episode of the series . It originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on July 7 , 2011 . In the episode , half @-@ demon Callie Maggotbone repeatedly refuses to go through with her arranged marriage to Twayne Boneraper . To convince her father she is serious with her boyfriend Mark Lilly , she asks him to move in with her . Following a therapy session held by Mark , Callie 's divorced parents get back together and produce a second daughter , Lilith , who will replace Callie as Twayne 's bride . Callie and Mark later take on the job to raise Lilith , who develops evil plans for the wedding . 
 The episode was written by Mick Kelly and directed by Richard Ferguson @-@ Hull and series creator Devin Clark . The episode features guest performances by recurring voice actors Pete Holmes , Julie Klausner and Mike O 'Gorman . " Callie and Her Sister " includes a homage to the horror film The Omen , along with other minor allusions to Rosemary 's Baby and The Shining . Critical responses to the episode were positive ; critics called it solid and memorable and praised its humor as well as the character development of Callie . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was watched by 980 @,@ 000 viewers in its original airing in the United States , which was deemed steady compared to the season premiere , " Wet Hot Demonic Summer " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Half @-@ demon Callie Maggotbone 's demon father Aldermach is pressuring her to break up with her boyfriend Mark Lilly and marry Twayne Boneraper , to fulfill an ancient magical blood pact ; Aldermach gets paid by Twayne 's family to deliver him a bride , and if he does not , he will get murdered . Callie refuses to marry Twayne , and to prove that her relationship with Mark is serious , she invites him to move in with her , but does not tell him about her arranged marriage to Twayne . Meanwhile , Mark is having troubles at the Department of Integration ; he receives rather negative feedback on his teacher evaluation forms from his students . Since the department cannot afford having individual sessions with students , he decides to hold them at his and his zombie roommate Randall 's apartment . At his first session , Mark is kidnapped by Aldermach who bribes him to break up with Callie . Mark declines , and Callie 's human mother Rosie shows up and argues with Aldermach , which gives Mark the idea to invite them both to therapy sessions . Following the session , Mark leaves the room for a short while , and when he comes back , Aldermach and Rosie are having sex and eventually get back together . 
 The next day , Rosie and Aldermach announce that they have given birth to Callie 's sister , Lilith . Thanks to the hormone injections Rosie has had , it only took a day for Lilith to be born and she will age one year , every day , and take Callie 's place as Twayne 's bride . After an accident caused by Lilith , Rosie is hospitalized and Mark and Callie take on the task to raise Lilith . In just a few weeks , she is eighteen years old and has started dating Randall . Mark takes in Twayne for a session and finds out about his arranged marriage to Lilith , and that the marriage will be a televised sex ritual . Callie realizes that she is forcing Lilith to marry Twayne , just like her father forced her , and tells Lilith that she does not want her to marry him . Lilith , however , wants to the opposite of what Callie wants and tells her that she will marry him . Just before the ritual is about to commence , Lilith reveals to Mark that she plots to kill Callie and Twayne and instead join Mark at the sex altar . Mark informs Callie , who takes out her soul to transform into a more demonic figure . Following a battle between the two , Lilith falls down to a lower level of Hell . Later , Callie kicks Mark out of her apartment as she does not have to marry Twayne anymore . 
 = = Production and cultural references = = 
 " Callie and Her Sister " was written by Mick Kelly , in his second writing credit for the series , following the first season finale " The <unk> " . The episode was directed by series creator Devin Clark and Richard Ferguson @-@ Hull . " Callie and Her Sister " marked Ferguson @-@ Hull 's first directing credit for the series ; he previously served as a director for the Adult Swim animated series Harvey Birdman , Attorney at Law ( 2000 – 07 ) . In addition to the main cast , " Callie and Her Sister " features appearances by recurring guest voice actors Pete Holmes , Julie Klausner and Mike O 'Gorman . Klausner provided the voices of Lilith and Rosie , and main cast member Larry Murphy returned to voice Callie 's father Aldermach . " Callie and Her Sister " was first hinted at in June 2011 during an interview by Clark on what to expect in the series ' second season , where he revealed the episode 's main plot and its references : " Callie 's parents get back together in one episode and give birth to a sister for Callie who because of being a supernatural creature , ends up aging one year , every day , and we have an homage to The Omen in there . Mark and Callie end up taking over the responsibilities of her parenting dealing with this demonic child . " 
 The story of Mark and Callie taking care of Callie 's sister Lilith , who eventually matures into an <unk> version of Callie , pays homage to the horror film The Omen ( 1976 ) . The homage to The Omen also includes elements of another horror film , Rosemary 's Baby ( 1968 ) . Lilith 's " creepy " and demonic characteristics as a child drew comparisons towards the film The Shining ( 1980 ) , and the episode 's title mimics the comedy @-@ drama film Hannah and Her Sisters ( 1986 ) . The review website Yelp is mentioned when Mark tells his clients to leave him a favorable review at the site . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode originally aired in the United States on Comedy Central on July 7 , 2011 , following the Futurama episode " Law and Oracle " . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Callie and Her Sister " was watched by 980 @,@ 000 viewers , compared to the 1 @.@ 55 million who watched Futurama . The episode also acquired a 0 @.@ 5 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , which TV by the Numbers writer Robert Seidman noted was " steady " compared to the rating for the previous episode , " Wet Hot Demonic Summer " . However , the episode marked a slight downfall in total viewership , as the season premiere drew an audience of 1 @.@ 14 million . 
 " Callie and Her Sister " was met with positive reviews from television critics . MTV writer Charles Webb referred it to as " really solid " and " more character @-@ focused " than the season premiere . He commented that " [ the episode ] leads to a marked improvement in the humor , which simply flows from scene to scene . " Webb also praised that the series ' writers allow Callie to develop her character , stating : " While we don 't exactly get any great new insights about the character [ ... ] it 's still cool that the writers are allowing her to develop a little given their non @-@ continuity driven focus . " Webb particularly praised the episode 's montage scene and the continuing " top @-@ notch " animation style . 
 Josh Harrison of entertainment website Ology rated the episode 8 out of 10 and wrote that " [ it ] was one to remember " . Harrison noted that the writers appear to explore the characters ' backgrounds during the second season , like how Leonard 's background was in focus in " Wet Hot Demonic Summer " . Harrison concluded his review while commenting on " Callie and Her Sister " : " This sort of episode is still in its early stages , but I don 't begrudge Ugly Americans the training wheels if it means we get to better know the people and creatures of the fascinating animated world . Good stuff , I say , and I 'd like to see more of it . " 
 = Ecnomiohyla rabborum = 
 Ecnomiohyla rabborum , commonly known as <unk> ' fringe @-@ limbed treefrog , is a species of frogs in the family Hylidae . They are relatively large frogs inhabiting the forest canopies of central Panama . Like other members of the genus Ecnomiohyla , they are capable of gliding by spreading their enormous and fully webbed hands and feet during descent . The males of the species are highly territorial , guarding water @-@ filled tree holes used for breeding . They are also the ones responsible for guarding and caring for the young , including providing food . They are the only known species of frog where the tadpoles derive nutrition by feeding on the skin cells of their fathers . 
 The species was originally discovered in 2005 and formally described in 2008 by a team of herpetologists led by Joseph R. Mendelson III . It is named in honor of the conservationists and herpetologists George B. Rabb and Mary S. Rabb . It is officially listed as Critically Endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) as of 2009 . It is believed that the species may be extinct in the wild due to the epidemic of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in its native range . Despite the efforts of several conservation teams , captive breeding programs have all failed . The last known female of the species died in 2009 . It was survived by two other individuals , both males . On February 17 , 2012 , one of the two was euthanized at Zoo Atlanta in Georgia due to failing health . The last known surviving member of the species , an adult male named <unk> , currently resides at the Atlanta Botanical Garden . 
 = = Description = = 
 Ecnomiohyla rabborum is a relatively large frog . The snout @-@ vent length ( SVL ) of males average between 62 to 97 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 to 3 @.@ 8 in ) , while in females it is between 61 to 100 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) . The head is wider than the body and flattened at the top . The snout is moderately long with nostrils protruding from the sides near the tip . Viewed from the top , the snout is more or less elliptical in shape . The <unk> ridge is concave ( curves outward ) and has thick and rounded edges . The loreal regions are similarly concave . The tympana are smaller in diameter than the eyes and slightly inclined . Smooth glandular structures ( known as the <unk> fold ) extend over the tympana from the eyes to the edges of the lower jaw . The tongue is round and it possesses narrowly spaced ovoid groups of pre @-@ vomerine teeth . 
 The arms are short and stout with very large hands . There are no skin folds on the wrists , though a scalloped fringe of skin is present from the elbows to just below the discs on the fourth fingers . The fingers are all relatively short with large flattened discs on the tips . The discs on the second , third , and fourth fingers are about the same diameter as the tympana . Small protrusions known as tubercles are present on the underside of the hands . On the first finger , the tubercles on the tipmost joints are elliptical in shape . On the second and third fingers , the tubercles below the finger joints ( <unk> tubercles ) are smaller than that on the fourth fingers . There are no tubercles on the palms of the hands though elongated flat tubercles are present behind the bases of the inner fingers ( the " thumbs " ) . Numerous small and round tubercles are also present in between the joints of the fingers . The fingers are more or less fully webbed . 
 The hind limbs are slender and of moderate length . Like the hands , the feet are very large . When resting , the heels of the legs barely overlap each other . If stretched forward up the length of the body , the <unk> articulation ( the " ankle " ) reaches beyond the eyes . Like the arms , a fringe of scalloped skin also extends from the heel to the base of the foot on each leg , continuing as a low ridge to the base of the disc of the fifth toe . The toes , like the fingers , possess flattened discs at the tips , though they are slightly smaller in diameter . The tubercles on the tipmost joints of the fifth toes are larger than all of the other <unk> tubercles on the toes . Interspersed between them are numerous small and conical tubercles . The toes are also fully webbed . 
 The skin of E. rabborum is granular in texture and predominantly a mottled brown . The upper surfaces of the limbs are also mottled brown while the rear surfaces of the thighs are a pale yellow . The chin and upper chest are distinctively brown , though the rest of the underside of the body is mostly white speckled with irregular brown spots . The eyelids and upper surfaces of the limbs and back are studded with green flecks , the appearance and positions of which can be changed by the animal voluntarily ( metachrosis ) . The irises of the eyes are uniformly reddish @-@ brown . 
 During the breeding season , adult males of the species are characterized by greatly enlarged upper arms ( humerus ) with a bony ridge covered by skin and black keratinized spines . Spines are also present on the upper surface of the area just before the thumbs . These spines are likely used during amplexus . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Ecnomiohyla rabborum is classified under the genus Ecnomiohyla of the treefrog subfamily <unk> , family Hylidae . It was first described in 2008 by a team of herpetologists consisting of Joseph R. Mendelson III , Jay M. Savage , Edgardo Griffith , Heidi Ross , Brian Kubicki , and Ronald <unk> . During its discovery in 2005 , it was initially misidentified by the team as Ecnomiohyla <unk> , but Kubicki recognized it as a new species . The type specimens were raised in captivity . They were obtained from tadpoles collected by Griffith and Ross from an area near El Valle de Antón , <unk> , Panama on July 15 , 2005 . 
 The generic name Ecnomiohyla comes from Greek <unk> ( " marvelous " or " unusual " ) and <unk> , the companion of Hercules . The specific name is in honor of the conservationists and herpetologists George B. Rabb and Mary S. Rabb . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Ecnomiohyla rabborum is known only from the cloud forests of the Pacific @-@ facing slopes of the mountains above the town of El Valle de Antón in central Panama , between the provinces of <unk> and Panamá . Its range has an area of less than 100 km2 ( 39 sq mi ) at altitudes of 900 to 1 @,@ 150 m ( 2 @,@ 950 to 3 @,@ 770 ft ) . However , it has not been observed in the area since 2007 . 
 = = Ecology and biology = = 
 Ecnomiohyla rabborum , like other members of the genus , live in the forest canopy . They are nocturnal and feed on insects . When threatened , they are capable of gliding through the air by leaping from their perch and fully stretching their massive webbed hands and feet . They can also steer the direction of their descent . In observations , they have been known to glide for a distance of 9 m ( 30 ft ) . 
 The males of the species are highly territorial , defending water @-@ filled tree holes used for breeding . The advertising calls of E. rabborum males consist of " warm up " owl @-@ like calls of three to five notes immediately followed by a single " <unk> " . The calling bouts happen only at night and last for about one to two minutes , with the intervals longer at the beginning and gradually becoming shorter . Aside from attracting females , the calls may also serve to warn off competing males . Mating occurs throughout the year , though the calls seem to intensify two to three days before or after a full moon and during the peak mating season from mid @-@ March to May . 
 Females lay their eggs inside the water @-@ filled tree holes , attached to the wood or bark just above the waterline . After laying their eggs , the females leave while the males remain to guard them . Males may mate more than once and a single tree hole can contain an egg clutch of 60 to 200 eggs . The eggs hatch into large tadpoles with dorsoventrally flattened bodies and short , blunt snouts . The eyes are situated on top and directed towards the sides . They are not visible when the tadpole is viewed from below . The nostrils are situated about two thirds of the way between the eyes and snout . The mouth is small and located at the bottom of the tip of the snout . Small papillae are present along the sides of the upper lip and along the entire margin of the lower lip . The beaks are robust and with small serrations . The spiracle opens on the middle of the left side of the body . The tail is slender with fins that do not extend to the body . The tadpoles are predominantly pale brown in color . At the time when the legs first appear , they have a snout to vent length of roughly 25 to 27 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 to 1 @.@ 06 in ) . The tadpoles are so large and numerous that at times , there appear to be more tadpoles than water in the tree holes . 
 E. rabborum is remarkable in that the males appear to provide nutrition to the tadpoles directly . During the day , the males back into the tadpole @-@ filled water of the tree holes and remain in that half @-@ submerged state until night . During this time , the tadpoles swim around them , rasping small pieces of skin from their fathers ' backs and eating them . This is the first observed instance of any frog species doing this , though it is similar to the way some female caecilians feed their young . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 At the time of its collection , the herpetologists who later described Ecnomiohyla rabborum were already aware of the encroaching threat of the chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ( colloquially referred to by biologists as " <unk> " ) in Panama . The fungus causes an infectious amphibian disease called chytridiomycosis , which has been linked to the massive decline and extinction of amphibian species in certain parts of the world ; including the Americas , Australia , and New Zealand . Infected amphibians can display a wide variety of symptoms , usually including lethargic and abnormal behavior , convulsions , peeling skin , ulcers , and hemorrhaging ; eventually resulting in death . The origin of the disease is unknown , but there is speculation that it may have been introduced throughout the world via importation of the African clawed frog ( Xenopus laevis ) . 
 In 2006 , in the hopes of saving the species , the then undescribed specimens of E. rabborum that teams of herpetologists collected were sent to captive breeding facilities in the El Valle Amphibian Conservation Centre ( <unk> ) , Zoo Atlanta , and the Atlanta Botanical Garden . However , these efforts ultimately proved to be futile . The frogs thrived in these facilities but never mated . The last female died in 2009 in the Atlanta Botanical Garden . 
 In an essay regarding the rapid extinctions of amphibians happening around the world , Joseph R. Mendelson III , the Curator of <unk> in Zoo Atlanta and one of the scientists who first described E. rabborum , stated that herpetologists in the last 20 years are becoming " forensic taxonomists " . Species are now being described just before or even after they have already gone extinct . On the situation of E. rabborum , he comments : 
 It appears that nature has run its course before three teams of dedicated people were able to determine the needs of these frogs in order for them to reproduce . To have been a part of one of those teams has been a frustrating and sad experience . 
 Two males in Zoo Atlanta and Atlanta Botanical Garden survived until February 17 , 2012 , when one of them had to be euthanized to prevent suffering after a decline in health and to preserve valuable genetic material . Though the frog could have been allowed to die naturally , amphibians decompose rapidly . If it had died during the night when no personnel were present , it could have proven impossible to extract genetic material . The Deputy Director of the Zoo , Dwight Lawson commented : 
 This is the second time in my career that I have literally seen one of the very last of its kind die and an entire species disappear forever with it . It is a disturbing experience , and we are all poorer for it . The ongoing amphibian extinction crisis has taken a rich diversity of animals from us , and more effort and resources are desperately needed to halt the losses . 
 The last known observation of the frog in the wild was that of a single male heard calling ( but not seen ) in 2007 . At the time of its last survey in 2009 , the IUCN classified E. rabborum as Critically Endangered . More recent estimates deem the species effectively extinct in the wild . A single adult male named <unk> at the Atlanta Botanical Garden is the last known survivor of the species . 
 = Hoodoo Gurus = 
 Hoodoo Gurus ( referred to as the Gurus by fans ) are an Australian rock band , formed in Sydney in 1981 , by the mainstay Dave Faulkner ( songwriter , lead singer and guitarist ) and later joined by Richard Grossman ( bass ) , Mark Kingsmill ( drums ) , and Brad Shepherd ( guitar , vocals , harmonica ) . Their popularity peaked in the mid to late 1980s with albums Mars Needs Guitars ! , Blow Your Cool ! and Magnum Cum Louder . 
 Hoodoo Gurus had a string of acclaimed pop @-@ rock singles including " Leilani " ( 1982 ) , " Tojo " ( 1983 ) , " My Girl " ( 1983 ) , " I Want You Back " ( 1984 ) , " Bittersweet " , " Like Wow - Wipeout ! " , and " What 's My Scene ? " . After touring the United States from 1984 onwards they gained popularity on the U.S. college rock circuit with singles " Come Anytime " ( 1989 ) reaching No. 1 and " Miss Freelove ' 69 " ( 1991 ) reaching No. 3 on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart . Gurus ’ biggest Australian hit single was their 1987 Top 3 hit song " What 's My Scene ? " or , as modified for the National Rugby League 2000s theme , " That 's My Team " . 
 Hoodoo Gurus ' iconic status on the Australian rock scene was acknowledged when they were inducted into the 2007 ARIA Hall of Fame . Their induction announcement stated that the Gurus were one of the most " inventive , lyrically smart and exciting " bands from Australia . From 1960s power pop , and wild garage punk to hard driving rock and funky psychedelic kitsch their music stood out from Sydney 's Detroit @-@ inspired bands . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation ( 1981 – 1983 ) = = = 
 Three Hoodoo Gurus founders were from Perth protopunk and punk bands : Dave Faulkner ( guitars ) and James Baker ( drums ) of The Victims ; while Baker had been with Roddy Radalj ( aka Roddy Ray 'Da ) ( guitars ) in The Scientists . The fourth founding member , Kimble Rendall ( guitars ) was formerly in Sydney punk rockers XL <unk> . The three guitarists Faulkner , Rendall and Radalj met at an end @-@ of @-@ 1980 New Year 's Eve party and were joined by Baker to form Le Hoodoo Gurus . 
 Le Hoodoo Gurus unorthodox line @-@ up of three guitars and no bass player , fused pop melodies , punk guitars and an American trash culture ethic . This was captured on their first single , " Leilani " released in October 1982 , on Phantom Records . This told the story of a maiden sacrificed to the gods and an erupting volcano while her true love looked on helplessly . They dropped the ' Le ' , to become Hoodoo Gurus , not long after the single 's release . As the Hoodoo Gurus , they gave their first ever performance on a segment of the kids ' TV program Simon Townsend 's Wonder World ; this was followed by a performance alongside a man and his singing dog , on The Don Lane Show . 
 Rendall left in 1982 before the release of " Leilani " , and went on to become an award @-@ winning music video and film director . Rendall was Second Unit Director on the latter two Matrix films , The Matrix Reloaded and The Matrix Revolutions , as well as I , Robot . Rendall also directed the slasher film , Cut in 2000 . Rendall was effectively replaced by Clyde Bramley ( bass guitar , backing vocals ) from Sydney bands The Hitmen and Super K. 
 Radalj was not happy with Rendall 's leaving or Faulkner 's greater influence and left the Gurus . He was replaced by ex @-@ Fun Things guitarist Brad Shepherd , who had been Bramley 's flatmate . Bramley and Shepherd had both been in The Hitmen and Super K. Faulkner wrote " I Want You Back " in response to Radalj 's public dissatisfaction with the Gurus . Radalj went on to perform with a number of other acts , including The <unk> , Love Rodeo , The <unk> and Roddy Ray 'Da & the Surfin ' Caesars . As Roddy Ray 'Da , he released Lost , Lonely and Vicious in 1990 , <unk> a year later and <unk> of Chicken in 1993 . 
 = = = Stoneage Romeos ( 1983 – 1984 ) = = = 
 Gurus new line @-@ up ( Baker , Bramley , Faulkner and Shepherd ) recorded the band 's first album in 1984 , Stoneage Romeos . The title came from a 1955 Three Stooges short Stone Age Romeos . The album was dedicated to characters from Get Smart , F @-@ Troop and Petticoat Junction . They were awarded ' Best Debut Album ' of 1984 at the July 1985 Countdown Music Awards . When Stoneage Romeos was released in America it stayed at number 1 in the Alternative / College charts for seven weeks , becoming one of the most played albums for the year on the college network . 
 Initially a cult inner @-@ city act , their popularity expanded due to regular airplay on radio station Triple J and nationwide pop TV show Countdown from mid @-@ 1983 . Their breakthrough single " My Girl " was accompanied by a video clip featuring a dog trainer with his once champion greyhound . Members of Spiderbait described seeing the video for the first time as " a beautiful , classic pop song " . Some viewers insisted the song was " written about a dog " . This was closely followed by " I Want You Back " , which featured animated plastic model dinosaurs . Both videos were aired frequently raising the group 's profile around the country . 
 Original drummer James Baker was sacked from the band in August 1984 and was replaced by Mark Kingsmill ( The Hitmen , New Christs , Screaming Tribesmen , Hellcats and Super K ) . Based on the success of the Stoneage Romeos the Hoodoo Gurus , with their new drummer , then embarked on their first tour of the United States in late 1984 . 
 = = = From Mars to Kinky ( 1985 – 1993 ) = = = 
 Following the US tour the Hoodoo Gurus went into the studio and recorded their second album , Mars Needs Guitars ! ( 1985 ) . The title was a twist on a Sci Fi B movie titled Mars Needs Women . The album 's first single , " Bittersweet " , had a more subdued regular @-@ looking video . The Hoodoo Gurus played Europe and the United States including sell @-@ out shows at London ’ s Hammersmith Palais and a two @-@ month tour as special guests with The Bangles . 
 The sacking of Baker upset some die @-@ hard fans and critics who felt that the group was losing touch with its " indie " roots , and Faulkner is said to have written the single " Poison Pen " ( September 1986 ) in response to some of the critical articles in the music press written about Baker 's departure . Another view was that it was about the replacement of their first manager , Stuart Coupe ( journalist , writer , tour promoter ) , but according to songwriter Faulkner it was about a relationship that had turned bitter . Baker had been involved with The Beasts of Bourbon as a side project from 1983 and now concentrated on their 1984 album The Axeman 's Jazz , subsequently he founded James Baker Experience and The <unk> ( latter two included Radalj ) , <unk> and eventually The <unk> . 
 Gurus ' peak of popularity was in the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1980s with the albums Mars Needs Guitars ! , Blow Your Cool ! and Magnum Cum Louder . The albums reached No. 140 ( 1986 ) , No. 120 ( 1987 ) and No. 101 ( 1989 ) on the American Billboard 200 album charts respectively . The band 's 1987 ' Blow Your Cool ' concert tour took them to 19 countries playing 204 venues . A concert from the Ritz in New York City was broadcast by MTV America . The ' Magnum Cum Louder ' tour in 1990 , with dates in Europe , America and Australasia ; included Japan for the first time . Based on their extensive touring of America , the band gained a solid following in the U.S. with regular exposure on US college radio ( and later MTV 's 120 Minutes ) and even developed a big fan base in Brazil . The third album Blow Your Cool ! let go of some of the peripheral quirkiness and just concentrated on the band 's pop power . Members of their international peer group The Bangles and Dream Syndicate contributed backing vocals to some songs . Then , Hoodoo Gurus decided to opt out of its record contract , tying up the group in legal wranglings for more than a year . In 1988 Richard Grossman ( ex Matt Finish , Divinyls ) replaced Clyde Bramley on bass . The most stable line @-@ up of Faulkner , Grossman , Kingsmill , and Shepherd saw Hoodoo Gurus from 1988 to the break @-@ up in January 1998 . 
 After two albums under their new contract , Magnum Cum Louder and 1991 's Kinky , which reached No. 101 and 172 on the American Billboard 200 album charts respectively the band then released in 1992 two compilations at once , Electric Soup , which contained the band 's hits and Gorilla Biscuit , which was made up of B @-@ sides and rarities . 
 Kinky provided the single " Miss Freelove ' 69 " which reached No. 19 on the ARIA Singles Chart , and No. 3 on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart in 1991 . Another single of the same year " 1000 Miles Away " reached No. 37 in Australia . It was adopted by the crew of Royal Australian Navy frigate HMAS Canberra as their ' anthem ' in 1993 , playing it whenever they left port . Hoodoo Gurus played a concert , including " 1000 Miles Away " , on @-@ board HMAS Canberra during its last voyage prior to decommissioning in 2005 . 
 = = = Crank through to the Bullet ( 1994 – 1998 ) = = = 
 They followed Kinky with Crank in 1994 . The ' Crank ' world tour took the Gurus through USA , Canada , Europe and included a one @-@ month tour of Brazil . Faulkner also composed the soundtrack to Laurie McInnes ' 1994 feature film Broken Highway . In 1995 , the Gurus collaborated with The Masters Apprentices frontman Jim Keays on an updated rendition of " Turn Up Your Radio " . The song was included on a new Masters ' Best of album , as well as being issued as a single . 
 In 1996 they moved to Mushroom Records for the release of their next album , Blue Cave . The band then undertook a national tour of Australian tour with US outfit The Posies and local band Drop City . Touring commitments were curtailed when Kingsmill severed tendons and nerves in his arm as a result of an onstage accident . Once Kingsmill recovered , the Gurus completed their ' Circus Maximus ' Australian tour by end of 1996 . In January 1997 , Faulkner announced that the band would be breaking up in December . March was the Gurus undertake another tour of Brazil , where they played a concert in front of 40 @,@ 000 people . The Gurus commenced their final Australian tour , the three @-@ month ' Spit the Dummy ' tour , in October 1997 . The tour coincided with the release of the double compilation album Armchair Gurus / Electric Chair , which made No. 29 on the national chart . The band played its final show in Melbourne on 11 January 1998 . The show made up for dates missed during December 1997 , when Faulkner was ill . 
 In November 1998 Mushroom had issued the Hoodoo Gurus ’ live album , Bite the Bullet . The songs had been recorded during the band ’ s ' Spit the Dummy ' farewell tour . The standard , single album version was joined by a limited edition , triple CD version subtitled Director ’ s Cut . It included the additional CDs , Doppelgänger ( a collection of live @-@ to @-@ air Broadcasts from between 1983 – 1996 ) and Bubble and Squeak ( a collection of outtakes and oddities ) . 
 Although Hoodoo Gurus officially split in 1998 they signed with Acadia Records , who released the band 's career @-@ spanning compilation <unk> in October 2000 . 
 = = = Hoodoo hiatus ( 1998 – 2003 ) – side projects and solo work = = = 
 = = = = Grossman = = = = 
 From 1990 onwards , Grossman has been involved in a side project , Ghostwriters , with Rob Hirst from Midnight Oil . Ghostwriters have released four albums with 2007 's Political Animal on Sony BMG . Shepherd had played with Ghostwriters on their albums Ghostwriters in 1991 and <unk> in 1999 . During 2001 , Grossman performed 20 concerts with long @-@ time friend Matt Moffitt ( 1956 – 2003 ) singer @-@ songwriter and founder of Matt Finish . Grossman had been an early member of Matt Finish , he returned to perform and record Just a Short Note ( Best of ) released in December 2001 . The Kelly Gang was a 2004 project Grossman formed with Jack Nolan , they brought in Hirst and Scott Aplin ( Waikiki ) to record Looking for the Sun ; Shepherd performed as a session musician . 
 = = = = Shepherd = = = = 
 Shepherd was briefly involved with Beasts of Bourbon alongside fellow Guru , James Baker . He recorded their four @-@ track CD , From the Belly of the Beasts in live 1984 performance at the Trade Union Club , Sydney . Shepherd 's tenure with Beasts ended after Baker was sacked from the Gurus . He joined another ex @-@ Guru , Roddy Radalj , in Roddy Ray 'Da and the Surfin ' Caesars during 1989 . In 1999 , following Gurus break @-@ up , Shepherd recorded " Alex Chilton " for The Replacements tribute album , I 'm in Love ... With That Song ( <unk> Records ) . He also produced <unk> 's debut 1999 EP , Up Go The <unk> and co @-@ produced their second EP , Well Ain 't That Something A Good Thing 's Comin ' on Laughing Outlaw Records . Shepherd went on to form a new band , The Monarchs ( initially known as The <unk> ) , together with Andy Kelly on bass ( Glide ) , Greg Hitchcock on guitar ( The Neptunes , The <unk> , New Christs , The <unk> , Challenger 7 , You Am I , The <unk> ) and his brother Murray Shepherd ( Harpoon , The Fun Things , Screaming Tribesmen ) on drums . The Monarchs played with The Meanies , Even , You Am I , Joe Strummer and The <unk> . In August 1999 The Monarchs recorded a self @-@ financed album with Wayne Connolly and in 2000 they released their first single , " 2001 " b / w " This Is All I Can Do " ( Ivy League Records ) ; this was followed by their debut album , Make Yer Own Fun , in October 2001 , on Shock Records . 
 = = = = Faulkner = = = = 
 Antenna was Faulkner 's side project ( 1998 – 1999 ) collaborating with long @-@ time friend Kim Salmon ( The Cheap Nasties , The Manikins , The Scientists , Beasts of Bourbon ) , also in Antenna were Justin Frew and Stuart McCarthy ( both of Southend ) . Antenna recorded an album mid @-@ 1998 , and then made its live debut at the Telstra Concert of the Century / Mushroom 25th anniversary in November 1998 . The concert coincided with the release of the band ’ s debut single , " Come on Spring " , and album , Installation . Guest performers on the album included Matt Thomas ( The Mavis 's ) on " All Rise " , and Christina Amphlett ( Divinyls ) on " Divine " . " Come on Spring " reaching No. 64 on the 1998 Triple J Hottest 100 list . Antenna appeared on the 1999 Big Day Out tour but disbanded soon after . 
 Faulkner also wrote original music for the films Broken Highway ( 1993 ) and The Sum of Us ( 1994 ) starring Russell Crowe and Jack Thompson . Faulkner was one of the new entries in the 2007 edition of Who 's Who in Australia . 
 = = = = Persian Rugs = = = = 
 In September 2001 , the four ex @-@ Gurus ( Faulkner , Grossman , Kingsmill & Shepherd ) performed as The <unk> and were later called Persian Rugs . At Homebake 2001 , ( 8 December ) both Hoodoo Gurus and Persian Rugs performed separate sets . Persian Rugs recorded a five @-@ track EP Mr. Tripper in June 2002 , Grossman then left , and Shepherd recommended bassist Kendall James as his replacement ( ex Thurston <unk> , Crusaders ) . With James , the Persian Rugs recorded their debut album Turkish Delight , released in August 2003 . 
 Persian Rugs provided the track " Be My Guru " for the Hoodoo Gurus ' tribute album Stoneage Cameos ( 2005 ) ( see Stoneage Romeos ) and by that time Hoodoo Gurus , with Grossman on bass , had already reformed . 
 The Persian Rugs was me doing a complete ‘ 60s revival sort of thing . Also , in a funny way , it was my own sort of version of retaliating at all the critics who always harped on the Gurus ’ ‘ 60s influences : ‘ You want to hear what I do when I do ‘ 60s ? Here it is ! ’ But I also had a whole lot of songs after the Gurus broke up , and though I rehearsed them with different musicians , they just couldn ’ t seem to get the flavor of what I was trying to do . It became obvious to me that there was only one band that could play these songs the way I wanted to hear them . So Mach Schau , far from us coming back and being ‘ middle aged ’ and writing for an older fan base , we just wanted to make a hard rocking record that out @-@ did anything we ’ d ever done . We really blew a gasket on that one — it ’ s our Presence , like Led Zeppelin . 
 = = = Gurus regroup ( 2003 – present ) = = = 
 By early 2003 Hoodoo Gurus had re @-@ formed to record " That 's My Team " as the promotional theme for the National Rugby League between 2003 and 2007 ( a CD was released September 2003 see " What 's My Scene ? " ) with all profits donated to Breast cancer charities . The original film clip of " What 's My Scene ? " included shots of band members in Wests and Cronulla jumpers . 
 On 17 November 2003 EMI Records announced Hoodoo Gurus ' reformation to record a new album , Mach Schau , they also released the track " White Night " as a radio @-@ only single . In January 2004 the band co @-@ headlined the annual Big Day Out festival with Metallica and The Strokes . Proudly Australian – celebrate Australia Day 2004 which included " Nothing 's Changing My Life " by Hoodoo Gurus was a four @-@ track give @-@ away CD . " Nothing 's Changing My Life " ( February 2004 ) was released as a single with Mach Schau following in March . The ' Mach Schau ' tour started in Perth late in March and was joined by Spiderbait from April to June . EMI reissued expanded / remastered editions of all Hoodoo Gurus albums ( from February 2005 ) ; also released was Tunnel Vision ( 2005 ) , a two @-@ DVD set compiling every Gurus ' video , never @-@ before @-@ seen live material and a retrospective documentary , " Be My Guru " . 
 The band performed at the 2006 NRL Grand Final . 
 Hoodoo Gurus toured during 2007 including several US dates , kicking off at the South By Southwest ( SXSW ) Music Festival in Austin , Texas ( see SXSW photo above ) , performances in Europe , including the <unk> Festival ( Spain ) . This was followed by a national tour of Australia called ' Clash of the Titans ' with The Stems and Radio Birdman . Their tour poster depicts the three bands as ' Heavyweights ' of the Australian music scene . Another solo tour started late in 2007 ( including performances at the Apollo Bay Music Festival , Splendour in the Grass , Meredith Music Festival , and the St Kilda Festival ) and continued into 2008 . There are tentative plans to release a new album in 2009 , although little material has been written so far . In June 2008 The Age newspaper commemorated 50 years of Australian rock ' n ' roll ( the anniversary of the release of Johnny O 'Keefe 's " Wild One " ) by selecting the Top 50 Australian Albums , with Stoneage Romeo coming in at No. 5 on the list . The Hoodoo Gurus performed at the Glastonbury Festival in the United Kingdom on 29 June 2008 . 
 Hoodoo Gurus performed on 14 March 2009 for Sound Relief at the Sydney Cricket Ground . Sound Relief was a benefit concert for victims of the Victorian Bushfire Crisis and the Queensland Floods . Appearing with Hoodoo Gurus at the Sydney concert were , Coldplay , Eskimo Joe , Icehouse , Jet , Josh Pyke , Little Birdy , The Presets , Wolfmother , You Am I and additional artists . 
 In March 2009 the Hoodoo Gurus also signed a new recording contract with Sony Music Australia , the deal includes the band 's back catalogue as well as a new album , the band 's ninth and the first since the release of Mach Schau in 2004 . Brad Shepherd said it had the potential to be " a career defining record " . During the process of writing the album Dave Faulkner said in reference to the eclectic mix of songs ready for the album that " rather than stopping myself writing something , I just didn 't artificially force myself to write in any direction " . The album was originally scheduled for release in September 2009 but they were not happy with the final mix . 
 We weren 't really satisfied with the studio we were in and a whole lot of things , so we had to pull the plug on that and then rethink . We just had to eat the expense , you know , we had to give them a week 's cancellation ( fee ) . 
 Hoodoo Gurus then sent their songs off to Durango , Colorado , where Ed Stasium , who worked on the band 's previous albums Kinky and Crank worked with Faulkner . Faulkner flew to the US after Hoodoo Gurus performed in Japan , their first performances there in over 20 years . 
 On 6 May 2009 , Faulkner was inducted into the Western Australian Music Industry ( WAM ) Hall of Fame . 
 In August 2009 it was revealed that Shepherd had been diagnosed with cancer and was recovering from recent surgery . It was his second cancer diagnosis , having had a melanoma removed five years earlier . 
 The first single from their new album , " <unk> ' Up " , was released in December 2009 and received some airplay on Australian radio stations . The album , Purity of Essence , was released on 16 March 2010 in Australia and internationally on 11 May 2010 . 
 On 3 October 2010 , Hoodoo Gurus toured to London , UK , performing at O2 Shepherd 's Bush Empire . 
 In April 2012 the band played a series of concerts titled Dig it Up ! in Australian capital cities , to celebrate 30 years since the release of their debut single " Leilani " . At the concerts , the band performed the whole of their debut album Stoneage Romeos and other hits . Also playing as part of the Dig It Up ! tour were Australian bands Died Pretty and The Hard Ons , as well as international bands such as Redd Kross , The Sonics and The <unk> . 
 In April 2013 , the band hosts the 2nd Dig It Up invitational concerts across the Australian capital cities , performing Mars Needs Guitars , and will be joined by Blue Öyster Cult , Flamin ' Groovies , Buzzcocks , and Peter Case . 
 In January 2015 , it was announced that Kingsmill would be retiring from the band . His last performances were on 22 and 23 May 2015 , at the " Be My Guru - Evolution Revolution " concerts at Sydney 's Powerhouse Museum , performed as the opening to the city 's annual Vivid Festival . The concerts reunited all eight past and present band members for a two @-@ hour set covering their beginnings as Le Hoodoo Gurus in 1982 all the way through to 2010 's Purity Of Essence . 
 The band will be headlining the ' A Day On The Green ' concert series in March 2016 , with <unk> , Violent Femmes Died Pretty , and <unk> . 
 = = = ARIA Hall of Fame = = = 
 Hoodoo Gurus was inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame on 18 July 2007 at the Plaza Ballroom , Melbourne . The ceremony was hosted by Julia Zemiro of SBS Television 's <unk> . The band were inducted by HG Nelson of Triple J 's This Sporting Life . They performed " The Right Time " and " I Want You Back " at the ceremony and subsequently toured with fellow inductees Radio Birdman . 
 The citation for the band 's nomination includes : 
 For two and a half decades the Hoodoo Gurus have consistently been one of the most inventive , lyrically smart and exciting rock 'n'roll bands Australia has ever produced ... along the way they 've influenced an entire generation of bands which explains why the likes of You Am I , The Living End , Dallas Crane , Grinspoon and many others queued up a few years back to pay tribute to the band 's 1984 debut album , Stoneage <unk> 
 For Grossman , this was his second Hall of Fame induction in a row ; the 2006 award was for his ( 1982 – 1987 ) stint with Divinyls . 
 = = Members = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 1984 : Stoneage Romeos 
 1985 : Mars Needs Guitars ! 
 1987 : Blow Your Cool ! 
 1989 : Magnum Cum Louder 
 1991 : Kinky 
 1994 : Crank 
 1996 : Blue Cave 
 2004 : Mach Schau 
 2010 : Purity of Essence 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Begin Again ( film ) = 
 Begin Again is a 2013 American musical comedy @-@ drama film written and directed by John Carney and starring Keira Knightley and Mark Ruffalo . Knightley plays a singer @-@ songwriter who is discovered by a struggling record label executive ( Ruffalo ) and collaborates with him to produce an album recorded in public locations all over New York City . 
 After the success of his 2007 musical film Once , Carney wrote the script for Begin Again in 2010 and employed Gregg Alexander to compose most of the film 's music . With an US $ 8 million budget , production began in July 2012 with filming taking place in various locations around New York City . The film premiered in September 2013 at the Toronto International Film Festival and was released theatrically on June 27 , 2014 , in conjunction with the release of the film 's soundtrack . It has grossed over $ 63 million worldwide and received mostly positive reviews from critics . It was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song for " Lost Stars " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dan Mulligan ( Mark Ruffalo ) is a formerly successful record label executive living in New York City who is estranged from his wife Miriam and struggling to keep up with the changing music industry . After being fired from his job , he goes on a drinking binge which leads him to a bar in the Lower East Side where he encounters Gretta James ( Keira Knightley ) . Gretta is a young and fiercely independent songwriter who has just broken up with her long @-@ time boyfriend and songwriting partner Dave Kohl ( Adam Levine ) , a newly successful musician who had an affair with one of his producers ' assistants . Captivated by Gretta 's music , Dan offers her to sign her to his former record label , and although she initially refuses she reconsiders the offer and agrees . 
 Dan and Gretta meet with Saul , Dan 's business partner and co @-@ founder of their record label , but he does not see the same potential in Gretta and turns her away . Undeterred , Dan proposes that he and Gretta produce their own album together , to be recorded live during the summer at various public locations around New York City . Recruiting a team of talented musicians , including Gretta 's best friend Steve , Dan sets out to make an album worthy of being published by his label . During this time , Dan and Gretta bond both personally and professionally , and Gretta takes Dan 's teenage daughter Violet , a fledgling guitarist , under her wing and encourages her to play on the album . When the album is finished , Dan and Gretta meet again with Saul , who is very impressed with their collaboration . Gretta demands that Saul give Dan his job back and give her a bigger share in the deal . They leave without reaching an agreement , but Dan feels confident that Saul will eventually sign Gretta to the label . 
 When Gretta sees Dave accepting an award on television , she criticizes him for selling out to the music industry and she expresses her grievances with him in a song which she records on his voice mail . A remorseful Dave , who is back in New York to promote his new album , returns her call and asks to see her . After some consideration , she decides to meet with him and they critique each other 's albums . Gretta feels betrayed by Dave 's heavily commercialized rendition of " Lost Stars , " a love ballad she had once written and composed for him as a Christmas present , believing that the true meaning of the song has been lost . Dave tells her that the audiences love when he plays it in the new way , and that their energy fills the room . He believes that music is about sharing it with people , but Gretta tells him that 's not what she intended for that song . Nevertheless , Dave invites her to come and hear him play the song at the Gramercy Theatre that weekend so that she can see the impact it has had on his fans . She arrives at the venue just in time to watch him play her original arrangement of the song , but as she watches him play and sees the reaction of the crowd to the song and how Dave responds to the fans ' adoration by slipping into singing the commercialized arrangement of the song , she realizes that he is a lost cause . Gretta then leaves the concert and cycles through the city with newfound closure and a dawning smile on her face . 
 Afterwards , Gretta visits Dan at his apartment as he prepares to move back home , having made amends with his wife . She tells him that she does not want him to release her album , instead preferring to distribute it online for $ 1 . Although Dan returns to work with Saul , he agrees to let Gretta release the album online and helps her to promote the release . The next day , Saul jokingly fires Dan for promoting Gretta 's album and informs him that it sold 10 @,@ 000 copies in its first day of release . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Keira Knightley as Gretta James , a songwriter 
 Mark Ruffalo as Dan Mulligan , a music producer 
 Adam Levine as Dave Kohl , Gretta 's ex @-@ boyfriend and a successful musician 
 Catherine Keener as Miriam Hart , Dan 's estranged wife 
 <unk> Steinfeld as Violet Mulligan , Dan and Miriam 's daughter 
 James Corden as Steve , Gretta 's best friend 
 CeeLo Green as <unk> , a successful rapper who was discovered by Dan 
 Mos Def as Saul , Dan 's long @-@ time business partner 
 Rob Morrow as CEO 
 = = Production = = 
 Director John Carney conceived the premise for Begin Again several years before he began to write the screenplay in 2010 . The story was partly inspired by his own experiences as a musician in a band , and from his impression of the artists and repertoire ( A & R ) executives of record labels during the 1990s , which formed the basis of Dan 's character . Carney wrote the script , which was initially titled Can a Song Save Your Life ? , before he , Glen Hansard , and Gregg Alexander began writing the songs ; he wanted " to work the music around the story , instead of the other way around . " The script 's style of featuring songs as a natural element of the story was inspired by the 1954 Judy Garland musical film A Star Is Born , and is also employed in Carney 's earlier film Once ( 2007 ) . Carney first pitched the film in 2010 to filmmaker Judd Apatow , who produced the film alongside Tobin Armbrust and Anthony Bregman whose production company Exclusive Media financed the film 's US $ 8 million budget . 
 Before casting Keira Knightley as Gretta , Carney considered casting a pop singer such as Adele in the main role , as well as a number of other actresses including Scarlett Johansson , who was at one point attached to the project . Knightley , who had never sung professionally before , prepared for the role by training with a vocal coach and learning how to play a guitar . Mark Ruffalo was Carney 's first choice for the role of Dan , and agreed to star in the film after Carney sent him the first draft of the screenplay . Singer Adam Levine was also the only person Carney considered casting as Dave , and won the role after talking with Carney over Skype and recording some dialogue as an audition ; he declined to be paid for appearing in the film . Although he had had minor acting parts on television before , Begin Again marked his first role in a film . Carney approached James Corden to appear in the film after admiring Corden 's performance in the lead role in a Broadway production of One Man , Two <unk> . 
 Principal photography of the film began in New York City on July 2 , 2012 , and lasted for 23 days . Carney chose to film in Manhattan 's lesser known neighborhoods that would be more recognizable to locals than tourists . Specific locations included Greenwich Village , the East Village , Times Square , and Washington Square Park . Rather than performing live during filming , the actors sang to pre @-@ recorded tracks . In order to save money on hiring a full crew and extras , some scenes — including one in Times Square — were shot late at night with a handheld camera . The rooftop location near the Empire State Building is located at 28 W 36th St. 
 = = = Carney – Knightley feud = = = 
 During a series of interviews to promote his film Sing Street in 2016 , Carney repeatedly criticized Knightley for her acting in Begin Again . When asked about the critical reaction to Sing Street by The Independent , Carney responded unprompted that " it 's a small personal movie with no Keira <unk> in it . It 's really rewarding . " In the same interview Carney also referred to her repeatedly as a model , despite the fact that Knightley had been working professionally as an actress since childhood , saying " I 'll never make a film with supermodels again . " He also criticized her in an interview with <unk> , saying , " I just think with Keira it was like asking her to do something that she could not do . " Though he did not specifically name Knightley , he did , in an interview with Den of Geek , say that his desire to make Sing Street came from his " experience of working , let 's face it , with a model on my last film " . Filmmakers Massy <unk> , Mark Romanek , Lorene Scafaria and Lynn Shelton , who had worked with Knightley on other films , tweeted their support for her after Carney 's comments . 
 Carney later tweeted a public apology saying he felt like " a complete idiot " and saying that Knightley was " nothing but professional and dedicated " during the filming of the movie . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack was released on June 30 , 2014 in the U.S. by Gregg Alexander 's record label <unk> , Levine 's label 222 Records , Polydor Records , and Interscope Records . Most of the film 's music was composed by Alexander with Danielle <unk> , Nick Lashley , Rick Nowels , and Nick Southwood . Some songs were written and composed by Glen Hansard and Carney , and most were performed by Knightley and Levine . The track " Drowning Pool " by The Walls , which played over the opening credit sequence , is not included on the soundtrack album . The song " Lost Stars " was nominated for numerous awards , including the Academy Award for Best Original Song and the Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Song . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = Release = = 
 Begin Again premiered on September 7 , 2013 at the Toronto International Film Festival , where The Weinstein Company acquired the U.S. distribution rights to the film for $ 7 million . It was later screened on April 26 , 2014 on the closing night of the Tribeca Film Festival . The film 's title was changed from Can a Song Save Your Life ? to Begin Again between its festival premiere and its theatrical release because viewers found it difficult to remember and it was often misquoted . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film was given a limited release in the United States on June 27 , 2014 , grossing $ 134 @,@ 064 on its opening weekend , and opened in wide release on July 11 . It was re @-@ released by The Weinstein Company on August 29 , closer to the awards season . Overall , the film earned $ 16 @,@ 170 @,@ 632 at the U.S. box office and $ 47 @,@ 294 @,@ 229 internationally for a total gross of $ 63 @,@ 464 @,@ 861 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Begin Again received generally positive reviews from critics . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds a rating of 83 % , based on 144 reviews , with an average rating of 6 @.@ 8 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads , " Writer @-@ director John Carney 's return to musical drama isn 't quite as potent as it was with Once , but thanks to charming work from its well @-@ matched leads , Begin Again is difficult to resist . " On Metacritic , the film has a score of 62 out of 100 , based on reviews from 39 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Rolling Stone critic Peter Travers gave Begin Again three out of four stars , praising the " subtle magic " of the lead actors ' performances and Carney 's creation of " surreal , enchanting loveliness " without being overly sentimental . Ian Freer of Empire awarded the film four out of five stars , describing it as " lovely stuff , winningly played , open @-@ hearted and guaranteed to slap on a smile on a balmy summer night . " In a review for Variety , Peter Debruge wrote that " Gregg Alexander 's music is undeniably the best thing " about the film , which " lays emotions on the line and then drives them home with music . " The Hollywood Reporter 's David Rooney praised the " disarming emotional candor and intimacy " of Carney 's script and the chemistry between Knightley and Ruffalo , while David Edelstein of New York enjoyed Ruffalo 's " very funny " performance and Knightley 's " surprisingly sweet singing voice " . 
 The Los Angeles Times 's Kenneth Turan , on the other hand , opined that the story and performances felt contrived , and that the film as a whole failed to impress as much as Carney 's previous musical film Once . Similar , A. O. Scott of The New York Times wrote that Begin Again was a " disappointing , overly produced follow @-@ up " to Once and found it " not very good , but ... kind of enjoyable . " In a review for The Guardian , Paul MacInnes awarded the film 2 out of 5 stars and described it as " a movie obsessed with authenticity but as phoney as a Miley Cyrus dance routine . " The Chicago Sun @-@ Times critic Bruce Ingram also found the film hypocritical , noting " the slightly bogus vibe " of the song performances that had been recorded in a studio but were meant to be played live . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = Thomas Baker ( aviator ) = 
 Thomas Charles Richmond Baker DFC , MM & Bar ( 2 May 1897 – 4 November 1918 ) was an Australian soldier , aviator , and flying ace of the First World War . Born in Smithfield , South Australia , he was an active sportsman in his youth and developed a keen interest in aviation . He was employed as a clerk with the Bank of New South Wales , before he enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force in July 1915 , for service in World War I. Posted to an artillery unit on the Western Front , he was awarded the Military Medal for carrying out numerous repairs on a communications line while subject to severe artillery fire . In June 1917 , Baker was awarded a bar to his decoration for his part in quelling a fire in one of the artillery gun pits that was endangering approximately 300 rounds of shrapnel and high explosive . 
 In September 1917 , Baker applied for a position as a mechanic in the Australian Flying Corps . He was instead selected for flight training , and was posted to courses in the United Kingdom . He graduated as a pilot and was commissioned a second lieutenant in March 1918 . Posted for active duty in France that June , Baker joined the ranks of No. 4 Squadron AFC . Over the next four months , he rose to the rank of captain and was credited with bringing down 12 German aircraft . He was shot down and killed on 4 November 1918 . In February 1919 , he was posthumously awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thomas Charles Richmond Baker was born in Smithfield , South Australia , on 2 May 1897 , the eldest son of Richmond Baker , a schoolmaster and farmer , and his wife Annie Martha ( née Gardner ) . He was educated at St Peter 's College in Adelaide . During his school years Baker was an active sportsman , taking part in rowing , tennis and football , in addition to being a member of the cadet corps . In his youth , he acquired an avid interest in aviation , and the construction of model aeroplanes became " his chief hobby " . Graduating from secondary school in 1914 , he gained employment as a clerk with the Adelaide branch of the Bank of New South Wales . During this time , he joined the 11th Royal Australian Engineers of the Citizens Military Force . 
 = = First World War = = 
 = = = Australian Imperial Force = = = 
 On 29 July 1915 , Baker enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force for service during the First World War . Allocated as a reinforcement to the 6th Field Artillery Brigade with the rank of gunner , he embarked from Melbourne aboard HMAT Persic on 22 November , bound for Egypt . On arrival , Baker was posted to the 16th Battery before moving to France for service on the Western Front . Disembarking in France on 1 July 1916 , Baker took part in the Somme offensive . 
 On 11 December 1916 , Baker was engaged in battle with his unit near Gueudecourt . During the action , he was posted as a telephonist with the forward observation team sent to record the fall of the artillery and secure the range for a bombardment . Their position during this time was on a forward slope of the Australian frontline , which was subject to constant observation and the attention of German snipers . Attempting to maintain communications , Baker ventured out on four occasions during the engagement , each time subject to the heavy artillery barrage from the German forces , and repaired the telephone line in thirty separate places . As a consequence , the 16th Battery was able to align its artillery barrage and destroy the Germans ' forward trench . Commended for his " great gallantry " as well as " good service and ... great devotion to duty " , Baker was awarded the Military Medal . The announcement for the decoration was published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 19 February 1917 . 
 In 1917 , the 16th Battery was relocated to the Messines sector of the frontline in Belgium . On 16 March , Baker was admitted to hospital suffering from an illness ; he returned to his unit six days later . During the afternoon of 21 June , the unit 's position was subject to a severe bombardment of artillery shelling , resulting in an order for all men to evacuate the gun pits and seek cover . As a consequence of the barrage , the camouflage covering one of the gun pits caught fire , endangering approximately 300 rounds of shrapnel and high explosives . The battery sergeant major immediately called for men to assist him in quelling the blaze ; Baker and three others volunteered . Despite the continuous shellfire , the four men promptly set about retrieving water from a nearby well and shellholes with buckets " at great personal risk " , dousing the fire . The camouflage had been completely destroyed , several sand bags had caught fire , and a few rounds of ammunition were charred . As a result of their actions , Baker 's three companions were recommended for the Military Medal , and Baker for a bar to his . The announcement of the decorations was promogulated in a supplement to the London Gazette on 21 August 1917 . 
 = = = Australian Flying Corps = = = 
 In September 1917 , Baker followed his ambition of joining the Australian Flying Corps and applied for a transfer to become an air mechanic when the opportunity arose . His application proved successful , though he was instead selected to become a pilot and was posted for flight training . Embarking for the United Kingdom the following month , he was posted to No. 5 Training Squadron as a cadet pilot for his initial aviation instruction . On 27 March , Baker graduated as a pilot in the Australian Flying Corps and was commissioned as a second lieutenant ; he had completed his first solo flight earlier that month . In May , he was posted for a course at No. 2 School of Aerial Fighting and Gunnery . 
 Baker proceeded overseas to France on 15 June 1918 and , on arrival the following day , was posted to No. 4 Squadron AFC piloting Sopwith Camels . On 23 June , he flew his first operational sortie over the German lines ; he was promoted to lieutenant four days later . On 31 July , Baker was among a formation of seven Camels tasked with carrying out a patrol over German @-@ held territory . The group crossed over into German lines near <unk> Forrest , and flew towards Estaires . The Camels soon intercepted a formation of seven Fokker D.VIIs , and the entire patrol immediately dived at the German aircraft . In the ensuing melee , Baker managed to force one of the aircraft down to the ground , thus scoring his first aerial victory . 
 Throughout August 1918 , No. 4 Squadron " maintained a high operational tempo " as the Allies launched a new offensive on the Western Front . On 7 August , Baker and two others took off from their squadron aerodrome at <unk> ; all three machines were carrying a heavy load of bombs . Airborne over Pont @-@ du @-@ Hem , the trio released their bombs over German billets in the area , before spotting two Albatros <unk> The three Australians closed in on the two aircraft . Baker engaged an Albatros , his fire severing the left wing of the aircraft , effectively destroying the machine . Nine days later , a formation of 65 aircraft was assembled from No. 88 Squadron RAF , No. 92 Squadron RAF , No. 2 Squadron AFC and Baker 's No. 4 Squadron AFC to execute a mass raid on the German aerodrome at Haubourdin . The fleet of aircraft was equipped with a range of incendiary and explosive bombs , in addition to machine gun ammunition . Led by Captain Harry Cobby , the aircraft from No. 4 Squadron were the first to sweep down and assault the target . At one point , Baker pursued a staff car until the vehicle ran up an embankment and flipped over . He later reported that " No one left the car " . The raid , which was the largest aerial attack by Allied forces to that date , was highly successful ; British estimates concluded that 37 German aeroplanes had been destroyed . 
 On 19 August , Baker led a patrol of six aircraft over Lys . Five days later , he shot down a German balloon while on a lone mission in poor weather , scoring his third aerial victory . At dawn on 30 August , Baker took off on a sortie with Lieutenants Roy King and Oscar Ramsay . Over Laventie , the trio encountered three DFW <unk> ; Baker and King each disposed of one of the aircraft . Baker was granted two weeks ' leave to the United Kingdom in early September . Towards the end of that month , No. 4 Squadron relocated to <unk> and was soon after re @-@ equipped with the Sopwith Snipe . By the time of the conversion , Baker had achieved flying ace status on the Sopwith Camel , having been credited with shooting down six German aircraft by early October . 
 Baker was promoted to temporary captain and made a flight commander in No. 4 Squadron on 24 October . Two days later , Baker and Lieutenant Thomas <unk> led a formation of nine Snipes . As the patrol drew near Tournai in the afternoon , they intercepted a group of 15 Fokker <unk> The Snipes swept towards the German aircraft , and Baker attempted to engage the formation leader , but the machine guns on his Snipe jammed . He brought in his aircraft for a second attempt , and managed to shoot the Fokker down out of control . In all , the Australians destroyed five of the Fokkers before the engagement ended . 
 On 28 October , Baker was credited with the destruction of a further three German aircraft from two separate patrols into Belgium that day . During the second excursion , he brought one Fokker down out of control , before shooting the other down over Ath . He was airborne again on an offensive patrol the next day . Fifteen Snipes from No. 4 Squadron were detailed for the patrol , and as the party drew near Tournai they encountered approximately 60 Fokker planes already engaged with several British aircraft . Baker led five of the Snipes into the assault , but confusion reigned for several minutes before the men could gain their bearings in the fight . Baker assailed two Fokkers that had been pursuing another Snipe , and was able to destroy one of the aircraft . On 30 October , " considerable activity " was observed at the German aerodrome in <unk> , and a formation of aircraft from No. 2 Squadron were detailed to bomb the area ; an escort of eleven Snipes — including Baker — from No. 4 Squadron was provided . As the bombing was taking place , several Fokker aircraft appeared and were intercepted by the Snipes . In the ensuing battle , Baker critically damaged one of the Fokkers , resulting in the aircraft dropping towards the ground tail @-@ first on its back . The Fokker proved to be Baker 's twelfth , and final , aerial victory of the war ; he had scored his last five victories in a period of three days . 
 On 4 November 1918 , the whole of No. 80 Wing RAF — of which No. 4 Squadron was part — took to the sky in an effort to " harass the German retreat on the Leuze @-@ Ath road " and to bomb the aerodrome to the east of Leuze . A formation of Sopwith Snipes from No. 4 Squadron had been utilised as an escort when the initial raid was carried out , and then to protect the bombers as they returned to the Allied lines . However , when the Australians had executed the latter duty , they were tailed by a patrol of twelve Fokkers . After seeing the bombers off , the Snipes wheeled around to confront the German aircraft . The battle raged for two or three minutes before dying out . As the Snipes re @-@ grouped , they discovered that three pilots were missing ; Baker was among the three . Baker and fellow ace Lieutenant Arthur Palliser were initially recorded as missing , but were later found to have fallen victim to Rittmeister Karl Bolle during the battle . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Described as " the most gallant airman ... and ... a pilot far above the average " by one of the men in his squadron , Baker was buried in <unk> Communal Cemetery , Belgium . His aerial victories were broken down as seven aircraft and one balloon destroyed with an additional four planes driven down out of control , making him No. 4 Squadron 's fourth highest scoring ace after Harry Cobby , Roy King and Edgar McCloughry . A stained @-@ glass window at St John 's Church of England in Adelaide is dedicated to his memory . On 8 February 1919 , the London Gazette carried the posthumous announcement of the award of the Distinguished Flying Cross to Thomas Baker , reading : 
 Air Ministry , 8th February , 1919 . 
 His Majesty the KING has been graciously pleased to confer the undermentioned Rewards on Officers and other ranks of the Royal Air Force in recognition of gallantry in flying operations against the enemy : — 
 [ ... ] 
 <unk> THE DISTINGUISHED <unk> CROSS . 
 [ ... ] 
 Lieut . Thomas Charles Richmond Baker , M.M. ( Australian F.C. ) . ( <unk> ) 
 This officer has carried out some forty low flying raids on hostile troops , aerodromes , etc . , and has taken part in numerous offensive patrols ; he has , in addition , destroyed eight hostile machines . In all these operations he has shown exceptional initiative and dash , never hesitating to lead his formation against overwhelming odds , nor shrinking from incurring personal danger . 
 = The Fight Before Christmas = 
 " The Fight Before Christmas " is the eighth episode of the twenty @-@ second season of The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network on December 5 , 2010 , and consists of four short dream segments that all take place during Christmas . In the first segment , Bart travels to the North Pole and sets out to get Santa into giving him the dirt bike he has wished for every year . In the second one , set during World War II , Lisa has to cope with the absence of her mother who has been deployed as a soldier overseas . Martha Stewart arrives at the Simpsons ' home in the third dream segment , helping Marge save the family 's Christmas . Finally , in the last segment the entire family has become puppet characters in a theater show that also stars Katy Perry . 
 Both Stewart and Perry guest starred in the episode as themselves . The segment featuring Perry , with the Simpsons as puppets , was filmed in live @-@ action . It parodies The Muppet Show and Sesame Street — two shows that also feature puppet characters ( The Muppets ) . The segment was inspired by the announcement that in September 2010 Perry would appear as herself on Sesame Street , though this appearance was later cut from that show because it became controversial . Since airing , " The Fight Before Christmas " has received mixed to positive reviews from television critics . It was watched by approximately 9 @.@ 56 million viewers during its original broadcast . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The structure of the episode is similar to the structure of the Treehouse of Horror episodes , only that it is divided in four stories instead of three . 
 = = = Bart 's Story = = = 
 Bart stays up late on Christmas Eve to kill Santa Claus for not bringing him a dirt bike three Christmases ago . He eventually falls asleep and dreams that the Polar Express , driven by Otto Mann , lands in front of the house and flies him to the North Pole . Bart meets Santa ( Krusty the Clown ) only to find out that he has run out of money , since giving out presents in return for cookies every year is not a sustainable business model . Feeling pity , Bart decides that Santa no longer has to give him a dirt bike and leaves with Santa throwing a party in his office after revealing how stupid kids are . 
 = = = Lisa 's Story = = = 
 Lisa dreams that it is December 1944 and that Marge is a soldier in World War II . Due to Marge being taken suddenly for overseas deployment while buying a Christmas tree the previous year , Lisa has sworn to never see another Christmas tree until Marge returns home safely . However , during Christmas of 1944 , the family gets a telegram saying that Marge is missing in action . After hearing the news , Lisa runs away to the place where she had last seen her mother , the Christmas Tree Farm . The owner of the place says that Marge paid for a tree the previous year but never picked it up . Lisa , believing the tree to be a symbol that Marge is alright , takes it home and decorates it together with Homer and Bart. Marge is then seen assassinating Adolf Hitler with an <unk> in a movie theater in France as he watches a propaganda film . When she walks away from the scene , the theater explodes behind her . 
 = = = Marge 's Story = = = 
 Marge dreams that she has sent a letter to Martha Stewart asking for her to help save the family 's Christmas . Martha promptly arrives and fills the house with the Christmas decorations Marge has always dreamed of , but the other family members end up as part of the decorations instead of being able to enjoy the holiday with her . Marge quickly realizes that it is Homer and the children that make Christmas special for her , so Martha gets rid of all the decorations with a magic wand . Marge then wakes up on Christmas Day to find that her family has brought her the ingredients for breakfast in bed . Their attempts to cook it go awry , so they go out for breakfast instead . 
 = = = Maggie 's Story = = = 
 Maggie dreams that the entire family has become puppets in a theater . As the Simpsons prepare for a trip to Hawaii and ask Moe to house @-@ sit for them , Homer 's boss Mr. Burns pays a surprise visit . He soon learns that Homer has feigned a neck injury to get time off work for the trip and calls his attack hounds on him . However , only one arrives ( represented by a crude sock puppet ) , since the show has spent its budget on Katy Perry , who appears as herself and Moe 's girlfriend . Noticing that Burns is disappointed by the lack of his attack hounds , Katy gives him a kiss . Touched by this , Burns decides to forgive the Simpsons and allows them to enjoy their trip in Hawaii , and then everyone sings a parody of " Twelve Days of Christmas " which plays during the credits . At the end of the credits , Moe attempts to kiss Katy but is not tall enough to reach her mouth , so he instead opts to kiss her bellybutton through her dress . Katy retorts that he is not kissing her bellybutton , meaning that he is actually kissing her vulva , but also says she does not want Moe to stop . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Fight Before Christmas " was written by Dan Castellaneta ( who provides the voice of Homer on The Simpsons ) and his wife Deb Lacusta , as part of the show 's twenty @-@ second season . It was directed by Bob Anderson and Matthew Schofield . Similar to the show 's Treehouse of Horror episodes , this episode features several segments . Since all four of them are set during Christmas , the episode was originally broadcast in December 2010 . There have been many Christmas episodes on The Simpsons ever since the first episode of the series , the 1989 holiday special " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " , and " The Fight Before Christmas " was not the first time a Christmas episode was divided into segments . Several parts of the episode were inspired by popular culture . The train that appears in the first dream segment references the train featured in the children 's book The Polar Express and its film adaptation . In Santa 's office building at the North Pole , the characters Schroeder ( from Peanuts ) and Bumble ( from Rudolph the Red @-@ Nosed Reindeer ) are seen . The second segment references the plot of the film Inglourious Basterds in that Marge blows up a movie theater with Adolf Hitler and other Nazis in it . In addition , the propaganda film that is playing in the theater features an evil version of the Disney character Dumbo flying over London and dropping bombs . 
 American media personality Martha Stewart guest starred in " The Fight Before Christmas " as an animated version of herself . Her appearance was announced to the press in April 2010 . Stewart commented in an interview that she enjoyed recording her part , which she described as " pretty true to life " . She also noted that " the writers are excellent " and joked that they " worked very hard with me to make sure I wasn 't too bad . " Stewart has expressed interest in guest starring on the show again in one of the Treehouse of Horror episodes , since her favorite holiday is Halloween . 
 = = = Live @-@ action segment = = = 
 The episode contains a live @-@ action segment featuring characters from the show as puppets and a guest appearance from singer Katy Perry as herself . It parodies the two television series The Muppet Show and Sesame Street , both of which feature the puppet characters The Muppets . References to those shows include puppet versions of Grampa and Jasper heckling the cast of the Simpsons puppet show from a box seat in the manner of Statler and Waldorf from The Muppet Show , and Moe devouring cookies like Cookie Monster does on Sesame Street . Brad Trechak of AOL TV noted that " the plot of the segment was silly and simplistic in line with the style of Sesame Street but had some real adult moments like one would see on The Muppet Show . " 
 The segment was inspired by the announcement that Perry would appear as herself on Sesame Street . This appearance , which sees her performing a child @-@ friendly version of her song " Hot n Cold " with Elmo , was originally to appear on the forty @-@ first @-@ season premiere of the educational children 's program on September 27 , 2010 . However , on September 23 it was announced that it had been cut from the show because some parents who had seen the appearance online complained about the revealing clothes worn by Perry . Sesame Workshop said in a statement that " In light of the feedback we 've received on the Katy Perry music video which was released on YouTube only , we have decided we will not air the segment on the television broadcast of Sesame Street , which is aimed at preschoolers . Katy Perry fans will still be able to view the video on YouTube . " 
 The Simpsons segment was filmed in mid @-@ September 2010 , before the controversy began , and thus it was not inspired by the decision to cut Perry 's appearance from Sesame Street . Executive producer Al Jean announced to Entertainment Weekly on September 25 that the singer would guest star on the show , commenting that " In the wake of Elmo 's terrible betrayal , the Simpsons puppets wish to announce they stand felt @-@ shoulder @-@ to @-@ shoulder with Katy Perry . " The segment was shot in front of a green screen . This was the third time that a sequence of The Simpsons was shot in live @-@ action — the first being the " Homer ³ " segment of the 1995 episode Treehouse of Horror VI in which a 3D computer @-@ animated Homer ends up in the real @-@ life world , and in the " Terror of Tiny Town " segment of Treehouse of Horror IX where Bart and Lisa appear on Live With Regis and Kathie Lee . 
 Perry wears a cleavage @-@ showing , red latex dress in the episode that features characters from the show on it . Entertainment Weekly author Dan Snierson noted that this dress " probably wouldn ’ t have been Street @-@ approved either " , and a writer for Metro commented that " the Simpsons ' producers were certainly not worried about Katy looking too raunchy " . Perry was a fan of The Simpsons before guest starring . In a video interview , she commented that she " thought it was an honor to be asked to be on The Simpsons . The Simpsons , they are kind of like a national treasure when it comes to , you know , America and the whole world . " She also stated that she considers it to be one of the highlights of her career , and that she saw it as a sign that she had " made it " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on December 5 , 2010 , the episode was watched by approximately 9 @.@ 56 million people . It received a 4 @.@ 2 Nielsen rating in the adults aged 18 – 49 demographic , making it the highest @-@ rated episode of the season at that point . The episode was also watched by an 11 % share of the television audience . The Simpsons became the highest rated program in Fox 's " Animation Domination " lineup that night , beating The Cleveland Show and American Dad ! . In addition , " The Fight Before Christmas " became the fifth highest @-@ rated program among adults aged 18 – 49 the week it aired , and the twentieth highest @-@ rated among all ages . 
 The episode as a whole has received mixed to positive reviews from critics . AOL TV 's Brad Trechak wrote that it " showed a level of imagination that the recent Halloween episodes have been lacking " and that it " started good and got progressively better [ ... ] " . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club , on the other hand , commented that the segments " got weaker as they went along " . He added the episode " wasn 't awful , and it did have some solid laughs , but the quality of the segments was decidedly hit and miss . " These two critics both praised Bart 's dream for being funny and Lisa 's dream for its Inglourious Basterds parody . They had different opinions on the last two sequences , though . Trechak thought Stewart " really shone in [ Marge 's dream ] , playing some sort of parody of herself crossed with Mary Poppins and Satan , " and singled out the live @-@ action sequence as his favorite because he is a fan of Jim Henson , the creator of The Muppets . VanDerWerff commented that " Marge 's visit from Martha Stewart was one joke stretched too far , and the final segment with the Muppet Simpsons was far too stilted . " 
 Several other critics have commented on the live @-@ action sequence . Mediaite 's Tommy Christopher wrote in a column that the episode was " capped off by a pitch @-@ perfect parody of The Muppet Show , but veered into adult humor that would make the Muppet @-@ inspired <unk> of Avenue Q blush . " He commented that the part where Moe thinks he is kissing Perry 's bellybutton and she tells him not to stop " has got to be a first on network television , breaking the dual taboos of oral sex and puppet @-@ on @-@ human conjugal bliss . " The segment was praised by Germain Lussier of / Film , who gave it as an example of how the show , " every once in a while , [ ... ] does something so outrageous , we all step back and marvel at their brilliance . " Joyce Eng and Kate Stanhope of TV Guide named the sequence the second top television moment of the week . 
 = Stuart Milner @-@ Barry = 
 Sir Philip Stuart Milner @-@ Barry KCVO CB OBE ( 20 September 1906 – 25 March 1995 ) was a British chess player , chess writer , World War II codebreaker and civil servant . He represented England in chess both before and after World War II . He worked at Bletchley Park during World War II , and was head of " Hut 6 " , a section responsible for deciphering messages which had been encrypted using the German Enigma machine . He was one of four leading codebreakers at Bletchley to petition the then @-@ Prime Minister Winston Churchill directly for more resources for their work . After the war he worked in the Treasury , and later administered the British honours system . In chess , he represented England in international tournaments , and lent his name to three opening variations . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Born in Hendon , London , Philip Stuart was the second of six children to a schoolteacher , Edward Leopold Milner @-@ Barry , who died in 1917 , and his wife , Edith Mary . A talented chess player , he won the first British Boys ' Championship in 1923 . He was a pupil at Cheltenham College , and won a scholarship to Trinity College , Cambridge , where he obtained firsts in classics and moral sciences . He represented Cambridge in chess . At Cambridge , he befriended another chess player , C.H.O 'D . ( Hugh ) Alexander , and composed a number of chess puzzles . Between 1929 and 1938 he was a city stockbroker , although he was unhappy with the work . From 1938 , he was the chess correspondent for The Times , succeeded in 1945 by Harry Golombek . 
 = = = Early chess contributions = = = 
 He made his debut in international @-@ class chess at the strong London 1932 tournament , which World Champion Alexander Alekhine won . Milner @-@ Barry 's best results in international competition were achieved in three straight years at the Margate tournaments from 1937 – 39 , and at Hastings 1938 . In all four events he finished just above the middle against strong fields , with performance ratings ( as calculated by Chessmetrics ) between <unk> and 2565 . This places him at a solid International Master standard , although he never received this title . He reached as high as No. 65 in the world between June and August 1941 , according to Chessmetrics , which ranks historical chess performances retrospectively , using modern algorithms . 
 He represented England in chess , and played in the international Chess Olympiads of 1937 and 1939 . The latter tournament , held in Buenos Aires , Argentina , coincided with Britain 's declaration of war on Germany in September 1939 . Milner @-@ Barry , with teammates who included Hugh Alexander ( at that time the British chess champion ) and Harry Golombek , abandoned the tournament unfinished , and returned to Britain . His full Olympiad results are listed later in the article . 
 = = Bletchley Park = = 
 Upon their return , all three soon joined the Government Code and Cypher School ( GC & CS ) at Bletchley Park . Milner @-@ Barry was recruited by mathematician Gordon Welchman , who had been his contemporary at Trinity College ; in turn Milner @-@ Barry recruited Hugh Alexander . Arriving in early 1940 , he joined Welchman 's " Hut 6 " section , whose task was to solve the Enigma cipher machine as used by the German Army and Air Force . 
 In 1993 , Milner @-@ Barry wrote that " to this day I could not claim that I fully understood how the machine worked , let alone what was involved in the problems of breaking and reading the Enigma cipher " . Nonetheless , with his knowledge of the German language , he made a study of the decrypts and found that they contained stereotyped patterns and forms of address that could be exploited as " cribs " – reliable guesses for the plain language message that matched a given piece of encrypted text . Finding reliable cribs was a critical task for Hut 6 , as Enigma was broken primarily with the aid of " bombes " , large electromechanical machines which automatically searched for parts of the correct settings . Bombes were reliant on a suitable crib in order to succeed . In autumn 1940 , Milner @-@ Barry was put in charge of the " Crib Room " . 
 He was billeted with Alexander , who was working in Hut 8 , the counterpart to Hut 6 working on German Naval Enigma . Their close friendship let them easily resolve the competing needs of their sections for the limited available bombe time . By October 1941 , he was deputy head of Hut 6 under Welchman . At this time , Bletchley Park was experiencing a shortage of clerical staff which was delaying the work on Enigma , and the management of GCCS appeared unable to obtain the resources needed . This affected both Hut 6 and Hut 8 , which was run by mathematician Alan Turing with Hugh Alexander as his deputy . Together , Welchman , Milner @-@ Barry , Turing and Alexander bypassed the chain of command and wrote a memorandum directly to the Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , outlining their difficulties . It fell to Milner @-@ Barry to deliver the message to 10 Downing Street in person , on 21 October 1941 . The next day , Churchill responded , " Action this day : Make sure they have all they want on extreme priority and report to me that this has been done . " Within a month their needs were being met . 
 In autumn 1943 , Milner @-@ Barry took over as head of Hut 6 , which by that time had grown to over 450 staff , Welchman having been appointed the Assistant Director of Mechanisation at Bletchley Park . He remained in charge until the end of the war , presiding over a number of technical challenges presented by the introduction of extra security devices to the German Enigma , including the Enigma Uhr and a <unk> " reflector " rotor . His entry in the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography notes that , " although he increasingly felt that Hut 6 was on the verge of losing the ability to decode Enigma , it held on until the end of the war , and this was due in no small part to his gifted leadership . " The official history of Hut 6 , written immediately after the end of World War II , comments on his early " most vital technical achievement " in finding cribs , and on his " administrative and diplomatic talents " in his later role as head of the section . 
 = = After World War II = = 
 Milner @-@ Barry joined the Treasury in 1945 with the grade of Principal . In 1947 , he married Thelma Tennant Wells , with whom he had a son and two daughters . The same year , he was promoted to Assistant Secretary , and Under @-@ secretary in 1954 . Apart from a stint in the Ministry of Health from 1958 – 60 , he remained with the Treasury until 1966 , when , aged 60 , he had reached the normal retirement age for the civil service . He was persuaded instead to carry on as a ceremonial officer administering the honours system . In this role , he supported the knighthoods of P. G. Wodehouse and Noël Coward . Milner @-@ Barry eventually retired in 1977 . He was appointed OBE in 1946 for his work in World War II , CB in 1962 , and KCVO in 1975 . 
 = = Later chess contributions = = 
 He had also continued to play chess , competing in the 1952 and 1956 Olympiads . This 1956 Olympiad trip to Moscow was risky , since Britain and the USSR , which had been allies during World War II , were by then locked into the Cold War , and Milner @-@ Barry 's wartime codebreaking knowledge would have been of great interest to the Soviets ; the very fact that Britain had broken German codes on a massive scale was kept secret until 1974 , when Frederick Winterbotham 's book The Ultra Secret was published . He placed second in the British Chess Championship at Hastings 1953 ( finishing behind only Daniel Yanofsky ) , with a score of 8 / 11 ; this would be his best result in British Championships . 
 He was president of the British Chess Federation between 1970 and 1973 , competed in the British Championship as late as 1978 , and was still competing in club and county @-@ level tournaments and matches into his 80s . His obituary in The Independent recalled his " savagely effective attacking style , honed to perfection through a series of ' serious friendly games ' against his old rival Hugh Alexander " . In 1972 , George Koltanowski wrote that , " his style was very pleasing to spectators because he was always looking for dangerous continuations and quite often he found them ! " His name is associated with three chess opening variations : 
 Milner @-@ Barry Variation of the Nimzo @-@ Indian Defence ( ECO <unk> ) : 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.Qc2 Nc6 
 Milner @-@ Barry Gambit in the French Defence ( ECO C02 ) : 1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 <unk> c5 <unk> Nc6 5.Nf3 Qb6 6.Bd3 cxd4 <unk> Bd7 8 @.@ 0 @-@ 0 ! ? Nxd4 <unk> Qxd4 10.Nc3 
 Milner @-@ Barry variation in the Petroff Defence ( ECO <unk> ) : 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nf6 3.Nxe5 d6 4.Nf3 Nxe4 <unk> Qe7 6.d3 Nf6 7.Bg5 Nbd7 
 = = = Olympiad results = = = 
 Milner @-@ Barry 's detailed results while competing for England in chess Olympiads are as follows : 
 Stockholm 1937 : board 3 , 3 / 9 ( + 2 − 5 = 2 ) 
 Buenos Aires 1939 : board 3 , 4 / 5 ( + 3 − 0 = 2 ) 
 Helsinki 1952 : board 3 , 5 ½ / 12 ( + 2 − 3 = 7 ) 
 Moscow 1956 : board 4 , 6 / 12 ( + 5 − 5 = 2 ) 
 Overall , he scored ( + 12 − 13 = 13 ) , 18 ½ / 38 , for 48 @.@ 7 per cent . 
 = = Final years = = 
 In 1985 , Milner @-@ Barry fiercely defended the reputation of Gordon Welchman , who had come under posthumous criticism for publishing details about the wartime work of Hut 6 . In 1992 , echoing his wartime visit to 10 Downing Street , Milner @-@ Barry was a member of a party who delivered a petition to the Prime Minister calling on the government to help preserve Bletchley Park , which was then under threat from demolition . 
 He died on 25 March 1995 in Lewisham Hospital , London . A memorial service was held for him at Westminster Abbey on 15 June . 
 = January 1992 nor 'easter = 
 The January 1992 nor 'easter was the second in a series of nor 'easters in a 14 month period that produced strong winds , high tides , and flooding along the East Coast of the United States . It was a small , short @-@ lived storm that was poorly forecast , intensifying rapidly on January 4 before striking the Eastern Shore of Virginia . The strongest quadrant of the storm moved over Delaware , and winds in the state reached 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) . The nor 'easter weakened as it moved westward , and it dissipated over Virginia before the energy reformed and redeveloped offshore . 
 In North Carolina , the storm flooded the main highway connecting the Outer Banks . The nor 'easter struck shortly during a new moon , producing high tides that resulted in significant beach erosion along the Delmarva Peninsula . The highest wind gust was 89 mph ( 143 km / h ) , reported in Chincoteague , Virginia . The cost of the lost beach near Ocean City , Maryland was estimated at over $ 10 million ( 1992 USD ) . In the city , the storm destroyed the tidal gauge , although the storm surge was estimated at 6 @.@ 6 ft ( 2 @.@ 0 m ) . The strongest quadrant of the storm moved over Delaware ; in the state , strong easterly winds produced significant tidal flooding , and 500 houses were damaged . A high tide of 9 @.@ 02 ft ( 2 @.@ 75 m ) at Dewey Beach was the second highest tide on record in the entire state . Flooding also affected South Jersey in many areas that experienced flooding from the 1991 Perfect Storm in the previous October . Damage was estimated at $ 45 million ( 1992 USD ) . Strong winds reached as far north as New York , where a fallen tree seriously injured a person driving a car . Freezing rain associated with the storm caused a traffic fatality in New York , as well as several accidents in Maine . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On January 2 , a small low pressure area developed along the East Coast of the United States . Due to its small size , the storm was poorly forecast . A strong upper @-@ level low moving through Georgia and South Carolina caused the low to move to the west , perpendicular to the Mid @-@ Atlantic coast . As it did so , the combination of warm air from the south and strong upper @-@ level winds caused the low to rapidly intensify . On January 4 , a buoy reported a minimum barometric pressure of 993 mb ( 29 @.@ 3 inHg ) , and maximum sustained winds of about 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) . The system developed tropical characteristics , including the development of an eye feature in the center of the storm . Between 0500 and 0700 UTC on January 4 , the storm moved ashore along the Eastern Shore of Virginia , about 25 mi ( 40 km ) south of Ocean City , Maryland . It quickly weakened while moving across the Delmarva Peninsula and it emerged into the Chesapeake Bay by 1000 UTC that day . Three hours later , the storm was stalled over northern Virginia . A secondary low pressure area developed within the overall system further out to sea later on January 4 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The nor 'easter struck about two months after the destructive Perfect Storm , and preceded another damaging storm in December 1992 . The storm produced strong winds and high surf during a new moon , which resulted in astronomically high tides . Such tides caused coastal flooding and damage to dune systems . Due to its small size , the storm 's impact was highly localized and did not spread far to the north of the Delaware Bay . 
 High waves flooded North Carolina Highway 12 in the Outer Banks up to 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) deep , closing a 10 mi ( 16 km ) portion between Rodanthe and Oregon Inlet . Portions of Kitty Hawk and Pea Island were also flooded . Offshore , the storm washed 500 drums of arsenic overboard a freighter , which prompted a Coast Guard search for the toxic supplies . In Virginia , the storm produced a peak wind gust of 89 mph ( 143 km / h ) at Chincoteague . Along the eastern shore , high surf destroyed one house and damaged 110 camping trailers . Flooding and high winds damaged the Wallops Flight Facility . High winds downed trees and power lines , leaving 4 @,@ 000 people without power . Property damage was estimated at $ 2 @.@ 2 million ( 1992 USD ) . 
 In Maryland , the storm struck just before high tide . A station on Assateague Island reported wind gusts of over 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) during the storm 's closest approach . On the island , the storm killed 11 Assateague Ponies and 20 deer . The cost to repair damages at Assateague Island National Seashore was estimated at $ 2 @.@ 5 million ( 1992 USD ) . High winds in eastern Maryland left 32 @,@ 000 people without power . The storm surge at Ocean City was estimated at 6 @.@ 6 ft ( 2 m ) , which washed over the city 's dune system in several locations . However , high waves destroyed the pier that the tidal gauge was on in the city . The combined effects of the nor 'easter and the Perfect Storm from the previous October caused significant beach erosion along the Maryland coastline . In Ocean City , some streets lost a significant volume of sand while others gained sand . The cost of the lost beach was estimated between $ 10 – 30 million ( 1992 USD ) . Low @-@ lying sections and coastal hotels in Ocean City were flooded . West of the city , the storm damaged several summer homes , washing four houses off their foundations . Damage in Ocean City was estimated around $ 700 @,@ 000 ( 1992 USD ) , much of which to a public golf course . 
 The stronger northeast quadrant moved directly over Delaware for one tidal cycle , producing strong east @-@ northeasterly wind gusts that peaked at 83 mph ( 134 km / h ) at a station along the Indian River . The highest tides and flooding along the Delaware coastline were between Bowers and Prime Hook National Wildlife Refuge , where high waves built momentum from the Atlantic Ocean through the Delaware Bay . In Bowers , the tide reached 8 @.@ 76 ft ( 2 @.@ 67 m ) along the Murderkill River ; the reading was only 2 in ( 51 mm ) less than the record set during the Ash Wednesday Storm of 1962 . The high tides flooded marsh vegetation in the town . In Lewes , the highest tide was 7 @.@ 40 ft ( 2 @.@ 26 m ) , which was the second highest on record ; only the 1962 storm was higher , which produced a tide of 8 @.@ 05 ft ( 2 @.@ 45 m ) . The storm caused significant flooding in Dewey Beach , where a high tide of 9 @.@ 02 ft ( 2 @.@ 75 m ) marked the second @-@ highest tide in Delaware history . The saltwater contaminated the town 's water supply . The ocean washed over dunes in several locations along Delaware Bay , including in Fowler Beach where flooding reached 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) inland . Near Mispillion Light , the high tides damaged the marina and several nearby buildings . The high tides flooded marshes and low @-@ lying areas throughout the state , which briefly closed portions of state highways 54 , 26 , and 1 . High tides destroyed 11 blocks of the boardwalk in Rehoboth Beach and half of the promenade at Bethany Beach . At nearby South Bethany , high waves destroyed three houses . Along the coast , the storm destroyed 15 houses and damaged 500 others , amounting to over $ 5 million ( 1992 USD ) in property damage . In addition to the strong winds and high tides , the nor 'easter produced light rainfall that did not cause any flooding . The highest total in the state was 1 @.@ 06 in ( 27 mm ) in Georgetown . Due to the damage , Kent and Sussex counties were declared federal disaster areas on February 6 ; this allocated federal funding for repairing storm damage . Then @-@ governor Michael Castle activated the state 's National Guard to assist clearing highways and prevent civilian access to damaged areas . Due to storm damage , access to Dewey Beach and Rehoboth Beach were restricted to residents . 
 Further northeast , the nor 'easter produced wind gusts of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) , along with high tides ; Steel Pier in Atlantic City reported a peak tide of about 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) . The ocean flooded under the boardwalk onto adjacent streets , and to the west of the city , flooding closed portions of the White Horse Pike . In Cape May Point , the storm breached dunes that withstood the Perfect Storm , which flooded half of the borough . High tides also caused flooding in nearby Cape May , leaving behind 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) of sand in some locations . There was significant dune damage in <unk> and Harvey Cedars . The storm damaged the boardwalk in Ocean City , and other coastal towns had damage to bulkheads and sea walls . About 3 @,@ 000 people were left without power in Somers Point . The storm affected 4 @,@ 000 houses , of which 76 had severe damage . Overall damage in the state was estimated at $ 45 million ( 1992 USD ) , of which around 30 % was public parks and buildings . However , damage was less than that from the Perfect Storm in the previous October . About 80 people evacuated to emergency shelters in South Jersey , and 95 residents of a nursing home in Atlantic City evacuated inland . Due to the storm damage , then @-@ governor Jim Florio declared a state of emergency in Cape May , Atlantic , Ocean , and Monmouth counties . Due to the successive impacts of nor 'easters in October and January , the state government provided money to restore beaches . 
 Further north , LaGuardia Airport outside New York City reported a wind gust of 48 mph ( 77 km / h ) . Strong winds on Long Island knocked a tree onto a car , seriously injuring the driver . Freezing rain from the storm caused traffic accidents , killing one person in White Creek . In Oyster Bay , the winds pushed an oil barge into a small boat , causing heavy damage to the smaller vessel . Moisture spread as far north as Maine , where the storm dropped freezing rain ; this caused several car accidents that resulted in 11 injuries . 
 = Warkworth Castle = 
 Warkworth Castle is a ruined medieval building in the town of the same name in the English county of Northumberland . The town and castle occupy a loop of the River Coquet , less than a mile from England 's north @-@ east coast . When the castle was founded is uncertain : traditionally its construction has been ascribed to Prince Henry of Scotland in the mid @-@ 12th century , but it may have been built by King Henry II of England when he took control of England 's northern counties . Warkworth Castle was first documented in a charter of 1157 – 1164 when Henry II granted it to Roger fitz Richard . The timber castle was considered " feeble " , and was left undefended when the Scots invaded in 1173 . 
 Roger 's son Robert inherited and improved the castle . Robert was a favourite of King John , and hosted him at Warkworth Castle in 1213 . The castle remained in the family line , with periods of guardianship when heirs were too young to control their estates . King Edward I stayed overnight in 1292 and John de Clavering , descendant of Roger fitz Richard , made the Crown his inheritor . With the outbreak of the Anglo @-@ Scottish Wars , Edward II invested in castles including Warkworth where he funded the strengthening of the garrison in 1319 . Twice in 1327 the Scots besieged the castle without success . 
 John de Clavering died in 1332 and his widow in 1345 , at which point Henry de Percy , 2nd Baron Percy , took control of Warkworth Castle , having been promised Clavering 's property by Edward III . Henry Percy , 1st Earl of Northumberland , added the imposing keep overlooking the village of Warkworth in the late 14th century . The fourth earl remodelled the buildings in the bailey and began the construction of a collegiate church within the castle , but work on the latter was abandoned after his death . Though Algernon Percy , 10th Earl of Northumberland , supported Parliament during the English Civil War , the castle was damaged during the conflict . The last Percy earl died in 1670 . In the mid @-@ 18th century the castle found its way into the hands of Hugh Smithson , who married the indirect Percy heiress . He adopted the name " Percy " and founded the dynasty of the Dukes of Northumberland , through whom possession of the castle descended . 
 In the late 19th century , the dukes refurbished Warkworth Castle and Anthony Salvin was commissioned to restore the keep . Alan Percy , 8th Duke of Northumberland , gave custody of the castle to the Office of Works in 1922 . Since 1984 English Heritage has cared for the site , which is a Grade I listed building and a Scheduled Ancient Monument . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Although the settlement of Warkworth in Northumberland dates back to at least the 8th century , the first castle was not built until after the Norman Conquest . The town and its castle occupied a loop of the River Coquet . The castle was built at the south end of the town , guarding the narrow neck of the loop . A fortified bridge also defended the approach to the town . The surrounding lowland countryside was favourable for agriculture . When the castle was founded and by whom is uncertain , though traditionally Prince Henry of Scotland has been thought responsible . With civil war in south @-@ west England , King Stephen of England needed to ensure northern England was secure . To this end , the Treaty of Durham in 1139 between Scotland and England ensured peace . Under the treaty Henry of Scotland became Earl of Northumbria in exchange for ceding control of the castles at Bamburgh and Newcastle to the English . Without them Henry would have needed a new seat from which to exercise his authority , and a new castle at Warkworth may have met the requirement . However , charters show that Henry still controlled Bamburgh Castle after the treaty , and as Warkworth was a modest castle by contemporary standards it may be have been founded by someone else . Henry died in 1152 and his son , Malcolm ( crowned King of Scotland in 1153 ) , inherited his lands . In 1157 Malcolm travelled to Peveril Castle in Derbyshire , where he paid homage to the new King of England , Henry II . Malcolm surrendered England 's northern counties to Henry , including the castles of Bamburgh , Carlisle , and Newcastle , and probably Appleby , Brough , Wark , and Warkworth , though it is possible that Henry II founded Warkworth Castle in 1157 to secure his lands in Northumberland ; other contemporary castles in the area were built for this purpose , for instance the one at Harbottle . 
 The first mention of Warkworth Castle occurs in a charter of 1157 – 1164 from Henry II granting the castle and surrounding manor to Roger fitz Richard , a member of a noble Norman family . It has been suggested that this charter may have used the term castle to describe a high @-@ status residence on the site , possibly dating from the Anglo @-@ Saxon period , meaning Roger may have built the castle . He owned lands across a wide area , and Warkworth may have been of little significance in the context of his other holdings . When the Scots invaded Northumberland in 1173 , although Roger fitz Richard was in the county Warkworth Castle was not defended by its garrison . Its defences at the time were described as " feeble " . In 1174 Duncan II , Earl of Fife , raided Warkworth . The contemporary record does not mention the castle , and instead notes Warkworth 's inhabitants sought refuge in the church . When Roger fitz Richard died in 1178 his son and heir , Robert fitz Roger , was still a child . A guardian looked after the family estates until Robert came of age in 1191 . He paid the Crown 300 marks in 1199 for confirmation of his ownership of Warkworth , including the castle . Substantial building work at Warkworth Castle is attributed to Robert . A favourite of King John , Robert hosted him at Warkworth Castle in 1213 . 
 Warkworth Castle continued to descend through the family line when Robert fitz Roger was succeeded by his son John in 1214 , who was succeeded by his son Roger in 1240 . Roger died in 1249 when his son Robert was one year old , and a guardian was appointed to care for the family 's estates : William de Valence , half @-@ brother of King Henry III . The castle , characterised by this time by the chronicler Matthew Paris as " noble " , remained under the guardianship of Valence until 1268 , when it reverted to Robert fitz John . King Edward I of England stayed at Warkworth Castle for a night in 1292 . The English king was asked to mediate in a dispute over the Scottish throne and laid his own claim , leading to the Anglo @-@ Scottish Wars . After the Scottish victory at the Battle of Stirling Bridge in 1297 , Robert and his son , John de Clavering , were captured . They were subsequently released and in 1310 John assumed control of the family estates . A year later , John made arrangements so that on his death the king would receive all of his property . Between roughly 1310 and 1330 the English struggled to deal with Scottish raids in northern England . Such was the importance of large castles during the Scottish Wars that the Crown subsidised their maintenance and even construction . In 1319 , King Edward II paid for a garrison for the castle of four men @-@ at @-@ arms and eight <unk> to enhance the existing force of twelve men @-@ at @-@ arms . Ralph Neville was the keeper of Warkworth Castle in 1322 . As he was married to John 's daughter , Euphemia , Ralph may have hoped to inherit the Clavering estates , but that did not happen . Twice in 1327 Scottish forces besieged the castle without success . 
 = = = Percy family = = = 
 Around this time , the Percy family was becoming Northumberland 's most powerful dynasty . Henry de Percy , 2nd Baron Percy , was in the service of Edward III and was paid 500 marks a year in perpetuity in return for leading a company of men @-@ at @-@ arms . In exchange for the annual fee , in 1328 Percy was promised the rights to the Clavering estates . Parliament declared such contracts illegal in 1331 , but after initially relinquishing his claim Percy was granted special permission to inherit . John de Clavering died in 1332 and his widow in 1345 , at which point the family 's estates became the property of the Percys . While the Percys owned Alnwick Castle , which was considered more prestigious , Warkworth was the family 's preferred home . Under the Percys a park was created nearby for hunting , and within the castle two residential blocks were created , described by historian John Goodall as " of unparalleled quality and sophistication in Northumberland " . The second baron died at Warkworth in 1352 . 
 In 1377 the fourth Baron Percy , also named Henry , was made the first Earl of Northumberland ( becoming the first family from northern England to be granted an earldom ) in recognition of his extensive power in the march areas along the Anglo @-@ Scottish border . With a network of contacts and dependencies , the Percys were the pre @-@ eminent family in northern England in the 14th century " for they have the <unk> of the people by north and ever had " , in the words of contemporaneous chronicler John <unk> . Henry Percy commissioned the building of the distinctive keep shortly after he was made Earl of Northumberland . Percy may have enhanced his main castle to compete with John of Gaunt , who rebuilt the nearby Dunstanburgh Castle , or with the House of Neville , a family becoming increasingly powerful in northern England and who undertook a programme of building at the castles of <unk> , Raby , Bamburgh , Middleham , and Sheriff Hutton . Architectural similarities between Warkworth 's keep , Bolton Castle , and the domestic buildings at Bamburgh Castle suggest that John Lewyn was the master mason responsible for building Warkworth 's keep . Earl Henry helped dethrone Richard II and replace him with Henry IV . The earl and his eldest son Henry " Hotspur " Percy fell out with the new king , and eventually rebelled . After Hotspur was killed at the Battle of Shrewsbury in 1403 , his father fled to Warkworth . The earl eventually went to York to submit to the king . He was arrested and the king attempted to install his own men at the castles of Alnwick , Langley Castle , Prudhoe , and Warkworth . The earl 's 14 @-@ year @-@ old son claimed that he was loyal to the king but was not empowered to formally surrender the castle , and it remained under control of the Percys . Henry was pardoned in 1404 . 
 Earl Henry rebelled again in 1405 , this time joining the unsuccessful revolt of Archbishop Scrope . While Henry was fleeing north after the failed rebellion , his castles offered some resistance before submitting to royal forces . Warkworth itself was well @-@ provisioned and the garrison initially refused to surrender . However , according to a letter written by Henry IV from Warkworth after its fall , after just seven shots from his cannon the defenders capitulated . The castle was forfeited to the Crown , and was used by one of the King 's sons , John , Duke of Bedford , who was appointed to rule the area . It remained in the ownership of the Crown until Henry V restored it to the Percy family in 1416 , and at the same time made the son of " Hotspur " Henry , another Henry Percy , second Earl of Northumberland . It is known that the second earl resided at Warkworth and undertook building work there , but it is now unclear for which parts he was responsible . 
 The Percys supported the House of Lancaster during the Wars of the Roses , and the second earl and his successor – Henry Percy , 3rd Earl of Northumberland – were killed at the battles of St Albans in 1455 and Towton in 1461 respectively . The new king , Edward IV , issued an attainder against the family and their property was confiscated . On 1 August 1464 , as a result of suppressing Lancastrian rebellions in the north for the previous three years , the title of Earl of Northumberland was given to the Yorkist John Neville , 1st Marquess of Montagu , and with it , the castle . During his tenure , he constructed a twenty @-@ five @-@ foot tall rectangular tower , built for defence , " with [ arrow ] slits in the three outer walls ; " this is known as ' Montagu 's Tower ' to this day . His brother , Richard Neville , 16th Earl of Warwick , used Warkworth as a base from which the Lancastrian @-@ held castles of Northumberland – Alnwick , Bamburgh , and Dunstanburgh – were attacked and their sieges co @-@ ordinated . In 1470 Edward IV returned the Percys ' estates to the eldest son of the third earl , who was also called Henry Percy . A year later Henry was granted the earldom of Northumberland . Some time after 1472 Henry remodelled the building of the bailey . He also planned to build a collegiate church within the castle , but the work was abandoned after his death . When the fourth earl was murdered in 1489 , his son , Henry Algernon , inherited and maintained the castle . In the early 16th century Henry Percy , 6th Earl of Northumberland , was responsible for clearing the collegiate church founded by his grandfather , but left incomplete by the fifth earl . Thomas Percy , brother of the sixth earl , was executed for his role in the Pilgrimage of Grace in 1536 . When Henry Percy died the next year without any sons , the family 's property passed to the Crown . Although royal officers still used the castle , by 1550 it had fallen into disrepair . In 1557 the Percy estates were restored to the descendants of Thomas , and the nephew of the sixth earl , another Thomas Percy , was given the earldom . He began a programme of repairs at the castle , and in the process dismantled " the hall and other houses of office " . 
 The Rising of the North in 1569 saw Catholic nobles in northern England rebel against the Protestant Queen Elizabeth I. The Catholic Thomas Percy joined the rebellion and supporters congregated at the castles of Alnwick and Warkworth . Sir John Forster , Warden of the March , ordered those inside to leave and the castles were surrendered to his control . During the conflict that followed , Warkworth remained under royal control . Forster pillaged the castle , stripping it of its timbers and furnishings . The keep at least did not share in this fate , but in April 1572 Henry Carey , 1st Baron Hunsdon , bemoaned the treatment meted out to the Percy castles , writing to the queen 's chief minister , " It is a great pity to see how Alnwick Castle and Warkworth are spoiled by him ... I am creditably informed that he means utterly to deface them both . " An attainder was issued against Thomas Percy so that when he came into English custody he was executed without trial on 22 August . As a result , Percy 's son was passed over , but under the terms of the attainder his brother was allowed to inherit . In 1574 , Elizabeth granted Henry Percy permission to inherit the family 's property and assume the title of 8th Earl of Northumberland . 
 The castle formed the backdrop for several scenes in William Shakespeare 's Henry IV , Part 1 and Part 2 . Another Henry Percy inherited the family estates in 1585 and assumed the title of 9th Earl of Northumberland . After the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605 , the earl was imprisoned for his connection with Thomas Percy , one of the plotters . Shortly before he was sentenced ( he was fined £ 30 @,@ 000 and held in the Tower of London ) , the earl leased Warkworth Castle to Sir Ralph Gray , who owned Chillingham Castle in Northumberland . Gray neglected the earl 's building and allowed it to fall further into disrepair . The lead from the buildings in the bailey was sold in 1607 to alleviate the earl 's financial problems . When James I visited in 1617 en route to Scotland , his entourage was angered by the sorry state of the castle . With the unification of England and Scotland under a single ruler , the earls of Northumberland had no need for two great castles near the Anglo @-@ Scottish border ; they maintained Alnwick at the expense of Warkworth . In the first quarter of the 17th century , the keep was used to hold manor courts and for the laying out of oats . 
 The details surrounding Warkworth Castle 's role in the English Civil War are unclear , but the conflict resulted in further damage to the structure . Initially held by Royalist forces , the castle was still important enough that when the Scots invaded in 1644 they forced its surrender . Algernon Percy , 10th Earl of Northumberland , supported Parliament , which may have prevented the Scots from doing much damage to the castle . Parliamentarian forces took over the castle in 1648 ; when they withdrew they removed the castle 's doors and iron so that it could not be reused by the enemy . They may also have partially demolished some of the castle , and may be responsible for its present state . Algernon Percy unsuccessfully applied for compensation in 1649 for the damage . 
 = = = Dukes of Northumberland and present day = = = 
 Josceline Percy , the last Percy earl , died in 1670 . Two years later his widow allowed the keep 's materials to be reused to build <unk> Hall . A total of 272 cart @-@ loads were taken from the keep . Josceline Percy 's property passed to the Duke of Somerset through marriage . In 1698 , the owners decided not to renovate Warkworth Castle after the estimate to add battlements , floors and new windows came in at £ 1 @,@ 600 . Elizabeth Seymour inherited the property from her father in 1750 . Her husband , Hugh Smithson , changed his name to Hugh Percy , and the castle then descended through the Dukes of Northumberland , a dynasty he founded . 
 During the 18th century the castle was allowed to languish . The south @-@ west tower was falling apart and around 1752 part of the curtain wall east of the gatehouse was demolished ( it was rebuilt towards the end of the century ) . The town and its historic ruins were by now attracting interest as a tourist destination , largely due to Bishop Thomas Percy 's poem , The Hermit of Warkworth . In the mid 19th century Hugh Percy , 3rd Duke of Northumberland , undertook some preservation work . His successor , Algernon Percy , contracted Anthony Salvin to restore the keep . The work undertaken between 1853 and 1858 was not as extensive as Salvin had planned , and was limited to partially refacing the exterior and adding new floors and roofs to two chambers , which became known as the Duke 's Chambers , on the second floor . The duke occasionally used the chambers for picnics when he visited from Alnwick Castle . Algernon Percy funded excavations at the castle in the 1850s which uncovered the remains of the collegiate church within the bailey . 
 In 1922 Alan Percy , 8th Duke of Northumberland , granted custodianship of the castle to the Office of Works which had been made accountable for the guardianship of ancient monuments . The Duke 's Chambers remained under direct control of the Percys . The Office of Works undertook excavations in the moat in 1924 and removed the custodian from the gatehouse . English Heritage , who now manage and maintain the site , succeeded as the castle 's custodians in 1984 , and three years later the Duke 's Chambers were given over to their care . The castle is a Scheduled Ancient Monument , a " nationally important " historic building and archaeological site which has been given protection against unauthorised change . It is also a Grade I listed building ( first listed in 1985 ) and recognised as an internationally important structure . 
 = = Layout = = 
 Warkworth Castle is an irregular enclosure . The keep is at the north end , overlooking the town , with the bailey to the south . The current keep was built on an earlier mound , known as a motte . The curtain wall of the bailey dates from the early 13th century . There are four towers : Carrickfergus Tower in the south @-@ west corner , Montagu Tower in the south @-@ east , a postern tower in the west wall ( north of the kitchen ) , and Grey Mare 's Tail Tower attached to the east wall . Against the east curtain wall was a stable . In the northern half of the bailey , aligned east – west , was an unfinished 15th @-@ century collegiate church ; it was cleared away in the early 16th century . Immediately west of the church was the kitchen , situated in the angle of the curtain wall as it changes from its north – south alignment and turns towards the keep . Along the west curtain wall , south of the kitchen , were the pantry , great hall , and withdrawing chambers . In the south @-@ west was a chapel . Apart from the north side , the castle was surrounded by a moat . 
 = = = Gatehouse = = = 
 The gatehouse in the centre of the south curtain wall mostly dates from the 13th century . It was originally accessed via a drawbridge and visitors had to pass through two gates , one at either end of the passage , and a portcullis . The semi @-@ octagonal projections on either side of the gate passage are considered ornamental . Between the projections and above the gate were machicolations , openings for missiles to be hurled at attackers . The rooms on either side of the passage were guardrooms . The only remaining openings on the front are slits at ground level . Slits on the other sides of the gatehouse , and along the entrance passage , allowed the gatekeeper to watch people approaching and entering the castle . The structure underwent later alterations in the 19th and 20th centuries when it housed the castle 's custodian ; slits in the gatehouse 's front may have been filled in . 
 = = = West range = = = 
 The range along the western curtain wall dates from about 1480 , when the fourth earl remodelled the bailey . The great hall was the social hub of the castle , where the household gathered to eat . The now @-@ ruined 15th @-@ century building replaced an earlier hall on the same site , dating from about 1200 , although some of the stone dates from the mid 12th century . The earl would have entered from the south from his connecting private chambers , and people of lower status through the Lion Tower . Internally , it was split into two aisles of differing width . Both halls were heated by open hearths , two of which survive from the earlier hall . Opposite ends of the hall were for opposite ends of the social scale within the castle . The high end ( next to the withdrawing chamber ) was for the earl and his family , and the low end ( next to the kitchen and other service rooms ) for the rest of the household . In the medieval period , the great hall was richly decorated with tapestries . 
 The Lion Tower was the entrance to the north end of the great hall . Above the archway through the tower were displayed heraldic items , symbolic of the Percy earls ' power . The lion at the bottom was the emblem of the earls . Though now much damaged , above the lion were the ancient arms of the family and the arms of the Lucy family , whose property the Percys had inherited in the 1380s . As the tower was entered from the bailey , on the right was a doorway leading to the incomplete collegiate church . To the left was the great hall , and beyond that , withdrawing chambers ; to the right were the buttery , pantry , larder , and kitchen . Immediately north of the kitchen was a postern tower . Built around 1200 , its upper floors were later reused for accommodation . An entrance of lesser status than the main gatehouse , the gate 's position next to the kitchen suggests it was a tradesmen 's entrance , used for conveying supplies to the castle . 
 The square Little Stair Tower was the entrance from the bailey to the withdrawing rooms south of the great hall . At ground floor level there was a doorway in each of the tower 's faces . Directly south of the east side of the tower was the castle 's chapel . The northern door led to the great hall , and the western door to a cellar under the great chamber . There are only fragmentary remains of the spiral staircase . Above the passageway was a single room , of uncertain purpose : it may have been used as another chapel , a guest room , or an antechamber where guests would wait before being admitted into the earl 's presence . 
 South of the great hall was a two @-@ storey building containing withdrawing chambers , dating from around 1200 . Narrow windows opening onto the bailey were original but have since been filled in . The first floor was entirely occupied by the great chamber , furnished with a fireplace . In the south @-@ west corner of the room was a door to a small room which was perhaps used as a safe . The ground floor was used as a cellar , through which the Carrickfergus Tower could be accessed . The polygonal tower was also accessible through the great chamber at first floor level . Fitted with latrines and a fireplace , it was an extension of the lordly accommodation provided by the great chamber . 
 = = = South and east = = = 
 Montagu Tower in the south @-@ east corner was probably built by John Neville , Lord Montagu , in the 15th century . Fitted with latrines and fireplaces , the upper floors provided accommodation , most likely for the more important members of the household . By the 16th century , the ground floor was used as a stable . The buildings against the south curtain wall between Montagu Tower and the gatehouse are of unknown purpose . North of Montagu Tower , against the east curtain wall , are the ruins of stables which stood two storeys high . West of the stables was a wellhouse containing a stone @-@ lined well some 18 metres ( 59 ft ) deep . The Grey Mare 's Tail Tower , probably built in the 1290s , has a slit in each of its five faces , offering views along the curtain wall . 
 = = = Keep = = = 
 Goodall described Warkworth 's keep as " a masterpiece of medieval English architecture " . Built in the last quarter of the 14th century , it was probably designed by John Lewyn . It was laid out in the form of a Greek cross and originally it was crested with a battlement , and perhaps decorative statues . Around the top of the building survive carvings of angels carrying shields . A large lion representing the Percy 's coat of arms overlooked the town from the north side of the keep . The lion and sculptures were probably originally painted and would have stood out from the rest of the building . Archaeologist Oliver Creighton suggests that the rebuilding of the keep and other reconstruction work were meant to suggest the enduring lordship of the owners . On top of the keep is a lookout tower , which would have been less prominent before the keep 's roof was removed . 
 Goodall suggests that the keep was used only for short periods , and the west range , including the great hall , was the lord 's preferred residence for prolonged visits to Warkworth Castle . The ground floor was used predominantly for storage of food and wine , but there was also a room with access to a basement chamber roughly 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) square . This has variously been interpreted as an accounting room with a floor safe , or guardroom with a dungeon dug into the floor . In the keep 's west wall was a postern through which stores would pass into the building . Kitchens occupied the west side of the first floor and were connected via staircases to the stores immediately below . In the south @-@ east corner was a great hall , originally heated by a central hearth and spanning the height of the first and second floors . A chapel off the great hall led to a large formal room where the lord would meet guests . The second floor was entirely domestic in nature , with bedrooms and withdrawing chambers . In the 19th century , while the rest of Warkworth Castle was in ruins , the rooms of the second floor were re @-@ roofed and occasionally used by the duke on visits . At the centre of the keep was a <unk> with interior windows ; at its foot was a tank for collecting rainwater used for cleaning . 
 = Greek battleship Salamis = 
 Salamis ( Greek : <unk> or <unk> ) was a dreadnought battleship ordered for the Greek Navy from the AG Vulcan shipyard in Hamburg , Germany in 1912 . She was ordered in response to Ottoman naval expansion begun in 1911 . The ship was to have been 569 feet 11 inches ( 173 @.@ 7 meters ) long , armed with eight 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) guns , and have had a top speed of 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) . Salamis was named after the Greek naval victory over a Persian fleet at the battle of Salamis in 480 BC . 
 Work began on the keel on 23 July 1913 , and the hull was launched on 11 November 1914 . Construction stopped in December 1914 , following the outbreak of World War I in August of that year . The German navy employed the unfinished ship as a floating barracks in Kiel . The armament for this ship was ordered from Bethlehem Steel in the United States and could not be delivered due to the British blockade of Germany . Bethlehem sold the guns to Britain instead and they were used to arm the four Abercrombie @-@ class monitors . The hull of the ship remained intact after the war and became the subject of a protracted legal dispute . She was finally awarded to the builders and the hull was scrapped in 1932 . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Salamis was 569 feet 11 inches ( 173 @.@ 71 m ) long at the waterline , and had a beam of 81 ft ( 25 m ) and a draft of 25 ft ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) . The ship was designed to displace 19 @,@ 500 t ( 19 @,@ 200 long tons ; 21 @,@ 500 short tons ) . Had the battleship been completed , she was to have been powered by three AEG turbines , each of which drove a propeller shaft . The turbines were supplied with steam by 18 Yarrow boilers . This would have provided Salamis with 40 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower and a top speed of 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The primary armament of the ship was eight 14 in ( 35 @.@ 6 cm ) / 45 caliber guns mounted in four twin @-@ gun turrets . Two turrets were to be mounted in a superfiring arrangement forward of the main superstructure , with the other two mounted similarly aft of the funnels . These guns had a rate of fire of between 1 @.@ 25 and 1 @.@ 75 rounds per minute ; they were capable of firing 1 @,@ 400 lb ( 640 kg ) armor @-@ piercing or high @-@ explosive shells . The guns were estimated to be able to fire 500 rounds before wear on the barrels would necessitate repair . The shells were fired at a muzzle velocity of around 2 @,@ 500 feet per second ( 762 m / s ) ; at elevation of 15 ° , the guns could hit targets out to 19 @,@ 900 yards ( 18 @,@ 200 m ) . At a range of 12 @,@ 000 yd ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) , the shells were expected to penetrate up to 13 in ( 33 cm ) of armor plate . 
 The ship 's secondary battery was to consist of twelve 6 in ( 15 @.@ 2 cm ) / 50 guns mounted in casemates amidships , six on either side . These guns fired 105 lb ( 47 @.@ 7 kg ) projectiles at a rate of about 6 per minute . The shells were fired at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 800 f / s ( 853 m / s ) , and had a range of 15 @,@ 000 yards ( 13 @,@ 720 m ) at 15 ° . Salamis 's armament was rounded out by twelve 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) quick @-@ firing guns , also mounted in casemates , and five 50 cm ( 20 in ) submerged torpedo tubes . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 Salamis had an armored belt that was 9 @.@ 875 in ( 250 @.@ 8 mm ) thick in the central section of the ship , where it protected critical areas , such as the ammunition magazines and machinery spaces . On either end of the ship , past the main battery gun turrets , the belt was decreased to 3 @.@ 875 in ( 98 @.@ 4 mm ) thick ; the height of the belt was also decreased in these areas . The main armored deck was 2 @.@ 875 in ( 73 @.@ 0 mm ) in the central portion of the ship , and as with the belt armor , in less important areas the thickness was decreased to 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) . The main battery gun turrets were protected by 9 @.@ 875 in @-@ thick armor plate on the sides and face , and the barbettes in which they were placed were protected by the same thickness of armor . The conning tower was lightly armored , with only 1 @.@ 25 in ( 32 mm ) worth of protection . 
 = = Construction and cancellation = = 
 In the run @-@ up to the Balkan wars of 1912 – 1913 , the Ottoman Empire — Greece 's traditional naval rival — set about modernizing its fleet . The first component was the order of the dreadnought Reşadiye in 1911 . The expansion of Ottoman naval power threatened Greek control of the Aegean ; to counter the Ottoman dreadnought , Greece decided to order a ship as well : the Salamis . The new battleship was ordered from the German shipbuilder AG Vulcan , based in Hamburg , in 1912 . This made Greece the fourteenth and final country to order a dreadnought battleship . The initial design called for a ship 458 ft ( 140 m ) long with a beam of 72 ft ( 22 m ) , a draft of 24 ft ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) , and a displacement of 13 @,@ 500 t ( 13 @,@ 300 long tons ; 14 @,@ 900 short tons ) . The ship was designed with 2 @-@ shaft turbines rated at 26 @,@ 000 shp for a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . The armament was to be six 14 inch guns in twin turrets , eight 6 inch , eight 3 in ( 7 @.@ 6 cm ) , and four 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns , and two 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes . The design was revised several times ; by 23 January 1912 , it was finalized with the details specified above . The ship was to be delivered to the Greek Navy by March 1915 , at a cost of £ 1 @,@ 693 @,@ 000 . Scientific American remarked that the ship would " not mark any particular advance in warship design , being , rather , an effort to combine the greatest defensive and offensive qualities with the least cost . " 
 The keel was laid down on 23 July 1913 ; the hull was complete and ready for launching by 11 November 1914 , the day the ship entered the water . The main battery and secondary guns were sub @-@ contracted to Bethlehem Steel in the United States . However , the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 had drastically altered the situation ; the naval blockade of Germany emplaced by Great Britain meant that the guns could not be delivered . Work was halted on 31 December 1914 . By this time Greece had only paid AG Vulcan £ 450 @,@ 000 . Bethlehem refused to send the main battery guns to Greece . The 14 @-@ inch guns were instead sold to the British , who used them to arm the four Abercrombie @-@ class monitors . The incomplete vessel was towed to Kiel , where she was used as a barracks ship . 
 After the end of the war , the Greek navy refused to accept the incomplete hull , and AG Vulcan sued the Greek government in 1923 . A lengthy arbitration ensued . The Greek navy alleged that the ship was obsolete and that under the Treaty of Versailles it could not be armed by the German shipyard . The dispute went before the Greco @-@ German Mixed Arbitral Tribunal ( established under Article 304 of the Treaty of Versailles ) , which dragged on throughout the 1920s . In 1928 , concerns at the impending recommissioning of the Turkish battlecruiser Yavuz ( ex @-@ SMS Goeben ) , whose refit had just begun meant that Greece considered responding positively to an offer from Vulcan to reach a compromise , one option being to complete and modernize Salamis . On 23 April 1932 the arbitrators determined that the Greek government owed AG Vulcan £ 30 @,@ 000 , and that AG Vulcan would be awarded the hull . The ship was broken up for scrap in Bremen that year . A second Greek dreadnought , the Vasilefs Konstantinos , a slightly modified version of the French Bretagne @-@ class battleship , met a similar fate . Like Salamis , work on Vasilefs Konstantinos was halted by the outbreak of the war in August 1914 , and in the aftermath the Greek government refused to pay for the unfinished ship as well . 
 = Stresemann 's bushcrow = 
 The Stresemann 's bushcrow ( Zavattariornis <unk> ) , also known as Abyssinian pie , bush crow , Ethiopian bushcrow , or by its generic name Zavattariornis , is a rather starling @-@ like bird , which is currently thought to be member of the crow family , Corvidae , though this is uncertain . It is slightly larger than the North American blue jay and is a bluish @-@ grey in overall colour which becomes almost white on the forehead . The throat and chest are creamy @-@ white with the tail and wings a glossy black . The black feathers have a tendency to bleach to brown at their tips . The iris of the bird is brown and the eye is surrounded by a band of naked bright blue skin . The bill , legs , and feet are black . 
 The range of this species is quite restricted , it being confined to thorn acacia country in southern Ethiopia near <unk> ( <unk> ) , Mega , and <unk> . It can be curiously absent from apparently suitable country near these areas ; the reasons for this are not apparent . 
 Feeding is usually in small groups and the bird takes mainly insects . Breeding usually starts in March , with the birds building their nest high in an acacia tree . The birds usually lay five to six cream eggs with lilac blotches . The nest itself is globular in shape with a tubular entrance on top . It is possible that more than just the breeding pair visit the nest and that the young of previous years help in rearing the young . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Stresemann 's bushcrow was described by Edgardo <unk> in 1938 . This species has been placed in several bird families since its description . It has long been considered a member of the crow family Corvidae ; however , several atypical features , such as its lice being from the suborder Mallophaga , its bare facial skin being capable of movement , and the structure of its palate , have suggested that it may belong in another family . Some authors placed the species within the starling family Sturnidae due to the bushcrow 's similarities in behavior and size with the wattled starling . Other authors have placed it in its own monotypic family , <unk> . DNA @-@ sequencing analysis supports its placement in the corvids , with its closest relatives being the ground jays , magpies , and the <unk> . It has been suggested that the bushcrow is a surviving relict ancestor to several of these relatives . However , its taxonomic situation is still considered to be in flux . 
 This species has numerous common names , including Stresemann 's bushcrow , bush @-@ crow , Ethiopian bushcrow , Abyssinian bushcrow , and Zavattariornis . 
 The genus name Zavattariornis commemorates Edoardo <unk> , an Italian zoologist and explorer who served as the director of Rome University 's Zoological Institute between 1935 and 1958 . Its name commemorates Erwin Stresemann , a German ornithologist . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Stresemann 's bushcrow is about 28 centimeters ( 11 in ) long and weighs 130 grams ( 4 @.@ 6 oz ) . The genders look similar and are not sexually dimorphic . Overall it is pale grey with a black tail and wings . The head , mantle , scapulars , back , rump , and uppertail coverts are all a pale grey . The feathers on the forehead , upper ear @-@ coverts , and throat fade into white . The bright azure skin around the bushcrow 's eye is featherless and can be inflated , narrowing the blackish @-@ brown eye into a slit . The feathers behind the eye are capable of moving to reveal an oblong pink patch of skin . The bird 's black beak <unk> into a sharply pointed tip and is relatively small for a corvid . This beak is 33 to 39 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 3 to 1 @.@ 5 in ) long . The feathers on the bird 's chin are fine and can form a small tuft when erected . The bushcrow 's breast and flanks are pale grey , fading into white on the rear flanks , belly , and undertail . On the wings , the lesser and median upper @-@ wing coverts are grey , while the rest of the wing is a slightly glossy blue @-@ black . Its blue @-@ black tail is relatively long and square @-@ ended . Its legs are black . When the plumage becomes worn , the upperparts appear to have a brownish tinge . The juvenile Stresemann 's bushcrow is slightly duller than the adult , and the feathers of the body and upperwings are fringed with creamy @-@ fawn . The facial skin , bill , and legs are also a dull grey . 
 The bushcrow is a very vocal species , particularly when foraging . Its main contact call has been described as a single metallic " kej " . While flying , the species frequently calls out a nasal , rapid " kerr kerr kerr " . While these are the most frequent vocalizations , several others are known . <unk> adults utter a metallic " kaw , kaw , kaw " . Foraging birds call out " how , how , how " , a single , quiet " <unk> " , and a soft , repeated " <unk> " . While building its nest , the bushcrow is known to utter a low " keh " sound , and adults utter a deep " waw " while rubbing their bills together . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 This species is endemic to central @-@ southern Ethiopia . It lives in a small area circumscribed by the towns of <unk> , Mega , and <unk> in Sidamo Province . Its total range covers about 2 @,@ 400 square kilometers ( 930 sq mi ) . 
 The Stresemann 's bushcrow lives in flat savanna covered with mature acacia and Commiphora <unk> . The bird prefers open short @-@ grass savannas with scattered stands of these mature <unk> . The soil must be deep and rich to support the bushcrow . It is most numerous when these stands are next to agricultural fields . For many years it was unknown why the species could be completely absent from areas of suitable habitat near seemingly identical but inhabited land . However recent research has revealed that the bird appears to inhabit an area with a very precise average temperature extreme , all of the seemingly suitable but uninhabited surrounding land actually has a slightly higher average temperature that appears to prevent the birds from successfully colonising . It is also not found near the scattered broadleaf woodland made up of Combretum and Terminalia . Its habitat is between 1 @,@ 300 and 1 @,@ 800 meters ( 4 @,@ 300 and 5 @,@ 900 ft ) above sea level . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 The Stresemann 's bushcrow is normally found in groups of about six birds . This species does not migrate . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The bushcrow feeds both on the ground and in trees . It begins foraging at sunrise . While foraging , a bushcrow can be alone , in a pair , or in a group of six or seven other bushcrows . A foraging bushcrow digs vigorously in the soil while its beak is held slightly open to catch any insects it unearths . When it catches something , it carries it to the nearest tree or bush , pins it down with its foot , and kills and eats the prey . This species has also been seen using its beak to tear apart rotten wood and inspecting cattle dung in the search for food . It may also land on the backs of cattle to search for parasites . It can also chase flying insects , which it does on foot , abruptly changing direction and taking flying leaps after its prey . It often mixes with white @-@ crowned starlings , red @-@ billed hornbills , red @-@ billed buffalo weavers , and superb starlings while foraging . When hunting in the trees , it is capable of walking atop horizontal branches and jumping upwards towards the crown , then descending in a glide from the crown to the ground . 
 It eats primarily invertebrates and specifically insects , including termites . Larvae and pupae , especially of <unk> moths , are eaten as well as the adults . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The Stresemann 's bushcrow nests either alone or in a small , loosely connected colony of three to five nests . It is monogamous and may form a lifelong pair bond . The bushcrow occasionally has a third bird , or in rare cases two to four more , help the breeding couple both build the nest and care for the young . The helpers may also not be restricted to helping one nest at a time , as they have been seen at nests across the loose colonies . <unk> and allopreening , where the birds feed or preen each other , takes place both between the pair and with the other bushcrows in the colony . The bushcrow lays its eggs shortly after the first rains , which normally occur in late February and early March , leading to its eggs being laid in late March and early April . 
 The nest is an untidy globular structure , on which the roof tapers to a point that has an opening into the interior chamber . The nest is 60 centimeters ( 24 in ) in diameter while the interior chamber is 30 centimeters ( 12 in ) across . To start constructing the nest , a single twig is inserted into the top of an acacia tree 5 to 6 meters ( 16 to 20 ft ) above the ground . This leads to the paired bushcrows becoming excited , engorging their blue facial skin . Almost ritualistically the pair then pick the acacia 's leaves and twigs , dropping them to the ground . The pair end this display by chasing each other through the trees before continuing construction . The nest is made out of thorny twigs while the interior chamber is lined with dry grass and dried cattle dung . <unk> soil is used to keep the initial twigs connected . Old nests are repaired and reused . 
 Up to six eggs are laid in the nest . The bushcrow 's eggs are cream @-@ colored with pale lilac blotches that concentrate into a ring at the wider end . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 Prior to modern settlement in villages , the nomadic indigenous peoples of Ethiopia provided easy hunting grounds for the bushcrow as they left loose , dung @-@ covered soil behind as they moved their cattle . This provided a rich abundance of beetle larvae for the bushcrow to feed upon . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 Changes in the grazing habits of Ethiopia 's indigenous peoples following the recent trend of settling in permanent villages have negatively impacted the Stresemann 's bushcrow . While previously grazers left the soil loose and covered in dung to support the bushcrow 's prey , this new lifestyle has resulted in overgrazing and soil compaction in some areas . The idea of private land ownership has also led to intensive planting of cash crops such as maize . The rich soil that the species needs to forage is also prime farming land . In the <unk> Wildlife Sanctuary , acacia trees are being collected for firewood , removing the bushcrow 's nesting site . While protected under law , this sanctuary has difficulties enforcing the law . It is believed that between 1999 and 2003 the population of the bushcrow declined by 80 % . 
 The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species lists the Stresemann 's bushcrow as endangered because of its very restricted range and loss of suitable habitat . The population seems to be declining rapidly and in 2007 it was estimated that there might be fewer than 10 @,@ 000 birds remaining . 
 = Kamadhenu = 
 Kamadhenu ( Sanskrit : <unk> , [ <unk> ̪ <unk> ] , <unk> ) , also known as Surabhi ( <unk> , <unk> ) , is a divine bovine @-@ goddess described in Hinduism as the mother of all cows . She is a miraculous " cow of plenty " who provides her owner whatever he desires and is often portrayed as the mother of other cattle as well as the eleven Rudras . In iconography , she is generally depicted as a white cow with a female head and breasts or as a white cow containing various deities within her body . All cows are venerated in Hinduism as the earthly embodiment of the Kamadhenu . As such , Kamadhenu is not worshipped independently as a goddess , and temples are not dedicated to her honor alone ; rather , she is honored by the veneration of cows in general throughout the observant Hindu population . 
 Hindu scriptures provide diverse accounts of the birth of Kamadhenu . While some narrate that she emerged from the churning of the cosmic ocean , others describe her as the daughter of the creator god Daksha , and as the wife of the sage Kashyapa . Still other scriptures narrate that Kamadhenu was in the possession of either Jamadagni or Vashista ( both ancient sages ) , and that kings who tried to steal her from the sage ultimately faced dire consequences for their actions . Kamadhenu plays the important role of providing milk and milk products to be used in her sage @-@ master 's oblations ; she is also capable of producing fierce warriors to protect him . In addition to dwelling in the sage 's hermitage , she is also described as dwelling in Goloka - the realm of the cows - and Patala , the netherworld . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Kamadhenu is often addressed by the proper name Surabhi , which is also used as a synonym for an ordinary cow . Professor Jacobi considers the name Surabhi — " the fragrant one " — to have originated from the peculiar smell of cows . According to the Monier Williams Sanskrit – English Dictionary ( 1899 ) , Surabhi means fragrant , charming , pleasing , as well as cow and earth . It can specifically refer to the divine cow Kamadhenu , the mother of cattle who is also sometimes described as a Matrika ( " mother " ) goddess . Other proper names attributed to Kamadhenu are Sabala ( " the spotted one " ) and Kapila ( " the red one " ) . 
 The epithets " Kamadhenu " , " <unk> " ( <unk> ् ) and " <unk> " ( <unk> ) literally mean the cow " from whom all that is desired is drawn " — " the cow of plenty " . In the Mahabharata and Devi Bhagavata Purana , in the context of the birth of Bhishma , the cow Nandini is given the epithet Kamadhenu . In other instances , Nandini is described as the cow @-@ daughter of Surabhi @-@ Kamadhenu . The scholar <unk> Mani considers Nandini and Surabhi to be synonyms of Kamadhenu . 
 = = Iconography and symbolism = = 
 According to Indologist Madeleine Biardeau , Kamadhenu or <unk> is the generic name of the sacred cow , who is regarded as the source of all prosperity in Hinduism . Kamadhenu is regarded as a form of Devi ( the Hindu Divine Mother ) and is closely related to the fertile Mother Earth ( Prithvi ) , who is often described as a cow in Sanskrit . The sacred cow denotes " purity and non @-@ erotic fertility , ... sacrificing and motherly nature , [ and ] sustenance of human life " . 
 Frederick M. Smith describes Kamadhenu as a " popular and enduring image in Indian art " . All the gods are believed to reside in the body of Kamadhenu — the generic cow . Her four legs are the scriptural Vedas ; her horns are the triune gods Brahma ( tip ) , Vishnu ( middle ) and Shiva ( base ) ; her eyes are the sun and moon gods , her shoulders the fire @-@ god Agni and the wind @-@ god Vayu and her legs the Himalayas . Kamadhenu is often depicted in this form in poster art . 
 Another representation of Kamadhenu shows her with the body of a white Zebu cow , crowned woman 's head , colourful eagle wings and a peacock 's tail . According to the Philadelphia Museum of Art , this form is influenced by the iconography of the Islamic Buraq , who is portrayed with a horse 's body , wings , and a woman 's face . Contemporary poster art also portrays Kamadhenu in this form . 
 A cow , identified with Kamadhenu , is often depicted accompanying the god Dattatreya . In relation to the deity 's iconography , she denotes the Brahminical aspect and Vaishnava connection of the deity contrasting with the accompanying dogs — symbolizing a non @-@ Brahminical aspect . She also symbolizes the Panch <unk> ( the five classical elements ) in the icon . Dattatreya is sometimes depicted holding the divine cow in one of his hands . 
 = = Birth and children = = 
 The Mahabharata ( Adi Parva book ) records that Kamadhenu @-@ Surabhi rose from the churning of the cosmic ocean ( Samudra manthan ) by the gods and demons to acquire Amrita ( ambrosia , elixir of life ) . As such , she is regarded the offspring of the gods and demons , created when they churned the cosmic milk ocean and then given to the Saptarishi , the seven great seers . She was ordered by the creator @-@ god Brahma to give milk , and supply it and ghee ( " clarified butter " ) for ritual fire @-@ sacrifices . 
 The Anushasana Parva book of the epic narrates that Surabhi was born from the belch of " the creator " ( Prajapati ) Daksha after he drank the Amrita that rose from the Samudra manthan . Further , Surabhi gave birth to many golden cows called Kapila cows , who were called the mothers of the world . The <unk> Brahmana also tells a similar tale : Prajapati created Surabhi from his breath . The Udyoga Parva Book of the Mahabharata narrates that the creator @-@ god Brahma drank so much Amrita that he vomited some of it , from which emerged Surabhi . 
 According to the Ramayana , Surabhi is the daughter of sage Kashyapa and his wife <unk> , the daughter of Daksha . Her daughters Rohini and <unk> are the mothers of cattle and horses respectively . Still , it is Surabhi who is described as the mother of all cows in the text . However , in the Puranas , such as Vishnu Purana and Bhagavata Purana , Surabhi is described as the daughter of Daksha and the wife of Kashyapa , as well as the mother of cows and buffaloes . 
 The Matsya Purana notes two conflicting descriptions of Surabhi . In one chapter , it describes Surabhi as the consort of Brahma and their union produced the cow <unk> , the eleven Rudras , " lower animals " , goats , swans and " high class drugs " . She is then described as the mother of cows and quadrupeds . In another instance , she is described as a daughter of Daksha , wife of Kashyapa and the mother of cows . The Harivamsa , an appendix of the Mahabharata , calls Surabhi the mother of Amrita ( ambrosia ) , Brahmins , cows and Rudras . 
 The Devi Bhagavata Purana narrates that Krishna and his lover Radha were enjoying dalliance , when they <unk> for milk . So , Krishna created a cow called Surabhi and a calf called <unk> from the left side of his body , and milked the cow . When drinking the milk , the milk pot fell on the ground and broke , spilling the milk , which became the <unk> , the cosmic milk ocean . Numerous cows then emerged from the pores of Surabhi 's skin and were presented to the cowherd @-@ companions ( <unk> ) of Krishna by him . Then Krishna worshipped Surabhi and decreed that she — a cow , the giver of milk and prosperity — be worshipped at Diwali on Bali <unk> day . 
 Various other scriptural references describe Surabhi as the mother of the Rudras including Nirrti ( Kashyapa being the father ) , the cow Nandini and even the serpent @-@ people nāgas . The Mahabharata also makes a passing reference to Surabhi as the mother of Nandini ( literally " daughter " ) in the context of the birth of Bhishma , an incarnation of a Vasu deity . Nandini , like her mother , is a " cow of plenty " or Kamadhenu , and resides with sage Vashista . Nandini is stolen by the divine Vasus and thus cursed by the sage to be born on the earth . The Raghuvamsa of Kalidasa mentions that king Dilip — an ancestor of god Rama — once passed by Kamadhenu @-@ Surabhi , but failed to pay respects to her , thus incurring the wrath of the divine cow , who cursed the king to go childless . So , since Kamadhenu had gone to Patala , the guru of Dilip , Vasistha advised the king to serve Nandini , Kamadhenu 's daughter who was in the hermitage . The king and his wife propitiated Nandini , who neutralized her mother 's curse and blessed the king to have a son , who was named Raghu . 
 In the Ramayana , Surabhi is described to be distressed by the treatment of her sons — the oxen — in fields . Her tears are considered a bad omen for the gods by Indra , the god @-@ king of heaven . The Vana Parva book of the <unk> also narrates a similar instance : Surabhi cries about the plight of her son — a bullock , who is overworked and beaten by his peasant @-@ master . Indra , moved by Surabhi 's tears , rains to stop the ploughing of the tormented bullock . 
 = = Wealth and protector of the Brahmin = = 
 In Hindu Religion , Kamadhenu is often associated with the Brahmin ( " priest class " including sages ) , whose wealth she symbolizes . Cow 's milk and its derivatives such as ghee ( clarified butter ) are integral parts of Vedic fire sacrifices , which are conducted by Brahmin priests ; thus the ancient Kamadhenu is sometimes also referred to the <unk> — the cow from whom oblations are drawn . Moreover , the cow also offers the Brahmin — who is prohibited to fight — protection against abusive kings who try to harm them . As a goddess , she becomes a warrior , creating armies to protect her master and herself . 
 Jamadagni 's cow 
 A legend narrates that the sacrificial cow Kamadhenu resided with sage Jamadagni . The earliest version of the legend , which appears in the epic Mahabharata , narrates that the thousand @-@ armed <unk> king , Kartavirya Arjuna , destroyed Jamadagni 's hermitage and captured the calf of Kamadhenu . To retrieve the calf , Jamadagni 's son Parashurama slew the king , whose sons in turn killed Jamadagni . Parashurama then destroyed the kshatriya ( " warrior " ) race 21 times and his father is resurrected by divine grace . Similar accounts of the abduction of the celestial cow or her calf , the killing of Jamadagni by Kartavirya Arjuna , and the revenge of Parashurama resulting in the death of Kartavirya Arjuna , exist in other texts . The Bhagavata Purana mentions that the king abducted Kamadhenu as well as her calf and Parashurama defeated the king and returned the <unk> to his father . The Padma Purana mentions that when Kartavirya Arjuna tried to capture her , Kamadhenu , by her own power , defeated him and his army and flew off to heaven ; the enraged king then killed Jamadagni . 
 In the Brahmanda Purana , Kamadhenu creates a great city by her power to accommodate Kartavirya Arjuna 's army , when they visit Jamadagni 's hermitage . On returning to his kingdom , Kartavirya Arjuna 's minister , Chandragupta , persuades him to capture the divine cow . The minister returns to the hermitage and tries to convince the sage to give away the cow , but to no avail , so he tries to snatch Kamadhenu with force . In the ensuing fight , the sage is killed , but Kamadhenu escapes to the sky and Chandragupta takes her calf with him instead . The Brahmanda Purana narrates this Kamadhenu Sushila was given to Jamadagni by the Kamadhenu @-@ Surabhi , who governs in Goloka . 
 The Brahma Vaivarta Purana narrates that the celestial cow – called Kapila here – produces various weapons and an army to aid Jamadagni defeat the king 's army , who had come to seize her . When the king himself challenged Jamadagni for battle , Kapila instructed her master in martial arts . Jamadagni led the army created by Kapila and defeated the king and his army several times ; each time sparing the life of the king . Finally , with the aid of a divine spear granted to him by the god Dattatreya , the king killed Jamadagni . 
 Vashista 's cow 
 The Ramayana presents a similar account about Kamadhenu , however , here the sage is Vashista and the king is Vishwamitra . Once , king Vishwamitra with his army arrived at the hermitage of sage Vashista . The sage welcomed him and offered a huge banquet – to the army – that was produced by Sabala – as Kamadhenu is called in the text . The astonished king asked the sage to part with Sabala and instead offered thousand of ordinary cows , elephants , horses and jewels in return . However , the sage refused to part with Sabala , who was necessary for the performance of the sacred rituals and charity by the sage . Agitated , Vishwamitra seized Sabala by force , but she returned to her master , fighting the king 's men . She hinted Vashista to order her to destroy the king 's army and the sage followed her wish . Intensely , she produced <unk> warriors , who were slain by <unk> 's army . So she produced warriors of Shaka @-@ Yavana lineage . From her mouth , emerged the <unk> , from her udder <unk> , from her hind Yavanas and <unk> , and from pores on her skin , <unk> , <unk> and other foreign warriors . Together , the army of Sabala killed Vishwamitra 's army and all his sons . This event led to a great rivalry between Vashista and Vishwamitra , who renounced his kingdom and became a great sage to defeat Vashista . 
 = = Abodes = = 
 Kamadhenu @-@ Surabhi 's residence varies depending on different scriptures . The Anushasana Parva of the Mahabharata tells how she was given the ownership of Goloka , the cow @-@ heaven located above the three worlds ( heaven , earth and netherworld ) : the daughter of Daksha , Surabhi went to Mount Kailash and worshipped Brahma for 10 @,@ 000 years . The pleased god conferred goddess @-@ hood on the cow and decreed that all people would worship her and her children – cows . He also gave her a world called Goloka , while her daughters would reside on earth among humans . 
 In one instance in the Ramayana , Surabhi is described to live in the city of Varuna – the Lord of oceans – which is situated below the earth in Patala ( the netherworld ) . Her flowing sweet milk is said to form <unk> or the <unk> , the cosmic milk ocean . In the Udyoga Parva book of the Mahabharata , this milk is said to be of six flavours and has the essence of all the best things of the earth . The Udyoga Parva specifies that Surabhi inhabits the lowest realm of Patala , known as <unk> , has for daughters – the <unk> – the guardian cow goddesses of the heavenly quarters : <unk> in the east , <unk> in the south , Subhadra in the west and <unk> in the north . 
 Apart from Goloka and Patala , Kamadhenu is also described as residing in the hermitages of the sages Jamadagni and Vashista . Scholar Mani explains the contradicting stories of Kamadhenu 's birth and presence in the processions of many gods and sages by stating that while there could be more than one Kamadhenu , all of them are incarnations of the original Kamadhenu , the mother of cows . 
 = = Other scriptural references = = 
 The Bhagavad Gita , a discourse by the god Krishna in the Mahabharata , twice refers to Kamadhenu as Kamadhuk . In verse 3 @.@ 10 , Krishna makes a reference to Kamadhuk while conveying that for doing one 's duty , one would get the milk of one 's desires . In verse 10 @.@ 28 , when Krishna declares to the source of the universe , he proclaims that among cows , he is Kamadhuk . 
 In the Anushasana Parva of the Mahabharata , the god Shiva is described as having cast a curse on Surabhi . This curse is interpreted as a reference to the following legend : Once , when the gods Brahma and Vishnu were fighting over who was superior , a fiery pillar — linga ( symbol of Shiva ) — emerged before them . It was that decided whoever found the end of this pillar was superior . Brahma flew to the skies to try to find the top of the pillar , but failed . So Brahma forced Surabhi ( in some versions , Surabhi instead suggested that Brahma should lie ) to falsely testify to Vishnu that Brahma had seen the top of the linga ; Shiva punished Surabhi by putting a curse on her so that her bovine offspring would have to eat unholy substances . This tale appears in the Skanda Purana . 
 = = Worship = = 
 Some temples and houses have images of Kamadhenu , which are worshipped . However , she has never had a worship cult dedicated to her and does not have any temples where she is worshipped as the chief deity . In Monier @-@ Williams 's words : " It is rather the living animal [ the cow ] which is the perpetual object of adoration " . Cows are often fed outside temples and worshipped regularly on all Fridays and on special occasions . Every cow to " a pious Hindu " is regarded as an Avatar ( earthly embodiment ) of the divine Kamadhenu . 
 = Oriel College , Oxford = 
 Oriel College is a constituent college of the University of Oxford in Oxford , England . Located in Oriel Square , the college has the distinction of being the oldest royal foundation in Oxford ( a title formerly claimed by University College , whose claim of being founded by King Alfred is no longer promoted ) . In recognition of this royal connection , the college has also been known as King 's College and King 's Hall . The reigning monarch of the United Kingdom ( since 1952 , Elizabeth II ) is the official Visitor of the College . 
 The original medieval foundation set up by Adam de Brome , under the patronage of Edward II , was called the House or Hall of the Blessed Mary at Oxford . The first design allowed for a Provost and ten Fellows , called ' scholars ' , and the College remained a small body of graduate Fellows until the 16th century , when it started to admit undergraduates . During the English Civil War , Oriel played host to high @-@ ranking members of the King 's Oxford Parliament . 
 The main site of the College incorporates four medieval halls : Bedel Hall , St Mary Hall , St Martin Hall and Tackley 's Inn , the last being the earliest property acquired by the college and the oldest standing medieval hall in Oxford . The College has nearly 40 Fellows , about 300 undergraduates and some 160 graduates , the student body having roughly equal numbers of men and women . 
 Oriel 's notable alumni include two Nobel laureates ; prominent Fellows have included founders of the Oxford Movement . Among Oriel 's more notable possessions are a painting by Bernard van Orley and three pieces of medieval silver plate . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 On 24 April 1324 , the Rector of the University Church , Adam de Brome , obtained a licence from King Edward II to found a " certain college of scholars studying various disciplines in honour of the Virgin " and to endow it to the value of £ 30 a year . Brome bought two properties in 1324 , Tackley 's Hall , on the south side of the High Street and Perilous Hall , on the north side of Broad Street , and as an investment he also purchased the advowson of a church in <unk> . 
 Brome 's foundation was confirmed in a charter dated 21 January 1326 , in which the Crown , represented by the Lord Chancellor , was to exercise the rights of Visitor ; a further charter drawn up in May of that year gave the rights of Visitor to Henry Burghersh , Bishop of Lincoln , as Oxford at that time was part of the diocese of Lincoln . Under Edward 's patronage , Brome diverted the revenues of the University Church to his college , which thereafter was responsible for appointing the Vicar and providing four chaplains to celebrate the daily services in the church . The college lost no time in seeking royal favour again after Edward II 's deposition , and Edward III confirmed his father 's favour in February 1327 , but the amended statutes remained in force with the Bishop of Lincoln as Visitor . In 1329 , the college received through royal grant a large house belonging to the crown , known as La Oriole , standing on the site of what is now First quad ; it is from this property that the college acquired its common name , " Oriel " , the name being in use from about 1349 . The word referred to an <unk> , or oriel window , forming a feature of the earlier property . 
 In the early <unk> several Fellows of Oriel took part in the disturbances accompanying Archbishop Arundel 's attempt to stamp out Lollardy in the University ; the Lollard belief that religious power and authority came through piety and not through the hierarchy of the Church particularly inflamed passions in Oxford , where its proponent , John Wycliffe , had been head of Balliol . Disregarding the Provost 's authority , Oriel Fellows fought bloody battles with other scholars , killed one of the Chancellor 's servants when they attacked his house , and were prominent among the group that obstructed the Archbishop and ridiculed his censures . 
 In 1442 , Henry VI sanctioned an arrangement whereby the town was to pay the college £ 25 a year from the fee farm in exchange for decayed property , allegedly worth £ 30 a year , which the college could not afford to keep in repair . The arrangement was cancelled in 1450 . 
 = = = Early Modern = = = 
 In 1643 a general obligation was imposed on Oxford colleges to support the Royalist cause in the English Civil War , the King called for Oriel 's plate and almost all of it was given , the total weighing 29 <unk> <unk> <unk> of gilt , and 52 <unk> <unk> <unk> of " white " plate . In the same year the College was assessed at £ 1 for the weekly sum of £ 40 charged on the colleges and halls for the fortification of the city . When the Oxford Parliament was assembled during the Civil War in 1644 , Oriel housed the Executive Committee of the Privy council , Parliament being held at neighbouring Christ Church . Following the defeat of the Royalist cause , the University was scrutinised by the Parliamentarians , and five of the eighteen Oriel Fellows were removed . The Visitors , using their own authority , elected Fellows between 1648 and October 1652 , when without reference to the Commissioners , John <unk> was chosen ; the autonomy of the College in this respect seems to have been restored . 
 In 1673 James Davenant , a Fellow since 1661 , complained to William Fuller , then Bishop of Lincoln , about Provost Say 's conduct in the election of Thomas Twitty to a Fellowship . Bishop Fuller appointed a commission that included the Vice @-@ Chancellor , Peter Mews , the Dean of Christ Church , John Fell , and the Principal of Brasenose , Thomas Yates . On 1 August Fell reported to the Bishop that ; 
 When this Devil of buying and selling is once cast out , your Lordship will , I hope , take care that he return not again , lest he bring seven worse than himself into the house after ' tis swept and <unk> . 
 On 24 January 1674 , Bishop Fuller issued a decree dealing with the recommendations of the commissioners — a majority of all the Fellows should always be insisted on , so the Provost could not push an election in a thin meeting , and Fellows should be admitted immediately after their election . On 28 January Provost Say obtained a recommendation for Twitty 's election from the King , but it was withdrawn on 13 February , following the Vice @-@ Chancellor 's refusal to swear Twitty into the University and the Bishop 's protests at Court . 
 During the early 1720s , a constitutional struggle began between the Provost and the Fellows , culminating in a lawsuit . In 1721 , Henry Edmunds was elected as a Fellow by 9 votes to 3 ; his election was rejected by Provost George Carter , and on appeal , by the Visitor , Edmund Gibson , then Bishop of Lincoln . <unk> of candidates by the Provost continued , fueling discontent among the Fellows , until a writ of attachment against the Bishop of Lincoln was heard between 1724 and 1726 . The opposing Fellows , led by Edmunds , appealed to the first set of statutes , claiming the Crown as Visitor , making Gibson 's decisions invalid ; Provost Carter , supported by Bishop Gibson , appealed to the second set , claiming the Bishop of Lincoln as Visitor . The jury decided for the Fellows , supporting the original charter of Edward II . 
 In a private printing of 1899 Provost Shadwell lists thirteen <unk> observed by the College during the 18th century ; by the end of the 19th century all but two , the Feast of the Immaculate Conception and the Purification of the Virgin , had ceased to be celebrated . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 In the early 19th century , the reforming zeal of <unk> John Eveleigh and Edward Copleston gained Oriel a reputation as the most brilliant college of the day . It was the centre of the " Oriel <unk> " — clerical liberals such as Richard Whately and Thomas Arnold were Fellows , and during the 1830s , two intellectually eminent Fellows of Oriel , John Keble and John Henry Newman , supported by Canon Pusey ( also an Oriel fellow initially , later at Christ Church ) and others , formed a group known as the Oxford Movement , alternatively as the Tractarians , or familiarly as the <unk> . The group was disgusted by the Church of England of the day and sought to revive the spirit of early Christianity . Tension arose in College since Provost Edward Hawkins was a determined opponent of the Movement . 
 During the First World War , a wall was built dividing Third quad from Second quad to accommodate members of Somerville College in St Mary 's Hall while their college buildings were being used as a military hospital . At this time Oxford separated male and female students as far as possible ; Vera Brittain , one of the Somerville students , recalled an amusing occurrence during her time there in her autobiography , Testament of Youth ; 
 [ ... ] the few remaining undergraduates in the still masculine section of Oriel not unnaturally concluded that it would be a first @-@ rate " rag " to break down the wall which divided them from the carefully guarded young females in St. Mary Hall . Great perturbation filled the souls of the Somerville dons when they came down to breakfast one morning to find that a large gap had suddenly appeared in the protecting masonry , through which had been thrust a hilarious placard : 
 " ' OO MADE THIS ' ERE ' <unk> ? " 
 " <unk> ! ! ! " 
 Throughout that day and the following night the Senior Common Room , from the Principal downwards , took it in turns to sit on guard beside the hole , for fear any unruly spirit should escape through it to the forbidden adventurous males on the other side . 
 In 1985 , the college became the last all @-@ male college in Oxford to admit women for matriculation as undergraduates . In 1984 , the Senior Common Room voted 23 @-@ 4 to admit women undergraduates from 1986 . The Junior Common Room president believed that " the distinctive character of the college will be undermined " . 
 A second Feast Day was added in 2007 by a benefaction from <unk> George Moody , to be celebrated on or near St George 's Day ( 23 April ) . The only remaining gaudy had been Candlemas , the new annual dinner will be known as the St. George 's Day Gaudy . The dinner is black tie and gowns , and by request of the benefactor , the main course will normally be goose . The inaugural event took place on Wednesday 25 April 2007 . 
 = = Buildings and environs = = 
 = = = Front Quad ( First quadrangle ) = = = 
 Nothing survives of the original buildings , La Oriole and the smaller St Martin 's Hall in the south @-@ east ; both were demolished before the quadrangle was built in the artisan mannerist style during the 17th century . The south and west ranges and the gate tower were built around 1620 to 1622 ; the north and east ranges and the chapel buildings date from 1637 to 1642 . The façade of the east range forms a classical E shape comprising the college chapel , hall and undercroft . The exterior and interior of the ranges are topped by an alternating pattern of decorative gables . The gate house has a <unk> portal and canted Gothic oriel windows , with fan vaulting in the entrance . The room above has a particularly fine plaster ceiling and chimneypiece of stucco caryatids and panelling interlaced with studded bands sprouting into large flowers . 
 The cartouches over staircases one , two , three , five and six and the chapel , bar and provost 's lodgings entrances bear the arms of important figures in the College 's history ; ( 1 ) Anthony Blencowe ( Provost 1574 @-@ 1618 ) who left money that paid for building the west side of front quad . ( 2 ) Richard Dudley ( Fellow 1495 @-@ 1536 ) who gave property for Fellowships . ( 3 ) John Carpenter ( Provost 1428 @-@ 1435 , later Bishop Carpenter ) who gave property , plate , Fellowships and Exhibitions . ( Chapel ) John Frank ( Master of the Rolls ) gave property for Fellowships around 1441 . ( Bar ) William Lewis ( Provost 1618 @-@ 1621 ) who canvassed successfully for donations for the rebuilding of college . ( 5 ) William Smith ( Bishop of Lincoln ) who gave property for a Fellowship around 1508 . ( Provost 's lodgings ) John Tolson who was Provost during the building of Front Quad . ( 6 ) Edward Hawkins ( Provost 1828 @-@ 1882 ) . 
 = = = = Hall = = = = 
 In the centre of the East range , the portico of the hall entrance commemorates its construction during the reign of Charles I with the legend " <unk> <unk> " , Charles , being King , in pierced stonework . The portico was completely rebuilt in 1897 , and above it are statues of two Kings : Edward II on the left , and probably either Charles I or James I , although this is disputed ; above those is a statue of the Blessed Virgin Mary after whom the College is officially named . The top breaks the Jacobean tradition and has classical pilasters , a shield with garlands , and a segmental pediment . 
 The hall has a hammerbeam roof ; the louvre in the centre is now glazed , but was originally the only means of escape for smoke rising from a fireplace in the centre of the floor . The wooden panelling was designed by Ninian Comper and was erected in 1911 in place of some previous 19th @-@ century Gothic type , though even earlier panelling , dating from 1710 , is evident in the Buttery . 
 Behind the High Table is a portrait of Edward II ; underneath is a longsword brought to the college in 1902 after being preserved for many years on one of the college 's estates at <unk> , near Bath . On either side are portraits of Sir Walter Raleigh and Joseph Butler . The other portraits around the hall include other prominent members of Oriel such as Matthew Arnold , Thomas Arnold , James Anthony Froude , John Keble , John Henry Newman , Richard Whately and John Robinson . 
 The heraldic glass in the windows display the coats of arms of benefactors and distinguished members of the College ; three of the windows were designed by Ninian Comper . The window next to the entrance on the East side contains the arms of Regius Professors of Modern History who have been ex @-@ officio Fellows of the College . 
 = = = = Chapel = = = = 
 The current chapel is Oriel 's third , the first being built around 1373 on the north side of the front quadrangle . By 1566 , the chapel was located on the south side of the quadrangle , as shown in a drawing made for Elizabeth I 's visit to Oxford in that year . The present building was consecrated in 1642 and despite subsequent restorations it largely retains its original appearance . 
 The bronze lectern was given to the College in 1654 . The black and white marble paving dates from 1677 – 78 . Except for the pews on the west , dating from 1884 , the panelling , stalls and screens are all 17th @-@ century , as are the altar and carved communion rails . Behind the altar is Bernard van Orley 's The Carrying of the Cross — a companion @-@ piece to this painting is in the National Gallery of Scotland . The organ case dates from 1716 ; originally designed by Christopher <unk> for St Mary Abbots Church , Kensington , it was acquired by Oriel in 1884 . 
 In the north @-@ west window of the gallery there is a small piece of late medieval glass , a figure of St Margaret of Antioch . In the south window of the gallery there is a painted window of " The Presentation of Christ in the Temple " , executed by William <unk> of York . It was originally set in the east window in 1767 ; a later version of his work can be seen in New College Chapel . The rest of the stained glass is Victorian : the earliest is on the easternmost part of the south side ; the rest date from after the 1884 restorations by Powell . 
 Above the entrance to the chapel is an oriel that , until the 1880s , was a room on the first floor that formed part of a set of rooms that were occupied by Richard Whately , and later by John Henry Newman . Whately is said to have used the space as a larder and Newman is said to have used it for his private prayers — when the organ was installed in 1884 , the space was used for the blower . The wall that once separated the room from the ante @-@ chapel was removed , making it accessible from the chapel . The organ was built by J. W. Walker & Sons in 1988 ; in 1991 the space behind the organ was rebuilt as an oratory and memorial to Newman and the Oxford Movement . A new stained glass window designed by Vivienne Haig and realised by Douglas Hogg was completed and installed in 2001 . 
 During the late 1980s , the chapel was extensively restored with the assistance of donations from Lady Norma Dalrymple @-@ Champneys . During this work , the chandelier , given in 1885 by Provost Shadwell while still a Fellow , was put back in place , the organ was restored , the painting mounted behind the altar , and the chapel repainted . A list of former chaplains and organ scholars was erected in the ante @-@ chapel . The Chaplain is Rev Dr Robert Tobin and the Senior Organ Scholar for 2010 @-@ 11 was Edwin Lock . At that time David Maw was appointed Director of Chapel Music . 
 = = = Back Quad ( Second quadrangle ) = = = 
 Originally a garden , the demand for more accommodation for undergraduates in the early 18th century resulted in two free @-@ standing blocks being built . The first block erected was the Robinson Building on the east side , built in 1720 by Bishop Robinson at the suggestion of his wife , as the inscription over the door records . Its twin block , the Carter Building , was erected on the west side in 1729 , as a result of a benefaction by Provost Carter . The two buildings stood for nearly a hundred years as detached blocks in the garden , and the architectural elements of the First quad are repeated on them — only here the seven gables are all alike . Between 1817 and 1819 , they were joined up to the Front quad with their present , rather incongruous connecting links . In the link to the Robinson Building , two purpose @-@ built rooms have been incorporated - the Champneys Room , designed by Weldon Champneys , the nephew of Basil Champneys , and the Benefactors Room , a panelled room honouring benefactors of the college . A Gothic oriel window , belonging to the Provost 's Lodgings , was added to the Carter Building in 1826 . 
 The north range houses the library and senior common rooms ; designed in the Neoclassical style by James Wyatt , it was built between 1788 and 1796 to accommodate the books <unk> by Edward , Baron Leigh , formerly High Steward of the University and an <unk> , whose gift had doubled the size of the library . The two @-@ storey building has rusticated arches on the ground floor and a row of Ionic columns above , dividing the façade into seven bays — the ground floor contains the first purpose built senior common rooms in Oxford , above is the library . 
 On 7 March 1949 , a fire spread from the library roof ; over 300 printed books and the manuscripts on exhibition were completely destroyed , and over 3 @,@ 000 books needed repair , though the main structure suffered little damage and restoration took less than a year . 
 = = = St. Mary 's Quad ( Third quadrangle ) = = = 
 The south , east and west ranges of third quadrangle contain elements of St Mary Hall , which was incorporated into Oriel in 1902 ; less than a decade later , the Hall 's buildings on the northern side were demolished for the construction of the Rhodes Building . Bedel Hall in the south was formally amalgamated with St Mary Hall in 1505 . 
 In the south range , parts of the medieval buildings survive and are incorporated into staircase ten — the straight , steep flight of stairs and timber framed partitions date from a mid @-@ 15th century rebuilding of St Mary Hall . The former Chapel , Hall and Buttery of St Mary Hall , built in 1640 , form part of the Junior Library and Junior Common Room . Viewed from the third quad , the Chapel , with its Gothic windows , can be seen to have been built neatly on top of the Hall , a unique example in Oxford of such a plan . 
 On the east side of the quad is a simple rustic style timber @-@ frame building ; known as " the Dolls ' House " , it was erected by Principal King in 1743 . 
 In 1826 an ornate range was erected by St Mary Hall in the Gothic Revival style , incorporating the old gate of St Mary Hall , on the west side of the quad . Designed by Daniel Robertson , it contains two quite ornate <unk> placed asymmetrically , one is of six lights , the other four . They are the best example of the pre @-@ archaeological Gothic in Oxford . The large oriel on the first floor at the north end was once the drawing room window of the Principal of the Hall . Parts of the street wall incorporated into this range show traces of blocked windows dating from the same period of rebuilding in the 15th century as the present @-@ day staircase ten . 
 The Rhodes Building , pictured right , was built in 1911 using £ 100 @,@ 000 left to the College for that purpose by former student Cecil Rhodes . It was designed by Basil Champneys and stands on the site of the house of the St Mary Hall Principal , on the High Street . Champneys 's first proposal for the building included an open arcade to the High Street , a domed central feature and balustraded parapet . The left hand block and much of the centre was to be given up to a new Provost 's Lodging , and the five windows on the first floor above the arcade were to light a gallery belonging to the Lodging . The college eventually decided to retain the existing Provost 's Lodging and demanded detailing " more in accordance with the style which has become traditional in Oxford " . It became the last building of the Jacobean revival style in Oxford . 
 On the side facing the High Street , there is a statue of Rhodes over the main entrance , with Edward VII and George V beneath . The inscription reads : " e Larga <unk> <unk> <unk> " , which , as well as acknowledging Rhodes ' munificence , is a chronogram giving the date of construction , <unk> . 
 The staircases of the interior façade are decorated with cartouches similar to those found in First Quad , and likewise bear the arms of important figures in the College 's history ; ( 13 ) Sir Walter Raleigh who was an undergraduate from 1572 to 1574 , ( 14 ) John Keble who was a Fellow between 1811 and 1835 ) , ( archway ) Edward Hawkins who was Provost from 1828 until 1882 and ( 15 ) Gilbert White who was an undergraduate from 1739 until 1743 and a Fellow from 1744 until 1793 . 
 The building was not entirely well received ; William Sherwood , Mayor of Oxford and Master of Magdalen College School , wrote : 
 Oriel [ has ] broken out into the High , ... destroying a most picturesque group of old houses in so doing , and , to put it gently , hardly compensating us for their removal . 
 = = = O 'Brien Quad ( Island site ) = = = 
 This is a convex quadrilateral of buildings , bordered by the High Street , and the meeting of Oriel Street and King Edward Street in Oriel Square . The site took six hundred years to acquire and although it contains teaching rooms and the Harris Lecture Theatre , it is largely given over to accommodation . 
 On the High Street , No. 106 and 107 stand on the site of Tackley 's Inn ; built around 1295 , it was the first piece of property that Adam de Brome acquired when he began to found the college in 1324 . It comprised a hall and chambers leased to scholars , behind a frontage of five shops , with the scholars above and a cellar of five bays below . The hall , which was open to the roof , was 33 feet ( 10 m ) long , 20 feet ( 6 m ) wide , and about 22 feet ( 7 m ) high ; at the east end was a large chamber with another chamber above it . The south wall of the building , which survives , was partly of stone and contains a large two @-@ light early 14th @-@ century window . The cellar below is of the same date and is the best preserved medieval cellar in Oxford ; originally entered by stone steps from the street , it has a stone vault divided into four sections by two diagonal ribs , with carved corbels . 
 The Oriel Street site was acquired between 1329 and 1392 . No. 12 , now staircases 19 and 20 , is the oldest tenement acquired by the college ; known as <unk> 's , it was granted to the college in 1392 by Thomas de <unk> , Fellow and later Provost , having previously been let to William de <unk> , Oriel 's fourth Provost , in 1367 . A back wing to the property was added around 1600 and further work to the front was conducted in 1724 – 38 . In 1985 , funded by a gift from Edgar O 'Brien and £ 10 @,@ 000 from the Pilgrim Trust , <unk> 's was refurbished along with Nos. 10 , 9 and 7 . 
 King Edward Street was created by the college between 1872 and 1873 when 109 and 110 High Street were demolished . The old shops on each side of the road were pulled down and rebuilt , and to preserve the continuity , the new shops were numbered 108 and 109 – 112 . Named after the college 's founder , the road was opened in 1873 . On the wall of the first floor of No. 6 , there is a large metal plaque with a portrait of Cecil Rhodes ; underneath is the inscription : 
 In this house , the Rt. Hon Cecil John Rhodes kept <unk> residence in the year 1881 . This memorial is erected by Alfred Mosely in recognition of the great services rendered by Cecil Rhodes to his country . 
 In the centre of the quad is the Harris Building , formerly Oriel court , a real tennis court where Charles I played tennis with his nephew Prince Rupert in December 1642 and King Edward VII had his first tennis lesson in 1859 . The building was in use as a lecture hall by 1923 , and after modernisation between 1991 and 1994 , funded by Sir Philip and Lady Harris , contains accommodation , a seminar room and the college 's main lecture theatre . The bronze plaque in the lobby commemorates Sir Philip 's father , Captain Charles William Harris , after whom the building is named . The building was opened by John Major , then Prime Minister , on 10 August 1993 . 
 Whereas the staircases on the first three quadrangles are marked with Arabic numerals , the Island site is marked with Roman numerals . Both sites have the numbering running anticlockwise around each quadrangle and there are two staircase <unk> − Mary Quad 's staircase numbering finishes at 18 and O 'Brien Quad 's staircase numbering begins with XVIII . 
 = = = Rectory Road = = = 
 Bordered by the Cowley Road , this site was formerly Nazareth House , a residential care home convent — Goldie Wing ( shown left ) and <unk> House are its surviving buildings . Nazareth House itself was demolished to make room for two purpose @-@ built halls of residence , James Mellon Hall ( shown right ) and David Paterson House . The two new halls were opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 8 November 2000 . 
 As it is about ten minutes walk from College and more peaceful than the middle of the city , it has become the principal choice of accommodation for Oriel 's graduates and finalists . The site has its own common rooms , squash court , gymnasium and support staff . 
 = = = Bartlemas = = = 
 Bartlemas is a conservation area that incorporates the remaining buildings of a leper hospital founded by Henry I ; it includes the sports grounds for Oriel , Jesus and Lincoln Colleges , along with landscaping for wildlife and small scale urban development . 
 In 1326 Provost Adam de Brome was appointed warden of St Bartholomew 's ; a leper hospital in Cowley Marsh , the hospital was later granted to the college by Edward III , along with the payments it had been receiving from the fee farm . It was increasingly used as a rest house for sick members of the college needing a change of air . In 1649 the college rebuilt the main hospital range north of the chapel , destroyed in the Civil War , as a row of four almshouses , called Bartlemas House . Bartlemas Chapel and two farm cottages are the other extant buildings . 
 = = = Filming location = = = 
 The buildings of Oriel College were used as a location for Hugh Grant 's first film , Privileged ( 1982 ) , as well as Oxford Blues ( 1984 ) , True Blue ( 1991 ) and The Dinosaur Hunter ( 2000 ) . The television crime series Inspector Morse used the College in the episodes " Ghost in the Machine " , under the name of ' Courtenay College ' , " The Silent World of Nicholas Quinn " , " The Infernal Serpent " , " Deadly Slumber " , " Twilight of the Gods " and " Death is now My Neighbour " , and in the one off follow on , Lewis , the Middle Common Room and Oriel Square were used . 
 = = Coat of arms = = 
 In heraldic terminology : Gules , three lions passant guardant Or within a bordure engrailed Argent . 
 The arms of the College are based on those of the founder Edward II , the three gold lions of England on a red background . However , as no one may bear another 's arms unaltered , an engrailed silver border was added " for difference " . 
 The three feathers , often adopted by members of the College , can be found in decorations around college and is the motif on the college crested tie . It probably represents Edward , the Black Prince , although it may represent King Charles I , who was Prince of Wales when the building of First quad began in the 17th century . 
 College colours , used on the college scarf , sports clothing , oar blades and the like , are two white stripes on navy . 
 The long @-@ time informal emblem of the Tortoise Club ( 1st Summer VIII and 1st Torpid crews ) , was formalized in a grant to the College by Letters Patent dated 20 April 2009 of Garter , Clarenceux and Norroy and Ulster King of Arms . The Badge is blazoned A Tortoise displayed the shell circular Azure charged with two concentric <unk> Argent . The grant is formulated to provide the College , the Boat Club , and the Oriel Society ( Oriel 's Alumni society ) use of the badge in relation to Tortoise Club alumni activities ; the Tortoise Club is not itself an incorporated entity and does not bear Arms in its own right ; therefore it could not be granted such a heraldic Badge directly . 
 = = Grace = = 
 Before formal Hall , the following Latin grace is recited by one of the student bible clerks . The translation is reputedly by Erasmus in his <unk> <unk> of a grace recorded by St John Chrysostom : 
 Benedicte Deus , qui <unk> nos a <unk> nostra et <unk> cibum omni <unk> , <unk> <unk> et <unk> corda nostra ut nos <unk> quod satis est <unk> <unk> in omne opus bonum , per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum , cui , <unk> et Spiritu Sancto , sit omnis <unk> , <unk> et imperium , in <unk> <unk> . 
 Blessed God , who <unk> us from our youth and <unk> food to all flesh , fill our hearts with joy and gladness , that we , having enough to satisfy us , may abound in every good work , through Jesus Christ our Lord , to whom , with thee and the Holy Spirit , be all honour , praise and power for all ages . 
 After the meal , the Provost , or a Fellow , usually recites a short Latin prayer [ <unk> <unk> , per Jesum Christum , Let praise be given to / by the Blessed One ] instead of the full post cibum grace : 
 Domine Deus , <unk> et vita <unk> , qui semper es <unk> cum in <unk> tum in defunctis , agimus tibi <unk> pro Eduardo <unk> , <unk> <unk> , pro Adamo De Brome , <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> nostris , quorum <unk> hic ad <unk> et ad studia <unk> <unk> <unk> ; <unk> ut nos his donis <unk> <unk> <unk> , ad resurrectionis gloriam <unk> <unk> , per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum . 
 Lord God , the resurrection and life of all who believe in thee , who art always worthy to be praised by both the living and the dead , we give thee thanks for Edward the Second , our Founder , for Adam de Brome , our principal benefactor and for all our other benefactors , by whose benefits we are here maintained in godliness and learning ; and we beseech thee that using these thy gifts rightly we may be led to the immortal glory of resurrection , through Jesus Christ our Lord . 
 = = Student life = = 
 Students are admitted to Oriel in line with the common framework the Oxford University Colleges adhere to , which lays down the principles and procedures for admission to Oxford University , which they all observe . 
 Accommodation is provided for all undergraduates , and for some graduates , though some accommodation is off @-@ site . Members are generally expected to dine in hall , where there are two sittings every evening , one informal and one formal , except on Saturdays , where there is only an informal sitting . The Bar , situated underneath the Hall , serves food from mid @-@ morning and drinks in the evening . There is both a Junior Common Room ( JCR ) , between Second and Third quad , and a Middle Common Room ( MCR ) , on the Island Site . 
 The college lending library supplements the university libraries and holds over 100 @,@ 000 volumes , including core undergraduate texts . Most undergraduate tutorials are carried out in the college , though for specialist papers , undergraduates may be sent to tutors in other colleges . 
 Between 2001 @-@ 2010 , Oriel College students chose not to be affiliated to the University @-@ wide Students ' union , OUSU , although this did not stop some students from getting involved with OUSU and running for elected office . In a 2010 student referendum the JCR decided to <unk> . However , in 2013 , in a fresh referendum , the Oriel JCR again voted to disaffiliate from OUSU . 
 Oriel College has its own drama society , the Oriel Lions , which funds college and Oxford University shows . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 Croquet may be played in St Mary quad in the summer , as can bowls on the south lawn of First quad . The sports ground is mainly used for cricket , tennis , rugby union and football . 
 = = = = Rowing = = = = 
 Rowing at Oriel is carried out from the college 's own boat @-@ house across Christ Church Meadow . Oriel has a reputation for its success in rowing , in particular the two intercollegiate bumps races , Torpids and Eights Week . In Tom Brown at Oxford by Thomas Hughes , Oriel 's win in the 1842 Head of the River Race , with Oriel bumping Trinity , was re @-@ written as Tom 's college , " St Ambrose " taking first place and " Oriel " in second place . 
 In 2005 the college remained " Head of the River " in Torpids and rowed over second in Eights Week . Having been awarded spoons in Summer Eights 2006 after being bumped every day of racing , the Men 's 1st VIII bumped twice in 2007 and twice again in 2008 to return to 2nd on the River , behind Balliol College . The women 's 1st VIII has also had success in Summer Eights in recent years , winning blades in 2007 after bumping on all four days and finishing 2008 in Division I for the first time since 1994 . In 2006 Oriel claimed the first ever double headship in Torpids , rowing over as Head of the River in both the men 's and women 's first divisions . Both Men 's and Women 's 1st VIIIs ceded the headship of Torpids in 2008 by being bumped ; the positions remained unchanged in 2007 as Torpids were cancelled . In recent years , Oriel has held the men 's <unk> in Eights in 2011 , 2012 , 2014 and 2015 . As of 2014 the women are 12th on the river . 
 On the afternoons of the Thursday , Friday and Saturday of 7th week in Trinity Term , the boat club hosts the annual Oriel Regatta ; events in this competition include side @-@ by @-@ side racing for eights , coxed fours , pairs and single sculls . The course runs upstream from the <unk> Boathouse to past the end of boathouses on Christ Church Island and are conducted in knock @-@ out format . 
 The general emblem of the Oriel College Boat Club is the original medieval badge of Edward , the Black Prince . In recent years this has been augmented by the addition of crossed @-@ oars below the feathers . 
 = = = = = The Tortoise Club = = = = = 
 The Tortoise Club is open to the men 's 1st Summer VIII and 1st Torpid ( as well as their respective <unk> ) , but does not extend to the Boat Club committee 's Bosun ( boatswain ) , Secretary , or Treasurer unless they are also 1st VIII , 1st Torpid , or <unk> to those boats . The unique emblem of the Tortoise Club is the tortoise badge . The College of Arms ' narrative should not be misunderstood to imply use of the Tortoise emblem by the general Oriel College Boat Club membership or members of the Oriel Society - these have their own appropriate emblematic devices . 
 = = = = = The Blessed Virgins Club = = = = = 
 At the creation of the Oriel College Women 's Boat Club in 1986 , Oriel 's female rowers in the 1st VIII and 1st Torpid became members of The Blessed Virgins Club , in like fashion and styling as their male counterparts in the Tortoise Club . The respective unique emblem of The Blessed Virgins is a pair of ( angelic ) wings . The choice of " Blessed Virgins " is a pun on the official name of the college , that being ' The House of Blessed Mary the Virgin in <unk> 
 = = = = = Oriel Rowing Jackets = = = = = 
 Until 2009 the wearing of Boat Club Jackets ( ivory with navy blue piping and cuff rings , bearing the three ostrich feather emblem on the left breast ) was limited to the 1st and 2nd Summer VIII 's and Torpids and the Oriel College Boat Club Committee . At that time cuff ring designations were : Three rings for 1st Summer VIII and 1st Torpid ; two rings for Boat Club Committee ; one ring for 2nd Summer VIII 2nd Torpid . These now obsolete designations can still seen at the Walters of Oxford website . 
 Changes brought about in 2009 to become more inclusive of lower @-@ boats ' alumni ( 3rd , 4th , and sometimes 5th VIII 's as well as boat coxswains ) reformed the cuff ring designations as follows : Three rings for 1st Summer VIII ; two rings for 1st Torpid and a blades @-@ winning 2nd Summer VIII at the Captain 's discretion ; one ring for general boat club members ( no specific distinction for committee members exists today ) . 
 = = Academic performance = = 
 Oriel is ranked 9th out of 30 in the 2012 / 13 Norrington Table . 
 = = People associated with the College = = 
 See also Former students of Oriel College and Fellows of Oriel College . 
 Many notable and famous people have passed through Oriel 's gates , from statesmen to cricketers to industrialists ; their most famous undergraduate is the 16th @-@ century explorer , Sir Walter Raleigh . On the graduate level , the college boasts as former fellows the principal founders of the Oxford Movement : John Keble , E.B. Pusey , and John Henry Newman . The College has produced many other churchmen , bishops , cardinals , governors , and two Nobel Prize recipients : Alexander Todd ( Chemistry ) and James Meade ( Economics ) . 
 The Professorial Fellowships the College holds are : the Regius Professor of Modern History , held by <unk> Roper and formerly by Robert Evans , Sir John Elliott , Hugh Trevor @-@ Roper and Thomas Arnold , the Oriel Professor of the Interpretation of Holy Scripture , held by John Barton , the <unk> Professor of the Philosophy of the Christian Religion , held by Brian <unk> , and the Nuffield Professor of Obstetrics and <unk> . 
 In the 1700s , Oriel attracted its first transatlantic students — sons of planters in Virginia . ' One of them came to regret giving a job to a young surveyor : George <unk> 
 = = Notable possessions = = 
 Oriel has three notable pieces of medieval plate . The first is a French beaker and cover in silver gilt ; past estimates on its dating from 1460 – 70 are thought mistaken , and circa 1350 , with later decoration , was later expounded . It was bought in 1493 for £ <unk> , under the mistaken belief that it had belonged to Edward II . In a college inventory of plate dated 21 December 1596 , it is named as the Founder 's Cup . 
 The second notable piece of plate is a mazer of maplewood with silver gilt mounts , dating from 1470 – 85 . On the edge of the rim is a row of grouped beads ; below is an inscription in black letters : 
 Vir <unk> vivas non quod petit atra <unk> sic caro casta <unk> lis <unk> <unk> 
 Man , in thy draughts let reason be thy guide , and not the craving of perverted lust ; 
 So honest nourishment will be supplied , and strife of tongue be trampled in the dust 
 This type of shallow drinking vessel was quite common in the Middle Ages , but the only other <unk> in Oxford are three dating from the 15th century , and one standing mazer from 1529 – 30 , all belonging to All Souls . Thirdly is a coconut cup , one of six in Oxford ; the Oriel cup has silver gilt mounts and dates from the first quarter of the 16th century . 
 Among the later plate are two <unk> , two patens and a chalice which date from 1640 – 41 . The larger pieces of Buttery Plate include the Sanford and Heywood grace cups , dated 1654 – 55 and 1669 – 70 , a rosewater ewer gifted in 1669 , a punchbowl dating from 1735 – 36 , and the great Wenman tankard presented in 1679 , which holds a gallon and is the largest in Oxford . Many of the 17th- and 18th @-@ century tankards were given by <unk> and commoners as a form of admission fee . 
 As of 2006 , the college 's estimated financial endowment was £ 77 million . Oriel possesses an engrossment of the Magna Carta . 
 = Black Tears = 
 " Black Tears " is a song by Australian alternative rock band Powderfinger , from their sixth studio album Dream Days at the Hotel Existence . The song is an acoustic ballad in a folk music style , beginning with one guitar and a lead vocal , later introducing a guitar with a synthesised effect from the first chorus . Following the Dream Days at the Hotel Existence release , live versions of the song have been released on other recordings . 
 The song did not cause the release of the album to be delayed , despite claims that the song 's lyrics could interfere with the 2004 Palm Island death in custody case . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 On 2 May 2007 , mX , an afternoon newspaper in Brisbane , revealed that the defence team for Senior Sergeant Chris Hurley would be referring the song to Queensland Attorney @-@ General Kerry Shine , due to concerns that the song 's lyrics could prejudice the 2004 Palm Island death in custody , where Hurley had been charged for manslaughter . On 2 May Hurley 's lawyer Glen <unk> said " The content and proposed timing of the song ’ s release raises some serious concerns regarding Mr Hurley ’ s trial . " It was claimed by the defence team that the song 's lyrics were similar to the events that took place surrounding the death of Mulrunji . The band 's manager , Paul Piticco , conceded the song was about the case but insisted they were not specific enough to cause a problem . The album was set to be released 10 days before Hurley would face Townsville Supreme Court , on 12 June . There were concerns that the case 's jury could potentially be biased by the lyrical content . 
 Due to the concerns raised , Powderfinger sought legal advice . Then Queensland premier , Peter Beattie , who had legal experience , said the song was likely to be protected by free speech laws , noting " The matter would have to go pertain specifically to the issues of the trial " for a " prejudice " argument to be raised . 
 Several days after the initial threats of legal action , Powderfinger backed down and announced they would change the song . The band 's lawyers sent Shine a copy of the new , altered lyrics . It was then reported that an analysis of the new lyrics found they were safe to release . This was the version that would later be used on the album . A statement from Shine 's office stated that " Crown Law has examined the lyrics . Crown Law have advised Mr Shine 's office the lyrics raise no legal concern . " 
 In a June 2007 interview , Fanning noted that Powderfinger hoped to re @-@ release the original version of the song in the future , after the case had been settled . He also said that he was not angry about having to change his lyrics , but lamented the lack of Australian musicians willing to challenge the status quo . 
 The legal threats against the song were attacked heavily by some writers , including Andrew Stafford of The Bulletin . He noted that it was highly unlikely " Black Tears " would be released as a single , so potential jurors would need to " buy a copy of Dream Days in the ten days between its release and Hurley 's trial just to hear the song " . He also noted that Piticco had stated the lyrics could just as easily refer to a death in Brisbane , not on Palm Island . 
 = = Musical content = = 
 In a media statement published on the band 's MySpace web page , lead singer Bernard Fanning , who originally wrote the song , said the inspiration came to him after " a trip that I took last year to Uluru " . He said it discussed the issue of people climbing the rock , which is sacred in Aboriginal folklore , despite " the prevalence of literature and signage " asking people not to . Fanning compared climbing Uluru to climbing the Vatican , which he noted would be highly offensive to Catholics . 
 Fanning said the second part of the song , which contained the controversial lyrics , was written following the Queensland Director of Public Prosecutions passing down its finding in the death in custody case . He said that the band believed the song would have no bearing on the legal procedure , they would nonetheless include an alternative version of the song on Dream Days at the Hotel Existence . 
 The alternate version of the song still contains the lyrics An island watchhouse bed / A black man 's lying <unk> but not the lyrics that followed . 
 Upon announcing that the album would contain an altered version , Fanning noted his initial reasons for the song , stating " to bring attention to the obvious disadvantage that is still being suffered by Aboriginal people in this country " , which he said included the issue of " Indigenous deaths in custody " . Despite the claimed lyrical change , some early versions of Dream Days at the Hotel Existence were shipped with a version of " Black Tears " that included the controversial lyrics , which were also published on the band 's website . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = = Original version = = = 
 Dream Days at the Hotel Existence – Track 9 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Across the Great Divide tour DVD – Disc 1 , Track 11 
 I Don 't Remember – iTunes only – Track 2 
 = Battle of Kujin = 
 The Battle of Kujin ( 25 – 26 October 1950 ) , also known as the Battle of the Broken Bridge , took place during the United Nations ( UN ) offensive towards the Yalu River , which followed the North Korean invasion of South Korea at the start of the Korean War . The battle was fought between Australian forces from 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 3 RAR ) and elements of the 17th Tank Brigade of the Korean People 's Army over a key bridge across the Taeryong River near Kujin , North Korea . On 25 October the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade had resumed their advance towards Pakchon after crossing the Chongchon River , with 3 RAR as the lead battalion . Arriving at Kujin , the Australians discovered that the centre span of the 300 @-@ metre ( 330 yd ) concrete bridge had been demolished by North Korean engineers , blocking their passage across the river . A platoon @-@ sized reconnaissance patrol crossed the river using debris from the destroyed span ; however , it was soon forced to withdraw by North Koreans holding the high ground . Airstrikes and artillery fire were subsequently called @-@ in at 17 : 15 by the Australians as they prepared to conduct an assault . 
 At 19 : 00 that evening , following the clearance of nearby Pakchon by D Company 3 RAR , the Australians sent two companies across the river to establish a bridgehead and prevent the North Koreans from consolidating their position on the western bank . A and B Companies subsequently established defensive positions on either side of the road . Shortly afterwards North Korean forces were detected forming up for an assault on the right flank against B Company , and these preparations were broken up with mortars . The North Koreans then engaged the forward Australian companies with mortar fire which was largely ineffective . However , by 22 : 30 North Korean activity increased significantly , with heavy small arms fire causing a number of casualties among the Australians which perilously had to be evacuated under fire by boat across the fast flowing tidal river . Further artillery support was called @-@ in by the Australians at 23 : 00 in response to renewed concentrations by the North Koreans in preparation for an assault . Meanwhile , the Australians sent another platoon across the river to reinforce the companies on the western bank . 
 At 04 : 00 on 26 October the North Koreans counterattacked A and B Companies , supported by a two T @-@ 34 tanks . In the ensuing fighting a convoy of North Korean vehicles , including a tank , two jeeps , a motorcycle and about 60 infantry moved down the road towards A Company with the intention of re @-@ occupying the ridges overlooking the river crossing . The Australians ambushed the convoy at close range with small arms fire and mortars , forcing the North Koreans to flee after abandoning their vehicles with only the tank successfully shooting its way out . Later another North Korean T @-@ 34 tank and supporting infantry pressed to within 10 metres ( 33 ft ) of the B Company headquarters , before stopping and taking up a position between the ridges unaware of the location of the Australians . By dawn the Australians were still in possession of the bridgehead . At 07 : 00 , a further airstrike was called @-@ in on the North Koreans holding the ridges to the west of the 3 RAR positions . With the way reported clear , C and D Companies crossed the river from the eastern bank later that morning . The battle continued during the morning ; however , by 12 : 00 the North Koreans finally withdrew , abandoning the bridge to the Australians . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
 The Korean War began early in the morning of 25 June 1950 , following the surprise invasion of the Republic of Korea ( ROK ) by its northern neighbour , the communist Democratic People 's Republic of Korea ( DPRK ) . Numerically superior and better @-@ equipped , the Korean People 's Army ( KPA ) crossed the 38th Parallel and rapidly advanced south , easily overcoming the South Koreans . In response , the United Nations ( UN ) decided to intervene on behalf of South Korea , inviting member states to send forces to restore the situation . As a consequence , American ground forces were hastily deployed in an attempt to prevent the South Koreans from collapsing ; however , they too were understrength and poorly equipped , and by early August had been forced back by the North Koreans to an enclave around Pusan , known as the Pusan Perimeter . Key US allies — Britain , Canada and Australia — also committed forces , although these were initially limited to naval contingents and were largely viewed as token efforts in the US . Under diplomatic pressure the British agreed to deploy an infantry brigade in July , and would later dispatch a second brigade as the crisis worsened . The Canadians also agreed to provide an infantry brigade , although the first battalion would not arrive until December 1950 . A total of 21 UN member states eventually contributed forces . 
 Australia was one of the first nations to commit units to the fighting , playing a small but sometimes significant part in the United Nations Command , which was initially led by General Douglas MacArthur . Forces deployed in Japan as part of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force formed the basis of the Australian response , with P @-@ 51 Mustang fighter @-@ bombers from No. 77 Squadron RAAF flying their first missions on 2 July , while the frigate HMAS Shoalhaven and the destroyer HMAS Bataan were also committed to naval operations . During this time the 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 3 RAR ) , which had been preparing to return to Australia prior to the outbreak of the war , remained in Japan ; however , on 26 July the Australian government announced that it would also commit the understrength and poorly equipped infantry battalion to the fighting , following a period of preparation . Training and re @-@ equipment began immediately , while hundreds of reinforcements were hastily recruited in Australia as part of K Force ; they soon began arriving to fill out the battalion . The battalion 's commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel Floyd Walsh , was subsequently replaced by Lieutenant Colonel Charles Green . An officer with extensive operational experience fighting the Japanese in New Guinea during the Second World War , Green took over from Walsh due to the latter 's perceived inexperience . 
 On 23 September 1950 , 3 RAR embarked for Korea , concentrating at Pusan on 28 September . There it joined the British 27th Infantry Brigade , a garrison formation hurriedly committed from Hong Kong by the British government as the situation deteriorated around the Pusan Perimeter in late August to bolster the US Eighth Army under Lieutenant General Walton Walker . Commanded by Brigadier Basil Coad , the brigade was renamed the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade and consisted of the 1st Battalion , Argyll and Sutherland Highland Regiment ( 1 ASHR ) , the 1st Battalion , Middlesex Regiment ( 1 MR ) and 3 RAR . Understrength , the two British battalions had each mustered just 600 men of all ranks , while the brigade was also short on transport and heavy equipment , and had no integral artillery support , for which it would rely entirely on the Americans until the 16th Field Regiment , Royal New Zealand Artillery arrived in January 1951 . As such , with a strength of nearly 1 @,@ 000 men , the addition of 3 RAR gave the brigade increased tactical weight as well as expediently allowing the Australians to work within a familiar organisational environment , rather than being attached to a US formation . Also under the command of the brigade were a number of US Army units , including 155 mm howitzers from the US 90th Field Artillery Battalion , M4 Sherman tanks from US 89th Tank Battalion and a company from the US 72nd Combat Engineer Battalion . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 By the time 3 RAR arrived in the theatre , the North Koreans had been broken and were in rapid retreat , with MacArthur 's forces conducting a successful amphibious assault at Inchon and breaking out along the Naktong perimeter on the southern tip of the Korean peninsula . A steady advance began , driving the North Koreans northwards towards the 38th Parallel . The 27th British Commonwealth Brigade was airlifted from Taegu to Kimpo Airfield north of Seoul on 5 October ; however , its vehicles had to move by road , driving 420 kilometres ( 260 mi ) , and did not arrive until 9 October . It was subsequently attached to the US 1st Cavalry Division , under the command of Major General Hobart R. Gay . On 16 October the brigade took over from the US 7th Cavalry Regiment as the vanguard of the UN advance up the west coast , its axis intended to take it through Kaesong , Kumchon and Hungsu @-@ ri to Sariwon , then through Hwangju to the North Korean capital of Pyongyang . Although the North Koreans had suffered heavily in the preceding weeks , they continued to resist strongly , while a lack of accurate maps and the narrowness of the roads made rapid movement difficult for the advancing UN forces . During this time 3 RAR had a platoon of American M4 Sherman tanks attached and a battery of field guns in direct support . 
 The 27th British Commonwealth Brigade subsequently moved 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) from Kumchon , with the Argylls capturing Sariwon on 17 October , killing 215 North Koreans and taking many prisoners for the loss of one man killed and three wounded . The brigade then passed to the command of the US 24th Infantry Division on 21 October , under the overall command of Major General John H. Church , while the US 1st Cavalry Division remained in Pyongyang to complete its capture . The 27th British Commonwealth Brigade was subsequently ordered to seize Chongju . Consequently , the brigade continued to advance north with little respite , and on 22 October the Australians fought their first major action at Yongju , killing 150 North Koreans and capturing 239 of the brigade 's 800 prisoners , for the loss of seven men wounded . Intending to defeat the North Koreans and bring the war to a close , the UN forces pushed towards the Yalu River , on the Chinese border . Resistance continued to be met as the brigade crossed the Chongchon River however , and they now moved towards Pakchon . On 24 October , MacArthur had removed all restrictions on the movement of his forces south of the Yalu River and prepared for the final phase of the UN advance , defying a directive of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff and risking Chinese intervention in support of North Korea . 
 With the Middlesex in the vanguard , the lead elements of the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade successfully crossed the Chongchon unopposed at Sinanju on 24 October using assault boats . The British battalion then established a defensive position over @-@ looking the main bridge in preparation for the remainder of the brigade to continue the advance the following day . However , both the road and rail bridges at Sinanju had previously been damaged and they were subsequently found to be unsuitable for use by vehicles and armour , while the tidal current also prevented the rafting of even light vehicles by the American engineers attached to the brigade . Meanwhile , the road bridge at Anju , 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) east , was also found to be damaged by ROK 1st Division when it entered the town . Following repairs the bridge was made available to the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade 's light wheeled vehicles on 25 October , while the accompanying Sherman tanks located a ford 4 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 0 mi ) upstream , and were able to cross the Chongchon at that point . With winter approaching , the British and Australians encountered the first of the cold weather as the temperature began to drop well below freezing at night . Consequently , prior to leaving Sinanju purpose @-@ designed American cold @-@ weather clothing was issued ; however , with stocks in short supply only a few of the men received the equipment , even after a second issue was arranged several days later . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Fighting on the Taeryong River , 25 October 1950 = = = 
 That afternoon Coad ordered 3 RAR to resume the lead and continue the advance towards Pakchon , the next major town 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) north on the Taeryong River . The Australians subsequently moved through the Middlesex , supported by tanks from D Company , US 89th Tank Battalion . By 16 : 00 B Company 3 RAR had reached the village of Kujin , 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) south of Pakchon , where the main west coast road diverged from the road to Pakchon , turning west across the Taeryong River to continue towards Chongju and the Manchurian border . There the Australians discovered that the centre span of the 300 @-@ metre ( 330 yd ) concrete bridge had been demolished by North Korean engineers , blocking their passage across the river . Forced to halt , the 3 @-@ inch mortars from Support Company 3 RAR were brought into a position to provide indirect fire support to the battalion . Meanwhile , using roughly made timber ladders from the debris of the bridge , two sections of 4 Platoon under the command of Lieutenant Alan Morrison crossed the bridge covered by the remainder of B Company and the tanks in order to reconnoitre the far bank . On the other side of the river the road ran through a ridge which rose steeply 20 metres ( 22 yd ) above the water . After advancing to the foot of the ridge , 50 North Koreans came forward from the hills to surrender to the Australians , and almost immediately they came under heavy but inaccurate fire from other North Koreans concealed in the hills . The surrendering North Koreans then scattered into the scrub , while the Australians returned fire . A US LT @-@ 6G Mosquito light spotter aircraft scouting beyond the western bank subsequently reported the presence of two North Korean companies to the north , overlooking the bridgehead . 
 Having established that the North Koreans held the high ground , Green ordered Morrison to withdraw across the bridge in order to allow an airstrike to take place from 17 : 15 , with the platoon bringing 10 North Korean prisoners with them as they did so . Two United States Air Force ( USAF ) F @-@ 80 Shooting Stars subsequently strafed the North Korean positions across the river until 17 : 30 . A and B Companies were then instructed to prepare to assault the North Korean positions on the western bank ; however , the approach of dusk prevented a second airstrike and a fire plan was subsequently arranged by the American artillery and the battalion mortars before a more substantial thrust across the river was launched by the Australians . In the meantime Green had also sent D Company into Pakchon to clear the town in order to protect the Australian right flank , and under the command of Major Walter Brown they reported entering the town at 17 : 00 . D Company subsequently returned at 18 : 30 , bringing 225 prisoners with them after leaving a platoon to guard the American engineers which had begun constructing a ford from a damaged underwater bridge for use the following day . Meanwhile , a North Korean machine @-@ gun sporadically engaged the Australians on their left , while strong concentrations of North Korean troops were detected on the west bank . 
 = = = 3 RAR establishes a bridgehead , 25 / 26 October 1950 = = = 
 With the bridge considered important by the advancing US Eighth Army , the Australians were determined to a force a passage across the river . However , with only a platoon from D Company holding a tenuous bridgehead at the Pakchon ford as dusk fell , Green could either cross the river the following morning via the ford , or he could attempt a lodgement across the bridge that night . Acting boldly he resolved to strengthen his position and at 19 : 00 A and B Companies were sent across the river to secure the bridgehead and prevent the North Koreans from being reinforced and consolidating their position on the western bank . Again using the broken span , the Australians crossed the river and scaled the bank in the moonlight , before establishing defensive positions on both sides of the road on the crest 400 metres ( 440 yd ) from the Taeryong . Achieving their objectives the Australians then spread out along the ridgeline , with A Company under Captain William Chitts on the left and B Company on the right commanded by Major George Thirlwell . Unchallenged , the Australians suspected that the North Koreans had withdrawn and , still largely without winter clothing , they then began to dig @-@ in amid a sub @-@ zero wind which blew in from Manchuria , 97 kilometres ( 60 mi ) away . Green deployed the remainder of the battalion on the eastern bank , with D Company to the north near Kujin , C Company to the east flanking the road to Sinanju and battalion headquarters located to the south in a paddy field . The American tanks were subsequently allocated to both C and D Companies and they provided rear security to the battalion during the night . 
 Shortly afterwards , at 19 : 30 , B Company detected a North Korean force of around company @-@ size preparing for a frontal assault , and called @-@ in mortar fire to break up their formations , while a number of forward patrols had to be withdrawn by the Australians in order to prevent their encirclement . In response the North Koreans fired mortars at the Australian positions with limited effect . Half an hour later North Korean shells hit the 3 RAR battalion headquarters and C Company positions on the other side of the river , however the rounds landed in the damp soil of the paddy field and failed to explode . Periodically they were also targeted by machine @-@ gun fire , but it was mostly high and posed little threat . Perhaps also under the impression that the Australians had withdrawn , the North Koreans failed to press their attack . Yet they soon realised their mistake and heavy small arms fire began again at 22 : 30 with North Korean activity against A and B Companies increasing significantly , which resulted in B Company suffering two killed and three wounded . The Australian right flank was now exposed and following a request from Thirlwell , Chitts detached 1 Platoon under Lieutenant John Wathen to bolster B Company . At 23 : 00 further artillery and mortar fire missions were ordered by the Australians against the North Koreans in response to renewed concentrations in preparation for an assault . Around the same time 8 Platoon C Company under Lieutenant Colin Townsend was sent across the bridge in the darkness to further reinforce B Company , and they dug @-@ in on each side of the road leading to the bridge . Telephone lines had been laid by the Australians to their forward companies , and despite the fighting they remained intact throughout the battle . 
 North Korean activity continued throughout the night , and although this resulted in further casualties in A and B Companies , they were unable to penetrate the forward Australian positions . Among the dead was Wathen , whose platoon was attacked by the North Koreans after moving to cover the exposed B Company position , resulting in several other Australians also being wounded . Meanwhile , during the evening the 3 RAR Assault Pioneer Platoon had also discovered and destroyed a small North Korean arms dump on the eastern bank of the river . The Australians subsequently attempted to evacuate their casualties from the forward companies , and although these had been relatively light the task proved perilous . With the bridge still down , the wounded had to be carried by hand on stretchers to the broken span and then lowered 6 metres ( 20 ft ) to a boat borrowed from the American engineers . The boat was then hauled by ropes back across to the eastern bank of the river where the casualties were load into jeep ambulances . Despite a number of difficulties the majority of the casualties were successfully evacuated by these means , even as the bridge occasionally came under small arms fire . However , at around 01 : 00 , while evacuating the final casualty , the boat came under fire again from North Korean snipers and sank after being swept against a concrete piling . The wounded soldier fell into the fast flowing Taeryong River and the 3 RAR battalion drum @-@ major , Sergeant Thomas Murray , subsequently dived into the freezing waters and rescued him . Murray was later awarded the George Medal for his actions . 
 Although a North Korean SU @-@ 76 self @-@ propelled gun had occasionally shelled Kujin with armour piercing rounds , there had been no reports of tanks being detected during the evening . However , at 04 : 00 on 26 October the North Koreans counterattacked the Australian companies with the support of T @-@ 34 tanks . In the ensuing fighting a convoy of North Korean vehicles , including a T @-@ 34 tank , two jeeps , a motorcycle and about 60 infantry moved down the road towards A Company with the intention of re @-@ occupying the ridges overlooking the river crossing , likely unaware of the Australian dispositions . The Australians held their fire until the entire force was within their field of fire , before ambushing it at close range with small arms fire from Bren light machine @-@ guns , rifles , grenades and mortars . The convoy was subsequently scattered and the North Koreans fled , abandoning their vehicles with only the tank successfully shooting its way out . Among the North Korean dead was the commanding officer of the Reconnaissance Unit of the 17th Tank Brigade , Lieutenant Colonel Kim In @-@ sik , who was carrying a number of marked maps and documents . These items were of considerable intelligence value and they revealed that the North Koreans were preparing a last line of defence at Chongju 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) away , with infantry supported by tanks . 
 Later another North Korean T @-@ 34 tank and supporting infantry pressed to within 10 metres ( 33 ft ) of the B Company headquarters , before stopping and taking up a position between the ridges still unaware of the location of the Australians . An attempt by the Australian infantrymen to engage the tank with a new M20 3 @.@ 5 @-@ inch bazooka failed however after the weapon misfired , and it subsequently withdrew out of range . The tank then continued to fire randomly for the remainder of the night , without effect . In reserve , C Company was subsequently woken during the battle to send a number of their bazookas forward to replace those used by B Company as it was suspected that theirs were faulty due to being poorly maintained . However , in their first close engagement with North Korean armour , it was possible that some of the Australians had simply forgotten to move the safety catches of their bazookas to the firing position in their excitement . Following firm directions the bazookas were used to good effect by 3 RAR in a number of encounters with tanks during the next few days . Regardless , despite using infantry mounted on tanks the North Koreans seemed unable to conduct the sort of organised or co @-@ ordinated assault required to dislodge the Australians , and they were relatively untroubled for the rest of the night . 
 = = = 27th British Commonwealth Brigade consolidates , 26 October 1950 = = = 
 By dawn the Australians were still in possession of the bridgehead across the Taeryong . A large number of undamaged North Korean vehicles were subsequently found in front of their positions and they were soon pressed into service . At 07 : 00 a further airstrike by USAF F @-@ 80 Shooting Stars was called @-@ in on the North Koreans holding the ridges to the west of the 3 RAR positions , and they were subsequently strafed and attacked with napalm . With the way reported clear , C and D Companies crossed the river from the eastern bank later that morning . C Company subsequently took up a defensive position a few hundred metres forward of A Company on the left of the road , while D Company crossed the river at Pakchon and advanced 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) to occupy a dominant hill on the battalion 's right flank . In spite of harassment by the North Koreans during the previous evening which had cost D Company four casualties , the American engineers at Pakchon had continued to work on the underwater bridge and the Sherman tanks were able to cross there by 11 : 00 that morning , although the water was still considered too deep for wheeled vehicles . 
