 = = = Leaves and carnivory = = = 
 Sundews are characterised by the glandular tentacles , topped with sticky secretions , that cover their laminae . The trapping and digestion mechanism usually employs two types of glands : stalked glands that secrete sweet mucilage to attract and ensnare insects and enzymes to digest them , and sessile glands that absorb the resulting nutrient soup ( the latter glands are missing in some species , such as D. <unk> ) . Small prey , mainly consisting of insects , are attracted by the sweet secretions of the peduncular glands . Upon touching these , the prey become entrapped by sticky mucilage which prevents their progress or escape . Eventually , the prey either succumb to death through exhaustion or through asphyxiation as the mucilage envelops them and clogs their spiracles . Death usually occurs within 15 minutes . The plant meanwhile secretes esterase , peroxidase , phosphatase and protease enzymes . These enzymes dissolve the insect and free the nutrients contained within it . This nutrient mixture is then absorbed through the leaf surfaces to be used by the rest of the plant . 
 All species of sundew are able to move their tentacles in response to contact with edible prey . The tentacles are extremely sensitive and will bend toward the center of the leaf to bring the insect into contact with as many stalked glands as possible . According to Charles Darwin , the contact of the legs of a small gnat with a single tentacle is enough to induce this response . This response to touch is known as <unk> , and is quite rapid in some species . The outer tentacles ( recently coined as " snap @-@ tentacles " ) of D. <unk> and D. <unk> can bend inwards toward prey in a matter of seconds after contact , while D. <unk> is known to bend these tentacles in toward prey in tenths of a second . In addition to tentacle movement , some species are able to bend their laminae to various degrees to maximize contact with the prey . Of these , D. capensis exhibits what is probably the most dramatic movement , curling its leaf completely around prey in 30 minutes . Some species , such as D. filiformis , are unable to bend their leaves in response to prey . 
 A further type of ( mostly strong red and yellow ) emergence has recently been discovered in a few Australian species ( D. <unk> , D. indica ) . Their function is not known yet , although they may help in attracting prey . 
 The leaf morphology of the species within the genus is extremely varied , ranging from the sessile ovate leaves of D. <unk> to the <unk> divided acicular leaves of D. <unk> . 
 = = = Flowers and fruit = = = 
 The flowers of sundews , as with nearly all carnivorous plants , are held far above the leaves by a long <unk> physical isolation of the flower from the traps was originally thought to be an adaptation meant to avoid trapping potential pollinators ; a recent study , however , indicated Drosera species attract distinct types of insects as pollinators and prey , with little overlap . Instead , the tall flower stalks probably help raise the flowers to a height where they are noticeable to pollinators . The mostly <unk> inflorescences are spikes , whose flowers open one at a time and usually only remain open for a short period . Flowers open in response to light intensity ( often opening only in direct sunlight ) , and the entire inflorescence is also <unk> , moving in response to the sun 's position in the sky . 
 The radially symmetrical ( actinomorphic ) flowers are always perfect and have five parts ( the exceptions to this rule are the four @-@ petaled D. pygmaea and the eight to 12 @-@ petaled D. heterophylla ) . Most of the species have small flowers ( < 1 @.@ 5 cm or 0 @.@ 6 in ) . A few species , however , such as D. regia and D. <unk> , have flowers 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) or more in diameter . In general , the flowers are white or pink . Australian species display a wider range of colors , including orange ( D. <unk> ) , red ( D. adelae ) , yellow ( D. <unk> ) or metallic violet ( D. microphylla ) . 
 The ovary is superior and develops into a dehiscent seed capsule bearing numerous tiny seeds . The pollen grain type is compound , which means four microspores ( pollen grains ) are stuck together with a protein called callose . 
 = = = Roots = = = 
 The root systems of most Drosera are often only weakly developed . Serving mainly to absorb water and to anchor the plant to the ground , the roots are relatively useless for nutrient uptake . A few South African species use their roots for water and food storage . Some species have wiry root systems that remain during frosts if the stem dies . Some species , such as D. adelae and D. hamiltonii , use their roots for asexual propagation , by sprouting plantlets along their length . Some Australian species form underground corms for this purpose , which also serve to allow the plants to survive dry summers . The roots of pygmy sundews are often extremely long in proportion to their size , with a 1 @-@ cm ( 0 @.@ 4 @-@ in ) plant extending roots over 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) beneath the soil surface . Some pygmy sundews , such as D. <unk> and D. <unk> , also form adventitious roots as supports . D. intermedia and D. rotundifolia have been reported to form arbuscular mycorrhizae , which penetrate the plant 's tissues . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogenetics = = 
 The <unk> cladogram to the right shows the relationship between various subgenera and classes as defined by the analysis of Rivadavia et al. in 2002 . The monotypic section <unk> was not included in the study , so its place in this system is unclear . More recent studies have placed this group near section <unk> , so it is placed there below . Also of note , the placement of the section Regiae in relation to Aldrovanda and Dionaea is uncertain . Since the section Drosera is polyphyletic , it shows up multiple times in the cladogram ( * ) . 
 This phylogenetic study has made the need for a revision of the genus even clearer . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Many species of sundews are self @-@ fertile ; their flowers will often self @-@ pollinate upon closing . Often , numerous seeds are produced . The tiny black seeds germinate in response to moisture and light , while seeds of temperate species also require cold , damp , stratification to germinate . Seeds of the tuberous species require a hot , dry summer period followed by a cool , moist winter to germinate . 
 Vegetative reproduction occurs naturally in some species that produce stolons or when roots come close to the surface of the soil . Older leaves that touch the ground may sprout plantlets . Pygmy sundews reproduce asexually using specialized scale @-@ like leaves called gemmae . Tuberous sundews can produce offsets from their corms . 
 In culture , sundews can often be propagated through leaf , crown , or root cuttings , as well as through seeds . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The range of the sundew genus stretches from Alaska in the north to New Zealand in the south . The centers of diversity are Australia , with roughly 50 % of all known species , and South America and southern Africa , each with more than 20 species . A few species are also found in large parts of Eurasia and North America . These areas , however , can be considered to form the outskirts of the generic range , as the ranges of sundews do not typically approach temperate or Arctic areas . Contrary to previous supposition , the evolutionary speciation of this genus is no longer thought to have occurred with the breakup of Gondwana through continental drift . Rather , speciation is now thought to have occurred as a result of a subsequent wide dispersal of its range . The origins of the genus are thought to have been in Africa or Australia . 
 Europe is home to only three species : D. intermedia , D. anglica , and D. rotundifolia . Where the ranges of the two latter species overlap , they sometimes hybridize to form the sterile D. × obovata . In addition to the three species and the hybrid native to Europe , North America is also home to four additional species ; D. brevifolia is a small annual native to coastal states from Texas to Virginia , while D. capillaris , a slightly larger plant with a similar range , is also found in areas of the Caribbean . The third species , D. linearis , is native to the northern United States and southern Canada . D. filiformis has two subspecies native to the East Coast of North America , the Gulf Coast , and the Florida panhandle . 
 This genus is often described as cosmopolitan , meaning it has worldwide distribution . The botanist Ludwig Diels , author of the only monograph of the family to date , called this description an " arrant misjudgment of this genus ' highly unusual distributional circumstances ( <unk> <unk> ihrer <unk> <unk> <unk> ) " , while admitting sundew species do " occupy a significant part of the Earth 's surface ( einen <unk> Teil der <unk> <unk> ) " . He particularly pointed to the absence of Drosera species from almost all arid climate zones , countless rainforests , the American Pacific Coast , Polynesia , the Mediterranean region , and North Africa , as well as the scarcity of species diversity in temperate zones , such as Europe and North America . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 Sundews generally grow in seasonally moist or more rarely constantly wet habitats with acidic soils and high levels of sunlight . Common habitats include bogs , fens , swamps , marshes , the tepuis of Venezuela , the <unk> of coastal Australia , the fynbos of South Africa , and moist streambanks . Many species grow in association with sphagnum moss , which absorbs much of the soil 's nutrient supply and also acidifies the soil , making nutrients less available to plant life . This allows sundews , which do not rely on soil @-@ bound nutrients , to flourish where more dominating vegetation would usually outcompete them . 
 The genus , though , is very variable in terms of habitat . Individual sundew species have adapted to a wide variety of environments , including atypical habitats , such as rainforests , deserts ( D. <unk> and D. indica ) , and even highly shaded environments ( Queensland sundews ) . The temperate species , which form hibernacula in the winter , are examples of such adaptation to habitats ; in general , sundews tend to inhabit warm climates , and are only moderately frost @-@ resistant . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Although none of the Drosera species in the United States are federally protected , all are listed as threatened or endangered in some states . Additionally , many of the remaining native populations lie on protected land , such as national parks or wildlife preserves . Drosera species are protected by law in many European countries , such as Germany , Austria , Switzerland , the Czech Republic , Finland , Hungary , France , and Bulgaria . Currently , the largest threat in Europe and North America is habitat destruction for development projects , as well as the draining of bogs for agricultural uses and peat harvesting . In many regions , this has led to the extirpation of some species from parts of their former range . Reintroduction of plants into such habitats is usually difficult or impossible , as the ecological needs of certain populations is closely tied to their geographical location . Through increased legal protection of bogs and moors , as well as a concentrated effort to <unk> such habitats , the threat to these plants ' survival might be curbed , although most species would remain endangered . The relatively unimpressive image of these plants , as well as their small , low growth , makes them difficult to protect . As part of the landscape , sundews are often overlooked or not recognized at all . 
 In South Africa and Australia , two of the three centers of species diversity , the natural habitats of these plants are undergoing a high degree of pressure from human activities . Expanding population centers ( such as Queensland , Perth , and Cape Town ) threaten many such habitats , as does the draining of moist areas for agriculture and forestry in rural areas . The droughts that have been sweeping Australia over the last 10 years also pose a threat to many species by drying up previously moist areas . 
 Those species endemic to a very limited area are often most threatened by the collection of plants from the wild . D. madagascariensis is considered endangered in Madagascar because of the large @-@ scale removal of plants from the wild for exportation ; 10 - 200 million plants are harvested for commercial medicinal use annually . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = As a medicinal plant = = = 
 Sundews were used as medicinal herbs as early as the 12th century , when an Italian doctor from the School of Salerno , Matthaeus <unk> , described the plant as an herbal remedy for coughs under the name <unk> sole . It has been used commonly in cough preparations in Germany and elsewhere in Europe . <unk> tea was especially recommended by herbalists for dry coughs , bronchitis , whooping cough , asthma and " bronchial cramps " . A modern study has shown that Drosera exhibits <unk> properties . 
 Culbreth 's 1927 Materia Medica listed D. rotundifolia , D. anglica and <unk> as being used as stimulants and <unk> , and " of doubtful efficacy " for treating bronchitis , whooping cough , and tuberculosis . Sundews have also been used as an aphrodisiac and to strengthen the heart , as well as to treat sunburn , toothache , and prevent freckles . They are still used today in some 200 @-@ 300 registered medications , usually in combination with other herbal ingredients . Today , Drosera is usually used to treat ailments such as asthma , coughs , lung infections , and stomach ulcers . 
 Medicinal preparations are primarily made using the roots , flowers , and fruit @-@ like capsules . Since all native sundews species are protected in many parts of Europe and North America , extracts are usually prepared using cultivated fast @-@ growing sundews ( specifically D. rotundifolia , D. intermedia , D. anglica , D. <unk> and D. madagascariensis ) or from plants collected and imported from Madagascar , Spain , France , Finland and the Baltics . 
 = = = As ornamental plants = = = 
 Because of their carnivorous nature and the beauty of their glistening traps , sundews have become favorite ornamental plants ; however , the environmental requirements of most species are relatively stringent and can be difficult to meet in cultivation . As a result , most species are unavailable commercially . A few of the hardiest varieties , however , have made their way into the mainstream nursery business and can often be found for sale next to Venus <unk> . These most often include D. capensis , D. <unk> , and D. spatulata . 
 Cultivation requirements vary greatly by species . In general , though , sundews require high environmental moisture content , usually in the form of a constantly moist or wet soil substrate . Most species also require this water to be pure , as nutrients , salts , or minerals in their soil can stunt their growth or even kill them . Commonly , plants are grown in a soil substrate containing some combination of dead or live sphagnum moss , sphagnum peat moss , sand , and / or perlite , and are watered with distilled , reverse osmosis , or rain water . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The mucilage produced by Drosera has remarkable elastic properties and has made this genus a very attractive subject in biomaterials research . In one recent study , the adhesive <unk> of three species ( D. <unk> , D. capensis , and D. spatulata ) were analyzed for <unk> and <unk> content . Using atomic force microscopy , transmission electron microscopy , and energy @-@ dispersive X @-@ ray spectroscopy , researchers were able to observe networks of nanofibers and nanoparticles of various sizes within the mucilage residues . In addition , calcium , magnesium , and chlorine – key components of biological salts - were identified . These nanoparticles are theorized to increase the viscosity and stickiness of the mucilage , in turn increasing the effectiveness of the trap . More importantly for biomaterials research , however , is the fact that , when dried , the mucin provides a suitable substrate for the attachment of living cells . This has important implications for tissue engineering , especially because of the elastic qualities of the adhesive . Essentially , a coating of Drosera mucilage on a surgical implant , such as a replacement hip or an organ transplant , could drastically improve the rate of recovery and decrease the potential for rejection , because living tissue can effectively attach and grow on it . The authors also suggest a wide variety of applications for Drosera mucin , including wound treatment , regenerative medicine , or enhancing synthetic adhesives . Also of note , because this mucilage can stretch to nearly a million times its original size and is readily available for use , it can be an extremely cost @-@ efficient source of <unk> . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 The corms of the tuberous sundews native to Australia are considered a delicacy by the Australian Aborigines . Some of these corms were also used to dye textiles , while another purple or yellow dye was traditionally prepared in the Scottish Highlands using D. rotundifolia . A sundew liqueur is also still produced using a recipe from the 14th century . It is made using fresh leaves from mainly D. capensis , D. spatulata , and D. rotundifolia . 
 = = Chemical constituents = = 
 Several chemical compounds with potential biological activities are found in sundews , including flavonoids ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) , quinones ( <unk> , <unk> glucoside and <unk> ( 7 – methyl – <unk> – 4 – glucoside ) ) , and other constituents such as carotenoids , plant acids ( e.g. butyric acid , citric acid , formic acid , gallic acid , malic acid , propionic acid ) , resin , tannins and ascorbic acid ( vitamin C ) . 
 = Goodbyeee = 
 " Goodbyeee " , or " Plan F : Goodbyeee " , is the sixth and final episode of the British historical sitcom Blackadder 's fourth series , entitled Blackadder Goes Forth . The episode was first broadcast on BBC1 in the United Kingdom on 2 November 1989 , shortly before Armistice Day . Apart from the one @-@ off short film Blackadder : Back & Forth made a decade later , it was the last episode of Blackadder to be produced and transmitted . 
 The episode depicts its main characters ' final hours before a British offensive on the Western Front of the First World War , and Captain Blackadder 's attempts to escape his fate by feigning madness ; after he fails to convince General Melchett , and Field Marshal Haig 's advice proves useless , he resigns himself to taking part in the push . Goodbyeee has a darker tone than other episodes in the series , culminating in its acclaimed ending in which the main characters are assumed to die in machine @-@ gun fire . The episode 's theme of death ties in with the series ' use of gallows humour , its criticism and satire of war , and its depiction of authority figures contentedly sending their subordinates to face the enemy , while unwilling to do so themselves . 
 Richard Curtis and Ben Elton wrote the episode , and further material was provided by cast members . Its final sequence , which shows the main characters going " over the top " , uses slow motion , as the programme 's creators were unhappy with the result of the scripted ending . The enhanced scene has been described as bold and highly poignant . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Each series of Blackadder depicts its protagonist , always a scheming and ( except in the first series ) witty man named Edmund Blackadder , in different periods throughout history . In Blackadder Goes Forth , he is Captain Blackadder ( Rowan Atkinson ) , an officer in the British Army on the Western Front during the First World War . 
 Joined by his colleagues — the poor , stupid and unhygienic Private Baldrick ( Tony Robinson ) , and the overly optimistic , upper @-@ class and equally idiotic Lieutenant George ( Hugh Laurie ) — Blackadder tries constantly to escape his position and avoid the " big push " , which he fears will result in his death . His efforts are hindered by the loud and intimidating General Melchett ( Stephen Fry ) and Melchett 's strict , sardonic , and <unk> staff officer , Captain Darling ( Tim McInnerny ) . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 Captain Blackadder 's trench receives a phone call from HQ : a full @-@ scale attack has been ordered for the next day at dawn . Realising that this is likely to mean his death , Blackadder plans to escape by pretending to be mad : he puts underpants on his head and sticks pencils in his nostrils . His plan is thwarted when General Melchett arrives to see what is happening and remarks that he shot an entire platoon that used this exact method ; Blackadder overhears and narrowly escapes Melchett 's punishment by pretending he is relating the story to Baldrick . 
 Melchett leaves after George declines his offer not to participate in the push , and Baldrick suggests that Blackadder ask Field Marshal Douglas Haig to get them out ; remembering that Haig owes him a favour , Blackadder decides to call in the morning . George , Baldrick and Blackadder discuss the War and the friends they have lost — George mentions the Christmas truce of 1914 ( in which the belligerents stopped fighting to play football ) and realises he is the only " Trinity <unk> " member still alive ; this is paralleled in Baldrick 's pets , who have all died . Back at HQ , Melchett surprises Captain Darling with a front @-@ line commission . Darling 's pleas to reconsider are misinterpreted , and Melchett insists that he go . 
 The following morning , Blackadder calls Field Marshal Haig and reminds him of his debt ; Haig reluctantly advises using the underpants method , and abruptly hangs up . Darling arrives , and his animosity with Blackadder dissolves as they are both put in the same situation . George tries to cheer everybody up , but finds himself as scared as the others . Darling states that he had hoped to live through the War , return to England and marry his fiancée . 
 The men are called to the trench to prepare for the big push . There is a moment of hope when the British barrage lifts , but Blackadder reminds his colleagues that they have stopped only to avoid hitting their own men . Baldrick has another " cunning plan " to escape , but there is no time to hear it . Blackadder concludes by earnestly wishing his comrades good luck , and they charge over the top into thunderous machine @-@ gun fire . The sequence enters slow motion as a slow piano version of the Blackadder theme is played . The series ends as the violent chaos of no man 's land fades into a tranquil field of poppies , with only birdsong to be heard . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Richard Curtis and Ben Elton , who swapped computer disks to make edits . They stuck to a rule whereby they could not add back material the other had removed . The script was collaboratively edited by the cast members of Blackadder Goes Forth during read @-@ throughs . Elton was primarily responsible for the sequence in which Blackadder explains how the First World War started ; the running gag of Baldrick using mud and bodily fluids to make coffee throughout the episode was greatly expanded during rehearsals . 
 The episode 's title is a reference to the popular First World War song " Good @-@ bye @-@ ee ! " , which was based on a catchphrase of the comedian Harry Tate . The song is also heard in an earlier episode — " Major Star " . The title is a departure from those of previous Blackadder Goes Forth episodes , which are puns on military ranks . 
 During the filming of the episode , which took place before a studio audience at BBC Television Centre , Rowan Atkinson described sharing his character 's dread of impending death and feeling a " knot in the pit of my stomach " , something that he had never experienced . Hugh Laurie said that filming was sad because " even for comic effect , we were representing the deaths of hundreds of thousands of people " . Regarding guest star Geoffrey Palmer , the producer John Lloyd said " [ We ] probably could have given [ him ] more attention " , calling him " a wonderful actor " who is " really just delivering three or four plot lines [ pieces of dialogue essential to the plot ] " . 
 The slow motion and fade effects at the end of the episode were not scripted , but the decision to use them was made in editing after the final scene was hastily filmed on an unconvincing polystyrene set , ruining the poignancy of the sequence ; the episode 's director Richard Boden added the poppy field image . The piano version of the theme tune was performed by Howard Goodall and recorded in a gymnasium , giving it what Lloyd described as a " liquid , lonely sound " . The episode 's end credits were omitted . Tim McInnerny did not know about these changes before the episode aired , and has said that he found the ending particularly emotional . 
 = = Themes = = 
 In the episode , Field Marshal Haig is shown casually sweeping away toy soldiers with a <unk> and brush ; BBC News Magazine 's <unk> Rohrer called this a " visual allusion to his callousness " , but quoted the historian Gary Sheffield as saying " The real Field Marshal Haig was certainly not a callous man . He was commanding the largest British army ever . Whatever he did you ended up with lots and lots of casualties . " Sheffield also noted that " Melchett is an amalgam of Haig and John French and the other generals " , so Haig effectively " appears twice " . The series , and the storyline of " Goodbyeee " especially , often depicts the " lions led by donkeys " perception of the War , an element of Blackadder Goes Forth that has been criticised by historians . 
 In his book The Great War , Ian F. W. Beckett also cited Sheffield : the latter commented that Blackadder Goes Forth was successful because " the characters and situations needed no explanation , so familiar was the audience with the received version of the war " . Beckett noted the popularity of the episode 's final scene , and compared it to a similarly popular one from Dad 's Army . He said that this comparison demonstrates the historian A. J. P. Taylor 's observation that the Second World War has been regarded as a " good war " in comparison to the first ; he opined that " television producers ... have much to answer for in the perpetuation of the image of the Great War as one in which a generation of ' lions ' were needlessly sacrificed by the ' donkeys ' " . 
 The producer John Lloyd cited the episode 's lack of another major character as the reason they had time to " explore the relationships of the five principal people " . Rowan Atkinson said that the scene involving Darling 's " ghastly realisation " of his commission was " very sad " ; Lloyd commented " I love the fact that Captain Darling does have some compassion ; he 's not just a bureaucrat " . They noted that " all the comedy just goes away " upon Darling 's arrival in the trench , and that " there are still funny moments , but dramatically there 's no comic content , it 's just leading inexorably to the end . " 
 Comparing the ending scene to those of previous series of Blackadder in which the main characters were also killed , the writer Richard Curtis commented that " I think it was by chance that [ previous series ] ended with Blackadder being killed ... but series four , we did do it very much on purpose . " He said that he and Elton felt they could use the First World War as a setting if the characters died , considering " if we did do that ... it would not be too disrespectful , and would actually represent some of the tragedy of the First World War " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Following its original broadcast on BBC1 at 9 : 30 pm on Thursday , 2 November 1989 , the episode was praised for its powerful and memorable ending . One journalist called the scene " a classy ending to a TV classic " and the Sunday Times said that it was " brave " and " properly responsible " of the writers to end the series poignantly , especially when the episode aired close to Remembrance Day . 
 The episode has also been the subject of more recent reviews : Rob Cromwell of The Guardian listed the final scene among six " perfect end @-@ of @-@ show finales " , saying of Blackadder : " It was brilliantly funny throughout , right up until the last 60 seconds " , and praising the writers and producer John Lloyd for " deliver [ ing ] a perfectly pitched , poignant ending " . Comparing Blackadder Goes Forth to the 2012 war serial Birdsong , Alison Graham of the Radio Times commented that " Nothing ... evokes the terror of those unspeakable battlefields or leaves such an overwhelming sense of loss as [ its characters ] going over the top to their certain death " . Den of Geek 's Carley <unk> placed the episode second on her list of " top 10 TV show endings " , calling it " one of the greatest interpretations of the madness of war that has ever been put on film " . The academic and theatre director Mary Luckhurst contrasted the regular British comedic treatment of the Second World War with the absence of comedies set in the First World War , until the Blackadder series , which she considered " an important British dramatic treatment " of the War . Of the final episode Luckhurst wrote : 
 " Goodbyeee " went a good deal further than any other sitcom or comedy , by terminally sending pretty much the entire cast over the top in 1917 , into a silence that has ... endured ever since . Many millions of viewers were shocked , and almost all taken aback by the abrupt realization of tragedy amid much @-@ loved national television and after riotous laughter to that sudden and bitter end ... 
 In a poll conducted by Channel 4 and The Observer to determine television 's one hundred most memorable moments , the final scene of " Goodbyeee " came ninth ; it was one of only two entries in the top ten that was not news coverage ( the other being a scene from Only Fools and Horses ) . The Radio Times in 2001 asked a panel of comedians , writers and producers to pick their " 50 favourite sitcom moments " ; " Goodbyeee " was the only Blackadder episode included , and was ranked eleventh . The British Film Institute 's Screenonline called the episode 's ending " unexpectedly moving " , and noted that , unusually for a comedy programme , it was repeated as part of a serious commemoration of Armistice Day : for its 80th anniversary in 1998 . The series ' overview from the website of UKTV 's channel Gold , which airs repeats of Blackadder , calls the final episode " a seamless blend of gallows humour and rich poignancy " , and " a fitting end to an iconic series " . In his segment advocating for Blackadder to be voted Britain 's Best Sitcom , the broadcaster and journalist John Sergeant called the final sequence " the one sitcom moment with claims to immortality " . 
 Some historians of the First World War have taken a different view . William Philpott referred to the series , by name , as " <unk> " and felt it part of a " post @-@ facto generalisation of the nature of their war " that " sucked in " even veterans of the conflict . In other words , the First World War soldier had become a " victim " in the public consciousness , a circumstance at odds with the historical record . The impact of Blackadder on the public consciousness was so pervasive that Gordon Corrigan referenced it in his book cover copy when he published his book " Mud , Blood , and <unk> , " which was an attempt to " dispel various myths " about the war . 
 = Hubert Humphrey presidential campaign , 1968 = 
 The Hubert Humphrey presidential campaign of 1968 began when Vice President of the United States Hubert Humphrey of Minnesota decided to seek the Democratic Party nomination for President of the United States following the announcement by President Lyndon B. Johnson that he would not seek the party 's nomination . Johnson had been stalled by the anti @-@ Vietnam War candidacy of Senator Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota , who along with Senator Robert F. Kennedy of New York , became the main opponents for Humphrey . The contest between the men featured a battle for control of the Democratic Party , and cast Humphrey 's " old politics " , against the " new politics " of McCarthy and Kennedy . The main cause of the division was the Vietnam War , which intensified during Humphrey 's tenure as Vice President and grew increasingly unpopular . 
 Humphrey entered the race too late to participate in any primaries , and relied on " favorite son " candidates to help him win delegates . He also lobbied for endorsements from powerful bosses within the Democratic Party , which provided him with necessary delegates . This traditional approach was criticized by the other candidates , who hoped to win the nomination from popular support . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in June 1968 , leaving McCarthy as his only opponent , until the 1968 Democratic National Convention , when Senator George McGovern of South Dakota ran as the successor of Kennedy . Humphrey won the party 's nomination at the Convention on the first ballot , amidst riots in Chicago . He selected little @-@ known Senator Edmund Muskie of Maine as his running mate . 
 During the general election , Humphrey faced former Vice President Richard Nixon of California , the Republican Party nominee . Nixon led in most polls throughout the campaign , and successfully criticized Humphrey 's role in Vietnam , connecting him to the unpopular president and the general disorder in the nation . Humphrey experienced a surge in the polls in the days prior to the election , largely due to incremental progress in the peace process in Vietnam and a break with the Johnson war policy , but was defeated by Nixon on Election Day . 
 = = Background = = 
 Hubert Humphrey was first elected to public office in 1945 as Mayor of Minneapolis . He served two , two @-@ year terms , and gained a reputation as an anti @-@ Communist and ardent supporter of the Civil Rights movement . He gave a rousing speech at the 1948 Democratic National Convention arguing for the adoption of a pro @-@ Civil Rights plank , exclaiming " The time has arrived in America for the Democratic Party to get out of the shadow of states ' rights and to walk forthrightly into the bright sunshine of human rights . " That same year , he was elected to the United States Senate , where he worked closely with Senate Majority Leader Lyndon Johnson . Humphrey 's persona and tactics in the Senate led to his nickname of " The Happy Warrior " . Contemporaries noted that he succeeded in politics because of a likable personality and ability to connect with voters on a personal level . 
 Humphrey first entered presidential politics in 1952 running as a favorite son candidate in Minnesota . In 1960 , he mounted a full @-@ scale run , winning primaries in South Dakota and Washington D.C. , but ultimately lost the Democratic nomination to future President John F. Kennedy . In 1964 , Humphrey was tapped as the running mate of President Lyndon Johnson , who went on to win in a landslide victory over Republican Barry Goldwater . As Vice President , Humphrey oversaw turbulent times in America , including race riots and growing frustration and anger over the large number of casualties in the Vietnam War . President Johnson 's popularity had plummeted as the election grew closer . 
 = = Lyndon Johnson campaign = = 
 Prior to Humphrey 's run , President Lyndon Johnson began a campaign for re @-@ election , entering his name in the first @-@ in @-@ the @-@ nation New Hampshire primary for March 1968 . Late in 1967 , building upon anti @-@ war sentiment , Senator Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota entered the race with heavy criticism of the President 's Vietnam War policies . Even before McCarthy 's entrance , Johnson grew concerned about a challenge . He confided to Democratic Congressional leaders that an opponent could pull the support of Martin Luther King , Jr. and Dr. Benjamin Spock , defeating him in New Hampshire , and forcing his withdrawal from the race ; similar to Senator Estes Kefauver 's 1952 challenge to President Harry Truman , which likely caused Truman not to seek re @-@ election . 
 Humphrey was assigned the task of campaigning for Johnson , and was described in the Associated Press as the " administration 's strongest advocate on Vietnam " policy . The task became difficult following the Tet Offensive , which despite being a tactical victory , resulted in the deaths of thousands of American and South Vietnamese soldiers . The offensive included an invasion of the United States Embassy in Saigon , which led many Americans to believe that the North Vietnamese were stronger than had been reported , and that the war was not nearing an end . From this point , most Americans either believed that the war should be escalated to completely destroy the enemy or that all American troops should be withdrawn from Vietnam to prevent the use of any more resources for the " hopeless task " . McCarthy decried the handling of the war , and declared that " the Administration 's reports of progress are the products of their own self @-@ deception . " The Johnson campaign tried many tactics to negate the war 's detractors before the New Hampshire primary , including the circulation of the slogan , " the communists in Vietnam are watching ... don 't vote for fuzzy thinking and surrender " . Despite polls that placed McCarthy around 10 % to 20 % in the state , he won 42 @.@ 2 % of the vote , slightly below Johnson 's 49 @.@ 4 % , and the result was hailed as a " moral victory " for McCarthy . Soon afterwards , inspired by the result , Senator Robert Kennedy of New York entered the race , despite previously announcing that he would not challenge the President for the nomination . Humphrey tried to encourage Johnson to be more involved in the campaign , but the President seemed uninterested . He delayed meetings with Indiana Governor Roger Branigin to arrange a favorite son " stand in " for the campaign , and neglected to hire the campaign 's 1964 campaign manager Larry O 'Brien , despite Humphrey 's insistence . But Humphrey was able to convince Johnson to speak to the influential National Farmers Union in Minneapolis , ahead of the Wisconsin Primary . 
 In late March , polls suggested that McCarthy would likely win the Wisconsin Primary . Around this time , Johnson decided to drop out of the race . When he informed Humphrey of his decision , the Vice President urged Johnson to remain as a candidate . Johnson replied that it was not in the best interest of the nation to mix the partisan politics of a presidential election with the ongoing Vietnam crisis , and that if elected , he probably would not be able to complete the term since the men in his family usually died in their early sixties . A week prior to the primary , on March 31 , the President publicly announced that he would not seek nor accept the Democratic Party nomination , thus setting the stage for a Humphrey presidential run . 
 = = Announcement = = 
 After Johnson 's withdrawal , Humphrey was hit with a barrage of media interest and fanfare . His aides Max Kampelman and Bill Connell began to set up an organization and held meetings with Humphrey and his advisors , encouraging him to start a campaign . Humphrey set up offices for preparation , and unsuccessfully courted Larry O 'Brien as campaign manager . O 'Brien explained that his loyalties lied with the Kennedy family , leaving Humphrey undecided on whom to hire . Connell added lawyer and former DNC Treasurer Richard McGuire , who established the temporary campaign headquarters at his law firm . Eventually , Humphrey decided to embrace the youth of politics , adding Senators Fred R. Harris and Walter Mondale , who agreed to lead the Democrats United for Humphrey organization . Harris was put in charge of winning delegates , and Mondale prepared for the convention , helping to keep an organization in place . Kampelman , Connell and McGuire questioned Humphrey 's decision to hire the Senators , explaining that they had no organizational experience . Humphrey worried about his organization in the state of Iowa , but Harris and Mondale assured him that what would be lost in the state would be made up in Maryland . The campaign believed they could build a coalition of southern and border state Democrats as well as Union and Civil rights leaders to win the nomination . Mondale and Harris also desired to add a few anti @-@ war liberals to the coalition . Meanwhile , Humphrey 's office constantly received calls urging him to announce . Congressman Hale Boggs and Senator Russell Long , both of Louisiana , warned Humphrey that if he did not declare his candidacy soon , Kennedy would secure the nomination . Labor leader George Meany also called for Humphrey to announce immediately , but when Humphrey explained that he did not want to rush into a campaign , Meany called President Johnson to demand that Humphrey announce . Johnson refused , and never explicitly asked Humphrey to run . Governors Harold Hughes of Iowa and Philip H. Hoff of Vermont , each advised Humphrey to resign as Vice President to separate himself from Johnson , but he declined . Before the official announcement , Humphrey met with Johnson and discussed the future . The President advised Humphrey that his biggest obstacle as a candidate would be money and organization , and that he must focus on the Midwest and Rust Belt states in order to win . 
 After weeks of speculation , Humphrey finally announced his candidacy on April 27 , 1968 , in front of a crowd of 1 @,@ 700 supporters in Washington D.C. chanting " We Want Hubert " . He delivered a twenty @-@ minute speech , broadcast throughout the nation on television and radio that had been in preparation for four days after Johnson 's withdrawal . Labor Secretary W. Willard Wirtz , White House staffers Harry McPherson and Charles Murphy , and journalists Norman Cousins and Bill Moyers all contributed to the speech . In the speech , Humphrey proclaimed that the election would be about " common sense , and a time for maturity , strength and responsibility . " He set his goals at not simply winning the nomination but winning in a way that would " unite [ the ] party " so he could then " unite and govern [ the ] nation . " He argued that his campaign was " the way politics ought to be ... the politics of happiness , the politics of purpose , the politics of joy . " His entrance occurred too late in the process to qualify for ballot access in the primaries . 
 = = Campaign developments = = 
 As the campaign got underway , Humphrey tried to position himself as the conservative Democrat in the race , hoping to appeal to Southern delegates . Republicans , feeling that the Vice President may be the nominee , began to attack him , describing his positions as socialistic and reminding voters that Southern Democrats once considered him a " wild @-@ eyed liberal . " Democrats conceded this point but argued that compared to McCarthy and Kennedy , Humphrey was conservative . He immediately made an impact on the polls , rocketing to number one among Democrats in the beginning of May with 38 % , ahead of both McCarthy and Kennedy . An internal struggle within the campaign between the new politics of Mondale and Harris , and the old politics of Connell , Kampelman and Maguire , sometimes disrupted the organization of staffers in different states . Humphrey ordered Connell to not circumvent Mondale and Harris on campaign decisions , but the clashing continued throughout the campaign . The older faction referred to Mondale and Harris as " boy scouts " . 
 At the Indiana primary , Humphrey began the strategy of using " favorite son " candidates as surrogates for his campaign , and to weaken his opponents . Governor Roger Branigin stood in for Humphrey in Indiana , and placed second , in front of McCarthy but below Kennedy . Senator Stephen M. Young of Ohio stood in for the Vice President in Ohio , and won the primary . He won his largest share of delegates during a six @-@ week period after May 10 , when the Vietnam War was briefly removed as a campaign issue due to the delicate peace talks with Hanoi . Later in May , he gained 57 delegates from Florida , as favorite son candidate Senator George Smathers defeated McCarthy in the Florida primary with 46 % of the vote . Humphrey also picked up delegates from Pennsylvania , following an endorsement from Philadelphia Mayor James Hugh Joseph Tate , and collected delegates from leaders in New York , Minnesota , Montana , Utah , Delaware and Connecticut . The other candidates criticized this tactic , and accused Humphrey of organizing a " bossed convention " against the wishes of the people . 
 The next month , Humphrey 's rival Robert Kennedy was assassinated in Los Angeles , prompting the Vice @-@ President to return to his home in Minnesota and " think about the next stage . " Humphrey was shaken by the event , and took two weeks off from campaigning . He met with President Johnson , and the two talked about " everything " during a three @-@ hour meeting . The assassination all but guaranteed Humphrey the nomination . He commented that he " was doing everything I could to win the nomination ... but God knows I didn 't want it that way . " A large number of Kennedy delegates switched to Humphrey , but he lost money from Republican donors concerned about a Kennedy nomination , and popular opinion polls shifted in favor of Senator McCarthy . In fact , Humphrey was booed before 50 @,@ 000 people on June 24 at the Lincoln Memorial as he was introduced at a Solidarity March for civil rights . Drew Pearson and Jack Anderson described the response as ironic , given that Humphrey was booed at the 1948 Democratic National Convention after advocating a civil rights plank . He tried to defend his record against the liberal detractors , but often encountered anti @-@ war protesters and hostile crowds while campaigning . At the end of June , Republican Senator Mark Hatfield of Oregon assessed the race , arguing that Humphrey would be the party 's nominee for president but criticized him for being too closely aligned with Johnson 's policies . Humphrey asked for Johnson 's permission to deviate from the administration 's position on the war for a plan that included a bombing halt and drawback of forces , but Johnson refused , explaining that it would disrupt the peace process and endanger American soldiers . He relayed to Humphrey that the blood of his son @-@ in @-@ law who was serving in Vietnam , would be on his hands if he announced the new position . 
 In July , Humphrey criticized McCarthy for simply complaining about the war effort and offering no plan for peace . Afterwards , McCarthy challenged Humphrey to a series of debates on an assortment of issues including Vietnam . The Vice @-@ President accepted the invitation but modified the proposal , requesting there be only one debate prior to the Democratic National Convention . However , the one @-@ on @-@ one debate never occurred , largely due to the Eastern Bloc invasion of Czechoslovakia , and the insistence from other candidates that they be included . At the end of the month , Humphrey began to court Senator Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts as a possible running mate , hoping the young Senator would increase his chances of winning the support of liberals , and alleviate the criticism spawned from his connections to Johnson . Kennedy declined . Humphrey also asked Larry O 'Brien , who had been named as chairman of the Democratic National Committee , to be his campaign manager . O 'Brien privately believed that Humphrey could not win in the general election , but joined because he felt " sympathy for Humphrey and the problems he faced . " He publicly predicted that the race would come " down to the wire " . 
 As former Vice President Richard Nixon gained the Republican Party nomination , Humphrey held what he thought was a private meeting with 23 college students in his office . There , he candidly discussed his thoughts about the political climate , unaware that reporters were also in the room and that his statements would become public . Humphrey remarked that youths were using the Vietnam War as " escapism " and ignoring domestic issues . He stated that he had received thousands of letters from young people about the Vietnam War but received zero about Head Start as part of the program designed for poor preschool children began to expire , which he saved with a tie @-@ breaking Senate vote . As the national convention approached with Humphrey 's likely nomination , the war continued to divide the party and set the stage for a battle in Chicago , Humphrey hoped to move the convention to Miami to escape a vitriolic venue , but President Johnson vetoed the idea . 
 = = Democratic National Convention = = 
 Just prior to the convention , Senator George McGovern of South Dakota entered the race , casting himself as the standard @-@ bearer of the Robert Kennedy legacy . As the 1968 Democratic National Convention started , Humphrey stated that he had more than enough delegates to secure the nomination , but commentators questioned the campaign 's ability to hold on to the delegates . The Texas delegation announced frustration at the McCarthy campaign 's attempts to change procedures , and declared that they might renominate President Johnson as a result . Observers noted that Humphrey 's delegates were supporters of Johnson , and could follow suit . Meanwhile , protests and sleep @-@ ins were held in the streets and parks of Chicago , forcing Mayor Richard J. Daley to order federal troops into the city . Eventually , 6 @,@ 000 federal troops and 18 @,@ 000 Illinois National Guardsmen were outside the convention , defending the premises . A televised debate was held featuring Humphrey , McCarthy and McGovern . Humphrey hoped to unite the party during the debate , affirming his support for peace in Vietnam , but his challengers were received better by the crowd , drawing more applause . 
 Humphrey won the party 's nomination on the first ballot after a two @-@ hour debate among delegates the next day , defeating McCarthy 1759 @.@ 25 to 601 . McGovern finished in third with 146 @.@ 5 , and gave a lukewarm endorsement of Humphrey , asking him to be " his own man " . McCarthy refused to make an endorsement , although he privately confided to Humphrey that his supporters would not understand if he immediately showed his support . Humphrey also narrowly won the party plank in support of the Vietnam War , although his officials pleaded with Johnson to accept a compromise with the doves , which he refused . The results caused the protests to intensify , prompting the use of tear gas , which Humphrey could smell in his hotel room . He also received six death threats . The tactics used to quell the protests were criticized by certain Democrats as being excessive . During his acceptance speech , Humphrey tried to unify the party , stating " the policies of tomorrow need not be limited to the policies of yesterday . " He asked former Republican candidate Nelson Rockefeller to be his running mate , but he declined . Several other names were mentioned to Humphrey during the convention . Texas Governor John Connally was suggested by a delegation of southern Democratic governors , but the Governor himself suggested Vietnam ambassador Cyrus Vance . O 'Brien and Fred Harris appeared to suggest themselves for the position , and adviser Connell also suggested Harris , although Max Kampelman favored former Peace Corps director Sargent Shriver . Humphrey instead decided on Senator and former Governor Edmund Muskie of Maine , who had been his preferred choice . Observers noted the selection of the Senator , active in civil rights and labor and on neither side of the war issue , was a move to appeal to liberals while not upsetting establishment Democrats . Republican nominee Richard Nixon congratulated Humphrey on his victory as the general election campaign began . 
 = = General election = = 
 As the general election got underway , the largest hurdle for the campaign was finances . Polling numbers showed Humphrey trailing Nixon , causing donations to decrease . President Johnson refused to use the power of his office to help raise money , although many speculated that the tardiness of the Convention , scheduled to coincide with Johnson 's birthday , contributed to the issue . To stay afloat , several loans were made , which eventually accounted for half of the $ 11 @.@ 6 million used by Humphrey throughout the general election . Campaign workers decided that no money would be spent on radio or television advertising until the final three weeks of the election . In September , President Johnson showed his support for Humphrey by giving what was described as the strongest endorsement of the campaign when he asked Texas Democrats to throw their support behind the Vice President . However , Johnson did not give his official endorsement until an October 10 radio address . Meanwhile , Humphrey campaigned in New York where he labeled Nixon a " Hawk , " stating that the former Vice President " wanted to go to war ( in Vietnam ) in 1954 . " At a later stop in Buffalo , Humphrey was met by protesters , whom he told to go do something useful . 
 Both campaigns began to use their running mates to attack the other candidate . Republican Vice Presidential nominee Spiro Agnew criticized the current Vice President for being " soft on communism " and " soft on inflation and soft on law and order . " He then compared the nominee to former British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain . But Agnew often made gaffes on the campaign trail , in contrast to Muskie who was viewed as a natural campaigner . In Missouri , in preparation for a meeting with former President Harry Truman , Muskie tried to defend his running mate from connections made by the Nixon campaign to the Johnson administration . He reversed the accusation by claiming that Nixon should be held accountable for the shortcomings of the Eisenhower Administration , under his logic . He then lambasted the Republican ticket for ignoring such issues as urban renewal , housing , and federal aid for education and sewage . Muskie was renowned for his speaking ability , and was known to turn around hostile crowds including one well publicized event when he asked an anti @-@ war protester to join him on the stage . Although he provided a small boost for the campaign , Nixon remained fifteen points ahead , 44 % to 29 % in the September 27 Gallup poll . Diplomat George W. Ball soon resigned his position in the Johnson administration to campaign for and advise Humphrey , hoping to prevent a Nixon victory . At the end of September , Humphrey 's chances for the presidency further declined as media outlets observed that the Republican Party would be the likely winners in the election . Humphrey acknowledged his odds , proclaiming at an event in Boston : " regardless of the outcome of this election , I want it to be said of Hubert Humphrey that at an important and tough moment of his life he stood up for what he believed and was not shouted down . " The comment drew boos from the crowd . Individuals close to the campaign noted that Humphrey looked tired and worn @-@ out while flying from stop to stop , but would brighten up when he encountered a crowd . 
 On September 30 , hoping to separate himself from the policies of the Johnson administration at the advice of O 'Brien who noted that he needed the anti @-@ war vote to win in New York and California , Humphrey delivered a televised speech in Salt Lake City to a nation @-@ wide audience , and announced that if he was elected , he would put an end to the bombing of North Vietnam , and called for a ceasefire . He labeled the new policy " as an acceptable risk for peace . " The plan was compared to Nixon 's , which the candidate stated would not be revealed until Inauguration Day . After the speech , anti @-@ war protesters stopped shadowing Humphrey 's appearances , and a few McCarthy supporters joined the campaign . Donations totaling $ 300 @,@ 000 were immediately made to Humphrey , and he also improved in the polls , cutting Nixon 's lead to single digits by mid @-@ October . Meanwhile , Nixon tried to shift the emphasis of the campaign to the issue of law and order , and declared that a vote for Humphrey , would amount to " a vote to continue a lackadaisical , do nothing attitude toward the crime crisis in America . " While campaigning in San Antonio , Humphrey went on the attack against Nixon . He accused the Republican nominee of playing politics with human rights , and claimed that he was " on the road to defeat . " Hoping to gain favor among the Hispanic community , Humphrey alleged that Nixon had never discussed the concerns of Hispanic @-@ Americans during the course of the campaign . Nixon continued to tie Humphrey to Johnson . He argued that the administration was playing politics with the Vietnam War by trying to complete a treaty before the election to favor the Vice President . Humphrey fired back at Nixon 's allegations , stating that the former Vice President was using " the old Nixon tactic of unsubstantiated insinuation " and requested that he show evidence for his claims . Humphrey challenged Nixon to a series of presidential debates , but the Republican nominee declined , largely due to his uncomfortable experience at the 1960 presidential debates , and to deny recognition to the populist American Independent Party candidate , Governor George Wallace of Alabama , who would have been included at the event . Both the Humphrey and Nixon campaigns were concerned that Wallace would take a sizable amount of states in the electoral college and force the House of Representatives to decide the election . Although Wallace had focused most of his campaign on the south , he was drawing large crowds during appearances in the north . Both campaigns delegated a large amount of resources to denounce Wallace as a " frustrated segregationist " . As election day neared , Wallace fell in the polls , greatly diminishing the chance that he would influence the result . 
 A few days before the election , Humphrey gained the endorsement of his former rival Eugene McCarthy . During a stop in Pittsburgh , Humphrey stated that the endorsement made him a " happy man . " The hopes of victory for Humphrey also began to look up as a bombing pause was achieved and that negotiations had progressed , cutting Nixon 's 18 point lead to 2 points at the end of October . The Soviet Union had tried to influence the North Vietnamese to soften on the negotiations to prevent a Nixon victory , but Nixon publicly accused President Johnson of speeding up the negotiations . Contemporary sources reveal that Nixon was personally involved in preventing the South Vietnamese from coming to the negotiation table , through the use of operative Anna Chennault who advised Saigon that a Nixon administration would offer them a better deal . Members of the campaign later claimed that Humphrey did not bring this up before the election , because he did not want to appear desperate while polls placed him even with Nixon . Humphrey held his final campaign rally at the Houston Astrodome on November 3 alongside President Johnson . Governor Connally did not attend the event , causing suspicion that he would back Nixon , but he later assured Humphrey that he would not do so . During his speech at the rally , Humphrey asked Americans to base their vote on hope rather than fear . The next day , the eve of the election , he appeared in Los Angeles with Muskie , and was greeted by 100 @,@ 000 supporters . Later that day , Humphrey and Nixon each held four @-@ hour televised forums from Los Angeles on rival television networks . Humphrey 's on ABC @-@ TV at 8 : 30pm EST , Nixon 's on NBC @-@ TV at 9pm EST . Humphrey , with Muskie by his side , fielded questions from a live studio audience and a phone bank of celebrities including Frank Sinatra and Paul Newman . The Nixon telecast featured no interaction with anyone other than sports personally Bud Wilkinson who read queries from index cards beside rows of volunteers taking calls . Muskie , commenting on the Republican broadcast from their studios noted that Spiro Agnew was nowhere to be found and how it appeared to be staged . Nixon tried to reverse Humphrey 's boost from the bombing halt by stating that he had been advised that " tons of supplies " were being sent along the Ho Chi Minh Trail by the North Vietnamese , a shipment that could not be stopped . Humphrey described these claims as " irresponsible , " which prompted Nixon to proclaim that Humphrey " doesn 't know what 's going on . " McCarthy called in during Humphrey 's telethon and affirmed his support for the ticket . Edward Kennedy videotaped an endorsement for Humphrey from his home in Massachusetts . 
 = = Results = = 
 On Election Day , Humphrey was defeated by Nixon 301 to 191 in the electoral college . Wallace received 46 , all in the deep south . The popular vote was much closer as Nixon edged Humphrey 43 @.@ 42 % to 42 @.@ 72 % , with a margin of approximately 500 @,@ 000 votes . Humphrey carried his home state of Minnesota and Texas , the home state of President Johnson ( as well as Maine , running @-@ mate Ed Muskie 's home state ) . He also won most of the Northeast and Michigan , but lost the west to Nixon and the south to Wallace . Humphrey conceded the race to Nixon , and stated that he would support him as president . On his way out he remarked : " I 've done my best . " 
 Post election polls showed that Humphrey lost the white vote with 38 % , nine points behind Nixon , but won the nonwhite vote solidly , 85 % to 12 % , including 97 % of African @-@ Americans . African @-@ Americans favored Humphrey because of his record on civil rights , and their desire to quickly end the war in Vietnam , where blacks were overrepresented . The racial divide in the election had widened since 1964 , and was attributed to civil rights protests and race riots . Humphrey won 45 % of the female vote , two points ahead of Nixon , but lost to the Republican among males , 41 % to 43 % . Voters with only a grade school education supported Humphrey 52 % to 33 % over Nixon , while Nixon won among both those with no higher education than high school ( 43 % to 42 % ) and those who graduated from college ( 54 % to 37 % ) . Occupation demographics mirrored these numbers with manual @-@ labor workers supporting Humphrey 50 % to 37 % , and with white @-@ collar ( 47 % to 41 % ) and professionals ( 56 % to 34 % ) favoring Nixon . Humphrey won among young voters ( under 30 years old ) by 47 % to 38 % , and also edged Nixon among those between 30 and 49 years , with 44 % to 41 % . Nixon won among voters over 50 years , 47 % to 41 % . Catholics backed Humphrey with 59 % , twelve points ahead of Nixon , but Protestants favored Nixon , 49 % to 35 % . Humphrey lost the Independent vote 31 % to 44 % , with 25 % going to Wallace , and won a lower percentage among Democrats ( 74 % ) than Nixon won among Republicans ( 86 % ) . This discrepancy was connected to the tough Democratic primary election that caused some former McCarthy , Kennedy or McGovern supporters to vote for Nixon or Wallace as a protest . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the defeat , Humphrey was depressed . To stay active , his friends helped him get hired as a professor at Macalester College and the University of Minnesota . He also wrote a syndicated column and was added to the board of directors for Encyclopædia Britannica . Augmented by paid speaking tours , he earned $ 200 @,@ 000 in his first year of private life , the most he ever earned in a single year . He also remained loyal to the Democratic Party , and often attended party fundraising events . In 1970 , Humphrey returned to politics and ran for the Senate seat vacated by Eugene McCarthy . During the campaign , he appeared refreshed . He had lost a dozen pounds and darkened his hair in preparation for the race , hoping to appear youthful . Humphrey easily won the election , and began his new term in 1971 . He ran again for the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1972 , and won the most votes during the primary campaign , but lost to George McGovern at the convention . McGovern went on to be defeated by President Nixon in a landslide . Humphrey was mentioned as a potential candidate for the 1976 presidential nomination , and an early poll placed him as the leading candidate by more than ten points . Draft efforts were organized to convince him to run , and although he did not formally announce his candidacy , he affirmed that if nominated , he would accept . Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter was nominated instead , and defeated Republican nominee Gerald Ford . Carter would later name Edmund Muskie as Secretary of State . After being diagnosed with bladder cancer , Humphrey died on January 13 , 1978 while still serving in the Senate . He called Richard Nixon prior to his death , and invited him to attend his funeral . 
 = Gravemind = 
 The Gravemind is a parasitic , hive mind intelligence in the Halo universe . While only one Gravemind is ever seen in the games , the title is given to the final stage of Flood evolution , in which the Flood becomes a superorganism . The Flood is a highly @-@ infectious parasite which is released several times during Halo 's story . The Chief and the Arbiter ( Thel <unk> , during the course of Halo 2 and Halo 3 ) are captured during their separate missions on Delta Halo , or Installation 05 , by a Gravemind , which resides in the bowels of the ancient Forerunner ringworld , where the Flood creature forges an alliance between the two foes in order to stop the activation of the ringworld — an event which would destroy all sentient life , and , therefore , starve the Flood . The character is voiced by Dee Bradley Baker . 
 Making its first appearance in Halo 2 , the Gravemind was introduced to dispel the idea that the Flood is a mindless virus . The character was designed by a Bungie team , including artists Robert McLees and Juan Ramirez , and slowly developed into a massive creature with tentacles and a frightening level of intelligence . Driven by a desire to spread , the Gravemind is cunning and manipulative ; he forges alliances as often as he tries to consume his allies , tricking the Master Chief into aiding him while infecting the Chief 's compatriots at the same time . The character has had a mixed reception by many critics upon his appearance in Halo 2 , and reviewers including 1UP.com found his role in Halo 3 confusing and without clear motive . More positively , critic Aaron Sagers used Gravemind as an example of a " frenemy " — the creature 's appearance made the Master Chief 's fight against the Flood more personal and more dramatic . 
 = = Design and attributes = = 
 Early Concepts for the Gravemind were done by Bungie artist Robert McLees . McLees is known at Bungie as the " architect of the Flood " , and had done the early concepts for the Flood forms in Halo : Combat Evolved . McLees ' original drawings were then added to by Juan Ramirez . The Gravemind 's form and design constantly changed during development . Early versions of the creature had a basic shape of a mass of tentacles , with a jagged tear in one large appendage forming a rudimentary mouth . Later on , the mouth was studded with the skulls of human and Covenant corpses for teeth . This design was later revised due to practical considerations about lip syncing the character for speech . Despite these design changes , the Gravemind 's size was always meant to be huge ; early concepts showed the Master Chief dwarfed by the Flood intelligence . 
 Unlike the mindless ' zombie ' nature of most Flood , the Gravemind is depicted as intelligent and cunning , and acts as a collective mind driving the Flood . It lyrically speaks prose in a form of trochaic or iambic <unk> . While capable of subterfuge , Gravemind is seen to use the brute strength and sheer numbers of the Flood to further its aims . When attacking planets , the Gravemind of the Forerunner 's time used smaller craft as ablative armor , sacrificing countless Flood so that larger ships can land and infest major population centers . In a more strategic move , Gravemind uses logic to sway the Forerunner 's own artificial intelligence , Mendicant Bias , to his side . While Mendicant Bias had been specifically created to defeat the Gravemind , the Flood leader convinces the AI that the Flood is a utopian ideal , and that its conquest of the galaxy is inevitable . While the Gravemind 's motivations and goals are not made expressly clear in Halo 2 , Halo 3 reveals Gravemind 's ultimate goal is to consume all thinking beings in the galaxy . 
 The Gravemind 's physical form is depicted as composed of rotting corpses and <unk> , towering nearly eighty meters high as seen in Halo 2 . Gravemind resembles a large Venus <unk> with many tentacles , but is capable of movement and linguistic communication via its large mouth formed from overlapping fleshy ' leaves ' . Though an animal , the Gravemind 's somewhat <unk> appearance has drawn comparisons to Audrey II from the 1986 film Little Shop of Horrors due to the tentacles about a central mouth . For Halo 2 : Anniversary , the Gravemind now has three flesh @-@ flaps that protrude and dangle towards the front of its head , each one decorated with teeth . It is also given a different sort of mouth , one that resembles a <unk> mouth with fangs . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 The Gravemind makes his first appearance halfway through Halo 2 's campaign . Using his tentacles to save the Master Chief and Arbiter from perishing , Gravemind brings them face to face in a chasm on Delta Halo . Gravemind reveals to the Arbiter that the ring 's architects , the Forerunners , died when they activated the installation in order to stop the threat of the Flood ; the Master Chief verifies what the creature says , having stopped the firing of another ring in Halo : Combat Evolved . Though the Arbiter does not accept the truth immediately , Gravemind sends the Master Chief to the Covenant city High Charity and the Arbiter to the Halo 's control room in order to stop the deluded Covenant from killing all sentient life a second time . Though he promises an alliance , Gravemind has ulterior motives . His Flood infest the human ship In Amber Clad and makes a slipspace jump into High Charity itself , in an effort to use the station to escape the confines of Halo . Having taken over the city , Gravemind questions the A.I. Cortana , who was left behind to destroy High Charity if Halo was activated . Gravemind says that he has questions that he will ask , and Cortana agrees to answer them . A short story in the 2009 Halo : Evolutions anthology details the conversations that follow . 
 Gravemind is one of the primary antagonists of Halo 3 . While the Master Chief and Arbiter have returned to Earth in order to stop the Prophet of Truth , the religious leader of the Covenant , from activating a Forerunner artifact buried in Africa , Gravemind turns High Charity into a Flood hive and sends an infected cruiser to Earth in an effort to infest the planet ; this plan fails , and a message from Cortana informs the Master Chief and allies of the existence of the Ark , a special installation built by the Forerunners outside of the Milky Way galaxy where all the Halos can be fired remotely . Gravemind , the Arbiter , and the Master Chief all want to stop the High Prophet of Truth from activating the rings , so the Flood once again ally with the Chief and Arbiter . As soon as Truth is killed , however , the Gravemind betrays both the Master Chief and the Arbiter , The Chief escapes the Flood 's clutches and rescues Cortana from High Charity . Despite being tortured by Gravemind , Cortana has managed to keep a secret safe from the Flood ; she has the activation index of Installation 04 , which she captured from 343 Guilty Spark during Halo : Combat Evolved . Using the index , Cortana can activate the local ringworld , destroying Gravemind but sparing the galaxy 's sentient life . Gravemind finally gains this knowledge , but too late ; the Master Chief escapes with Cortana , destroying High Charity in the process . Gravemind survives the blast and attempts to rebuild himself on the new ring . Despite his best efforts , the Master Chief and company activate Halo , stopping the Flood once again . Gravemind , resigned to his defeat , nonetheless insists that it will only slow — not stop — the Flood . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception of the leader of the Flood were mixed . In a review of Halo 2 , Mike Leonard of the <unk> community said that the introduction of the Gravemind character had him " rolling my eyes hard enough to get motion sickness from seeing the back of the inside of my skull " ; Leonard went on to say that the " Little Shop of Horrors reject " ruined the " cool " of the Halo franchise . Staff from GamesRadar singled out the appearance of the Gravemind as a sign the Halo series had jumped the shark . " Until Gravemind showed up , we were pretty sure we understood the Halo series ' story , " they wrote , but that the appearance of a Venus <unk> @-@ like creature with an ego and " a tendency to spout philosophical drivel " was unexpected . Jeremy Parish of 1UP.com bemoaned the fact that Gravemind was never explicitly stated to be the Flood leader in either Halo 2 or Halo 3 and was hardly seen in the third installment . Publications also took issue with the fact that the character 's motivations were never fully explored ; the South Florida Sun @-@ Sentinel said that the " unique and compelling characters " of Halo 3 , such as Cortana and the Master Chief , were overwhelmed by Gravemind . 
 More favorably , Aaron Sagers of the newspaper The Morning Call saw Gravemind as a perfect example of a trend in pop culture called a " frenemy " . A frenemy , according to Sagers , is a friend or rival " with whom [ the protagonist ] feuds ; an individual who reinvigorates the sense of self @-@ worth and drives up one 's visibility in the public 's eye . " Gravemind , operating as a frenemy , served to personify the Master Chief 's otherwise nebulous fight against the Flood . Will <unk> of <unk> listed the Flood as one of the great video game aliens , and that the revelation of a central Flood intelligence was a good idea despite the Gravemind 's resemblance to Audrey II . 
 = Louis I of Hungary = 
 Louis I , also Louis the Great ( Hungarian : Nagy Lajos ; Croatian : <unk> Veliki ; Slovak : <unk> Veľký ) or Louis the Hungarian ( Polish : Ludwik <unk> ; 5 March 1326 – 10 September 1382 ) , was King of Hungary and Croatia from 1342 and King of Poland from 1370 . He was the first child of Charles I of Hungary and his wife , Elizabeth of Poland , to survive infancy . A 1338 treaty between his father and Casimir III of Poland , Louis 's maternal uncle , confirmed Louis 's right to inherit the Kingdom of Poland if his uncle died without a son . In exchange , Louis was obliged to assist his uncle to reoccupy the lands that Poland had lost in previous decades . He bore the title of Duke of Transylvania between 1339 and 1342 but did not administer the province . 
 Louis was of age when succeeded his father in 1342 , but his deeply religious mother exerted a powerful influence on him . He inherited a centralized kingdom and a rich treasury from his father . During the first years of his reign , Louis launched a crusade against the Lithuanians and restored royal power in Croatia ; his troops defeated a Tatar army , expanding his authority towards the Black Sea . When his brother , Andrew , Duke of Calabria , husband of Queen Joanna I of Naples , was assassinated in 1345 , Louis accused the queen of his murder and punishing her became the principal goal of his foreign policy . He launched two campaigns to the Kingdom of Naples between 1347 and 1350 . His troops occupied large territories on both occasions , and Louis adopted the styles of Neapolitan sovereigns ( including the title of King of Sicily and Jerusalem ) , but the Holy See never recognized his claim . Louis 's arbitrary acts and atrocities committed by his mercenaries made his rule unpopular in Southern Italy . He withdrew all his troops from the Kingdom of Naples in 1351 . 
 Like his father , Louis administered Hungary with absolute power and used royal prerogatives to grant privileges to his courtiers . However , he also confirmed the liberties of the Hungarian nobility at the Diet of 1351 , emphasizing the equal status of all noblemen . At the same Diet , he introduced an entail system and a uniform rent payable by the peasants to the landowners , and confirmed the right to free movement for all peasants . He waged wars against the Lithuanians , Serbia , and the Golden Horde in the 1350s , restoring the authority of Hungarian monarchs over territories along frontiers that had been lost during previous decades . He forced the Republic of Venice to renounce the Dalmatian towns in 1358 . He also made several attempts to expand his suzerainty over the rulers of Bosnia , Moldavia , Wallachia , and parts of Bulgaria and Serbia . These rulers were sometimes willing to yield to him , either under duress or in the hope of support against their internal opponents , but Louis 's rule in these regions was only nominal during most of his reign . His attempts to convert his pagan or Orthodox subjects to Catholicism made him unpopular in the Balkan states . Louis established a university in Pécs in 1367 , but it was closed within two decades because he did not arrange for sufficient revenues to maintain it . 
 Louis inherited Poland after his uncle 's death in 1370 . Since he fathered only daughters , he wanted his subjects to acknowledge the right of his daughters to succeed him in both Hungary and Poland . For this purpose , he issued the Privilege of Koszyce in 1374 spelling out the liberties of Polish noblemen . However , his rule remained unpopular in Poland . In Hungary , he authorized the royal free towns to delegate jurors to the high court hearing their cases and set up a new high court . Suffering from a skin disease , Louis became even more religious during the last years of his life . At the beginning of the Western Schism , he acknowledged Pope Urban VI as the legitimate pope . After the pope dethroned Joanna I of Naples and made Louis 's distant cousin , Charles of Durazzo , king of Naples , Louis helped Charles occupy the kingdom . In Hungarian historiography , Louis was regarded for centuries as the most powerful Hungarian monarch who ruled over an empire " whose shores were washed by three seas " . 
 = = Childhood and youth ( 1326 – 1342 ) = = 
 Born on 5 March 1326 , Louis was the third son of Charles I of Hungary and his wife , Elizabeth of Poland . He was named for his father 's uncle , Louis , Bishop of Toulouse , canonized in 1317 . The first @-@ born son of his parents , Charles , died before Louis was born . Louis became his father 's heir after the death of his brother Ladislaus in 1329 . 
 He had a liberal education by the standards of his age and learned French , German and Latin . He showed a special interest in history and astrology . A cleric from Wrocław , Nicholas , taught him the basic principles of Christian faith . However , Louis 's religious zeal was due to his mother 's influence . In a royal charter , Louis remembered that in his childhood , a knight of the royal court , Peter <unk> , often carried him on his shoulders . His two tutors , Nicholas Drugeth and Nicholas <unk> , saved the lives of both Louis and his younger brother , Andrew , when Felician Záh attempted to assassinate the royal family in Visegrád on 17 April 1330 . 
 Louis was only nine when he stamped a treaty of alliance between his father and John of Bohemia . A year later , Louis accompanied his father in invading Austria . On 1 March 1338 , John of Bohemia 's son and heir , Charles , Margrave of Moravia , signed a new treaty with Charles I of Hungary and Louis in Visegrád . According to the treaty , Charles of Moravia acknowledged the right of Charles I 's sons to succeed their maternal uncle , Casimir III of Poland , if Casimir died without a male issue . Louis also pledged that he would marry the margrave 's three @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Margaret . 
 Casimir III 's first wife , Aldona of Lithuania , died on 26 May 1339 . Two leading Polish noblemen – Zbigniew , chancellor of Cracow , and <unk> <unk> – persuaded Casimir , who had not fathered a son , to make his sister , Elizabeth , and her offspring his heirs . According to the 15th @-@ century Jan Długosz , Casimir held a general sejm in Cracow where " the assembled prelates and nobles " proclaimed Louis as Casimir 's heir , but the reference to the sejm is anachronistic . Historian Paul W. Knoll writes that Casimir preferred his sister 's family to his own daughters or a member of a cadet branch of the Piast dynasty , because he wanted to ensure the king of Hungary 's support against the Teutonic Knights . Louis 's father and uncle signed a treaty in Visegrád in July whereby Casimir III made Louis his heir if he died without a son . In exchange , Charles I pledged that Louis would reoccupy Pomerania and other Polish lands lost to the Teutonic Order without Polish funds and would only employ Poles in the royal administration in Poland . 
 Louis received the title of Duke of Transylvania from his father in 1339 , but he did not administer the province . According to a royal charter from the same year , Louis 's bride , Margaret of Bohemia , lived in the Hungarian royal court . Louis 's separate ducal court was first mentioned in a royal charter of 1340 . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = First years ( 1342 – 1345 ) = = = 
 Charles I died on 16 July 1342 . Five days later , Csanád <unk> , Archbishop of Esztergom , crowned Louis king with the Holy Crown of Hungary in Székesfehérvár . Although Louis had attained the age of majority , his mother Elizabeth " acted as a sort of co @-@ regent " for decades , because she exerted a powerful influence on him . Louis inherited a rich treasury from his father , who had strengthened royal authority and ruled without holding Diets during the last decades of his reign . 
 Louis introduced a new system of land grants , excluding the grantee 's brothers and other kinsmen from the donation in contrast with customary law : such estates escheated to the Crown if the grantee 's last male descendants died . On the other hand , Louis often " promoted a daughter to a son " , that is authorized a daughter to inherit her father 's estates , although customary law prescribed that the landed property of a deceased nobleman who had no sons was to be inherited by his kinsmen . Louis often granted this privilege to the wives of his favorites . Louis also frequently authorized landowners to apply capital punishment in their estates , limiting the authority of the magistrates of the counties . 
 William Drugeth , an influential advisor of Louis 's late father , died in September 1342 . He bequeathed his landed property to his brother , Nicholas , but Louis confiscated those estates . In late autumn , Louis dismissed his father 's Voivode of Transylvania , Thomas Szécsényi , although Szécsényi 's wife was a distant cousin of the queen mother . Louis especially favored the Lackfis : eight members of the family held high offices during his reign . Andrew Lackfi was the commander of the royal army during the first war of Louis 's reign . In late 1342 or early 1343 , he invaded Serbia and restored the Banate of Macsó , which had been lost during his father 's reign . 
 Robert the Wise , King of Naples , died on 20 January 1343 . In his testament , he declared his granddaughter , Joanna I , his sole heir , excluding Louis 's younger brother , Andrew , Joanna 's husband , from becoming co @-@ ruler . Louis and his mother regarded this as an infringement of a previous agreement between the late kings of Naples and Hungary . He visited his bride 's father , Charles of Moravia , in Prague to persuade him to intervene on Andrew 's behalf with Charles 's former tutor , Pope Clement VI , the overlord of the Kingdom of Naples . Louis also sent envoys to his Neapolitan relatives and the high officials of the kingdom , urging them to promote his brother 's interests . Their mother , Elizabeth , left for Naples in the summer , taking with her almost the whole royal treasure , including more than 6 @,@ 628 kilograms ( 14 @,@ 612 lb ) of silver and 5 @,@ 150 kilograms ( 11 @,@ 350 lb ) of gold . During her seven @-@ month @-@ long stay in Italy , she was only able to persuade her daughter @-@ in @-@ law and the pope to promise that Andrew would be crowned as Joanna 's husband . 
 According to the nearly contemporaneous chronicle of John of Küküllő , Louis launched his first campaign against a group of Transylvanian Saxons , who had refused to pay taxes , and forced them to yield in the summer of 1344 . During his stay in Transylvania , Nicholas Alexander – who was the son of Basarab , the ruling prince of Wallachia – swore loyalty to Louis on his father 's behalf in <unk> ( now Brașov in Romania ) ; thus the suzerainty of the Hungarian monarchs over Wallachia was , at least outwardly , restored . 
 Louis joined a crusade against the pagan Lithuanians in December 1344 . The crusaders – including John of Bohemia , Charles of Moravia , Peter of Bourbon , and William of Hainaut and Holland – laid siege to Vilnius . However , a Lithuanian invasion of the lands of the Teutonic Knights forced them to lift the siege . Louis returned to Hungary in late February 1345 . He dispatched Andrew Lackfi to invade the lands of the Golden Horde in retaliation for the Tatars ' earlier plundering raids against Transylvania and the Szepesség ( now Spiš in Slovakia ) . Lackfi and his army of mainly Székely warriors inflicted a defeat on a large Tatar army . Thereafter the Golden Horde 's control of the lands between the Eastern Carpathians and the Black Sea weakened . A conflict between Louis 's uncle and father @-@ in @-@ law ( Casimir III of Poland and Charles of Moravia ) led to a war between Poland and Bohemia in April . In this war Louis supported his uncle with reinforcements in accordance with the agreement of 1339 . 
 While Louis 's armies were fighting in Poland and against the Tatars , Louis marched to Croatia in June 1345 and besieged Knin , the former seat of the late Ivan <unk> , who had successfully resisted Louis 's father , forcing his widow and son to surrender . The Counts of <unk> and other Croatian noblemen also yielded to him during his stay in Croatia . The citizens of Zadar rebelled against the Republic of Venice and accepted his suzerainty . Louis meanwhile returned to Visegrád . He dispatched Stephen II , Ban of Bosnia , to assist the burghers of Zadar , but the ban did not fight against the Venetians . 
 = = = = Gallery = = = = 
 = = = The Neapolitan campaigns ( 1345 – 1350 ) = = = 
 Louis 's brother , Andrew , was murdered in Aversa on 18 September 1345 . Louis and his mother accused Andrew 's widow , Queen Joanna I , Robert , Prince of Taranto , Charles , Duke of Durazzo and other members of the Neapolitan branches of the Capetian House of Anjou of plotting against Andrew . In his letter of 15 January 1346 to Pope Clement VI , Louis demanded that the pope dethrone the " husband @-@ killer " queen and grant Naples to Andrew 's posthumous son by Joanna , Charles Martel , Duke of Calabria . Louis also laid claim to the regency of the kingdom during the minority of his nephew , referring to his <unk> descent from the first @-@ born son of Robert the Wise 's father , Charles II of Naples . He even promised to increase the amount of yearly tribute that the kings of Naples would pay to the Holy See . After the pope failed to fully investigate Andrew 's murder , Louis decided to invade southern Italy . In preparation for the invasion , he sent his envoys to Ancona and other Italian towns before summer 1346 . 
 While his envoys negotiated in Italy , Louis marched to Dalmatia to relieve Zadar , but the Venetians bribed his commanders . When the citizens broke out and attacked the besiegers on 1 July , the royal army failed to intervene , and the Venetians overcame the defenders outside the walls of the town . Louis withdrew but refused to renounce Dalmatia , although the Venetians offered to pay 320 @,@ 000 golden florins as compensation . Lacking military support from Louis , however , Zadar surrendered to the Venetians on 21 December 1346 . 
 Louis sent small expeditions one after one to Italy at the beginning of his war against Joanna , because he did not want to harass the Italians who had suffered from a famine the previous year . His first troops departed under the command of Nicholas <unk> , Bishop of Nyitra ( now Nitra in Slovakia ) , on 24 April 1347 . Louis also hired German mercenaries . He departed from Visegrád on 11 November . After marching through Udine , Verona , Modena , Bologna , Urbino , and Perugia , he entered the Kingdom of Naples on 24 December near L 'Aquila , which had yielded to him . 
 Queen Joanna remarried , wedding a distant cousin , Louis of Taranto , and fled for Marseille on 11 January 1348 . Their other relatives , Robert of Taranto and Charles of Durazzo , visited Louis in Aversa to yield to him . Louis received them amicably and convinced them to persuade their brothers , Philip of Taranto and Louis of Durazzo , to join them . After their arrival , Louis 's " smile was replaced by the harshest expression as he unveiled with terrible words the true feelings he had for the princes and that he had kept hidden until then " , according to the contemporaneous Domenico da Gravina . He repeated his former accusations , blamed his kinsmen for his brother 's murder , and had them captured on 22 January . The next day Charles of Durazzo – the husband of Joanna I 's sister , Mary – was beheaded upon Louis 's orders . The other princes were kept captive and sent to Hungary , together with Louis 's infant nephew , Charles Martel . 
 Louis marched to Naples in February . The citizens offered him a ceremonious entry , but he refused , threatening to let his soldiers sack the town if they did not raise the taxes . He adopted the traditional titles of the kings of Naples – " King of Sicily and Jerusalem , Duke of Apulia and Prince of Capua " – and administered the kingdom from the Castel Nuovo , garrisoning his mercenaries in the most important forts . He used unusually brutal methods of investigation to capture all accomplices in the death of his brother , according to Domenico da Gravina . Most local noble families ( including the <unk> and the <unk> ) refused to cooperate with him . The pope refused to confirm Louis 's rule in Naples , which would have united two powerful kingdoms under Louis 's rule . The pope and the cardinals declared Queen Joanna innocent of her husband 's murder at a formal meeting of the College of Cardinals . 
 The arrival of the Black Death forced Louis to leave Italy in May . He made Ulrich <unk> governor of Naples , but his mercenaries did not hinder Joanna I and her husband from returning in September . Louis , who had signed a truce for eight years with Venice on 5 August , sent new troops to Naples under the command of Stephen Lackfi , Voivode of Transylvania , in late 1349 . Lackfi reoccupied Capua , Aversa and other forts that had been lost to Joanna I , but a mutiny among his German mercenaries forced him to return to Hungary . The Black Death had meanwhile reached Hungary . The first wave of the epidemic ended in June , but it returned in September , killing Louis 's first wife , Margaret . Louis also fell ill , but survived the plague . Although the Black Death was less devastating in the sparsely populated Hungary than in other parts of Europe , there were regions that became depopulated in 1349 , and the demand for work force increased in the subsequent years . 
 Louis proposed to renounce the Kingdom of Naples if Pope Clement dethroned Joanna . After the pope refused , Louis departed for his second Neapolitan campaign in April 1350 . He suppressed a mutiny that occurred among his mercenaries while he and his troops were waiting for the arrival of further troops in Barletta . While marching towards Naples , he faced resistance at many towns because his vanguards , which were under the command of Stephen Lackfi , had become notorious for their cruelty . 
 During the campaign , Louis personally led assaults and climbed city walls together with his soldiers , endangering his own life . While besieging <unk> di Puglia , Louis fell into the moat from a ladder when a defender of the fort hit him with a stone . He dove into a river without hesitation to save a young soldier who was swept away while exploring a ford upon his order . An arrow pierced Louis 's left leg during the siege of Aversa . After the fall of Aversa to Hungarian troops on 3 August , Queen Joanna and her husband again fled from Naples . However , Louis decided to return to Hungary . According to the contemporaneous historian Matteo Villani , Louis attempted to " leave the kingdom without losing face " after he had run out of money and experienced the resistance of the local population . 
 To celebrate the Jubilee of 1350 , Louis visited Rome during his journey back to Hungary . He arrived in Buda on 25 October 1350 . With the mediation of the Holy See , the envoys of Louis and Queen Joanna 's husband , Louis of Taranto , signed a truce for six months . The pope promised Louis that the queen 's role in her husband 's murder would again be investigated , and he ordered her to pay 300 @,@ 000 gold florins as a ransom for the imprisoned Neapolitan princes . 
 = = = Expansion ( 1350 – 1358 ) = = = 
 Casimir III of Poland urged Louis to intervene in his war with the Lithuanians who had occupied Brest , Volodymyr @-@ Volynskyi , and other important towns in Halych and Lodomeria in the previous years . The two monarchs agreed that Halych and Lodomeria would be integrated into the Kingdom of Hungary after Casimir 's death . Casimir also authorized Louis to redeem the two realms for 100 @,@ 000 florins if Casimir fathered a son . Louis led his army to Cracow in June 1351 . Because Casimir fell ill , Louis became the sole commander of the united Polish and Hungarian army . He invaded the lands of the Lithuanian prince , Kęstutis , in July . Kęstutis seemingly accepted Louis 's suzerainty on 15 August and agreed to be baptised , along with his brothers , in Buda . However , Kęstutis did nothing to fulfill his promises after Polish and Hungarian troops were withdrawn . In an attempt to capture Kęstutis , Louis returned , but he could not defeat the Lithuanians , who even killed one of his allies , Boleslaus III of Płock , in battle . Louis returned to Buda before 13 September . A papal legate visited Louis to persuade him to wage war against Stefan Dušan , Emperor of the Serbs , who had forced his Roman Catholic subjects to be re @-@ baptised and join the Serbian Orthodox Church . 
 To deal with the grievances of the Hungarian noblemen , Louis held a Diet in late 1351 . He confirmed all but one of the provisions of the Golden Bull of 1222 , declaring that all noblemen enjoyed the same liberties in his realms . He rejected only the provision that authorized noblemen who died without a son to freely bequeath their estates . Instead , he introduced an entail system , prescribing that the estates of a nobleman who had no male descendants passed to his kinsmen , or if there were no male relatives to the Crown , upon his death . At the same Diet , Louis ordered that all landowners were to collect the " ninth " , that is one tenth of specified agricultural products , from the peasants who held plots on their estates . On the other hand , he confirmed the right of all peasants to freely move to another landowner 's estates . 
 The " general accord " between Louis and the royal couple of Naples " was accepted by both sides " during 1351 , according to the contemporaneous Niccolò <unk> . Joanna I and her husband returned to the Kingdom of Naples and Louis 's troops were withdrawn . Louis even renounced the ransom that Joanna I had promised to pay for the liberation of the imprisoned Neapolitan princes , stating that he had not gone to " war for greed , but to avenge the death of his brother " . Louis continued to use the titles of his grandfather , Charles Martel of Anjou ( the firstborn son of Charles II of Naples ) , styling himself as " Prince of Salerno and lord of Monte Sant 'Angelo " . 
 Casimir III laid siege to Belz and Louis joined his uncle in March 1352 . During the siege , which ended without the surrender of the fort , Louis was heavily injured in his head . Algirdas , Grand Duke of Lithuania , hired Tatar mercenaries who stormed into Podolia , Louis returned to Hungary because he feared a Tatar invasion of Transylvania . Pope Clement proclaimed a crusade against the Lithuanians and the Tatars in May , authorizing Louis to collect a tithe from Church revenues during the next four years . The pope stated that he had never " granted a tenth of such duration " , emphasizing the link between his magnanimity and the release of the imprisoned Neapolitan princes . The pope also authorized Louis to seize the pagans ' and schismatics ' lands bordering on his kingdom . 
 Although Louis signed an alliance with the Republic of Genoa in October 1352 , he did not intervene in the Genoese – Venetian War , because his truce of 1349 with Venice was still in force . Louis married Elizabeth of Bosnia , who was the daughter of his vassal , Stephen II , in 1353 . Historian Gyula Kristó says that this marriage showed Louis 's renewed interest in the affairs of the Balkan Peninsula . While he was hunting in Zólyom County ( now in Slovakia ) in late November 1353 , a brown bear attacked him , inflicting 24 wounds on his legs . Louis 's life was saved by a knight of the court , John Besenyő , who killed the beast with his sword . 
 According to Matteo Villani , Louis launched an expedition against the Golden Horde at the head of an army of 200 @,@ 000 horsemen in April 1354 . The young Tatar ruler , whom historian Iván Bertényi identified as Jani Beg , did not want to wage war against Hungary and agreed to sign a peace treaty . Although no other primary source mentioned that campaign and treaty , the Tatars made no plundering raids in Transylvania after 1354 , which suggests that Villani 's report is reliable . In the same year , Louis invaded Serbia , forcing Stefan Dušan to withdraw from the region along the river Sava . Under duress , Dušan initiated negotiations with the Holy See for acknowledgement of the popes ' primacy . The following year , Louis sent reinforcements to Casimir III to fight against the Lithuanians , and Hungarian troops supported Albert II , Duke of Austria , against Zürich . The Venetian delegates offered Louis 6 – 7 @,@ 000 golden ducats as a compensation for Dalmatia , but Louis refused to give up his plan to reconquer the province . He signed an alliance with Albert II of Austria and Nicolaus of Luxemburg , Patriarch of Aquileia , against Venice . Upon his order , Croatian lords besieged and captured Klis , a Dalmatian fortress that Stefan Dušan 's sister , Jelena , had inherited from her husband , Mladen Šubić . 
 In summer 1356 , Louis invaded Venetian territories without a formal declaration of war . He laid siege to Treviso on 27 July . A local nobleman , Giuliano Baldachino , noticed that Louis sat alone while writing his letters on the banks of Sile River on each morning . Baldachino proposed the Venetians to assassinate him in exchange for 12 @,@ 000 golden florins and Castelfranco Veneto , but they refused his offer because he did not share the details of his plans with them . Louis returned to Buda in the autumn , but his troops continued the siege . Pope Innocent VI urged the Venetians to make a peace with Hungary . The pope made Louis the " standard @-@ bearer of the Church " and granted him a three @-@ year tithe to fight against Francesco II <unk> and other rebellious lords in the Papal States . Louis sent an army under Nicholas Lackfi 's command to support the pope 's troops in Italy . 
 Louis marched to Dalmatia in July 1357 . Split , Trogir , and Šibenik soon got rid of Venetian governors and yielded to Louis . After a short siege , Louis 's army also captured Zadar with the assistance of its townspeople . Tvrtko I of Bosnia , who had succeeded Louis 's father @-@ in @-@ law in 1353 , surrendered western Hum to Louis , who claimed that territory as his wife 's dowry . In the Treaty of Zadar , which was signed on 18 February 1358 , the Republic of Venice renounced all Dalmatian towns and islands between the Gulf of Kvarner and Durazzo in favor of Louis . The Republic of Ragusa also accepted Louis 's suzerainty . The Dalmatian towns remained self @-@ governing communities , owing only a yearly tribute and naval service to Louis , who also abolished all commercial restrictions that had been introduced during the Venetians ' rule . The merchants of Ragusa were explicitly entitled to freely trade in Serbia even during a war between Hungary and Serbia . 
 = = = Wars in the Balkans ( 1358 – 1370 ) = = = 
 Serbia started to disintegrate after the death of Stefan Dušan . According to Matteo Villani , an unidentified Serbian lord sought Hungarian assistance against his more powerful ( and also unnamed ) enemy in the late 1350s . Historians John V. A. Fine and Pál Engel write that the Serbian lord was a member of the Rastislalić family ; Gyula Kristó and Iván Bertényi identify him as Lazar Hrebeljanović . Royal charters of 1358 show that Hungarian troops fought in Serbia in October 1358 . The next summer Louis also marched to Serbia , but Stefan Uroš V of Serbia avoided battle . 
 Louis and the royal army stayed in Transylvania in November 1359 and January 1360 , implying that he planned a military expedition against Wallachia or another neighboring territory . A charter of 1360 said that a Romanian voivode , Dragoș of <unk> , restored Louis 's suzerainty in Moldavia after a rebellion of local Romanians . According to most Moldavian chronicles , Dragoș , who is sometimes identified with Dragoș of <unk> and sometimes as Dragoș of <unk> , departed " from the Hungarian country , from Maramureș " at the head of his retinue , crossed the Carpathian Mountains while chasing an aurochs and settled in the valley of the Moldova River in 1359 . The same chronicles presented this " dismounting " by Dragoș as a decisive step towards the development of the Principality of Moldavia . Another Romanian voivode , Bogdan , who had rebelled against Louis and plundered the estates of the Romanian landowners loyal to the king already in the 1340s , departed from Hungary and invaded Moldavia in the early 1360s . Bogdan expelled the descendants of Louis 's vassal , Dragoș , from the principality . According to John of Küküllő , Louis launched several expeditions against Bogdan , but their dates cannot be determined . Bogdan ruled Moldavia as an independent prince . 
 Upon the pope 's request , Louis sent Hungarian troops to relieve Bologna , which was besieged by Bernabò Visconti 's troops . After Visconti lifted the siege , Louis 's mercenaries pillaged the region and refused to cooperate with the papal legate ; Louis had the commander of the army imprisoned . After a conflict emerged between Emperor Charles IV and Rudolf IV , Duke of Austria , rumors spread about a conspiracy to dethrone the emperor in favor of Louis or Rudolf . Charles IV , Rudolf IV and Louis met in Nagyszombat ( now Trnava in Slovakia ) in May . The emperor and the duke mutually surrendered their claims to the other party 's realms . Louis also persuaded the emperor to renounce his suzerainty over the Duchy of Płock in Poland . 
 Louis decided to convert the Jews in Hungary to Catholicism around 1360 . After experiencing resistance , he expelled them from his realms . Their immovable property was confiscated , but they were allowed to take their personal property with them and also to recover the loans they had made . No pogrom took place , which was unusual in the 14th century , according to historian Raphael Patai . 
 Emperor Charles IV and Rudolf IV of Austria signed a treaty of alliance against the patriarch of Aquileia , who was Louis 's ally , in August 1361 . Fearing the formation of a coalition along the western borders of Hungary , Louis asked his former enemy , Louis of Taranto ( Joanna I 's husband ) , to send at least one of his brothers to Buda , and mediated a reconciliation between Rudolph IV and the patriarch . At a meeting with Louis 's envoys in Prague , Emperor Charles made an insulting remark about Louis 's mother , stating that she " was shameless " , according to Jan Długosz 's chronicle . Louis demanded an apology , but the emperor did not answer . 
 In preparation for a war against Bohemia , Louis ordered the mobilization of the royal army and marched to Trencsén ( now Trenčín in Slovakia ) . However , his supposed allies ( Rudolf IV of Austria , <unk> III of Tyrol and Casimir III of Poland ) failed to join him , and the emperor initiated negotiations that lasted for months with the mediation of Casimir III . Louis was finally reconciled with Charles IV at their meeting in <unk> <unk> on 8 May 1363 . 
 Louis invaded Bosnia from two directions in the spring of 1363 . An army under the command of Palatine Nicholas <unk> and Nicholas <unk> , Archbishop of Esztergom , laid siege to Srebrenica , but the fortress did not surrender . As the royal seal was stolen during the siege , a new seal was made and all Louis 's former charters were to be confirmed with the new seal . The army under Louis 's personal command besieged Sokolac in July , but could not capture it . Hungarian troops returned to Hungary in the same month . Pope Urban V proclaimed a crusade against the Muslim powers of the <unk> upon Peter I of Cyprus 's request on 31 March 1363 . Urban V urged Louis to join the crusade , emphasizing that he was a powerful monarch , a devout Christian , and " well @-@ placed to help " . The next month the pope levied a three @-@ year tithe on the church revenues in Hungary and asked Louis to support the papal officials to collect the tax . However , Louis made every effort to hinder the activities of the papal tax collectors , stating that he needed resources to cover the costs of his future wars against the infidels and the pope 's enemies in Italy . 
 Louis signed a treaty with Emperor Charles and Rudolf IV of Austria in Brno in early 1364 , which put an end to their conflicts . In September , Louis visited Cracow to attend the large congress where Peter I of Cyprus attempted to persuade a dozen European monarchs to join the crusade . Louis was the only monarch to promise assistance , but later failed to fulfill his promise . At the congress , Casimir III of Poland confirmed Louis 's right to succeed him in Poland if he died without a male issue . Louis , who had not fathered a son either , invited a distant relative of his , Charles of Durazzo , to Hungary in 1364 , but did not make the young prince his official heir . Louis allowed the Jews to return to Hungary in the same year ; legal proceedings between the Jews and those who had seized their houses lasted for years . 
 Louis assembled his armies in Temesvár ( now Timișoara in Romania ) in February 1365 . According a royal charter that year , he was planning to invade Wallachia because the new voivode , Vladislav Vlaicu , had refused to obey him . However , he ended up heading a campaign against the Bulgarian Tsardom of Vidin and its ruler Ivan Sratsimir , which suggests that Vladislav Vlaicu had in the meantime yielded to him . Louis seized Vidin and imprisoned Ivan Stratsimir in May or June . Within three months , his troops occupied Ivan Stratsimir 's realm , which was organized into a separate border province , or <unk> , under the command of Hungarian lords . 
 The Byzantine Emperor , John V Palaiologos visited Louis in Buda in early 1366 , seeking his assistance against the Ottoman Turks , who had set foot in Europe . This was the first occasion that a Byzantine Emperor left his empire to plead for a foreign monarch 's assistance . According to Louis 's physician , Giovanni di <unk> , at his first meeting with Louis , the emperor refused to dismount and to take off his hat , which offended Louis . John V pledged that he would promote the union of the Byzantine Church with the Papacy , and Louis promised to send him help , but neither the emperor nor Louis fulfilled their promises . Pope Urban encouraged Louis not to send help to Constantinople before the emperor guaranteed the Church union . 
 Louis stayed in Transylvania between June and September 1366 , implying that he waged war against Moldavia . He issued a decree authorizing the Transylvanian noblemen to pass judgments against " malefactors belonging to any nation , especially Romanians " . He also decreed that testimony of a Romanian knez who had received a royal charter of grant weighed the same as that of a nobleman . In the same year , Louis granted the Banate of Severin and the district of <unk> to Vladislav Vlaicu of Wallachia , who had accepted his suzerainty . Tvrtko I of Bosnia also accepted Louis 's suzerainty after Hungarian troops assisted him in regaining his throne in early 1367 . 
 Louis made attempts to convert his pagan or " schismatic " subjects to Catholicism , even by force . The conversion of the pagan Cumans who had settled in Hungary a century before was completed during his reign , according to John of Küküllő . After the conquest of Vidin , he sent Franciscan friars to the new <unk> to convert the local Orthodox population , which caused widespread discontent among the Bulgarians . In 1366 , he ordered that all Serbian priests be converted and <unk> . He also decreed that only Roman Catholic noblemen and knezes were allowed to hold landed property in the district of <unk> in Temes County . Louis supported the religious orders , especially the Franciscans and the <unk> , for whom he and his mother set up dozens of new monasteries . Upon Louis 's request , Pope Urban V sanctioned the establishment of a university in Pécs in 1367 , with the exception of a faculty of theology . However , Louis did not arrange for sufficient revenues and the university was closed by 1390 . 
 Vladislav Vlaicu of Wallachia made an alliance with Ivan Shishman , a half @-@ brother of the former ruler of Vidin , Ivan Sratsimir . Their united armies imposed a blockade on Vidin . Louis marched to the Lower Danube and ordered Nicholas Lackfi , Voivode of Transylvania , to invade Wallachia in the autumn of 1368 . The voivode 's army marched through the valley of the Ialomița River , but the Wallachians ambushed it and killed many Hungarian soldiers , including the voivode . However , Louis 's campaign against Wallachia from the west was successful and Vladislav Vlaicu yield to him in next summer . Upon his initiative , Louis restored Ivan Stratsimir in Vidin . Ivan Stratsimir swore loyalty to Louis and sent his two daughters as hostages to Hungary . 
 From the late 1360s , Louis suffered from a skin disease with symptoms similar to leprosy . Thereafter he became even more zealous and dedicated more time to praying and religious contemplation . After his meeting with Louis in 1372 , the papal legate , John de <unk> , stated : " I call God as my witness that I have never seen a monarch more majestic and more powerful ... or one who desires peace and calm as much as he . " He also changed the priorities of his foreign policy and began neglecting the Balkan states . Casimir III of Poland and Louis signed a treaty against Emperor Charles IV in Buda in February 1369 . At their next meeting in Pressburg ( now Bratislava in Slovakia ) in September , Albert I of Bavaria , and Rupert I of the Palatinate joined their coalition against the emperor and the Habsburgs . However , Emperor Charles IV persuaded the two Wittelsbachs ( Albert I and Rupert I ) to break off the coalition in September 1370 . 
 = = = Union with Poland and reforms ( 1370 – 1377 ) = = = 
 Casimir III of Poland died on 5 November 1370 . Louis arrived after his uncle 's funeral and ordered the erection of a splendid Gothic marble monument to the deceased king . He was crowned king of Poland in the Cracow Cathedral on 17 November . Casimir III had willed his patrimony – including the duchies of Sieradz , Łęczyca and Dobrzyń – to his grandson , Casimir IV , Duke of Pomerania . However , the Polish prelates and lords were opposed to the disintegration of Poland and Casimir III 's testament was declared void . Louis visited Gniezno and made his Polish mother , Elizabeth , regent before returning to Hungary in December . His uncle 's two surviving daughters ( Anna and Hedwig ) accompanied him , and the Polish Crown Jewels were transferred to Buda , which raised discontent among Louis 's new subjects . Louis 's wife gave birth to a daughter , Catherine , in 1370 , seventeen years after their marriage ; a second daughter , Mary , was born in 1371 . Thereafter Louis 's made several attempts to safeguard his daughters ' right to succeed him . 
 During a war between Emperor Charles IV and Stephen II , Duke of Bavaria , Louis intervened on the duke 's behalf and the Hungarian army invaded Moravia . After the duke and the emperor signed a peace treaty , Louis and the emperor agreed upon the betrothal of their children early the next year . The Ottomans annihilated the Serbian armies in the Battle of Marica on 26 September 1371 . Lazar Hrebeljanović , one of the Serbian lords , swore loyalty to Louis . Pope Gregory XI urged Louis to resist the Ottomans but also pleaded with him to send reinforcements to Italy to fight against Bernabò Visconti . A war broke out between the Republic of Venice and Francesco I da Carrara , Lord of Padova , who was an ally of Louis , in the summer of 1372 . Louis sent reinforcements to Italy to assist Francesco da Carrara . The Venetians defeated the Hungarian troops at Treviso and captured its commander , Nicholas Lackfi , forcing Louis I to sign a peace treaty on 23 September 1373 . 
 Louis and the representatives of the Polish nobility started negotiations of Louis 's succession in Poland in the autumn of 1373 . After a year of negotiations , he issued the so @-@ called Privilege of Koszyce on 17 September 1374 , reducing the tax that Polish noblemen paid to the king by about 84 % and promising a remuneration to noblemen who participated in foreign military campaigns . In exchange , the Polish lords confirmed the right of Louis 's daughters to inherit Poland . 
 Louis invaded Wallachia in May 1375 , because the new prince of Wallachia , Radu I , had formed an alliance with the Bulgarian ruler , Ivan Shishman , and the Ottoman Sultan Murad I. The Hungarian army routed the united forces of the Wallachians and their allies , and Louis occupied the Banate of Severin , but Radu I did not yield . During the summer , Wallachian troops <unk> into Transylvania and Ottomans pillaged the Banat . 
 From the middle of the 1370s , the Lackfis ' influence diminished and new favorites emerged in the royal court . James <unk> was appointed judge royal in 1373 , and Nicholas Garay became the palatine in 1375 . The organization of central government was also modified to create a more centralized power structure . Louis 's " secret seal " , that he had always taken with him during his wars and journeys , was declared authentic , and Louis entrusted it to the secret chancellor who was always to accompany him . A new high official , the Lord Chancellor were authorized to use the great seal in the king 's name in 1376 or 1377 . Demetrius , Bishop of Zagreb , who was of humble origin , was the first to hold this new office . The Lord Chancellor became the head of a new central court of justice , called the court of " the king 's special presence " in 1377 . From around the same time , the royal free towns delegated jurors to assist the master of the treasury , who headed the court of appeal for the towns . A new official , the treasurer , took over the financial duties of the master of the treasury . 
 The Lithuanians made raids in Halych , Lodomeria , and Poland , almost reaching Cracow in November 1376 . A riot broke out in Cracow against the unpopular queen mother , Elizabeth , on 6 December . The rioters slaughtered about 160 servants of the queen @-@ mother , forcing her to flee to Hungary . Taking advantage of the situation , Władysław the White , Duke of <unk> , who was a male member of the royal Piast dynasty , announced his claim to the Polish crown . However , Louis 's partisans defeated the pretender , and Louis made him abbot of the Pannonhalma Archabbey in Hungary . Louis appointed Vladislaus II of Opole his governor in Poland . In summer 1377 , Louis invaded the territories held by the Lithuanian prince , George , in Lodomeria . His Polish troops soon captured Chełm , while Louis seized George 's seat , Belz , after besieging it for seven weeks . He incorporated the occupied territories in Lodomeria , together with Galicia , into the Kingdom of Hungary . Three Lithuanian princes – Fedor , Prince of Ratno , and two princes of Podolia , Alexander and Boris – accepted Louis 's suzerainty . 
 = = = Last years ( 1377 – 1382 ) = = = 
 Tvrtko I of Bosnia had himself crowned king , adopting the title of " King of Serbia , Bosnia and the <unk> " , in 1377 . Whether Louis had approved Tvrtko 's coronation cannot be decided . A new war broke out between Venice and Genoa in 1378 . Louis supported the Genoese and Trogir became the regular base of the Genoese fleet , which transformed Dalmatia into an important theater of war . Louis also sent reinforcements to Francesco I da Carrara to fight against the Venetians . 
 The cardinals who had turned against Pope Urban VI elected a new pope , Clement VII on 20 September 1378 , which gave rise to the Western Schism . Louis acknowledged Urban VI as the legitimate pope and offered him support to fight against his opponents in Italy . As Joanna I of Naples decided to join Clement VII 's camp , Pope Urban excommunicated and dethroned her on 17 June 1380 . The pope acknowledged Charles of Durazzo , who had lived in Louis 's court , as the lawful king of Naples . After Charles of Durazzo promised that he would not claim Hungary against Louis 's daughters , Louis dispatched him to invade Southern Italy at the head of a large army . Within a year , Charles of Durazzo occupied the Kingdom of Naples , and forced Queen Joanna to surrender to him on 26 August 1381 . 
 The envoys of Louis and Venice had meanwhile started negotiations on a new peace treaty , which was signed in Turin on 24 August 1381 . According to the treaty , Venice renounced Dalmatia and also promised to pay 7 @,@ 000 golden florins as an annual tribute to Hungary . Louis also stipulated that Venice was to transfer the relics of St Paul of Thebes to the newly established Pauline monastery at <unk> . 
 Royal charters referred to military actions in Lodomeria and Wallachia in the first half of 1382 , but no further information of those wars was preserved . Louis , whose health was quickly deteriorating , invited the representatives of the Polish prelates and lord for a meeting in Zólyom . Upon his demand , the Poles swore loyalty to his daughter , Mary , and her bride , Sigismund of Luxemburg , on 25 July 1382 . Louis died in Nagyszombat in the night on 10 or 11 September 1382 . He was buried in the Székesfehérvár Cathedral in a chapel that had been built upon his orders . 
 = = Family = = 
 Louis 's first wife , Margaret , was the oldest child of Charles , Margrave of Moravia , and his first wife , Blanche of Valois . Margaret was born in 1335 . The exact date of the marriage of Louis and Margaret is unknown , but it occurred between 1342 and 1345 . Margaret died childless on 7 September 1349 . 
 According to the Chronicle of <unk> , the Neapolitan princes whom Louis had imprisoned during his first campaign in Southern Italy proposed him to marry Queen Joanna I 's younger sister and heir , Mary . She was the widow of Charles of Durazzo , who had been executed on Louis 's orders . During the siege of Aversa in the summer of 1350 , Louis met her envoy in the nearby <unk> @-@ <unk> and the terms of their marriage were accepted . However , Mary was forced to marry <unk> of Baux after Louis left Southern Italy . 
 Louis married his second wife , Elizabeth , around 20 June 1353 . Elizabeth was the daughter of Stephen II , Ban of Bosnia , and Stephen 's wife , Elizabeth of Kuyavia . Louis and his new wife were within the prohibited degree of kinship , because Louis 's mother and his wife 's grandmother were cousins , but they applied for a papal dispensation only about four months after their marriage . Historian Iván Bertényi says that this haste suggests that Elizabeth , who had been living in the court of Louis 's mother , was pregnant at the time of the marriage . If this theory is valid , Louis 's and his wife 's first child was stillborn . Their next child , Catherine , was born in 1370 and died in 1378 . The next daughter , Mary , who would succeed Louis in Hungary , was born in 1371 . Louis 's youngest daughter , Hedwig , who was born in 1373 , became queen regnant of Poland . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Louis was the only Hungarian monarch to receive the epithet " Great " . He was mentioned under this byname not only in Hungarian chronicles in the 14th and 15th centuries , but also in a 17th @-@ century genealogy of the <unk> . Both his chivalrous personality and his successful military campaigns contributed to the development of his fame as a " great king " . Louis waged wars in almost each year during his reign . Louis " always desired peace at home and war abroad for neither can be made without the other " , according to Antonio Bonfini 's late 15th @-@ century chronicle . Historian <unk> <unk> writes that Louis 's military actions show that he continued and accomplished his father 's policy through recovering Croatia and Dalmatia and waging wars in Southern Italy , in Lithuania and in the Balkan Peninsula . On the other hand , Pál Engel says that Louis 's " expeditions often lacked a realistic goal and sometimes even a reasonable pretext ... it was war itself that gave him pleasure " . 
 In the age of Romantic nationalism , Hungary during Louis 's reign was described as an empire " whose shores were washed by three seas " in reference to the Adriatic , Baltic and Black Seas . For instance , in 1845 the poet Sándor Petőfi referred to Louis 's reign as a period when " the falling stars of the north , the east and the south were all extinguished in Hungarian seas " . Actually , Poland remained an independent country during Louis 's reign and its borders did not extend to the Baltic Sea , and Louis 's suzerainty along the northwestern shores of the Black Sea was also uncertain . 
 In Polish historiography , two contrasting evaluation of Louis 's reign in Poland coexisted . The " pessimistic " tradition can be traced back to the views of the late 14th @-@ century Jan of Czarnków , who was banished from Poland during Louis 's reign . Czarnków emphasized that " there was no stability in the Kingdom of Poland " and the royal officials " continually pillaged the property of the poor people " during Louis 's reign . According to the " optimistic " historiographic tradition , Louis continued Casimir the Great 's policy of preserving the unity of Poland against the separatist magnates of Greater Poland with the assistance of lords from Lesser Poland . 
 John of Küküllő emphasized that Louis " ruled neither with passion , nor with arbitrariness , but rather as the guardian of righteousness " . Antonio Bonfini also described Louis as a just king wandering among his subjects in disguise to protect them the royal officials ' arbitrary acts . Even Jan of Czarnków underlined that Louis " did not rule in an absolute manner ; on the contrary , the foundations ... of [ the Poles ' ] freedom were laid by him " . 
 New palaces and castles built at Zólyom , <unk> and Louis 's other favorite hunting places were " masterpieces of the highest European standards " of his age , according to historian László Kontler . Louis initiated the <unk> of the Illuminated Chronicle , which preserved the text of earlier chronicles . The 147 miniatures decorating the Illuminated Chronicle testify the mastery of Hungarian workshops during Louis 's reign . 
 = Entranceways at Main Street at Lamarck Drive and Smallwood Drive = 
 Entranceways at Main Street at Lamarck Drive and Smallwood Drive are a set of complementary residential subdivision stone entranceways built in 1926 . They are located on Main Street ( New York State Route 5 ) in the hamlet of Snyder , New York within the town of Amherst , which is located in Erie County . These entranceways are markers representing the American suburbanization of rural areas through land development associated with transportation on the edges of urban developments . The Smallwood entranceway is a pair of symmetric groupings of stone gatehouses and posts flanking the two sides of the drive at Main Street . The Lamarck entranceway is a pair of Y @-@ shaped and U @-@ shaped stone half @-@ walls flanking the two sides of the drive at Main Street . The entranceways were added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 7 , 2005 . 
 = = History = = 
 Williamsville developed around a mill that was erected in 1811 and the town of Amherst was born in 1818 . At that time Main Street served as the main link from Williamsville and Amherst to Buffalo . Main Street was displaced as " the unchallenged main artery of Amherst and Western New York " by the Erie Canal in 1825 and later by adjacent railroads . By 1866 , Buffalo Street Railway Company built a street car system that ran on Main Street from Amherst to Buffalo . Daily stage coach service also began in 1866 along Main Street and continued until it was displaced by an electric trolley in 1893 , the track ran 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) from Main and Bailey Avenue ( U.S. Route 62 in New York ) to the east with stops that included Entranceways at Main Street at Lamarck Drive and Smallwood Drive . 
 The early 20th century estate era gave way to the residential subdivision era . The subdivisions in suburban Buffalo took on an urban flavor along the area 's main thoroughfares and paths of migration . Charles S. Burkhardt began Audubon Terrace on 400 acres north of Main Street in October 1919 on the Taylor and Satterfield Estates . In May 1923 , Burkhardt began to create 585 lots south of Main Street extending to Wehrle Drive on the former Witmer Farm property . 
 = = Location = = 
 Main Street is a four @-@ lane road running east @-@ west connecting Williamsville ( the other side of Interstate 290 ( I @-@ 290 ) , known as the Youngman Expressway ) to points westward such as the neighboring hamlet of Eggertsville and downtown Buffalo . The entranceways are located proximately to large residential lawns of surrounding houses in the 1920s @-@ built subdivisions . From the junction with the I @-@ 290 heading west , the first intersection ( after the adjacent Main Street and Kensington intersection ) is a four @-@ way light where it meets Lamarck Drive from the south and Smallwood Drive from the north . Both streets serve two way traffic . The entranceways sit on the four corners of this intersection . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Smallwood Drive = = = 
 Both of the Smallwood Drive groupings of stones on the north side of Main Street have dominant octagonal gatehouses built upon four pairs of stained heavy timber columns supported by quarry @-@ faced random ashlar half @-@ walls on cut stone chamfered bases . The bases flank Smallwood Drive 's concrete parallel sidewalks run along through the centerline of the gatehouses . The Main Street sidewalk passes in front of the gatehouses . The columns are braced with heavy timber lintel on open sides supported by pegged heavy timber brackets that form a lancet @-@ head arch . The structures are topped by steeply @-@ pitched and flared standing seam copper roofs that have <unk> that are located nearly two stories above the street land grading and that depict flying birds . 
 The Smallwood Drive gatehouse sides have tall and slightly tapered have quarry @-@ faced random ashlar stone posts with chamfered corners on stone bases . These posts support flat cast capitals beneath wrought iron balustrades with filigreed corners . The structures still host original hexagonal metal and glass light fixtures that hang from metal brackets on the Smallwood Drive post faces . The pair of groupings has Tudor Revival architectural influences . 
 = = = Lamarck Drive = = = 
 Both of the Lamarck Drive groupings of stones on the south side of Main Street are composed of a pair of symmetric stone structures flanking the drive . Each stone grouping features a tall capped , stone post topped by a large cut metal pictorial sign . The posts have flanking stone Y @-@ shaped half @-@ walls parallel to the drive . These half @-@ walls have corresponding block U @-@ shaped half @-@ walls that along with the Y @-@ shaped half @-@ walls jointly form a square through which new concrete sidewalks run along Lamarck Drive . The design also has Tudor Revival influences in concert with the surrounding residences . 
 The posts have 4 by 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m × 1 @.@ 2 m ) bases and stand 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) in height , while the half walls stand approximately 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) . Both structures are made of quarry @-@ faced random ashlar limestone on a cut and smooth finished chamfer stone base . The posts have chamfered edges . The posts include randomly located tan- and brown @-@ colored granite blocks . Similar blocks are at the top and midpoints of the half @-@ walls . The half @-@ walls are coped with recently installed rectangular cut and finished stone slabs that have rough cut edges protruding over the half @-@ walls . An octagonal pyramid of three sequentially smaller cast concrete courses with slightly flared edges cap the posts . The Main Street post faces have the original hexagonal metal and glass light fixtures hanging from metal hooks , while only the hooks remain on the Lamarck faces . 
 Atop the posts are signs of painted metal panels with silhouette depictions braced below by filigree metal brackets . The signs are 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) in length and 3 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) in height . They neither match nor mirror each other . The west sign depicts a Native American domestic scene including trees , teepees , a camp fire with trestle , and figures carrying a deer from a pole . The east sign depicts Tudor Revival architecture . Christ the King Church is located at 30 Lamarck Drive at Main Street on the southeastern corner . The other three corners are residential addresses . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The entryways remain in their original location , retain original design , setting , and materials . The entranceways continue to serve their original functions of marking the vehicular and pedestrian entrance to the subdivision . The eastern Smallwood Drive entrance provides shelter for Niagara Frontier Transportation Authority Metro Bus riders heading west toward the Buffalo Metro Rail and downtown Buffalo , New York . The residential dwellings adjacent to the entrances are original and the setting has had no known changes since the widening of Main Street in the 1920s . Charles S. Burkhardt purchased the land for the Audubon Terrace ( Smallwood side ) and Audubon Terrace South ( Lamarck side ) subdivisions that these entranceways have marked since their 1926 construction . The entranceways are in fair condition despite perceptible light fixture changes and shoddy repairs . <unk> Corporation , which has little known history , is the builder of the circa 1925 shelter entranceways and subdivision according to what is known about them . 
 These entranceways are significant as relatively rare structures associated with the transformation of the formerly rural Town of Amherst into a residential suburban Buffalo community known as the hamlet of Snyder . They represent the American suburbanization of rural areas through land development associated with transportation on the edges of urban developments . They are symbolic of the marketed character of the residential developments as a desirable residential alternative to urban life . The entranceways were added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 7 , 2005 . 
 = Interstate 895 ( Maryland ) = 
 Interstate 895 ( I @-@ 895 ) is an Interstate Highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . Known as the Harbor Tunnel Thruway , the highway runs 14 @.@ 87 miles ( 23 @.@ 93 km ) between one junction with I @-@ 95 in Elkridge and another interchange with I @-@ 95 on the east side of Baltimore . I @-@ 895 is a toll road that crosses the Patapsco River estuary via the Baltimore Harbor Tunnel , connecting U.S. Route 1 ( US 1 ) , I @-@ 695 , and the Baltimore – Washington Parkway in the southwestern suburbs of Baltimore with US 40 on the east side of Baltimore . In conjunction with a pair of spurs , unsigned I @-@ 895A and I @-@ 895B , I @-@ 895 provides access to the tunnel from I @-@ 97 and Maryland Route 2 ( MD 2 ) in Glen Burnie . The highway is designed for through traffic by having partial interchanges that require vehicles from almost all starting points to pass through the tunnel and the tunnel toll plaza , where a $ 4 toll is charged to passenger vehicles , before exiting the facility . 
 The idea of a crossing of the Patapsco River south of downtown Baltimore has been studied since the 1930s . In the early 1950s , the Maryland State Roads Commission chose to construct a four @-@ lane tunnel between the Canton and Fairfield neighborhoods of Baltimore and approach highways to connect the tunnel with major highways to Washington , Annapolis , Richmond , and Philadelphia . The tunnel and approach highways were constructed beginning in 1955 and opened in November 1957 , opening a bottleneck for Baltimore through traffic , which formerly had to navigate the city streets . The Harbor Tunnel Thruway was connected with the John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway in the early 1960s and the portion of I @-@ 95 south to Washington in the early 1970s . With these connections , I @-@ 895 was burdened with most of the through traffic passing through Baltimore . The congestion was not resolved until I @-@ 95 through Baltimore was completed when the eight @-@ lane Fort McHenry Tunnel opened in November 1985 . The transfer of most traffic to the new tunnel allowed the Baltimore Harbor Tunnel to be partially shut down for extensive maintenance in the late 1980s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 I @-@ 895 is maintained by the Maryland Transportation Authority ( MdTA ) and , like all Interstate Highways , is a part of the National Highway System for its entire length . 
 = = = Western approach = = = 
 I @-@ 895 begins at Exit 46 of I @-@ 95 in Elkridge with single @-@ lane flyover ramps from northbound I @-@ 95 to I @-@ 895 and from I @-@ 895 to southbound I @-@ 95 . The highway , which has a speed limit of 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) , expands to four lanes on a viaduct over local roads and CSX 's Capital Subdivision and MARC 's Camden Line . I @-@ 895 crosses the Patapsco River ( the Howard – Baltimore county line ) and US 1 ( Washington Boulevard ) , then receives the Exit 1 flyover ramps from northbound US 1 and to southbound US 1 before passing under I @-@ 195 with no access . I @-@ 895 continues east parallel to the Patapsco River . The highway passes along the southern edge of <unk> , where it crosses the Amtrak Northeast Corridor and MARC 's Penn Line and Herbert Run . 
 I @-@ 895 meets I @-@ 695 ( Baltimore Beltway ) at Exit 3 , which includes a loop ramp from eastbound I @-@ 695 and a ramp to westbound I @-@ 695 . The highway crosses Hammonds Ferry Road in Baltimore Highlands before Exit 4 with MD 295 ( Baltimore – Washington Parkway ) , which includes a loop ramp to southbound MD 295 and a ramp from northbound MD 295 . The speed limit drops to 55 miles per hour ( 89 km / h ) , then the highway crosses MD 648 ( Annapolis Road ) and curves northeast across marshland , the main line of the Baltimore Light Rail , and the Patapsco River into Anne Arundel County . East of the river , I @-@ 895 receives flyover ramps from the thruway 's southern approach , unsigned I @-@ 895B , at Exit 6 in Brooklyn Park . 
 The highway enters the city of Baltimore and curves to the east over Patapsco Avenue before Exit 7 with MD 2 ( Potee Street ) , which includes a loop ramp to southbound MD 2 and a ramp from the intersection of MD 2 and MD 173 ( Patapsco Avenue ) . I @-@ 895 parallels CSX 's Curtis Bay Branch as the highway passes along the northern edge of the Brooklyn neighborhood . The highway crosses the Curtis Bay Branch on a steel K truss bridge ahead of Exits 8A and 8B . Exit 8A includes a loop ramp to and a flyover ramp from Shell Road , which heads toward the Curtis Bay , Baltimore neighborhood . Exit 8B includes ramps from eastbound <unk> Avenue and to westbound <unk> Avenue ; that street leads to Hanover Street and downtown Baltimore . I @-@ 895 passes through the 14 @-@ booth toll plaza for the tunnel ; immediately to the east of the toll plaza is Exit 9 , a half @-@ diamond interchange with Childs Street for traffic to and from the toll plaza . The speed limit decreases to 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) as the highway curves to the northeast through the Fairfield unit of the Port of Baltimore and descends into the Baltimore Harbor Tunnel . 
 = = = Northern approach = = = 
 I @-@ 895 surfaces from the tunnel adjacent to the toll plaza for the Fort McHenry Tunnel within the Canton neighborhood . The highway passes over several rail lines of the Canton Railroad and several streets as it curves to the north . The Exit 10 ramp to Holabird Avenue diverges from I @-@ 895 immediately before the highway passes under I @-@ 95 with no access . I @-@ 895 returns to ground level and the highway crosses Ponca and Boston streets ; the speed limit increases to 55 miles per hour ( 89 km / h ) ahead of exits 11A and 11B , which serve Boston and O 'Donnell streets , respectively . The highway crosses a rail line before passing through the Greektown neighborhood in a cut . I @-@ 895 passes under MD 150 ( Eastern Avenue ) ahead of Exit 12 , a four @-@ ramp partial cloverleaf interchange with Lombard Street just to the west of Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center that has ramps in both directions of the Interstate . 
 The highway veers northeast and crosses both the Amtrak Northeast Corridor and CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision before Exit 13 with US 40 ( Pulaski Highway ) and MD 151 ( Erdman Avenue ) ; the entrance ramp extends from the US 40 – MD 151 partial cloverleaf interchange immediately to the north and west . After crossing Herring Run , I @-@ 895 meets Moravia Road at Exit 14 , a five @-@ ramp partial cloverleaf interchange that lacks an exit from northbound I @-@ 895 . A branch of the I @-@ 95 Express Toll Lanes begin within the interchange with Moravia Road , and there is a ramp from northbound I @-@ 895 to the northbound toll lanes . The highway crosses Moores Run before reaching its northern terminus at Exit 62 of I @-@ 95 ( John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway ) , a pair of flyover ramps from I @-@ 895 to northbound I @-@ 95 and from southbound I @-@ 95 to I @-@ 895 on the boundary between the city of Baltimore and the Baltimore County community of Rosedale . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning and construction = = = 
 In 1938 , the Maryland State Roads Commission ( SRC ) commissioned an engineering study titled Maryland 's Primary Bridge Program to examine the feasibility of major bridges across significant transportation barriers , including a bridge crossing the Patapsco River southeast of the Inner Harbor . Another study in 1944 examined the idea of a bridge with limited @-@ access approach roads running from US 1 in Elkridge to the Patapsco River crossing and from the bridge to US 40 near Erdman Avenue in east Baltimore . The financial resources for the project were established in 1947 when the Maryland General Assembly passed an act allowing for the pooling of revenue bonds and toll receipts between the state 's toll facilities — the existing Potomac River Bridge and Susquehanna River Bridge , and the upcoming Chesapeake Bay Bridge — to finance the construction of the Patapsco River Crossing . Finally , a 1953 study examined three different routes — Canton @-@ Fairfield , Canton @-@ Fort McHenry , and a Canton @-@ Fort McHenry @-@ Fairfield dual crossing option — and whether the crossing should be a bridge or tunnel . 
 In 1954 , the SRC decided to construct a tunnel between Canton and Fairfield , with three approach highways : a west approach from US 1 in Elkridge , a south approach from MD 2 in Glen Burnie to connect with the west approach in Brooklyn Park , and a north approach from US 40 and Erdman Avenue in east Baltimore . The approach highways were to be limited @-@ access with directional , partial interchanges so that only traffic intending to use the tunnel would use the approach roads . Any vehicles entering an approach road would not be able to exit until having passed through the tunnel and the tunnel toll facility . 
 Shortly after work began on the Patapsco Tunnel Project on April 7 , 1955 , several changes were made to the plans for the approach highways . The northern terminus at US 40 was altered to allow an extension from US 40 to the southern end of the future Northeastern Expressway ( now John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway ) . As a result , additional connections with US 40 were planned for the area around present day Exit 14 . In addition , the south approach was to have a tie @-@ in to the Glen Burnie Bypass ( now I @-@ 97 ) then under construction . The tunnel and approach highways were completed and opened November 29 , 1957 as the Baltimore Harbor Tunnel and the Harbor Tunnel Thruway , respectively . The opening of the tunnel and approach roads removed a significant amount of traffic from the streets of Baltimore and eliminated 51 traffic lights from the route of motorists passing through the city . 
 = = = Improvements and relief = = = 
 The Harbor Tunnel Thruway was extended north to the city limits of Baltimore to seamlessly connect with the Northeastern Expressway when that highway opened northeast to the Baltimore Beltway in 1961 . In 1969 , Moravia Road was extended east to US 40 using the connector between US 40 and the thruway and several ramps were added to that road 's interchanges with US 40 and the thruway . In addition , flyover ramps were constructed at the city limits for I @-@ 95 to diverge from the John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway onto its own path through east Baltimore in 1970 . The Harbor Tunnel Thruway was extended at its south end in 1973 to connect with I @-@ 95 shortly after that Interstate was completed between the Capital Beltway and the Baltimore Beltway in 1971 . 
 Since I @-@ 95 had not yet been completed through Baltimore , the Harbor Tunnel Thruway , which was designated I @-@ 895 in 1979 , was the main route for traffic passing through Baltimore . As a result , the highway was very congested , and travel through Baltimore had once again become a bottleneck . Relief came with the completion of the eight @-@ lane Fort McHenry Tunnel on I @-@ 95 on November 23 , 1985 . With most traffic diverted to the new tunnel , major reconstruction work began on the Baltimore Harbor Tunnel . Traffic was reduced to one lane in each direction through the tunnel as each of the two tubes was renovated between 1987 and 1989 . More recent changes include the elimination of the entrance ramp from Ponca Street at Exit 10 , the expansion of Exit 12 to a full interchange to provide access to Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center in both directions ( thus shortening the toll portion of I @-@ 895 ) , and the reconstruction of the northern interchange with I @-@ 95 in 2009 so I @-@ 895 enters and exits I @-@ 95 on the right side of the roadway . 
 = = = Tolls and exit numbers = = = 
 The original toll for the Harbor Tunnel Thruway was 40 cents for passenger vehicles and 85 cents for trucks . By 1985 , the toll had risen to $ 1 . Electronic toll collection began at the toll plaza in 1999 for M @-@ TAG customers ; the M @-@ TAG system was absorbed by E @-@ ZPass in 2001 . MdTA increased the toll for passenger vehicles to $ 2 in 2003 . In May 2011 , the agency announced the toll for the Harbor Tunnel Thruway and the two other harbor crossings would increase to $ 3 on October 1 , 2011 and to $ 4 on July 1 , 2013 . 
 The Harbor Tunnel Thruway has had three different exit number systems throughout its existence . The first numbering scheme was in place by 1963 . The northbound exits were numbered between 1 ( Holabird Avenue ) and 5 ( US 40 ) , while the southbound exits were numbered 1 ( Hanover Street ) to 7 ( US 1 ) . The second numbering scheme , which did not change the interchange numbers on the northern approach to the tunnel , was introduced in 1971 . The exits on the western approach were renumbered 11 ( Hanover Street ) to 17 ( US 1 ) . Under both schemes , the Childs Street exit did not have a number and the Moravia Road interchange was numbered as Exit 1 of the John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway . The third and present numbering scheme was enacted in 1991 . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = = Auxiliary routes = = 
 I @-@ 895 has two auxiliary routes , I @-@ 895A and I @-@ 895B . Both highways are portions of the southern approach to the Baltimore Harbor Tunnel that connects with the mainline of the Harbor Tunnel Thruway in Brooklyn Park . Both spurs are maintained by MdTA . I @-@ 895A and the portion of I @-@ 895B north of I @-@ 895A are part of the main National Highway System . The segment of I @-@ 895B between MD 2 and I @-@ 895A is a National Highway System principal arterial . 
 = = = I @-@ 895A = = = 
 I @-@ 895A is the designation for the 0 @.@ 71 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 14 km ) connector between the northern end of I @-@ 97 just north of I @-@ 695 ( Baltimore Beltway ) and I @-@ 895B within Glen Burnie . The highway was constructed in 1957 to connect the northern end of the Glen Burnie Bypass with the Harbor Tunnel Thruway . In conjunction with the reconstruction of I @-@ 97 's interchange with I @-@ 695 , in which the loop ramp from I @-@ 97 north to I @-@ 695 west was replaced with a flyover joining I @-@ 695 on the left , a loop ramp was added on I @-@ 895A in 1995 to allow access to the right side of I @-@ 695 west for traffic exiting at MD 648 ( Baltimore Annapolis Boulevard ) . 
 = = = I @-@ 895B = = = 
 I @-@ 895B is the designation for the 2 @.@ 67 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 30 km ) southern approach to the mainline of Harbor Tunnel Thruway between MD 2 ( Governor Ritchie Highway ) in Glen Burnie and I @-@ 895 in Brooklyn Park . The highway was completed in 1957 with the remainder of the Harbor Tunnel Thruway . The only change to the southern approach is the addition of ramps from I @-@ 895B north to I @-@ 695 west and from I @-@ 695 east to I @-@ 895B south to improve access between MD 2 and the Baltimore Beltway ; these ramps , now marked as Exit 3A on I @-@ 695 east , were completed in 1968 . 
 = The Boat Race 1928 = 
 The 80th Boat Race took place on 28 March 1928 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . In a race umpired by former Oxford rower Charles Burnell , Cambridge won by ten lengths , the largest margin of victory since 1900 , in a time of 20 minutes 25 seconds . The victory took the overall record to 40 – 39 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1927 race by three lengths , with Oxford leading overall with 40 victories to Cambridge 's 38 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford were coached by H. R. Baker ( who rowed for the Dark Blues in the 1908 and 1909 races ) , A. E. Kitchin ( who also rowed in 1908 ) , P. C. Mallam ( a Dark Blue from 1921 to 1924 inclusive ) , C. M. Pitman ( who rowed four times between 1892 and 1895 ) and J. D. W. Thomson ( who was a three @-@ time Blue between 1925 and 1927 ) . Cambridge 's coaches were William Dudley Ward ( who had rowed in 1897 , 1899 and 1900 races ) , Francis Escombe , P. H. Thomas ( a four @-@ time Blue between 1902 and 1905 ) and David Alexander Wauchope ( who had rowed in the 1895 race ) . For the second year the umpire was Charles Burnell who had rowed for Oxford in the 1895 , 1896 , 1897 and 1898 races . Charles Kent , who rowed for Oxford in the 1891 race , was the finishing judge for the first time . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 9 @.@ 625 lb ( 80 @.@ 4 kg ) , 0 @.@ 625 pounds ( 0 @.@ 3 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Cambridge 's crew contained three participants with Boat Race experience : R. Beesly , J. C. Holcroft and stroke T. E. Letchworth . Oxford saw four participants return , including number two T. W. Shaw and cox J. H. Croft , both of whom were making their third consecutive appearance in the event . One participant was registered as non @-@ British : Oxford 's number four H. C. Morphett was from Australia . 
 According to author and former Oxford rower George Drinkwater , the Cambridge crew were " really good " with the trial eights being " much above the average " . After relocating to Ely in the build @-@ up to the race , Cambridge 's crew was reorganised and improved , before final modifications were made at Putney . Drinkwater stated " it was obvious that they were going to be a fast crew " . Conversely , Oxford suffered from " a dearth of experienced material " who " never developed and were quite incapable of rowing a racing stroke " . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Cambridge . Burnell started the race at 9 : 45 a.m. in reasonable conditions but on a poor tide . Cambridge took the lead from the start and were half a length ahead by the time they passed the boathouses ( 400 yards ( 370 m ) along the course ) . Dropping the stroke rate to 29 strokes per minute , the Light Blues held off the faster rating Oxford to the Mile Post . Here Cambridge pushed away quickly and , according to Drinkwater , " long before Hammersmith the race had become a procession " , so much so that the Light Blues reduced their efforts to a paddle . 
 Cambridge won by ten lengths in a time of 20 minutes 25 seconds , the slowest winning time since the 1925 race . It was their fifth consecutive victory and their ninth win in ten races and took the overall record to 40 – 39 in Oxford 's favour . It was the largest winning margin where both boats completed the course since the 1900 race . 
 = Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) = 
 " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey from her second Christmas album / thirteenth studio album , Merry Christmas II You ( 2010 ) . The second single from the album , an extended play consisting of nine remixes was released by Island on December 14 , 2010 . Using the public domain poem " Auld Lang Syne " by Robert Burns , Carey along with Randy Jackson and Johnny " Sev " Severin ( of RedOne ) composed a new arrangement and re @-@ titled it . The track garnered a negative response from critics , all of whom disliked how Carey had re @-@ composed the poem into a house music song . An accompanying music video was released featuring a pregnant Carey singing in front of a background of exploding fireworks . " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " charted on the lower regions of the South Korean international singles charts and at number nine on the US Holiday Digital Songs chart . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " is a re @-@ write of " Auld Lang Syne " by Scottish poet and lyricist Robert Burns , which was written in 1788 and published in James Johnson 's Scots Musical Museum in 1796 . However , as noted by the BBC 's Pauline Mackay , Burns often re @-@ arranged and rewrote old songs before publishing them as his own work , and is thus listed under the public domain . Mariah Carey 's version is a new arrangement that uses some of the original lyrics by Burns , and was composed by Carey with Randy Jackson and Johnny " Sev " Severin . The singer 's vocals were recorded by Brian Garten at Henson Studios and Westlake Recording Studios , both located in Los Angeles , California . The music for the song was recorded by Severin , Keith Gretlein and Garten . It was mixed by Phil Tan and Damien Lewis at The Ninja Beat Club in Atlanta , Georgia . All instrumentation was performed by Severin , apart from the piano which was played by James " Big Jim " Wright . Background vocals were performed Melonie Daniels , Sherry McGhee and Onitsha Shaw . Rye Songs administered by songs of Universal ( BMI ) / Hope Faith Destiny Music Group ( BMI ) ; 2101 Songs Admin . By Sony / ATV ( BMI ) . Johnny " Sev " Severin appears on behalf of RedOne Productions . 
 It appears as the thirteenth and final song on the standard track listing of Merry Christmas II You ( 2010 ) . On December 14 , 2010 , Carey released Extended play of nine remixes by ( five by Ralphi Rosario and four by Johnny Vicious ) as a digital download on iTunes . " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " is a house track with a " thumping " instrumental according to Rich Juzwiak of The Village Voice , that lasts for three minutes and forty @-@ seven seconds . At one point in the song , Carey says " Does anybody really know the words ? " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " garnered a negative response from critics . Mike Diver of the BBC wrote that Carey shows restraint for the most part of the album , but " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " as the final track is " slathered in cheesy beats " . Rolling Stone writer Caryn Ganz disapproved of the dance beat , saying " It 's hard to figure out what 's ' extra festive ' ( as the full song title promises ) about her ' All I Want for Christmas Is You ' update , and far easier to determine what 's wrong with ' Auld Lang Syne ' ( an awkward dance beat ) . " Juzwiak was critical of the song , describing it as " robotic " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 A music video for " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " was released on December 15 , 2010 . A pregnant Carey , who only moves from the waist up , wears a black laced dress while standing in front of a green screen , which depict exploding fireworks in the nights sky . Becky Bain for Idolator positively reviewed the video , writing " There is something so endlessly entertaining about watching Mariah Carey do her patented diva theatrics — waving her arms like a crazy hand model ; tenderly stroking her hair ; spinning around dramatically . " 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Digital download ( Album Version ) 
 " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " – 3 : 47 
 Digital download ( Remixes ) 
 " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " [ Ralphi Rosario Traditional Club Mix ] – 3 : 47 
 " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " [ Rosario Traditional Mixshow ] – 6 : 11 
 " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " [ Rosario Traditional Radio Edit ] – 4 : 13 
 " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " [ Ralphi 's Alternative Club Mix ] – 6 : 07 
 " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " [ Ralphi 's Alternative Mixshow Edit ] – 5 : 21 
 " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " [ Johnny Vicious Warehouse Mix ] – 6 : 44 
 " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " [ Johnny Vicious Warehouse Radio ] – 3 : 14 
 " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " [ Johnny Vicious Warehouse Dub ] – 7 : 37 
 " Auld Lang Syne ( The New Year 's Anthem ) " [ Johnny Vicious Warehouse Mix ] { No Vocal Intro } – 5 : 39 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Tunnels ( novel ) = 
 Tunnels is a subterranean fiction novel by British authors Roderick Gordon and Brian Williams . It was initially self @-@ published as The Highfield Mole in 2005 , and re @-@ released as Tunnels by Chicken House in 2007 . The story follows Will Burrows , a 14 @-@ year @-@ old ' archaeologist ' , who stumbles upon an underground civilization called The Colony . Will and friend Chester flee The Colony and set out to find Will 's father , in the Deeps , a place even deeper in the Earth than The Colony . 
 Tunnels was critically well received , although some complaints about its lengthy , slow start were recorded . The book placed on The New York Times Children 's Chapter Books Bestseller List in February and March 2008 . It is the first book in the Tunnels series , and was followed by Deeper ( 2008 ) , Freefall ( 2009 ) , Closer ( 2010 ) , Spiral ( 2011 ) and Terminal ( 2013 ) . BBC Audiobooks and Recorded Books have released audio editions . On February 28 , 2013 , Relativity Media announced Mikael <unk> would direct a film adaptation of the novel . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The main influence in fourteen @-@ year @-@ old Will Burrow 's life is his father , Dr. Burrows , and together they share an interest in archaeology and a fascination for the buried past . When Dr. Burrows begins to notice strange ' pallid men ' where they live in Highfield , and then promptly goes missing , Will and his friend Chester go and search of him . They discover a blocked passageway behind bookshelves in the cellar of the Burrows home and re @-@ excavate it , finding the passage leads to a door set into the rock , and beyond the door is an old lift that takes them down to another set of doors . A cobblestone street lies beyond , lit by a row of orb @-@ like street lamps ; houses that appear to be carved out of the walls themselves flank the street . 
 They are soon captured by the police of the underground community , known as the Colony . In prison , Will is visited by Mr. Jerome , and his son Cal . They reveal Will was actually born in the Colony , and that they are his real family ; Mr. Jerome his father and Cal his younger brother . Will is eventually released from the prison and taken to the Jerome 's home , where Will and Cal 's Uncle Tam is delighted to see him and informs Will that his adoptive father , Dr. Burrows , was recently there , and had willingly traveled down into the Deeps — a place even deeper in the Earth than The Colony . Will learns that the Styx , the religious rulers of the Colony , are either going to enslave Chester or banish him to the Deeps to fend for himself . Will refuses to abandon his friend , and Uncle Tam formulates a plan for him to rescue Chester and to take him back to the surface . 
 Will and Cal attempt to rescue Chester before he is sent to the deeps on the ' Miner 's Train ' , but the Styx arrive and they are forced to leave Chester behind . During the botched escape attempt , it is revealed that Rebecca , Will 's adoptive sister , is actually a Styx implanted in his family to monitor him . The boys head through a series of tunnels to the Eternal City , and old stone city , estimated by Will to be from Roman times , where the air is filled with deadly bio @-@ toxins . They avoid the Styx soldiers , who patrol the city with their vicious stalker attack dogs , and eventually emerge on the bank of the Thames . Will makes for his home in Highfield , but there Will 's health deteriorates , so Cal helps him to his Auntie Jean 's flat where he recovers . Soon they return underground to find Will 's adoptive father , and attempt to rescue Chester once again . They encounter another Styx patrol , and Uncle Tam kills a member of the Styx , whom he calls <unk> , but is mortally wounded in the fight , and the strong willed Uncle Tam chooses to stay behind to give the boys time to escape . With the help of Imago <unk> , a member of Uncle Tam 's gang , Will and Cal escape to a small hiding place half way between the Colony and the Eternal City . There , they rest and mourn for Uncle Tam ; and are told by Imago that Chester 's train to the deeps will pass directly under their hiding spot shortly . They jump down into the train through a hole in the floor of the hiding spot , and find Chester . Together they ride down to the Deeps . In the book 's epilogue , Rebecca kills Imago , who was hiding on the surface , by poison . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 The novel was initially self @-@ published under the title The Highfield Mole : The Circle in the Spiral on 17 March 2005 , with a limited run of 500 hardback and 2 @,@ 000 <unk> copies , financed by the sale of Roderick Gordon 's house . The book received some trade press attention before launch and the entire hardback run sold within a day . On 19 November 2005 , Barry Cunningham , of Chicken House , announced that he had agreed to publish The Highfield Mole and a second book in the series . Cunningham , while working for Bloomsbury in London , famously signed up J. K. Rowling , and this connection led to the book being branded " the next Harry Potter " . 
 The authors and Barry Cunningham also decided to retitle the book Tunnels , to reflect that it had been changed by some limited editing . With the announcement of the publication date , and press coverage in the UK , the price of the original self @-@ published books jumped dramatically , with one copy selling for £ 950 . Tunnels was released in the UK as a softcover on 2 July 2007 , and in the United States as a hardcover on 10 December 2007 , and as a paperback on 1 February 2009 . In Canada , the book was released as a paperback on 7 July 2007 , as a hardcover on 1 January 2008 , and a mass market paperback on 1 February 2009 . In the United States , Tunnels had an initial printing of 100 @,@ 000 copies . In February and March 2008 it appeared on The New York Times Children 's Chapter Books Best Seller List . 
 The sequel , Deeper , was released in the UK on 5 May 2008 ( in the United States on 3 February 2009 ) , and a third book , Freefall , was published in the UK on 18 May 2009 ( in the United States on 1 February 2010 ) . The fourth book , called Closer , was published in the UK in May 2010 , and the fifth , Spiral , was released on 1 September 2011 , the authors released the final novel , Terminal , in 2014 , concluding the series as a <unk> . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Many reviewers criticised the first third of Tunnels for its slow pace , but praised the remainder of the book for its fast @-@ paced excitement , suspense , and adventure . In Britain , children 's author Philip Ardagh , reviewing for The Guardian , thought the long wait for Will to discover the underground city could dull the reader 's anticipation , noting that the event did not occur until page 170 . He did observe , however , that when the city is reached , " fantastic fun " begins and that from then on its well paced , exciting and – in places – frightening and bloody . " He thought the characters " splendidly named and drawn " . In The Sunday Times of 7 July 2007 , Nicolette Jones described the book as " a good adventure yarn ... [ b ] ut after 460 suspenseful pages it is frustratingly inconclusive . " She noted the book became a best @-@ seller the month of its release based simply on " stories about its discovery by [ publisher ] Barry Cunningham , who " found " Harry Potter . " 
 Publishers Weekly thought the book " full of holes , as if its raison d 'etre were to set up the action for future books " . Like The Guardian , PW commented on the slow start but noted the pace picked up once the Colony was reached . School Library Journal wrote that after a slow start , " the pace picks up " , and praised the plot twists and the setting . Kirkus Review wrote " [ d ] <unk> but exciting " and Booklist thought " [ the novel ] appears to be a very promising series kickoff " . The Horn Book Review felt readers " may lose patience with the slow beginning " , but observed that adventure lovers would still like the plot . 
 = = Other formats = = 
 BBC Audiobooks Ltd. released an unabridged version of Tunnels on CD in the UK and Canada on 5 November 2007 , and in the United States on 8 November 2007 . Reader Jack Davenport garnered critical praise for his " haunting tone " and his ability to depict the people of The Colony with an Irish @-@ sounding accent and their rulers with an " intimidating aristocratic hiss . " In the United States , Recorded Books released an unabridged recording on 31 October 2008 read by Stephen Crossley . 
 In February 2013 , Relativity Media announced it had assigned Mikael <unk> to direct a film adaptation of the novel . 
 The Polish publishers ' website features an interactive game based on Tunnels . 
 = Robert of Ghent = 
 Robert of Ghent or Robert de Gant ( c . 1085 – after 1154 ) was Lord Chancellor of England and Dean of York in the 12th century . The younger son of a nobleman , Robert was probably a member of the cathedral chapter of York before his selection as chancellor by King Stephen of England in the mid @-@ 1140s . He is not mentioned often in documents from his time as chancellor , but why this is so is unknown . He became dean at York Minster around 1147 . Robert was slightly involved in the disputes over who would be Archbishop of York in the late 1140s and 1150s , but it is likely that his chancellorship prevented his deeper involvement in diocesan affairs . He was no longer chancellor after the death of Stephen , but probably continued to hold the office of dean until his death around 1157 or 1158 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Robert was probably one of the sons of Gilbert de Gant , who is mentioned in the Domesday Book . Gilbert was from Flanders and came to England during 1069 . Gilbert , who died around 1095 , was married to Alice , daughter of Hugh de Montfort . Robert 's conjectured siblings were Emma — wife of Alan de Percy , Hugh de Montfort @-@ sur @-@ Risle , Gilbert de Gant — who died before his father , and Walter de Gant . If Robert was a son of Gilbert , he was a younger son , probably the youngest of the four brothers , and probably was born sometime around 1085 , as his supposed parents married about 1075 and there were older siblings . Robert is often confused in the historical records with another Robert , son of Walter . Robert was probably also the uncle of Gilbert de Gant , later Earl of Lincoln . 
 Robert 's first appearance in the historical record is at Ramsey Abbey sometime between 1114 and 1123 , where he appears as a witness to a charter . A further appearance is in a document of his brother Walter dating between 1130 and 1139 . It is likely that Robert was a canon of York Cathedral before 1147 . He is also claimed to have held the office of Provost of Beverley Minster as the immediate predecessor to Thomas Becket , but this is unlikely , as Becket did not become provost until 1154 , long after Robert had become Dean of York . 
 = = Chancellor = = 
 Robert was Lord Chancellor from spring 1140 to summer 1154 , serving King Stephen of England . It is not known exactly when Stephen appointed Robert chancellor nor why Stephen choose him for the office . The historian Richard Sherman speculated that Stephen appointed Robert as a favour to Walter de Gant , perhaps because of Walter 's at the Battle of Cowton Moor in 1138 . Three charters which date from March 1140 to January 1141 and are supposed to be witnessed by Robert all have difficulties with either the dating or whether the signature attributed to Robert is actually Robert , so exact dating of his term of office isn 't possible from charter evidence . For a brief period in 1141 , Stephen 's rival Empress Matilda also appointed two chancellors – William de Vere and William FitzGilbert – but they did not interrupt Robert 's term of service . Robert was with Stephen at Caistor during the middle of 1143 , where he was a witness on charters . Throughout his approximately 14 years as chancellor , Robert only witnessed 20 charters certainly and perhaps another 13 that are not securely attributed to Robert . Stephen 's two previous chancellors , Roger le Poer and Philip de Harcourt , had a much higher rate of attesting charters – 62 in 3 @.@ 5 years for Roger and 12 in 9 months for Philip . Various reasons have been put forward for why Robert attested at a lower rate than the earlier chancellors , including indifference to his office , deputising the duties to another clerk , or difficulty in following the itinerant court due to age . Robert 's last secure appearance as chancellor as a witness to a charter is one dated to the summer of 1154 at Lincoln . 
 It is possible that Robert had a falling out with Stephen in the last months of the king 's reign — Stephen died in October 1154 . Stephen besieged Drax Castle in the summer of 1154 , which had earlier been given to Robert 's nephew Robert . The younger Robert may have objected to giving up his castle to the previous owners and the elder Robert may have taken offence at these events . This would explain why Robert does not appear on Stephen 's charters after the Lincoln charter of 1154 , but this theory is just speculation by one of Robert 's biographers . Robert was replaced as chancellor by Becket shortly after Henry II 's coronation on 19 December 1154 and before January 1155 . 
 = = Dean of York = = 
 Robert held the office of Dean of York from at least 1147 , but may have occupied the office as early as 1142 . He may have been still alive as late as 1157 , as it is possible he was the addressee of a letter from the papacy in January 1157 . His last secure attestation as dean is in October 1154 . Although Keats @-@ Rohan states in Domesday Descendants that Robert was also Archdeacon of York , he is not so listed in the Fasti Ecclesiae Anglicanae under any of the archdeaconries . 
 In 1147 William fitzHerbert , the Archbishop of York , was deposed , and a new election for the archbishopric was ordered by Pope Eugenius III on 11 May 1147 . The election took place on 24 July 1147 at Richmond rather than York , due to the opposition of William of Aumale , the Earl of York , who supported the ousted archbishop . Robert , along with Hugh de Puiset and some of the cathedral chapter , favoured Hilary , a canon lawyer . Most of the rest of the archdiocese 's officials and the chapter favoured Henry Murdac . The disputed election was decided by the pope , who declared Murdac the new archbishop and gave the vacant bishopric of Chichester to Hilary . Murdac was consecrated by Eugenius on 7 December 1147 , and Robert appears to have supported the new archbishop , or at least not to have actively opposed him . But others among the cathedral chapter and suffragan bishops of York continued to actively agitate against Murdac , including refusing him entry to York for three years . Robert took little other part in the disputes at York during Murdac 's archiepiscopate . Probably , it was Robert 's involvement in secular office as chancellor that restricted his activities with his ecclesiastical office . Robert may have become a supporter of Murdac 's during this time , as the archbishop addressed at least six confirmation grants to Robert . 
 William was re @-@ elected to York after Murdac 's death in 1153 . When William attempted to enter York on 9 May 1154 , Robert , along with Osbert de Bayeux , tried to prevent his entry , but their attempt was unsuccessful and they then went to Theobald of Bec , the Archbishop of Canterbury , and appealed in vain against William 's actions . It is possible that Robert feared that William would remove Robert from the deanship . After William 's death , Robert , once more acting with Osbert , pressured the cathedral chapter of York to elect Stephen 's choice of Roger de Pont L 'Évêque as the new Archbishop of York . Osbert was later accused of poisoning William , and was deprived of his office and clerical status when he could not clear himself from the accusation . Although Robert was associated with Osbert 's opposition to William , there is no evidence that Robert was ever thought to have been involved in the possible poisoning of William . 
 = = Death = = 
 The historian Katharine Keats @-@ Rohan records his death as occurring in 1157 or 1158 . Robert 's successor as dean , Robert <unk> , is first securely attested as dean on 6 May 1158 , and the last secure date for his holding his previous office is 13 December 1157 , which suggests that Robert of Ghent died in between those dates , or shortly before the earlier date . 
 = Jump ( Rihanna song ) = 
 " Jump " is a song recorded by Barbadian singer Rihanna for her seventh studio album , Unapologetic ( 2012 ) . It was written by Kevin Cossom , M. B. Williams , StarGate and Chase & Status , with production done by the latter two and Kuk Harrell . It samples the lyrics of the 1996 single " Pony " , performed by Ginuwine . Its composition and structure received comparisons to not only Justin Timberlake 's song " Cry Me a River " and Magnetic Man 's " I Need Air " , but also to some of Rihanna 's previous songs , including " Rude Boy " and " Red Lipstick " . A remix of the song called " Jump ( Club Cheval Rap Remix ) " by rapper Theophilus London was leaked onto the internet . " Jump " was serviced to Australian radio on January 24 , 2014 as the album 's fifth Australian single and seventh overall . 
 The song received generally positive reviews from music critics . Many reviewers thought that " Jump " stood out as one of a couple of highlights on Unapologetic , while a few others singled it out as the sole highlight . However , it prompted a mixed reaction from James Montgomery for MTV , who thought that the dubstep bass line produced a " mixed result " . Genevieve Koski for The A.V. Club , who wrote that the track should not have been included on the album as it is a poor song choice , commented that songs like " Jump " are responsible for simply furthering her career in the music industry . Following the release of Unapologetic , " Jump " debuted on the French Singles Chart at number 153 and the UK Singles Chart at number 150 due to strong digital download sales . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 Rihanna began developing a " new sound " for her seventh studio album in March 2012 , even though she had not yet begun recording . On September 12 , 2012 , Def Jam France announced via Twitter that Rihanna would release a new single the upcoming week while her seventh studio album is scheduled to be released in November 2012 . However , the tweet was shortly deleted and replaced with another clarifying that more information will available the next day ( September 13 ) . Via her official Twitter account , Rihanna posted series of " teasing " tweets announcing her seventh studio album . On October 11 , 2012 , in one of her tweets revealed that the title of her new album is Unapologetic alongside with its cover . 
 " Jump " is the overall seventh and final single off Unapologetic . It was written by Kevin Cossom and M. B. Williams together with its producers StarGate ( Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor Erik Hermansen ) and Chase & Status ( Saul Milton and Will Kennard ) . The song samples elements of " Pony " ( 1996 ) , as performed by Ginuwine and written by Elgin " Ginuwine " Lumpkin , Stephen Garrett and Timothy " Timbaland " Mosley . In an interview with MTV News Ginuwine stated : " You know what ? My management told me she wanted to use it , and Rihanna , I 'm a fan of hers and I love what she 's doing . You got to embrace it ! You can 't be a stickler ... especially when an artist like Rihanna wants to use it " . He further said that he is anxious to hear what the singer has done with the sample and hopes that it will do a good job for her , just as it did for him . 
 Eriksen and Miles Walker recorded " Jump " at Roc the Mic Studio in New York , while Aamir Yaqub served as the assistant vocal engineer . Kuk Harrell provided the vocal production of the song and also recorded Rihanna 's vocals together with Marcos Tovar at R Studios in Los Angeles . It was mixed by Phil Than at Ninja Club Studios in Atlanta with Daniela Rivera serving as assistant mixing engineer . Cossom sang additional vocals , while all the instruments and programming were provided by Eriksen , Hermansen , Mikey Mike and Chase & Status . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Jump " is a song that runs four minutes and twenty @-@ four seconds , and " utilizes dubstep 's distinctive bass sound to approximate the belching chorus of the original song " . According to Brad Stern of MTV Buzzworthy , " Jump " features " sexy , slow burning " chorus and resembles Rihanna 's 2010 single " Rude Boy " ( Rated R , 2009 ) . Daily Mirror 's Priya Elan also compared " Jump " to the singer 's song " Red Lipstick " ( Talk That Talk , 2011 ) , while James Bien of The Daily Northwestern found it similar to the 2010 single by Magnetic Man , " I Need Air " . Melissa Maerz of Entertainment Weekly labeled the song a " dubstep @-@ warped banger " . 
 Eric Henderson for Slant Magazine disapproved of " Jump " , writing that it is an " ice @-@ cold " and " echoey dubstep torture chamber " whereby Rihanna interpolates Ginuwine 's " Pony " sample void of emotion . Rihanna 's vocals on the song sound similar to the vocals by Justin Timberlake on his 2002 single " Cry Me a River " ( Justified , 2002 ) . Lyrically , in " Jump " Rihanna preaches to her former partner that she won 't be chasing him . Jude Rodgers of The Guardian described it as a " see sex wriggling everywhere " . In the song , the singer sings " Skrillex @-@ worthy " lines , " You think I give a damn / but you know who I am / I don 't go around chasing no dude " . The chorus features Rihanna singing , " If you want it , let 's do it / Ridin ' my pony / My saddle is <unk> ' / Come and jump on it . " 
 = = Remix = = 
 Rapper Theophilus London remixed the song , a remix which leaked under the title " Jump ( Club Cheval Rap Remix ) " . Additional production to the song was added by Club cheval . Several new lines were added , such as " I don 't follow the trend / the trend follow me , <unk> " and " I 'm in Nice getting nice with some freaks / Hermes , bubble bath , so I 'm feelin ' <unk> . " He also quotes lyrics from Rihanna 's 2012 single " Diamonds " in the line , " Versace , chrome , we 're <unk> ' / Shine bright like a Neil Diamond . " Michael <unk> of MTV Buzzworthy praised the remix and wrote that it makes the song sound even better . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Allison Stewart for The Washington Post thought that " Jump " stood out as one of the highlights of Unapologetic , describing it as a " monster in the making " . Along with " Stay " , Stewart listed " Jump " as her top two songs on the album . Alike Stewart , Melissa Maerz for Entertainment Weekly wrote that " Jump " was one of her top recommendations to listen to along with " Diamonds " . Stacey @-@ Ann Ellis for Vibe thought that " Jump " could be " mosh @-@ inducing " if played in a nightclub . Michael Gallucci for PopCrush also agreed that " Jump " is one of Unapologetic 's best songs , writing that " It 's an unofficial rule in pop music that any song titled ' Jump ' is going to be great ( see Pointer Sisters , Van Halen , Kriss Kross , etc . ) . Rihanna 's is no exception " . Chris Younie for 4Music echoed Gallucci 's sentiments , writing that it is one of the best songs on the album . He further wrote that he felt as though the album peaked after the second track , " Diamonds " , had finished , but stated that " Jump " filled void between that and the former . 
 Adam R. Holz for Plugged In Online described the track as " nasty " with a " crude " chorus . James Montgomery for MTV News thought that the dubstep bass line produced a " mixed result " , but he praised the sample of Ginuwine 's " Pony " . Genevieve Koski for The A.V. Club criticised " Jump " , writing that it is the " perfect example " of poor decision making with regard to song choices for the album , which her opinion , have " elevated " Rihanna 's career . She brandished the song as " trashy decadence without shame " . <unk> Copsey for Digital Spy felt that the song embodied " a sense of last @-@ minute record label box @-@ ticking " , with particular emphasis on Chase & Status ' presence and the " wobble " of the chorus . He continued it described " Jump " as a " safe option " to include on the album . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Roc the Mic Studios , New York City , New York 
 Vocals recorded at R Studios , Los Angeles , California . 
 Mixed at Ninja Club Studios , Atlanta , Georgia . 
 Sample 
 Contains samples of " Pony " performed by Ginuwine and written by Elgin Lumpkin , Stephen Garrett and Timothy Mosley . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Unapologetic , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Following the release of Unapologetic , " Jump " debuted on two national single charts due to strong digital download sales . In France , it debuted at number 153 for the week dated December 1 , 2012 , and fell to number 191 the following week ; it spent a total of two weeks on the chart . In the United Kingdom , it debuted at number 150 on December 2 , 2012 . It peaked at number 34 on the R & B / Hip @-@ hop Digital Songs chart on December 3 , 2012 . In Oceania , it attained commercial success after being released as a single . It peaked at number 10 in New @-@ Zealand and at number 5 in Australia , where it was certified Platinum for shipments over 75 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = The Virgin Tour = 
 The Virgin Tour was the debut concert tour by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna . The tour supported her first two studio albums , Madonna ( 1983 ) and Like a Virgin ( 1984 ) . Although , initially planned for an international audience , the tour was restricted within the United States and Canada only . Warner Bros. decided to send Madonna on the tour , after Like a Virgin became a success . After an official announcement on March 15 , 1985 , Madonna and her team started production plans for it . Madonna wanted the tour to be a reflection of her own self and collaborated with designer Maripol for the costumes . Beastie Boys were signed as the opening act , while record producer Patrick Leonard was signed as the music director for the tour . 
 The stage was triangular in shape and consisted of ramps around it , with lighting arrangements hanging about 30 feet above the stage . Four giant screens lined the outer perimeter of the stage , on three sides . The set list consisted of songs from Madonna and Like a Virgin ; the songs were performed by Madonna , who was backed by two dancers , as she moved energetically across the stage . The show ended with Madonna in a wedding dress , performing " Like a Virgin " and " Material Girl " . 
 The Virgin Tour received mixed reception from critics , but was a commercial success . As soon as the tour was announced , tickets were sold everywhere . Macy 's New York department store was flooded with buyers , who bought the tour merchandise , ranging from shirts , sunglasses , the crucifix earrings and fingerless gloves . After its end , the Virgin Tour was reported to have grossed over $ 5 million ( $ 11 million in 2016 dollars ) , with Billboard Boxscore reporting a gross of $ 3 @.@ 3 million ( $ 7 @.@ 26 million in 2016 dollars ) . The tour was recorded and released in VHS , as Madonna Live : The Virgin Tour , and received a gold certification by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . With the commencement of the Virgin Tour , a wide ranging audience — especially young women — thronged to attend , attired in Madonna inspired clothing . This frenzy regarding Madonna gave rise to a new term called Madonna wannabe — a word that was ultimately officially recognized by the Webster 's Dictionary in May 1991 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Virgin Tour was officially announced on March 15 , 1985 , by Warner Bros. Records . Prior to the tour , Madonna 's only live performances were limited to evening shows at Danceteria , CBGB and Mudd Club , and only the 1984 MTV Video Music Awards , where she performed her song " Like a Virgin " . Following the success of the Like a Virgin album , the record label wanted to milk @-@ in the success of the album by sending Madonna on a worldwide tour . However , the tour was restricted within United States and Canada . It did not visit Europe , Asia or other continents . Early on there were plans to schedule dates in Britain and Japan due to Madonna 's large fan bases in both countries , however the final schedule did not reflect the idea . In the end several more U.S. dates were added and the tour was moved to larger concert venues due to overwhelmingly strong ticket sales . Madonna was quite nervous to perform in front of a huge audience , and singing with a live band for the first time . During a 2009 interview with Rolling Stone , interviewer Austin Scaggs asked Madonna regarding her feelings and emotions during the tour , since it was the first time she was playing in arenas . Madonna replied saying , 
 " That whole tour was crazy , because I went from playing CBGB and the Mudd Club to playing sporting arenas . I played a small theater in Seattle , and the girls had flap skirts on and the tights cut off below their knees and lace gloves and rosaries and bows in their hair and big hoop earrings . I was like , ' This is insane ! ' After Seattle , all of the shows were moved to arenas . I 've never done a bus tour . Everyone says they are really fun . " 
 = = Development = = 
 After the tour was confirmed , Madonna and her troupe started working on it . Madonna wanted it to be " loud and brazen , and a reflection of my street @-@ style and <unk> attitude . " She wanted a concert where people can enjoy themselves as much as she would enjoy performing . Commenting on the development , Madonna said " I normally hate performances where there is just a singer singing , and a lame @-@ ass band playing in the background ; or shows where there is a rocker screaming his lungs out and jumping on the crowd . That just plain sucks ! That 's why I wanted something different , something that would be memorable . " For the show , Madonna collaborated with her designer friend Maripol for the clothes and the fashion . Maripol operated a small fabric boutique called <unk> in Greenwich Village , where the designs and the clothes for the tour were decided by her and Madonna . Rehearsals for the show started in late February , with auditions and choosing the dancers going on in @-@ between . Madonna specifically wanted male back @-@ up dancers , citing that the " <unk> moves that I do on stage works better with men beside me . " To further promote the tour , Warner Bros. Entertainers Merchandise Management Corp. introduced the Boy Toy collection , named after the belt buckle Madonna wore on the Like a Virgin album cover picture . It consisted of a rectangular buckle , with the words " Boy " and " Toy " <unk> on it in gold color . For choosing a music director for the tour , Madonna 's manager Freddy DeMann contacted record producer Patrick Leonard , who had just returned from the Victory Tour by The Jackson 5 . At first Leonard said no , feeling exhausted from the Victory Tour , but after he spoke to Madonna on the phone , he found her charming , and agreed to sign for the tour . 
 Beastie Boys were signed as the opening act for the tour . Adam " MCA " Yauch of the group recollected : " One day , Russell Simmons , co @-@ founder of Def Jam Recordings , came in and said , ' Hey guess what — Madonna 's manager called . Do you guys want to go on tour with her ? " DeMann had asked for another group called The Fat Boys , but Simmons did not manage them and lied , saying " Oh , the Fat Boys have another gig that week . What about Run – D.M.C. ? " But they were too expensive according to DeMann , and hence ultimately Beastie Boys were chosen . Adam " Ad @-@ Rock " Horovitz from the band commented : " It 's not like any of us knew Madonna that much , but we all used to hang out at <unk> [ club ] so we knew about each other . I don 't know why she thought it would be a good idea [ to open for her tour ] , though . It was a terrible idea . But it was great for her in a way because we were so awful that by the time she came onstage , the audience had to be happy . " The circular stage for the tour , consisted of three ramps around the perimeter , which were connected with each other . A long line of stairs descended to the main stage from the central ramp ; it was flanked by the band . About 30 feet above the stage , the speakers were suspended from a circular beam . Four giant screens lined the outer perimeter of the stage , on three sides . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 The show opened with Beastie Boys performing six of their songs for 30 minutes . They were accompanied by a DJ who scratched the music , with The Beastie Boys prancing around the stage , making lewd gestures towards the audience . As they finished their performance , the backdrops started displaying Madonna 's images from her music videos . The band — consisting of guitarists , bassists , a drummer and three synthesizer players — came into focus , and the music started . Madonna 's voice was heard , saying : " Don 't be afraid ... it 's gonna be alright . " Then , Madonna 's silhouette appeared behind a white screen on top of the stairs as the first beats kicked in . The white screen lifted and she is finally seen , wearing a psychedelic <unk> , a blue see @-@ through crop @-@ top and her characteristic black bra . She also had lacy leggings and crucifixes around her ear and her neck . She posed on the stairs before reaching the microphone to sing " Dress You Up " . After dancing to the last note of the music , Madonna and the two male back @-@ up dancers went to the back of the stage , as the music of " Holiday " began . Taking a moment to ask the audience how they are feeling , Madonna declared , " I was never elected homecoming queen , but I sure feel like one now " , and started the performance of " Into the Groove " , playing a tambourine . A boombox was present on the stage during the performance , Madonna sitting and playing with it , and addressing it as her " box " . She continued with " Everybody " , while asking the audience to clap along with her . As she finished the vigorous performance of " Everybody " , the lights were dimmed and the introduction music of " Angel " started . Rotating lights fell on the stage . Madonna appeared sitting on top of the stairs and gradually descended . During the intermediate bridge , she and her dancers moved energetically around the whole stage , as white balloons fell on them from above . Madonna continued singing as the lights were dimmed again . She finished the performance and disappeared behind the wings for a costume change . She appeared on the stage wearing a black , fringed micro @-@ top and similar skirt , with her belly @-@ button exposed , and a number of crucifixes in different sizes , hanging from different parts of her body . 
 As the guitar intro of " Gambler " started , Madonna stood on the side @-@ stage and started dancing energetically , as flashlights fell on her . While singing the song , she sometimes opened her jacket and sometimes straddled a steel structure present on the side of the stage . The performance ended with Madonna jumping off the side stage , onto the main one . She then performed " Borderline " , " Lucky Star " and " Crazy for You " — while touching the hands of the audience members . Madonna then returned to the microphone and started singing " Over and Over " from Like a Virgin . It was followed by " Burning Up " during which she caressed one of the guitarist , ultimately disappearing for another <unk> change . As the music of the song " Like a Virgin " started , Madonna returned on the stage , wearing a wedding dress , holding a bouquet in her hand and a long white veil behind her . <unk> by a white bow atop her head and lacy , three @-@ quarter length gloves , she also had a crucifix on her waistband and another hanging from a long chain around her neck . Madonna asked the audience " Will you marry me ? " When the audience answered affirmatively , she threw the bouquet towards them and started singing the song . Madonna continued singing the song while rolling around the floor , and added a snippet of Michael Jackson 's Motown @-@ style single , " Billie Jean " . Balloons floated out towards the audience again as she pulled apart her veil and threw it towards the audience . She returned to the stage in the arms of one of the backup dancers , wearing a boob tube and a tight white skirt , carrying a bunch of notes in her left hand , and a number of garlands around her neck . In a self @-@ parodying performance of the song " Material Girl " , at the end of the performance Madonna asked the audience " Do you really think I 'm a material girl ? ... I 'm not ... Take it [ Throwing fake money ] ... I don 't need money ... I need love . " As she began to strip off more clothes and jewelry , she was apprehended and marched offstage by an extra posing as her father . In Detroit , her father Tony Ciccone himself did the honors . The show ended with Madonna returning onstage once more to take her fur coat and doing a curtsey . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The tour received generally mixed reviews from critics . Jason <unk> from The Philadelphia Inquirer said that " On stage , wiggling and writhing , a rock @-@ video vision of messy , <unk> blond hair , bare skin , sequined paisley and dime store diamonds was the flash @-@ and @-@ trash rock queen Madonna . Behold the Madonna clones — she is turning into one fine legend . " Jeff <unk> from the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette felt that " the modus operandi [ of the tour ] was clear . Madonna was not only selling her music to throngs of teen @-@ agers and adults alike , but she was selling herself and the entire package proved to be a joy for the 14 @,@ 500 screaming fans . [ ... ] Madonna 's ' Virgin Tour ' had torn the cover off Pittsburgh 's sexuality . " Rachel Lee from The Sacramento Bee felt that " more than any pop star in recent memory , even Boy George and Prince , Madonna is an image . Her hour @-@ long concert here Tuesday night , as professionally performed and well @-@ choreographed as it was , did nothing to give her more dimension than the two already bestowed on her . " Arthur Daniels from Lexington Herald @-@ Leader felt that " Madonna looked grim , but the fans were delighted when the blond rock star made her first major concert appearance to kick off her ' Virgin Tour ' . [ ... ] She looked blank and did not look up as she passed fans who gathered by the stage door before the show . " 
 Robert Hilburn from the Los Angeles Times commented : " Madonna represents a contemporary fantasy figure that revives the glamour , innocence and raw sexuality of many of Madonna 's own teen heroes , including Marilyn Monroe and James Dean . Like the early Monroe , Madonna may portray a bimbo , but there she 's clearly no pushover . Though the audience was on its feet throughout , it often seemed that Madonna was operating beneath her potential in this pop format . It 's important to demonstrate that she can handle herself live , but the simplicity of pop concerts doesn 't begin to tax her ambition or talent . In fact , she has so little to do other than express this aggressive , sexy attitude that the show seemed long at just over an hour . Heidi Sherman from Spin commented , " The Virgin Tour was Madonna 's first , yet it put her in the same league as Prince and Bruce Springsteen . It proved that Madonna was beyond real . And if her stage presence indicated she was more showgirl than musician , at least she knew how to <unk> up her act for the postfeminist MTV age . Boy Toy ? Not exactly . She was a bonafide pop star in the process of becoming a cultural icon . " 
 Laura <unk> from South Florida Sun @-@ Sentinel felt that " ' Virgin Tour ' establishes Madonna more as a bimbo , rather than the strong , independent woman people think her to be . " David O 'Reilly from Philadelphia Daily News said that with the concert " Madonna proved once more why she was called a ' talentless bimbo ' ; it was utter trash . " Richard <unk> of Orlando Sentinel gave a positive review , saying " Madonna 's ' Virgin Tour ' was very enjoyable and she put her music video charms in her live performances . " Maya <unk> from The Miami Herald said that " We know [ Madonna is ] sexy , exotically beautiful and her funk / pop songs make us want to dance , but on stage , she is extremely tame compared to her raw persona in her music videos . She is like daddy 's little girl . " Mary Edgar Smith from The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution observed that " It was obvious from the apparel of the young girls at last week 's Virgin Tour concerts in Tampa and Orlando , Fla . , that the 26 @-@ year @-@ old singer [ Madonna ] had more to give to the music world than what others suggest . She will be a force to be reckoned with . " Stephen Holden from The New York Times commented , " While her pubescent lookalike fans cheer approvingly , the star 's manipulation of such symbols as a wedding gown , a cross , furs and jewels becomes a lighthearted communal psychodrama . Madonna has brought traditional little girl 's games of dress @-@ up and playing with dolls ( using oneself as model ) into the television age by turning them into a public spectacle . " A review in Variety by John Gleeson said that " Madonna 's singing was like a soundtrack to a more visceral display of herself , her persona , her nonstop dancing and her surprisingly explicit sexual dare , which included a visual climax — so to speak — to every other song . " Paul Grein from Billboard said that " Madonna 's show was stylish , well @-@ paced and consistently entertaining . " 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 As soon as the tour was announced , tickets were sold out almost everywhere . In San Francisco , tour shirts were selling at a clocked rate of one every six seconds . All 17 @,@ 672 tickets for Madonna 's show at New York City 's Radio City Music Hall were completely sold out in a record @-@ breaking 34 minutes . Both the shows at Chicago 's UIC Pavilion were sold in a single day with a record breaking 18 @,@ 000 tickets being sold . In Philadelphia , record breaking 31 @,@ 000 tickets were sold in under four hours . Along with ticket sales , merchandise associated with the tour also sold rapidly . T @-@ shirts , posters and promo @-@ magazines featuring Madonna 's image were picked up by the fans , even though most them were overpriced compared to the market value . After its end , the Virgin Tour was reported to have grossed over $ 5 million ( $ 11 million in 2016 dollars ) , with Billboard Boxscore reporting a gross of $ 3 @.@ 3 million ( $ 7 @.@ 26 million in 2016 dollars ) . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 The 1985 Madonna Live : The Virgin Tour VHS documents a Detroit stop on the tour . " Angel " , " Borderline " and " Burning Up " were part of the tour set list but were not included on the official VHS release . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of 50 @,@ 000 copies and received a " Video Software Dealers Award " for the Most Popular Music Video in September 1986 . The video received mixed reviews from critics . Annie Temple from Philadelphia Daily News said that the release was " not so flattering " and " was a sloppy job " . Dennis Hunt from the Los Angeles Times said that " the video is sometimes distracting and blurry , wonder what went wrong during recording . The angles are awkward , especially when the audience members are shown touching Madonna 's hand . Was it really necessary to show a fan coming unannounced on the stage ? " Terry Atkinson from the same paper said , " This follows the typical concert video format of putting you in the best seat in the hall and letting the aura of a superior performer <unk> your senses . " Joe Logan and Gail <unk> from The Wichita Eagle said that " seeing Madonna live in an arena and seeing her up , close and personal in the tour cassette is totally different . The energy , the movements , the provocation — all captures you more . " The release debuted at 14 on Billboard 's Top Music Videocassettes chart , on December 7 , 1985 , and reached a peak of 11 , the next week . The video started a slow climb on the chart , and on the issue dated January 18 , 1986 , it reached the top of the chart , replacing Prince & The Revolution : Live by The Revolution . On May 24 , 1986 , the video again climbed back in the top ten of the chart , at position two . It was present on the chart for a total of 65 weeks . Live – The Virgin Tour was the top selling music videocassette for 1986 . The video was certified two @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of 200 @,@ 000 copies and received a " Video Software Dealers Award " for the Most Popular Music Video , in September 1986 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 When the tour first started , people — especially women — thronged to see it wearing clothes inspired by Madonna . Debbi Voller , author of Madonna : The Style Book , observed that " Hundreds of thousands of young girls came to the concert dressed like her , with bleached and tousled hair , see @-@ through tops , bras , fingerless gloves and crucifixes . Magazines and TV shows ran lookalike competitions . " This frenzy regarding Madonna gave rise to a new term called Madonna wannabe — a word that was ultimately officially recognized by the Webster 's Dictionary in May 1991 . Madonna was mystified as to why all the women would want to copy her look . She commented , 
 " I never set out to be a role model . I am a strong woman , a successful woman , and I don 't conform to a stereotype . For so long women have been told that there are certain ways they mustn 't look if they want to get ahead in life . And there I was dressing in a forbidden way and yet obviously in charge of my life . It was then I realized why were all of them out there in their seats , dressing like me . " 
 While the tour was going on , the American lingerie industry reported that their turnover was suddenly up by 40 percent and that Madonna 's image was responsible for this underwear revival . Sam Gower from Rolling Stone commented , " In the sixties , women burned their bras , now they wear five at a time , and bare their belly buttons . Madonna has done for the corset and crucifix what punk did for the safety pin . Macy 's New York department store was flooded with buyers , who bought the tour merchandise like the crucifix earrings and fingerless gloves . " The demand was so huge that Macy 's had to refill the merchandise time again . Madonna 's subversive antics on the tour provoked fiery and antics among the press . Rolling Stone said : " Like Marilyn Monroe , Madonna is bent on epitomizing and championing a vision of female sexuality , and like Monroe she is often dismissed as an artist for doing so . " Suzanne Ferriss , author of On Fashion said that " Virgin Tour exemplified Madonna 's extended desire to treat boys as toys and her chastity belt coming off at her own whim and desire . Her dance numbers with men during the tour shows them as her underlings , accessories that she toys with and totally dominates . " 
 = = Set list = = 
 " Dress You Up " 
 " Holiday " 
 " Into the Groove " 
 " Everybody " 
 " Angel " 
 " Gambler " 
 " Borderline " 
 " Lucky Star " 
 " Crazy for You " 
 " Over and Over " 
 " Burning Up " 
 " Like a Virgin " ( contains excerpts from " Billie Jean " ) 
 " Material Girl " 
 Source : 
 = = Shows = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Madonna – vocals 
 Ian Knight – set designer 
 Brad Jeffries – choreographer 
 Patrick Leonard – keyboards / MD 
 Billy Meyers – keyboards 
 Jonathan P. Moffet – drums 
 Bill Lanphier – bass guitar / synth bass 
 James Harrah – guitars 
 Paul Pesco – guitars 
 Michael Perea – backup dancer 
 Lyndon B. Johnson – backup dancer 
 Freddy DeMann – personal management , for Weisner @-@ DeMann Entertainment 
 Dave Kob – audio mixing 
 Maripol – costume designer 
 = Hurricane Kyle ( 2002 ) = 
 Hurricane Kyle was the fifth longest @-@ lived Atlantic tropical or subtropical cyclone on record . The eleventh named storm and third hurricane of the 2002 Atlantic hurricane season , Kyle developed as a subtropical cyclone on September 20 to the east @-@ southeast of Bermuda . Looping westward , it transitioned into a tropical cyclone and became a hurricane on September 25 . For the next two weeks , Kyle tracked generally westward , oscillating in strength several times because of fluctuations in environmental conditions . On October 11 , the cyclone turned northeastward and made landfalls near Charleston , South Carolina , and Long Beach , North Carolina , at tropical storm status . After lasting as a cyclone for 22 days , Kyle dissipated on October 12 as it was absorbed by an approaching cold front . 
 The hurricane brought light precipitation to Bermuda , but no significant damage was reported there . Moderate rainfall accompanied its two landfalls in the United States , causing localized flash flooding and road closures . Floodwaters forced the evacuation of a nursing home and several mobile homes in South Carolina . Kyle spawned at least four tornadoes , the costliest of which struck Georgetown , South Carolina ; it damaged 106 buildings and destroyed seven others , causing eight injuries . Overall damage totaled about $ 5 million ( 2002 USD , $ 6 @.@ 58 million 2016 USD ) , and no direct deaths were reported . However , the remnants of Kyle contributed to one indirect death in the British Isles . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A cold front stalled and began weakening to the southeast of Bermuda on September 15 , spawning a low @-@ pressure area by September 18 . A stationary wind circulation developed around the low by September 19 , aided by a trough aloft to its west . Convection developed into narrow banding features far from the center , and the overall structure gradually consolidated . It is estimated that the system developed into a subtropical depression late on September 20 , about 490 miles southeast of Bermuda ; it was classified subtropical because of the large distance between the convection and the center , uncharacteristic of purely tropical systems . The cyclone tracked northward within the weak steering flow between an upper @-@ level low to its south and a trough to its north . Strengthening gradually , the depression attained subtropical storm status early on September 21 , and as such was named Kyle by the National Hurricane Center . 
 After being named , Kyle tracked north @-@ northeastward before gradually executing a clockwise loop . Initially , the circulation center remained partly exposed to the south and west of the deep convection . On September 22 , the convection increased around the center as the system developed a warm thermal core , and as a result it was reclassified as a fully tropical cyclone . A building anticyclone to the northwest turned Kyle to the southwest . After the storm briefly weakened , previously moderate wind shear began decreasing , which allowed convection to deepen and the outflow over the cyclone to improve . Tracking over progressively warmer waters , Kyle began developing a banding eye feature late on September 24 . Slow strengthening continued , and the storm attained hurricane status at 1200 UTC on September 25 . The next day , Kyle reached peak winds of 85 mph ( 130 km / h ) about 490 miles east @-@ southeast of Bermuda . 
 After maintaining its peak intensity for about 24 hours , Kyle began weakening on September 27 as increased upper @-@ level shear restricted outflow and distorted the convection envelope ; drier air also contributed to the weakening . On September 28 , after turning west @-@ northwestward , the hurricane weakened to tropical storm status , and by the next day the center had become devoid of deep convection . A trough passing to its north and a developing ridge to its west left the storm nearly stationary for several days . The weakening rate of Kyle was temporarily halted when thunderstorms redeveloped on September 29 and again early the next day , though late on September 30 the storm weakened to tropical depression status . The circulation had become elongated from northeast to southwest . The northeastern portion became associated with the approaching frontal zone , and was briefly monitored for signs of development . However , the southwestern portion redeveloped convection and became the dominant circulation . 
 Remaining a tropical depression for about 18 hours , Kyle re @-@ intensified to tropical storm status on October 1 , after redeveloping some thunderstorms southeast of the center . Despite unfavorable wind shear , the convection became better organized , developing into rain bands and wrapping into the mid @-@ level circulation of the storm . Late on October 2 , Kyle developed an eye feature in the center of the storm , and the winds increased to about 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) ; operationally it was forecast to regain hurricane status . However , the storm encountered further wind shear , which left the center exposed from the convection by early on October 4 . Convection became intermittent and separated from the circulation , and Kyle again weakened to tropical depression status on October 5 . By then , the storm had begun a steady west @-@ northwest motion , which was followed by a slow turn to the north @-@ northeast . On October 6 , a decrease in wind shear allowed the cyclone to again reach tropical storm status , about 295 miles ( 475 km ) west @-@ northwest of Bermuda . Around the same time , the system was located in an area of weak steering currents ; a ridge was to its northeast and southwest , an upper @-@ level low was to its east @-@ southeast , and a broad trough was to its northwest . By October 7 , it began a slow southwestward motion around a ridge to its west . The circulation became elongated as dry air limited convection , and after shear increased on October 8 , Kyle weakened to tropical depression status . 
 By early on October 9 , the depression consisted of a circulation center without any of the associated deep convection that is one of the prerequisites of being a tropical cyclone . Several hurricane forecast models predicted Kyle to weaken until dissipation . After 24 hours without significant convection , thunderstorms reformed to the southeast of the center on October 10 as the depression entered an area of warmer water temperatures . Environmental conditions became more favorable , with weakening wind shear and decreasing dry air . The depression continued tracking around a ridge , turning to the west and west @-@ northwest toward the coast of Florida . Convection increased markedly early on October 11 as it turned northward ahead of an approaching cold front , and Kyle regained tropical storm status about 35 miles ( 60 km ) east of the border between Florida and Georgia . 
 After re @-@ attaining tropical storm status , Kyle turned more to the northeast and parallel to the coastline , making landfall near McClellanville , South Carolina as a minimal tropical storm . The storm briefly moved over open waters before again making landfall near Long Beach , North Carolina late on October 11 . By early on October 12 , the storm had weakened to tropical depression status . At the time of it moving ashore , there was a separate non @-@ tropical low to the northeast of the depression , and shear had greatly increased , which made re @-@ intensification unlikely . However , convection redeveloped baroclinically with the approaching cold front , and Kyle attained tropical storm status for the fifth time over the eastern Pamlico Sound . The restrengthening was short @-@ lived , as the wind field expanded while the convection transitioned into that of a frontal band . After emerging into the western Atlantic Ocean , Tropical Storm Kyle merged with a cold front late on October 12 . The remnants of Kyle continued eastward , executing a loop on October 14 before turning northeastward and impacting the Azores on October 17 . The next day , the remnants of Kyle were absorbed by an extratropical cyclone to its northwest , which continued northeastward and moved near the British Isles on October 23 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Because of uncertainties in its track , the government of Bermuda posted a tropical storm watch for the island on September 30 ; it was discontinued the following day . 
 As Kyle approached the coast of Florida , a tropical storm watch was issued between Cocoa Beach , Florida and Brunswick , Georgia , and later was extended northward to Edisto Beach , South Carolina . Early on October 11 , a tropical storm warning was put in place between Brunswick , Georgia and Cape Fear , North Carolina , which was later amended to include the Pamlico Sound and the coastline through Surf City , North Carolina . Prior to it making landfall , the National Weather Service office in Wilmington , North Carolina issued a flood watch for much of the coastline that was ultimately affected ; in South Carolina , a flood warning was issued for the counties of Florence , Williamsburg , and Georgetown . States of emergencies were declared for ten South Carolina counties . 
 = = Impact = = 
 On Bermuda , the combination of the storm and a cold front to its north produced 2 @.@ 19 inches ( 55 @.@ 6 mm ) of rainfall in the first two days of October , which was about half of the monthly rainfall total . 
 While passing near the northeast coast of Florida , Kyle produced a storm surge of 1 @.@ 31 feet ( 0 @.@ 4 m ) in Fernandina Beach . Winds were light , with gusts peaking at 32 mph ( 52 km / h ) in St. Augustine , and precipitation reached 2 @.@ 05 inches ( 52 mm ) in Fernandina Beach . Along the Georgia coastline , the storm dropped moderate rainfall that peaked at 5 @.@ 35 inches ( 136 mm ) at Hunter Army Airfield . Most of the precipitation fell in a 12 ‑ hour period , which flooded roads and low @-@ lying areas ; several roads were closed , and numerous vehicles stalled in the floodwaters . 
 Moderate rainfall from Kyle in South Carolina peaked at 6 @.@ 35 inches ( 161 mm ) in Edisto Beach , with the precipitation resulting in minor urban flooding . In and around St. Stephen , flooding reached several feet in depth in roads and buildings ; there , a nursing home had to be evacuated because of flooding . High waters in Manning severely damaged 17 mobile homes , forcing about 50 people to move to shelters . Ten car accidents were reported in Florence . The tropical storm spawned an F2 tornado in Georgetown that remained on the ground for about 1 @.@ 25 miles ( 2 km ) . At its peak strength , the tornado overturned five mobile homes and a car . The tornado destroyed seven homes and damaged 106 buildings , 28 severely . Eight people were injured by the tornado . 
 In North Carolina , above @-@ normal tides caused minor beach erosion . Rainfall near the coastline reached 5 @.@ 6 inches ( 142 mm ) in Greenville . Moisture from the storm led to increased rainfall further inland , peaking at 8 @.@ 72 inches ( 221 mm ) in Butner . Raleigh @-@ Durham recorded a two @-@ day rainfall total of 5 @.@ 79 inches ( 147 mm ) , which was the highest two @-@ day total at the station since Hurricane Floyd in 1999 . Heavy rainfall caused flash flooding in Martin County , where several roads were closed . Moderate winds were reported in the state , with gusts peaking at 49 mph ( 79 km / h ) on Bald Head Island . The storm spawned at least three tornadoes in the state , including an F2 twister near <unk> that damaged two houses and a farm . 
 Moisture from Kyle extended into the Mid @-@ Atlantic states and southern New York . The precipitation alleviated rainfall deficits throughout the region . Overall damage amounted to about $ 5 million ( 2002 USD , $ 6 @.@ 58 million 2016 USD ) . While no deaths were reported directly from Kyle , its remnants contributed to one death in stormy seas off the British Isles . 
 = = Records = = 
 Lasting for a total of 22 days , Hurricane Kyle was operationally considered the third longest @-@ lived tropical cyclone in the Atlantic basin ; Kyle was behind Hurricane Ginger in the 1971 season with 27 @.@ 25 days and Hurricane Inga in the 1969 season with 24 @.@ 75 days . However , an update to the Atlantic hurricane best track in 2004 led to the San Ciriaco Hurricane of 1899 to be re @-@ analyzed as the longest @-@ lived Atlantic tropical cyclone on record , and as a result Kyle was dropped to the fourth longest @-@ lived . In September 2012 , Hurricane Nadine surpassed Kyle as the fourth longest @-@ lived cyclone at 22 @.@ 25 days , dropping Kyle to fifth longest @-@ lived . Kyle was the only Atlantic tropical cyclone on record to attain tropical storm status on five occasions . 
 = Meerkat Manor : The Story Begins = 
 Meerkat Manor : The Story Begins is a 2008 television film created by Discovery Films and Oxford Scientific Films as a prequel to the Animal Planet series Meerkat Manor . A scripted documentary narrated by Whoopi Goldberg , the film details the life of a meerkat named Flower from birth to her becoming the leader of a meerkat group called the Whiskers . The film is based on the research notes of the Kalahari Meerkat Project and primarily uses wild meerkat " actors " to represent those in the story . Shot over two years at the Kuruman River Reserve in Northern Cape , South Africa , the film employed a much larger crew than the series . Some scenes were shot at a wildlife park in the United Kingdom , while others were created using camera tricks and trained film animals . 
 The 75 @-@ minute film premiered at the 2008 Tribeca Film Festival before its television premiere on Animal Planet on May 25 , 2008 . While it was praised for its cinematography , for maintaining the depth of coverage of the television series , and for its accessibility to newcomers to the series , it was criticized for not offering anything new to fans . The Kalahari Meerkat Project noted that the film was not completely accurate but praised it overall and recommended against analyzing it . Several reviewers praised Goldberg 's narration , but the script was criticized as being too simplistic for adult viewers . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The meerkat Flower is born in the Kalahari Desert on March 15 , 2000 , to Holly , the leader of a meerkat group called the Whiskers . After an attack by a rival group , the Lazuli , the Whiskers are forced to surrender their territory and move to a new home . A hawk kills Holly when Flower is a year old , and her father abandons the group to find a new mate . Flower 's sister Viale becomes the group 's matriarch and chooses <unk> , a roving male from the Lazuli , as her mate . Flower mates with <unk> 's brother , Zaphod , but Viale kills the resulting pups and banishes Flower from the group , allowing her to return later . During a time of starvation and drought , Viale attempts to lead the group across a road to forage . As she crosses , she is struck and killed by a passing truck . As the Whiskers attempt to adjust to the loss of their leader , a snake approaches the group . Flower steps in to lead an attack to drive it off . In doing so , she becomes the new leader of the group . Zaphod returns to the group to be her mate , while <unk> steps aside and leaves the group . Flower leads the Whiskers back to their original home , and after a brief battle , the Whiskers reclaim it from the Lazuli . At end of the film , an on @-@ screen note describes Flower 's death during the third season of Meerkat Manor and the children she left behind . 
 = = Production = = 
 Created by Oxford Scientific Films for Discovery Films , Meerkat Manor : The Story Begins is a prequel biography of Flower , the central meerkat of the highly rated documentary series Meerkat Manor . Caroline Hawkins , creator of the series , wrote the script using notes taken by Kalahari Meerkat Project researchers , including head researcher Tim Clutton @-@ Brock . Hawkins notes that Oxford Scientific Films believes the film is the first natural history prequel to be created . The film was directed by Chris Barker and Mike Slee , while Whoopi Goldberg , a known Meerkat Manor fan , provided the narration . 
 Meerkat Manor normally films episodes using a crew of only two or three people to avoid disturbing the meerkats ; the film was shot over two years at the Kuruman River Reserve , where the Kalahari Meerkat Project that the meerkats are a part of is based , and employed a much larger crew . Breaking from the series ' pure documentary format , the film does not include footage of the project meerkats depicted in the story . Instead , wild meerkat " actors " represented Flower and her family ; Flower was depicted by approximately eight female meerkats . The camera crew sought out appropriately aged meerkats for each scene , then filmed them until they behaved in ways the script required . 
 While the majority of the meerkats filmed were partially habituated , the cinematographers had to move carefully to avoid scaring the animals . The crew used radios to keep in contact with one another as they followed the meerkat groups around . Although the park normally prohibits low @-@ flying aircraft , the production crew was given permission to film for three days using a low @-@ flying helicopter . Mounted to its front underside was a new type of camera that was not affected by the shaking of the helicopter . Full @-@ color scenes depicting the birth of meerkat pups were obtained by filming captive meerkats at the Cotswold Wildlife Park in the United Kingdom . 
 Because of the viewer backlash Animal Planet received for allowing meerkats from the Meerkat Manor series to die , the producers of the film debated including the filmed death of a young meerkat who was bitten by a snake . They questioned whether viewers would understand that the meerkats were wild animals and that human interference would disrupt the animals ' natural life cycles . In addition , to avoid disrupting the research , crews are only allowed to film within the research area under a strictly enforced agreement not to interfere with the meerkats ' lives . The producers ultimately included the scene , but the meerkat 's cries for help as it lay dying were edited out . Other meerkat deaths depicted were reenactments . For Viale 's death scene , the crew rigged a camera mounted on a platform on the side of a truck . Robin Smith , the film and series main cinematographer , hung partially out of the truck to hold the camera steady , giving the visual impression of a truck bearing down on a meerkat . To provide bird and snake footage , professional handlers were employed , ensuring the meerkats were not deliberately put in danger . 
 In 2007 , the real Flower was killed by a snake bite — before the film and the third series of Meerkat Manor had finished shooting . According to Executive producer Mick Kaczorowski , Flower 's death imposed the need for a " bigger " ending to the film than the producers originally planned ; Flower 's death was addressed and the coda added . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The film premiered at the 2008 Tribeca Film Festival on April 30 in the Spotlight section , before airing in the United States on Animal Planet on May 25 . Its television premiere was followed by the 30 @-@ minute Making of Meerkat Manor : The Story Begins special . The film was screened at the 2008 Festival du film <unk> de Dinard in France , as The <unk> , and at the Wildscreen Festival in Bristol on October 18 and October 24 , 2008 . 
 It was released to Region 1 DVD in North America on June 3 , 2008 , with the Making of ... special included as an extra . The DVD also includes another special , The Science of Meerkat Manor , giving viewers a look at how the Kalahari Meerkat Project researchers work with the meerkats . It is scheduled for Region 2 DVD release in the United Kingdom on November 2 , 2009 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2009 , the film was nominated by the Cinema Audio Society for an award in the " Outstanding Achievement in Sound Mixing for DVD Original Programming " category , losing out to the music documentary If All Goes Wrong . Variety 's Ronnie Scheib did not think that Meerkat Manor : The Story Begins offered anything new for viewers of the television series , feeling that it was a " re @-@ edited , re @-@ scored , re @-@ narrated " version of the existing series . While he found Goldberg 's narration to be higher quality than in most documentaries of this type , he also felt that it " pales after a while . " Scheib praised the film for its cinematography and the depth and quality of coverage of the meerkats , and said their activities " constantly amaze " , while noting that the film was a condensed and embellished version of actual events that did not distort the meerkats ' story . The Friends of the Kalahari Meerkat Project , a sponsorship for the research group studying the meerkats , thought the film was a " heart @-@ touching tribute to Flower , with amazing meerkat , landscape and wildlife footage " . Though the group noted that the film changes some details from the life history reports it was based on , they felt the film should be enjoyed rather than analyzed . Common Sense Media reviewer Emily Ashby felt the film was accessible to fans and newcomers to the series ; she praised the story 's scope and emotional impact , calling it a " captivating journey " that did not avoid depicting the " harsh facts of life in the wild " . David Lowe from The Sun found the film to be " charming " and a " fantastic documentary [ that ] manages to be both educational and incredibly entertaining . " 
 = National symbols of Pakistan = 
 Pakistan has several official national symbols including a historic document , a flag , an emblem , an anthem , a memorial tower as well as several national heroes . The symbols were adopted at various stages in the existence of Pakistan and there are various rules and regulations governing their definition or use . The oldest symbol is the Lahore Resolution , adopted by the All India Muslim League on 23 March 1940 , and which presented the official demand for the creation of a separate country for the Muslims of India . The Minar @-@ e @-@ Pakistan memorial tower which was built in 1968 on the site where the Lahore Resolution was passed . The national flag was adopted just before independence was achieved on 14 August 1947 . The national anthem and the state emblem were each adopted in 1954 . There are also several other symbols including the national animal , bird , flower and tree . 
 = = Lahore Resolution and Minar @-@ e @-@ Pakistan = = 
 The Lahore Resolution ( <unk> @-@ e @-@ Lahore ) ) ( Urdu : <unk> <unk> ) , also known as the Pakistan Resolution , was a formal political statement adopted by the All India Muslim League at the occasion of its three @-@ day general session on 22 – 24 March 1940 at Minto Park ( now Iqbal Park ) , Lahore . The resolution called for greater Muslim autonomy in British India and has been largely interpreted as a demand for a separate Muslim state . The idea of separate state for Indian Muslims was first suggested by Muhammad Iqbal in 1930 and the name of Pakistan was proposed by Choudhary Rahmat Ali in his Pakistan Declaration pamphlet in 1933 . Initially , Muhammad Ali Jinnah and other leaders were in favour of Hindu @-@ Muslim unity , but the volatile political climate and religious hostilities of the 1930s made the idea more appealing . In his speech , Jinnah criticised the Indian National Congress and the nationalist Muslims , and espoused the Two @-@ Nation Theory and the reasons for the demand for separate Muslim homelands . Sikandar Hayat Khan , the Chief Minister of the Punjab , drafted the original resolution , but disavowed the final version , which followed endless redrafting by the Subject Committee of the Muslim League . The text unambiguously rejected the concept of a " United India " because of increasing inter @-@ communal violence and recommended the creation of an independent Muslim state . The resolution was moved in the general session by A.K. Fazlul Huq , Chief Minister of Bengal and was supported seconded by several leaders . The principle text of the Lahore Resolution was passed on 24 March 1940 . In 1941 it became part of the Muslim League 's constitution . By 1946 , it formed the basis for the struggle of the Muslim League for a separate Muslim state . The statement declared : 
 No constitutional plan would be workable or acceptable to the Muslims unless geographical contiguous units are demarcated into regions which should be so constituted with such territorial readjustments as may be necessary . That the areas in which the Muslims are numerically in majority as in the North @-@ Western and Eastern zones of India should be grouped to constitute independent states in which the constituent units shall be autonomous and sovereign … That adequate , effective and mandatory safeguards shall be specifically provided in the constitution for minorities in the units and in the regions for the protection of their religious , cultural , economic , political , administrative and other rights of the minorities , with their consultation . Arrangements thus should be made for the security of Muslims where they were in a minority . 
 The Minar @-@ e @-@ Pakistan ( Urdu : <unk> <unk> ; <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> ) or Tower of Pakistan is a 60 metre tall concrete minaret in Iqbal Park in Lahore . The Minar was built on the site where the Muslim League passed the Lahore Resolution , demanding the creation of Pakistan . Pakistan now celebrates this day as a national holiday each year under the name of Pakistan Day which is also the day in 1956 when the country became the first Islamic Republic in the world . It was designed by Muhammad Wali Ullah Khan and built by Mian Abdul Khaliq Company . The base of the tower is raised about 4 metres from the ground . The next 13 metres form a sculpted , flower @-@ like base and from this point the Minar tapers as it rises . The base platform is shaped like a five @-@ pointed star and it encloses crescent shaped pools . It is constructed of reinforced concrete , with the floors and walls rendered in stone and marble . 
 = = National flag = = 
 The national flag was designed by Muhammad Ali Jinnah , the founder of Pakistan , and was based on the original flag of the Muslim League . It was adopted by the Constituent Assembly on August 11 , 1947 , just days before independence . The flag is referred to in the national anthem as Parcham @-@ e @-@ <unk> @-@ o @-@ <unk> in Urdu ( lit . Flag of the Crescent and Star ) . The flag comprises a dark green field , representing the Muslim majority of Pakistan , with a vertical white stripe in the hoist , representing religious minorities . In the centre is a white crescent moon , representing progress , and a white five @-@ pointed star , representing light and knowledge . The flag symbolizes Pakistan 's commitment to Islam , the Islamic world and the rights of religious minorities . The flag is flown on several important days of the year including Republic Day and Independence Day . The flag is also flown on the residences and motor vehicles of many public officials including the President and the Prime Minister . 
 = = National anthem = = 
 The national anthem of Pakistan or <unk> <unk> Urdu : <unk> <unk> , is played during any event involving the hoisting of the flag , for example Republic Day ( March 23 ) and Independence Day ( August 14 ) . The Constituent Assembly had not adopted a national anthem by the time Pakistan became independent , so when the flag was hoisted at the independence ceremony it was accompanied by the song , " Pakistan <unk> , Azadi <unk> " . Muhammad Ali Jinnah asked a Lahore @-@ based Hindu writer , Jagan Nath Azad , to write a national anthem for Pakistan . Jinnah may have done this to promote a more secular idealism for Pakistan . The anthem written by Azad was quickly approved by Jinnah , and it was played on Radio Pakistan . Azad 's work remained as Pakistan ’ s national anthem for about eighteen months . 
 A National Anthem Committee was formed in 1948 , but it had difficulty finding suitable music and lyrics . The impending state visit of the Shah of Iran in 1950 , resulted in the hasty adoption of a three stanza composition by Ahmed <unk> <unk> . Initially it was performed without lyrics for the Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan on August 10 , 1950 and was approved for playing during the visit of the Shah . However , the anthem was not officially adopted until August 1954 . The National Anthem Committee eventually approved lyrics written by Abu @-@ Al @-@ Asar Hafeez <unk> and the new national anthem was first played properly on Radio Pakistan on August 13 , 1954 . Official approval was announced by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting on August 16 , 1954 followed by a performance of the national anthem in 1955 involving eleven major singers of Pakistan including Ahmad Rushdi . 
 = = State emblem = = 
 The State Emblem was adopted in 1954 and symbolizes Pakistan 's ideological foundation , the basis of its economy , its cultural heritage and its guiding principles . The four components of the emblem are a crescent and star crest above a shield , which is surrounded by a wreath , below which is a scroll . The crest and the green colour of the emblem are traditional symbols of Islam . The quartered shield in the centre shows cotton , wheat , tea and jute , which were the major crops of Pakistan at independence and signify the agricultural base of the economy . The floral wreath , surrounding the shield , represents the floral designs used in traditional Mughal art and emphasizes the cultural heritage of Pakistan . 
 = = Nation 's Motto = = 
 The scroll supporting the shield contains Muhammad Ali Jinnah 's motto in Urdu , which reads from right to left : ( <unk> ، <unk> ، <unk> ) " Iman , Ittehad , <unk> " translated as " Faith , Unity , Discipline " and are intended as the guiding principles for Pakistan . 
 = = Other symbols = = 
 = Spirited Away = 
 Spirited Away ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Sen to Chihiro no Kamikakushi , " Sen and Chihiro 's <unk> Away " ) is a 2001 Japanese anime fantasy film written and directed by Hayao Miyazaki and produced by Studio Ghibli . The film stars Rumi Hiiragi , Miyu Irino , Mari Natsuki , Takeshi Naito , Yasuko <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Takehiko Ono and <unk> Sugawara , and tells the story of Chihiro <unk> ( Hiiragi ) , a sullen ten @-@ year @-@ old girl who , while moving to a new neighborhood , enters the spirit world . After her parents are transformed into pigs by the witch Yubaba ( Natsuki ) , Chihiro takes a job working in Yubaba 's bathhouse to find a way to free herself and her parents and return to the human world . 
 Miyazaki wrote the script after he decided the film would be based on the ten @-@ year @-@ old daughter of his friend , associate producer Seiji Okuda , who came to visit his house each summer . At the time , Miyazaki was developing two personal projects , but they were rejected . With a budget of US $ 19 million , production of Spirited Away began in 2000 . During production , Miyazaki realized the film would be over three hours long and decided to cut out several parts of the story . Pixar director John Lasseter , a fan of Miyazaki , was approached by Walt Disney Pictures to supervise an English @-@ language translation for the film 's North American release . Lasseter hired Kirk Wise as director and Donald W. Ernst as producer of the adaptation . Screenwriters Cindy Davis Hewitt and Donald H. Hewitt wrote the English @-@ language dialogue , which they wrote to match the characters ' original Japanese @-@ language lip movements . 
 The film was released on 20 July 2001 , and became the most successful film in Japanese history , grossing about $ 289 million worldwide and receiving widespread critical acclaim . The film overtook Titanic ( at the time the top grossing film worldwide ) in the Japanese box office to become the highest @-@ grossing film in Japanese history with a ¥ 30 @.@ 4 billion total . Spirited Away is frequently ranked among the greatest animated films . It won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature at the 75th Academy Awards ( Making it the only hand drawn animated film and Japanese animated film to win best animated film ) , the Golden Bear at the 2002 Berlin International Film Festival ( tied with Bloody Sunday ) and is among the top ten in the BFI list of the 50 films you should see by the age of 14 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ten @-@ year @-@ old Chihiro <unk> and her parents are traveling to their new home when her father takes a wrong turn . They unknowingly enter a magical world that Chihiro 's father insists on exploring . While Chihiro 's parents eat like pigs at an empty restaurant stall , Chihiro finds an exquisite bathhouse and meets a young boy named Haku who warns her to return across the river before sunset . However , Chihiro discovers too late that her parents have turned into pigs and she is unable to cross the flooded river , becoming trapped in the spirit world . 
 After finding Chihiro , Haku has her ask for a job from the bathhouse 's boiler @-@ man , <unk> , a spider yōkai commanding the <unk> . <unk> and the worker Lin send Chihiro to the witch , Yubaba , who runs the bathhouse ; she gives Chihiro a job but renames her Sen ( 千 ) . While visiting her parents ' pigpen , Sen finds a goodbye card addressed to Chihiro and realizes that she has already forgotten her name . Haku warns her that Yubaba controls people by taking their names and that if she forgets hers like he has forgotten his , she will not be able to leave the spirit world . While working , Sen invites a silent masked creature named No @-@ Face inside , believing him to be a customer . A ' stink spirit ' arrives as Sen 's first customer . She discovers he is the spirit of a polluted river . In gratitude for cleaning him , he gives Sen a magic emetic dumpling . Meanwhile , No @-@ Face tempts a worker with gold , then swallows him . He demands food and begins tipping extensively . As the workers swarm him hoping to be tipped , he swallows yet another two greedy workers . 
 Sen discovers paper <unk> attacking a dragon and recognizes the dragon as Haku transformed . When a grievously @-@ injured Haku crashes into Yubaba 's penthouse , Sen follows him upstairs . When she reaches Haku , a <unk> that stowed away on her back transforms into Zeniba , Yubaba 's twin sister . She transforms Yubaba 's baby son Boh into a mouse , creates a decoy baby and turns Yubaba 's bird creature into a tiny bird . Zeniba tells Sen that Haku has stolen a magic golden seal from her , and warns Sen that it carries a deadly curse . After Haku dives to the boiler room with Sen and Boh on his back , she feeds him part of the dumpling , causing him to vomit both the seal and a black slug , which Sen crushes with her foot . 
 With Haku unconscious , Sen resolves to return the seal and apologize for Haku . Before she leaves the bathhouse , Sen confronts No @-@ Face , who is now massive and feeds him the rest of the dumpling . No @-@ Face chases Sen out of the bathhouse , steadily vomiting out those he has eaten . Sen , No @-@ Face and Boh travel to see Zeniba . Enraged at the damage caused by No @-@ Face , Yubaba blames Sen for inviting him in and orders that her parents be slaughtered . After Haku reveals that Boh is missing , he promises to retrieve Boh in exchange for Yubaba freeing Sen and her parents . 
 Sen , No @-@ Face and Boh arrive at Zeniba 's house , where Zeniba , now the benevolent " Granny " , reveals that Sen 's love for Haku broke her curse and that Yubaba had used the black slug to control Haku . Haku appears in his dragon form and flies both Sen and Boh back to the bathhouse . No @-@ Face unexpectedly shows itself as a very good spinner for Zeniba and accepts her proposal to stay as a worker . On the way back , Sen recalls a memory from her youth in which she had fallen into the Kohaku River but was washed safely ashore . After correctly guessing that Haku is the spirit of the Kohaku River ( and thus revealing his real name ) , Haku is completely freed from Yubaba 's control . When they arrive at the bathhouse , Yubaba tells Sen that in order to break the curse on her parents , she must identify them from among a group of pigs . After Sen correctly states that none of the pigs are her parents , she is given back her real name Chihiro . Haku takes her to the now dry riverbed and vows to meet her again . Chihiro crosses the river and reunites with her restored parents , who do not remember what happened . They walk back to their car and drive away . 
 = = Voice cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Every summer , Hayao Miyazaki spent his vacation at a mountain cabin with his family and five girls who were friends of the family . The idea for Spirited Away came about when he wanted to make a film for these friends . Miyazaki had previously directed films such as My Neighbor Totoro and Kiki 's Delivery Service , which were for small children and teenagers , but he had not created a film for ten @-@ year @-@ old girls . For inspiration , he read shōjo manga magazines like Nakayoshi and Ribon the girls had left at the cabin , but felt they only offered subjects on " crushes " and romance . When looking at his young friends , Miyazaki felt this was not what they " held dear in their hearts " and decided to produce the film about a girl heroine whom they could look up to instead . 
 Miyazaki wanted to produce a new film for years , he previously wrote two project proposals , but they were rejected . The first one was based on the Japanese book <unk> <unk> Fushigina Machi , and the second one was about a teenage heroine . Miyazaki 's third proposal , which ended up becoming Sen and Chihiro Spirited Away , was more successful . The three stories revolved around a bathhouse that was based on a bathhouse in Miyazaki 's hometown . Miyazaki thought the bathhouse was a mysterious place , and there was a small door next to one of the bathtubs in the bathhouse . Miyazaki was always curious to what was behind it , and he made up several stories about it ; one of which was the inspiration for the bathhouse in Spirited Away . 
 Production of Spirited Away commenced in 2000 on a budget of ¥ 1 @.@ 9 billion ( US $ 19 million ) . Disney invested 10 % of the cost for the right of first refusal for American distribution . As with Princess Mononoke , Miyazaki and the Studio Ghibli staff experimented with computer animation . With the use of more computers and programs such as Softimage , the staff learned the software , but kept the technology at a level to enhance the story , not to " steal the show " . Each character was mostly hand @-@ drawn , with Miyazaki working alongside his animators to see they were getting it just right . The biggest difficulty in making the film was to reduce its length . When production started , Miyazaki realized it would be more than three hours long if he made it according to his plot . He had to delete many scenes from the story , and tried to reduce the " eye @-@ candy " in the film because he wanted it to be simple . Miyazaki did not want to make the hero a " pretty girl . " At the beginning , he was frustrated at how she looked " dull " and thought , " She isn 't cute . Isn 't there something we can do ? " As the film neared the end , however , he was relieved to feel " she will be a charming woman . " 
 Miyazaki based some of the buildings in the spirit world on the buildings in the real @-@ life Edo @-@ Tokyo Open Air Architectural Museum in <unk> , Tokyo , Japan . He often visited the museum for inspiration while working on the film . Miyazaki had always been interested in the Pseudo @-@ Western style buildings from the Meiji period that were available there . The museum made Miyazaki feel nostalgic , " especially when I stand here alone in the evening , near closing time , and the sun is setting – tears well up in my eyes . " Another major inspiration was the <unk> , a traditional Japanese inn located in Yamagata Prefecture , famous for its exquisite architecture and ornamental features . While some guidebooks and articles claim that the old gold town of <unk> in Taiwan served as an inspirational model for the film , Miyazaki has denied this . The <unk> Onsen is also often said to be a key inspiration for the Spirited Away onsen / bathhouse . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The film score of Spirited Away was composed and conducted by Miyazaki 's regular collaborator Joe Hisaishi , and performed by the New Japan Philharmonic . The soundtrack received awards at the 56th Mainichi Film Competition Award for Best Music , the Tokyo International Anime Fair 2001 Best Music Award in the Theater Movie category , and the 17th Japan Gold Disk Award for Animation Album of the Year . Later , Hisaishi added lyrics to " One Summer 's Day " and named the new version " The Name of Life " ( <unk> , " <unk> no Namae " ) which was performed by Ayaka <unk> . 
 The closing song , " Always With Me " ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> , literally , " Always , No Matter How Many Times " ) was written and performed by <unk> Kimura , a composer and lyre @-@ player from Osaka . The lyrics were written by Kimura 's friend Wakako Kaku . The song was intended to be used for Rin the Chimney Painter ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ <unk> no Rin ) , a different Miyazaki film which was never released . In the special features of Japanese DVD , Hayao Miyazaki explains how the song in fact inspired him to create Spirited Away . The song itself would be recognized as Gold at the 43rd Japan Record Awards . 
 Besides the original soundtrack , there is also an image album , titled Spirited Away Image Album ( <unk> <unk> , Sen to Chihiro no Kamikakushi <unk> <unk> ) , that contains 10 tracks . 
 = = = English adaptation = = = 
 Both Walt Disney Pictures and DreamWorks bid for the US distribution rights . Eventually , Disney won the rights to dub the English adaptation of Spirited Away , under the supervision of Pixar animator John Lasseter . A Miyazaki fan , Lasseter would sit with his staff and watch Miyazaki 's work when encountering story problems , and at one point they did so with Spirited Away , which impressed Lasseter . Upon hearing his reaction to the film , people at Disney asked Lasseter if he would be interested in trying to bring Spirited Away to an American audience . Lasseter agreed to be executive producer for English adaptation . Soon , several others began to join the project : Beauty and the Beast co @-@ director Kirk Wise and Aladdin co @-@ producer Donald W. Ernst joined Lasseter as director and producer of Spirited Away respectively . Cindy Davis Hewitt and Donald H. Hewitt penned the English @-@ language dialogue , which they wrote to match the characters ' original Japanese @-@ language lip movements . 
 The cast of the film consisted of <unk> Chase , Jason Marsden , Susan Egan , David Ogden Stiers , and John Ratzenberger . Advertising was limited , and Spirited Away was only mentioned in a small scrolling section of their film page on Disney 's official website . Disney had sidelined their official website for Spirited Away and it remained hidden . The promotion of the film was given a worse treatment than Disney 's own B @-@ movies by comparison . Marc Hairston argues this was a justified response to Ghibli 's retention of the merchandising rights to the film and characters , which imposed a limitation on Disney that did not validate the marketing costs . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The film has been compared to Lewis Carroll 's Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland as the stories have some elements in common such being set in a fantasy world , the plots including a disturbance in logic and stability , and there being motifs such as food having transformational qualities ; though developments and themes are not shared . Among other stories compared to Spirited Away , The Wonderful Wizard of Oz is seen to be more closely linked thematically . 
 The major themes of Spirited Away center on the protagonist Chihiro and her liminal journey through the realm of spirits . The archetypal entrance into another world demarcates Chihiro 's status as one somewhere between child and adult . Chihiro also stands outside societal boundaries in the supernatural setting . The use of the word <unk> ( literally " hidden by gods " ) within the Japanese title , and its associated folklore , reinforces this liminal passage : " Kamikakushi is a verdict of ' social death ' in this world , and coming back to this world from Kamikakushi meant ' social resurrection . ' " 
 Yubaba has many similarities to The Coachman from Pinocchio , in the sense that she transforms humans into pigs in a similar way that the boys of Pleasure Island were transformed into donkeys . Upon gaining employment at the bathhouse , Yubaba 's seizure of Chihiro 's true name symbolically kills the child , who must then assume adulthood . She then undergoes a rite of passage according to the monomyth format ; to recover continuity with her past , Chihiro must create a new identity . 
 Along with its function within the ostensible coming of age theme , Yubaba 's act of taking Chihiro 's name and replacing it with Sen ( literally , " one thousand " ) , is symbolic of capitalism 's single @-@ minded concern with value , illustrative of the film 's exploration of capitalism and its effect on traditional Japanese culture . 
 Yubaba is stylistically unique within the bathhouse , wearing Western dress and living among European décor and furnishings , in contrast with the minimalist Japanese style of her employee 's quarters , representing the Western capitalist influence over Japan in its Meiji period and beyond . The <unk> design of the abandoned theme park is the setting for Chihiro 's parents ' transformation , the father reassuring Chihiro that he has " credit cards and cash " , before their morphing into literal consumerist pigs . 
 Spirited Away contains critical commentary on modern Japanese society concerning generational conflicts and environmental pollution . Chihiro has been seen as a representation of the shōjo , whose roles and ideology had changed dramatically since post @-@ war Japan . 
 Just as Chihiro seeks her past identity , Japan , in its anxiety over the economic downturn occurring during the release of the film in 2001 , sought to reconnect to past values . In an interview , Miyazaki has commented on this nostalgic element for an old Japan . 
 However , the bathhouse of the spirits cannot be seen as a place free of ambiguity and darkness . Many of the employees are rude to Chihiro because she is human , and corruption is ever @-@ present ; it is a place of excess and greed , as depicted in the initial appearance of the No @-@ Face . In stark contrast to the simplicity of Chihiro 's journey and transformation is the constant chaotic carnival in the background . 
 Additional themes are expressed through the No @-@ Face , who reflects the characters which surround him , learning by example and taking the traits of whomever he consumes . This nature results in No @-@ Face 's monstrous rampage through the bath house . After Chihiro saves No @-@ Face with the emetic dumpling , he becomes timid once more . At the end of the film , Zeniba decides to take care of No @-@ Face so he can develop without the negative influence of the bathhouse . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Spirited Away was released theatrically in Japan on 20 July 2001 by distributor Toho , grossing ¥ 30 @.@ 4 billion to become the highest @-@ grossing film in Japanese history , according to the Motion Picture Producers Association of Japan . It was also the first film to earn $ 200 million at the worldwide box office before opening in the United States . The film was dubbed into English by Walt Disney Pictures , under the supervision of Pixar 's John Lasseter . The dubbed version premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival on 7 September 2002 and was later released in North America on 20 September 2002 . Spirited Away had very little marketing , less than Disney 's other B @-@ films , with at most , 151 theaters showing the film in 2002 . After the 2003 Oscars , it expanded to as many as 714 theaters . The film grossed US $ 449 @,@ 839 in its opening weekend and ultimately grossed around $ 10 million by September 2003 . In addition to its North American earnings of $ 10 million and Japanese earnings of $ 250 million , it grossed a further $ 29 million from other countries for a worldwide total of about $ 289 million . In Argentina , it 's in the Top 10 of anime films with the most tickets sold . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Spirited Away received widespread critical acclaim from film critics . The film holds a 97 % approval rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes based on 178 reviews , with an average rating of 8 @.@ 6 / 10 , and the consensus : " Spirited Away is a dazzling , enchanting , and gorgeously drawn fairy tale that will leave viewers a little more curious and fascinated by our world . " On Metacritic , the film achieved a weighted average score of 94 out of 100 based on 37 reviews , signifying " universal acclaim " . 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film a full four stars , praising the film and Miyazaki 's direction . Ebert also said that Spirited Away was one of " the year 's best films . " Elvis Mitchell of The New York Times positively reviewed the film and praised the animation sequences . Mitchell also drew a favorable comparison to Lewis Carroll 's Through the Looking @-@ Glass and also said that his movies are about " moodiness as mood " and the characters " heightens the [ film 's ] tension . " Derek Elley of Variety said that Spirited Away " can be enjoyed by sprigs and adults alike " and praised the animation and music . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times praised the voice acting and said the film is the " product of a fierce and fearless imagination whose creations are unlike anything a person has seen before " . Turan also praised Miyazaki 's direction . Orlando Sentinel 's critic Jay Boyar also praised Miyazaki 's direction and said the film is " the perfect choice for a child who has moved into a new home . " 
 In 2010 , Rotten Tomatoes ranked Spirited Away as the thirteenth @-@ best animated film on the site . In 2005 , it was ranked as the twelfth @-@ best animated film of all time by IGN . The film is also ranked No. 9 of the highest @-@ rated movies of all time on Metacritic , being the highest rated traditionally animated film on the site . The film ranked number 10 in Empire magazine 's " The 100 Best Films Of World Cinema " in 2010 . 
 In his book Otaku , Hiroki Azuma observed : " Between 2001 and 2007 , the otaku forms and markets quite rapidly won social recognition in Japan " , and cites Miyazaki 's win at the Academy Awards for Spirited Away among his examples . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Spirited Away was first released on VHS and DVD format in Japan by Buena Vista Home Entertainment on 19 July 2002 . The Japanese DVD releases includes storyboards for the film and the special edition includes a Ghibli DVD player . Spirited Away currently holds the record for most home video copies sold of all @-@ time in Japan with 2 @,@ 403 @,@ 000 . In North America , the film was released on DVD and VHS formats by Walt Disney Home Entertainment on 15 April 2003 . The attention brought by the Oscar win resulted in the film becoming a strong seller . The bonus features include Japanese trailers , a making @-@ of documentary which originally aired on Nippon Television , interviews with the North American voice actors , a select storyboard @-@ to @-@ scene comparison and The Art of Spirited Away , a documentary narrated by actor Jason Marsden . 
 The film was released nationwide in the UK on 12 September 2003 . It was released on DVD in the UK on 29 March 2004 . In 2005 , it was re @-@ released by Optimum Releasing . The film was released on Blu @-@ ray format in Japan and the UK in 2014 , and was released in North America on 16 June 2015 . 
 = New Cutie Honey = 
 New Cutie Honey ( Japanese : 新 ・ <unk> , Hepburn : Shin <unk> Hanī , also known as New Super Android Cutey Honey or by the ADV Films title New Cutey Honey ) is a 1994 Japanese anime series in the Cutie Honey media franchise created by Go Nagai . Inspired by continued popularity of the original 1973 Cutie Honey television series , and first announced by Toei Video in October 1993 , it was the only Cutie Honey anime production to be licensed for distribution in the United States until Discotek Media released the 1973 series on DVD in November 2013 . Unlike the original , it was developed as an OVA ( original video animation ) , a type of anime made for home video . Its filmed episodes were released by ADV Films in the US , and have also been sold in the United Kingdom , France , Italy , Australia , and New Zealand . 
 Set one hundred years after the original , it follows protagonist Honey Kisaragi , along with her friends from the Hayami family , as she fights criminals in the fictional Cosplay City . Honey , a female android , has a device within her that allows her to transform into various personas , or summon weapons and other powers , by shouting " Honey Flash ! " The first four episodes contain a complete story in which Honey battles the forces of Dolmeck , a man feared even by other criminals . In later episodes , she defeats other enemies empowered by her returning former nemesis , Panther Zora . The series staff planned to make at least twelve episodes , but it ended with eight in 1995 . A 2004 DVD release included a scripted but unfilmed ninth episode — a Christmas story — as a drama CD . 
 New Cutie Honey includes many characters and cameos from or based on prior works by Nagai , such as Mazinger Z and Devilman . It has inspired merchandise of its own , including many scale model kits of Honey . ADV 's English language dub of the series features Jessica Calvello , who Nagai picked for the title role . Critical responses to the series have focused on its production values and voice work , and have explored Honey 's transformations — which often tear off her clothes and show her naked body as they occur — in relation to her strong character traits . It has also been compared and contrasted with other anime based on Nagai 's works . 
 = = Plot = = 
 New Cutie Honey is set one hundred years after the events of the original 1973 Cutie Honey television series , in the fictional Cosplay City . Mayor Light ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> , voiced by Sho Hayami in its original Japanese and Jason Douglas in its English dub ) vows to rein in a citywide crime wave and restore peace . However , a self @-@ proclaimed " Lord of Darkness " named Dolmeck ( <unk> , v.b. <unk> Yara and Bryan Bounds ) , feared even by other criminals there , seeks to derail his efforts in the first four episodes . A large freelance gang of armored , axe @-@ wielding mutant motorcyclists , joined by two of Dolmeck 's allies — Black Maiden ( <unk> , v.b. Taeko Yamada and Tamara Lo ) , a very young @-@ looking red @-@ haired girl who rides naked in a humanoid robot slightly shorter than him and can <unk> move objects and people ; and Peeping Spider ( <unk> , v.b. <unk> Kakegawa and Guil Lunde ) , who wears decorative robotic spider legs and an electronic <unk> scope , and can use stealth technology , see through objects , sense spacetime disturbances , and trap people in strong webs — attack an outdoor meeting of the Mayor and his fellow citizens . Dolmeck then halts the attackers and asks the Mayor to rule the city with and under him . Unknown to all , Light 's secretary Honey Kisaragi ( <unk> <unk> , Kisaragi Hanī , v.b. Michiko Neya and Jessica Calvello ) is a gynoid who previously could transform into the titular red @-@ haired , sword @-@ wielding heroine Cutie Honey or summon other personas and powers , often after shouting " Honey Flash ! " She later confronts the biker gang and another female minion of Dolmeck , and inadvertently regains those abilities and lost memories before defeating the group . 
 Light agrees to fight crime in the city with Honey 's help . She moves into the home of Danbei Hayami ( 早見 <unk> , Hayami Danbei , v.b. <unk> Tomita and Tristan <unk> ) , a returning character from the 1973 Cutie Honey series . He is now both a 150 @-@ year @-@ old cyborg fitted with many sensors and tools , and a pervert who often tries to see Honey naked and even asks her to transform to do so . They live there with his young grandson Chokkei ( 早見 <unk> , Hayami Chokkei , v.b. Rica Matsumoto and David Nance ) , who has a crush on Honey and wishes to become like Mayor Light ; and Chokkei 's parents , who themselves attempted to rob a city bank in the first episode . Chokkei 's mother Daiko ( 早見 <unk> , Hayami Daiko , v.b. Rika Fukami and Tiffany Grant ) is a self @-@ proclaimed expert thief who can summon increased strength when her son is in danger , and a descendant of Seiji Hayami from the original TV series . His father Akakabu ( 早見 <unk> , Hayami Akakabu , v.b. Wataru Takagi and Greg Stanley ) loves his wife and son but , like Danbei , is not above peeking at Honey when she showers . 
 Honey remembers that the minion she defeated injected liquid from a " capsule " to transform into a monster . She fights other capsule users , then seeks the capsules ' source . After she defeats a female capsule distributor , Peeping Spider learns and reveals Honey 's true robot form . He kidnaps Chokkei and sends him to Dolmeck 's airship , and Honey and the rest of the Hayamis fly there to rescue him ; they fight Peeping Spider , defeat Black Maiden , and attack a large structure in the ship along the way . Maiden then reveals herself to be Panther Zora ( Honey 's nemesis and the leader of the Panther Claw in the original series ) reborn ; Honey wounds Dolmeck , and his body releases the fallen evil souls of all the countless villains Honey has killed . Zora then absorbs them , evolving her body into that of a fully adult woman . Honey tries to re @-@ seal Dolmeck 's body , while Danbei destroys the airship . After the entire Hayami family escapes the ship with Danbei 's jet pack , Honey emerges alive from within a falling rock . 
 The next four episodes are set an unspecified time after the battle with Dolmeck . Chokkei has grown older and fond of Honey , and the Hayamis remain with her to fight off antagonists who transform and gain their power through direct influence by Zora . Mayor Light rarely appears in this half of the series . A girl named Natsuko ( <unk> , v.b. Junko Iwao and Jenny <unk> ) appears in the fifth episode as a criminal who wants to use a nuclear bomb to get a ransom ; she joins Honey 's group by the sixth episode , often stays near Chokkei , and calls him " boy " to his annoyance . Her presence reminds Honey of her old friend of the same name who died at the hands of Sister Jill in the original versions of Cutie Honey and vows to protect her . Natsuko is initially confused by this until Chokkei explains the reason why . In the seventh , Daiko — now a leader of a " United Thug Alliance " of gangs — goes with Honey and the Hayamis to rescue fellow thugs imprisoned by an army of " Thug Hunters " , and reveals she fell in love with Akakabu for his persistence in an earlier fight with her . Peeping Spider returns in the eighth , last episode ; there , Honey and her friends capture him and use his technologies to defeat a teleporting gold thief . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 The first anime incarnation of Cutie Honey was broadcast from October 13 , 1973 to March 30 , 1974 , alongside the Go Nagai Cutie Honey manga that had started publishing on October 1 , 1973 . Fred Patten wrote in the liner notes for Rhino Entertainment 's CD The Best of Anime ( 1998 ) that the series , even untranslated , was a favorite among early anime fan clubs for its nude transformation sequences and innuendos . Even as brief nudity became commonplace in 1980s anime , the continued popularity of Honey inspired New Cutie Honey 's creation in 1994 . Toei Video announced the series in a press conference dated October 12 , 1993 , with Go Nagai , series director <unk> Nagaoka , Hitomi ( the lead singer of the group les 5 @-@ 4 @-@ 3 @-@ 2 @-@ 1 , who perform the series ' Japanese theme song ) , and Honey and Chokkei 's Japanese voice actors Neya and Matsumoto in attendance . 
 The Japanese name of the series , 新 ・ <unk> , became officially romanized as New Super Android Cutey Honey or New Cutey Honey . It has also been spelled with " Cutie " instead of " Cutey " . Unlike the original Cutie Honey , the series is an " OVA " ( original video animation ) , one made for home video formats such as VHS tape . OVAs are known for their higher quality than anime TV series , and Toei felt the new Honey was especially high @-@ quality because ( according to them ) each episode used ten thousand cels , three times the usual number . By November 1994 , series planner Naoko Takahashi said that Honey was tentatively set to last twelve episodes , with more to be considered later , but the series was cut short at the eighth episode , released in late November 1995 . Several scenes in that episode have unshaded foregrounds , partly drawn characters with missing legs , or both . A script for a planned ninth episode was produced as a drama CD voiced by the series ' original voice actors . Its English dub , made by ADV Films in 1998 , features Jessica Calvello , who was hand @-@ picked by Nagai to perform the voice of Honey . In a post at the Anime on DVD forums , voice actor and writer George Manley — who has worked for the Houston @-@ based ADV — praised both Neya and Calvello 's work in Honey as examples of " impressive " performances , and said that the series , whose dub was released four years before he began voice work , " was the title , and I often admit this , that brought me back to watching anime and started me on a long road to , ' Wow , I wonder what might happen if I moved to Houston ... ' " . 
 = = = Themes and cameos = = = 
 At the 1994 Anime America convention , Nagai talked about the contrast between Honey and the dark Cosplay City : " I thought ... well , what would Honey @-@ chan do if she appeared in a dark futuristic city like in BATMAN . In the movie BATMAN , everything is dark . Dark background and dark characters . However , in the case of Honey @-@ chan , she ’ s super cheerful and sunny . She really stands out due to the dark background . " He believed that New Cutie Honey differed from other anime that focus on settings and characters ' expositions , and that Honey instead " makes her own moves , and she carries the whole story " . On the relative weakness of male characters in the series , he said , " Honey @-@ chan is like a mother , and she loves to protect weak men . Their existence is her reason to live , like oh , ' I have to fight to protect you . ' " 
 Honey pays homage to some of Nagai 's other creations , such as the Mazinger and Devilman series ; the first two episodes alone include many cameos . The first shows Mayor Light and Chokkei in a picture with characters from Nagai 's <unk> Gakuen , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> <unk> , while Devilman 's titular character appears as a gargoyle . In the second , a scene in a downtown market in Cosplay City has cameos from <unk> Godzilla from <unk> Gakuen and <unk> Abashiri from The Abashiri Family ; a scene in Honey 's bedroom shows a bust of Mazinger Z and a framed picture of her father , Dr. Kisaragi ; and several scenes show Mazinger Z 's Sayaka Yumi , The Abashiri Family 's <unk> , and an unnamed character from <unk> Kamen as they get turned into plastic @-@ coated statues . Cutie Honey 's skin @-@ tight , full @-@ body costume uses the same design and tricolor ( blue , black , and red ) scheme as that of Nagai 's original manga , but its chest opening — with rounded side edges — resembles the one in her 1973 anime attire . The opening sequence used in the first four episodes shows versions of Honey 's original seven forms in the TV series : Kisaragi , Hurricane , Misty , Idol , Flash , Fancy , and Cutie . Danbei 's techniques parody those of Nagai 's super robots Mazinger Z and <unk> . Later episodes feature appearances by Akira Fudo of Devilman and Professor Kabuto of Mazinger Z. In episode 7 , Honey transforms herself into Kouji Kabuto . The title sequence of episodes 5 through 8 features Sirene , Devilman 's nemesis , and Akira Fudo of Devilman along with Mazinger Z 's <unk> Kabuto . Devilman can be briefly seen as one of the back @-@ up guitarists for the one @-@ time antagonist Saline in episode 3 . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Episodes and releases = = = 
 The eight 25 @-@ minute episodes of New Cutie Honey are directed by <unk> Nagaoka and produced by Toei Animation . Their names in Japan are prefixed by " Stage . " , followed by the episode number . Each episode title , from the fifth onward , is prefixed with " Dark Army Story ( <unk> , Yami no <unk> hen ) " . ADV Films released the series in four two @-@ episode VHS tapes with English subtitles . The subtitled versions were released between 1994 and 1996 , and English dubs of the episodes were made in 1998 . New Cutie Honey was followed by the TV series Cutie Honey Flash in 1997 and the three @-@ episode OVA Re : Cutie Honey in 2004 . 
 The series has been reissued many times for various markets , and was eventually shown on television and posted on the Internet . Four @-@ volume VHS versions were released in France and Italy in 1996 : the French version ( also called Cutey Honey : La Guerrière de L 'amour ) was dubbed by <unk> and released by Dynamic Visions ( now known as <unk> ) , and the Italian ( Cutey Honey : La <unk> Dell 'Amore ) was released by Dynamic Italia ( now Dynit ) . Toei re @-@ released the entire series on DVD on May 21 , 2004 as the New Cutie Honey Complete Pack . The release included a drama CD called Kurisumasu ni Noroi no Yuki ga Furu ( <unk> ? , lit . " Cursed Snow Falls in Christmas " ) based on a script for an unfilmed ninth episode . ADV reissued the series on two DVD collections in November and December 2000 , as a single two @-@ disc Essential Anime edition on May 25 , 2004 , and on a three @-@ DVD bundle with the <unk> Kamen OVA in April 2008 . The series was published on two DVDs in the United Kingdom , released on September 20 and November 15 , 2004 , by ADV Films UK . Madman Entertainment followed with a two @-@ DVD collection , released in Australia on February 2 , 2007 and in New Zealand on March 14 . Two episodes were broadcast each month on the Toei Channel satellite television network between January and April 2003 and episodes were shown on the Anime Network in April and May 2004 . The Anime Network added the series to their on @-@ demand Online Player service on July 9 , 2009 . By then , ADV had divested many of their assets : the company transferred licenses to Honey and other works to AEsir Holdings , their home video distribution arm to Section23 Films , and Anime Network to Valkyrie Media Partners on June 1 that year . 
 Writer <unk> Kyū ( <unk> · Q ? , lit . " Claude Q " ) and composer Takeo Watanabe are credited for both opening themes of the series : " Cutie Honey " , performed by les 5 @-@ 4 @-@ 3 @-@ 2 @-@ 1 for the first four episodes ; and " Cutie Honey ( English Version ) " , translated by Masaki <unk> , arranged by Takao Konishi , and performed by <unk> for the next four . The themes are based on the original series ' theme " Cutie Honey " . The English theme , which has a softer beat than the les 5 @-@ 4 @-@ 3 @-@ 2 @-@ 1 cover , is also used for the prior episodes in ADV 's November 2000 DVD release . Three ending themes are used : les 5 @-@ 4 @-@ 3 @-@ 2 @-@ 1 arranged and performed " Circle Game " for the first and second episodes and " Rendez @-@ vous in Space " for the third , and <unk> Hiramatsu performed " Legend of Good @-@ Bye " for episodes 5 through 8 . 
 = = = Soundtracks = = = 
 The music of New Cutie Honey has been released on several soundtracks , and some of the music has since been re @-@ released on compilation albums . The first soundtrack , New Super Android Cutey Honey : Music Collection Vol . 1 ( COCC @-@ <unk> ) , was released on February 21 , 1994 by Nippon Columbia Co . Ltd . ( now Columbia Music Entertainment ) . It includes les 5 @-@ 4 @-@ 3 @-@ 2 @-@ 1 's " Cutie Honey " , advertised as a " more danceable " version of the original , and " Circle Game " . It also has guitar work by Yoshio Nomura , background music by Kazuhiko Toyama , and dialogue between protagonists Honey and Chokkei . It was followed by Music Collection Vol . 2 ( COCC @-@ <unk> ) on June 21 , 1994 , which includes a version of Cutie Honey sung by Michiko Neya , along with " Burning Up ! " , the theme of Saline used in the third episode ; by Special Vocal Collection ( COCC @-@ <unk> ) on April 29 , 1995 ; and by Music Collection Vol . 3 ( COCC @-@ <unk> ) , which has the English Cutie Honey theme , on June 1 , 1995 . 
 The three @-@ CD compilation Gō Nagai Collection : Gō Nagai & Dynamic Production World ~ True Music Version ~ ( <unk> <unk> & <unk> ・ <unk> ～ 真 ・ <unk> ～ ) , released in June 1998 , includes the les 5 @-@ 4 @-@ 3 @-@ 2 @-@ 1 version of Cutie Honey as the last of its 71 tracks . The 2004 compilation Cutie Honey Song Collection Special has six New Cutie Honey tracks . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 New Cutie Honey and its characters have inspired a wide range of products , and the character Honey in particular prompted many model kits and figures . The New Cutey Honey Perfect Guide , an art book with character descriptions , interviews , and detailed summaries of the first two episodes , was released by <unk> on May 19 , 1994 . This was followed by New Cutey Honey Perfect Guide Vol . 2 , made for the next two , on November 11 that year . The two books contain information on other series @-@ based merchandise , such as Honey @-@ themed telephone cards , posters , T @-@ shirts , a 1 / 6 scale model kit of Honey by <unk> Tsushima , pencil boards , production materials , and a carrying case . A series special called " <unk> " , Tenshi no <unk> ( <unk> ? , lit . " Angel 's holiday " ) , was released on VHS and Laserdisc on November 21 , 1994 ; it includes 30 minutes of selected scenes from the first four episodes and appearances by Nagai , Nagaoka , Neya , Matsumoto , and Fukami . In December 2005 , a 283 @-@ page book by MEF containing drawings and production material from New Cutie Honey and the 1995 PC @-@ FX video game Cutie Honey FX was released . 
 Two sets of six Honey figures , based on various forms she takes throughout the series , were released by Banpresto . Both have three common figures : one of her Cutie form , another of her " S & M Queen " form , and one of her <unk> form with broken armor ( which she takes during a battle in the eighth episode ) . 1 / 8 scale models of her Cutie and standard " Kisaragi " form — the latter first taken at the end of the first episode — were made by Volks ; both show her with one foot on a base labeled " CH " . A 1 / 6 scale kit of Cutie Honey lying on her side , with her sword in hand , was released in limited quantities in 2000 and 2001 . Three 1 / 5 @.@ 5 scale Honey kits that depict her diving suit ( from the sixth episode ) , tennis outfit ( from the English @-@ language title sequence ) , and Kisaragi form were created by Kurushima and released between late 2002 and early 2004 . 1 / 6 scale kits based on Honey 's Cutie and Kisaragi forms , and 1 / 5 @.@ 5 scale kits of her Cutie and partially armored forms , were created by Yu <unk> of Left @-@ Hand . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Chris Beveridge of Anime on DVD ( now part of Mania.com ) gave positive reviews to the two New Cutey Honey Collections released in 2000 by ADV ; he " was really impressed with the production values of this show " and called it " quite a bit of fun , especially for those looking for fan @-@ service with a bit more intelligence and style than some of the other offerings out there " . Two reviews of Honey on the website Anime Jump greatly diverged : site maintainer Mike Toole rated the series 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and called it " tons of fun , a light , tasty action @-@ comedy that 's ... spirited and silly and tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek " , and praised its character designs as " letter @-@ perfect to Go Nagai 's original ( quite appealing ! ) character designs " ; Jason Carter praised Calvello 's voice work in his review of the 2004 ADV release , but rated it 1 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars , said that much of Cosplay City " goes back and forth between looking like an ordinary modern metropolis and resembling some sort of Smurf town built of polluted marshmallows " , and concluded " The characters are largely annoying , the plot is hackneyed , the nudity is absurd , the fighting is rarely more than average , and the whole thing is ultimately pointless - as the series ' later attempts at developing Honey as a person make all too clear . " Sandra Dozier of DVD Verdict was also unimpressed with Honey : " I can see why it is popular — the glossy animation , the well @-@ endowed chicks , the scant clothing . If that isn 't your thing , however , there is very little to draw you to this series . " 
 Reviewers have noticed Go Nagai 's influence on New Cutie Honey ; several considered it among the best anime based on his works , while others preferred different series . Dozier said that Nagai is " recognized in the anime world as an influential artist and storyteller who is known for preferring extra helpings of nudity and violence in his work " , and that such influence " definitely comes through " in the series . Carlos Ross of THEM Anime gave earlier Nagai anime bad ratings , but called Honey " another Go Nagai @-@ based anime that common logic should dictate that THEM rate harshly - except that we actually enjoyed it immensely " , while calling its " awfully ugly backdrops , and weird @-@ looking characters " " standard Go Nagai " . Beveridge says he greatly preferred Honey over other Nagai offerings , but that " it really doesn 't rise up too much higher than thinly veiled fan service with something of a story " . Scott Green of Ain 't It Cool News praised " Nagai 's tasteless sense of strangeness " as the series ' " highpoint " , saying its " bright American style superhero design , with kaleidoscopic oddity , humorously gratuitous nudity and violence " make it " amusing nonsense " . In his negative review , Carter said the Devilman @-@ based Devil Lady was a more entertaining anime with a similar " impressively built woman fighting monsters " premise . 
 Many reviewers also contrasted its portrayal of main character Honey as a powerful figure with how it also shows off her body through her nude transformation sequences . Susan J. Napier , author of Anime from Akira to Princess Mononoke , distinguished the series from more pornographic anime such as Wicked City , Twin Dolls , and La Blue Girl . Napier thought that the series " sends mixed messages " because even though Honey has great strength and heroism , her transformations are very sexual in nature . She wrote that " the presumably male viewer is invited in , to participate in the <unk> and clothing of her nude body , while both male and female viewer alike are allowed the vicarious participation in the ecstatic transformation process " , but quickly added : " Despite the regressive and voyeuristic aspects of her characterization , she is still clearly the film 's hero , one worthy of admiration and emulation ... in the film 's several violent scenes she more than holds her own . " Dozier did not share that sentiment : she said " Honey does have some appeal as a fighter and as someone who cares very much about the people who are important to her , but her android past and her family life aren 't explored too deeply — mostly , she 's too busy getting into compromising situations and fighting evil . " 
 Both Dozier and Yuricon president Erica Friedman wrote about the sexual nature of Honey , including the lesbian desire of the Jewel Princess ( one of Honey 's enemies ) for her in the second episode . Friedman — who had looked for such " implied yuri " in Cutie Honey manga — called the Princess 's appearance " * just * what I was hoping for " , and praised Honey 's change to her S & M Queen form in response . Ross said about the series : " It 's seemingly exploitative , it 's incredibly sexist , and the female members of my household - you 'd expect them to be indignant , but , no , they were laughing their butts off because it was so blatant , and yet Honey was actually never objectified in the whole series . " He further writes , " Honey Kisaragi is an extremely strong character who is no damsel in distress . If anyone needs help in this series , it 's the guys ! " Toole said that Jessica Calvello " gives the character a growling , tough @-@ girl charm that was conspicuously absent from the original version " , while Dozier said that Calvello captured " the combination of innocence and bravado [ of Honey ] that is both so confusing and yet so appropriate " . Beveridge said the " fight sequences are pretty well done and provide some fun moments watching Honey battle the various demonic forms " , but concluded that Honey 's main goal is to showcase the lead heroine 's changes : " Oh , lets face it. it 's all about the half to completely naked transformation sequences . They 're <unk> ! " 
 = Vicars ' Close , Wells = 
 Vicars ' Close , in Wells , Somerset , England , is claimed to be the oldest purely residential street with original buildings surviving intact in Europe . John Julius Norwich calls it " that rarest of survivals , a planned street of the mid @-@ 14th century " . It comprises numerous Grade I listed buildings , comprising 27 residences ( originally 44 ) , built for Bishop Ralph of Shrewsbury , a chapel and library at the north end , and a hall at the south end , over an arched gate . It is connected at its southern end to the cathedral by way of a walkway over Chain Gate . 
 The Close is about 460 feet ( 140 m ) long , and paved with setts . Its width is tapered by 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) to make it look longer when viewed from the main entrance nearest the cathedral . When viewed from the other end it looks shorter . By the nineteenth century the buildings were reported to be in a poor state of repair , and part of the hall was being used as a malt house . Repairs have since been carried out including the construction of Shrewsbury House to replace buildings damaged in a fire . 
 The Vicars ' Hall was completed in 1348 and included a communal dining room , administrative offices and treasury of the Vicars Choral . The houses on either side of the close were built in the 14th and early 15th centuries . Since then alterations have been made including a unified roof , front gardens and raised chimneys . The final part of the construction of the close was during the 1420s when the Vicars ' Chapel and Library was constructed on the wall of the Liberty of St Andrew . The south face includes shields commemorating the bishops of the time . The interior is decorated with 19th century gesso work by Heywood Sumner and the building now used by Wells Cathedral School . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The Close owes its origins to a grant of land and buildings by Walter de Hulle , a canon of Wells Cathedral , for the purpose of accommodating chantry priests ; however the land is likely to have been used for a long period before the construction of the close , as prehistoric flint flakes and Romano @-@ British pottery shards were recovered from the garden of number four during work to construct an extension . 
 Bishop Jocelin styled the priests serving the cathedral as the Vicars Choral , in the 12th century , their duty being to chant divine service eight times a day . Previously they had lived throughout the town , and Bishop Ralph resolved to incorporate them and provide subsistence for the future . The Vicars Choral were assigned annuities from his lands and tenements in Congresbury and Wookey , an annual fee from the vicarage of Chew , and endowed them with lands obtained from the <unk> of Walter de Hulle . The residences he built became known as the College , or Close of the Vicars . 
 = = Vicars ' Hall and gateway = = 
 The entrance arch into the close comprises a pedestrian gate adjacent to a waggon gate , and has a lierne vault ceiling . The four @-@ centered <unk> @-@ arches may have been by William Joy or Thomas Witney his predecessor as master mason of the cathedral . 
 The first parts of the Close to be constructed were this first floor barrel @-@ roofed common hall above a store room , kitchen and bakehouse which were completed in 1348 . The fireplace , with a lectern , and the east window with stained glass , were added in the 15th century . A room known as The Chequer above the staircase was added in the early 15th century . It has a large fireplace which may have been enlarged following a fire . One of the monks known as The Receiver sat in the room to receive rents and other funds due to the vicars , which were kept in a large chest dating from 1633 . Next to The Chequer is the Muniment Room which has a filing cabinet dating from around 1420 used to hold documents such as leases of land . Beneath these rooms is The Treasury which has ten cupboards where the vicars vestments were stored . 
 In the 19th century parts of the hall found use as a malt house , and as a library for the Theological College . The western half of the building was added around 1862 by John Henry Parker . 
 The Chain Gate , built with Doulting stone , was abutted to the hall in 1459 by Thomas Beckington . This included a gallery over the gate into the cathedral for the vicars ' convenience . 
 = = Vicars ' Chapel and Library = = 
 The chapel was built between 1424 and 1430 at the north end of the close . It is eight degrees out of alignment with the rest of the close . This is because the northern wall of the chapel was built on top of the old wall enclosing the Liberty of St Andrew . The Liberty encompassed 52 acres ( 21 ha ) broadly situated to the east of the city centre of Wells . The main part of the Liberty formed a walled precinct within the city ( which was otherwise not walled ) and this included Wells Cathedral , the Cathedral Green , the Bishop 's Palace , the Old Deanery , and the Vicars ' Close . To compensate for the misalignment of the chapel the roof slopes to the west so that it appears level from the close . 
 Most of the Vicars ' Chapel is rubble masonry however the south face which can be seen from the close is of white Conglomerate quarried locally . The shields on the wall are those of Nicholas <unk> , suggesting that construction was started during his reign as bishop between 1407 and 1424 , and John Stafford who was bishop from 1424 until 1443 suggesting that construction was completed under his episcopate . The lower floor was a chapel , and a spiral stair led up to the library . The chapel was dedicated to the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary and St Katherine . It is now used by the chaplain of Wells Cathedral School . The interior is decorated with 19th century gesso work by Heywood Sumner . 
 = = Residences = = 
 The residences are built of stone from the Mercia Mudstone Group . There were originally 22 houses on the east side and 20 on the west . They line each side of a quadrangle which appears longer than it is because of false perspective achieved by building the houses at the upper northern end nearest the chapel 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) closer together than those at the lower southern end closest to the Vicars ' Hall . Each house originally comprised a ground floor hall of approximately 20 by 13 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 by 4 @.@ 0 m ) and an upper floor of the same size . Both had a fireplace in the front wall . Washing facilities and a latrine were outside the back door . The date of some of the buildings is unclear but it is known that some had been built by 1363 and the rest were completed by 1412 . There were originally 42 houses each for one vicar , however in a charter of <unk> Queen Elizabeth restricted the number of vicars to twenty , and the Vicars Choral currently number twelve men . No. 1 Vicars ' Close was once a larger property , but has since been divided and part of the building is now called No. 1 St. Andrew Street . 
 Following the 15th century Reformation when clerical marriage was permitted , larger households would have been required and as a result some of the houses were altered and combined by knocking through walls , into larger dwellings . Others had extensions built to the rear . Water supply was originally from two wells , one at each end of the close . By 1468 lead pipes had been installed to bring water into the houses , although the wells continued to function until the 19th century . Number 22 is the house which still has most of its original medieval structure as it was originally built . 
 In the fifteenth century , Bishop Thomas Beckington left much of his estate to the Vicars ' Choral , enabling repairs to be carried out . The gardens in front of the houses were not part of the original scheme with the garden walls being added as part of this development . The walls are on average 4 metres ( 13 ft ) from the front of the houses . He unified the appearance of the terraces including the installation of a single arch @-@ braced and wind @-@ braced trussed sloping roof around 1466 . The chimney shafts were renewed and raised , possibly because of the introduction of coal as the fuel rather than wood . Each stack incorporates two heraldic shields and the upper sections of the stacks are octagonal . The shields are those of the Bishop , a beacon above tun , and the arms of his three executors ; sugar loaves for Hugh Sugar , three swans for Richard Swan , and the talbot for John Pope . Many of the original windows were replaced in the 18th century . Shrewsbury House is architecturally different from all the other buildings . It was re @-@ built in the 19th century after a fire that burnt down the original structure . 
 = Hurricane Paul ( 1982 ) = 
 Hurricane Paul was a particularly deadly and destructive Pacific hurricane which killed a total of 1 @,@ 696 people and caused $ 1 @.@ 156 billion in damage . The sixteenth named storm and tenth hurricane of the 1982 Pacific hurricane season , Paul developed as a tropical depression just offshore Central America on September 18 . The depression briefly moved inland two days later just before heading westward out to sea . The storm changed little in strength for several days until September 25 , when it slowly intensified into a tropical storm . Two days later , Paul attained hurricane status , and further strengthened to Category 2 intensity after turning northward . The hurricane then accelerated toward the northeast , reaching peak winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) . Paul made landfall over Baja California Sur on September 29 , and subsequently moved ashore in Sinaloa , Mexico the next day . 
 Prior to making landfall near the El Salvador – Guatemala border as a tropical depression , the precursor disturbance dropped heavy rainfall over Nicaragua , which later spread into El Salvador and Guatemala . Many rivers in the region burst their banks after five days of rainfall , causing severe flooding and multiple mudslides . Throughout Central America , at least 1 @,@ 432 people were killed , with most of the fatalities occurring in El Salvador and Guatemala . Another 225 deaths were attributed to floods from the depression in southern Mexico . In addition , Paul was responsible for moderate damage and 24 fatalities in northwestern Mexico , where it made landfall at hurricane strength . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The precursor disturbance to Paul originated from an area of low barometric pressure and disorganized thunderstorms , which was first noted near the Pacific coast of Nicaragua on September 15 . Several days later , satellite imagery indicated it had developed a center of cyclonic circulation ; on 1800 UTC September 20 , the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center initiated advisories on the system and classified it as Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Two . At that time , it was located 200 mi ( 320 km ) west of Managua , Nicaragua and supported winds of 35 mph ( 50 km / h ) . The depression turned northward in response to a weak steering flow between two high pressure systems — one near Cabo San Lucas and the other west of Central America . It then moved inland near the El Salvador – Guatemala border , and dissipated overland . 
 Under the influence of a persistent stationary trough near California , the remains of the depression retraced westward back over the open waters of the Pacific . Advisories on the system were resumed late on September 20 . Though it was reconsidered a tropical cyclone , its wind circulation was poorly defined ; the depression again degenerated into an open trough at 0000 UTC September 22 . Its forward motion remained relatively unchanged for several days , and by September 24 the system was reclassified as a tropical cyclone . After briefly drifting northward , the system began tracking toward the west @-@ northwest . It gradually organized into a tropical storm at 0000 UTC September 25 . Since it was then situated over favorable sea surface temperatures between 28 ° C ( 82 ° F ) and 29 ° C ( 84 ° F ) , Paul underwent a phase of rapid intensification . This allowed it to reach Category 1 hurricane strength on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale ( SSHWS ) just two days after its naming . 
 Upon becoming a hurricane , Paul turned to the north and continued to develop . As the storm neared Baja California Sur , it reached Category 2 intensity . An upper @-@ level trough forced the hurricane to accelerate towards the northeast , at which point it had reached peak wind speeds of 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) . From 1800 to 2100 UTC on September 29 , the eye of the hurricane made landfall along Baja California Sur , moving ashore less than 100 mi ( 160 km ) south of La Paz near San José del Cabo . After weakening slightly inland , Paul briefly reemerged over water and subsequently made its final landfall near Los Mochis , Sinaloa with winds of 100 mph ( 165 km / h Tropical cyclone advisories were discontinued shortly thereafter , though exact information on the storm after it moved inland is unavailable due to a lack of data completion in the hurricane database . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 An alert was issued for the Mexican states of Sonora and Sinaloa and Baja California Sur ; army and navy units were on standby in case of an emergency . Roughly 50 @,@ 000 people evacuated to storm shelters and thousands of others sought refuge in public buildings , such as schools and churches . Across La Paz , officials evacuated 3 @,@ 000 families from hurricane @-@ prone areas . In the towns of Altata and <unk> alone , army officials evacuated 5 @,@ 000 coastal residents . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = El Salvador = = = 
 The tropical depression that later became Paul produced the worst natural disaster in El Salvador history since 1965 . Although the death toll was initially believed to be lower it rose to a final toll of 761 after new victims were confirmed on September 28 . Of these deaths , 312 occurred in the capital city of San Salvador , which had also sustained the worst damage . Another 40 people perished in <unk> , a very small village located 42 mi ( 68 km ) west of San Salvador . Rescue workers searched through rocks and mud to find missing victims . About 25 @,@ 000 – 30 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . Much of San Salvador was submerged by flood waters of up to 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) high , and even after their recession hundreds of homes remained buried under trees , debris , and 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) of mud . In all , property damage from the storm amounted to $ 100 million ( 1982 US $ ) in the country ; economic losses were estimated at $ 280 million ( 1982 USD ) . The extensive floods swept through significant amounts of crops , causing destruction and damage worth $ 250 million . 
 = = = Nicaragua , Guatemala , and southern Mexico = = = 
 In Guatemala , widespread catastrophic floods claimed 615 lives and left 668 others missing . More than 10 @,@ 000 people were left homeless in the wake of the disaster . According to the highway department , the storm destroyed 16 bridges which left 200 communities isolated from surrounding areas . Overall , economic losses of $ 100 million ( 1982 USD ) were reported in the country . In Nicaragua , similar extensive flooding killed 71 people and caused $ 356 million ( 1982 USD ) in economic losses . Throughout southern Mexico , floods from the precursor depression to Paul killed another 225 people . 
 = = = Baja California Sur = = = 
 Hurricane Paul produced heavy rainfall along its path through Baja California Sur . At least 85 homes in La Paz sustained damage , and many telephone lines in the region were down at the height of the storm . Wind gusts estimated at 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) swept through San José del Cabo , causing property damage and subsequently leaving 9 @,@ 000 homeless . Despite the damage , no deaths were reported in the wake of Paul . 
 = = = Northwest Mexico and southwest United States = = = 
 Upon making its final landfall in Sinaloa , Paul produced hurricane @-@ force winds recorded at 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) in Los Mochis . The winds demolished numerous homes in the region , leaving 140 @,@ 000 residents homeless and another 400 @,@ 000 people isolated . The greatest damage occurred 70 miles ( 110 km ) south of Los Mochis in the city of <unk> ; some houses suffered total destruction , while many other had their roof blown off . A total of 24 people were killed by the storm , although it produced beneficial rains over the region . 
 The worst flooding occurred near the Rio Sinaloa ; 7 @.@ 9 in ( 200 mm ) to 12 in ( 300 mm ) of rain fell in some locations . Over 25 @,@ 000 homes were damaged . Agricultural damage was severe in the state of Sinaloa , with up to 40 percent of the soybean crop destroyed . Sugar cane , tomato , and rice crops also sustained damage from the hurricane , and in its wake the state 's corn production was down by 26 percent from the previous year . Total storm damage in Mexico amounted to $ 4 @.@ 5 billion ( 1982 MXN ; $ 70 million USD ) . 
 The remnants of Paul moved into the United States , producing heavy rainfall in southern New Mexico and extreme West Texas . Inclement weather was observed as far inland as the Great Plains . A combination of rain and snow moved into Colorado ; 6 in ( 150 mm ) of snow was expected in Wyoming , thus winter storm warnings were required for parts of the state . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the aftermath of the storm , the Government of El Salvador was criticized for failing to keep the public well informed . It provided over $ 300 @,@ 000 in aid and declared a state of emergency ; additionally , a state of mourning was declared . The United Nations World Food program began distributing food set aside for victims of the El Salvador Civil War . The U.S. Embassy in Guatemala provided $ 25 @,@ 000 in aid for the country . Mexican authorities rushed to supply food and water to the homeless . 
 = Boletellus ananas = 
 Boletellus ananas , commonly known as the pineapple bolete , is a mushroom in the family Boletaceae , and the type species of the genus Boletellus . It is distributed in southeastern North America , northeastern South America , Asia , and New Zealand , where it grows scattered or in groups on the ground , often at the base of oak and pine trees . The fruit body is characterized by the reddish @-@ pink ( or pinkish @-@ tan to yellowish if an older specimen ) scales on the cap that are often found hanging from the edge . The pore surface on the underside of the cap is made of irregular or angular pores up to 2 mm wide that bruise a blue color . It is yellow when young but ages to a deep olive @-@ brown color . Microscopically , B. ananas is distinguished by large spores with cross striae on the ridges and spirally encrusted hyphae in the marginal appendiculae and flesh of the stem . Previously known as Boletus ananas and Boletus coccinea ( among other synonyms ) , the species was given its current name by William Alphonso Murrill in 1909 . Two varieties of Boletellus ananas have been described . Although the mushroom may be considered edible , it is not recommended for consumption . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first named by Moses Ashley Curtis as Boletus ananas in 1848 , based on specimens he found near the Santee River , in South Carolina . In 1909 , William Murrill described the new genus Boletellus and made Boletellus ananas the type species . According to Murrill , the taxon Boletus isabellinus , described by Charles Horton Peck in 1897 from specimens collected in Ocean Springs , Mississippi , is a synonym of B. ananas ; Peck described this species from undeveloped specimens . Wally Snell later doubted Murrill 's conclusion in a 1933 publication ; he considered the differences in the spore structure too great to consider the species conspecific with B. ananas , although he admitted it was impossible to come to any definitive conclusions until mature fruit bodies and spore prints were available for study . Rolf Singer and colleagues ( 1992 ) suggested the name Boletellus coccineus for Boletellus ananas . Singer created this name , however , in the mistaken belief that the earliest available name for the taxon was Boletus coccineus , proposed by Elias Magnus Fries in 1838 . However , Fries ’ s name is an illegitimate later homonym ( compare with Boletus coccineus , named by Bulliard in 1791 ) , and Singer ’ s combination is actually based on Strobilomyces coccineus , named by Pier Andrea Saccardo in 1888 . The earliest available name for the species is therefore Boletus ananas M.A. Curtis 1848 , the basionym of Boletellus ananas . 
 Boletellus ananas , as the type species of the genus Boletellus , is in section Boletellus that Singer based on the scaly , dry cap with red @-@ pink tones , a marginal veil that clasps the stem when immature , and longitudinally ridged spores that are greater than 16 μm long . The genus name Boletellus means " small boletus " , while the specific epithet ananas alludes to the name for pineapple , referring to the pineapple @-@ like pattern of scales on the cap surface . The mushroom is commonly known as the " pineapple bolete " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of B. ananas is 33 – 74 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 – 2 @.@ 9 in ) wide and plano @-@ convex ( flat on one side and rounded on the other ) . It is covered with squamules ( small scales ) that can be either pressed against the cap or curved back on itself . The squamules range in color from reddish @-@ brown to red @-@ tan , to pink to pinkish @-@ gray , and they are more concentrated and more scaly in the center of the cap , extending out of cream to light orange @-@ pink to light pink @-@ red floccose ground . The margin clasps the stem when young ; at maturity it separates into triangular veil remnants ( appendiculae ) that measure 6 – 12 by 3 – 10 mm . The color of these appendiculae range from buff @-@ white to faint pink . The flesh is 2 – 3 mm thick at the edge of the cap , 7 – 10 mm over the tubes , and 11 – 18 mm centrally . It is buff white to light yellow , and quickly turns bluish upon exposure to air . The tubes are 1 – 5 mm long at the margin , 10 – 20 mm in the center , and 4 – 6 mm at the stem . They are broadly and deeply depressed around the stem , of irregular lengths , bright yellow to olive @-@ yellow to mustard @-@ yellow , and also rapidly turn blue upon exposure . The pores are the same color as the tubes , and rapidly turn blue @-@ green with pressure ; they are angular , and there are about 0 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 5 pores per mm . The stem is 53 – 115 cm ( 20 @.@ 9 – 45 @.@ 3 in ) by 6 – 14 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) wide , and gradually becomes larger towards the base to 10 – 19 mm . The top part of the stem is cream to pink , the middle finely longitudinally striate , with the striations darkening with handling , red @-@ lavender to brown @-@ red , lighter with age . Immediately above the basal tomentum the stem surface is cream @-@ colored with few striations . The basal tomentum is made of stiff , coarse white hairs over the lower 6 – 50 mm . The flesh of the stem is solid ( i.e. , not hollow ) white to buff @-@ tan to light yellow , and turns slightly blue with exposure . The odor is not distinctive ( although it has been described as " musty " ) and the taste is mild . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are olivaceous @-@ brown in medium to heavy deposit . They are inamyloid , almond @-@ shaped , contain one or more oil droplets , and measure 17 @.@ 5 – 22 @.@ 2 by 6 @.@ 4 @-@ 8 µm . The spore wall is 0 @.@ 5 – 1 µm thick , with 12 – 14 longitudinal ridges . These ridges are less than 1 µm tall , occasionally bifurcating , converging at poles , with minute cross @-@ striae . Although these cross @-@ striae are visible when observed with light microscopy , they are not evident when viewed with scanning electron microscopy . The hilar appendage ( the region of a spore which attaches to the basidium via the sterigma ) is 0 @.@ 3 – 1 µm long . The basidia are four @-@ spored , club @-@ shaped , and have numerous refractive globules ; they measure 39 – 57 by 11 – 15 µm . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the face of a gill ) are 42 – 47 by 8 @-@ 12 µm , swollen and beaked , slightly capitate . They are abundant , arising from the subhymenium , projecting 19 @.@ 3 – 29 @.@ 6 µm above the hymenial palisade , thin @-@ walled , hyaline , and devoid of refractive contents . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the edge of a gill ) are 19 – 42 by 5 – 11 µm , swollen , cylindrical to narrowly cub @-@ shaped , thin @-@ walled , and infrequent . The flesh of the hymenium is boletoid and strongly divergent ( composed of different tissue layers ) . The <unk> ( middle tissue layer ) is 24 @.@ 7 – 45 @.@ 7 µm wide , and made of many parallel , slightly interwoven hyphae . The lateral stratum hyphae are 4 @.@ 4 – 8 @.@ 4 µm wide , hyaline , gelatinized in a dilute solution of potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) , and regularly septate . The cap cuticle is a densely interwoven <unk> palisade ( an erect , roughly parallel chains of closely packed cells ) of cylindrical elements with inflated terminal cells . The terminal cells are 23 @.@ 5 – 51 @.@ 9 by 9 @.@ 4 – 16 @.@ 8 µm , inamyloid , cylindrical to club @-@ shaped , interwoven , and concentrated on the squamules . The marginal appendiculae are composed of wefts of interwoven inflated hyphae , some with faint golden spirally arranged encrusting pigments that are evident when mounted in water , KOH , and Melzer 's reagent . The flesh of the cap is composed of highly interwoven hyphae measuring 7 @.@ 4 – 11 @.@ 1 µm wide that are hyaline in water , gelatinized and hyaline in KOH , and regularly septate . The stipitipellis ( stem cuticle ) is a <unk> palisade of cylindrical elements with inflated terminal cells . The terminal cells project 30 @.@ 4 – 63 µm , and they are cylindrical to club @-@ shaped , occasionally with an abrupt tapering point . The flesh of the stem is made of densely interwoven hyphae that are 4 @.@ 9 – 7 @.@ 2 µm wide , with spirally arranged , faint golden encrusting pigments that can be seen in KOH , Melzer 's reagent , and water . Clamp connections are absent in this species . 
 = = = Varieties = = = 
 The typical variety of Boletellus ananas has consistently larger fruit bodies than B. ananas var. minor Singer from Brazil and Nicaragua , and lacks the thick @-@ walled cheilocystidia of B. ananas var. <unk> Singer from Nicaragua and Panama . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Although the mushroom is used as a food in Mexico , field guides list it as " inedible " or " not recommended " . 
 = = Similar species = = 
 Strobilomyces <unk> is roughly similar in appearance because of its rough scaly cap and lacerated margin , but may be distinguished from B. ananas by smooth stem without a ring , different spores , and flesh that is less tough . The Australian species Boletellus <unk> has spores with narrow longitudinal ribs that do not have cross @-@ striae . B. <unk> has colors that are not red as in B. ananas , and pores that can become reddish in maturity . Further , the cap flesh of B. <unk> turns blue upon exposure to air . 
 = = Ecology , habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies of B. ananas typically grow scattered or in groups under oak and pine trees , often on their bases . In Guyana , the mushroom typically fruits singly or in pairs within 1 – 2 m ( 3 @.@ 3 – 6 @.@ 6 ft ) above ground level on the trunks of the tropical tree Dicymbe corymbosa ( subfamily <unk> ) , associated with ectomycorrhizas within humic accumulations . It is rarely found fruiting on the ground on heavily decayed , root @-@ penetrated wood . Rolf Singer suggested that the fungus was not mycorrhizal , noting that as well as occurring under or on the bases of both pine and oaks , it occurred in scanty humus and debris accumulated on rock walls . Singer concluded that the species prefers to grow on hard surfaces . Harry D. Thiers , in his study of the bolete flora of Texas , wrote that B. ananas was a rare species that often fruited abundantly following an extended period of rain and high humidity . 
 Some varieties of B. ananas from southeastern North America , Costa Rica , Brazil , Panama , Nicaragua , and Guyana have been noted to fruit on tree trunks , although terrestrial fruiting has been reported in Malaysia and Central America . Due to the typically elevated fruiting habit and occurrence on dead wood , the ectomycorrhizal status of B. ananas has been debated ; in the <unk> Murrill noted " it always occurs either as a wound parasite on pine trunks or about the base of living pine trees . " All collections have been made in association with <unk> host trees including Pinus and Quercus species in southeastern North America and Central America , Quercus <unk> in Colombia , various Fagaceae and Dipterocarpaceae species in Malaysia , and Leptospermum and Pinus species in New Zealand . In Guyana , the humic deposits on Dicymbe trunks bearing B. ananas are consistently permeated with abundant ectomycorrhizas . The fungus was reported as forming mycorrhizal associations with eucalypts in Australia , based on fruit body association with trees . 
 Its North American distribution encompasses a range extending north from North Carolina to Florida , west to Texas and south to Mexico , and Central America . In 2008 , it was reported for the first time in the Upper <unk> and Upper <unk> River Basins in Guyana . It has also been collected from New Zealand , Asia ( including China , Korea , Malaysia , and Taiwan ) , and possibly Australia . 
 = HMS Glowworm ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Glowworm was a G @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy in the mid @-@ 1930s . During the Spanish Civil War the ship spent part of 1936 and 1937 in Spanish waters , enforcing the arms blockade imposed by Britain and France on both sides of the conflict . Glowworm was transferred from the Mediterranean Fleet shortly after the beginning of World War II to the British Isles , to escort shipping in local waters . In March 1940 , she was transferred to the Home Fleet , just in time to participate in the opening stages of the Norwegian Campaign . On 8 April 1940 Glowworm encountered German destroyers transporting troops to invade Norway in Operation Weserübung . The destroyers attempted to disengage while calling for help from the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper . Glowworm was heavily damaged by Admiral Hipper , but still attempted to torpedo the German ship . The two ships collided , which broke the bow off Glowworm , and she sank shortly afterwards . 
 = = Description = = 
 Glowworm displaced 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 370 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 883 long tons ( 1 @,@ 913 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 5 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Glowworm carried a maximum of 470 long tons ( 480 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 530 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 240 km ; 6 @,@ 360 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 137 officers and men in peacetime . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft defence Glowworm had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . She was the test ship for the new quintuple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Glowworm was ordered from the yards of John I. Thornycroft and Company , at Woolston , Hampshire on 5 March 1934 under the 1933 Construction Programme . She was laid down on 15 August 1934 and launched on 22 July 1935 . She was completed on 22 January 1936 at a total cost of £ 248 @,@ 785 , excluding government @-@ furnished equipment like the armament . Upon commissioning she was assigned to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla of the Mediterranean Fleet . Glowworm patrolled Spanish waters during the Spanish Civil War enforcing the edicts of the Non @-@ Intervention Committee until she had a refit at Portsmouth between 27 May and 8 June 1937 . The ship returned to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla in the Mediterranean after her brief refit . Glowworm returned to Portsmouth for a longer overhaul between 7 June and 25 July 1938 and escorted the ocean liner SS Strathnaver between Malta and Alexandria during the Munich Crisis in September 1938 . She then escorted the light cruiser Arethusa on her voyage to Aden later that month . During night exercises on 16 May 1939 , Glowworm collided with her sister , Grenade , and was forced to put into Alexandria for temporary repairs . She received permanent repairs in Malta between 23 May and 24 June . 
 Glowworm was in Alexandria when World War II began in September 1939 . In October the flotilla was transferred to the Western Approaches Command and Glowworm sailed for the UK on 19 October with her sisters Gallant , Grafton , and Greyhound . They arrived at Plymouth on 22 October and were deployed in the South Western Approaches . Glowworm carried out convoy escort duties and anti @-@ submarine patrols until 12 November when she was transferred to the 22nd Destroyer Flotilla , based at Harwich , for North Sea patrol and escort duties . On 22 February 1940 she was hit by the Swedish ship Rex in fog whilst at anchor off Outer Dowsing . Glowworm suffered significant structural damage and was under repair at a commercial dockyard in Hull until late March . On completion of the repairs , she was transferred back to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla of the Home Fleet , rejoining the flotilla at its base at Scapa Flow on 20 March . 
 On 5 April Glowworm was part of the escort of the battlecruiser Renown , along with her sisters Greyhound , Hero , and Hyperion . The ships covered the minelaying operation in Norwegian waters , Operation Wilfred . On 7 April , Glowworm was detached from the task force to search for a man lost overboard . 
 = = = Final battle = = = 
 On the morning of 8 April 1940 Glowworm was on her way to rejoin Renown when she encountered the German destroyers Z11 Bernd von Arnim and Z18 Hans Lüdemann in the heavy fog before 8 : 00 a.m. The destroyers were part of a German naval detachment , led by the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper , on its way to land troops at Trondheim as part of the German invasion of Norway ( Operation Weserübung ) . Glowworm opened fire and the German destroyers attempted to disengage , signalling for help . The request was soon answered by Admiral Hipper which spotted Glowworm at 09 : 50 . Hipper initially had difficulty in distinguishing Glowworm from von Arnim , but opened fire eight minutes later at a range of 8 @,@ 400 metres ( 9 @,@ 200 yd ) with her 20 @.@ 3 @-@ centimetre ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) main guns . Glowworm was hit by Hipper 's fourth salvo and she started making smoke . She turned into her own smoke in an attempt to break visual contact with Hipper , but the cruiser 's radar @-@ directed guns were not affected by the smoke . When the destroyer emerged from her smoke the range was now short enough that the cruiser 's 10 @.@ 5 @-@ centimetre ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns could fire . Glowworm 's radio room , bridge , and forward 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch gun were all destroyed , and she received additional hits in the engine room , the captain 's day cabin , and finally the mast . As this crashed down , it caused a short circuit of the wiring , causing the ship 's siren to start a banshee wail . At 10 : 10 Lieutenant Commander Gerard Broadmead Roope , fired five torpedoes from one mounting at a range of 800 metres ( 870 yd ) , but all missed because Captain Hellmuth Heye had kept Hipper 's bow pointed at Glowworm throughout the battle to minimize his risk from torpedoes . The destroyer fell back through her smoke screen to buy time to get her second torpedo mount working , but Heye followed Glowworm through the smoke to finish her off before she could fire the rest of her torpedoes . The two ships were very close when Hipper emerged from the smoke and Roope ordered a hard turn to starboard to reduce the range and possibly ram the destroyer . Hipper was slow to answer her helm and Glowworm struck the cruiser just abaft the anchor . The collision broke off Glowworm 's bow and the rest of the ship scraped along Hipper 's side , gouging open several holes in the latter 's hull and destroying her forward starboard torpedo mounting . One German sailor was knocked overboard by the collision . Hipper took on some 500 tonnes ( 490 long tons ) of water before the leaks could be isolated , but was not seriously damaged . Glowworm was on fire when she drifted clear and her boilers exploded at 10 : 24 , taking 109 of her crew with her . 
 Admiral Hipper hove to in order to rescue her man overboard and Glowworm 's survivors . The German sailor was not found , but 40 British sailors were recovered , although at least six later died of their wounds . Lieutenant Ramsay , the senior surviving officer , told his rescuers that neither the helm nor the emergency rudder were manned when the ships collided so the destroyer 's turn towards Hipper was probably accidental . German accounts only mention four torpedoes fired by Glowworm , but British accounts say all ten were fired . This was confirmed by photographic evidence taken after the collision showing all of her torpedo tubes empty . 
 Roope , who drowned when he could no longer hang on to a rope whilst being pulled up the side of the cruiser , was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross , thus becoming the first VC recipient of the Second World War . The award was justified , in part , by the recommendation of Heye , who wrote to the British authorities via the Red Cross , giving a statement of the valiant courage Roope had shown when engaging a much superior ship in close battle . Ramsay was also awarded the DSO . Both awards were made after the end of the war . 
 = Hakeem Olajuwon = 
 Hakeem Abdul Olajuwon ( / <unk> / ; [ <unk> ̃ ] ; born January 21 , 1963 ) , formerly known as Akeem Olajuwon , is a Nigerian @-@ American retired professional basketball player . From 1984 to 2002 , he played the center position in the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) for the Houston Rockets , and the Toronto Raptors . He led the Rockets to back @-@ to @-@ back NBA championships in 1994 and 1995 . In 2008 , he was inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame , and in 2016 , he was inducted into the FIBA Hall of Fame . Listed at 7 ft 0 in ( 2 @.@ 13 m ) ( but standing closer to 6 ft 10 in ( 2 @.@ 08 m ) by his own admission ) , Olajuwon is considered one of the greatest centers ever to play the game . He was nicknamed " The Dream " during his basketball career after he dunked so effortlessly that his college coach said it " looked like a dream . " 
 Born in Lagos , Nigeria , Olajuwon traveled from his home country to play for the University of Houston under Coach Guy Lewis . His college career for the Cougars included three trips to the Final Four . Olajuwon was drafted by the Houston Rockets with the first overall selection of the 1984 NBA draft , a draft that included Michael Jordan , Charles Barkley , and John Stockton . He combined with the 7 ft 4 in ( 2 @.@ 24 m ) Ralph Sampson to form a duo dubbed the " Twin Towers " . The two led the Rockets to the 1986 NBA Finals , where they lost in six games to the Boston Celtics . After Sampson was traded to the Warriors in 1988 , Olajuwon became the Rockets ' undisputed leader . He led the league in rebounding twice ( 1989 , 1990 ) and blocks three times ( 1990 , 1991 , 1993 ) . 
 Despite very nearly being traded during a bitter contract dispute before the 1992 – 93 season , he remained in Houston where in 1993 – 94 , he became the only player in NBA history to win the NBA MVP , Defensive Player of the Year , and Finals MVP awards in the same season . His Rockets won back @-@ to @-@ back championships against the New York Knicks ( avenging his college championship loss to Patrick Ewing ) , and Shaquille O 'Neal 's Orlando Magic . In 1996 , Olajuwon was a member of the Olympic gold @-@ medal @-@ winning United States national team , and was selected as one of the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History . He ended his career as the league 's all @-@ time leader in blocks , with 3 @,@ 830 , and is one of four NBA players to record a quadruple @-@ double . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Olajuwon was born to Salim and <unk> Olajuwon , middle @-@ class Yoruba owners of a cement business in Lagos , Nigeria . " Olajuwon " translates to " surpassing wealth " in Yoruba . He was the third of six children . He credits his parents with instilling virtues of hard work and discipline into him and his siblings ; " They taught us to be honest , work hard , respect our elders , and believe in ourselves " . Olajuwon has expressed displeasure at his childhood in Nigeria being characterized as backward . " Lagos is a very cosmopolitan city ... There are many ethnic groups . I grew up in an environment at schools where there were all different types of people . " 
 During his youth , Olajuwon was a soccer goalkeeper , which helped give him the footwork and agility to balance his size and strength in basketball , and also contributed to his shot @-@ blocking ability . Olajuwon did not play basketball until the age of 15 , when he entered a local tournament . It has been said that a coach in Nigeria once asked him to dunk and demonstrated while standing on a chair . Olajuwon then tried to stand on the chair himself . When redirected by staff not to use the chair , Hakeem could initially not dunk the basketball . 
 Despite early struggles , Olajuwon quickly became taken with the game : " Basketball is something that is so unique . That immediately I pick up the game and , you know , realize that this is the sport for me . All the other sports just become secondary . " 
 = = College career = = 
 Olajuwon emigrated from Nigeria to play basketball at the University of Houston under Cougars coach Guy Lewis . Olajuwon was not highly recruited and was merely offered a visit to the university to work out for the coaching staff , based on a recommendation from a friend of Lewis who had seen Olajuwon play . He later recalled that when he originally arrived at the airport in 1980 for the visit , no representative of the school was there to greet him . When he called the staff , they told him to take a taxi out to the university . 
 After redshirting his freshman year in 1980 – 81 because he could not yet get clearance from the NCAA to play , Olajuwon played sparingly as a redshirt freshman in 1981 – 82 , and the Cougars were eliminated in the Final Four by the eventual NCAA champion , North Carolina Tar Heels . Olajuwon sought advice from the coaching staff about how to increase his playing time , and they advised him to work out with local Houston resident and multiple NBA MVP winner , Moses Malone . Malone , who was then a center on the NBA 's Houston Rockets , played games every off season with several NBA players at the <unk> Recreation Center . Olajuwon joined the workouts and went head to head with Malone in several games throughout the summer . Olajuwon credited this experience with rapidly improving his game : " The way Moses helped me is by being out there playing and allowing me to go against that level of competition . He was the best center in the NBA at the time , so I was trying to improve my game against the best . " 
 Olajuwon returned from that summer a different player . He and his teammates ( including Clyde Drexler ) formed what was dubbed " Phi Slama Jama , " the first slam @-@ dunking " fraternity , " so named because of its above @-@ the @-@ rim prowess . In his sophomore and junior years he helped the Cougars advance to consecutive NCAA championship games , where they lost to North Carolina State on a last second tip @-@ in in 1983 and a Patrick Ewing @-@ led Georgetown team in 1984 . Olajuwon won the 1983 NCAA Tournament Player of the Year award , even though he played for the losing team in the final game . He is , to date , the last player from a losing side to be granted this honor . Drexler departed for the NBA in 1983 , leaving Olajuwon the lone star on the team . 
 After the 1983 – 84 season , Olajuwon debated whether to stay in college or declare early for the NBA draft . At that time ( before the NBA Draft Lottery was introduced in 1985 ) , the first pick was awarded by coin flip . Olajuwon recalled : " I really believed that Houston was going to win the coin flip and pick the number 1 draft choice , and I really wanted to play in Houston so I had to make that decision ( to leave early ) . " His intuition proved correct , and a lucky toss placed Houston ahead of the Portland Trail Blazers . Olajuwon was considered the top amateur prospect in the summer of 1984 over fellow collegians and future NBA stars Michael Jordan , Charles Barkley , and John Stockton , and was selected first overall by the Rockets in the 1984 NBA draft . 
 In his autobiography , Living the Dream , Olajuwon mentions an intriguing draft trade offered to the Rockets that would have sent Clyde Drexler and the number two pick in the 1984 NBA draft from Portland in exchange for Ralph Sampson . Had the Rockets made the deal , Olajuwon states the Rockets could have selected Michael Jordan with the number two pick to play alongside Olajuwon and Drexler , who had established chemistry playing together during their Phi Slama Jama days in college . Sportswriter Sam Smith speculates that such a trade " would have changed league history and maybe the entire Michael Jordan legend " . From 1991 to 1998 , every NBA championship team included either Jordan or Olajuwon ; furthermore , at least one of Drexler , Jordan , and Olajuwon was involved in every NBA Finals from 1990 to 1998 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Houston Rockets = = = 
 = = = = Rookie and sophomore years = = = = 
 The Rockets had immediate success during Olajuwon 's rookie season , as their win @-@ loss record improved from 29 – 53 in 1983 – 84 to 48 – 34 in 1984 – 85 . He teamed with the 1984 Rookie of the Year , 7 ft 4 in ( 2 @.@ 24 m ) Ralph Sampson to form the original NBA " Twin Towers " duo . Olajuwon averaged 20 @.@ 6 points , 11 @.@ 9 rebounds and 2 @.@ 68 blocks in his rookie season . He finished as runner @-@ up to Michael Jordan in the 1985 Rookie of the Year voting , and was the only other rookie to receive any votes . 
 Olajuwon averaged 23 @.@ 5 points , 11 @.@ 5 rebounds , and 3 @.@ 4 blocks per game during his second pro season ( 1985 – 86 ) . The Rockets finished 51 – 31 , and advanced all the way to the Western Conference Finals where they faced the defending champion Los Angeles Lakers . The Rockets won the series fairly easily , four games to one , shocking the sports world and landing Olajuwon on the cover of Sports Illustrated . Olajuwon scored 75 points in victories in games three and four , and after the series Lakers coach Pat Riley remarked " We tried everything . We put four bodies on him . We helped from different angles . He 's just a great player . " The Rockets advanced to the 1986 NBA Finals where they succumbed in six games to the Boston Celtics , whose 1986 team is often considered one of the best teams in NBA history . 
 = = = = Mid @-@ career years = = = = 
