 Formation of approximately the current depth of the Colorado River 's Grand Canyon by 1 @.@ 2 mya further caused its tributaries to cut down even deeper . <unk> erosion of one of those tributaries , the Paria River , eroded north @-@ northwestward toward what is now Paria Amphitheater . The river took a route roughly parallel to and east of the Paunsaugunt Fault . Erosion from snow and rain that fall directly on the east @-@ facing rim of the Paunsaugunt Plateau forms gullies that widen into alcoves and amphitheaters while differential erosion and frost wedging create the hoodoos . Streams on the plateau do not contribute to the formation of alcoves or amphitheaters because they flow away from the rim . Erosion continues in this fashion today . 
 = = Hoodoo formation in Bryce Canyon = = 
 The Pink Member of the Claron Formation is largely composed of easily eroded and relatively soft limestone . When rain combines with carbon dioxide it forms a weak solution of carbonic acid . This acid helps to slowly dissolve the limestone in the Claron Formation grain by grain . It is this process of chemical weathering that rounds the edges of hoodoos and gives them their lumpy and bulging profiles . 
 In the winter , melting snow seeps into cracks and joints and freezes at night . The force of the expanding ice helps to erode the rock of the Claron Formation . Over 200 of these freeze / thaw cycles occur each year in Bryce Canyon . Frost wedging exploits and widens the nearly vertical joint planes that divide the Pink Member of the Claron Formation . 
 Internal layers of mudstone , conglomerate and siltstone interrupt the limestone horizontally . These layers are more resistant to attack by carbonic acid and they can therefore act as protective capstones of fins , windows and hoodoos . Many of the more durable hoodoos are capped with a type of magnesium @-@ rich limestone called dolomite . Dolomite dissolves at a much slower rate , and consequently protects the weaker limestone underneath . 
 However , the same processes that create hoodoos will also eventually destroy them . In the case of Bryce Canyon , the hoodoos ' rate of erosion is 2 – 4 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 3 m ) every 100 years . As the canyon continues to erode to the west it will eventually capture ( in perhaps 3 million years ) the watershed of the East Fork of the Sevier River . Once this river flows through Bryce Amphitheater it will dominate the erosional pattern ; replacing hoodoos with a V @-@ shaped canyon and steep cliff walls typical of the weathering and erosional patterns created by rivers . A foreshadowing of this can be observed in Water Canyon while hiking the Mossy Cave Trail . A diversion canal has been taking a portion of the East Fork of the Sevier River through this section of the park for over 100 years . 
 = Cargolink = 
 Cargolink AS is a Norwegian railway company . Owned by the automotive distribution company Autolink , Cargolink has operated both autorack and container trains since November 2008 . Cargolink has a fleet of ten diesel locomotives , five shunters , 100 autoracks and 60 container cars . Combined autorack and container trains are operated up to five times per week along the Sørland- , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Nordland Lines , as well as services through Sweden . 
 Autolink , the largest distributor of automobiles in Norway , has traditionally bought train services from CargoNet . In 2007 , they signed a contract with Ofotbanen , and at the same time bought 40 % of the company . However , Ofotbanen was in financial difficulties , causing a dispute between the two owners . The result was that Autolink formally established Cargolink in March 2008 , without the knowledge of Ofotbanen , and terminated the contract with Ofotbanen in July . Cargolink received an operating licence in September and service started in November . 
 = = Operation = = 
 Cargolink has a fleet of five shunters at their port in Drammen , in addition to three Di 6 diesel locomotives and three TRAXX electric locomotives for main haulage . While the shunters are owned by Cargolink , the diesel locomotives are leased from Dispolok of Germany and the electric locomotives are leased from Hector Rail . It also has more than 100 closed autoracks for automobile transport , and 60 container cars . 70 new autoracks are under delivery from Sweden . 
 On contract from Autolink , Cargolink operates autorack trains throughout large portions of the Norwegian railway network , from the seaports in Drammen and Oslo . Services are provided along the Sørland Line to Stavanger , along the Bergen Line to Bergen , along the Dovre Line to Trondheim , along the Rauma Line to Åndalsnes , and along the Nordland Line to Mosjøen , Mo i Rana and Bodø . It also operates through Sweden to reach Narvik and Malmö Each route has up to five weekly departures in both directions with combined autorack and container trains . The company transports 55 @,@ 000 cars annually on 600 trains , giving a revenue of NOK 65 million . Autolink is responsible for about three @-@ quarters of all new @-@ car distribution in the country . On the weekly return trips from Northern Norway , Cargolink uses the empty cars to transport aluminum from <unk> Mosjøen . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Autolink and Ofotbanen = = = 
 Autolink has traditionally owned a large pool of autoracks . These have been operated by the Norwegian State Railways , and subsequently their subsidiary CargoNet . On 31 January 2007 , Autolink bought 40 % of the private railway company Ofotbanen , and at the same time signed a haulage contract with them . This made Autolink Ofotbanen 's largest customer , and second largest owner . In March , Autolink ordered additional 70 new autoracks for NOK 175 million . 
 Ofotbanen have since their establishment had financial difficulties . The contract with Autolink had helped , but in July 2008 , Autolink canceled their contract with Ofotbanen . Two weeks later , Autolink announced that they would establish their own railway company , which they had been working with since March . They stated that the deal with Ofotbanen was discontinued because the majority owner — Rail Management , in turn owned by Mons Bolin — would not allow additional private placements of capital , nor sell their shares to Autolink . From 29 July , all automotive trains stopped running , and no cars were transported for ten days . The same day , all board members in Ofotbanen representing Autolink withdrew from their positions . 
 The matter ended in court , with a case to determine whether Autolink should be allowed to take control of four train radios that were located in locomotives owned by Autolink , but operated by Ofotbanen . In a shareholder agreement between Autolink and Rail Management , the ownership of the train radios had been transferred to Autolink , but the agreement has clauses that specified that Autolink could not start a competing railway company . Stating that Autolink had been disloyal in regard to the contract , Ofoten District Court ruled on 17 July 2008 against Autolink 's demand for an interim order to transfer the ownership of the radios to Autolink . The court ruled that an interim decision could not be made due to the complexity of the contracts , and that a normal lawsuit would have to be carried out to determine the matter . There was agreement that Autolink , on 13 February 2008 , had bought five shunters from Ofotbanen for NOK 12 million , of which NOK 9 @.@ 5 million was paid by Autolink deleting debt . 
 Ofotbanen lost their license from the Norwegian Railway Inspectorate on 7 October 2008 . This was because Ofotbanen had not documented necessary accounts for 2007 , nor provided evidence of necessary liquidity . On 24 October , the company was declared bankrupt . Rail Management subsequently established the new company Ofotbanen Drift , and stated that the cause of the bankruptcy was that Autolink had not let them make a private placement of NOK 10 million . 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 Work on establishing the new company was initiated by Autolink in March 2008 , with the company formally established on 27 March . It received an operating license from the Norwegian Railway Inspectorate on 18 September 2008 . Five shunters that were operated by Ofotbanen , but owned by Autolink , were transferred to Cargolink . In addition , ten Di 6 diesel locomotives have been leased from Vossloh , with options for later purchase . Operations started on 2 November , with 22 engineers based in Drammen . Since the company has an all @-@ diesel fleet , management is working to reroute trains to Trondheim and Northern Norway along the Røros Line instead of the Dovre Line . CargoNet and Ofotbanen had been using the Dovre Line because it is electrified , giving lower operating costs despite its elevation , 350 m ( 1 @,@ 150 ft ) higher than the Røros Line . After initial trial runs with only three locomotives , full service was introduced later in November . 
 = The One After the Superbowl = 
 " The One After the Superbowl " [ sic ] is a double @-@ length episode of the American television sitcom Friends ' second season . It originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on January 28 , 1996 , immediately after NBC 's telecast of Super Bowl XXX . The network 's decision to air the episode directly after the Super Bowl was made in hopes of making it the " highest @-@ grossing ad @-@ revenue day in television history . " Guest stars in the episode are Brooke Shields , Chris Isaak , Julia Roberts , Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme , Fred Willard , and Dan Castellaneta . They were cast to draw more viewers and further increase the advertising revenue . 
 The main plot of the episode sees Ross searching for his former pet monkey , Marcel , and discovering that he is working on a film set in New York . The first part of the episode was written by Mike <unk> and Jeffrey <unk> and the second by Michael Borkow . Both parts were directed by Michael Lembeck . The episode drew 52 @.@ 9 million viewers , making it the most @-@ watched episode in the show 's history . Since airing , " The One After the Superbowl " has received mixed reviews from television critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After seeing a monkey in a beer commercial that reminds him of his former pet monkey Marcel , Ross decides to pay a visit to his old pet at the San Diego Zoo during his business trip to California . When Ross cannot find the monkey , the zoo administrator ( Fred Willard ) tells him that Marcel has died . However , a janitor ( Dan <unk> ) later informs Ross that Marcel was kidnapped and forced into show business and is currently filming a movie in New York . Meanwhile , Joey has to contend with a stalker ( Brooke Shields ) who thinks that Joey is actually Dr. Drake Ramoray , the character he plays on Days of Our Lives . Despite this , Joey goes on a date with her . She dumps him when she suspects " Drake " is cheating on her with another woman ( actually another character in the soap opera ) . Phoebe dates a man ( Chris Isaak ) who hired her to perform at a children 's concert . 
 Ross , hoping for a reunion with Marcel , looks for him on the movie set . Joey meanwhile , sucks up to the production assistant to land a part in the movie . While on set , Chandler meets his old childhood friend Susie " Underpants " Moss ( Julia Roberts ) working on the production , with whom he has a colored history ; when they were in elementary school , Chandler pulled up Susie 's skirt when she was on stage , revealing her underwear to the entire school . They arrange a date , Chandler unsuspecting that it is a plot to get revenge . After convincing him to wear her panties , Susie leaves him wearing nothing but the panties in a bathroom stall in the restaurant where they were having dinner . Meanwhile , Monica ( Courteney Cox ) and Rachel meet the movie 's star Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme , and compete for his attention . This creates tension between them , as they both argue over who should get to date him . They both dump him when he tries to convince them to have a threesome with Drew Barrymore . Ross finally reunites with Marcel and Joey lands a small role in the movie , but loses his solitary line after overacting . 
 = = Production = = 
 The first part of " The One After the Superbowl " was written by Mike <unk> and Jeffrey <unk> , and the second part by Michael Borkow . Both parts were directed by Michael Lembeck . On January 28 , 1996 , the day the episode aired , executive producer Kevin S. Bright commented : " It 'll be bigger in size and scope then a regular Friends episode . Tonight we go one step beyond . " At the beginning of January 1996 , it was confirmed that Julia Roberts , Brooke Shields , Chris Isaak and Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme would all guest star in " The One After the Superbowl " . Actors and comedians Fred Willard and Dan Castellaneta also made minor guest appearances in the episode , as the zookeeper and the zoo janitor respectively . 
 Bright commented that Shields ' performance was " a little into silly land " at first , but it " eventually turned in a very funny performance . " Shields commented that when she was asked to appear on the show , she " said yes basically sight unseen . I don 't know where I was on the list . Maybe everybody else said no . " The writers had difficulty devising jokes that would be funny when Van Damme said them . In order to create " Van Damme @-@ proof " jokes , one writer " would say them in a really horrible French accent , putting the emphasis on the wrong word " . If people laughed , Van Damme was given the joke to perform . One line created in this way was Van Damme 's " I can crack a walnut with my butt . " 
 Roberts recorded her scenes from January 6 – 8 , 1996 . She had a relationship with cast member Matthew Perry at the time and an audience member said about their on @-@ screen kiss , " Julia looked at Matt and said ' I 'm glad we rehearsed this over the weekend ' . " A sound recordist commented : " I 've seen screen kisses before but this was the best . They really went at it . " Roberts thought her appearance on the show was " the most nerve @-@ wracking thing " she had done since auditioning for Pretty Woman . " I wanted to be the best I could be . [ Perry ] is incredibly funny , and you want to inspire that same kind of joy that he does . Then at a certain point at lunch , you go , ' Well , it ain 't gonna happen . I 'll just try to be cute . ' " 
 The decision to air the episode directly after Super Bowl XXX was made by NBC in hopes of making that Sunday the " highest @-@ grossing ad @-@ revenue day in television history . " The guest stars were cast to draw more viewers and further increase the advertising revenue . In past years , networks had " exploited " the post @-@ Super Bowl time slot to launch new series . NBC made an exception with Friends because they believed it would attract more advertising revenue than a new show . Curt King , press manager for Friends , commented : " Try to think of the new shows that were premiered after recent Super Bowls and name one that 's still around . What we decided to do this year was not to unveil a new show but give people an extra @-@ special version of a show they already like a lot . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The One After the Superbowl " is the most @-@ watched episode in the history of Friends , with a total of 52 @.@ 9 million viewers tuned in after the Super Bowl ended . The episode generated a 29 @.@ 5 Nielsen rating and a 47 percent audience share , making it the highest @-@ rated episode of any show ever ( scripted or otherwise ) to debut after the Super Bowl . The advertising rates for " The One After the Superbowl " averaged $ 600 @,@ 000 for 30 seconds of commercial time . This was one of the largest advertising rates ever for a sitcom at the time . The episode 's director , Michael Lembeck , won the 1996 Emmy Award in the " Outstanding Individual Achievement in Directing for a Comedy Series " category for this episode , the only Emmy won by Friends that year . 
 " The One After the Superbowl " received mixed reviews from television critics . Lisa Davis of the Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram called the guest appearances " a blatant ploy to boost ratings . " The Charlotte Observer 's Tim Goodman said the episode 's " pathetic infusion of ' star appeal ' " made him " nauseous " and commented that the producers " should just make Bernie Kopell a regular and turn it into the Love Boat all over again . " Diane Holloway of the Austin American @-@ Statesman also noted the similarities with the television series Love Boat , known for its many guest stars : " [ The episode ] had a couple of chuckles , but came off like a young Love Boat . " Entertainment Weekly called the episode " fragmented , poorly paced , and only sporadically funny . <unk> the already crowded ensemble with celebs may have been a ratings grabber ... but the results are forced <unk> and stilted acting , " specifically citing Van Damme . Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide wrote that the episode " feels like nothing more than a big stunt to follow the big game . " He went on to say that the cameos of Willard and Castellaneta " offers easily the best parts of the program . " 
 Shields was praised for her performance . Alan Pergament of The Buffalo News said she " showed a different side and was the best guest star " in the episode . Peter Marks of The New York Times commented that Shields ' performance was " so edgy and unbridled " that she " stole the episode " from Roberts and Isaak . Jae @-@ Ha Kim of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times wrote that the chemistry between Perry and Roberts was " authentic " and that Shields " may have found her niche as a sitcom queen . " Her performance in the episode impressed NBC so much that she was offered her own sitcom , Suddenly Susan , for the network 's 1996 fall lineup . In discussion of Shields performance , Joanne Ostrow of The Denver Post noted that she " did a nice turn to help her stalled career . " She went on to say that Roberts ' appearance was " to little effect " . 
 Ostrow commented that the Monica and Rachel storyline " was evidence of unfunny , lazy writing . " Kim , however , thought the storyline offered some " funny moments . " Ostrow was complimentary of cast members Lisa Kudrow and David Schwimmer 's performances . " Lisa Kudrow , as Phoebe , singer of truthful folk songs , continues to be a Friends highlight and David Schwimmer can carry off amusing , emotionally tinged moments even opposite a monkey . " DVD Talk 's Earl Cressey named the episode one of the highlights of the second season of Friends . Hal Boedeker of The Orlando Sentinel praised " The One After the Superbowl " for being better than most episodes of Friends and " pleasantly off @-@ the @-@ wall and in keeping with the Friends spirit . " The authors of Friends Like Us : The Unofficial Guide to Friends wrote that there are " some lovely moments of slapstick " in the episode . They called Roberts " a fine guest @-@ star " , while Van Damme was " embarrassing " . Pergament said " The One After the Superbowl " " had its moments " , but he thought it felt more like an episode of Seinfeld than an episode of Friends . The Houston Chronicle 's Ann Hodges gave the episode a more negative review , commenting that the Friends writers " dropped the ball " with it : " Women 's underwear , three @-@ way @-@ sex jokes , and a monkey — that was it . The insipid , stupid script was an insult to guest stars like Julia Roberts and Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme . " 
 = Who Do You Love ? ( Bo Diddley song ) = 
 " Who Do You Love ? " is a song written by American rock and roll pioneer Bo Diddley . Recorded in 1956 , it is one of his most popular and enduring works . The song represents one of Bo Diddley 's strongest lyrical efforts and uses a combination of hoodoo @-@ type imagery and boasting . It is an upbeat rocker , but the original did not use the signature Bo Diddley beat rhythm . 
 " Who Do You Love ? " was part of Bo Diddley 's repertoire throughout his career , but none of his various recordings reached the record charts . The song has been interpreted and recorded by numerous musicians in different styles , often adding a Bo Diddley beat . Popular renditions include those by Ronnie Hawkins and George Thorogood , with charting singles by the Woolies , Tom Rush , Quicksilver Messenger Service , and Juicy Lucy . 
 Guitarists ' contributions to the various renditions of the song have been noted by music critics and writers . Beginning with blues guitarist Jody Williams ' prominent fills and solo on Bo Diddley 's original recording , the guitar work by Robbie Robertson ( Hawkins ) , John Cipollina ( Quicksilver ) , Glenn Ross Campbell ( Juicy Lucy ) , and Thorogood on later adaptations has been also acknowledged . 
 = = Background and lyrics = = 
 Bo Diddley wrote " Who Do You Love " in 1956 . The idea came to him in Kansas City , where he heard a group of children trying to out @-@ brag one another using a particular rhythm . " It was like an African chant , and I wanted words that would suit it " , Bo Diddley recalled . Inspired by Muddy Waters 1954 hit " I 'm Your Hoochie Coochie Man " , he wanted to outdo songwriter Willie Dixon 's lyrical swagger : 
 I 'm telling this chick ... how bad I am , so she can go tell the cat she 's hanging with , " this dude is something else . " That 's what it kinda meant , cat ridin ' rattlesnakes and <unk> ' boa constrictors and stuff . 
 He also sings about a skull , a tombstone , a graveyard , and a scream in the night to convey a sense of <unk> . The use of the homonym " who do " is an allusion to " hoodoo " , a Louisiana / Mississippi folk magic belief that events can be influenced by its use . However , Bo Diddley uses imagery more common to the American Southwest , combined with exaggerated bravado . He explained that the first line , " I got forty @-@ seven miles of barbed wire " , came to him quickly , " but I couldn 't get a rhyme for it . I thought of car tires and mule trains , and I couldn 't get anything to fit . Then one day I said ' use a cobra snake , ' and my drummer , Clifton James , added ' for a necktie ' " . These are directed at a female he is trying to woo – " who do you love , me or him " . The lyrics confirm the effect : " Arlene took me by my hand , she said ' oo @-@ ee daddy I understand ' , who do you love ? " . 
 = = Composition and recording = = 
 Musically , " Who Do You Love ? " is an uptempo song centered on one chord ( A ♭ ) with guitar flourishes that complement the vocals . It has a strong rhythm , but unlike later interpretations , it does not use the typical Bo Diddley beat . Instead , the song uses a " modified cut shuffle beat " or 2 / 4 time , giving it an almost rockabilly feel , similar to Chuck Berry 's " Maybellene " . 
 " Who Do You Love ? " was recorded in Chicago on March 24 , 1956 , one year after recording the self @-@ titled " Bo Diddley " , his debut single . Bo Diddley uses his characteristic sound processing effects , including echoey vocal and tremolo @-@ laden rhythm electric guitar . Jody Williams answers the vocal lines with prominent , distinctive overdriven guitar fills and a solo . Biographer George R. White calls his playing " revolutionary " . In naming Williams to its list of " 35 Blues Guitarists Who Definitely Started It All " , Spin magazine adds , " His solo on Diddley 's ' Who Do You Love ? ' is a lesson in evil " . Clifton James plays the drums and percussionist Jerome Green adds maracas . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 In 1956 , the song was released as a single by Checker Records , a Chess Records subsidiary , but did not reach the record charts . It reached a bigger audience when it was included on his first compilation album , Bo Diddley , released in 1958 . " Who Do You Love ? " appears on numerous later compilations , including His Best . Music critic Cub Koda calls " Who Do You Love ? " one of Bo Diddley 's strongest lyrical efforts . Writer Don Snowden notes that it is " an enduring lyric archetype on the order of ' Johnny B. Goode ' and ' Hoochie Coochie Man ' " . White describes it as " a stunning display of <unk> braggadocio " . He adds that the song is " spine @-@ chilling ... [ with ] murky vocals , eerie — almost surreal — lyrics " . 
 In 1967 , Bo Diddley recorded an updated version of the song with Muddy Waters and Little Walter for the Super Blues collaboration album . He recorded it again in 1987 for the La Bamba film soundtrack . Willie Dixon produced the song and Los Lobos provided the ensemble backing . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 = = = Ronnie Hawkins and the Hawks = = = 
 Rockabilly singer Ronnie Hawkins performed " Who Do You Love ? " during live engagements as early as the late 1950s . After several singles , Hawkins recorded the song in February 1963 for Roulette Records in New York City . He was backed by the Hawks , who later toured with Bob Dylan and became the Band . Music historian Charlie Gillett describes Hawkins ' vocal as " low and hard , <unk> all that rock ' n ' roll could do " . 
 The Hawks ' Robbie Robertson 's guitar playing is prominent in the recording and has been noted by several music writers . Critic Richie Unterberger described it as " a good few years ahead of its time in its manic distorted intensity " . Robertson 's style has been compared to that of blues guitarist Willie Johnson , who was a key contributor to Howlin ' Wolf 's early 1950s sound . Longtime Howlin ' Wolf guitarist Hubert Sumlin 's 1961 solo on " Wang Dang Doodle " has been suggested as inspiring Robertson . However , Gillett notes , " Robertson 's guitar style did not imitate any particular previous guitarist " and added " five years later , many guitarists were trying in vain for comparable effects " . 
 Hawkins ' single was a hit in Canada , according to writer Oliver Trager , but its release predated Canadian record chart compiler , RPM magazine . Except near the border in the Great Lakes area , the record was largely unnoticed and did not appear on the Billboard charts . In 1964 , they performed an eight @-@ minute version in a jam style later associated with the Grateful Dead . Robertson , along with Levon Helm and Garth Hudson , backed John P. Hammond for a recording of " Who Do You Love " for the latter 's So Many Roads album . Released in 1965 , the song uses a Bo Diddley beat with a blues rock arrangement . In 1976 , Hawkins performed the song with the Band for The Last Waltz concert film and album . Band biographer Neil Minturn describes it as " demanding an ebullient , loose , insistent , repetitive groove , with roots in Southern , rural culture . Hawkins continued to perform " Who Do You Love ? " as a solo artist . 
 = = = Quicksilver Messenger Service = = = 
 San Francisco psychedelic rock band Quicksilver Messenger Service made " Who Do You Love " a feature of their live performances . During the group 's early days in 1966 and 1967 with singer and harmonica player Jim Murray , the song was performed with a relatively concise blues rock arrangement featuring a Bo Diddley @-@ style beat and harmonica and guitar solos . They attempted at least one studio recording in 1967 during the sessions that led to their first album , Quicksilver Messenger Service . The demo was officially released on the 1999 album Unreleased Quicksilver Messenger Service – Lost Gold and Silver . At just less than six minutes , it is fairly representative of their early performances . 
 However , by mid @-@ 1968 " Who Do You Love " took on a different arrangement . Unterberger calls it a " template upon which to hang long instrumental guitar improvisations , [ with ] the tempo and the melody of the original tune all but disappearing " . A 25 @-@ minute live adaptation was included on Quicksilver 's second album , Happy Trails , that was edited from 1968 recordings at the Fillmore East and / or Fillmore West . The group performs it as a six @-@ part suite that " weave [ s ] into and back out of the main theme " , with sections allow for instrumental exploration by the individual band members . 
 The first and last sections , titled " Who Do You Love Parts 1 and 2 " , are the most Bo Diddley @-@ anchored sections of the song with vocals and a his well @-@ known beat . The non @-@ vocal sections have titles that play on the original , but beginning with different interrogatives : when , where , how , and which . The second section features a jazz @-@ influenced guitar solo by Gary Duncan and interplay with guitarist John Cipollina , while the third deconstructs into guitar effects and ambient audience sounds . The fourth section returns to the Bo Diddley theme with a guitar solo by Cipollina , described in a Mojo magazine album review as " distinctive , quivering , vibrato @-@ heavy playing " , with the band delivering a solid backing . The fifth section highlights David Freiberg 's bass lines and the sixth section is the coda with vocal and harmonies . 
 Rock music critic Greil Marcus calls " Who Do You Love " " one of the best rock 'n'roll recordings to emerge from San Francisco [ and ] some of the finest hard rock ever recorded " . In the description of the song , Legends of Rock Guitar : The Essential Reference of Rock 's Greatest Guitarists includes : 
 [ Cipollina ] whips out nearly every technique and effect known to rock guitarists at the time , including heavy distortion , feedback , <unk> , echo , and <unk> effects , as well as his novel jazz influences , whammy vibrato , and string bending techniques . 
 At over twenty @-@ five minutes , the song was too long for commercial radio airplay . Capitol Records prepared an edited 3 : 35 version for release as a single . It became Quicksilver 's first appearance on Billboard 's Hot 100 singles chart , where it reached number 91 in 1969 . The Happy Trails record album , with the song taking up the entire first side , became a best seller at number 27 in the album chart , also in 1969 . Rolling Stone included the album at number 189 on its list of the " 500 Greatest Albums of all Time " 
 = = = George Thorogood and the Destroyers = = = 
 American blues rock singer and guitarist George Thorogood and the Destroyers recorded " Who Do You Love ? " for their second album , Move It on Over ( 1978 ) . In contrast to Quicksilver Messenger Service , Thorogood 's punchy 4 : 21 rendition is more suited to a dive bar than a psychedelic ballroom . AllMusic writer Tim Sendra notes the song 's " pounding " Bo Diddley @-@ beat , with Thorogood 's " nasty slide [ guitar ] playing and <unk> blues vocals " . In addition to Bo Diddley 's lyrics , he included : " Snakeskin shoes baby put ' em on your feet , got the good time music with a Bo Diddley beat " . 
 The song became an FM rock radio staple and one of Thorogood 's most identifiable and popular songs . In 1985 , he performed it with Bo Diddley at Live Aid benefit concert in Philadelphia . " Who Do You Love ? " continues to be a part of Thorogood 's repertoire , with several live recordings , including for his 30th Anniversary Tour : Live album and video . 
 = = Recognition and legacy = = 
 In 2004 , Rolling Stone magazine ranked Bo Diddley 's original song at number 133 on their list of the " 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " . In 2010 , the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences acknowledged it with a Grammy Hall of Fame Award , which " honor [ s ] recordings of lasting qualitative or historical significance " . 
 " Who Do You Love ? " has been interpreted and recorded by numerous musicians . Folk singer Tom Rush recorded the song for his 1966 album Take a Little Walk with Me . Unterberger describes it as " electric rock ... Tom adapted an <unk> low and playful growl for Diddley 's ' Who Do You Love , ' graced by early fuzz guitar distortion " with the same musicians who backed Dylan in 1965 . A single version was released by Rush the same year , which reached number 39 on Billboard magazine 's " Top Sellers in Top Markets " chart for Boston on May 14 , 1966 . A second " Who Do You Love " single by Rush was released in 1971 , which appeared at number 105 on Billboard 's " Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles " chart . Rush performed the song at the Boston Symphony Hall in December 2012 , which is included on his 2013 Celebrates 50 Years of Music album and DVD . 
 A psychedelic rock version by the Misunderstood was recorded in 1966 and released as the B @-@ side to the " I Can Take You to the Sun " single on Fontana Records . Author Dave Thompson writes , " The Misunderstood pumped it up but kept it short , psychedelic sound effects , heart attack drums , [ and ] eerie harmonics " . Misunderstood guitarist Glenn Ross Campbell reworked " Who Do You Love " with his later band , Juicy Lucy , which reached number 14 in the UK Singles Chart in 1970 . The song features Campbell 's <unk> steel guitar lines , which Thompson describes " as fast and mean and dirty as any record could have been , a breakneck tour through the bayou swamps and dirt @-@ track roads of the American South , powered by a guitar to make your fingers bleed " . 
 The Woolies recorded " Who Do You Love " in an early American garage band – style that reached number 97 on Billboard Hot 100 in 1967 . Other renditions include those by the Blues Project , the Doors , Carlos Santana , and the Jesus and Mary Chain . 
 = Hurricane Lili ( 1990 ) = 
 Hurricane Lili was a moderate tropical cyclone of the 1990 Atlantic hurricane season . It began as a subtropical cyclone over the central Atlantic and became a hurricane while moving westward toward the United States . Lili did not gain any additional strength before curving away from land and weakening into a tropical storm . After transitioning into an extratropical cyclone , it made landfall in southeastern Newfoundland . Overall , the hurricane 's effects on land were minimal , despite multiple tropical cyclone watches and warnings . Initial uncertainty in its track prompted some concern of a landfall in North Carolina , but it remained predominately over the open ocean . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In early October 1990 , a non @-@ tropical low pressure system existed in the upper levels of the atmosphere southwest of the Azores . By October 6 , the low moved to the surface , and upon doing so it immediately became a subtropical cyclone . The system slowly moved toward the southwest for several days , gradually gaining the characteristics of a tropical cyclone ; subsequent to turning westward and accelerating in forward speed , it became a hurricane at 0000 UTC on October 11 . Steered by a ridge to the north , Hurricane Lili continued on its westward track . It never intensified significantly , and reached its peak intensity with windspeeds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) and a minimum air pressure of 987 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 15 inHg ) concurrently with its upgrade into a hurricane . Afterward , its air pressure began to slowly rise . Late on October 11 , the cyclone passed about 140 mi ( 230 km ) south of Bermuda . 
 As it approached the United States , the storm slowed and began curving northward , passing 195 mi ( 314 km ) east of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . It weakened into a tropical storm on October 13 . For a time , the system 's proximity to Tropical Storm Marco resulted in hints of the Fujiwhara effect , in which two tropical cyclone appear to rotate around each other . A high pressure area over Newfoundland steered Lili northeastward , away from the United States , and the tropical storm once again sped up . It skirted the coast of Nova Scotia and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on October 15 , dissipating shortly after crossing southeastern Newfoundland . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 On October 11 , a hurricane warning was issued for Bermuda , although it was replaced by a tropical storm warning later that day . However , the storm 's effects on the island were limited to rainfall and gusty winds . It also caused strong winds in Nova Scotia and Newfoundland . 
 The hurricane 's track was initially uncertain . Some forecasts indicated it would continue westward and make landfall on North Carolina , while others predicted it would miss land . A " general evacuation " was ordered on Ocracoke Island , while multiple tropical cyclone watches and warnings were posted along the coasts of North Carolina and Virginia . Some residents purchased emergency supplies to prepare for the hurricane . Lili had minimal impact on land , with no deaths or significant damage reported . The North Carolina coast sustained minor beach erosion . A newspaper reported that rainfall from the storm led to flooding in southern Pennsylvania , particularly in and around <unk> . At least one family was forced to leave their home , and a state highway was temporarily closed . The National Hurricane Center 's preliminary report on Hurricane Lili does not confirm the two events were related , however . 
 = Asa Lovejoy = 
 Asa Lawrence Lovejoy ( March 14 , 1808 – September 10 , 1882 ) was an American pioneer and politician in the region that would become the U.S. state of Oregon . He is best remembered as a founder of the city of Portland , Oregon . He was an attorney in Boston , Massachusetts before traveling by land to Oregon ; he was a legislator in the Provisional Government of Oregon , mayor of Oregon City , and a general during the Cayuse War that followed the Whitman massacre in 1847 . He was also a candidate for Provisional Governor in 1847 , before the Oregon Territory was founded , but lost that election . 
 Lovejoy continued his political career during territorial period as a member of both chambers of the Oregon Territorial Legislature ; he served as the first Speaker of the Oregon House of Representatives in 1849 . He was also a delegate to the Oregon Constitutional Convention held in 1857 that paved the way for Oregon 's entry into the Union . He was part owner of the Oregon Telegraph newspaper , and worked on railroad development in the Willamette Valley after leaving politics . Lovejoy Street in Northwest Portland and the Lovejoy Fountain in Downtown Portland are named in his honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lovejoy was born in Groton , Massachusetts , on March 14 , 1808 . His parents were Betsy Lovejoy ( née Lawrence ) and Doctor Samuel Lovejoy . In the Eastern United States , he attended college at both Cambridge College and Amherst College , before studying law and passing the Maine bar to become an attorney . After leaving Boston he moved west to Missouri , but left the bottom lands of that state for the unorganized Oregon Country due to poor health . 
 = = Oregon Country = = 
 Lovejoy first traveled to the Oregon Country in 1842 over the Oregon Trail . He was part of a wagon train led by Elijah White that arrived at the Whitman Mission in what is now eastern Washington State . During this trip he was briefly held captive with another immigrant by Native Americans before arriving at the Whitman 's . At the mission , Lovejoy agreed to join Marcus Whitman on a trip to return east during the winter . Lovejoy returned to Oregon in 1843 , as part of the Great Migration that helped open up the Oregon Trail to large migrations , settling in the Willamette Valley . Upon returning to the region , Lovejoy set up a law practice in Oregon City , the seat of government during the Provisional Government period . 
 = = = Portland = = = 
 In 1843 , Lovejoy and traveling companion William Overton split a claim to a 640 acres ( 2 @.@ 6 km2 ) tract along the Willamette River . This site would later become part of downtown Portland . Overton held the land , as Lovejoy settled elsewhere . Overton soon sold his share to Francis Pettygrove and Lovejoy and Pettygrove held their famous coin toss in 1845 to decide the name of the city which was being platted on the claim . Each desired to name the area after his hometown . Pettygrove , from Portland , Maine , won the toss , and the town site became known as Portland , Oregon . The two would plat sixteen blocks of the town that year ; Lovejoy later sold his stake to Benjamin Stark in 1845 . Also in 1845 , Lovejoy married Elizabeth McGary . They would have five children : William , Amos , Ada , Elizabeth , and Nellie . In 1846 , he was the last administrator of the Ewing Young estate , whose death had precipitated the formation of the Provisional Government of Oregon . 
 = = Political career = = 
 In 1844 , Asa Lovejoy was elected to the Provisional Legislature of Oregon to represent Clackamas District . Lovejoy ran for the newly created office of governor that replaced the Executive Committee in 1845 with the adoption of the Second Organic Laws of Oregon . George Abernethy won the election after he received the most votes with 228 , followed by Osbourne Russell with 130 , William J. Bailey with 75 , and finally Lovejoy with 71 votes . Though he lost the election for governor , he was elected as mayor of Oregon City that year . 
 Lovejoy returned to the legislature in 1846 and served as Speaker of the body . In 1847 , Lovejoy ran against Abernethy for governor a second time . Lovejoy lost the election 536 to 520 . From 1847 to 1848 , he served as adjunct general during the Cayuse War , the war resulting from the Whitman Massacre . 
 Lovejoy was elected in 1848 to what would be the final session of the Provisional Legislature , which was held in late 1848 into early 1849 . However , Lovejoy now representing Vancouver District north of the Columbia River resigned before the session started . In September 1848 , he traveled with a group to California during the California Gold Rush , but returned aboard the brig Undine in January 1849 after six weeks in California . During the same session he resigned from , he was selected by the Provisional Legislature as Supreme Judge of the government on February 16 , 1849 , but never served and the Provisional government was dissolved the following month with the arrival of the territorial government . 
 Once the government of the Oregon Territory arrived in March 1849 , a new legislature with two chambers was established . Lovejoy was elected to the first session of this legislature , first serving in the lower chamber Oregon House of Representatives . Representing Clackamas District again , he also became the first Speaker of the Oregon Territorial Legislature . In 1851 , he returned to the legislature , serving in the upper chamber Council . The following year , he remained in the Council , but now elected as a Whig Party politician . In 1854 , he was back in the House of Representatives , and in 1856 he served in one final session , now as a Democratic Party member . 
 In 1857 , Lovejoy represented Clackamas County at the Oregon Constitutional Convention in Salem . The convention created the Oregon Constitution in preparation for the territory becoming a U.S. state . Lovejoy , still a Democrat , served as the chairperson of the boundaries committee and also served on the committee responsible for matters concerning the legislature . The convention finished on September 18 , 1857 , and submitted the finished document to a vote of the public on November 9 . This vote approved the Constitution and on February 14 , 1859 , Oregon entered the Union as the 33rd state . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 In his later years he was involved in a variety of business ventures in Oregon , including as a major shareholder in the Oregon Telegraph newspaper and vice @-@ president of the Willamette Steam Navigation Company . Lovejoy died on September 10 , 1882 , at the age of 74 and was buried in the Masonic section at Lone Fir Cemetery in Portland . Lovejoy Street in Portland is named after him , and the character Reverend Timothy Lovejoy in The Simpsons is named after this street . The fountain at Lovejoy Fountain Park in downtown Portland is named in his honor . 
 = Tiny Toon Adventures : How I Spent My Vacation = 
 Tiny Toon Adventures : How I Spent My Vacation is a 1992 American direct @-@ to @-@ video animated comedy film from Warner Bros. Animation and Amblin Entertainment . Featuring the regular characters from the animated program Tiny Toon Adventures , the film follows them during their summer vacation from school , mainly focused on Babs and Buster going downriver , Plucky and Hamton going to a world famous amusement park , and Fifi in search of her favorite movie star . 
 Steven Spielberg was the executive producer of the film , which was written by Paul Dini , Nicholas Hollander , Tom Ruegger , and Sherri Stoner . Japanese studio Tokyo Movie Shinsha produced the animation . How I Spent My Vacation was released on VHS and Laserdisc formats on March 11 , 1992 . It was the first animated film to be released direct @-@ to @-@ video in the United States . The film was later aired on television as four separate Tiny Toon Adventures episodes . 
 The film was one of the highest selling videos in the United States , listing on Billboard magazine 's 40 " Top Video Sales " for 16 weeks as of July 1992 . Points of praise by critics included the film 's jokes and celebrity caricatures , while points of criticism included the segmented plot . Themes of the film included parodies of pop culture and summer vacations . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Tiny Toon Adventures characters leave for their summer vacations after their term at Acme <unk> ends . Babs and Buster Bunny have a water pistol fight , which eventually escalates into their flooding Acme Acres . The bunnies , along with Byron Basset , float from flooded Acme Acres down to the Southern United States , where they continuously avoid getting eaten by the river 's residents . 
 Plucky Duck joins Hamton J. Pig and Hamton 's family as they drive to the amusement park HappyWorldLand . The trip turns out to be very long and painful for Plucky , who becomes annoyed with the family 's habits and is almost killed by an escaped convict that the Pigs mistake for a hitchhiker . They eventually arrive at HappyWorldLand , only to simply ride the tour monorail around the park and then immediately decide to head back home , much to Plucky 's dismay . 
 Meanwhile , Elmyra Duff becomes upset after losing her cat <unk> . When her family visits a nature park , she tortures the zoo animals with her adoration . Fifi Le Fume spends time with film actor Johnny Pew , who is uninterested in Fifi . Fowlmouth and Shirley the Loon see <unk> . Fifi and Johnny attend the same film . Fowlmouth continuously talks through the film and is thrown out of the theater . Fifi gets annoyed when Johnny takes her photograph of him and signs it for another girl . Fifi kicks Johnny out of the theater , causing him to end up with Elmyra ( still wearing The Cheetah 's fur she got at the zoo earlier ) and becoming her new " kitty " . 
 After realizing they are the main course at a dinner theater on a showboat , Babs and Buster escape with the help of Byron . They are chased down by the hungry animals they met throughout their journey , but are rescued by a possum Buster had befriended earlier . The escaped convict returns and tries to kill them as well ; Buster , Babs , Byron and the possum try to escape using a mine cart and the escaped convict fells off a cliff . The four end up falling down a " plot hole " which leads them through <unk> and back to Acme Acres . The film ends with the characters ' return to the <unk> for the fall semester of school . 
 = = Voice cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 In 1990 , Bugs Bunny magazine reported that Warner Bros. was planning the release of How I Spent My Vacation , then referred to as a " Tiny Toon Adventures home video " . Plans for the film began before Tiny Toon Adventures premiered on television . Warner Bros. discussed with executive producer Steven Spielberg whether the film should be released in theaters , but Spielberg insisted on a direct @-@ to @-@ video release . Spielberg said that he wanted to make the film a direct @-@ to @-@ video release because " animated features are ideally suited for the repeat viewing , " a factor he found important to the genre 's appeal to those watching animated films at home . In an interview for the Los Angeles Times , executive in charge of production Jean MacCurdy did not specify the budget of the film , but stated that it was far more costly than episodes of Tiny Toon Adventures . According to Hal Erickson 's Television Cartoon Shows : an Illustrated Encyclopedia , the budget of the average Tiny Toon Adventures episode was approximately $ 350 @,@ 000 . 
 How I Spent My Vacation was written by series writers Paul Dini , Nicholas Hollander , Tom Ruegger and Sherri Stoner . Ruegger also produced the film , and Steven Spielberg was the executive producer . The film was animated by Tokyo Movie Shinsha , a Japanese studio . The film had eight directors : Rich Aarons , Ken Boyer , Kent Butterworth , Barry Caldwell , Alfred <unk> , Arthur Leonardi , Byron <unk> , and Aoyama Hiroshi . The film is about 73 minutes long . 
 = = Themes = = 
 One of the hallmarks of How I Spent My Vacation was the parody of film , popular culture , and celebrities . Videos for Kids noted that the film makes fun of " California culture and youth " with the use of celebrity caricatures , such as those of Roseanne Barr , Johnny Carson , Arsenio Hall , David Letterman , Jay Leno , Oprah Winfrey , and Sylvester Stallone . The film makes fun of other cartoon characters , such as those of Superman , The Simpsons , Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles , Who Framed Roger Rabbit , The Ren & Stimpy Show , Beavis and Butthead , and The Little Mermaid . Babs and Buster 's travels down the river are a parody of the film Deliverance . 
 Jean MacCurdy said that How I Spent My Vacation makes fun of summer vacations by mocking " the boredom of summer and some of those horrible car trips " ( an issue that was first explored in National Lampoon 's Vacation ) . In the film , the Hampton family car trip is very taxing for Plucky Duck ; he is disgusted by the family and is nearly killed by an escaped lunatic that the family mistakes for a hitchhiker ( He happens to be a caricature of Jason Voorhees ) . The film 's fictional theme park , " HappyWorldLand " , is a spoof of Disneyland . The film also parodies the THX logo and Deep Note when Fowlmouth and Shirley are at the movie theater . 
 = = Home media releases and broadcast = = 
 How I Spent My Vacation was released direct @-@ to @-@ video on March 11 , 1992 . The film was released on VHS and Laserdisc formats . MacCurdy said that the film was released at that time to take advantage of the Easter market . Because retailers had high demand for the film , Warner Bros. shipped to them nearly one million copies , which the Los Angeles Times noted as " a record for direct @-@ to @-@ video programs " . 
 How I Spent My Vacation was the first direct @-@ to @-@ video , feature @-@ length animated film released in the United States . At the time , the concept of a direct @-@ to @-@ video animated feature was so strange to consumers that some mistakenly thought How I Spent My Vacation was a collection of Tiny Toon Adventures episodes . 
 The film later aired on Fox Kids on September 5 , 1993 , as four Tiny Toon Adventures episodes , episodes 97 through 100 . Warner Bros. began to release the Tiny Toon Adventures series on DVD , in volumes , on July 29 , 2008 . The company released How I Spent My Vacation for the first time on DVD on August 21 , 2012 ( 20 years later ) . The Hub , which airs Tiny Toon Adventures , has shown the film as a " Hub Family Movie . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviews ranged from positive to mixed . Giving three out of four bones , the VideoHound 's Golden Movie Retriever highlighted the parodies in the film , and noted that " Parents will be [ as ] equally entertained [ as children ] by the level of humor and fast @-@ paced action " . Film critic Leonard Maltin gave the film two and a half stars out of four , saying the film was " [ e ] <unk> , " but praised the voice cast , songs and " funny business " . TV Guide called the film a " firecracker " , citing the film 's many jokes . The book Videos for Kids : The Essential , Indispensable Parent 's Guide to Children 's Movies on Video praised the " tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek humor " and celebrity caricatures but issued warning to parents , stating that the film may not be appropriate for " children too young to identify satire " because the characters in the film " are rude and combative " and may not be positive role models . Videos for Kids still concluded that the film " should provide an enjoyable viewing experience for the whole family " . Dennis Hunt of the Los Angeles Times said that the format of a direct @-@ video film was " unusual " , but that some parts of the film were " hilarious " , especially the scenes which make fun of Walt Disney World . Since its release , How I Spent My Vacation has been rated as one of the " Top 20 ( <unk> ) Direct @-@ to @-@ Video Animated Films " by The Animated Movie Guide . 
 Rating the film a " C + " overall , Steve Daly of Entertainment Weekly noted that while the film was " superior to most TV fare " , he called the film a " pandering <unk> make @-@ over " of the Looney Tunes cartoons on which Tiny Toons was based , saying the characters were immature and the content was " fast without being funny " . A 1992 issue of the Video Watchdog was particularly critical , calling the film " a mixed bag " that " sacrificed ( ... ) a cohesive plot for an outline that allows various teams of characters to come up with four stories . " The magazine also questioned the point of using characters heavily based on the classic Looney Tunes characters instead of using the classic characters themselves . 
 The VHS release of How I Spent My Vacation was one of the highest selling videos in the United states ; on the Billboard charts , the video ranked 12th in sales in April 1992 . In May 1992 , How I Spent My Vacation rose to 9th in video sales . On July 18 , 1992 , How I Spent My Vacation had been on Billboard Magazine 's 40 " Top Video Sales " for 16 weeks . On June 27 , 1992 , the film was ranked the 5th highest on Billboard 's " Top Kid Video " . On February 6 , 1993 , How I Spent My Vacation had been on the " Top Kid Video " list for 41 weeks . While it did not state the revenue of the film , the Toronto Star stated that the film sold so well that Warner Bros. decided to release videos of Tiny Toon Adventures episodes . 
 = Panama – Pacific commemorative coins = 
 The five Panama – Pacific commemorative coins were produced in connection with the 1915 Panama – Pacific International Exposition in San Francisco . Struck at that city 's mint , the issue included round and octagonal $ 50 pieces . Excepting modern bullion coins , these two gold pieces are the highest denomination ever issued and the largest coins ever struck by the United States Mint . The octagonal $ 50 piece is the only U.S. coin to be issued that is not round . 
 In January 1915 , Congress passed legislation for a silver half dollar , as well as a gold dollar , quarter eagle ( $ 2 @.@ 50 piece ) , and two $ 50 pieces : one round and one octagonal . The Mint had already consulted artists . Treasury Secretary William G. McAdoo initially rejected all their designs . Two of them , Robert I. Aitken for the $ 50 pieces and Charles Keck for the gold dollar , persevered , and their submissions were used . The half dollar and quarter eagle were designed by Chief Engraver Charles E. Barber , possibly with the participation of his longtime assistant , George T. Morgan . 
 The coins were vended at the Exposition by prominent numismatist Farran Zerbe . They did not sell well , and many of each denomination were returned for melting . Only a few hundred of each of the $ 50 pieces were distributed , making them the lowest @-@ mintage commemorative coins . They catalog for up to $ 200 @,@ 000 , depending on condition . 
 = = Background = = 
 Private gold pieces , sometimes dubbed " pioneer gold " , were struck several times during the 19th century from locally produced bullion in areas where federal coins were scarce . These unofficial coins came from sites ranging from Georgia to Oregon . Many , ranging in denomination from 25 cents to 50 dollars , are relics of the California Gold Rush and its aftermath . The fifty @-@ dollar denomination was struck by private minters such as Kellogg and Co . The private $ 50 pieces were round in form , but those struck by Augustus Humbert for the U.S. Assay Office at San Francisco , prior to the establishment of the San Francisco Mint in 1854 , were octagonal . Humbert 's pieces were not money in a legal sense , as Congress had not authorized them as legal tender , and were officially deemed ingots . Nevertheless , they contained their full value in gold . Bearing the denomination " Fifty Dollars " , they were called " slugs " or " quintuple eagles " by the public . They circulated widely in California and elsewhere in the Far West , and were accepted on par with federal gold coins . 
 All of these $ 50 pieces , public or private , are very rare and valuable today : One of Humbert 's octagonal pieces , dated 1851 and with a lettered edge , sold at auction in 2010 for $ 546 @,@ 250 . The only $ 50 piece produced by the United States Bureau of the Mint prior to 1915 was the 1877 pattern half union , produced experimentally at the Philadelphia Mint , though it was not approved as a circulating coin . 
 In 1904 , San Francisco merchant Rueben Hale proposed an exposition in his home city for 1915 , both to commemorate the opening of the Panama Canal and to mark the 400th anniversary of Vasco Núñez de Balboa becoming the first European known to view the Pacific Ocean from the Americas : in phrasing then current , he discovered the Pacific . Although the 1906 San Francisco earthquake and fire caused a momentary setback to these plans , it actually sparked additional fundraising . Many of the wealthiest in California gave financial support , the state matched private donations dollar for dollar , and in 1911 , President William Howard Taft selected San Francisco over its competitor , New Orleans , to host the fair . 
 The Panama – Pacific International Exposition , constructed in San Francisco by the Golden Gate at a cost of $ 50 million , was open from February 20 , 1915 , to December 4 , 1915 . About 19 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 people attended , and the exposition was a great success , generating enough profit to build the San Francisco Civic Auditorium with about $ 1 million remaining . The Palace of Fine Arts is the only building from the fair which remains on the site . 
 Commemorative coins were not then sold to the public by the Mint , as they subsequently have been . Instead , a commemorative 's authorizing legislation would designate a group or organization to purchase the coins from the Mint at face value , and sell them to the public as a fundraiser . Among those who had pushed for commemorative legislation in the past , and had been involved in the sale of the resulting coins , was Farran Zerbe , a collector and numismatic promoter who had by 1914 served as president of the American Numismatic Association . Zerbe was a controversial figure — some felt the coins with which he had been involved had been sold at inflated prices — but he helped promote the hobby with his exhibit , " Money of the World " , which later became part of the Chase Manhattan Money Museum . 
 = = Legislation = = 
 Several proposals for commemorative coins had been introduced by mid @-@ 1914 , though none had been issued by the Mint since 1905 . One , sponsored by New York Senator Elihu Root , called for a commemorative quarter dollar marking a century of peace , as well as the August 1914 opening of the Panama Canal . Two bills were introduced calling for coins to commemorate and benefit the Panama – Pacific Exposition ; H.R. <unk> was introduced by California Congressman Julius Kahn on June 3 , 1914 . Senate bill ( S. ) 6309 was introduced in that body by New Jersey Senator James E. Martine on July 6 . This bill called for two $ 50 pieces ( one round , one octagonal ) , a quarter eagle or $ 2 @.@ 50 in gold , a commemorative gold dollar , and a half dollar . The octagonal pieces were intended to recall the unofficial $ 50 coins struck during the Gold Rush 
 Martine 's bill passed the Senate on August 3 , having been approved by the Committee on Industrial Expositions , to which it had been referred . The only objection was procedural , by Utah 's Reed Smoot : that the bill should have instead been referred to and approved by the Senate Committee on Banking and Currency , or its Committee on Finance . Neither Smoot nor any other senator objected to the bill itself , which Martine indicated had the support of Treasury Secretary William G. McAdoo . S. 6309 was the following day sent to the House of Representatives , where it was referred to the Committee on Coinage , Weights and Measures . It emerged from that committee on September 1 , 1914 , with several amendments , one of which increased the combined authorized mintage of the two $ 50 pieces from 2 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 000 . S. 6309 was briefly considered by the House of Representatives on January 4 , 1915 , and passed after Kahn successfully proposed a minor amendment to strike out the dollar sign from the phrase " silver coins of the denomination of $ 50 cents each " . The Senate concurred in the House amendments two days later , passing the bill without question , change , or opposition , and President Woodrow Wilson signed it into law on January 16 . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 Once Kahn 's bill was introduced in the House , Mint Director George E. Roberts began to make informal arrangements to prepare for the commemorative issue . The bill called for four different designs ( the two $ 50 pieces would differ mainly in shape ) , plus a commemorative medal to be sold to fairgoers , with an award medal to be given to prizewinning exhibitors . All of these pieces were to be struck by the Bureau of the Mint , and Roberts asked the Commission of Fine Arts to recommend artists . Among those recommended were Adolph A. Weinman ( who would design the Mercury dime and Walking Liberty half dollar in 1916 ) , and Bela L. Pratt ( creator of the 1908 Indian Head gold pieces ) . Others included sculptors Evelyn Longman , Robert I. Aitken , Charles Keck , and Paul Manship . 
 Roberts wrote to several of the sculptors , and found Aitken interested in creating the $ 50 pieces . The Mint Director 's tentative negotiations with Aitken for the large gold coins and with Buffalo nickel designer James Earl Fraser for the award medal ended when Roberts resigned in November to take a banking job ; McAdoo appointed Dr. Frederic Dewey as Acting Director of the Mint . Dewey and McAdoo did little regarding the Panama – Pacific coins until Congress began to pass the authorizing legislation in early January 1915 . Once it had passed both houses , and was awaiting Wilson 's signature , Dewey arranged for a meeting in New York with Aitken , Keck , Longman , and Manship . The authorizing act required the Mint to begin delivering coins by the opening date of the fair , February 20 , 1915 , and although this proved impractical , the Mint still acted quickly . McAdoo approved the choices of Aitken for the $ 50 pieces , Longman for the quarter eagle , Keck for the dollar , and Manship for the half dollar on January 21 . All four artists were already at work , and Aitken responded to the notification of his hiring by submitting designs , which were similar to the actual coins . 
 By January 29 , all four artists had submitted bronze casts of their proposals . Dewey forwarded them to McAdoo , who solicited advice from the Commission of Fine Arts ( which liked them ) , his Assistant Secretary , William Malburn ( who did not ) , and Chief Engraver Charles E. Barber and others at the Philadelphia Mint ( who offered suggestions ) . McAdoo had asked that the Mint prepare alternative designs for all the coins , and Barber did so , starting with the half dollar . <unk> to all four of the outside artists were sent on February 5 over McAdoo 's signature . The reasons for this are uncertain , as the rejections are terse – Anthony Swiatek and Walter Breen , in their volume on commemoratives , assert that Malburn 's opposition was decisive . 
 All four outside artists protested . Manship 's objections were to no avail ; McAdoo selected the design submitted by Barber for the half dollar . Longman asked for an explanation , submitted new designs , and came to Washington to discuss the matter . According to a letter several months later from Dewey , she fell ill there and was unable to participate further ; numismatic historian Roger Burdette finds the explanation odd and suggests that there may have been some other reason . Barber was selected to design the quarter eagle . Both <unk> and Keck objected to the Commission of Fine Arts and to McAdoo ; Keck also submitted additional designs . Both men met with McAdoo , Malburn and Dewey in Washington , and agreed to changes to their proposed designs . With that done , the $ 50 and $ 1 pieces were approved on March 6 , 1915 . The half dollar was approved two days later . Barber submitted his designs for the quarter eagle on March 16 . They met an enthusiastic reception at the Treasury Department , and were approved . 
 = = Designs = = 
 = = = Barber 's half dollar and quarter eagle = = = 
 To what extent Mint Assistant Engraver ( later Chief Engraver ) George T. Morgan should be credited for work on the half dollar and quarter eagle is uncertain ; Mint officials and employees were not consistent on this point . Assistant Director Mary M. O 'Reilly said in 1936 that the bureau 's records indicated that Barber was the designer . Later the same year , she forwarded a statement by an unnamed Philadelphia Mint employee stating that by the very nature of Barber 's and Morgan 's long association ( Morgan was Barber 's assistant for 37 years ) , the two engravers would have conferred frequently , and that Morgan 's technique is " very obvious on both sides of both coins " . The employee concluded that " no mistake could be made , in my opinion , in crediting both men with the execution of these two coins . I am certain that this is correct . " Q. David Bowers , in his book on commemoratives , mentions the dispute , credits Barber on the obverses of both coins , and gives both men credit on the reverse of the half dollar . He asserts Morgan created the reverse of the quarter eagle . 
 The obverse of the half dollar depicts Liberty , who is scattering fruits and flowers from a cornucopia held by a small , nude child . Behind them , the sun sets beyond San Francisco 's Golden Gate , as yet unadorned by its bridge . Tom La <unk> , in his 1987 article on the Panama – Pacific issue , pointed out that miners regarded the Golden Gate as a sign of good luck , and suggested it might have been better to depict it on a gold coin . The cornucopia , according to Burdette , demonstrates the advancement in trade brought by the canal , though the 1915 Report of the Director of the Mint states it " <unk> [ ies ] the boundless resources of the West " . The obverse is based on Barber 's earlier work , especially his medals for the annual Assay Commission . A representation of waves lies between the sun and the date , representing the maritime themes of the exposition . San Francisco 's mint mark , S , is to the left of the date . The reverse depicts an eagle atop a Union shield , flanked by branches of olive , symbolizing peace , something Swiatek and Breen found ironic given the coin 's issuance during World War I , and oak , the latter a choice which they were at a loss to explain . The 1915 Mint Director 's report deemed the oak branch an " emblem of strength " . Burdette notes that Barber 's original design flanked the shield with two dolphins , representing the two oceans joined by the canal , instead of branches , and speculates , " McAdoo either did not understand the allegory , did not care for it , or simply did not like aquatic mammals on coins " . McAdoo may also have been suffering from a surfeit of dolphins , as the dollar and octagonal $ 50 pieces bear them — the ones on the half dollar were removed and replaced by the branches . 
 Art historian Cornelius Vermeule deemed the obverse of the half dollar " a halfway point between the designs on French silver pieces early in the new century and A. A. Weinman 's ' Walking Liberty ' for the half dollar " . The fifty @-@ cent piece bears the motto " In God We Trust " , as do the $ 50 pieces , the first commemorative coins to display it . That motto was first used on U.S. coins in 1864 . In the 19th century , it was not mandatory that the motto be used , but it nevertheless appeared on most denominations of U.S. coins by the turn of the 20th century . In 1907 and 1908 , there had been many objections to the motto 's omission on the gold ten dollar and twenty dollar pieces designed by Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens . In response to the public outcry , Congress in 1908 passed legislation requiring its presence on any circulating coin which had previously borne it , as both gold pieces had until 1907 . The wording on the Panama – Pacific pieces was left to the discretion of the Secretary of the Treasury , but officials may have remembered the fracas . Swiatek and Breen suggested that those involved in creating or approving the design may have moved to head off controversy . 
 Barber 's quarter eagle ( the first of that denomination issued as a commemorative ) depicts , according to the Mint Director 's report , " Columbia , representing the United States , seated [ on ] the mythical sea horse [ a hippocampus ] , riding through the waters of the canal , with caduceus in grasp , the emblem of trade and commerce , inviting the nations of the world to use the new way from ocean to ocean . Reverse : American eagle , resting on a standard bearing the motto ' E Pluribus Unum ' " . The mint mark is on the obverse , to the right of the date . Swiatek and Breen suggested that the caduceus ( in modern usage a symbol of medicine ) is " said to represent the medical breakthroughs of Col. William C. Gorgas 's successful campaign " to control malaria and yellow fever at the canal site . They wrote that on the reverse , the " defiant eagle probably alludes to the necessity of keeping the Canal open during World War I ; the whole composition is meant to suggest a Roman legionary standard , which was a pole surmounted by some such device " . 
 The obverse of the quarter eagle , Vermeule opined , derived from coins of ancient Greece depicting a " Nereid , perhaps Thetis , who bears the shield of Achilles astride a <unk> " . He suggested that the quarter eagle obverse " may be Barber 's answer to Theodore Roosevelt 's and Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens ' clamor for modern coins in the Greek manner " . The half dollar 's reverse , along with that of the quarter eagle , " are classic symphonies of old designs , motifs that trace back to the eagles and shields of [ Charles Barber 's predecessors as Chief Engraver ] Longacre and William Barber revised into modern form . " 
 = = = Dollar and $ 50 pieces = = = 
 Keck 's obverse for the dollar was one of the alternative designs submitted to McAdoo , depicting the unadorned , capped head of a Panama Canal construction worker — Keck 's original concept had featured Poseidon , god of the sea in Greek mythology . The worker , who represents the labor necessary to build the canal , is sometimes mistaken for a baseball player . Keck 's reverse contains the words " Panama – Pacific Exposition " , " San Francisco " , the denomination of the coin , and two dolphins , symbolizing the joining of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans by the canal . The mint mark is beneath the letters D and O in " Dollar " . 
 Vermeule called Keck 's dollar " a novel , daring use of the limited area afforded by such a small , thin coin . Compared with the earlier gold dollars , the coin is a work of art . " Numismatist Arlie Slabaugh , in his volume on commemoratives , noted that the Panama – Pacific dollar " presents a bold American design , completely different from the classical styles used on the other denominations " . 
 Aitken explained his design for the $ 50 pieces : 
 In order to express in my design the fact that this coin is struck to commemorate the Panama – Pacific Exposition , and as the exposition stands for all that wisdom and industry have produced , I have used as the central motive [ motif ] of the obverse , the head of the virgin goddess Minerva . She is the goddess of wisdom , of skill , of contemplation ... Moreover , she features prominently on the seal of the State of California ... the use of the dolphins on the octagonal coin do much to add to its charm , as well as express the uninterrupted water route made possible by the canal . Upon the reverse I use the owl , the bird sacred to Minerva , also the symbol of wisdom ... With these simple symbols , all full of beauty in themselves , I feel that I have expressed the larger meaning of the exposition , its appeal to the intellect . 
 The goddess wears a crested helmet , as her Greek equivalent , Pallas Athena , was commonly depicted on ancient coins ; it is pushed back to signify her peaceful intentions . She wears mail , which Swiatek and Breen found an odd anachronism . She bears upon her shield the Roman numerals <unk> for the year 1915 , the second use of Roman numerals on U.S. coins after the early types of the 1907 Saint @-@ Gaudens double eagle . Though Aitken had originally had expressed the date as " 1915 " in his original sketches , he had soon changed his mind , " As these designs will not be used in any other year , there will be no need to change the year as we must on other coins . " 
 Kevin Flynn , in his book on commemorative coins , described the branch on which the owl perches as that of a ponderosa pine tree ; several cones are visible . The design on the octagonal piece is smaller than on the round , to allow space for the border featuring the dolphins . The mint mark is on the reverse , adjacent to the rightmost pine cone and directly above the letter " O " in " San Francisco " . 
 The design for the $ 50 received contemporary criticism ; some suggested that the presence of the dolphins on the octagonal coin implied that the canal had been constructed for cetacean convenience . A 1916 column in the American Journal of Numismatics contained the conclusion that " the criticism often heard that ' there is nothing American about the coin except the inscription ' is fully warranted . " Swiatek and Breen dismissed criticisms as " numerous and mostly irrelevant , based on total misreading of the iconography . [ McAdoo began it ] with stupid claims that Pallas Athena meant nothing on a U.S. coin unless she could be identified with Liberty , and that Athena 's owl would never mean anything to all of us " . Vermeule deemed the $ 50 coins " a tour de force , dated to be sure , but unusual enough in all respects to be worthy of what American numismatic art could achieve " . Later Chief Engraver Elizabeth Jones felt that the $ 50 pieces were " stylistically in step with the period [ and have ] considerable artistic merits " . Jeff Garrett and Ron Guth , in their book on U.S. gold coins , deemed the Panama – Pacific $ 50 pieces " one of the most stunning issues ever produced by the U.S. government " . 
 = = Production and distribution = = 
 Once the designs were approved , the artists prepared bronze casts to be sent to the Medallic Art Company in New York . There , hubs would be made that the Mint could use to produce coinage dies , as the company could do it faster than could the Mint . The Panama – Pacific issues are the first American coins known to have been produced from hubs provided by a private company — the Medallic Art Company prepared hubs for the 1913 Buffalo nickel , but it is uncertain if they were used . The Panama – Pacific hubs were sent to the Philadelphia Mint , where the Engraving Department , headed by Barber , would produce the necessary dies . Although the authorizing statute required that the coins be struck in San Francisco , all coinage dies at that time were produced by Barber and his assistants in Philadelphia . 
 By April , Robert W. Woolley had been commissioned as Director of the Mint , and he approved samples of the gold dollar , the first to have work completed , on April 22 . He then traveled to San Francisco , and was there when the dies for the dollar arrived on the 27th . When the San Francisco Mint 's coiner examined them , they proved to be lacking the mint mark " S " , customary on coins produced there . Woolley was not sure if this was intentional , and wired to Philadelphia Mint Superintendent Adam M. Joyce on the 29th . Upon learning that it was intentional — Joyce reasoned that as the entire mintage of this , the first commemorative issue to be struck outside Philadelphia , would be produced at San Francisco , there was no need to use a mint mark — Woolley ordered that the dies at San Francisco and in transit be returned to Philadelphia , and new ones produced with the mint mark . Woolley believed that people would assume the coins were struck at Philadelphia , which did not then use a mint mark . Burdette notes that the San Francisco Mint was a source of local pride and the omission of the mint mark would likely have led to widespread protest , and possibly to two varieties of each of the new coins : with mint mark , and without . New dollar dies were sent from Philadelphia on May 3 , and for the half dollar the following day . Dies for the $ 50 followed on May 14 , and for the quarter eagle on May 27 . 
 Containing 2 @.@ <unk> troy ounces ( 2 @.@ <unk> oz ; 75 @.@ 54 g ) of gold and measuring 44 @.@ 9 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 77 in ) across for the octagonal ) and 43 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 7 in ) in diameter for the round , the $ 50 pieces were the largest and heaviest U.S. coins issued until surpassed in 2010 by the America the Beautiful Silver Bullion Coins . The octagonal $ 50 piece is the only U.S. coin that is not round . The facilities at the San Francisco Mint were inadequate to strike such large coins as the $ 50 pieces , and a hydraulic medal press was shipped from Philadelphia . This press was ceremoniously operated at that mint on June 15 , 1915 for the initial striking of $ 50 octagonal pieces ; the first by San Francisco Mint Superintendent T. W. H. Shanahan , for presentation to the exposition 's president , Charles C. Moore . The next nine were struck by other dignitaries , including Congressman Kahn . Anyone else present with the price of $ 100 per coin was then allowed to strike their own piece , and at least three people , including Dewey 's wife and the local postmaster , did so . 
 The Panama – Pacific Exposition Company hired Farran Zerbe to sell the new coins at the fair . Despite the provisions of the law mandating a delivery of coins before the fair 's opening , the only government products Zerbe initially had to vend at his " Money of the World " exhibit were a souvenir medal , designed by Aitken and struck by a press operating at the Mint 's exhibit , and prints produced by the Bureau of Engraving and Printing , also on @-@ site . Sales of the medal were slow , and Zerbe did not have coins to sell until soon after May 8 , 1915 , when the half dollar and dollar dies were received . Zerbe found the coins hard to sell ; many potential purchasers , faced with a plethora of medals , reproductions of Gold Rush @-@ era pioneer gold coins , and other wares from a variety of vendors , did not believe his coins were official government products . Treasury officials agreed to allow him space for a salesperson at the Mint 's exhibit , and the two lower denominations were sold there , with orders taken for the $ 50 pieces . Soon , though , Zerbe stopped selling the gold dollar there , and the rest of the fair 's run was marked by conflict between him and Treasury representatives . The full legal allocation for each denomination had been struck , but though Zerbe continued selling coins by mail after the fair closed on December 4 , 1915 , sales dropped though 1916 . Zerbe continued to sell coins on behalf of the exposition until at least November 1916 , and at some point , he sold an unknown quantity to himself to supply the future needs of his coin business . The remainder were melted by the Treasury . 
 The Mint struck 1 @,@ 500 of each of the two $ 50 pieces , plus nine extra of the octagonal and ten of the round , to be sent to Philadelphia to await the 1916 meeting of the annual Assay Commission , when they would be available for inspection and testing . Zerbe had arranged for special display boxes and cases . A set of four denominations ( with the purchaser 's choice of round or octagonal for the $ 50 ) cost $ 100 ; a set of five cost $ 200 . Copper display frames with two of each coin were said by Slabaugh to have cost $ 400 , but Swiatek , in his 2011 book on commemoratives , indicates that these sets may actually have been given to dignitaries , as no sales receipts or correspondence relating to them are known . A set of the three smaller denominations sold for $ 7 , the half dollar at $ 1 , the gold dollar at $ 2 or $ 2 @.@ 25 ( prices may have varied ) , and the quarter eagle at $ 4 each . 
 = = Collecting and mintages = = 
 More of the octagonal $ 50 pieces were sold than of the round , as the former proved more popular because of the association with the Gold Rush , and because people liked the dolphins . As half of the 3 @,@ 000 authorized mintage for the $ 50 pieces were of each variety , this meant more of the round ones would be melted , leaving the round $ 50 with the lowest distribution of any U.S. commemorative coin , about 483 — the runner up being the octagonal with about 645 , though sources vary on the exact numbers distributed . 
 The Mint has sold gold bullion coins with the denomination $ 100 , the 2015 American Liberty , High Relief coin , and of $ 50 , the American Gold Eagle ( since 1986 ) and the American Buffalo ( since 2008 ) . It has also issued an American Platinum Eagle with a face value of $ 100 , since 1997 . The half @-@ ounce platinum piece also bears a denomination of fifty dollars . 
 R.S. Yeoman 's A Guide Book of United States Coins , published in 2015 , lists the Panama – Pacific half dollar at between $ 500 and $ 3 @,@ 500 , depending on condition . The dollar lists at between $ 600 and $ 2 @,@ 200 and the quarter eagle between $ 1 @,@ 650 and $ 7 @,@ 500 . Each of the two $ 50 pieces lists for between about $ 50 @,@ 000 and $ 230 @,@ 000 depending on condition . 
 = Raining Blood = 
 " Raining Blood " is a song by the American thrash metal band Slayer . Written by Jeff Hanneman and Kerry King for the 1986 studio album Reign in Blood , the concept deals with religion , specifically said to be about overthrowing Heaven . 
 The song is one of three tracks on Reign in Blood longer than three minutes , at four minutes and fourteen seconds . It ends with a minute of rain sound effects , closing Reign in Blood . Described as a " classic " by Allmusic , it is noted by fans as one of Slayer 's most popular songs . As an almost permanent addition to their live sets , both Hanneman and King acknowledged it as their favorite song to play live . 
 There have been many appearances of the song in the media and elsewhere , including the South Park episode , " Die Hippie , Die " and Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock , said to be one of the hardest songs in the Career Mode setlist . There is also a live appearance of the song in the compilation albums Headbangers Ball and Hard N ' Heavy Vol . 61 . 
 = = Writing and concept = = 
 " Raining Blood " was written by Jeff Hanneman and Kerry King . D. X. Ferris said that " when Hanneman wrote the song , he envisioned a scene from a dark street or bloody back alley " , and later went on to say that the song " described a banished soul awakened and hungry for vengeance . " The second verse was written by King , who " pick [ ed ] up on Hanneman 's title and in his new direction " . The song , along with the rest of Reign in Blood , was recorded in 1986 in Los Angeles , California , with producer Rick Rubin . 
 Hanneman explained that " it 's about a guy who 's in Purgatory ' cause he was cast out of Heaven . He 's waiting for revenge and wants to fuck that place up . " King later said that " the rest of the song explains what happens when he starts fucking people up . The lyrics ' Return to power draws near ' is because he 's waiting to get strong enough again to overthrow Heaven . And then ' Fall into me , the sky 's crimson tears ' is everybody 's blood flowing into him . So basically , ' Raining Blood ' is all the angels ' blood falling on him . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Raining Blood " is four minutes and seventeen seconds long , and is Reign in Blood 's closing track . The song is one of three songs from the album that exceeds three minutes in length . Steve Huey from Allmusic proposed that " Reign in Blood opens and closes with slightly longer tracks ( the classics ' Angel of Death ' and ' Raining Blood ' ) whose slower riffs offer most of the album 's few hints of melody . " The song 's music was written solely by guitarist Hanneman ( who is also a primary writer of the song 's lyrics ) , who presented both hostility and anger in his writing . Huey also noted that " the riffs are built on atonal chromaticism that sounds as sickening as the graphic violence depicted in many of the lyrics " , and said that it was " monstrously " and " terrifyingly evocative " . 
 Clay Jarvis from Stylus Magazine wrote that the song possessed " a red @-@ herring , scorched @-@ earth intro , eerie thunderstorm @-@ and @-@ tom @-@ tom @-@ triplet interlude and one of the most recognizable riffs in metal history . It is a dynamic , explosive and fitting end to a remarkable , violent experience . " D. X. Ferris wrote , author of the 33 ⅓ book Reign In Blood ( ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8264 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 ) , that the song " lunges to life with its core riff , the ten most recognizable notes in metal , a diminished @-@ scale run down the fretboard that 's the most badass guitar riff since Black Sabbath 's ' Sweet Leaf ' . " Guitarist Kerry King said that " The intro is big with the two harmony and then the first beat that Dave [ Lombardo ] does , that double @-@ kick thing , and it 's like this backwards gallop that gets the crowd going wherever you are . " The piece ends with a full minute of " rain sound effects , " closing Reign in Blood . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Raining Blood " , along with Reign in Blood 's opening track " Angel of Death " , is an almost permanent addition to Slayer 's live set @-@ list , and was Hanneman and King 's favorite track to play live . At the end of the Still Reigning DVD , there is a finale with the band covered in fake blood during the performance of " Raining Blood " . When asked both Slayer guitarists " which song holds best " , both replied " Raining Blood " . Hanneman admitted that he " still love [ s ] playing that song live . You 'd think we 'd be tired of it – I mean , I 'd love to know how many times we 've played it live . That would be really interesting . " King said " we could be playing in front of Alanis Morissette , and the crowd loves the part . " 
 King told D. X. Ferris that " whenever ' Raining Blood ' comes in the set , it just electrifies the whole crowd . People just shit when you hit the first few notes . Like ' Jesus Christ it 's a guitar , settle down . ' " In the past , Slayer used fake blood to cover their bodies when performing the song live . However , when asked about using fake blood in future performances , King remarked " It 's time to move on , but never say never . I know Japan never saw it , South America and Australia never saw it . So you never know . " 
 = = Appearances = = 
 The song was featured in the 127th South Park episode , " Die Hippie , Die " , which aired on March 16 , 2005 . Slayer guitarist Kerry King found the episode humorous and expressed his interest in the show , mentioning it in an interview , saying " It was good to see the song being put to good use . If we can horrify some hippies , we 've done our job . " 
 The song was also included in the Grand Theft Auto : Vice City in @-@ game radio station V @-@ Rock . " Raining Blood " is a playable song in the video game Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock , where it is renowned for being one of the hardest songs in the Career Mode setlist : a 2008 job advertisement for future Guitar Hero playtesters listed the song as one of four that potential applicants had to be capable of playing on the highest difficulty level . The song is also featured in Guitar Hero : Smash Hits , with the very first five note chord in the series . It was released as a downloadable song for Rock Band 3 in April 10 of 2012 along with South of Heaven and Seasons in the Abyss . It was also released as a downloadable song for Rocksmith 2014 on May 19 , 2015 as part of the Slayer Song Pack . 
 At the mixed martial arts event UFC 97 on April 18 , 2009 , fighter Chuck Liddell made his penultimate appearance in the UFC and used " Raining Blood " as his entrance music . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 In 2001 , the song was covered by Tori Amos on her studio album Strange Little Girls . The cover of " Raining Blood " was suggested by bassist Justin Meldal @-@ Johnsen , who told Amos that she " had tried pretty much every other genre of music , from rap to new wave to punk to country to pop , why not some metal ? " Meldal @-@ Johnsen chose the album Reign in Blood , and after listening to it , Amos agreed to make a cover version of " Raining Blood " . King states the cover was odd ; " It took me a minute and a half to find a spot in the song where I knew where she was . It 's so weird . If she had never told us , we would have never known . You could have played it for us and we 'd have been like , ' What 's that ? ' Like a minute and a half through I heard a line and was like , ' I know where she 's at ! ' " In response , Slayer sent some T @-@ shirts to Amos , which she said was appreciated . 
 The song has also been covered by Malevolent Creation , Havok , Natalie <unk> , Vader , <unk> , Quiet Company , Reggie and the Full Effect , and Erik Hinds , who covered the entire Reign in Blood album on a H <unk> . The guitar riffs from " Raining Blood " and " Mandatory Suicide " were sampled by rapper Lil Jon in the song " Stop Fuckin Wit ' Me " from the 2004 album Crunk Juice . It was Rick Rubin 's only collaboration with Lil Jon on the record . Jon wanted to create a " black version " of Suicidal Tendencies ' song " Institutionalized " . The New Zealand drum and bass group Concord Dawn produced a drum and bass cover version on their album Uprising , on which they partially sample the famous opening riff of the song . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Stylus Magazine 's Clay Jarvis said that the song is fit to be the closing song for Reign in Blood , and also noted that the song , along with other songs from Reign in Blood , has " manic , hacksaw guitars , monsoons of double @-@ bass drum rolling and from @-@ the @-@ throat barking — all note @-@ perfect and precise — that still smokes the asses of any band playing fast and / or heavy today " . J. Bennett affirmed that the song " still make [ s ] other metal bands sound like frail <unk> " . Steve Huey said that it was a classic , and that its " slower riffs offer most of the album 's few hints of melody " . Erik Hinds from About.com said that the piece has unexpectedly become a ballad . Derrick Harris , an editor of the official newspaper of University of Wisconsin – Eau Claire , said that it had a " blistering solo " . It peaked at number 64 in the United Kingdom , where it would stay on the chart for three weeks . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Tom Araya – bass , vocals 
 Jeff Hanneman – guitar 
 Kerry King – guitar , backing vocals 
 Dave Lombardo – drums 
 Rick Rubin – record producer 
 Andy Wallace – engineering 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Siah <unk> Pumped Storage Power Plant = 
 The Siah Bisheh Pumped Storage Power Plant ( Persian : <unk> <unk> <unk> ‌ <unk> <unk> ‌ <unk> ) , also spelled <unk> and Siah <unk> , is located in the Alborz Mountain range near the village of Siah Bisheh and 48 km ( 30 mi ) south of <unk> in Mazandaran Province , Iran . The power plant uses the pumped @-@ storage hydroelectric method to generate electricity during periods of high energy demand , making it a peaking power plant , intended to fulfill peak electricity demand in Tehran 60 km ( 37 mi ) to the south . When complete it will have an installed generating capacity of 1 @,@ 040 megawatts ( 1 @,@ 390 @,@ 000 hp ) and a pumping capacity of 940 megawatts ( 1 @,@ 260 @,@ 000 hp ) . Planning for the project began in the 1970s and construction began in 1985 . It was delayed from 1992 until 2001 and the first generator went online in May 2013 . The remaining generators were commissioned by 1 September 2015 . The power plant is the first pumped @-@ storage type in Iran and will also use the country 's first concrete @-@ face rock @-@ fill dam – two of them . 
 = = Background = = 
 A site was first identified for the power plant in the 1970s when a study was carried out on the water resources of the <unk> Mountains by the Belgian firm <unk> . Several sites for dams were identified including Siah Bisheh as a potential place for a pumped @-@ storage power plant . In 1975 , a feasibility report on the Siah Bisheh project was submitted to the Ministry of Energy . The <unk> Mountains study concluded in 1977 and geologic studies began in 1978 but were halted in 1979 due to the Iranian Revolution . In 1983 , Lahmeyer International was contracted to create designs for Phase II ( underground excavation ) which were completed in 1985 , the same year construction on the dam 's diversion tunnels began . Further designs for Phase I ( superstructures ) were developed and construction continued until 1992 when a lack of funding halted the project once again . Construction would not commence again until 2001 . In 2002 and 2003 , contracts for the dams and power plant were awarded and construction continued . The project was 90 percent complete as of April 2012 . Both the upper and lower reservoir were complete and had finished impounding in January 2013 . The first of four generators was commissioned in May 2013 and the remaining were operational by 1 September 2015 . 
 = = Design and operation = = 
 The power plant operates using a lower and upper reservoir along with a power plant connected to both . Water is either pumped from the lower to the upper reservoir to serve as stored energy or released from the upper to the lower reservoir to generate electricity . Pumping occurs during low demand , cheap electricity , periods such as night and generating will occur during peak demand , expensive electricity , hours such as during the day . The pumping / generating process repeats as needed . 
 Both the upper and lower reservoirs are created by concrete @-@ face rock @-@ fill dams on the <unk> River which has an average inflow of 67 @.@ 1 cubic metres per second ( 2 @,@ 370 cu ft / s ) . The upper dam is 82 @.@ 5 metres ( 271 ft ) tall and 436 m ( 1 @,@ 430 ft ) long . It contains 1 @,@ 550 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 2 @,@ 030 @,@ 000 cu yd ) of fill ( structural volume ) and is 12 metres ( 39 ft ) wide at its crest and 280 m ( 919 ft ) wide at its base . Its reservoir has a storage capacity of 4 @,@ 344 @,@ 220 cubic metres ( 3 @,@ 521 @.@ 92 acre · ft ) ( of which 3 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 m3 ( 2 @,@ 837 acre · ft ) is active or usable ) and a surface area of 141 square kilometres ( 54 sq mi ) . The lower reservoir dam is the bigger of the two and is 102 m ( 335 ft ) tall and 332 metres ( 1 @,@ 089 ft ) long . It contains 2 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cu yd ) of fill and is 12 m ( 39 ft ) wide at its crest and 360 metres ( 1 @,@ 180 ft ) wide at its base . Its reservoir has a storage capacity of 6 @,@ 874 @,@ 709 m3 ( 5 @,@ 573 acre · ft ) ( of which 3 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 2 @,@ 900 acre · ft ) is active or usable ) and a surface area of 141 km2 ( 54 sq mi ) . Each of the dams are equipped with a chute staircase spillway . The upper dam 's has a maximum discharge capacity of 203 m3 / s ( 7 @,@ 169 cu ft / s ) and the lower : 198 @.@ 25 cubic metres per second ( 7 @,@ 001 cu ft / s ) . The normal elevation for the upper reservoir is 2 @,@ 406 @.@ 5 m ( 7 @,@ 895 ft ) and the lower 1 @,@ 905 @.@ 4 metres ( 6 @,@ 251 ft ) which affords a gross maximum hydraulic head of 520 m ( 1 @,@ 706 ft ) and normal of 504 metres ( 1 @,@ 654 ft ) . 
 Connecting the upper reservoir to the power station is an intake which feeds water into two 5 @.@ 7 metres ( 19 ft ) diameter head @-@ race tunnels . Their length from the intake to two surge tanks ( used to prevent water hammer ) is 2 @,@ 225 metres ( 7 @,@ 300 ft ) ( left tunnel ) and 2 @,@ 185 metres ( 7 @,@ 169 ft ) ( right tunnel ) . From the surge tanks the tunnels each turn into a 680 metres ( 2 @,@ 230 ft ) long penstocks which delivers water to the power station which is located underground near the lower reservoir . At the power station , each penstock <unk> into two penstocks to supply the four Francis turbine pump @-@ generators with water . The pump @-@ generators have a generating capacity of 260 MW and pumping capacity of 235 MW . The generators can each discharge up to 65 cubic metres per second ( 2 @,@ 300 cu ft / s ) of water and the power is converted by transformers to 400 kV . After water is discharged by the generators , it proceeds down one of two tail @-@ race tunnels ( 197 metres ( 646 ft ) and 159 metres ( 522 ft ) in length ) before being discharged into the lower reservoir . When pumping is required , the pump @-@ generators reverse into pumps and send water back to the upper reservoir through the same water conduits . Each generator can pump up to 50 m3 / s ( 1 @,@ 766 cu ft / s ) of water . 
 = Notodden Airport , Tuven = 
 Notodden Airport , Tuven ( Norwegian : Notodden flyplass , Tuven ; IATA : NTB , ICAO : <unk> ) is a municipal regional airport at Heddal in Notodden , a municipality in Telemark county , Norway . The airport is mostly used for general aviation , and has extensive sailplane activity . Bergen Air Transport operates the airport 's only scheduled route , six times per week to Bergen Airport , Flesland . In 2011 , the airport had 5 @,@ 078 aircraft movements and 3 @,@ 423 passengers . The airport has a single 1 @,@ 393 @-@ by @-@ 40 @-@ meter ( 4 @,@ 570 by 131 ft ) runway with flight information service and instrument landing system . In connection with the airport is a water aerodrome , which uses the lake of Heddalsvatnet for take @-@ off and landing . 
 The airport was opened in 1955 , and the following year Braathens SAFE started services to Oslo and Stavanger . Low patronage forced the airline to abandon the route in 1959 . In 1968 , the runway was extended and the municipality hoped to establish charter services , but these never realized . Partnair started flights to Oslo and Stavanger in 1985 , but these were terminated less than a year later , again due to low patronage . In 1998 , Air Team started flights to Oslo and Stavanger , which were replaced by Bergen Air Transport services to Bergen from 2000 . 
 = = History = = 
 The first plans for an airport serving Notodden were launched in 1954 by Reidar Hedwig @-@ Dahl , director of the tourist office . In late 1954 or early 1955 , he held a meeting with Ludvig G. Braathen , owner of Braathens SAFE , and representatives for his airline . They saw Notodden as a possible gateway to Telemark and Braathen promised to start flying to an airport serving Notodden , should one be built . At the time , Braathen had started flying to several smaller airports in Norway using a fleet of de Havilland Heron aircraft . Braathen had been traveling around Norway and encouraging municipalities to build regional airports , stating that he wanted more but smaller airports than the central authorities were planning . He succeeded at having similar airports built in Hamar and Røros . 
 The issue was first discussed politically on 23 April 1955 . The municipalities of Heddal and Notodden reached an agreement concerning financing and ownership the airport , whereby Notodden would own seven elevenths and Heddal four elevenths of the airport . Construction of the airport cost 200 @,@ 000 Norwegian krone ( NOK ) , which included a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ by @-@ 40 @-@ meter ( 3 @,@ 280 by 130 ft ) runway . This was sufficient for the Herons , but the plans included the possibility to extend the runway by another 240 meters ( 790 ft ) to allow landing by larger aircraft , such as the Douglas DC @-@ 3 . Construction took seven and a half months , and the airport opened on 11 November 1955 ( 1955 @-@ 11 @-@ 11 ) . The operating costs were estimated at NOK 17 @,@ 850 for the first year . This excluded air traffic control , which was covered by the state . 
 Braathens SAFE started test flights on 14 March 1956 , with the service taking 20 minutes from Oslo Airport , Fornebu . The scheduled service was inaugurated on 21 May as a stop on Braathens SAFE 's route between Oslo and Stavanger Airport , Sola . Passengers could travel twice each day to both airports , with tickets costing NOK 30 . The service was seasonal and only flown during the summer half of the year . Notodden Airport proved to have too few passengers , resulting in the route being terminated after the end of the 1958 season . The last season , the service was operated by Thor Solberg on contract with Braathens SAFE . From 1959 , Solberg started with a two @-@ month service with six weekly round trips to Fornebu , after securing a NOK 5 @,@ 000 guarantee from the municipality to cover any losses . The route was abandoned after the single season . 
 General aviation activities at the airport gradually increased . In the early 1960s , sailplanes became popular at the airport . The aerodrome is located with good wind and air pressure conditions for sailplane flying , and Oslo Flyklubb stationed two of its sailplanes at Tuven . Ronald <unk> established a pilot school in 1966 , but was forced to close after failing to make ends meet . 
 In 1967 , Notodden Municipality granted NOK 900 @,@ 000 and Telemark County Municipality granted NOK 600 @,@ 000 for the runway to be extended to 1 @,@ 400 meters ( 4 @,@ 600 ft ) . The new section of runway was laid down to Heddalsvatnet . At the same time , the gravel runway was asphalted . This was sufficient to allow Fokker F @-@ 27 Friendship and Convair CV @-@ 440 Metropolitan to operate . The plan was to serve international charter flights during winter , which would bring tourists to neighboring mountain resorts . During a time when there was a heated political debate over state grants to airport , Notodden was the only airport which had expanded without any central grants . The airport never succeeded at attracting any regular charter services . 
 The opening was planned for 18 October 1968 , but was delayed to the following year after the airport was flooded a week before the scheduled date . The construction work resulted in a legal dispute between the municipality and the consulting company Norsk Teknisk <unk> . The initial filling of earthwork had proved insufficient , so additional earthwork had to be filled , costing an additional NOK 840 @,@ 000 . The municipality demanded that the consulting company cover NOK 250 @,@ 000 of the extra cost . 
 In 1979 , Det Norske <unk> started Norway 's first helicopter pilot school at the airport . This was met with protests from the neighbors , who were affected by noise pollution all day long . The municipality was sued by 600 locals who wanted to prohibit the school from operating . During an air show in 1983 , the airport was visited by a Boeing 737 @-@ 200 from Braathens SAFE and General Dynamics F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcon from the Royal Norwegian Air Force . 
 In March 1985 , Partnair was granted concession for scheduled services from Fornebu via Notodden to Stavanger . The route was started on 15 August using a ten @-@ seat Beechcraft 200 Super King Air and flew twice a day , five days a week . This route was made possible after an instrument landing system was installed at the airport . The NOK 2 million cost had been paid for by Norsk Hydro , while <unk> had paid NOK 100 @,@ 000 for new landing lights . The upgrades also included a new terminal , which included a café in the second story and seating for 14 people . Ticket sales and check @-@ in was managed by NSB <unk> , a subsidiary of the Norwegian State Railways . After five months , Partnair had lost NOK 1 @.@ 2 million on the route . In average , they were selling three to four tickets per flight to Stavanger , and one to Oslo . From March 1986 , the leg from Notodden to Oslo was dropped and the service to Stavanger reduced . However , the route proved unprofitable and was eventually terminated later the same month . 
 As part of the Oslo Airport location controversy , after the new airport was decided located to Gardermoen , there was a public discussion as to what to do with the general aviation which had operated from Fornebu . While some local aircraft owners wanted to keep a small part of Fornebu for general aviation , the authorities decided to close the airport completely . Instead , the general aviation was distributed to various private airports in Eastern Norway , including Notodden . In May 1998 , Air Team started flights from Notodden to Bergen . Air Team gradually moved all its operations , including its pilot school , to Notodden . After <unk> was closed in October , the airline experienced a quadrupling of patronage , as Gardermoen had given longer travel time for people in Buskerud and Telemark . In addition to business travel , the airline catered offshore workers commuting to the North Sea via Bergen . The airline stated that it intended to also open routes to Stavanger and Copenhagen . 
 In 1999 , the British airport operator TBI announced it was in negotiations to purchase an airport close to Oslo , and Dagens <unk> speculated that it could be Notodden . The municipality confirmed that they were in negotiations to establish a limited company to operate the airport , which would be jointly owned by Air Team and the municipality . In 2000 , Bergen Air Transport started flying between Notodden and Bergen , using a Cessna 421B . It transported 1 @,@ 000 passengers in 2000 , and 1 @,@ 500 the following year . During the summer of 2002 , the company also attempted to fly from Notodden to Kristiansund Airport , Kvernberget , but was forced to give up due to lack of passengers . In 1995 , the airport saw 770 arriving and departing passengers . It increased to 2 @,@ 467 the following year but fell to 986 in 1998 before increasing to 3 @,@ 682 in 1999 . The patronage has since varied significantly from year to year , but has stayed in the range between 1 @,@ 500 and 3 @,@ 500 passengers per year . 
 On 20 November 2003 , Notodden Airport was closed for all scheduled traffic by the Norwegian Civil Aviation Authority , due to a not conforming with safety requirements . Bergen Air Transport was forced to reroute all its aircraft to Skien Airport , Geiteryggen . Following an investment of NOK 500 @,@ 000 from the airline and NOK 1 @.@ 2 million from the municipality , scheduled services could commence . The municipality had ambitions to upgrade the airport to a higher standard , which would allow it to serve charter aircraft weighing more than 5 @.@ 7 tonnes ( 5 @.@ 6 long tons ; 6 @.@ 3 short tons ) and with more than nine passengers . The plans were abandoned after 11 neighboring municipalities rejected giving grants for the necessary technical upgrades . Notodden Municipality instead started a program to increase the popularity of the airport by targeting companies in the neighboring municipality of Kongsberg to encourage use of the airport , instead of going to Oslo Airport , Gardermoen and Sandefjord Airport , Torp . Another NOK 250 @,@ 000 was invested from 1 October 2004 to keep meet safety requirements . Starting in October 2004 , security control was introduced . In September 2007 , the Bergen Air Transport bought a new hangar at Notodden , giving it ample space for expansion , and new arrival and departure facilities . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The airport consists of a 1 @,@ 393 by 40 meters ( 4 @,@ 570 by 131 ft ) asphalted runway aligned 12 – 30 . County Road 152 crosses the runway , forcing the road to close when the runway is in use . It has a flight information service ( AFIS ) and is located 19 meters ( 62 ft ) above mean sea level . It has category 3 fire fighting and a rescue vessel . The airport is equipped with an instrument landing system . In connection with the airport lies a water aerodrome , which uses Heddalsvatnet for landing and take @-@ off . The area for landing and take @-@ off is 1 @,@ 000 by 100 meters ( 3 @,@ 280 by 330 ft ) and has the same center @-@ line as the runway . 
 The airport is operated by the limited company Notodden Lufthavn AS , which is again owned by Notodden Municipality . Tuven is dominated by general aviation , in part organized by Notodden flyklubb and Kongsberg flyklubb . In 2010 , the airport had 5 @,@ 078 aircraft movements and 3 @,@ 423 passengers , making it the scheduled airport in Norway the fewest passengers . <unk> , a retailer and maintainer of Cessna aircraft , including seaplanes , is based at the airport . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 = Kirk Cameron = 
 Kirk Thomas Cameron ( born October 12 , 1970 ) is an American actor . He is best known for his role as Mike Seaver on the ABC sitcom Growing Pains ( 1985 – 92 ) , a role for which he was nominated for two Golden Globe Awards . 
 As a child actor , Cameron made several other television and film appearances through the 1980s and 1990s , including the films Like Father Like Son ( 1987 ) and Listen to Me ( 1989 ) . In the 2000s , he portrayed Cameron " Buck " Williams in the Left Behind film series and Caleb Holt in the drama film Fireproof ( 2008 ) . His most recent film , Saving Christmas ( 2014 ) , gained notoriety for reaching # 1 on the IMDb Bottom 100 List within one month of its theatrical release . 
 Cameron is also an active Evangelical Christian , partnering with Ray Comfort in the evangelical ministry The Way of the Master , and has co @-@ founded The Firefly Foundation with his wife , actress Chelsea Noble . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Cameron was born in Panorama City , California , a suburb of Los Angeles . His parents are Barbara ( née <unk> ) and Robert Cameron , a retired schoolteacher . He is the brother to Bridgette ( b . 1967 ) , Melissa ( b . 1970 ) , and actress Candace Cameron Bure , who is most notable for her role as D.J. Tanner on the popular television sitcom , Full House . He went to school on the set of Growing Pains , as opposed to public school . He graduated from high school at age 17 with high honors . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Cameron began acting at age nine , and his first job was in an advertisement for a breakfast cereal . His first starring role was at age 13 , in the television series Two Marriages . At this age , he appeared in several television shows and films . He became famous in 1985 after being cast as Mike Seaver in the ABC television sitcom Growing Pains . In the series , Mike would eventually have a girlfriend named Kate MacDonald , played by Chelsea Noble , Cameron 's future wife . Cameron subsequently became a teen heartthrob in the late 1980s , while appearing on the covers of several teen magazines , including Tiger Beat , Teen Beat , 16 and others . At the time , he was making $ 50 @,@ 000 a week . He was also in a 60 @-@ second Pepsi commercial during Super Bowl XXIV . 
 Cameron also guest starred in " Just One of the Guys " a 1988 episode of Full House in which he played the cousin of D.J. Tanner , a role played by Cameron 's sister , Candace . 
 Cameron went on to star in many films , including 1987 's Like Father Like Son ( a body @-@ switch comedy with Dudley Moore ) , which was a box office success . His next theatrical film , 1989 's Listen to Me , performed poorly at the box office . When Growing Pains ended in 1992 , Cameron went on to star in The WB sitcom Kirk which premiered in 1995 and ended two years later . In Kirk , Cameron played Kirk Hartman , a 24 @-@ year @-@ old who has to raise his siblings . Cameron and Noble also worked together on Kirk . 
 = = = 2000 – 2010 = = = 
 Cameron has since mostly left mainstream film and television , though a decade after Growing Pains ended , he starred in a television reunion film , The Growing Pains Movie , in 2000 , and another one , Growing Pains : Return of the <unk> , in 2004 . Cameron reunited with the cast of Growing Pains for a CNN Larry King Live interview which aired on February 7 , 2006 , in conjunction with the Warner Bros. release of the complete first season of Growing Pains on DVD . Aside from this , Cameron has often worked in Christian @-@ themed productions , among them the post @-@ Rapture films Left Behind : The Movie , Left Behind II : Tribulation Force , and Left Behind : World at War , in which he plays Cameron " Buck " Williams . Cameron 's wife Noble also starred in the film series , playing Hattie Durham . Cameron has worked with Cloud Ten Pictures , a company which produces Christian @-@ themed films , and has starred in several of their films , including The Miracle of the Cards . 
 He also appeared in the 2008 drama film , Fireproof , which was produced by Sherwood Pictures . The film was created on a budget of $ 500 @,@ 000 , with Cameron as the lead actor , portraying Captain Caleb Holt . Though it was a low @-@ budget film , the film grossed $ 33 @,@ 415 @,@ 129 and was a box office success . It was the highest grossing independent film of 2008 . 
 = = = 2010 – present = = = 
 In 2012 , Cameron was the narrator and host of the documentary film Monumental : In Search of America 's National Treasure . On its opening day , March 27 , 2012 , Monumental grossed $ 28 @,@ 340 . The film stayed in theaters until May 20 , 2012 , grossing a total of $ 177 @,@ 729 . 
 In 2013 , Cameron announced he would be the host of the film Unstoppable slated to premiere September 24 , 2013 . A trailer for the film was blocked on Facebook , with Cameron speculating that it was due to the film 's religious content . Facebook has since removed the block , stating it was the result of a mistake by an automated system and a spam site previously registered at the same web address . 
 In 2014 , Cameron starred in the faith @-@ based comedy film Saving Christmas . The film was heavily panned by critics , winning the 2014 Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Picture and Worst Screenplay . Cameron also won the award for Worst Actor and Worst Screen Combo , which he won with " his ego " . 
 = = Evangelistic ministry = = 
 Cameron currently partners with fellow evangelist Ray Comfort , training Christians in evangelism . Together , they founded the ministry of The Way of the Master , which is best known for the television show of the same name that Cameron co @-@ hosts , and which won the National Religious Broadcasters ’ Best Program Award for two consecutive years . It also formerly featured a radio show known as The Way of the Master Radio with talk show host Todd Friel . The radio show was later canceled , and replaced with Wretched Radio , hosted by Friel . Cameron , along with his wife , founded The Firefly Foundation , which runs Camp Firefly , a summer camp that gives terminally ill children and their families a free week 's vacation . 
 Cameron and Comfort participated in a televised debate with atheists Brian Sapient and Kelly O 'Conner of the Rational Response Squad , at Calvary Baptist Church , in Manhattan , on May 5 , 2007 . It was moderated by ABC 's Martin Bashir and parts of it were aired on Nightline . At issue was the existence of God , which Comfort stated he could prove scientifically , without relying on faith or the Bible . The audience was composed of both theists and atheists . Points of discussion included atheism and evolution . While Sapient contended during his arguments that Comfort violated the rules by talking about the Ten Commandments , Cameron later stated on the Way of the Master radio show that the rules of the debate did not say that the Bible could never be referenced , but rather that Comfort simply had to come up with one argument that didn 't reference the Bible or faith . 
 In November 2009 Cameron and others distributed free copies of an altered version of Charles Darwin 's On the Origin of Species on college campuses in the United States . The book consisted of Darwin 's text with chapters of the book removed , and with an added introduction by Ray Comfort reiterating common creationist assertions about Darwin and evolution . The book was criticized by scientists and Darwin biographers who criticized the omission of key chapters of the book , and who stated that its introduction contains misinformation about Darwin , and long @-@ refuted creationist arguments about the science of evolution , such as the linking of Nazi racial theories to Darwinist ideas . Comfort later said that the four chapters were chosen at random to be omitted in order to make the book small enough to be affordable as a giveaway , with the absent chapters available for download , but that the missing chapters were included in the second edition , which had a smaller text size that made printing the entire book as a giveaway affordable . The second edition still lacks Darwin 's preface and glossary of terms . The National Center for Science Education arranged a campaign to distribute an analysis of the Comfort introduction and a banana bookmark at colleges across the U.S. , a reference to Comfort 's presentation of the banana as an argument for the existence of God . 
 On March 2 , 2012 Cameron stated on Piers Morgan Tonight that " homosexuality is unnatural , detrimental and ultimately destructive to foundations of civilization " . Cameron 's comments received criticism from GLAAD , and provoked a backlash from gay rights activists and members of the entertainment industry , including Roseanne Barr , Kristin Chenoweth , Craig Ferguson , Jesse Tyler Ferguson , Debra Messing , Martha Plimpton , as well as Growing Pains co @-@ stars Tracey Gold and Alan Thicke . Piers Morgan stated that Cameron was brave for expressing his opinion , " however antiquated his beliefs may be " . Rosie O 'Donnell invited him to discuss his comments on same @-@ sex marriage on The Rosie Show , but he declined and suggested a private dinner to discuss this topic personally . 
 On April 11 , 2012 Cameron was honored by Indiana Wesleyan University , and inducted into their Society of World Changers during a ceremony in which he spoke on <unk> 's campus . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Cameron and his wife , fellow Growing Pains star Chelsea Noble , were married on July 21 , 1991 . They now have six children , four of whom were adopted : Jack ( born 1996 ) , Isabella ( born 1997 ) , Anna ( born 1998 ) , and Luke ( born 2000 ) ; and two biological : Olivia ( born 2001 ) and James ( born 2003 ) . 
 = = = Conversion to Christianity = = = 
 Cameron was an atheist in his early teens . When he was 17 , during the height of his career on Growing Pains , he became a born @-@ again Christian . After converting to Christianity , he began to insist that storylines be edited to remove anything he thought too adult or inappropriate in Growing Pains . After the series was cancelled , Cameron did not maintain contact with his former co @-@ stars , and did not speak to Tracey Gold for eight years . Cameron has stated that this was not due to any animosity on his part toward any of his former cast @-@ members , but an outgrowth of his desire to start a new life away from the entertainment industry , and the life he had been in for the previous seven years . Prior to the premiere of The Growing Pains Movie in 2000 , for which the entire main cast reunited , Cameron described his regrets over how his relationship with his castmates changed after his religious conversion during production of the series , saying , " I definitely kind of made an about @-@ face , going toward another aspect of my life " , admits Cameron . " I shifted my focus from 100 % on the show , to 100 % on [ my new life ] , and left 0 % on the show — and even the friendships that were a part of that show . If I could go back , I think I could make decisions that were less inadvertently hurtful to the cast — like talking and explaining to them why I just wanted to have my family at my wedding . " 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 1994 : The Horde ; Chauncey 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Delaware Route 17 = 
 Delaware Route 17 ( DE 17 ) is a two @-@ lane undivided state highway located in Sussex County , Delaware . The route runs in a northeast @-@ southwest direction between DE 54 in Selbyville and DE 26 west of Millville , crossing DE 20 in Roxana . It is called Bethany Road within Selbyville and Roxana Road for the remainder of its length . The route passes through rural areas of southeastern Sussex County . DE 17 serves to connect Selbyville with the Bethany Beach area . The route was built as a state highway in the 1920s and received the DE 17 designation by 1938 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 17 begins at an intersection with DE 54 in the town of Selbyville , where it heads northeast on Bethany Road . The route is a two @-@ lane , undivided , asphalt road that runs through flat areas of the Atlantic coastal plain its entire length . From the southern terminus , the road passes several homes before leaving Selbyville . At this point , DE 17 enters a mix of farmland and woodland with some homes . Here , the name of road becomes Roxana Road . Upon reaching the community of Roxana , the roadway crosses DE 20 . After DE 20 , the road continues through rural areas . Following a turn to the north , the route comes to its terminus at an intersection with DE 26 to the west of Millville . 
 In 2011 , DE 17 had an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 4 @,@ 343 vehicles at the <unk> Road intersection to a low of 2 @,@ 608 vehicles at the DE 20 intersection . None of DE 17 is part of the National Highway System . The portion of DE 17 between <unk> Road and Peppers Corner Road serves as part of a hurricane evacuation route from the coastal community of South Bethany , providing an alternate to DE 26 to the north . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , what is now DE 17 was under construction as an unnumbered paved state highway between Selbyville and Roxana , with a small section of paved state highway complete near Roxana . It was also designated as a state aid road , a road that was to receive funding from the state to be built as a state highway by the county , from Roxana north to Millville . All of the route had been completed as an unnumbered paved state highway by 1924 . DE 17 was designated by 1938 to run from DE 54 in Selbyville to DE 26 near Millville . The route has remained on the same alignment since . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Sussex County . 
 = Iximche = 
 Iximche ( / <unk> / ) ( or <unk> using Spanish orthography ) is a Pre @-@ Columbian Mesoamerican archaeological site in the western highlands of Guatemala . Iximche was the capital of the Late Postclassic Kaqchikel Maya kingdom from 1470 until its abandonment in 1524 . The architecture of the site included a number of pyramid @-@ temples , palaces and two Mesoamerican ballcourts . <unk> uncovered the poorly preserved remains of painted murals on some of the buildings and ample evidence of human sacrifice . The ruins of Iximche were declared a Guatemalan National Monument in the 1960s . The site has a small museum displaying a number of pieces found there , including sculptures and ceramics . It is open daily . 
 For many years the Kaqchikel served as loyal allies of the K 'iche ' Maya . The growing power of the Kaqchikel within the alliance eventually caused such friction that the Kaqchikel were forced to flee the K 'iche ' capital and found the city of Iximche . The Kaqchikel established their new capital upon an easily defensible ridge almost surrounded by deep ravines . Iximche developed quickly as a city and within 50 years of its foundation it had reached its maximum extent . The rulers of Iximche were four principal lords drawn from the four main clans of the Kaqchikel , although it was the lords of the Sotz 'il and Xahil clans who held the real power . 
 After the initial establishment of Iximche , the K 'iche ' left the Kaqchikel in peace for a number of years . The peace did not last and the Kaqchikel soundly defeated their former overlords around 1491 . This was followed by infighting among the Kaqchikel clans with the rebel clans finally being overcome in 1493 . Wars against the K 'iche ' continued throughout the early 15th century . When the Spanish conquistadors arrived in Mexico , the Aztec emperor sent messengers to warn the Kaqchikel . After the surrender of the Aztecs to Hernán Cortés , Iximche sent its own messengers to offer a Kaqchikel alliance with the Spanish . Smallpox decimated the population of Iximche before the physical arrival of the Europeans . At the time of the Spanish Conquest Iximche was the second most important city in the Guatemalan Highlands , after the K 'iche ' capital at Q 'umarkaj . Conquistador Pedro de Alvarado was initially well received in the city in 1524 and the Kaqchikel kings provided the Spanish with native allies to assist in the conquest of the other highland Maya kingdoms . Iximche was declared the first capital of the Kingdom of Guatemala in the same year . Due to excessive Spanish demands for tribute the Kaqchikel soon broke the alliance and deserted their capital , which was burned 2 years later by Spanish deserters . The Europeans founded a new town nearby but abandoned it in 1527 due to the continued hostility of the Kaqchikel , who finally surrendered in 1530 . 
 The ruins of Iximche were first described by a Guatemalan historian in the late 17th century . They were visited various times by scholars during the 19th century , who published plans and descriptions . Serious investigations of the site started in the 1940s and continued sporadically until the early 1970s . In 1980 , during the Guatemalan Civil War , a meeting took place at the ruins between guerillas and Maya leaders that resulted in the guerillas stating that they would defend indigenous rights . A ritual was carried out at the site in 1989 in order to reestablish the ruins as a sacred place for Maya ceremonies . United States President George W. Bush visited the site in 2007 , and in the same year Iximche was the venue for the III Continental Summit of Indigenous Peoples and Nationalities of <unk> Yala . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The site 's name derives from the Mayan name of the <unk> tree ( Brosimum alicastrum ) , from the words <unk> and che , meaning literally " maize tree " . Iximche was called Guatemala by the Spanish , from the Nahuatl <unk> meaning " forested land " . Since the Spanish conquistadors founded their first capital at Iximche , they took the name of the city used by their Nahuatl @-@ speaking Mexican allies and applied it to the new Spanish city and , by extension , to the kingdom . From this comes the modern name of the country . The site has also been referred to as Patinamit by 19th century investigators , a Kaqchikel word meaning " the city " . 
 = = Location = = 
 Iximche is located 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) south of Tecpán , and 90 kilometres ( 56 mi ) west of Guatemala City , in the northwest of the Guatemalan department of Chimaltenango . The city was built at an altitude of 2 @,@ 260 metres ( 7 @,@ 410 ft ) in an easily defensible position on a ridge surrounded by deep ravines , in order to defend the city from its hostile K 'iche ' and Tz 'utujil neighbours . The ridge is called <unk> and is a promontory of Tecpán hill , a 3 @,@ 075 @-@ metre @-@ high ( 10 @,@ 089 ft ) mountain to the northwest of the ruins , which sit at the southeastern end of this promontory . The ridge is flanked by two rivers flowing in deep ravines , Río El Molino and Río Los <unk> , which both join to flow southwest into the Madre Vieja River , which empties into the Pacific Ocean . Iximche is located among pine forests common to highland Guatemala . 
 = = Political organisation = = 
 The Kaqchikel kingdom itself was divided among four clans that between them contained ten principal lineages or " big houses " . The clans themselves were the Xahil , who were the main branch of the Kaqchikel , the Sotz 'il , the Tukuche and the <unk> . 
 The rulers of Iximche were four principal lords with the titles of Ahpo Sotz 'il , Ahpo Xahil , K 'alel Achi and Ahuchan , although in reality it was the first two of these that held the real power . The two main clans of the Kaqchikel people each provided a leader , one was the Ahpo Sotz 'il ( " Lord of the Sotz 'il " ) and the other was the Ahpo Xahil . These royal titles were originally bestowed upon the leaders of the Xahil and Sotz 'il clans by the K 'iche ' in gratitude for their military services to the K 'iche ' Kingdom of Q 'umarkaj . Both leaders were supposed to be equal in rank but in practice the Sotz 'il king was the senior ( or nab 'ey al , " firstborn child " ) while the king of the Xahil was subordinate ( the <unk> al , " <unk> child " ) . The K 'alel Achi and the Ahuchan were the other two lords , which translate from Kaqchikel as the " principal person " and the " speaker " . The Kaqchikel document <unk> de los <unk> gives alternate titles for two of the four lords . This document lists the Ahpo Sotz 'il and the Ahpo Xahil as the two most important , the other two lords were drawn from two additional clans and were the Ahpo Tukuche ( " Lord of the Tukuche " ) and the Ahpo <unk> ( " Lord of the <unk> " ) . 
 The titles of Ahpo Sotz 'il and Ahpo Xahil were passed from father to son . The Xahil heir bore the title <unk> Achi <unk> , and the Sotz 'il heir bore the title <unk> Achi Balam . They were important positions in their own right and the heirs were military leaders who commanded on the battlefield . 
 When Iximche was founded in the late 15th century AD Wuqu @-@ Batz ' was Ahpo Sotz 'il , Hun @-@ Toh was Ahpo Xahil , <unk> was K 'alel Achi and <unk> @-@ Keh was Ahuchan . According to the early Colonial Kaqchikel document Memorial de Sololá , the last two of these were not very important . Each of the four lords had his own section in the new city that included his palace , royal court and temples . 
 = = Known rulers = = 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Archaeologists only found traces of one pre @-@ Kaqchikel occupational phase and this was an ancient level dating to the Late Preclassic . Occasional Early and Late Classic remains have been found but they are incidental and do not represent a Classic Period occupation of the site . 
 = = = Late Postclassic history = = = 
 The Kaqchikel people were closely related to the K 'iche ' , their former allies . The K 'iche 'an peoples ( including the Kaqchikel , the K 'iche ' and others ) had received strong influences from central Mexico since the time of the great Early Classic metropolis of Teotihuacan . The history of Iximche is largely drawn from the Annals of the Kaqchikels , a document written in the Kaqchikel language but using Latin characters soon after the Spanish Conquest . This document details the origins , history and conquest of the Kaqchikels . The Kaqchikel served as close allies of the K 'iche ' for many years . The Kaqchikel rulers Hun @-@ Toh and Wuqu @-@ Batz ' served the great K 'iche ' king K 'iq 'ab with such loyalty that he rewarded them with the royal titles Ahpo Sotz 'il and Ahpo Xahil and the power to rule . The sons of K 'iq 'ab became jealous of the growing power of the Kaqchikel lords and led a revolt against their father that seriously damaged his authority . This revolt had serious consequences for the K 'iche ' as their conquered domains seized the opportunity to break free from their subjugation . 
 A minor incident in the K 'iche ' capital Q 'umarkaj escalated to have important consequences . A K 'iche ' soldier tried to seize bread from a Kaqchikel woman who was selling it in the market . The woman refused the soldier and drove him off with a stick . The Kaqchikel demanded the execution of the K 'iche ' soldier while the K 'iche ' nobility demanded the punishment of the Kaqchikel bread seller . When the Kaqchikel lords refused to hand her over , the K 'iche ' lords sentenced Hun @-@ Toh and Wuqu @-@ Batz ' to death against the wishes of the K 'iche ' king K 'iq 'ab . King K 'iq 'ab warned his Kaqchikel friends and advised them to flee Q 'umarkaj . On the day 13 Iq ' of the Kaqchikel calendar the four lords of the Kaqchikel led their people out of the K 'iche ' capital to found their own capital at Iximche . The exact year of this event is not known with certainty but is believed to have been between AD 1470 and 1485 , with some scholars , such as Guillemín , preferring 1470 . The Kaqchikel abandoned their previous capital <unk> ( speculated to be modern Chichicastenango ) because it was too close to Q 'umarkaj . 
 K 'iq 'ab prevented his nobles from making war on the Kaqchikel for the remainder of his life , giving his former allies the time to establish their own kingdom and prepare its defences . When Hun @-@ Toh died he was succeeded by his son Lahuh @-@ Ah . Lahuh @-@ Ah died in 1488 and was replaced by Kablahuh @-@ Tihax . Oxlahuh @-@ Tz 'i ' , the son of Wuqu @-@ Batz ' , had a long and successful reign and lived through the reigns of two of his co @-@ rulers . 
 The Kaqchikel kings Oxlahuh @-@ Tz 'i ' and Kablahuh @-@ Tihax gained a definitive victory over the K 'iche ' around 1491 when they captured the K 'iche ' kings Tepepul and <unk> together with the idol of their most important deity Tohil . The captured K 'iche ' kings were sacrificed together with a number of nobles and high @-@ ranking soldiers , including the son and grandson of the king . After this defeat of the K 'iche ' , two Kaqchikel clans rebelled , the <unk> and the Tukuche . The kings Oxlahuh @-@ Tz 'i ' and Kablahuh @-@ Tihax crushed the rebellion on 20 May 1493 . 
 Oxlahuh @-@ Tz 'i ' died on 23 July 1508 and was succeeded by his son Hun @-@ Iq ' . Kablahuh @-@ Tihax died on 4 February 1509 and was succeeded by his son Lahuh @-@ Noh . The Kaqchikel continued their wars against the K 'iche ' kingdom over the following decade . The Aztec emperor Moctezuma II sent messengers to the Kaqchikel in 1510 , warning of strangers in the Caribbean . In 1512 he sent another messenger ( named as Witz <unk> 'il ) warning of the arrival of the Spanish in Yucatán and Veracruz . 
 In 1513 the Kaqchikel suffered from a plague of locusts . The following year , in 1514 , Iximche was severely damaged by a fire . A plague , described as terrible in the Annals of the Kaqchikel , struck the city in 1519 and lasted two years , resulting in a large number of deaths . This was likely to have been smallpox brought to the Americas with the Spanish . After the Aztec capital Tenochtitlan fell to the Spanish onslaught in 1521 , the Kaqchikel sent messengers to Hernán Cortés offering an alliance with the Spanish . 
 On 11 August 1521 , Belehe Qat and Cahi Imox were chosen as lords of the city after the deaths of Hun @-@ Iq ' and Lahuh @-@ Noh , the previous kings . Cahi Imox was the Ahpo Sotz 'il and Belehe Qat was the Ahpo Xahil . On the eve of the Spanish Conquest , the Kaqchikel kingdom based at Iximche was still expanding into areas formerly controlled by the K 'iche ' and it was rapidly becoming the most powerful new kingdom in the Guatemalan Highlands . It was second in importance only to the K 'iche ' capital at Q 'umarkaj . 
 = = = Spanish Conquest = = = 
 When Spanish conquistador Pedro de Alvarado arrived in what is now Guatemala in 1524 , 3 years after the conquest of the Aztecs , he found the highland Maya kingdoms weakened by twenty years of warfare and swept by the first European plagues . In the period of February to March 1524 he fought and completely defeated the K 'iche ' , razed Q 'umarkaj and executed the K 'iche ' kings . The Spanish were invited into Iximche on 14 April 1524 and were well received by the lords Belehe Qat and Cahi Imox . The Kaqchikel kings provided native soldiers to assist the conquistadors against continuing K 'iche ' resistance and to help with the defeat of the neighbouring Tz <unk> kingdom . The Spanish only stayed briefly in Iximche before continuing through Atitlán , Escuintla and Cuscatlán . The Spanish returned to the Kaqchikel capital on 23 July 1524 and on 27 July ( 1 Q 'at in the Kaqchikel calendar ) Pedro de Alvarado declared Iximche as the first capital of Guatemala , Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala ( " St. James of the Knights of Guatemala " ) . 
 Pedro de Alvarado rapidly began to demand gold in tribute from the Kaqchikels , souring the friendship between the two peoples . He demanded that the Kaqchikel kings deliver 1000 gold leaves each of 15 pesos . A Kaqchikel priest foretold that the Kaqchikel gods would destroy the Spanish and the Kaqchikel people abandoned their city and fled to the forests and hills on 28 August 1524 ( 7 <unk> in the Kaqchikel calendar ) . Ten days later the Spanish declared war on the Kaqchikel . A couple of years later , on 9 February 1526 , a group of sixteen Spanish deserters burnt the palace of the Ahpo Xahil , sacked the temples and kidnapped a priest , acts that the Kaqchikel blamed on Pedro de Alvarado . Conquistador Bernal Díaz del Castillo recounted how in 1526 he returned to Iximche and spent the night in the " old city of Guatemala " together with Luis Marín and other members of Hernán Cortés 's expedition to Honduras . He reported that the houses of the city were still in excellent condition , his account was the last description of the city while it was still inhabitable . 
 The Spanish founded a new town at Tecpán Guatemala , with Tecpán being Nahuatl for " palace " , so the name of the new town translated as " the palace among the trees " . The inhabitants of Iximche were dispersed , with some being moved to Tecpán , others to Sololá and to other towns around Lake Atitlán . 
 The Spaniards abandoned Tecpán in 1527 , due to the continuous Kaqchikel attacks , and moved to the Almolonga Valley to the east , refounding their capital on the site of today 's San Miguel Escobar district of Ciudad Vieja , near Antigua Guatemala . 
 The Kaqchikel kept up resistance against the Spanish for a number of years but on 9 May 1530 the two kings of the most important clans returned from the wilds . A day later they were joined by many nobles and their families and many more people came with them to surrender at the new Spanish capital at Ciudad Vieja . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 The ruins were described by Guatemalan historian Francisco Antonio de Fuentes y Guzmán in 1695 . Miguel Rivera Maestre published some plans and views of the ruins in 1834 in his Atlas del Estado de Guatemala ( " Atlas of the State of Guatemala " ) . American diplomat and writer John Lloyd Stephens described the ruins , which he called Patinamit , after he visited Iximche with English artist Frederick Catherwood and in 1840 . Catherwood never published any drawings of the site and Stephens reported that the locals had plundered the stone at the site for many years in order to use it for building materials in Tecpán . French architect Cesar Daly mapped Iximche in 1857 . 
 In Spanish Colonial times Iximche was the focus of a syncretic cult worshipping a relic from the ruins that had been transferred to the church in Tecpán . As late as the 19th century processions to the ruins from Tecpán took place every Good Friday . This cult had died out by the time of the Guatemalan Civil War in the late 20th century . 
 Alfred P. Maudslay visited Iximche in 1887 and referred to it both as Patinamit and Iximche . He carried out a site survey and published a plan of the ruins . Robert Wauchope carried out a ceramic study of Iximche in the 1940s on behalf of the Middle American Research Institute of Tulane University and published his work in 1948 – 1949 . Historian Janos de <unk> began excavations at the ruins in January 1956 . The remains of the city were excavated by Swiss @-@ Guatemalan archaeologist George ( Jorge ) Guillemín from 1959 @-@ 1972 . Guillemín published his work in 1959 , 1967 and 1969 . The excavation and restoration of the ruins was funded by the Guatemalan Committee for Reconstruction of National Monuments until July 1961 , after 1963 the investigations were funded by the Swiss National Foundation for Scientific Research . Guillemín died before his investigations could be completed and his full report published . His field notes were finally published in 2003 . 
 In 1960 the ruins of Iximche were declared a National Monument under governmental decree 1360 of the Congress of the Republic of Guatemala , published in May 1963 . In 1980 , during the Guatemalan Civil War , the ruins were chosen as a meeting place between Maya leaders and the guerillas , as a result of which the guerillas stated explicitly that they would defend indigenous rights in the so @-@ called " Declaration of Iximche " . In 1989 an important Maya ceremony was carried out at the site in order to reestablish the ruins as a sacred place for indigenous ceremonies . 
 United States President Bush visited the site on March 12 , 2007 . Local Maya priests said that they would be conducting purifying rites after his visit to cleanse the area of " bad spirits " brought by the president , who they said persecuted their " migrant brothers " in the United States . " We reject this portrayal of our people as a tourist attraction , " a spokesman , Morales <unk> , said . 
 From 26 – 30 March 2007 Iximche was the site of the III Continental Summit of Indigenous Peoples and Nationalities of <unk> Yala . The meeting 's closing " Declaration of Iximche " committed delegates to a struggle for social justice and against " neoliberalism and other forms of oppression . " 
 = = Tourism = = 
 The majority of visitors to Iximche are indigenous Maya , at the weekend the site attracts about 250 visitors per day . Comparatively few tourists visit the ruins and the majority that do are Guatemalan nationals . Modern aj q <unk> ' ( Maya priests often referred to as " <unk> " in English ) arrive as pilgrims at Iximche from throughout the Guatemalan Highlands . 
 Tourist facilities at the site include visitor parking , a small museum , a picnic area and a football field . The museum is open on a daily basis and displays a number of artefacts recovered from the ruins . 
 = = Site description = = 
 The site was largely preserved by the Spanish due to their alliance with the Kaqchikel against the K 'iche ' . The site ’ s central core is flanked by deep ravines and is separated from the main residential area by a defensive ditch . The city developed very quickly and within 50 years of its foundation it had reached its maximum extent . This explosive population growth at the city caused the residential area to spill over into the edges of the ravines themselves . The site center consists of four large and two small plazas , each of which contained at least two temples . Along with elite palaces , there are two ballcourts , the larger of which is 40 metres ( 130 ft ) long and had zoomorphic markers . The plazas are named A , B , C , D , E and F , running from northwest ( A ) to southeast ( F ) . The ceremonial centre of the city was separated from the residential areas by a wall . 
 Today the ruins are accessed via the modern town of Tecpán Guatemala , which replaced Iximche when it was destroyed . The modern entrance to the site is on the northern side of the ruins and includes visitor parking , a small museum , a picnic area and a football field , as well as the custodian 's house . In an area of woodland to the south of the central portion of the ruins is a modern ceremonial area used by the modern Kaqchikel to carry out their rituals . This ceremonial area is linked to the ruins by a footpath and includes six concrete altars arranged around an unexcavated building . Flowers , food and drink are placed on these altars as sacrifices . The museum displays a number of pieces from the site , including sculptures and ceramics . 
 Plazas A and B are thought to have comprised a single complex belonging to the Sotz 'il clan and included the palace of the Ahpo Sotz 'il . Plaza A possesses a ballcourt , two temples and ten palace structures , five of which are interconnecting . 
 Plaza C was separated from Plazas A and B by a 0 @.@ 91 @-@ metre ( 3 ft ) wall and was the palace complex of the Ahpo Xahil , the junior co @-@ ruler . Plaza C also had two temples facing each other across the plaza . The Xahil ballcourt was on the southwest side of Plaza C and the palace proper of the Ahpo Xahil was on the southeast side of the plaza . The Xahil Palace was built with an east @-@ west alignment with the entry courtyard on the western side of the palace and had a central altar . The main palace was entered from the eastern side of the entry courtyard . The rooms and courtyards of the Xahil Palace contained a great deal of domestic artefacts . The Xahil Palace was destroyed by a major fire that resulted in the collapse of the adobe walls and it may be that this was the complex where Pedro de Alvarado was lodged with his Spanish soldiers . It would also be the same building that Spanish deserters burned in 1526 . The collapse of the building preserved the domestic contents of the palace for archaeologists , unlike the palace of the Ahpo Sotz 'il where comparatively few artefacts were recovered . 
 Plaza D has not been excavated although it was cleared and mapped by archaeologists . It is a large plaza surrounded by fairly high mounds although it does not appear to have had the large east and west pyramids present on the other main plazas . It had a palace on the south side with three interior courtyards , the westernmost of which had a cross @-@ shaped altar . The palace was smaller than those of the Ahpo Sotz 'il and the Ahpo Xahil and is believed to have been the palace of the Ahuchan . 
 Plazas E and F are to the east of Plaza D and also included palace buildings . These plazas were not mapped by Guillemín and remain covered by trees . The two plazas formed a single complex , believed to have been that of the K 'alel Achi . 
 The defensive ditch running across the promontory was originally 8 metres ( 26 ft ) deep . It was largely filled in soon after the Conquest in order to render the city less defensible . In the middle of the 19th century the defensive ditch was measured as 3 yards ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) deep , in the 1960s it was still visible on the ground although it is now almost totally filled in . 
 Ceramic finds at the site include frequent finds of incense @-@ burners with handles and molded decoration . The most common domestic ceramics are of a micaceous ware and include ceramic <unk> ( a type of griddle ) . Imported ceramics include Chinautla Polychrome and White @-@ on @-@ red , they are reasonably common at the site . Brown bowls are of a type also found in Zaculeu and Mixco Viejo , both of which also had a Late Postclassic occupation . Three @-@ legged metates ( a kind of mortar ) were frequently recovered from the excavations and black obsidian blades were found in great quantities . Simple jade jewellery was also found . 
 Human sacrifice is evidenced at the site by the altar upon Structure 2 , of a type used in heart sacrifice , and by a cylindrical cache of skulls taken from decapitated victims accompanied by obsidian knives . A pentatonic flute crafted from a child 's femur was recovered from one of the temples and is also indicative of human sacrifice . 
 Because of the very brief nature of the Spanish occupation of the city , very few European artefacts were found . Those few pieces that were found consisted of forged iron crossbow bolts . 
 = = = Structures = = = 
 Over 160 structures have been mapped at Iximche . The structures were faced with stone blocks that were coated in lime plaster , which in some cases was then painted with Mixtec @-@ Puebla style murals , although few traces of the murals survive today . The Mixtec @-@ Puebla style originated around AD 900 in central Mexico and spread from there throughout Mesoamerica . The superstructures of buildings at Iximche were built from adobe blocks and once supported beam and mortar roofs but none have survived . The platform cores were generally built of rough stones set in a clay matrix . A few of the structures have been restored and the site core is kept clear of overgrowth . Residential structures built on platforms around the ceremonial plazas usually had built @-@ in benches and hearths . 
 = = = = Great Palace I = = = = 
 The Great Palace I ( or Gran Palacio I in Spanish ) is a large residential complex on the northeast side of Plaza B. The surviving remains consist of a sunken patio and some low house platforms . Excavation revealed three construction phases , the earliest of which dates to the founding of the city by Wuqu @-@ Batz ' and Hun @-@ Toh . This phase covered approximately 500 square metres ( 5 @,@ 400 sq ft ) and came to form the core of the palace . The first phase consisted of four long single @-@ roomed residential range structures arranged around a courtyard , which possessed an altar in the middle . The residential units possessed inset benches against the walls and hearths in the middle of the floorspace . The walls were originally built of adobe covered with painted murals . Artefacts recovered from this phase included obsidian knives , <unk> , metates and domestic ceramics . Fragments of incense burners were recovered close to the altars in the palace . The Palace expanded in all directions around this early core with the addition of new buildings and courtyards . The early courtyard was later divided into several smaller patios . The last phase of construction at the Palace dates to the joint reign of Hun @-@ Iq ' and <unk> Noj , by the end of which the palace covered an area of more than 3 @,@ 000 square metres ( 32 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . 
 On the southwest of the palace courtyard there were some low platforms , possibly ritual dance platforms , and on the southeast side was a building with benches against three of the walls and hearths at each end . This may have been the room where the Ahpo Sotz 'il held court and received visitors and tribute . 
 = = = = Great Palace II = = = = 
 The Great Palace II ( or Gran Palacio II in Spanish ) is another large residential complex , it is located on the southeast side of Plaza C. The palace is formed by a large number of small rooms arranged around seven interior courtyards . A large quantity of ceramic remains were recovered from within this palace . The rooms around the northeast courtyard within the Great Palace II may have been the royal apartments of this complex , owing to their position near the central courtyard while at the same time being closed off from it . The ceramics from this area were of exotic origin and elite nature . The royal apartments may also have included the rooms around the north courtyard of the palace . 
 = = = = Temple 2 = = = = 
 Temple 2 ( also known as Structure 2 ) is a tiered pyramidal platform on the west side of Plaza A. It has a stairway that climbs the east side of the structure , providing access from the plaza . Structure 2 faces the sunrise on the summer solstice . The structure is the best preserved of the excavated temples . Like many buildings at Iximche it had three construction phases dating , from oldest to newest , from the reigns of Wuqu @-@ Batz ' , Oxlahuh Tz 'i ' and Hun @-@ Iq ' . The earliest of these phases was located by archaeologists tunnelling into the interior of the structure . It is poorly preserved because the facing stones were stripped in order to be reused . The middle phase is the best preserved of the three phases of construction and consisted of four stepped tiers supporting high talud @-@ tablero style walls consisting of a sloping wall topped by a vertical panel . The temple had recessed corners and a steep stairway climbed to the topmost tier , at the top of the stair was a 40 @-@ centimetre @-@ high ( 16 in ) sacrificial altar measuring 45 centimetres ( 18 in ) wide by 18 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) deep . The altar was made from stone and stucco and the top was slightly concave , it is of a type used in human sacrifice . 
 The temple floor is elevated 9 metres ( 30 ft ) above the plaza and the temple superstructure , including both the temple walls and the roof , would have added another 5 metres ( 16 ft ) to the total height of the structure at the time of the Spanish Conquest . The temple shrine had benches built against three sides of the interior and a hearth in the middle . A small rear chamber also had benches , this chamber may have been where the gods of the Sotz 'il were kept . A small section of the temple floor had been opened as if to receive a burial but the tomb was never used and was covered over again . The remains of a turtle were excavated from the plaza immediately in front of the temple and may have represented one of the <unk> ( a class of mythical being ) that supported the temple . Turtles also played an important part in the Classic Period Maya myth of the rebirth of the Maize God . 
 The temple shrine was built on a final platform on top of the fourth tier . The exposed remains of the shrine date to the reign of Oxlahuh @-@ Tz 'i ' . It had a triple doorway divided by columns and was built from adobe covered with plaster , the columns and walls on <unk> side of the doorways were painted with decorations , traces of red , yellow and blue were found by archaeologists , these colours were applied to designs marked out onto a thin cap of clay with a pointed instrument . The quality of the work was very fine and indicated execution by a specialised artist . There were ten painted figures on the front of the building with further murals on the back . The designs consist of two rows of discs on top of a row of vertical stripes with figures painted against the striped background with the discs above them . The painted figures are performing various actions , one of which is tongue piercing , and they probably represent a Kaqchikel ritual in progress . The painted murals are very poorly preserved due to deterioration caused by damp combined with damage caused by tree roots . The style of the paintings is very similar to that of Postclassic Mixtec art . Exposed parts of the middle phase of construction were damaged and the second phase was covered by the final construction phase , which was badly damaged by the stonework being stripped away for building the nearby town of Tecpán . 
 At the southwest corner of Temple 2 is a low platform that bore painted murals that had a skull with crossed longbones upon two bands of decoration . This platform may have been an <unk> or " skull place " , a Kaqchikel version of the Aztec <unk> skull racks . Two skulls bearing evidence of decapitation were found in a cache to the southeast of Temple 2 together with some obsidian blades . 
 = = = = Temple 3 = = = = 
 Temple 3 ( also known as Structure 3 ) is a pyramid @-@ temple located on the east side of Plaza A , opposite Temple 2 , and is similar in form to that building . The stairway climbs the west ( plaza ) side of the temple platform . In front of the stairway , at the level of the plaza , is a small rectangular platform . A large amount of ceramic remains were found associated with this building , these were pieces of large cylindrical incense @-@ burners , of which more than twelve were used in the temple . One represented an elderly god emerging from the jaws of a serpent , another two show the same deity in a standing position . They may represent one of the <unk> deities of the Kaqchikel , B <unk> @-@ Toh or Hun @-@ Tihax . The incense burners were found exactly where the Kaqchikels had left them when they abandoned Iximche . Some of these incense @-@ burners bore a suspended solar disc with modelled rays . Fragments of an Early Postclassic <unk> ware vessel were recovered scattered around three sides of the temple that were probably the remains of a relic from within the temple itself . There is no evidence of such early occupation at Iximche and may have been plundered from Zaculeu , a city with a long occupational history that was conquered by the K 'iche ' -Kaqchikel alliance . A sacrificial flint knife was also recovered from Structure 3 . Two low platforms stand in front of the temple , they were likely to have been used either as altars or as dance platforms . 
 = = = = Other structures = = = = 
 Structure 1 ( also known as Temple 1 ) is a pyramid temple facing onto Plaza B. It is the only temple at Iximche to have been completely restored . 
 Structure 4 is another pyramid @-@ temple base on the west side of Plaza C. It has a low platform at its southeastern corner , where 48 severed heads were excavated immediately to the west . Schele and Mathews have speculated that these may be the heads of the K 'iche ' kings <unk> and <unk> together with other members of the K 'iche ' court who were captured by the Kaqchikels and decapitated . Most of the skulls were found with associated obsidian blades . Most of the skulls had been individually buried in pits cut into the floor of the plaza , although a few were grouped into small lots . 
 Structure 5 was a pyramid @-@ temple . Excavation revealed at least two phases of construction and the pyramidal platform had a single stair that divided into two as it approached the summit shrine . 
 Structure 6 is an unrestored temple @-@ pyramid platform to the southwest of Plaza C. 
 Structure 7 , at the southwest side of Plaza C , is a ballcourt of similar dimensions to Structure 8 . It was the ballcourt of the Xahil clan and may have been the older of the two ballcourts . Each end of the ballcourt had a projecting stairway and there was an additional stairway to the southeast . A tennoned head sculpture recovered from Plaza C may originally have been a ballcourt marker from this ballcourt . 
 Structure 8 is located at the southwestern side of Plaza A. It is a 40 @-@ metre @-@ long ( 130 ft ) I @-@ shaped ball @-@ court with a 30 by 7 metres ( 98 by 23 ft ) playing area . The end @-@ zones are enclosed and accessed via stairways . The two lateral platforms enclosing the playing area were extended by building onto the outermost side . In Kaqchikel ballcourts were called hom and were seen as gateways to Xibalba , the underworld . Structure 8 has been excavated and restored . Excavations uncovered two levels of plaster flooring , indicating that the ballcourt had been built during the second of the three main phases of construction at Iximche , dating it to about AD 1500 . 
 Structure 9 @-@ sub had two pillars separating three doorways . 
 Structure 10 had an internal patio with the building surrounding it on three sides . 
 Structure 13 , lying between Plazas A and B , had an internal patio with the structure enclosing it on three sides , much like Structure 10 . 
 Structure 14 is a circular altar in Plaza B measuring 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) across . It is very similar to those used for so @-@ called " gladiatorial sacrifice " by the Aztecs and it may have served this purpose . This hypothesis is supported by the presence of a noble burial interred with three companions . 
 Structure 22 is a range structure on the north side of Plaza A. The bases of pillars survive that once separated five doorways . Structure 22 is one of the best preserved palace platforms at Iximche and had benches set against the inside of three of the walls and hearths set into the floor . 
 Structure 24 - two crude tennoned zoomorphic heads , possibly jaguar heads , were found near this structure but were probably ballcourt markers from one of the two ballcourts . It is likely that they served as a core onto which stucco modelling was applied . 
 Structure 27 is located behind Temple 2 . Within it was found the noble tomb E @-@ 27 @-@ A. 
 Structure 38 is a 61 @-@ metre ( 200 ft ) long platform that completely enclosed the north side of Plaza C. It supported three residential structures , each of which had its own stairway . Domestic ceramics were found associated with these buildings . An incense burner was also found with an effigy of Tlaloc , the central Mexican rain god . 
 = = = Human remains = = = 
 The skeletal remains of more than 100 individuals have been excavated at Iximche , some of which were very well preserved . Unfortunately the bones became mixed when warehoused near the site after excavation and their original locations are no longer clear . Thirty @-@ six skulls were analysed by archaeologists , of these 25 show evidence of decapitation , a sacrificial practice commonly represented in Maya art from the Classic Period . Thirteen of these sacrifices were male , seven were female and five were of indeterminate gender . Most of the sacrifices were of young adults , ten were aged between 15 and 21 years old and eleven were aged little more than 21 years old , based on skull development . It is likely that these sacrificed individuals were not Kaqchikels but were captives taken from enemy states . Less than 3 % of the analysed skulls showed evidence of iron deficiency anemia , a very low percentage compared with remains recovered from Copán and Altar de Sacrificios ( 64 % and 88 % respectively ) . This low percentage indicates that these individuals were not exposed to particular dietary stress and were likely to belong to the elite class . 31 % of the skulls had evidence of infection , about half of which were active infections at the time of death , although none were serious . Half of these infections left evidence in the maxillary sinus , this suggests a fairly high level of airborne pathogens in the environment . Tooth enamel analysis was carried out on 19 individuals and revealed hypoplasia in the teeth of 89 % of these , indicating a high level of poor health in the first 7 years of childhood . 
 All excavated tombs were intrusive burials interred under residential platforms . They were all found in a squatting position without any particular orientation . Many of the remains were found accompanied by a broken obsidian blade . Some burials had other offerings , for example that of a woman accompanied by domestic utensils , some of which were blackened with soot . Two child burials each had a jade bead and the burial of an elderly male was accompanied by pieces of burnt pine and evergreen oak . 
 Burial E @-@ 27 @-@ A was a noble tomb in Structure 27 , in Plaza A. The remains of three sacrificed adults were piled together face down in a 1 square metre ( 11 sq ft ) space . Under these sacrifices were the seated remains of another person . This individual wore a gold headband with a jade and turquoise mosaic and a necklace with ten representations of jaguar heads together with forty small gold beads . On each arm he wore a bracelet fashioned from the occipital bone of a human skull and engraved with fine designs that included birds and stars hanging from a Mexican @-@ style celestial band . A finely crafted piece of jade was found near the lower jaw and had probably been originally placed within the mouth of the deceased . There was also a copper nose ornament in the shape of the moon and some jade beads , one of which represented a deity similar to that represented on the incense burners found at Temple 3 . The remains dated from the earlier phase of occupation of Iximche and the deceased had died in battle from a blow to the head from a blunt instrument . The burial has been tentatively identified as that of one of two sons of Wuqu @-@ Batz ' of the Xahil clan , who died in the Kaqchikel wars of expansion , either <unk> @-@ Tz <unk> Uka or <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 = Bad Romance = 
 " Bad Romance " is a song by American singer Lady Gaga from her third extended play , The Fame Monster ( 2009 ) . It was written and produced by Gaga and RedOne . Lyrically , " Bad Romance " explores Gaga 's attraction to individuals with whom romance never works , her preference for lonely relationships and the paranoia she experienced while on tour . Following an illegal demo leak , Gaga showcased the final product at Alexander McQueen 's show at the Paris Fashion Week in October 2009 , followed by the release of the single 's cover art . Musically , " Bad Romance " features a spoken bridge , a full @-@ throated chorus and sung lyrics about being in love with one 's best friend . The song , which is imbued with elements of <unk> house and techno , as well as music from 1980s and the 1990s , was touted by Gaga as an experimental pop record . The song contains a few lines in French . 
 Most commentators were enticed by " Bad Romance " , which they declared one of the highlights of The Fame Monster album . It was included in the ' best @-@ of ' lists in several media outlets such as Rolling Stone and Pitchfork Media , and acquired two Grammy Awards for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance and Best Short Form Music Video . In the United States , " Bad Romance " peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 , and it has been certified eleven @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , having sold 5 @.@ 6 million digital downloads as of April 2016 . It achieved worldwide success by topping the charts in a variety of markets , ultimately selling 12 million copies worldwide , thus becoming one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time . 
 The accompanying music video of " Bad Romance " features Gaga inside a surreal white bathhouse . There , she gets kidnapped by a group of supermodels who drug her and sell her to the Russian mafia for sexual slavery . The music video ends with Gaga killing the man who bought her . The song 's video garnered acclaim from critics , who not only applauded the risqué and symbolic nature of the plot , but its artistic direction and vivid imagery . In 2011 , the music video was voted the best video of the 2000s ( decade ) by readers of Billboard . It was nominated for numerous superlatives , including ten awards at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards , where the singer won seven , including a recognition for Video of the Year . Gaga has performed " Bad Romance " on various television programs , such as Saturday Night Live , at various award ceremonies , such as the 2009 American Music Awards , and in three of her tours , the most recent being ArtRave : The Artpop Ball . 
 = = Background = = 
 Gaga collaborated with Nadir " RedOne " Khayat in writing " Bad Romance " , with Khayat taking charge of production . The song was recorded at Record Plant Studios in Los Angeles and FC Walvisch Recording Media Studios in Amsterdam . " Bad Romance " was released as the lead single from The Fame Monster ( 2009 ) , Gaga 's follow @-@ up to her debut album , The Fame ( 2008 ) . Before its official release , a demo version of the song was published illegally on the internet , prompting Gaga to comment via Twitter , " leaked next single is makin my ears bleed . Wait till you hear the real version . " A snippet of the song was performed on Saturday Night Live on October 3 , 2009 , along with " Poker Face " and " LoveGame " . The final version of " Bad Romance " premiered during the finale of fashion designer Alexander McQueen 's 2010 Paris Fashion Week show , and the song 's release followed on October 19 , 2009 . 
 According to Gaga , the song was one of her initial efforts among the songs that she wrote in 2009 while touring . The songs composed during that time were about the various abstract " monsters " — metaphors for her paranoias — that she faced during the tour . One of these concepts became the inspiration behind " Bad Romance " . Gaga explained that she generally felt lonely when she was involved in a relationship and concluded that she was attracted to men with whom romance never works . " Bad Romance " explores her preference for such lonely relationships and her poor choice in men . Gaga wrote the lyrics of " Bad Romance " in Norway on her tour bus . She further elaborated on the writing process in an interview with Grazia : 
 I was in Russia , then Germany , and spent a lot of time in Eastern Europe . There is this amazing German house @-@ techno music , so I wanted to make a pop experimental record . I kind of wanted to leave the ' 80s a little bit , so the chorus is a ' 90s melody , which is what the inspiration was . There was certainly some whisky involved in the writing of the record . It 's about being in love with your best friend . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Bad Romance " is a dance @-@ pop song with house , new wave and techno influences . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " Bad Romance " is set in common time with a metronome of 119 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of A minor , with Gaga 's vocal range spanning from the low @-@ note of E3 to the high @-@ note of C5 . The song follows in the chord progression of Am – C – F – C – G in the verses and F – G – Am – C – F – G – E – Am in the chorus . The song opens with Gaga singing a portion of the chorus , then transitioning into the " Rah @-@ <unk> @-@ ah @-@ ah , Roma @-@ <unk> @-@ ma , Gaga @-@ ooh @-@ la @-@ la " hook . It is followed by the sound of drum beats and keyboards . After the first verse , the pre @-@ chorus follows , with Gaga voicing the lines , " You know that I want you , And you know that I need you , I want your bad , your bad romance " . The full @-@ throated chorus then follows , where she sings , " I want your love , And I want your revenge , You and me could write a bad romance ... Caught in a bad romance " . 
 Gil Kaufman from MTV News found similarities between the tempo of " Bad Romance " and that of Gaga 's previous single " Poker Face " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine noticed the 1980s influences that resonate throughout the track : " If melodies could be time @-@ stamped , these would have ' 80s ' branded on their asses . " Daniel Brockman of The Phoenix pinpointed not only the declarations of liberation " from a significant other " , but the Depeche Mode and Madonna @-@ esque qualities that permeate " Bad Romance " . To Pitchfork Media journalist Scott Plagenhoef , Gaga was able to transform her persona to reflect various female entertainers of similar vein , often reminiscent of the likes of Britney Spears , Madonna and Amy Winehouse . Simon Price from The Independent heard characteristics of Boney M in the chorus , and stated that the first line of the song , " I want your ugly , I want your disease " , established the grim tone of The Fame Monster . 
 The lyrics address aspects of a bad relationship , but also reference fashion in the line , " Walk , walk fashion baby , Work it move that bitch crazy . " In an interview , Gaga pointed out that in the verse , " I want your psycho , your vertigo shtick , Want you in my Rear Window , Baby , you 're sick " , she was listing Alfred Hitchcock films ; she said , " What I 'm really trying to say is I want the deepest , darkest , sickest parts of you that you are afraid to share with anyone because I love you that much . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Bad Romance " was widely acclaimed by critics . In a 2011 review for the song , Rolling Stone declared it the best song in Gaga 's discography . <unk> the " essence of <unk> " , the publication was enamored by the song 's " relentlessly " catchy chorus and " pummeling [ sic ] " beat , which reflected a track that was " grand " , " joyful " and " melancholy " . Kaufman , while applauding the drastic transition into a bombastic " Erasure @-@ esque throb during the chorus " , felt that the instant catch that was apparent in her earlier singles was absent in " Bad Romance " . Kitty Empire of The Guardian argued that instances such as this established Gaga as a figure comparable to Madonna . 
 Referring to her emerging popularity , Jon Dolan from Rolling Stone notes that " Bad Romance " makes the singer 's name a " Teutonic chant " . A columnist from the aforementioned publication , Daniel Kreps , while writing about the song 's initial leak , felt that the song was comparable to " Poker Face " and was not on a par with her other singles . Christopher John Farley from The Wall Street Journal praised the " <unk> " catchiness of the hook , while Michael Hubbard from MusicOMH opined that the chorus of the song was Gaga 's best yet . Pitchfork Media placed " Bad Romance " at number 39 in its top 100 tracks of 2009 , saying that it was " epic in construction " , and Edna Gundersen of USA Today commented that the song was a " ferocious club thumper " that possessed a " sordid underbelly " . The Boston Public Health Commission rated " Bad Romance " as number 10 on its list of " Top 10 List of Songs with Unhealthy Relationship Ingredients " . 
 Mikael Wood of the Los Angeles Times wrote about the lead single 's " turbocharged Euro @-@ soul " , while BBC critic Paul Lester summed up " Bad Romance " as a song with " cheesy rave synths , the now typically Gaga stomping beat and a controversy @-@ lite lyric . " Monica Herrera from Billboard , while saying that it was not as catchy as Gaga 's previous efforts , commended the track 's " wicked sex appeal " , and Jon Blistein from L Magazine wrote about the organization of the song . He felt that " Bad Romance " " [ revelled ] in the nightmare it tries to create with Hitchcock references and somber vocals " , but lacked cohesion , that it was an amalgamation of " Cher song " , " faux @-@ European accented verse " , " power disco chorus " and " bland spoken @-@ word bridge " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Bad Romance " debuted at number nine on the Billboard Hot 100 on November 14 , 2009 , making it Gaga 's highest debuting song on the chart at the time . It sold 143 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads in its first week . After two weeks the song moved from number 11 to number two , which became its peak . It held the spot for seven non @-@ consecutive weeks , held out of the top spot by " Empire State of Mind " by Jay @-@ Z featuring Alicia Keys and " Tik Tok " by Kesha . The movement to the runner @-@ up spot was first spurred by a 49 % digital gain , which took the song to the top of the Hot Digital Songs chart , selling 209 @,@ 000 digital copies that week . " Bad Romance " became Gaga 's third @-@ highest peaking song on the Hot 100 , behind " Just Dance " and " Poker Face " . As of April 2016 , " Bad Romance " had sold 5 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , according to Nielsen Soundscan , making Gaga the second artist in digital history to have three singles — along with " Just Dance " and " Poker Face " — pass the five million mark in digital sales . After RIAA started including video streams in their tabulation of the single certifications , " Bad Romance " was certified 11 times platinum for eleven million in total of sales and streaming . " Bad Romance " debuted on the Pop Songs chart at number 38 and moved to the number one position , making it Gaga 's fifth consecutive number one single on the chart . The same week it also topped the Hot Dance Club Songs chart . According to Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems , " Bad Romance " set the record for most weekly plays in the 17 @-@ year history of the Pop Songs chart , registering 10 @,@ 859 plays from 130 radio stations monitored for the chart . The record was later broken by Kesha , with her song " Tik Tok " . 
 The song debuted on the ARIA Charts of Australia at number 16 , and at number 33 on the New Zealand RIANZ charts . The next week , " Bad Romance " was the greatest gainer on the ARIA charts and moved to position three . In its seventh week on the chart , the song reached a new peak of two in Australia , and a peak of three in New Zealand . The song was certified four @-@ times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 280 @,@ 000 copies of the single . On October 29 , 2009 , " Bad Romance " debuted on the Irish Singles Chart at number 20 ; it reached the top in its seventh week . On the Canadian Hot 100 , " Bad Romance " debuted at number 58 . The following week it reached number one , making it the third song by Gaga to top the Canadian chart . After being replaced by " Tik Tok " for two weeks , " Bad Romance " again claimed the top spot on the chart . The Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) certified " Bad Romance " seven @-@ times platinum , for shipment of 280 @,@ 000 copies of the single . 
 After its release in the United Kingdom , " Bad Romance " debuted at number 14 on the UK Singles Chart . In December 2009 , the song reached the top spot , making it Gaga 's third UK number one single . She became the first female in British chart history to have three number one singles in one year . Two weeks later , in the first week of 2010 , " Bad Romance " returned to the number one spot , making her only the second female artist of the 21st century to have two separate runs at the top spot . " Bad Romance " was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , for shipment of 400 @,@ 000 copies of the single . The release of her single " Applause " in August 2013 prompted an increase in sales of " Bad Romance " , pushing it across the one million sales threshold in the UK , thus making Lady Gaga one of only 17 artists ever to have had a single in the UK that has reached more than one million sales . In Sweden , the song debuted at number three and after two weeks reached the top of the chart . Across Europe the song debuted on the main charts of Austria , Belgium ( Flanders and Wallonia ) , Czech Republic , Denmark , Finland ( where it was in the top 50 for 65 weeks from late 2009 to early 2011 ) , Netherlands , Norway and Switzerland . On the European Hot 100 Singles chart , " Bad Romance " reached number @-@ one remaining there for two weeks . According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry , the song sold 9 @.@ 7 million copies worldwide in 2010 , and went on to sell 12 million in total , thus becoming one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 During an interview with Rolling Stone , Gaga confirmed that film director Francis Lawrence had directed the music video for " Bad Romance " and that she was impressed with the final version . She explained , " I knew [ Lawrence 's ] ability as a director is so much higher than what I could [ do ] . " Her creative team Haus of Gaga managed the art direction , and the final video premiered on November 10 , 2009 . Gaga described her experience of working with Lawrence : 
 I wanted somebody with a tremendous understanding of how to make a pop video , because my biggest challenge working with directors is that I am the director and I write the treatments and I get the fashion and I decide what it 's about and it 's very hard to find directors that will relinquish any sort of input from the artist . ... But Francis and I worked together . ... It was collaborative . He 's a really pop video director and a filmmaker . He did I Am Legend and I 'm a huge Will Smith fan , so I knew he could execute the video in a way that I could give him all my weirdest , most psychotic ideas ... But it would come across to and be relevant to the public . 
 The concept of the music video was a joint collaboration between Gaga and Lawrence . Originally , the video was going to be shot in New York City , with more elaborate sets , including sets outdoors . The idea was scrapped , however , for budgetary reasons : the budget for the video was low and there was no product placement . Because of Gaga 's schedule , the video was shot in Los Angeles over a two @-@ day period . Lawrence described Gaga 's work ethic and creativity during the video shoot : " She loves the art form of music videos and she is a real creative partner and has great ideas and really cool and unique tastes . She has a great team working with her as well , helping build really fantastic things that she wears . She works hard , she shows up on time and she 's pretty spontaneous ... it was great ... if she had a new song and wanted to do something , I would do it in a second . She was really fun to work with . " 
 Gaga created a pair of razor @-@ blade sunglasses — which she believed portrayed tough female spirit — to wear in the video , explaining " I wanted to design a pair for some of the toughest chicks and some of my girlfriends ... they used to keep razor blades in the side of their mouths ... That tough female spirit is something that I want to project . It 's meant to be , ' This is my shield , this is my weapon , this is my inner sense of fame , this is my monster . ' " Gaga also said that the video shows " how the entertainment industry can , in a metaphorical way , simulate human trafficking - products being sold , the woman perceived as a commodity . " The white latex suits in the video were inspired by the wolf costume from the film Where the Wild Things Are . Gaga also wore designer Alexander McQueen 's 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) high shoes and the famous " Alien " shoes . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The main idea behind the video is that of Gaga getting kidnapped by a group of supermodels who drug her and then sell her off to the Russian mafia for a million rubles . It takes place in a fluorescent white bathhouse . The video begins with Gaga sitting on a white throne in a brightly @-@ lit white room . The scene shows her wearing the razor @-@ blade glasses and surrounded by people and a harlequin Great Dane . She has her finger on the mute button of an iPod speaker , and as she releases it , " Bad Romance " begins to play and a dimly @-@ lit bathhouse is shown . A bright light pans across the walls , activating fluorescent lighting , which shines through a sign reading " Bath Haus of GaGa " . As the first hook of the song begins , a group of female dancers wearing white long @-@ sleeved leotards with knee @-@ high boots and matching crowns crawl out of white , coffin @-@ like pods . The center pod has " Mons † er " written on it , and Gaga emerges wearing an outfit similar to those worn by the others , who begin to dance behind her . A pastiche of ensuing scenes alternates between Gaga singing to herself in front of a mirror and lying in a bathtub . 
 When the chorus of the song begins , two women pull Gaga out of the bathtub , rip her top clothing off and force her to drink a glass of vodka . As the second verse begins , Gaga , wearing a diamond @-@ covered outfit topped with a crown , seductively dances for a group of men bidding for her . She straddles one of the men , played by Slovenian model Jurij <unk> , and performs a lap dance for him . Afterwards , the man raises his bid and becomes the highest bidder for her . When the chorus is played for the third time , Gaga is shown wearing a faux @-@ polar bear hide jacket . She walks towards the man , who is sitting on a bed and unbuttoning his shirt , while drinking a glass of vodka . Gaga has a look of indifference on her face and removes her jacket and sunglasses . Suddenly , the bed spontaneously combusts with the man still sitting on it , and Gaga sings in a sinister way in front of the flames . The video ends with her lying beside a smoldering skeleton , on top of the destroyed bed , covered in ashes . With soot smeared across her body , she calmly smokes a cigarette while her pyrotechnic bra activates . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Upon its release , the video received general acclaim from critics and fans . Tim Stack from Entertainment Weekly called the video " amazing " and added , " I don 't think Gaga has ever looked prettier than in the close @-@ ups where she 's more stripped down . " Jennifer Cady of E ! was also impressed by the video and commented , " This music video really makes us appreciate everything Gaga actually brings to pop music . She 's exciting to watch , plain and simple . ... We need someone like Gaga to really bring it . To put actual thought and care into her product so that it feels alive " . <unk> <unk> of New York Daily News thought Gaga laid the " theatrics on thick " in the video but complimented her for wearing minimal makeup , calling it " refreshingly normal " . Todd Martens of the Los Angeles Times said that the video brought back his faith in performance art , and that " Gaga brings enough [ drama ] on her own , thank you very much . " He also thought the set for the video " worthy of a feature @-@ length film " . Daniel Kreps from Rolling Stone felt that the scenes from the music video were reminiscent of the work of Stanley Kubrick . He added that in " Bad Romance " Gaga portrays her craziest ideas yet . 
 Jocelyn Vena from MTV believed that the video was symbolic and portrayed how " the old Gaga is over , here 's the brand @-@ new Gaga : the one who seems to delight in pushing the boundaries and exploring all manner of sexual proclivities " . She further believed that the video was a testament to Gaga 's brilliance " as an artist that uses the video art form as the jump @-@ off point for the next leg of their career " . In 2011 , Claire Suddath of Time said that although later Gaga videos were more elaborate , " Bad Romance " was Gaga at her best . In Lady Gaga : Behind the Fame , Emily Herbert drew comparisons between the underlying theme of the video and the theme of The Fame Monster — the relationship with fame . She wrote , " Was this the price that Gaga had to pay for the fame she so desired ? Did she feel as if she 'd had to prostitute herself in some way ? The themes were all based around sex , decadence , and corruption ; alcohol and even cigarettes , twenty @-@ first century society 's biggest no @-@ no , were present , and so by implication ... drugs . " The Wall Street Journal noted Gaga as one of the few pop stars of the present time who really understood spectacle , fashion , shock , choreography — all the things that Madonna and Michael Jackson were masters of in the 1980s . 
 The video and its choreography also drew many comparisons with the music video of Michael Jackson 's Thriller , both having robotic , zombie @-@ like arm movements and morbid themes . Tim Stack from Entertainment Weekly compared some of the dance choreography of the video with the choreography in " Thriller " . <unk> <unk> of New York Daily News compared the pods in the video with coffins and called the dance " zombie @-@ like " ; Gaga " [ stole ] a page from Michael Jackson 's ' Thriller ' video " , she said . Los Angeles Times said the video had some " twitchy , ' Thriller ' -like dance moves " , while The Wall Street Journal compared the shock art of " Bad Romance " with the shock art of Michael Jackson during the 1980s . Evan Sawdey of PopMatters also compared the video with " Thriller " , but was not sure whether Gaga was deliberately paying homage to it , or this was " just another excuse for Gaga to wear the <unk> outfits ever designed by mankind " . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 Rolling Stone ranked the song at number nine on its list of the " 25 Best Songs of 2009 " , and on February 13 , 2011 , the single won the Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance . In 2015 , Billboard named the song as " The Biggest Hot 100 Hit to Peak at No. 2 " , describing it as a " modern classic " . 
 On August 3 , 2010 , the music video received 10 nominations at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards , in the categories of Best Cinematography , Best Editing , Best Art Direction , Best Special Effects , Best Choreography , Best Direction , Best Dance Video , Best Pop Video , Best Female Video and Video of the Year , tying with Peter Gabriel 's song " Sledgehammer " for the record of most nominations for a single video in the history of the MTV Video Music Award . The video went on to win seven of the categories . It also won the Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video . In 2011 , " Bad Romance " was voted the best video of the 2000s ( decade ) by readers of Billboard , narrowly beating Britney Spears 's " Toxic " . Time magazine also included " Bad Romance " on its list of best music videos since the 1980s . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 A portion of the song was performed on Saturday Night Live on October 3 , 2009 . Gaga wore a complex outfit called " The Orb " , designed by Nasir Mazhar and her creative team Haus of Gaga . Described by Gaga as a " fashion installation " , it consisted of concentric metallic rings that revolved around her . After finishing her performance of " LoveGame " , Gaga sat at her piano and played an acoustic version of the chorus of " Bad Romance " . She performed the song on the TV show Gossip Girl , during the episode called " The Last Days of Disco Stick " . The performance took place at a private show arranged by Blair Waldorf , one of the characters from Gossip Girl . In an interview with MTV , Gaga explained that the decision to perform on the show was inspired by her sister . She stated that she did not want the performance to be out of tune with the storyline of the show , so she worked with the scriptwriters to incorporate it into the plot . The performance included many ladders , symbolizing bad luck , and featured Gaga wearing a 35 @-@ foot ( 11 m ) long dress . According to the show 's executive producer Stephanie Savage , the song incorporated a few Gossip Girl @-@ specific lyrics . The performance began with Gaga emerging from two giant doors wearing a large red gown . She climbed up a ladder , from where she sang parts of the song , and her male dancers danced around the ladder as she continued to sing . 
 " Bad Romance " was also performed at the 2009 American Music Awards , where she coupled it with " Speechless " from The Fame Monster . Gaga was dressed in a flesh @-@ colored bodysuit wrapped with white piping and embedded with flashing lights , imitating ribs and a spine . The performance started with " Bad Romance " , with Gaga dancing around the stage and ultimately breaking open a glass door with the microphone stand . It was performed on The Jay Leno Show , where Gaga wore a pair of black sunglasses and a black jacket with shoulder pads that extended above her head . Her male back @-@ up dancers were dressed in black suits and S & M @-@ inspired headgear . Both " Bad Romance " and " Speechless " were performed on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on November 25 , 2009 . Gaga performed " Bad Romance " on the British TV show The X Factor on December 6 , 2009 . The performance there had her singing inside a 4 @-@ m long bathtub and playing the piano while sitting on a toilet . " Bad Romance " was performed as the last song of Gaga 's The Monster Ball Tour . Wearing an 1980s @-@ inspired white power suit with exaggerated high shoulders and high @-@ waisted pants , she performed the song while standing in a human @-@ sized gyroscope . On January 15 , 2010 , Gaga performed " Bad Romance " as part of a three @-@ song medley on The Oprah Winfrey Show . Gaga was dressed in a metallic jacket and had spikes in her hair , and she carried a spiked ball dangling from a chain held in her hand . " Bad Romance " was also performed at NBC 's Today Show , along with " Alejandro " , " Teeth " and her later 2011 single called " You and I " . In May 2011 , Gaga performed the song during Radio 1 's Big Weekend in Carlisle , Cumbria . 
 She also performed the song on Good Morning America as a part of their " Summer Concert Series " . It was the opening song of the show . Gaga entered the stage flying on a harness and stretching out her hands towards the audience , as steam billowed from center @-@ stage . Once the song started her dancers removed the white cape she was wearing , to reveal her in red fishnet stockings with black felt pieces , a red leotard and black lace boots . The song was added to the set list for Gaga 's 2012 Born This Way Ball . It was performed after an interlude by Mother <unk> The performance featured the original choreography , with Gaga wearing a white , ram @-@ style outfit designed by Haus of Gaga . During the European leg of the tour , Gaga began the performance in an egg @-@ shaped container reminiscent of the one that she emerged from at the 53rd Grammy Awards . In 2014 , Gaga performed the song on her ArtRave : The Artpop Ball tour , in a neon anime inspired dress . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 On March 14 , 2010 , Marco <unk> from Nightwish covered the song on the Finnish choir @-@ singing TV show <unk> . Hayley Williams , the lead singer from the band Paramore , covered a piano version of the song and posted it on her Twitter page on March 28 , 2010 . On March 29 , 2010 , Thirty Seconds to Mars covered the song in BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge . The cover was later released as a bonus track on the deluxe edition of the band 's album This Is War and reached number 11 on the UK Rock Chart . Glee performed it during one of its episodes titled " Theatricality " , as a group number for which the actors donned Lady Gaga outfits . When glee club New Directions member Rachel Berry discovers that rival glee club Vocal Adrenaline are planning to perform a Lady Gaga number at Regionals , the character Will ( Matthew Morrison ) sets the club a Gaga assignment . The girls and Kurt then create costumes inspired by Gaga and perform " Bad Romance " . The version sold 48 @,@ 000 digital downloads according to Nielsen Soundscan , and entered the Billboard Hot 100 at 54 , staying on the chart for one week . 
 Singer <unk> posted a cover of the song on YouTube . Her version of " Bad Romance " received praise from filmmaker David Lynch and The Washington Post writer David Malitz , who included it on " Click Track – Singles Files " , the newspaper 's weekly playlist . The <unk> Orchestra also covered the song , with Dutch singer Caro Emerald , on June 1 , 2011 . This was included as a bonus track on Caro 's debut album , Deleted Scenes from the Cutting Room Floor , and has received many positive criticisms . Singer Lulu and actor Cuba Gooding , Jr. performed a version of " Bad Romance " as a duet during the August 5 , 2011 episode of Chris Moyles ' Quiz Night on Channel 4 in the UK . The song was covered with lyric changes by Alvin and the Chipmunks and The Chipettes in the 2011 film Alvin and the Chipmunks : Chipwrecked and features on its soundtrack . At the 46th Annual Songwriters Hall of Fame Awards , Linda Perry sang the song in a slowed down rendition , before Tony Bennett present the Contemporary Icon Award to Gaga . In 2015 , actress Meryl Streep recorded the song for her film , Ricki and the Flash . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording and management 
 Recorded at Record Plant Studios ( Los Angeles , California ) and FC Walvisch ( Amsterdam ) 
 Mastered at Oasis Mastering ( Burbank , California ) 
 Published by Sony ATV Songs , LLC , RedOne Productions LLC ( BMI ) , Stefani Germanotta P / K / A Lady Gaga ( BMI ) , House Of Gaga Publishing Inc. and <unk> Music Inc . ( BMI ) 
 Personnel 
 Lady Gaga – lead vocals , songwriter , co @-@ producer , vocal arrangement , background vocals 
 RedOne – songwriter , producer , vocal editing , vocal arrangement , background vocals , audio engineering , instrumentation , programming , recording 
 Johny Severin – vocal editing 
 Dave Russell – audio engineering 
 <unk> Bakker – audio engineering 
 Mark " Spike " Stent – audio mixing 
 Gene Grimaldi – audio mastering 
 Credits adapted from The Fame Monster album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 Since May 9 , 2013 , RIAA certifications for digital singles include on @-@ demand audio and / or video song streams in addition to downloads , resulting in the 11 × Platinum certification for the track . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = McMaster University = 
 McMaster University ( commonly referred to as McMaster or Mac ) is a public research university located in Hamilton , Ontario , Canada . The main campus is located on 121 hectares ( 300 acres ) of land near the residential neighbourhoods of Ainslie Wood and Westdale , adjacent to Hamilton 's Royal Botanical Gardens . The university operates six academic faculties : the DeGroote School of Business , Engineering , Health Sciences , Humanities , Social Science , and Science . It is a member of the U15 , a group of research @-@ intensive universities in Canada . The university bears the name of Honourable William McMaster , a prominent Canadian Senator and banker who bequeathed C $ 900 @,@ 000 to the founding of the university . McMaster University was incorporated under the terms of an act of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario in 1887 , merging the Toronto Baptist College with Woodstock College . It opened in Toronto in 1890 . Inadequate facilities and the gift of land in Hamilton prompted the institution to relocate in 1930 . McMaster was controlled by the Baptist Convention of Ontario and Quebec until it became a privately chartered , publicly funded non @-@ denominational institution in 1957 . 
 The university is co @-@ educational , and has over 25 @,@ 000 undergraduate and over 4 @,@ 000 post @-@ graduate students . Alumni and former students of the university can be found all across Canada and in 140 countries around the world . Notable alumni include government officials , academics , business leaders and two Nobel laureates . The university ranked 4th among Canadian universities and 94th in the world according to the 2015 @-@ 2016 Times Higher Education World University Rankings , 4th among Canadian universities and 96th in the world according to the 2015 Academic Ranking of World Universities , and 6th among Canadian universities and 149th in the world according to the 2014 QS World University Rankings . McMaster University is particularly well known for its medical school , which was recently ranked 25th in the world and 3rd in Canada by the Times Higher Education World University Subject Rankings in 2015 . The McMaster athletic teams are known as the Marauders , and are members of the Canadian Interuniversity Sport . 
 = = History = = 
 McMaster University resulted from the outgrowth of educational initiatives undertaken by Baptists as early as the 1830s . It was founded in 1881 as Toronto Baptist College . Canadian Senator William McMaster , the first president of the Canadian Bank of Commerce , bequeathed funds to endow a university , which was incorporated through a merger of Toronto Baptist College and Woodstock College , Woodstock , Ontario . In 1887 the Act to unite Toronto Baptist College and Woodstock College was granted royal assent , and McMaster University was officially incorporated . Woodstock College , Woodstock , and Moulton Ladies ' College , Toronto , were maintained in close connection . 
 The new university , housed in McMaster Hall in Toronto , was sponsored by the Baptist Convention of Ontario and Quebec as a sectarian undergraduate institution for its clergy and adherents . The first courses — initially limited to arts and theology leading to a BA degree — were taught in 1890 , and the first degrees were conferred in 1894 . 
 As the university grew , McMaster Hall started to become overcrowded . The suggestion to move the university to Hamilton was first brought up by a student and Hamilton native in 1909 , although the proposal was not seriously considered by the university until two years later . By the 1920s , after previous proposals between various university staff , the Hamilton Chamber of Commerce launched a campaign to bring McMaster University to Hamilton . As the issue of space at McMaster Hall became more acute , the university administration debated the future of the university . The university nearly became federated with the University of Toronto , as had been the case with Trinity College and Victoria College . Instead , in 1927 , the university administration decided to transfer the university to Hamilton . The Baptist Convention of Ontario and Quebec secured $ 1 @.@ 5 million , while the citizens of Hamilton raised an additional $ 500 @,@ 000 to help finance the move . The lands for the university and new buildings were secured through gifts from graduates . Lands were transferred from Royal Botanical Gardens to establish the campus area . The first academic session on the new Hamilton campus began in 1930 . McMaster 's property in Toronto was sold to the University of Toronto when McMaster moved to Hamilton in 1930 . McMaster Hall is now home to the Royal Conservatory of Music . 
 Professional programs during the interwar period were limited to just theology and nursing . By the 1940s the McMaster administration was under pressure to modernize and expand the university 's programs . During the Second World War and post @-@ war periods the demand for technological expertise , particularly in the sciences , increased . This problem placed a strain on the finances of what was still a denominational Baptist institution . In particular , the institution could no longer secure sufficient funds from denominational sources alone to sustain science research . Since denominational institutions could not receive public funds , the Baptist Convention of Ontario and Quebec decided to reorganize the university , creating two federated colleges . The arts and divinity programs were reconstituted as University College and science was reorganized under the newly incorporated Hamilton College as a separate division capable of receiving provincial grants . Hamilton College was incorporated in 1948 by letters patent under The Companies Act , although it remained only affiliated with the university . The University traditionally focused on undergraduate studies , and did not offer a PhD program until 1949 . 
 Through the 1950s increased funding advanced the place of sciences within the institution . In 1950 , the university had completed the construction of three academic buildings for the sciences , all designed by local architect William Russell Souter . Public funding was eventually necessary to ensure the humanities and social sciences were given an equal place . Thus , in 1957 the University reorganized once again under The McMaster University Act , 1957 , dissolving the two colleges . Its property was vested to McMaster and the university became a nondenominational institution eligible for public funding . The historic Baptist connection was continued through McMaster Divinity College , a separately chartered affiliated college of the university . Also in 1957 , PhD programs were consolidated in a new Faculty of Graduate Studies . Construction of the McMaster Nuclear Reactor also began in 1957 , and was the first university @-@ based research reactor in the Commonwealth when it began operating in 1959 . 
 In 1965 , with the support of the Ontario government , the University established a medical school and teaching hospital , graduating its first class of physicians in 1972 . In 1968 the university was reorganized under an amended act of the McMaster Act into the Divisions of Arts , Science , and Health Sciences , each with its own Vice @-@ President , while the Divinity College continued under its existing arrangement . In 1974 the divisional structure of the university was dissolved and reorganized again under The McMaster University Act , 1976 and the vice @-@ presidents were replaced by a single Vice @-@ President ( Academic ) . The Faculties of Business , Engineering , Health Sciences , Humanities , Science , and Social Sciences were retained , each under the leadership of a dean . 
 = = Campus = = 
 McMaster University is situated in the city of Hamilton , Ontario , located in the Golden Horseshoe along the western end of Lake Ontario . The main campus is bordered to the north by Cootes Paradise , an extensive natural marshland , to the east and west by residential neighbourhoods , and to its south by Main Street West , a major transportation artery . Its northern boundaries are a popular destination for walkers who make use of the many trails that connect the campus to Royal Botanical Gardens . While the main campus is 152 @.@ 4 hectares ( 377 acres ) , the majority of the teaching facilities are centered within the core 12 @.@ 1 hectares ( 30 acres ) . In addition to its main campus in Hamilton , McMaster owns several other properties around Hamilton , as well as in Burlington , Kitchener , and St. Catharines , Ontario . 
 The university owns and manages 62 buildings , both on and off campus . The buildings at McMaster vary in age , with Hamilton Hall opening in 1926 , to the university 's new nuclear research facility , which opened in 2011 . Plans to construct a new academic building in 2013 , known as the Wilson Building for Studies in Humanities and Social Sciences , are underway after securing a substantial donation from the university 's chancellor , Lynton Wilson , as well as securing funding from the provincial government . McMaster main campus is divided up into three main areas : the Core Campus , North Campus and West Campus . The Core Campus is where the majority of the university 's academic , research and residential buildings are located while the North Campus is made up of the university 's athletic precinct and a small number of surface parking . The West Campus is the least developed area of the main campus , containing only a few buildings , surface parking , and undeveloped land . 
 = = = Academic facilities = = = 
 The university 's campus has gone through continuous development since 1928 . The main campus 's six original buildings are of neo @-@ Gothic architecture . They are now flanked by over fifty structures built predominantly during the boom in the 1950s , 1960s and during the 2000s . The largest facility is the McMaster University Medical Centre , a multi @-@ use research hospital that is home to the second @-@ largest neonatal intensive care unit and the third @-@ largest child and youth mental health unit in the country . It is connected to the Life Sciences building and the Michael DeGroote Centre for Learning & Discovery , which houses many well @-@ funded research groups in areas of genetics , infectious diseases , and several specific conditions . 
 The McMaster Nuclear Reactor ( MNR ) has been the largest university reactor in the Commonwealth since it began operation and is the second largest research reactor in North America . It is a " pool @-@ type " reactor with a core of enriched uranium fuel moderated and cooled by distilled water . While the MNR 's primary purpose is research and the production of medical isotopes , the MNR also serves students in nuclear engineering , medical and health physics , and other applied radiation sciences . The university provides a wide range of irradiation , laboratory , and holding facilities , which include a cyclotron , an accelerator , a small @-@ angle neutron @-@ scattering detector , and wide @-@ angle neutron scattering facilities . The cyclotron is used for the production of fluorine @-@ 18 , and is used for research purposes , particularly the development of novel molecular imaging agents . 
 = = = Library and museum = = = 
 The university 's library system is a member of 31 organizations , including the Association of Research Libraries . The university library system averages 2 @.@ 3 million patrons each year . The library 's resource expenditure on October 2013 was approximately $ 8 million , with 90 percent of the budget allocated to serial subscriptions , and 10 percent on hard copy acquisitions . The library system include four libraries housing 1 @,@ 240 @,@ 643 paper books and 2 @,@ 255 @,@ 053 total resources , including videos , maps , sound recordings , and microfilm . Mills Library houses the humanities and social sciences collections , with a wide range of print and digital resources . Innis Library houses content which supports the academic and research interests of the DeGroote School of Business . Thode Library houses academic material of various disciplines of science and engineering , while the Health Science Library houses books pertaining to medical sciences . The William Ready Division of Archives and Research Collections at McMaster University consist of papers of Canadian publishers ; British personalities and of Canadian literary figures such as Farley Mowat , Pierre Berton , Matt Cohen , Marian Engel . It includes the archives of Bertrand Russell , and of labour unions . 
 The McMaster Museum of Art 's ( MMA ) principal role is to support the academic mission of McMaster University and to contribute to the discourse on art in Canada . The museum has the highest attendance figures for a university @-@ affiliated museum in Canada , with 31 @,@ 400 visitors in 2012 . Established in 1967 , the museum houses and exhibits the university 's art collection . As of 2010 , that collection of 7 @,@ 230 pieces holds a total value of $ 98 million . The collection includes works by Gustave Courbet , Claude Monet , Camille Pissarro , Walter Sickert and Vincent van Gogh . The museum also boasts the most comprehensive collection of German expressionist and Weimar period prints in Canada . 
 = = = Housing and student facilities = = = 
 Currently McMaster has twelve smoke @-@ free student residences : Bates , Brandon , Edwards , Hedden , Les Prince , Mary E. Keyes , Matthews , McKay , Moulton , Wallingford , Whidden , and Woodstock Hall . McMaster 's student residences can accommodate 3 @,@ 685 students in total . The latest residence to be built was Les Prince Hall , a large co @-@ ed building , completed in 2006 . It was named for a long @-@ time hall master in the residence system who lived with his family on campus until after his retirement in 1980 . In September 2010 , 49 percent of first @-@ year students lived on campus , with 17 @.@ 1 percent of the overall undergraduate population living on campus . Residences provide traditional room and board style , furnished apartment style , and suite @-@ style accommodation . Brandon Hall houses the university 's substance @-@ free lifestyle living spaces . The residence system is supervised by Residence Life staff , who provide guidance and help the transition to university life for many first @-@ year students . Residence students are represented by the Inter @-@ Residence Council ( IRC ) , which aims to build a sense of community among the residents through programming . Additionally , the IRC seeks to advocate for all residence students on issues they may face , such as facilities , dining , environment , and more , and provide opportunities for residence students to gain valuable leadership opportunities . They are an integral part of the McMaster residence community . 
 The McMaster University Student Centre ( MUSC ) is the centre of student life and programming . It contains a café , study space , common areas , and a number of administrative departments , including the CIBC Conference Hall . The MUSC contains the offices of a number of student organizations , including the McMaster Students Union and The Silhouette weekly newspaper as well as other services such as the Campus Health Centre and the campus dentist . The university has over twenty dining outlets located throughout the campus , including two major residence dining facilities . The university has a number of vegetarian establishments , such as a completely vegetarian cafe known as Bridges Café and a farmers market stand . The university was voted as the country 's most vegan @-@ friendly university through People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) for a number of years . Several other dining outlets at McMaster have garnered a number of awards throughout the years for food services . 
 = = = Off @-@ campus facilities = = = 
 As of 2010 McMaster University 's DeGroote School of Business operates a 1 @.@ 82 @-@ hectare ( 4 @.@ 5 @-@ acre ) site in the neighbouring city of Burlington . Consideration for the new building began in 2004 , when McMaster University had announced its initial intent to construct a new <unk> and technology @-@ intensive campus in partnership with the city of Burlington . In 2009 , the City of Burlington , Halton Region , and McMaster University signed an official agreement laying out the timelines and next steps for the university 's expansion into Burlington . Construction began on 17 June 2009 , and the official opening was on 7 October 2010 . The four @-@ story , 90 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 8 @,@ 400 m2 ) building is called the Ron Joyce Centre . The Ron Joyce Centre is home to DeGroote 's MBA program and its business management program ( both degree and non @-@ degree programs ) . 
 McMaster has a number of administrative offices at its Downtown Centre , located in Hamilton in the former Wentworth County Courthouse . The centre is also home to the McMaster Centre for Continuing Education , which offers a variety of certificate and diploma programs as well as personal and professional development programs . McMaster had also announced that construction of the McMaster Downtown Health Campus in downtown Hamilton had begun in December 2012 . The Health Campus is expected to provide teaching spaces , exam rooms and clinical spaces for local residents . 
 The Michael G. DeGroote School of Medicine is located on the main campus as well as in two regional <unk> at St. Catharines and Kitchener . The Waterloo Regional Campus is located in downtown Kitchener , sharing facilities with the Health Sciences Campus of the University of Waterloo . The campus in St. Catharines is located at Brock University 's Niagara Health and Bioscience Research Complex . Approximately 30 medical students in each year of the program attend each campus . Those who apply to McMaster 's School of Medicine are asked to rank their site choice ( Hamilton , Niagara Region , Waterloo Region ) from first to third , or no preference . Offers of admission to the medical school are made from a rank list irrespective of geographical preference . Subsequent to an applicant 's acceptance , registrants to the class are placed based on their preference and geographical background . The offers given out by McMaster are bound to the assigned site . 
 McMaster purchased a large industrial park three kilometres east of its main Hamilton campus in 2005 with the intention of creating an array of research facilities for the development of advanced manufacturing and materials , biotechnology , automotive , and nanotechnology . In July 2005 the federal government announced that it would be relocating <unk> , a federal government materials research laboratory , from its Ottawa centre to Hamilton . This decision helped spearhead the development of the McMaster Innovation Park . The United Nations University @-@ International Network on Water , Environment and Health ( UNU @-@ <unk> ) is currently headquartered within the park . UNU @-@ <unk> is the only United Nations agency headquartered in Ontario and the only North American host site for a United Nations University , after moving to McMaster Innovation Park on 23 April 2008 . 
 = = = Sustainability = = = 
 The Office of Sustainability , created as the All @-@ modes Commuting & Transportation Office in 2002 , is charged with promoting sustainable operations and growth at the university . The Office of Sustainability , headed by the Manager of University Sustainability , works with various members of the university population , external community groups , and the government . Along with the other members of the Council of Ontario Universities , McMaster signed a pledge in 2009 known as Ontario Universities Committed to a Greener World , with the objective of transforming its campus into a model of environmental responsibility . On 21 October 2010 , the university signed two accords addressing the issue of climate change : the Talloires Declaration and the University and College Presidents ’ Climate Change Statement of Action for Canada . 
 The university campus received a B grade from the Sustainable Endowments Institute on its College Sustainability Report Card for 2011 . 
 = = Administration = = 
 The governance of the university is conducted through the Board of Governors and the Senate , both of which were established in the Act to unite Toronto Baptist College and Woodstock College in 1887 . The Board is responsible for the university 's conduct , management , and control of the university and of its property , revenues , business , and affairs . Ex officio governors of the Board include the university 's chancellor , president , and the chairman of the board @-@ senate committee on long @-@ range planning . The Board also consists of 34 other governors , either appointed or elected by the various members of the university 's community , including elected representatives from the student body . While The McMaster University Act , 1976 outlines that the board be only composed of 37 members , the Board also includes 12 honorary members , bringing the total number of governors to 51 . 
 The Senate is responsible for the university 's academics , including standards for admission into the university and qualifications for degrees , diplomas , and certificates . The Senate consists of 15 ex officio positions granted to the chancellor , the president , the vice @-@ presidents of the university , the senior dean of each faculty , the dean of graduate studies , the dean of adult education , the principal of McMaster Divinity College , and the Chairman of the Undergraduate Council . The Senate also consists of 51 other members , appointed or elected by the various communities of the university including elected representatives of the student body . Meetings of the Board of Governors and the Senate are open to the public . 
 The president acts as the chief executive officer of the university under the authority of the Board and the Senate , and supervises and directs the academic and administrative work of the university and of its teaching and non @-@ teaching staff . Patrick Deane is the seventh president of the university , serving the post since 1 July 2010 . The office was created in 1949 , with George Gilmour serving as the university 's first president . The office of the vice @-@ chancellor , created at the same time as the office of president , has always been held by the incumbent president of the university . 
 Programs , departments , and schools at McMaster are divided among six faculties . By enrolment , the two largest faculties is the Faculty of Sciences , with 6 @,@ 656 full @-@ time and part @-@ time undergraduate and graduate students , followed by the Faculty of Health Sciences , with 5 @,@ 409 full @-@ time and part @-@ time undergraduates and graduate students . The School of Graduate Studies serves as the central administrative unit of graduate education at the university . The School of Graduate Studies is not considered its own faculty . The Arts and Science program is taught jointly by the other faculties at McMaster . Created in 1981 , the program aims to provide a broad @-@ based , liberal education , providing substantial work in both the arts and sciences . 
 = = = Finances = = = 
 The total net assets owned by the university as of 30 April 2015 stands at $ 892 @.@ 7 million . The university had completed the 2014 – 2015 year with revenues of $ 990 @.@ 8 million , expenses of $ 912 @.@ 2 million and an excess of revenues over expenses of $ 78 @.@ 6 million . McMaster 's revenue comes from endowment income , gifts , fees , and annual grants from the City of Hamilton , the Hamilton @-@ Wentworth Region , the Province of Ontario , and the Government of Canada . The largest source of revenue is operating grants provided by the government , valued at nearly C $ 265 @.@ 2 million . As of 30 April 2014 , McMaster 's financial endowment was valued at C $ 655 @.@ 5 million . The financing of McMaster 's scholarships and bursaries takes up 40 per cent of the endowments received . Financial Services comprises the following areas : Student Accounts & <unk> , Financial Accounting and Reporting , and <unk> Services . 
 The university has been registered as an educational charitable organization in Canada since 1 January 1967 . As of 2011 , the university is registered primarily as a post @-@ secondary institution , with 70 percent of the charity dedicated to the management and maintenance of the university . The remaining 30 percent has been dedicated under research . 
 = = Academics = = 
 McMaster is a publicly funded research university , and a member of the Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada . McMaster functions on a semester system , operating year @-@ round on academic semesters , fall / winter and spring / summer . In the 2014 @-@ 2015 academic year , the university had an enrollment of 30 @,@ 117 , students : 24 @,@ 569 undergraduate students , 4 @,@ 348 graduate students . 
 Students may apply for financial aid such as the Ontario Student Assistance Program and Canada Student Loans and Grants through the federal and provincial governments . The financial aid provided may come in the form of loans , grants , bursaries , scholarships , fellowships , debt reduction , interest relief , and work programs . In 2012 @-@ 2013 , McMaster students received $ 86 @.@ 1 million in Canada @-@ Ontario Integrated Student Loans and $ 14 @.@ 9 million in grants , approximately $ 101 @.@ 1 million in total . 
 = = = McMaster Model = = = 
 The McMaster Model is the university 's policy for a student @-@ centred , problem @-@ based , interdisciplinary approach to learning , a policy which has been adopted by several other universities around the world . During the 1960s the McMaster University Medical School pioneered problem @-@ based learning ( PBL ) tutorials that have since been adopted by other programs and faculties within the university . PBL is now used in medicine , occupational therapy , physical therapy , nursing , midwifery , and other allied fields . Most medical schools in Canada and more than 80 percent of medical schools in the United States employ PBL in their curriculum , and many international universities do the same . 
 In 1991 , McMaster 's School of Medicine adopted progress testing , developing the personal progress index ( PPI ) , a system based on progress testing invented concurrently by the University of Missouri @-@ Kansas City 's medical school and the Maastricht University . The PPI is used as an objective method for assessing acquisition and retention of knowledge for students in the medical program . The PPI is administered at regular intervals to all students in the program , regardless of their level of training , and plots students ' scores as they move through the program . Students typically score 20 percent on their first examination , and increase by five to seven percent with each successive examination . Students can monitor the changes in their scores and receive formative feedback based on a standardized score relative to the class mean . Due to the overwhelming success and research supporting the use of the PPI as an evaluation tool , it is now used in Canada , US , Europe , and Australia . 
 = = = Reputation = = = 
 McMaster University has consistently been ranked one of Canada 's top universities . In the 2013 Academic Ranking of World Universities ( ARWU ) rankings , the university ranked 92nd in the world and fourth @-@ highest in Canada . The 2013 @-@ 2014 Times Higher Education World University Rankings placed McMaster 92nd in the world , and fourth in Canada . The 2014 QS World University Rankings ranked the university 113th in the world and sixth in Canada . In U.S. News & World Report 2014 global university rankings , the university placed 141st , and sixth in Canada . Newsweek had also ranked McMaster as the 15th top university outside of the United States , and the fourth best university in Canada . In terms of national rankings , Maclean 's ranked McMaster 5th in their 2015 overall reputation university rankings . McMaster was ranked in spite of having opted out — along with several other universities in Canada — of participating in Maclean 's graduate survey since 2006 . 
 McMaster 's Michael G. DeGroote School of Medicine has also gained notability . In the 2014 – 2015 Times Higher Education rankings of clinical , pre @-@ clinical , and health universities , McMaster 's medical school ranked 25th in the world and third in Canada . The 2015 QS World University Rankings had ranked the medical program at McMaster 33rd in the world , and fourth in Canada . In the ARWU 2014 rankings for the field of clinical medicine and pharmacy , the university had placed 45th in the world and third in Canada . In U.S. News & World Report 2014 rankings for clinical medicine , the university placed 45th in the world , and fourth in Canada . According to a 2013 Maclean 's survey with first @-@ year medical students who obtained a Canadian undergraduate degree , 10 @.@ 5 percent of these students attended McMaster for their undergraduate education , the most out of any undergraduate institution in the country . 
 McMaster was also ranked in a number of ARWU rankings based on academic fields . The university was ranked 41st in the ARWU 2013 in the field of social sciences , the second @-@ highest in the country . In the U.S. News & World Report 2014 rankings for social sciences and public health , the university placed 67th in the world , and fourth in Canada. on In the same 2013 ARWU rankings , the university had ranked 101 – 150th in the field of natural science and mathematics . In an employability survey published by the New York Times in October 2011 , when CEOs and <unk> were asked to select the top universities which they recruited from , McMaster placed 61st in the world , and fourth in Canada . Another global employability survey by Times Higher Education was conducted in 2015 . In the 2015 Times Global Employability University Ranking , McMaster was placed 86th in the world , and fifth in Canada . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 In Research Infosource 's Decade in Review , McMaster was designated as the top Canadian performer in university research income growth from 1999 to 2009 in the medical doctoral category and as the second @-@ top performer in research intensity growth for the same period . With a total sponsored research income of $ 325 @.@ 156 million , McMaster has the sixth largest sponsored research income in the country . With an average research income of C $ 239 @.@ 4 per full @-@ time faculty member , McMaster is also the second most research intensive full @-@ service university in the country . In 2004 McMaster earned the designation of research university of the year based on its ability to attract and capitalize on its research income . Its research activities exceed those of universities twice its size . The federal government is the largest source of funding , providing 54 percent of McMaster 's research budget , primarily through grants . Corporations contribute around 13 percent of the overall research budget . 
 In terms of research performance , High Impact Universities 2010 ranked McMaster 62nd out of 500 universities , and fourth in Canada . The university was ranked 25th out of 500 universities — second in the country — for research performance in the fields of medicine , dentistry , pharmacology , and health sciences . The university was ranked 83rd out of 500 universities , ranking third nationally , for research performance in the fields of engineering , computing , and technology . In the fields of arts , humanities , business , and social sciences , the university 's research performance was ranked 60th out of 500 universities , the third highest nationally . In 2012 , the Higher Education Strategy Associates , another organization which also ranks universities on the basis of their research strength , ranked McMaster tenth nationally in the field of science and engineering and seventh nationally in the field of social sciences and humanities . The Higher Education Evaluation and Accreditation Council of Taiwan ( HEEACT ) , an organization which also evaluates universities based on their scientific paper 's performances , ranked McMaster 54th in the world and fourth nationally for in social sciences in its 2011 rankings . HEEACT placed McMaster 95th in the world and fifth nationally for its overall research performance . 
 McMaster has received accolades for its research strengths , particularly in the field of health sciences . For five years in a row , McMaster has ranked second in for biomedical and health care research revenues by the Association of Faculties of Medicine of Canada . In 2008 – 2009 , Faculty investigators were overseeing $ 133 million a year in research , much of that research conducted by scientists and physicians who teach in the medical school . For its 2011 rankings , HEEACT ranked McMaster 35th in the world and third on a national scale for scientific papers in clinical medicine . The Faculty of Health Sciences operates several research institutes , including the Farncombe Family Digestive Health Research Institute , the DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research , and the Stem Cell and Cancer Research Institute . A McMaster research group led by David Sackett and later Gordon Guyatt had been largely credited for largely establishing the methodologies used in evidence @-@ based medicine . Guyatt had also been credited for coining the term evidence @-@ based medicine in 1990 . In November 2010 , researchers at the Stem Cell and Cancer Research Institute turned clumps of human skin into blood cells , which may help alleviate the shortage of blood donors . A portion of Albert Einstein 's brain is preserved and held for medical research at the McMaster brain bank . Researchers there have identified differences in his brain that may relate to his genius for spatial and mathematical thinking . 
 The Brockhouse Institute for Material Research ( BIMR ) is located at McMaster . Created in 1960 by Howard Petch , the institute was named after McMaster alumnus Bertram Brockhouse . The BIMR is an interdisciplinary research organization with the mandate to develop , support , and co @-@ ordinate all materials research related activities at McMaster . Its membership of 123 faculty members is drawn from 13 departments in the Faculties of Science , Engineering , and Health Sciences , as well as several Canadian and international universities . Facilities of the BIMR include the Canadian Centre for Electron Microscopy , Centre for Crystal Growth , McMaster Analytical <unk> Facility , Electronic and Magnetic Characterization Facility , and the <unk> Research Laboratories . The Canadian Centre for Electron Microscopy is home to the world 's most advanced microscope . The Titan 80 – 300 cubed microscope has a magnification of 14 million and is used for material , medical , and nanotechnology research . 
 The university also operates the McMaster Nuclear Reactor , which has been used for nuclear science and engineering research since 1959 . The strength of nuclear science at McMaster was augmented in 1968 under the presidency of Dr. H.G. Thode by the construction of a <unk> Model FN Tandem particle accelerator . The <unk> Model KN single @-@ ended accelerator was added the same year . The academic direction of the laboratory fell to the Physics Department in the early days , as it was primarily a nuclear structure laboratory . During the next 28 years , the nuclear research effort was extensive , with hundreds of graduate students trained and many publications generated . The reactor at McMaster produces 25 percent of the world 's supply of iodine @-@ 125 , an isotope used in nuclear medicine to treat prostate cancer . The production of molybdenum @-@ 99 at the National Research Universal Reactor ( <unk> ) has also been occasionally moved to the university 's reactor , during the 1970 and 2009 shutdown of the <unk> . McMaster University 's <unk> @-@ 2 non @-@ power reactor operating licence is valid until June 30 , 2014 . The <unk> reactor is used for research and education , commercial applications such as neutron radiography , and medical radioisotope production ; Iodine @-@ 125 is used in cancer therapy . 
 = = = Admissions = = = 
 The requirements for admission differ between students from Ontario , other provinces in Canada , and international students due to the lack of uniformity in marking schemes . The acceptance rate at McMaster for full @-@ time , first @-@ year applications in fall 2013 was 58 @.@ 7 percent . In September 2012 , the secondary school average for full @-@ time first @-@ year students at McMaster University was 86 @.@ 9 percent . Students entering McMaster 's more selective undergraduate programs , including the Bachelor of Health Sciences program and the Arts and Science program , had a secondary school average of 95 @.@ 8 percent . The Bachelor of Health Sciences program at McMaster was also ranked the most competitive undergraduate program in Canada with a 4 @.@ 5 % acceptance rate by Yahoo ! Finance in 2016 . McMaster received 27 @,@ 102 applicants in the 2012 academic year . McMaster 's medical school is the most competitive medical program in Canada by application numbers , with more than 5 @,@ 200 applicants competing for 204 positions , an acceptance rate of 3 @.@ 9 % . 
 The Michael DeGroote School of Medicine has notably developed admission tests that has since become adopted by other <unk> is In 2001 , they developed the multiple @-@ mini interview in an effort to address long @-@ standing concerns over standard panel interviews ; viewed as poor reflectors for medical school performance . This format uses short , independent assessments in a timed circuit to obtain aggregate scores in interpersonal skills , professionalism , ethical / moral judgment , and critical thinking to assess candidates . The multiple @-@ mini interview has consistently shown to have a higher predictive validity for future performance than traditional interviews . The multiple @-@ mini interview process has since been adopted by the majority of Canadian medical schools , as well as a number of medical schools in the United States . In 2010 , the medical school developed the Computer @-@ based Assessment for Sampling Personal Characteristics , in order to better assess the personal characteristics of the applicant . A number of other medical schools have since adopted the <unk> test , including New York Medical College , Robert Wood Johnson Medical School , and the University of Ottawa Faculty of Medicine . 
 = = Student life = = 
 In the 2012 @-@ 2013 academic year , the university had an enrollment of 29 @,@ 411 students : 25 @,@ 174 undergraduate students , 4 @,@ 237 graduate students . The student body is largely made up of Ontario residents , making up 89 @.@ 3 percent of the student population . International and out @-@ of @-@ province students represented , respectively , 7 @.@ 5 percent , and 3 @.@ 2 percent . Students come from all 10 Canadian provinces , two Canadian territories and 87 countries . Full @-@ time students make up about 87 percent of the student body . Among full @-@ time students , the university has a first @-@ time student retention rate of 88 @.@ 7 percent . 
 = = = Student groups = = = 
 The main student unions on administrative and policy issues are the McMaster Students Union for full @-@ time undergraduates , the McMaster Association of Part @-@ Time Students for part @-@ time undergraduates , and the McMaster Graduate Students Association for postgraduates . In addition , each faculty has its own student representative body . Students within the residence are represented by the Inter @-@ Residence Council . There are more than 200 student organizations and clubs , covering a wide range of interests such as academics , culture , religion , social issues , and recreation . Many of them are centred on the McMaster student activity centre , the McMaster University Student Centre . The Silhouette , the student @-@ run newspaper , is the oldest student service at McMaster University , in publication since 1929 . Since 1968 , the McMaster Engineering Society has published The <unk> , the main satire magazine of McMaster University . The campus radio station <unk> @-@ FM ( 93 @.@ 3 FM ) is Canada ’ s second @-@ oldest campus radio station , and has been broadcasting since 1978 . <unk> , a popular online student @-@ run forum and information network , has been operating since 2007 and has over 18 @,@ 000 registered members . The McMaster Marching Band , created in September 2009 , is a brass , reed and percussion marching band composed of 45 graduate and undergraduate students as well as members of the surrounding community who wish to participate . 
 The university hosts a number of honour societies , including the McMaster Honour Society and a chapter of the Golden Key International Honour Society . The university is home to two semi @-@ professional acting companies , McMaster Musical Theatre and the McMaster Thespian Company . The McMaster Engineering Musical is an annual musical production that is written , directed , and cast by engineers . The production often features unique interpretations of popular songs or musicals . The university and the student unions do not recognize any fraternity or sororities ; existing chapters operate as non @-@ accredited off @-@ campus organizations . Five fraternities currently operate an active chapter at the university ; Pi Kappa Alpha , Omega Psi Phi , Lambda Phi Epsilon , Alpha Epsilon Pi and Phi Delta Theta and six Sororities including Tau Sigma Phi , Alpha Pi Phi , Epsilon Sigma Alpha , Delta Pi , Nu Omega Zeta , and Delta Psi Delta . 
 = = = Athletics = = = 
 Athletics at McMaster is managed by the university 's student affairs , under their athletics and recreation department . The university 's varsity teams compete in the Ontario University Athletics conference of the Canadian Interuniversity Sport . The university 's team sports programs include baseball , basketball , football , lacrosse , rugby , soccer , swimming , volleyball , and water polo . The first major sport game played at McMaster was in 1889 , when a group of alumni from Toronto Baptist College and Woodstock College played an exhibition game against one another , sparking an early intercity rivalry between McMaster students . In 1897 the university placed all physical activity and sports under the jurisdiction of a central executive committee . The varsity teams have been known as the McMaster Marauders since 1948 , through a contest run by the student newspaper , The Silhouette , to name the university 's men 's basketball team . 
 The Marauders have won 11 national championships and 139 provincial champions since 1961 . The men 's water polo team has won the Ontario University Athletics championship 25 times , making it the Marauders ' most successful team at the provincial level . The men 's wrestling team has been the Marauders ' most successful team at the national level , winning the Canadian Interuniversity Sport championship four times . McMaster University has graduated 34 Olympic athletes , eight Olympic coaches , two Olympic administrators and two Olympic officials . As is mandatory for all members of Canadian Interuniversity Sport , McMaster University does not provide full @-@ ride athletic scholarships . 
 The university 's sports facilities are located in the northeast corner of the main campus . The university has a number of sports facilities , including the David Braley Athletic Centre and the Ron Joyce Stadium . Ron Joyce Stadium includes a full @-@ sized Canadian football field and FIFA @-@ sized soccer pitch . The stadium features permanent seating for 6 @,@ 000 and temporary seating for an additional 6 @,@ 000 on the other side of the field when needed . Ron Joyce Stadium is not only used by the university 's football and soccer varsity teams it is also used as the training camp for the Hamilton Tiger @-@ Cats of the Canadian Football League and as the home stadium for the Hamilton Nationals of Major League Lacrosse . 
 Intramural sport leagues and tournaments have a high level of participation at McMaster . Opportunities are offered at multiple skill levels and across a variety of sports to service a range of interest and ability . Sports offered include traditional sports like volleyball , basketball , soccer and cricket , as well as less traditional events like dodgeball , inner tube water polo , and extreme potato sack racing . 
 = = <unk> and other representations = = 
 McMaster uses a number of symbols to represent the institution , with the university 's Office of Public Relations managing the university 's visual identity . The university 's present visual identity , and logo was approved by the University Senate in 1997 . Other symbols utilized by the university includes a flag , unveiled on the 29 September 2015 , as well as a ceremonial mace . The university mace was bequeathed in 1950 from the graduating class of 1900 . Used in ceremonies such as convocation , the mace symbolizes the authority of the University Senate to confer degrees . The university also uses several tag lines as a part of its overall branding effort . As of 2007 , the branding tag line used by the university is " Learning Without Borders , " although the previous tag line , " Inspire , Innovation , and Discovery , " is still used to a limited extent . 
 In addition to the visual representations of the institution , the university 's individual departments , faculties , and schools also employ symbols to visually represent them . One such example is the Faculty of Engineering 's fireball emblem , adopted by the faculty in 1960 . The fireball was adopted from the coat of arms of the defunct Hamilton College . Hamilton College was a science @-@ based college affiliated with McMaster prior to its dissolution in 1957 , when the rest of the university was reorganized . 
 = = = Motto and songs = = = 
 The university 's motto , chosen from Colossians 1 : 17 , is <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> . The motto , adopted in 1888 , is Greek for " In Christ all things consist " . The McMaster motto is unusual in that it employs Greek instead of Latin or English . The use of Latin reflects the origin of universities in mediaeval institutions in which Latin was more prominent than Greek . McMaster 's founders desired to go back beyond the Middle Ages to the earliest days of the Christian faith , and therefore used the Greek form . 
 Notable among a number of songs commonly played and sung at various events such as commencement and convocation , and athletic games are : The Alma Mater Song ( 1935 ) , with words by Mrs. A.A. Burridge and music by Hugh <unk> ; The McMaster March , with words by Claire Senior Burke et al . , and music by Arthur Burridge ; and My Mac ( 1982 ) , with words and music by Fred Moyes . 
 = = = Coat of arms = = = 
 After the university moved to Hamilton in 1930 , the university petitioned Lord Lyon King of Arms in Edinburgh for a coat of arms . The request was granted on behalf of The Crown on 20 October 1930 . In 1997 the Board of Governors introduced a simplified shield design , which recognized the tradition of McMaster ’ s heraldry while improving the quality of print and electronic reproduction . The university 's arms and badge was registered with the Canadian Heraldic Authority on 15 October 2006 . 
 The coat of arms consists of a shield , a crest , and a motto , together with a helmet . The shield contains an eagle , symbolic of the heavenly vision , with a cross on its breast to indicate Christianity as the inspiration for the university 's vision . The chief of the shield bears an open book , a common symbol of learning , with a maple leaf on each side , signifying that McMaster 's charter was granted by the Province of Ontario . The helmet , above the shield , has the open visor and forward @-@ facing style typically used by universities . The mantling surrounding the shield and helmet represents the cloak worn over a knight 's armour as protection from the sun . The crest , located above the helmet , is a stag and oak tree , which serves as a tribute to the Canadian Senator , William McMaster , who also used a stag and oak on his insignias . The motto is located above the crest , as is common in Scottish heraldry . 
 = = Notable alumni and faculty = = 
 As of November 2010 , McMaster University has over 140 @,@ 000 alumni residing over 140 countries . Throughout McMaster 's history , faculty , alumni , and former students have played prominent roles in many fields , accumulating a number of awards including Nobel prizes , Rhodes scholarships and the Lasker Award . Nobel Prize winners include alumnus Myron Scholes , who was awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1997 ; faculty member Bertram Brockhouse , who was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1994 ; and alumnus James <unk> , who accepted the Nobel Peace Prize in 1992 on behalf of Doctors Without Borders . 
 Prominent alumni in the field of science include Douglas L. Coleman , who discovered leptin . Notable faculty members in the field of social sciences Henry Giroux , one of the founding theorists of critical pedagogy . A prominent alumnus in the field of social sciences was Harold Innis , who helped shape communication theory and the staples thesis . Other academics and educators who graduated from McMaster include Robert C. <unk> , president of the University of California system ; Heather Munroe @-@ Blum , principal of McGill University ; Howard Petch , president of the University of Waterloo and University of Victoria ; David Chadwick Smith , principal of Queen 's University ; and Mark Wainwright , president of the University of New South Wales . 
 Many former students have gained local , national and international prominence for serving in government . Croatian Prime Minister , Tihomir Orešković was an alumnus of the university . Lincoln Alexander served as Lieutenant Governor of Ontario , also becoming the first visible @-@ minority Lieutenant Governor in Canada . Two premiers from Canada , the former premier of Ontario , Dalton McGuinty , and the former premier of Saskatchewan , Tommy Douglas , were graduates of McMaster University . Many graduates have also served as Members of Parliament in the Canadian House of Commons , including , Tony Valeri , the Government House Leader ; and Lawrence Pennell , the Solicitor General of Canada . Roy Kellock , a Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada was a graduate from the university . Charles Aubrey Eaton , one of the signers of the original United Nations Charter and a member of the United States House of Representatives , was also a graduate . 
 A significant number of prominent business leaders have studied at McMaster . Examples include David Braley , owner of the Toronto Argonauts and BC Lions of the Canadian Football League ; Stephen <unk> , former president and CEO of Nokia ; Cyrus S. Eaton , founder of Republic Steel ; Paul D. House , current executive chairman of Tim Hortons ; Lynton Wilson , chairman of Bell Canada , CAE Inc . , and Nortel ; Michael Lee @-@ Chin , current chairman , CEO of AIC Limited ; , and Rob Burgess , former chairman and CEO of Macromedia . 
 A number of McMaster alumni had also had successful sports careers , including Syl Apps of the Toronto Maple Leafs ; and NHL coach Roger Neilson . The university has had 34 of its graduates compete in the Olympic games , including Olympic medalists Larry Cain ; Adam van <unk> ; and Mark <unk> . McMaster faculty member Norman Lane was also an Olympic medalist . Several alumni of the university have also become prominent in the entertainment industry , including comedians , actors and directors . Such alumni include Eugene Levy ; Martin Short ; Jonathan <unk> ; Ivan Reitman ; Dave Thomas ; and John Candy . Two members of McMaster had travelled in space ; faculty member Dafydd Williams , and alumna Roberta Bondar , the first Canadian woman in space . 
 = FC Porto in international club football = 
 Futebol Clube do Porto , an association football club based in Porto , is the most successful Portuguese team in international club competitions . They have won a total of seven official international titles , which include two UEFA Champions League ( in 1987 , as the European Cup , and 2004 ) , two UEFA Europa League ( in 2003 , as the UEFA Cup , and 2011 ) , one UEFA Super Cup ( in 1987 ) , and two Intercontinental Cup ( in 1987 and 2004 ) trophies . In addition , the club was a Cup Winners ' Cup runner @-@ up in 1984 – its first European final – and took part unsuccessfully in three other UEFA Super Cup matches , in 2003 , 2004 , and 2011 . 
 Porto first participated in international competitions in 1956 , when they qualified for the second season of the European Cup as domestic league winners . They lost their first two European matches against Athletic Bilbao and were eliminated from the competition . Porto then debuted in the non @-@ UEFA affiliated Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup in 1962 – 63 , in the Cup Winners ' Cup in 1964 – 65 , and in the inaugural editions of the UEFA Cup ( Fairs Cup successor ) and UEFA Champions League ( European Cup successor ) in 1971 – 72 and 1992 – 93 , respectively . The club has qualified for UEFA competitions every year since 1974 , and has 20 appearances in the UEFA Champions League group stage – a competition record shared with Barcelona , Manchester United , and Real Madrid . 
 Until their 1986 – 87 European Cup success , Porto were the only of Portugal 's " Big Three " teams without an international trophy – Benfica had won two consecutive European Cup titles in 1961 and 1962 , and Sporting were Cup Winners ' Cup victors in 1964 . As European Cup winners , Porto contested the UEFA Super Cup and the Intercontinental Cup , lifting both trophies in their first appearance . To this date , they remain the only Portuguese team to have won either of these competitions . As of the end of the 2014 – 15 season , Porto occupies the ninth place in both the all @-@ time European Cup and UEFA Champions League club rankings , and are the second @-@ best Portuguese team in the UEFA club ranking . 
 Tomislav Ivić and José Mourinho are Porto 's most successful coaches , each with two international titles . Former Portuguese international goalkeeper Vítor <unk> holds the club record for the most appearances in international competitions ( 99 ) , while Colombian striker Radamel Falcao is the club 's top goalscorer , with 22 goals . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early decades ( 1956 – 77 ) = = = 
 Porto first participated in international club competitions in 1956 , when they took part in the second edition of the European Cup . Qualification for this competition – contested between Europe 's national champions – was achieved after Porto secured their fourth Primeira Divisão title in the previous season . Their debut was in a preliminary round tie against Spanish champions Atlético Bilbao . At their new home ground , the Estádio das Antas , Porto lost the first match 2 – 1 and were eliminated a week later in Bilbao , after a 3 – 2 defeat . Porto returned to this tournament two years later but fell at the same stage . After three seasons without qualifying for European competitions , Porto finished the 1961 – 62 league as runners @-@ up and entered the non @-@ UEFA @-@ affiliated Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup for the first time in 1962 – 63 . They were knocked out in the first round by Dinamo Zagreb , who secured a draw in Yugoslavia after winning in Portugal . Porto returned to the Fairs Cup in the following season , but failed to advance past the first round . 
 The Cup Winners ' Cup was a UEFA competition open to domestic cup winners ( or losing finalists , if the winners had already qualified for the European Cup ) . Porto qualified for this tournament for the first time in 1964 – 65 , after losing the 1964 Portuguese Cup final against champions Benfica . Porto progressed from the first round of a European competition for the first time , after a 4 – 0 aggregate victory over French Cup winners Lyon , but fell in the next round to 1860 Munich . At the end of that season , Porto finished runners @-@ up to Benfica in the league and qualified for the following season 's Fairs Cup . The club 's performance was similar to that of the previous campaign : a first @-@ round elimination of a French team ( Stade Français ) followed by a second @-@ round loss to a German team ( Hannover 96 ) , which included a 5 – 0 away defeat that was , at the time , Porto 's heaviest in Europe . They took part in the Fairs Cup in the following two seasons , but could not progress beyond the first round . In the first case , Porto were eliminated by the flip of a coin , after extra @-@ time was not enough to break the deadlock with Bordeaux . 
 In 1968 , the club won their third Portuguese Cup and qualified for the 1968 – 69 Cup Winners ' Cup . As in previous years , they were unable to get past the second round , losing 4 – 1 on aggregate to Slovan Bratislava . Porto 's last participation in the Fairs Cup , in 1969 – 70 , also ended in the second round , with a defeat against holders Newcastle United . Domestically , Porto finished the league in an all @-@ time low ninth place , thus failing to qualify for European competition in the 1970 – 71 season . They returned the following season to participate in the inaugural edition of the UEFA Cup , which officially replaced the Fairs Cup , but their debut against Nantes led to another premature exit . Porto returned to this tournament in four of the following five seasons , the exception being 1973 – 74 , when it failed qualification for European competitions . In the first of those seasons ( 1972 – 73 ) , Porto reached the third round of a European competition for the first time , but were eliminated by Dynamo Dresden . They beat Barcelona in the first round , in what was the teams ' first European encounter and the only time Porto eliminated the Spanish side from European competitions . In the 1975 – 76 UEFA Cup , Porto were again eliminated in the third round , but in the process they beat Luxembourg 's <unk> <unk> with a club record home ( 7 – 0 ) and aggregate ( 10 – 0 ) win scores . In the first round of the following season 's UEFA Cup , Porto were matched with Schalke 04 . After a tie in the first leg , Porto squandered a 2 – 0 lead in the second leg , conceding three goals in the last 15 minutes , which resulted in their elimination . 
 = = = First final – Pedroto years ( 1977 – 84 ) = = = 
 Head coach José Maria Pedroto oversaw Porto 's victory over Braga in the 1977 Portuguese Cup final , which ensured the club 's participation in the 1977 – 78 Cup Winners ' Cup . After overcoming Köln in the first round , Porto met Manchester United for the first time in international club competition . Reactions to the second round draw predicted an easy task for the English team , but Porto stunned its visitors and Europe with a 4 – 0 win . In Old Trafford , Manchester United pressed hard and even benefited from two own goals , but their 5 – 2 win was insufficient to prevent a shocking elimination at the hands of Porto . Playing in a quarter @-@ final round for the first time , they were defeated by the eventual competition winners , Anderlecht . 
 Porto finished the season at the top of the Primeira Liga , ending a 19 @-@ year drought of league titles . In their return to the European Cup , they were eliminated in the first round after suffering their heaviest defeat in European competitions : 6 – 1 against AEK Athens . Porto secured back @-@ to @-@ back league titles to participate in the 1979 – 80 European Cup . They eliminated Milan in the first round , with a second @-@ leg 1 – 0 win at San Siro , and advanced to a second @-@ round contest with Real Madrid . Two goals from Fernando Gomes granted a 2 – 1 home win for Porto , but Real 's goal proved crucial to secure their qualification on the away goals rule , after a 1 – 0 win in Madrid . Porto spent their following five seasons competing either in the UEFA Cup or Cup Winners ' Cup . In the 1980 – 81 and 1982 – 83 UEFA Cup editions , Porto was eliminated in the second round by Grasshoppers and Anderlecht , respectively . In between , the club sailed into the 1981 – 82 Cup Winners ' Cup quarter @-@ finals , where they were beaten by the eventual runners @-@ up Standard Liège . 
 Porto lost the 1983 Portuguese Cup final to league champions Benfica , which allowed their participation in the 1983 – 84 Cup Winners ' Cup as losing cup finalists . They eliminated Dinamo Zagreb , Rangers , and Shakhtar Donetsk to reach their first European semi @-@ final . The competition draw paired Porto with the holders Aberdeen , managed by Alex Ferguson . Taking a 1 – 0 lead to Pittodrie , Porto resisted to the attacking pressure of their opponents . In the 76th minute , <unk> scored the only goal of the match , which confirmed Porto 's place in their first European final . " We simply were not good enough against Porto " , said Ferguson in the aftermath . This feat was met with such enthusiasm that the plane returning the team to Porto could not land because the runway had been invaded by supporters . The final against Juventus was contested at the former St. Jakob Stadium in Basel , where Portuguese supporters were a minority . The Italians were the favourites and started off well , taking the lead through Beniamino Vignola in the 13th minute . Seventeen minutes later , António Sousa equalised for Porto , but the Portuguese side could not prevent Zbigniew Boniek from scoring Juventus 's winning goal just before half @-@ time . Despite the defeat , this final was a stepping stone in the growth of the club 's international reputation . 
 = = = First titles – Artur Jorge and Ivić years ( 1984 – 91 ) = = = 
 Victory in the 1984 Portuguese Cup final ensured Porto 's return to the Cup Winners ' Cup in 1984 – 85 , but they were surprisingly knocked out in the first round by Welsh Cup runners @-@ up Wrexham . In January 1985 , having left his job because of health problems , Pedroto died ; he was succeeded by his apprentice Artur Jorge . Porto won the 1984 – 85 Primeira Liga and qualified for the 1985 – 86 European Cup , where they first beat an Ajax side guided by Johan Cruyff and featuring Ronald Koeman , Frank Rijkaard and Marco van Basten . Porto then faced Barcelona in the second round ; after a 2 – 0 loss at Camp Nou , Juary scored all three goals of Porto 's 3 – 1 win , which was insufficient to avoid elimination on the away goals rule . 
 Porto defended their league title to earn a place in the 1986 – 87 European Cup . They faced Malta 's Rabat Ajax in the first round , but had to play their home leg away from the Estádio das Antas ( in Vila do Conde ) , because the pitch was being lowered to increase the stadium capacity . The Maltese suffered a 9 – 0 defeat , which is still Porto 's biggest home win for European competitions . In the second round , they played the Czechoslovak champions TJ Vítkovice ; Porto lost 1 – 0 in Ostrava but overcame the disadvantage with a 3 – 0 home win . They then eliminated Brøndby of Denmark to advance to the European Cup semi @-@ finals for the first time , where they were drawn against Dynamo Kyiv . The Soviets were considered strong favourites to progress , but Porto won both legs with a 2 – 1 scoreline and confirmed their second European final in four seasons . 
 Standing between Porto and the European title were three @-@ time champions Bayern Munich , who knocked out Real Madrid in the other semi @-@ final and had the odds in their favour . Moreover , Porto 's centre @-@ back Lima Pereira and striker Fernando Gomes had suffered leg injuries and were deemed unfit to play . With the final scheduled for Vienna 's <unk> , support for the Bavarian team far outnumbered that for Porto . Bayern took the lead in the 26th minute through Ludwig <unk> and secured it until the 77th minute , when Rabah Madjer 's backheel equaliser became one of the most memorable goals in European Cup finals . Three minutes later , Madjer provided the cross for Juary 's match @-@ deciding volley . This victory was celebrated in Portugal and praised by the European press , which highlighted Porto 's second @-@ half resurgence and the key contributions of Madjer , Juary and Paulo <unk> in the team 's success . Having witnessed their Lisbon rivals lift European trophies in the 1960s – Benfica 's back @-@ to @-@ back European Cup wins in 1961 and 1962 , and Sporting 's successful Cup Winners ' Cup run in 1964 ) – this win meant that Porto were no longer the only " Big Three " club in Portugal without international silverware . 
 Soon after the final , Artur Jorge left Porto to coach French team Matra Racing ; his substitute was Tomislav Ivić . As European Cup winners , Porto contested the 1987 European Super Cup against Ajax , the 1986 – 87 Cup Winners ' Cup holders . Porto won the first leg 1 – 0 in Amsterdam , and two months later repeated the result at home , becoming the competition 's first Portuguese winners . In between , Porto traveled to Japan to contest the 1987 Intercontinental Cup against the 1987 Copa Libertadores winners , Peñarol of Uruguay . A severe snowstorm hit Tokyo on the day of the match , which nearly forced its postponement . Despite the poor weather conditions , the game went ahead . Porto took the lead just before half @-@ time but conceded the equaliser in the final minutes of the second half . In extra @-@ time , Madjer lobbed a ball from the midfield over Peñarol 's goalkeeper ; it landed on the snow a few feet away from the goal line , but with enough impulse to roll into the goal and secure Porto 's ( and Portugal 's ) first Intercontinental Cup title . 
 As holders , Porto were automatically qualified for the 1987 – 88 European Cup , but their previous season 's success was not emulated as they were eliminated in the second round by Real Madrid . Ivić departed with a league title and Artur Jorge was brought back with the 1988 – 89 season underway . In the 1988 – 89 European Cup , Porto were knocked out by the holders , PSV Eindhoven , after a heavy 5 – 0 away defeat . Finishing second in the 1988 – 89 Primeira Liga , Porto entered the UEFA Cup , seven years after their last participation . They eliminated Flacăra Moreni of Romania and Valencia , before falling in the third round to Hamburg . Returning to the European Cup in 1990 – 91 , Porto began their campaign beating the Northern Irish champions Portadown ( 13 – 1 on aggregate , including an 8 – 1 away win , the club 's biggest in European competitions ) and Dinamo Bucureşti ( 4 – 0 ) . In the quarter @-@ finals , they faced Bayern Munich for the first time since the 1987 final . After securing a 1 – 1 draw in Munich , Porto were beaten 2 – 0 at home . 
 = = = Champions League regular ( 1991 – 2002 ) = = = 
 Porto entered the 1991 – 92 Cup Winners ' Cup following their seventh Portuguese Cup final win in mid @-@ 1991 , but their campaign ended in the second round against Tottenham . In the 1992 – 93 season , UEFA renamed the European Cup to UEFA Champions League and confirmed the introduction of a round @-@ robin group stage , tested in the previous season . Apart from 1994 – 95 , when they competed for the last time in the Cup Winners ' Cup – being eliminated on penalties in the quarter @-@ finals against Sampdoria – Porto were present in every edition of the Champions League from its founding season to 1999 – 2000 . In the first edition , Porto overcame two preliminary rounds to reach the group stage , where they played IFK Göteborg , Milan , and PSV Eindhoven . Two wins in six matches resulted in a third place in the group and failure to progress to the final ( only accessible for the group winners ) . They returned the following season to the group stage and were drawn against Anderlecht , Werder Bremen , and Milan . Buoyed by a 5 – 0 away defeat of the Germans , Porto secured the group 's runner @-@ up place and a semi @-@ final meeting with Barcelona . The one @-@ legged tie was drawn to take place at Camp Nou , and ended with a 3 – 0 victory for the home side . 
 The 1995 – 96 UEFA Champions League participation was short @-@ lived as Porto finished outside of their group 's top two places . The following season , they were drawn into a group with Milan for the third time in four participations . Having failed to beat the Italians in their previous meetings , Porto were on the verge of suffering another defeat in San Siro , as they trailed Milan by 2 – 1 with 20 minutes to go . However , two goals by Mário Jardel overturned the score and sealed the win for Porto . They were confirmed as group winners after victories over IFK Göteborg and Rosenborg . In the quarter @-@ finals , they fell to Manchester United after a 4 – 0 away loss . Porto did not progress past the group stage of the two subsequent Champions League seasons , coming last in 1997 – 98 and third in 1998 – 99 . The club got back on track in the 1999 – 2000 season , overcoming two consecutive group stages to meet Bayern Munich in the quarter @-@ finals . Having drawn 1 – 1 in Portugal , Bayern took an early lead in the second leg ; Porto leveled the score in the 88th minute , but one minute later , the Germans scored the winning goal . 
 Sporting won the 1999 – 2000 Primeira Liga and ended Porto 's chances to clinch a record sixth consecutive title . As runners @-@ up , Porto had to go through a qualifying round to reach the 2000 – 01 UEFA Champions League group stage . However , a loss to Anderlecht meant elimination and consequent transfer into that season 's UEFA Cup , where they were beaten in the quarter @-@ finals by the eventual winners , Liverpool . Having lost the 2000 – 01 season 's league title to city rivals Boavista , Porto had to start their 2001 – 02 Champions League participation in the second qualifying round . They defeated Welsh side Barry Town and Grasshoppers to reach the first group stage , where they finished runners @-@ up to Juventus . In the second group stage , Porto registered four losses in six matches , finishing in the fourth and last place . Domestically , the club concluded the league in third place , just outside the Champions League qualification places . Midway through the season , Porto sacked coach Octávio Machado and hired 38 @-@ year @-@ old Portuguese coach José Mourinho , who had led Leiria to their best @-@ ever league finish . 
 = = = Return to glory – Mourinho years ( 2002 – 04 ) = = = 
 Sitting fifth in the league , Porto consolidated their performances following Mourinho 's arrival and registered a win – draw – loss record of 11 – 2 – 2 to climb to third place and qualify for the 2002 – 03 UEFA Cup . They progressed through the first four rounds with convincing wins , suffering only one defeat against French side Lens . In the quarter @-@ finals , Porto were surprised at home with a 1 – 0 home defeat against Panathinaikos . In Athens , Derlei scored in the 16th minute to tie the round , and added a second goal in the first half of extra @-@ time to propel Porto into the semi @-@ finals . Facing Lazio at home for the first leg , Porto conceded an early goal by Claudio López . A few minutes later , Maniche 's equaliser sparked a strong attacking display by the home team , which scored a further three goals to secure a significant advantage for the second leg . In Rome , a goalless draw confirmed Porto 's presence in their third major European competition final , the first since their 1987 European Cup victory . Their opponents were Celtic , who had eliminated Boavista in the other semi @-@ final to advance to their first European final since 1970 . 
 Scheduled for 21 May 2003 at Seville 's Estadio Olímpico , the 2003 UEFA Cup Final took place under an intense heat , which did not dissuade a 53 @,@ 000 @-@ strong crowd of supporters , mostly in favour of the Scottish team . A contested first half was heading into half @-@ time when , during injury time , Derlei put Porto ahead . Soon after the restart , Henrik Larsson headed Celtic 's equaliser , but Dmitri Alenichev restored Porto 's lead a few minutes later . Larsson again leveled the score , sending the match into extra @-@ time . Despite <unk> 's dismissal in the first half of extra @-@ time , Celtic held on until the 115th minute , when Derlei intercepted a blocked shot and beat the goalkeeper to score the winning goal . His 12th goal in the competition confirmed him as the top scorer ( ahead of Larsson ) , and inscribed Porto ( and Portugal ) into the list of UEFA Cup winners , for the first time . With their first Primeira Liga title in four years mathematically confirmed two weeks ahead of the Seville final , Mourinho then led Porto to victory in the Portuguese Cup final , against his former club , Leiria , to conclude a treble @-@ winning season . 
 In late August , Porto kicked off their 2003 – 04 European season with a loss in the 2003 UEFA Super Cup match against the 2002 – 03 UEFA Champions League winners , Milan . Two weeks later , they began their 2003 – 04 UEFA Champions League campaign in a group comprising Real Madrid , Marseille , and Partizan . Porto qualified for the knockout phase as group runners @-@ up , behind Real Madrid , who inflicted their only group stage defeat . The draw for the round of 16 paired Porto with Manchester United , with the first leg taking place in Portugal . In the first European club competition match at the Estádio do Dragão , Porto won 2 – 1 with goals from Benni McCarthy . At Old Trafford , Paul Scholes put the English side ahead in the match and in the round ( advantage on away goals ) . On the brink of elimination , Porto earned a free kick in the 90th minute ; McCarthy 's shot was blocked near the line by goalkeeper Tim Howard , but <unk> caught the rebound and scored the equaliser that took Porto through to the next round . In the quarter @-@ finals , they overcame another French team ( Lyon ) to advance to the Champions League semi @-@ finals for the first time since 1994 . Porto faced Deportivo La Coruña , who had convincingly eliminated the previous season 's finalists , Juventus and Milan . A goalless first leg match in Portugal postponed the decision to the Estadio Riazor , where a penalty kick converted by Derlei confirmed Porto 's second major European final in two consecutive seasons . The other finalists were AS Monaco , who had eliminated Real Madrid and Chelsea . 
 The Arena <unk> in Gelsenkirchen hosted the final , which provided one of the most lopsided results in European Cup and Champions League finals , as Porto defeated Monaco 3 – 0 . Despite the score , Monaco were a pressing side and started off better with dangerous incursions into Porto 's penalty area by captain Ludovic Giuly , who was replaced midway through the first half due to injury . In the 38th minute , Carlos Alberto opened the score for Porto . Despite one goal behind and without playmaker Giuly , Monaco created chances in the second half , but Alenichev and Deco set each other up for the second and third goals , respectively . Porto won UEFA 's premier competition for the second time and became the second club to win the UEFA Cup and the European Champion Club 's Cup in consecutive seasons , after Liverpool 's 1975 – 76 UEFA Cup and 1976 – 77 European Cup wins . This was Mourinho 's last match for Porto ; a week later , he was presented as Chelsea 's manager . 
 = = = Post @-@ Mourinho transition and Ferreira years ( 2004 – 10 ) = = = 
 Champions League success struck a hard blow in the team , which saw its influential coach and key players leave to clubs from prominent European leagues . To replace Mourinho , Porto signed Luigi Delneri but the Italian was sacked before overseeing an official match , and his place was taken by Víctor Fernández . His tenure did not start off well , as Porto lost the UEFA Super Cup for the second time in two years , going down 2 – 1 against Valencia . Filling the Champions League title @-@ holder spot in the group stage of the following season 's tournament , Porto were drawn together with Chelsea , which meant Mourinho 's return to the Estádio do Dragão . In the last group match , they hosted the Londoners in need of a win to assure qualification . As Damien Duff put Chelsea ahead , Porto were at risk of becoming the first holders not to get past the group stage , but goals from Diego and McCarthy saved Porto from premature elimination . Nevertheless , the defending champions were subsequently knocked out in the round of 16 , after losing 4 – 2 on aggregate against Inter . Before this tie , Porto returned to Japan to contest the last edition of the Intercontinental Cup , 17 years after their first triumph . They dominated Colombia 's Once Caldas for most of the 90 minutes plus extra @-@ time , but were unable to score . It took 18 kicks from the penalty mark to decide the match 8 – 7 for Porto and give the club their second and last title in this competition . 
 Despite the managerial instability – Fernández was replaced by José <unk> soon after their Champions League elimination – and weak performances in league matches , Porto finished runners @-@ up to Benfica and secured qualification for the 2005 – 06 UEFA Champions League group stage . Dutch coach Co <unk> was appointed as the new coach for the 2005 – 06 season , and although his team delivered domestically – reclaiming both Portuguese league and Cup titles – it disappointed in the Champions League , as Porto finished last of their group , with one win and three losses . In reaction to <unk> 's resignation in the summer of 2006 , the club signed experienced coach Jesualdo Ferreira from Boavista . Porto qualified from their Champions League group with the same points as Arsenal , but behind on head @-@ to @-@ head standings . Paired with Chelsea in the round of 16 , Porto drew the first leg match in Portugal but were eliminated with a 2 – 1 loss in London . 
 Porto won three consecutive Primeira Liga titles with Ferreira , ensuring their presence in the three subsequent Champions League seasons . In 2007 – 08 , Porto fell again in the round of 16 , losing to Schalke 04 in a penalty shootout . In the following season 's round of 16 , they eliminated Atlético Madrid on away goals and progressed to a quarter @-@ final tie with Manchester United . A two @-@ all draw in Manchester gave Porto the upper hand in the round , but a Cristiano Ronaldo goal in the opening minutes of the return leg ended their European run . The 2009 – 10 UEFA Champions League season was Ferreira 's last in charge of Porto , and like in previous years , he successfully guided the team past the group stage . In the round of 16 , a 2 – 1 home win over Arsenal was obliterated by a 5 – 0 defeat in London , which included a hat @-@ trick from Nicklas Bendtner . Domestically , Porto failed to win a fifth consecutive league title and their third @-@ place finish excluded them from competing in the 2010 – 11 Champions League . However , victory in the Portuguese Cup final confirmed the club 's entry in the play @-@ off round of the 2010 – 11 UEFA Europa League . 
 = = = Recent years ( 2010 – present ) = = = 
 Ferreira stepped down at the end of the 2009 – 10 season and was replaced by André Villas @-@ Boas , a former assistant of Mourinho at Porto , Chelsea , and Internazionale . In a single season , Villas @-@ Boas guided the team to a record @-@ matching four titles , including victory in the 2010 – 11 UEFA Europa League . Their triumphant campaign started in the play @-@ off round , where they overcame Belgian side Genk to reach the group stage . Porto topped their group undefeated , only dropping points against Beşiktaş . In the round of 32 , despite a second @-@ leg home loss , they eliminated the 2005 – 06 and 2006 – 07 UEFA Cup winners Sevilla , setting up a tie with CSKA Moscow . Porto defeated the Russians in both legs and advanced to the quarter @-@ finals , where they were paired against another Muscovite club , this time Spartak Moscow . Two prolific displays , which included a hat @-@ trick by Radamel Falcao , sealed a 10 – 3 aggregate win for Porto . In the semi @-@ finals , Falcao went one better and scored four goals in a first @-@ leg 5 – 1 win against Villarreal , which all but confirmed the club 's fourth major European final . The Dublin final was an all @-@ Portuguese affair between Porto and Primeira Liga rivals Braga . Contrasting with previous matches in the tournament , Porto 's performance was more contained and victory was secured with a single goal by Falcao , who became the competition 's top scorer . 
 In June 2011 , Villas @-@ Boas left Porto to become Chelsea 's manager . He took his technical staff to London , except his assistant coach Vítor Pereira , who became the club 's new coach . His first European match was against Barcelona , for the 2011 UEFA Super Cup . In their third appearance in the Monaco showpiece match , Porto left once again as runners @-@ up , after losing 2 – 0 . They did not get through the 2011 – 12 UEFA Champions League group stage , after conceding defeats to APOEL and Zenit St. Petersburg , the eventual group winners and runners @-@ up . Transferred to the UEFA Europa League round of 32 , the defending champions were knocked out by Manchester City with a 6 – 1 aggregate loss . As 2011 – 12 Primeira Liga winners , Porto assured their return to the Champions League in the following season . Having finished second to Paris Saint @-@ Germain in a group containing Dinamo Zagreb and Dynamo Kiev , Porto qualified to the round of 16 , where they faced tournament debutants Málaga . Unable to capitalize on a first @-@ leg 1 – 0 advantage , Porto lost 2 – 0 at La Rosaleda Stadium and were eliminated . 
 = = Records = = 
 As of 25 February 2016 
 Key 
 = = = Team , coaches and players = = = 
 First match : 1 – 2 vs Athletic Bilbao , 1956 – 57 European Cup preliminary round ( 20 September 1956 ) 
 First goal : José Maria , against Athletic Bilbao 
 Biggest home win : 9 – 0 vs Rabat Ajax , 1986 – 87 European Cup first round ( 17 September 1986 ) 
 Biggest away win : 8 – 1 vs Portadown , 1990 – 91 European Cup first round ( 3 October 1990 ) 
 Biggest home loss : 1 – 3 vs Real Madrid , 2003 – 04 UEFA Champions League group stage ( 1 October 2003 ) 
 Biggest away loss : 1 – 6 
 vs AEK Athens , 1978 – 79 European Cup first round ( 13 September 1978 ) 
 vs Bayern Munich , 2014 – 15 UEFA Champions League quarter @-@ finals ( 21 April 2015 ) 
 Coach with most matches : Jesualdo Ferreira , 34 
 Coach with most titles : Tomislav Ivić and José Mourinho , 2 
 Player with most total appearances : Vítor <unk> , 99 
 Player with most consecutive appearances : <unk> <unk> , 50 
 Player with most goals scored : Radamel Falcao , 22 
 = = = By season = = = 
 = = = By competition = = = 
 = = = Finals = = = 
 Matches won after regular time ( 90 minutes of play ) , extra @-@ time ( <unk> ) or a penalty shootout ( p ) are highlighted in green , while losses are highlighted in red . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = Juan Manuel de Rosas = 
 Juan Manuel de Rosas ( 30 March 1793 – 14 March 1877 ) , nicknamed " Restorer of the Laws " , was a politician and army officer who ruled Buenos Aires Province and briefly the Argentine Confederation . Although born into a wealthy family , Rosas independently amassed a personal fortune , acquiring large tracts of land in the process . Rosas enlisted his workers in a private militia , as was common for rural proprietors , and took part in the factious disputes that led to numerous civil wars in his country . Victorious in warfare , personally influential , and with vast landholdings and a loyal private army , Rosas became the quintessential caudillo , as provincial warlords in the region were known . He eventually reached the rank of brigadier general , the highest in the Argentine army , and became the undisputed leader of the Federalist Party . 
 In December 1829 , Rosas became governor of the province of Buenos Aires and established a dictatorship backed by state terrorism . In 1831 , he signed the Federal Pact , recognizing provincial autonomy and creating the Argentine Confederation . When his term of office ended in 1832 , Rosas departed to the frontier to wage war on the indigenous peoples . After his supporters launched a coup in Buenos Aires , Rosas was asked to return and he once again took office as governor . Rosas reestablished his dictatorship and formed the repressive Mazorca , an armed <unk> that killed thousands of citizens . Elections became a farce , and the legislature and judiciary became docile instruments of his will . Rosas created a cult of personality and his regime became totalitarian in nature , with all aspects of society rigidly controlled . 
 Rosas faced many threats to his power during the late 1830s and early 1840s . He fought a war against the Peru – Bolivian Confederation , endured a blockade by France , faced a revolt in his own province and battled a major rebellion that lasted years and spread to several Argentine provinces . Rosas persevered and extended his influence in the provinces , exercising effective control over them through direct and indirect means . By 1848 , he had extended his power beyond the borders of Buenos Aires and was ruler of all of Argentina . Rosas also attempted to annex the neighboring nations of Uruguay and Paraguay . France and Great Britain jointly retaliated against Argentine expansionism , blockading Buenos Aires for most of the late 1840s , but were unable to halt Rosas , whose prestige was greatly enhanced by his string of successes . 
 When the Empire of Brazil began aiding Uruguay in its struggle against Argentina , Rosas declared war in August 1851 , starting the Platine War . This short conflict ended with the defeat of Rosas and his flight to Britain . His last years were spent in exile living as a tenant farmer until his death in 1877 . Rosas garnered an enduring public perception among Argentines as a brutal tyrant . Since the 1930s , an authoritarian , anti @-@ Semitic , and racist political movement in Argentina called Revisionism has tried to improve Rosas 's reputation and establish a new dictatorship in the model of his regime . In 1989 , his remains were repatriated by the government in an attempt to promote national unity , seeking forgiveness for him and especially for the 1970s military dictatorship . Rosas remains a controversial figure in Argentina in the 21st century . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Birth = = = 
 Juan Manuel José Domingo Ortiz de Rosas was born on 30 March 1793 at his family 's town house in Buenos Aires , the capital of the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata . He was the first child of León Ortiz de Rosas and Agustina López de <unk> . León Ortiz was the son of an immigrant from the Spanish Province of Burgos . A military officer with an undistinguished career , León Ortiz had married into a wealthy Criollo family . The young Juan Manuel de Rosas 's character was heavily influenced by his mother Agustina , a strong @-@ willed and domineering woman who derived these character traits from her father Clemente López de <unk> , a landowner who died defending his estate from an Indian attack in 1783 . 
 As was common practice at the time , Rosas was schooled at home until the age of 8 , and then enrolled in what was regarded the best private school in Buenos Aires . Though befitting the son of a wealthy landowner , his education was unremarkable . According to historian John Lynch , Rosas ' education " was supplemented by his own efforts in the years that followed . Rosas was not entirely unread , though the time , the place , and his own bias limited the choice of authors . He appears to have had a sympathetic , if superficial , acquaintance with minor political thinkers of French absolutism . " 
 In 1806 , a British expeditionary force invaded Buenos Aires . A 13 @-@ year @-@ old Rosas served distributing ammunition to troops in a force organized by Viceroy Santiago Liniers to counter the invasion . The British were defeated in August 1806 , but returned a year later . Rosas was then assigned to the <unk> de los <unk> ( a militia cavalry ) , although he was probably barred from active duty during this time due to illness . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 After the British invasions had been repelled , Rosas and his family moved from Buenos Aires to their estancia ( ranch ) . His work there further shaped his character and outlook as part of the Platine region 's social establishment . In the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata , owners of large landholdings ( including the Rosas family ) provided food , equipment and protection for families living in areas under their control . Their private defense forces consisted primarily of laborers who were drafted as soldiers . Most of these peons , as such workers were called , were gauchos . 
 The landed aristocracy of Spanish descent considered the illiterate , mixed @-@ race gauchos , who comprised the majority of the population , to be ungovernable and untrustworthy . The gauchos were tolerated because there was no other labor force available , but were treated with contempt by the landowners . Rosas got along well with the gauchos in his service , despite his harsh and authoritarian comportment . He was known to dress like them , joke with them , take part in their horse @-@ play , and pay them well , but he never allowed them to forget that he was their master rather than their equal . Shaped by the colonial society in which he lived , Rosas was conservative , an advocate of hierarchy and authority , like the other great landowners in the region . 
 Rosas acquired a working knowledge of administering <unk> and , beginning in 1811 , took charge of his family 's estancias . In 1813 , he married Encarnación Ezcurra , daughter of a wealthy family from Buenos Aires . He soon afterward sought to establish a career for himself , leaving his parent 's estate . He produced salted meat and acquired landholdings in the process . As the years passed he became an <unk> ( rancher ) in his own right , accumulating land while establishing a successful partnership with second cousins from the politically powerful Anchorena clan . His hard work and organizational skills in deploying labor were key to his success , rather than creating new or applying nontraditional approaches to production . 
 = = Rise to power = = 
 = = = Caudillo = = = 
 The May Revolution of 1810 marked the early stage of a process which later led to the disintegration of Spain 's Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata , independence and the eventual formation of Argentina . Rosas , like many landowners in the countryside , was suspicious of a movement advanced primarily by merchants and bureaucrats in the city of Buenos Aires . Rosas was specially outraged by the execution of Viceroy Santiago Liniers at the hands of the revolutionaries . Rosas felt nostalgic about colonial times , seeing them as stable , orderly and prosperous . 
 When the Congress of Tucumán severed all remaining ties with Spain in July 1816 , Rosas and his peers accepted independence as an accomplished fact . Independence resulted in a breakup of the territories that had formed the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata . The province of Buenos Aires fought a civil war with the other provinces over the degree of autonomy which the provincial governments were to have . The Unitarian Party supported the preeminence of Buenos Aires , while the Federalist Party defended provincial autonomy . A decade of strife over the issue destroyed the ties between capital and provinces , with new republics being declared throughout the country . Efforts by the Buenos Aires government to quash these independent states were met with determined local resistance . In 1820 Rosas and his gauchos , all dressed in red and nicknamed " Colorados del Monte " ( " Reds of the Mount " ) , enlisted in the army of Buenos Aires as the Fifth Regiment of Militia . They repulsed invading provincial armies , saving Buenos Aires . 
 At the end of the conflict , Rosas returned to his estancias having acquired prestige for his military service . He was promoted to cavalry colonel and was awarded further landholdings by the government . These additions , together with his successful business and fresh property acquisitions , greatly boosted his wealth . By 1830 , he was the 10th largest landowner in the province of Buenos Aires ( in which the city of the same name was located ) , owning 300 @,@ 000 cattle and 420 @,@ 000 acres ( 170 @,@ 000 ha ) of land . With his newly gained influence , military background , vast landholdings and a private army of gauchos loyal only to him , Rosas became the quintessential caudillo , as provincial warlords in the region were known . 
 = = = Governor of Buenos Aires = = = 
 National unity crumbled under the weight of a continuous round of civil wars , rebellions and coups . The Unitarian – Federalist struggle brought perennial instability while caudillos fought for power and laid waste to the countryside . By 1826 , Rosas had built a power base , consisting of relatives , friends and clients , and joined the Federalist Party . He remained a strong advocate of his native province of Buenos Aires , with little concern for political ideology . In 1820 , Rosas fought alongside the Unitarians because he saw the Federalist invasion as a menace to Buenos Aires . When the Unitarians sought to appease the Federalists by proposing to grant the other provinces a share in the customs revenues flowing through Buenos Aires , Rosas saw this as a threat to his province 's interests . In 1827 , four provinces led by Federalist caudillos rebelled against the Unitarian government . Rosas was the driving force behind the Federalist takeover of Buenos Aires and the election of Manuel Dorrego as provincial governor that year . Rosas was awarded with the post of general commander of the rural militias of the province of Buenos Aires on 14 July , which increased his influence and power . 
 In December 1828 Juan Lavalle , the Unitarian governor of Buenos Aires had Dorrego seized and executed without trial . With Dorrego gone , Rosas filled the vacant Federalist leadership and rebelled against the Unitarians . He allied with Estanislao López , caudillo and ruler of Santa Fe Province , and they defeated Lavalle at the Battle of Márquez Bridge in April 1829 . When Rosas entered the city of Buenos Aires in November of that year , he was hailed both as a victorious military leader and as the head of the Federalists . Rosas was considered a handsome man , standing 1 @.@ 77 meters ( 5 ft 10 in ) tall with blond hair and " piercing blue eyes " . Charles Darwin , who met him during his circumnavigation aboard HMS Beagle , assessed him as " a man of extraordinary character " . British diplomat Henry Southern said that in " appearance Rosas resembles an English gentleman farmer — his manners are courteous without being refined . He is affable and agreeable in conversation , which however nearly always turns on himself , but his tone is pleasant and agreeable enough . His memory is stupendous : and his accuracy in all points of detail never failing . " 
 On 6 December 1829 , the House of Representatives of Buenos Aires elected Rosas governor and granted him <unk> <unk> ( extraordinary powers ) . This marked the beginning of his regime , described by historians as a dictatorship . He saw himself as a benevolent dictator , saying : " For me the ideal of good government would be paternal autocracy , intelligent , disinterested and indefatigable ... I have always admired the autocratic dictators who have been the first servants of their people . That is my great title : I have always sought to serve the country . " He used his power to censor his critics and banish his enemies . He later justified these measures , stating : " When I took over the government I found the government in anarchy , divided into warring factions , reduced to pure chaos , a hell in miniature ... " 
 = = = Desert Campaign = = = 
 Rosas ' early administration was preoccupied with the severe deficits , large public debts and the impact of currency devaluation which his government inherited . A great drought that began in December 1828 , which would last until April 1832 , greatly impacted the economy . The Unitarians were still at large , controlling several provinces that had banded together in the Unitarian League . The capture of José María Paz , the main Unitarian leader , in March 1831 resulted in the end of the Unitarian – Federalist civil war and the collapse of the Unitarian League . Rosas was content , for the moment , to agree to recognize provincial autonomy in the Federal Pact . In an effort to alleviate the government 's financial problems , he improved revenue collection while not raising taxes and curtailed expenditure . 
 By the end of his first term , Rosas was generally credited with having staved off political and financial instability . He faced increased opposition in the House of Representatives , however . All members of the House were Federalists , as Rosas had restored the legislature that had been in place under Dorrego , and which had subsequently been dissolved by Lavalle . A liberal Federalist faction , which accepted dictatorship as a temporary necessity , called for the adoption of a constitution . Rosas was unwilling to govern constrained by a constitutional framework and only grudgingly relinquished his dictatorial powers . His term of office ended soon after , on 5 December 1832 . 
 While the government in Buenos Aires was distracted with political infighting , ranchers began moving into territories in the south inhabited by indigenous peoples . The resulting conflict with native peoples necessitated a government response . Rosas steadfastly endorsed policies which supported this expansion . During his governorship he granted lands in the south to war veterans and to ranchers seeking alternative pasture lands during the drought . Although the south was regarded as a virtual desert at the time , it had great potential and resources for agricultural development , particularly for ranching operations . The government gave Rosas command of an army with orders to subdue the Indian tribes in the coveted territory . Rosas was generous to those Indians who surrendered , rewarding them with animals and goods . Although he personally disliked killing Indians , he relentlessly hunted down those who refused to yield . The Desert Campaign lasted from 1833 to 1834 , with Rosas subjugating the entire region . His conquest of the south opened up many possibilities for further territorial expansion , which led him to state : " The fine territories , which extend from the Andes to the coast and down to the Magellan Straits are now wide open for our children . " 
 = = Second governorship = = 
 = = = Absolute power = = = 
 While Rosas was away on the Desert Campaign in October 1833 , a group of Rosistas ( Rosas 's supporters ) laid siege to Buenos Aires . Inside the city , Rosas 's wife , Encarnación , assembled a contingent of associates to aid the besiegers . The Revolution of the Restorers , as the <unk> coup came to be known , forced the provincial governor Juan Ramón Balcarce to resign . In quick succession , Balcarce was followed by two others who presided over weak and ineffective governments . The Rosismo ( <unk> ) had become a powerful faction within the Federalist Party , and pressured other factions to accept a return of Rosas , endowed with dictatorial powers , as the only way to restore stability . The House of Representatives yielded , and on 7 March 1835 , Rosas was reelected governor and invested with the <unk> del <unk> público ( sum of public power ) . 
 A <unk> was held to determine whether the citizens of Buenos Aires supported Rosas 's reelection and <unk> of dictatorial powers . During his governorship from 1829 to 1832 , Rosas had reduced the election process to a farce . He had installed loyal associates as justices of the peace , powerful officeholders with administrative and judicial functions who were also charged with tax collection , leading militia and presiding over elections . Through the exclusion of voters and intimidation of the opposition , the justices of the peace delivered any result Rosas favored . Half of the members of the House of Representatives faced reelection each year , and the opposition to Rosas had quickly been eliminated through rigged elections , allowing him to control the legislature . Control over finances had been stripped from the legislature , and its approval of legislation turned into a rubber stamp to preserve a semblance of democracy . The result of the 1833 election was a predictable 99 @.@ 9 percent " yes " vote . 
 Rosas believed that the manipulation of elections were necessary for political stability , because most of the country 's population was illiterate . He acquired absolute power over the province with the assent and support of most <unk> and businessmen , who shared his views . However , the estancia formed the power base on which Rosas relied . Lynch said that there " was a great deal of group cohesion and solidarity among the landed class . Rosas himself was the center of a vast kinship group based on land . He was surrounded by a closely knit economic and political network linking deputies , law officers , officials , and military who were also landowners and related among themselves or with Rosas . " 
 = = = Totalitarian regime = = = 
 Rosas 's authority and influence spread far beyond the House of Representatives . He exercised tight control over the bureaucracy as well as his cabinet , stating : " Do not imagine that my Ministers are anything but my Secretaries . I put them in their offices to listen and report , and nothing more . " His supporters were rewarded with positions within the state apparatus , and anyone he deemed a threat was purged . Opposition newspapers were burned in public squares . Rosas created an elaborate cult of personality , presenting himself as an almighty and <unk> figure who protected the people . His portraits were carried in street demonstrations and placed on church altars to be venerated . Rosismo was no longer a mere faction within the Federalist ranks ; it had become a political movement . As early as 1829 , Rosas had confided to an Uruguayan diplomatic envoy : " I tell you I am not a Federalist , and I have never belonged to that party . " During his governorship , he still claimed to have favored Federalism against Unitarianism , although in practice Federalism had by that time been subsumed into the Rosismo movement . 
 Rosas established a totalitarian regime , in which the government sought to dictate every aspect of public and private life . It was mandated that the slogan " Death to the Savage Unitarians " be inscribed at the head of all official documents . Anyone on the state payroll — from military officers , priests , to civil servants and teachers — was obliged to wear a red badge with the inscription " Federation or Death " . Every male was required to have a " federal look " , i.e. , to sport a large mustache and sideburns , leading many to wear false mustaches . The red color — symbol of both the Federalist Party and of Rosismo — became omnipresent in the province of Buenos Aires . Soldiers wore red <unk> ( blankets worn as trousers ) , caps and jackets , and their horses sported red accouterments . Civilians were also required to wear the color . A red waistcoat , red badge and red hat band were required for men , while women wore ribbons in that color and children donned school uniforms based upon Rosismo paradigms . Building exteriors and interiors were also decorated in red . 
 Most Catholic clergy in Buenos Aires willingly backed Rosas ' regime . The Jesuits , the only ones who refused to do so , were expelled from the country . The lower social strata in Buenos Aires , which formed the vast majority of its populace , experienced no improvement in the conditions under which they lived . When Rosas slashed expenditures , he cut resources from education , social services , general welfare and public works . None of the lands confiscated from Indians and Unitarians were turned over to rural workers , including gauchos ) . Black people did not experience any improvement in their conditions either . Rosas was himself a slave @-@ owner , and helped revive the slave trade . Despite doing little to promote their interests , he remained popular among blacks and gauchos . He employed blacks , patronized their festivities and attended their <unk> . The gauchos admired his leadership and willingness to <unk> with them to some extent . 
 = = = State terrorism = = = 
 In addition to purges , banishments and censorship , Rosas took measures against the opposition and anyone else he deemed a threat that historians have considered state terrorism . Terror was a tool used to intimidate dissident voices , to shore up support among his own partisans and to exterminate his foes . His targets were denounced as having ties , sometimes inaccurately , to Unitarians . Those victimized included members of his government and party who were suspected of being insufficiently loyal . If actual opponents were not at hand , the regime found other targets that were punished to make an example . A climate of fear was used to create unquestioning conformity to Rosas ' dictates . 
 State terrorism was carried out by the Mazorca , an armed <unk> unit of the Sociedad Popular <unk> political organization . The Sociedad Popular <unk> and the Mazorca were creations of Rosas , who retained tight control over both . The tactics of the <unk> included neighborhood sweeps in which houses would be searched and occupants intimidated . Others who fell into their power were arrested , tortured and killed . Killings were generally by shooting , lance @-@ thrusting or throat @-@ slitting . Many were castrated , or had their beards scalped or their tongues cut out . Modern estimates report around 2 @,@ 000 people were killed from 1829 until 1852 . 
 Although a judicial system still existed in Buenos Aires , Rosas removed any independence the courts might have exercised , either by controlling appointments to judgeships , or by circumventing their authority entirely . He would sit in judgement over cases , issuing sentences which included fines , service in the army , imprisonment , or execution . The exercise of state terror as a tool of intimidation was restricted to Rosas himself ; his subordinates had no control over it . It was used against specific targets , rather than randomly . Terrorism was orchestrated rather than a product of popular zeal , was targeted for effect rather than indiscriminate . Anarchic demonstrations , vigilantism and <unk> were antithetical to a regime touting a law and order agenda . Foreigners were exempted from abuses , as were people too poor or inconsequential to serve as effective examples . Victims were selected for their usefulness as tools of intimidation . 
 = = Struggle for dominance = = 
 = = = Rebellions and foreign threat = = = 
 Throughout the late 1830s and early 1840s , Rosas faced a series of major threats to his power . The Unitarians found an ally in Andrés de Santa Cruz , the ruler of the Peru – Bolivian Confederation . Rosas declared war against the Peru – Bolivian Confederation on 19 March 1837 , joining the War of the Confederation between Chile and Peru – Bolivia . The <unk> army played a minor role in the conflict , which resulted in the overthrow of Santa Cruz and the dissolution of the Peru – Bolivian Confederation . On 28 March 1838 , France declared a blockade of the Port of Buenos Aires , eager to extend its influence over the region . Unable to confront the French , Rosas increased internal repression to forestall potential uprisings against his regime . 
 The blockade caused severe damage to the economy across all the provinces , as they exported their goods through the port of Buenos Aires . Despite the 1831 Federal Pact , all provinces had long been discontent with the de facto primacy that Buenos Aires province held over them . On 28 February 1839 , the province of Corrientes revolted and attacked both Buenos Aires and Entre Ríos provinces . Rosas counterattacked and defeated the rebels , killing their leader , the governor of Corrientes . In June , Rosas uncovered a plot by dissident Rosistas to oust him from power in what became known as the Maza conspiracy . Rosas imprisoned some of the plotters and executed others . Manuel Vicente Maza , president of both the House of Representatives and the Supreme Court , was murdered by Rosas 's Mazorca agents within the halls of the parliament on the pretext that his son was involved in the conspiracy . In the countryside , <unk> , including a younger brother of Rosas , revolted , beginning the Rebellion of the South . The rebels attempted to ally with France , but were easily crushed , many losing their lives and properties in the process . 
 In September 1839 , Juan Lavalle returned after ten years in exile . He allied with the governor of Corrientes , which revolted once again , and invaded Buenos Aires province at the head of Unitarian troops armed and supplied by the French . Emboldened by Lavalle 's actions , the provinces of Tucumán , Salta , La Rioja , Catamarca and Jujuy formed the Coalition of the North and also rebelled against Buenos Aires . Great Britain intervened on behalf of Rosas , and France lifted the blockade on 29 October 1840 . The struggle with his internal enemies was hard @-@ fought . By December 1842 , Lavalle had been killed and the rebellious provinces subdued , except for Corrientes , which was only defeated in 1847 . Terrorism was also employed on the battlefield , as the Rosistas refused to take prisoners . The defeated men had their throats cut and their heads put on display . 
 = = = Ruler of Argentina = = = 
 Around 1845 , Rosas managed to establish absolute dominance over the region . He exercised complete control over all aspects of society with the solid backing of the army . Rosas was raised from colonel to brigadier general ( the highest army rank ) on 18 December 1829 . On 12 November 1840 he declined he newly created and higher rank of grand marshal ( gran <unk> ) , which had been bestowed on him by the House of Representatives . The army was led by officers who had backgrounds and values similar to his . Confident of his power , Rosas made some concessions by returning confiscated properties to their owners , disbanding the Mazorca and ending torture and political assassinations . The inhabitants of Buenos Aires still dressed and behaved according to the set of rules Rosas had imposed , but the climate of constant and widespread fear greatly diminished . 
 When Rosas was elected governor for the first time in 1829 , he held no power outside the province of Buenos Aires . There was no national government or national parliament . The former Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata had been succeeded by the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata , which by 1831 , following the Federal Pact and officially from 22 May 1835 , had increasingly been known as the Argentine Confederation , or simply , Argentina . Rosas 's victory over the other Argentine provinces in the early 1840s turned them into satellites of Buenos Aires . He gradually put in place provincial governors who were either allied or too weak to have real independence , which allowed him to exercise dominance over all the provinces . By 1848 , Rosas began calling his government the " government of the confederacy " and the " general government " , which would have been inconceivable a few years before . The next year , with acquiescence of the provinces , he named himself " Supreme Head of the Confederacy " and became the indisputable ruler of Argentina . 
 As Rosas aged and his health declined , the question of who would succeed him became a growing concern among his supporters . His wife Encarnación had died in October 1838 after a long illness . Although devastated by his loss , Rosas exploited her death to raise support for his regime . Not long after , at the age of 47 , he began an affair with his fifteen @-@ year @-@ old maid , María Eugenia Castro , with whom he had five illegitimate children . From his marriage to Encarnación , Rosas had two children : Juan Bautista Pedro and Manuela <unk> . Rosas established a hereditary dictatorship , naming the children from his marriage as his successors , stating that " [ t ] hey are both worthy children of my beloved Encarnación , and if , God willing , I die , then you will find that they are capable of succeeding me . " It is unknown whether Rosas was a closet monarchist . Later during his exile , Rosas would declare that Princess Alice of the United Kingdom would be the ideal ruler for his country . Nonetheless , in public he stated that his regime was republican in nature . 
 = = Apogee and downfall = = 
 = = = Anglo @-@ French blockade = = = 
 The breakup of the old Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata during the 1810s eventually resulted in the emergence of independent nations of Paraguay , Bolivia and Uruguay in the northern portion of the Viceroyalty , while its southern territories coalesced into the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata . Rosas planned to restore , if not all , at least a considerable part of the former borders of the old Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata . He never recognized the independence of Paraguay and regarded it a rebel Argentine province that would inevitably be reconquered . He sent an army under Manuel Oribe who invaded Uruguay and conquered most of the country , except for its capital Montevideo that endured a long siege starting in 1843 . When pressed by the British , Rosas declined to guarantee Uruguayan independence . In South America , all potential foreign threats to Rosas 's plans of conquest collapsed , including Gran Colombia and the Peru – Bolivian Confederation , or were troubled by internal turmoil , as was the Empire of Brazil . To reinforce his claims over Uruguay and Paraguay , and maintain his dominance over the Argentine provinces , Rosas blockaded the port of Montevideo and closed the interior rivers to foreign trade . 
 The loss of trade was unacceptable to Britain and France . On 17 September 1845 both nations established the Anglo @-@ French blockade of the Río de la Plata and enforced the free navigation in the Río de la Plata Basin ( or Platine region ) . Argentina resisted the pressure and fought back to a standstill . This undeclared war caused more economic harm to France and Britain than to Argentina . The British faced increasing pressure at home once they realized that the access gained to the other ports within the Platine region did not compensate for the loss of trade with Buenos Aires . Britain ended all hostilities and lifted the blockade on 15 July 1847 , followed by France on 12 June 1848 . Rosas had successfully resisted the two most powerful nations on Earth ; his standing , and Argentina 's , increased among Hispanic American nations . The Venezuelan humanist Andrés Bello , summarizing the prevailing opinion , considered Rosas among " the leading ranks of the great men of America " . 
 Although his prestige was on the rise , Rosas made no serious attempts to further liberalize his regime . Every year he presented his resignation and the pliant House of Representatives predictably declined , claiming that maintaining him in office was vital for the nation 's welfare . Rosas also allowed exiled Argentines to return to their homeland , but only because he was so confident of his control and that no one was willing to risk defying him . The execution in August 1848 of the pregnant young Camila O 'Gorman , charged with a forbidden romance with a priest , caused a backlash throughout the continent . Nonetheless , it served as a clear warning that Rosas had no intention of loosening his grip . 
 = = = Platine War = = = 
 Rosas failed to realize that discontent was steadily growing throughout the country . Throughout the 1840s he became increasingly secluded in his country house in Palermo , some miles away from Buenos Aires . There he ruled and lived under heavy protection provided by guards and patrols . He declined to meet with his ministers and relied solely on secretaries . His daughter Manuela replaced his wife at his right hand and became the link between Rosas and the outside world . The reason for Rosas 's increasing isolation was given by a member of his secretariat : " The dictator is not stupid : he knows the people hate him ; he goes in constant fear and always has one eye on the chance to rob and abuse them and the other on making a getaway . He has a horse ready saddled at the door of his office day and night " . 
 Meanwhile , Brazil , now ascendant under Emperor Dom Pedro II , provided support to the Uruguayan government that still held out in Montevideo , as well as to the ambitious Justo José de Urquiza , a caudillo in Entre Ríos who rebelled against Rosas . Once one of Rosas ' most trusted lieutenants , Urquiza now claimed to fight for a constitutional government , although his ambition to become head of state was barely disguised . In retaliation , Rosas declared war on Brazil on 18 August 1851 , beginning the Platine War . The army under Oribe in Uruguay surrendered to Urquiza in October . With arms and financial aid given by Brazil , Urquiza then marched through Argentine territory heading to Buenos Aires . 
 Uncharacteristically , Rosas remained passive throughout the conflict . The Argentine ruler lost heart once he realized that he had fallen into a trap . Even if he defeated Urquiza , his forces would probably be weakened enough to prevent him from challenging the Brazilian army that was ready to invade Argentina . With no other alternative , Rosas remarked : " There is no other way ; we have to play for the high stakes and go for everything . Here we are , and from here there is no retreat . " After an unsuccessful battle against Urquiza on 3 February 1852 , Rosas fled to Buenos Aires . Once there , he disguised himself and boarded a ship that took him to Britain to live in exile . Embittered , he remarked : " It is not the people who have overthrown me . It is the monkeys , the Brazilians . " 
 = = Later years = = 
 = = = Exile and death = = = 
 Rosas arrived in Plymouth , Great Britain , on 26 April 1852 . The British gave him asylum , paid for his travel and welcomed him with a 21 @-@ gun salute . These honors were granted because , according to the British Foreign Secretary James Harris , 3rd Earl of Malmesbury , " General Rosas was no common refugee , but one who had shown great distinction and kindness to the British merchants who had traded with his country " . Months before his fall , Rosas had arranged with the British chargé d 'affaires Captain Robert Gore for protection and asylum in the event of his defeat . Both his children by Encarnación followed him into exile , although Juan Bautista soon returned with his family to Argentina . His daughter Manuela married the son of an old associate of Rosas , an act which the former dictator never forgave . A domineering father , Rosas wanted his daughter to remain devoted to him alone . Although he forbade her from writing or visiting , Manuela remained loyal to him and maintained contact . 
 The new Argentine government confiscated all of Rosas ' properties and tried him as a criminal , later sentencing him to death . Rosas was appalled that most of his friends , supporters and allies abandoned him and became either silent or openly critical of him . Rosismo vanished overnight . " The landed class , supporters and beneficiaries of Rosas , now had to make their peace — and their profits — with his successors . Survival , not allegiance , was their politics " , argued Lynch . Urquiza , a one @-@ time ally and later an enemy , reconciled with Rosas and sent him financial assistance , hoping for political support in return — although Rosas had scant political capital left . Rosas followed Argentina 's developments while in exile , always hoping for an opportunity to return , but he never again insinuated himself into Argentine affairs . 
 In exile Rosas was not destitute , but he lived modestly amid financial constraints during the remainder of his life . A very few loyal friends sent him money , but it was never enough . He sold one of his estancias before the confiscation and became a tenant farmer in Swaythling , near Southampton . He employed a housekeeper and two to four laborers , to whom he paid above @-@ average wages . Despite constant concern over his shortage of funds , Rosas found joy in farm life , once remarking : " I now consider myself happy on this farm , living in modest circumstances as you see , earning a living the hard way by the sweat of my brow " . A contemporary described him in final years : " He was then eighty , a man still handsome and imposing ; his manners were most refined , and the modest environment did nothing to lessen his air of a great lord , inherited from his family . " After a walk on a cold day , Rosas caught pneumonia and died at 07 : 00 on the morning of 14 March 1877 . Following a private mass attended by his family and a few friends , he was buried in the town cemetery of Southampton . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Serious attempts to reassess Rosas 's reputation began in the 1880s with the publication of scholarly works by Adolfo Saldías and Ernesto Quesada . Later , a more blatant " Revisionist " movement would flourish under Nacionalismo ( Nationalism ) . Nacionalismo was a political movement that appeared in Argentina in the 1920s and reached its apex in the 1930s . It was the Argentine equivalent of the authoritarian ideologies that arose during the same period , such as Nazism , Fascism and <unk> . Argentine Nationalism was an authoritarian , anti @-@ Semitic , racist and misogynistic political movement with support for racially based pseudo @-@ scientific theories such as eugenics . Revisionismo ( Revisionism ) was the historiographical wing of Argentine Nacionalismo . The main goal of Argentine Nacionalismo was to establish a national dictatorship . For the Nacionalismo movement , Rosas and his regime were idealized and portrayed as <unk> of governmental virtue . Revisionismo served as a useful tool , as the main purpose of the revisionists within the Nacionalismo agenda was to rehabilitate Rosas 's image . 
 Despite a decades @-@ long struggle , Revisionismo failed to be taken seriously . According to Michael Goebel , the revisionists had a " lack of interest in scholarly standards " and were known for " their institutional <unk> in the intellectual field " . They also never succeeded in changing mainstream views regarding Rosas . William Spence Robertson said in 1930 : " Among the <unk> personages of the ' Age of Dictators ' in South America none played a more spectacular role than the Argentine dictator , Juan Manuel de Rosas , whose gigantic and ominous figure <unk> the Plata River for more than twenty years . So despotic was his power that Argentine writers have themselves styled this age of their history as ' The Tyranny of Rosas ' . " In 1961 , William Dusenberry said : " Rosas is a negative memory in Argentina . He left behind him the black legend of Argentine history — a legend which Argentines in general wish to forget . There is no monument to him in the entire nation ; no park , plaza , or street bears his name . " 
 In the 1980s , Argentina was a fractured , deeply divided nation , having faced military dictatorships , severe economic crises and a defeat in the Falklands War . President Carlos Menem decided to repatriate Rosas 's remains and take advantage of the occasion to unite the Argentines . Menem believed that if the Argentines could forgive Rosas and his regime , they might do the same regarding the more recent and vividly remembered past . On 30 September 1989 , an elaborate and enormous cortege organized by the government was held , after which the remains of the Argentine ruler were interred in his family vault at La Recoleta Cemetery , Buenos Aires . Closely allied with <unk> , Menem ( and his fellow Peronist presidential successors Néstor Kirchner and Cristina Fernández de Kirchner ) have honored Rosas on banknotes , postage stamps and monuments , causing mixed reactions among the public . Rosas remains a controversial figure among Argentines , who " have long been fascinated and outraged " by him , as historian John Lynch noted . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Giovanni Villani = 
 Giovanni Villani ( Italian pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; c . 1276 or 1280 – 1348 ) was an Italian banker , official , diplomat and chronicler from Florence who wrote the Nuova Cronica ( New Chronicles ) on the history of Florence . He was a leading statesman of Florence but later gained an unsavory reputation and served time in prison as a result of the bankruptcy of a trading and banking company he worked for . His interest in and elaboration of economic details , statistical information , and political and psychological insight mark him as a more modern chronicler of late medieval Europe . His Cronica is viewed as the first introduction of statistics as a positive element in history . However , historian Kenneth R. Bartlett notes that , in contrast to his Renaissance @-@ era successors , " his reliance on such elements as divine providence links Villani closely with the medieval vernacular chronicle tradition . " In recurring themes made implicit through significant events described in his Cronica , Villani also emphasized three assumptions about the relationship of sin and morality to historical events , these being that excess brings disaster , that forces of right and wrong are in constant struggle , and that events are directly influenced by the will of God . 
 Villani was inspired to write his Cronica after attending the jubilee celebration in Rome in 1300 and noting the venerable history of that city . He outlined the events in his Cronica year for year , following a strictly linear narrative format . He provided intricate details on many important historical events of the city of Florence and the wider region of Tuscany , such as construction projects , floods , fires , famines , and plagues . 
 While continuing work on the Cronica and detailing the enormous loss of life during the Black Death in 1348 , Villani died of the same illness . His work on the Cronica was continued by his brother and nephew . Villani 's work has received both praise and criticism from modern historians . The criticism is mostly aimed at his emphasis on supernatural guidance of events , his organizational style , and his glorification of the papacy and Florence . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 Giovanni Villani was born into the Florentine merchant middle class . He was the son of Villano di <unk> di <unk> , who came from an old and well @-@ respected <unk> <unk> family of merchants . Villani was a member of the Arte di Calimala ( wool finishers ) guild in Florence since 1300 , serving on the <unk> council of eight . During that year he visited Rome during the jubilee celebration . After observing the well @-@ known ancient monuments of Rome and acknowledging its renowned historical personages , he was inspired to write the Cronica , a universal history of Florence in a strictly linear , year @-@ by @-@ year format . During the early years of the 14th century , he gained political perspective by travelling throughout Italy , Switzerland , France and Flanders for the Peruzzi bank , of which he was a shareholder from 1300 to 1308 . Traveling abroad as a factor for the company , Villani was paid a regular salary in addition to his shareholding profits . On May 15 , 1306 , one of the first exchange contracts ( cambium ) to mention the city of Bruges involved two parties : Giovanni Villani , representing the Peruzzi Company , granting a loan to Tommaso Fini , representing the <unk> Company of Siena . Villani and his brother Matteo transferred most of their economic activities to the Buonaccorsi firm by 1322 . Giovanni Villani was a co @-@ director of Buonaccorsi in 1324 . The Buonaccorsi handled banking and commodity trade activities , spreading their influence throughout Italy , France , Flanders , England and several places in the Mediterranean . 
 Villani returned to Florence in 1307 where he married and settled down for a life of city politics . He became one of the priors of Florence in 1316 and 1317 . At the same time , he participated in the crafty diplomatic tactics that resulted in peace with Pisa and Lucca . As head of the mint beginning in 1316 , he collected its earlier records and created a register of all the coins struck in Florence . In 1321 , he was again chosen prior , and in 1324 was deputed to inspect the rebuilding of the city walls . He went with the Florentine army to fight against Castruccio <unk> , lord of Lucca , and was present at <unk> during Florence 's defeat . In his Cronica , he gave a detailed account of why Florence was unable to acquire Lucca after the death of Castruccio <unk> . 
 A famine spread across Tuscany in 1328 . From 1329 to 1330 Villani was a commune @-@ appointed magistrate of provisioning protecting Florence from the famine 's worst effects . In order to mitigate rising levels of starvation and assuage peasant discontent , grain was speedily imported from Sicily through Talamone , 60 @,@ 000 gold florins were taken from the city purse by the Florentine commune to aid the relief effort , and all the city 's bakers had their ovens requisitioned by the government so that loaves of bread could be sold at affordable prices to the riotous and starving poor . 
 Villani was sent on another diplomatic mission in 1329 , this time to Bologna to meet Cardinal Bertrand de Pouget . From 1330 to 1331 he superintended the making of Andrea Pisano 's bronze doors for the Baptistry . At the same time , he served as the consul for his guild of the Arte di Calimala and watched over the raising of the campanile of the <unk> . He was also sent with others as a hostage to Ferrara , to ensure that Florence made good on a debt ; he resided there for some months in 1341 . 
 Villani often expressed an optimistic viewpoint in his writing ; this changed with the short @-@ lived regime of Walter VI of Brienne , a despot invited to Florence and granted signoria . In fact , after experiencing his own financial troubles , a terminated career , and the failure of Florence in international affairs , and witnessing a host of different natural calamities and the onset of the Black Death in Europe , he became convinced that the apocalypse and final judgement was near . The bankruptcy of the Buonaccorsi Company led to Villani 's conviction and imprisonment in 1346 , as he was a main partner . Other banking companies also went bankrupt , such as the Peruzzi in 1343 and the Compagnia dei Bardi in 1346 ( they were allied in a joint venture by 1336 ) ; Villani calculated that before their bankruptcy the Peruzzi had lost some 600 @,@ 000 florins and the Bardi had lost some 900 @,@ 000 florins . Although Villani attributed the losses to the companies ' massive monetary loans to Edward III of England which were never repaid , historian Edwin S. Hunt suggests that the firms simply lacked the resources to have made such loans , which in all probability were much smaller and were not the key reasons for the companies ' failures . The Bardi and Peruzzi were just two of many European banks that Edward III accepted loans from , prominent members of the Bardi and other Florentine families were owed only 63 @,@ 000 <unk> by Edward in 1348 , and even a mass of small lenders and investors in Florence could not have made the necessary loan to England . The figure Villani asserted of 400 @,@ 000 <unk> owed to the Peruzzi by Edward alone equalled Villani 's estimate for the entire payroll of 30 @,@ 000 workers of the Florentine cloth industry in 1338 . Hunt asserts that the failures of the Florentine banks seems closely tied to the expansionist policy of Florence in Tuscany , hoping that newly conquered territory would yield greater security for their trade in northern Europe , but instead resulted in costly campaigns and little profit . In addition to the questionable figures Villani posed for the Peruzzi and Bardi companies , it is also known that several events described in his Cronica surrounding the Buonaccorsi 's bankruptcy were written to deliberately obscure the truth about the company 's fraudulent behavior ; Miller writes that " this is one of the most convincing conclusions " of historian Michele <unk> 's Giovanni Villani e la Compagnia dei Buonaccorsi ( 1971 ) . 
 Villani and the Buonaccorsi had gained an unsavory reputation as early as 1331 , when Villani was tried ( and cleared ) for barratry for his part in building the new third circuit of walls around Florence . Charles , Duke of Calabria had granted the Buonaccorsi the right to tax three of the six districts of Florence , which did not help Villani 's reputation amongst his fellow citizens . In early June 1342 , partners and agents of the Buonaccorsi suddenly fled Florence , Avignon , and Naples , following bankruptcy proceedings by creditors , nearly all of whom had deposits in the Buonaccorsi bank . Like other Florentine bankers and companies having difficulty with bankruptcy at the time , in September 1342 they supported the move to invite Walter VI of Brienne to become the next signor of Florence . Walter later suspended all legal actions taken against the Buonaccorsi and other company partners for nearly a year . 
 However , the legal case against the company was reopened and resumed in October 1343 , after the violent overthrow of Walter VI . It is unclear how long Villani served his prison sentence for alleged misconduct during the economic disaster of 1346 . It is known that he was imprisoned in the Carceri delle <unk> . After the overthrow of the Brienne regime and a subsequent but short @-@ lived aristocratic signoria , the novi cives or new families — some even from the lesser guilds — rose up in late September 1343 and established a government that provided them with much greater representation in officialdom . Villani and other chroniclers disdained these rustic non @-@ aristocrats who suddenly rose to power , considering them brazen upstarts incapable of governance . Villani 's class was at a constitutional disadvantage , as twenty @-@ one guilds representing twenty @-@ one equal voices in government meant that the oligarchy of higher <unk> was " helplessly outnumbered " as historian John M. <unk> states . Yet by the 1350s the general attitude towards the novi cives had changed much , as even Villani 's brother Matteo depicted them in a heroic light for being united in a coalition with the merchants and artisans to curb oligarchic power . Villani was also a staunch supporter of what he deemed the liberties of the Church , while criticizing the new popular government of the novi cives since they protested against the many legal exemptions the Church enjoyed . However , he did find civic pride in that the whole city — including the novi cives — had joined together in an uprising against Walter VI , whose sins of imposing tyranny were , to Villani , sufficient justification for the violence needed to overthrow him . 
 = = Nuova Cronica = = 
