 Villani 's work is an Italian chronicle written from the perspective of the political class of Florence just as the city rose to a rich and powerful position . Only scanty and partly legendary records had preceded his work , and there is little known of events before the death of Countess Matilda in 1115 . The Chronica de origine civitatis was composed sometime before 1231 , but there is little comparison between this work and Villani 's ; mid @-@ 20th @-@ century historian Nicolai Rubinstein states that the legendary accounts in this earlier chronicle were " arbitrarily selected by a compiler whose learning and critical faculties were considerably below the standard of his age . " In contrast , Rubinstein states Villani provided " a mature expression " of Florentine history . Yet Villani still relied upon the Chronica de origine civitatis as the prime source for Florence 's early history in his narrative . 
 In the 36th chapter of Book 8 , Villani states that the idea of writing the Cronica was suggested to him during the jubilee of Rome in 1300 , under the following circumstances after Pope Boniface VIII made in honor of Christ 's nativity a great indulgence ; Villani writes : 
 And being on that blessed pilgrimage in the sacred city of Rome and seeing its great and ancient monuments and reading the great deeds of the Romans as described by Virgil , Sallust , Lucan , Livy , Valerius , Orosius , and other masters of history ... I took my prompting from them although I am a disciple unworthy of such an undertaking . But in view of the fact that our city of Florence , daughter and offspring of Rome , was mounting and pursuing great purposes , while Rome was in its decline , I thought it proper to trace in this chronicle the origins of the city of Florence , so far as I have been able to recover them , and to relate the city 's further development at greater length , and at the same time to give a brief account of events throughout the world as long as it please God , in the hope of whose favor I undertook the said enterprise rather than in reliance on my own poor wits . And thus in the year 1300 , on my return from Rome , I began to compile this book in the name of God and the blessed John the Baptist and in honor of our city of Florence . 
 In his writing , Villani states that he considers Florence to be the " daughter and creation of Rome , " but asserts Rome 's decline and Florence 's rise as a great city compelled him to lay out a detailed history of the city . To emphasize the imperial greatness of Florentine history , Villani also asserted that the city was given a second founding when it was rebuilt by Charlemagne ( r . 800 – 814 as Holy Roman Emperor ) — which was absent from the Chronica de origine civitatis . Historian J.K. Hyde writes that the idea of Florence being the daughter of Rome would have given the Florentines a sense of destiny , while the second founding by Charlemagne provided historical context for alliance with France , which Hyde calls " the touchstone of <unk> " . Villani 's reasoning for Rome 's decline was the schisms of the Church and rebellion against the papal institution , while the ascension of Otto I , Holy Roman Emperor ( r . 962 – 973 ) allowed for the conditions of Florence 's rise against enemies of papal authority , such as Florentine @-@ conquered Fiesole . Villani was certain that the Republic of Florence had experienced a great setback on its path to glory with the defeat of the Guelphs by the Ghibellines at the Battle of Montaperti in 1260 . Despite this , Villani states that the paramount prosperity and tranquility of the city by 1293 was evidenced by the fact that its gates were no longer locked at night and that indirect taxes such as the gate fee ( common in times of war ) were not levied . Historian Felicity <unk> states that the validity of this comment should be heavily scrutinized considering the Florence statutes of 1290 that designated employment for individuals in charge of locking the city gates . Villani also contradicts himself by writing of a night attack on Florence in 1323 which clearly demonstrates the fact that the gates were locked at night . 
 In 1300 or shortly after , Villani began working on the Cronica , which was divided into twelve books ; the first six deal with the largely legendary history of Florence , starting at conventionally biblical times with the story of the Tower of Babel up to the year 1264 . The second phase , in six books , covered the history from 1264 until his own time , all the way up to 1346 . He outlined the events in his Cronica in year @-@ to @-@ year accounts ; for this he has gained criticism over the years for writing in an episodic manner lacking a unifying theme or point of view . He wrote his Cronica in the vernacular language rather than Latin , the language of the educated elite . His chronicles are intercut with historical episodes reported just as he heard them , sometimes with little interpretation . This often led to historical inaccuracies in his work , especially in the biographies of historical or contemporary people living outside of Florence ( even with well @-@ known monarchs ) . 
 Despite numerous mistakes , Villani often displayed an insider 's knowledge on many subjects , as a result of his extensive travels and access to both official and private documents . For example , De Vries states that he wrote one of the most accurate accounts of the Battle of Crécy during the Hundred Years ' War , including information that the archers were placed precariously behind the English and Welsh infantry , not on the flanks as others asserted . While describing detailed events unfolding within the city , Villani would name every individual street , square , bridge , family , and person involved , assuming his readers would have the same intimate knowledge of Florence as he did . 
 Villani is perhaps unequalled for the value of the statistical data he has preserved . For example , he recorded that in Florence there were 80 banks , 146 bakeries , 80 members in an association of city judges with 600 notaries , 60 physicians and surgical doctors , 100 shops and dealers of spices , 8 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 children attending primary school each year , 550 to 600 students attending 4 different schools for Scholastic knowledge , 13 @,@ 200 bushels of grain consumed weekly by the city , and 70 @,@ 000 to 80 @,@ 000 pieces of cloth produced in the workshops of the Arte della Lana each year , the latter having a total value of 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 gold florins . 
 Villani was a Guelph , but his book is much more taken up with an inquiry into what is useful and true than with factional party considerations . In a departure from Guelph politics , he favored republicanism over monarchy , praising the philosopher <unk> Latini as " the master and initiator in refining the Florentines , in making them skilled in good speaking and in knowing how to guide and rule our republic according to political science . " However , Villani admitted in his writing that republicanism bred factional strife , that benevolent rulers like Robert of Naples were sometimes needed to keep order , and republicanism could become tyrannical if it came to represent only one class ( such as exclusive favoring of aristocrats , merchants , or artisans ) . When detailing the construction of the Florence Cathedral and the artist Giotto di Bondone as the designer of the new bell tower , Villani called him " the most sovereign master of painting in his time . " Villani 's Cronica also provides the first known biography of Dante Alighieri ( 1265 – 1321 ) , author of the Divine Comedy , who Villani described as haughty , disdainful , and reserved . In his revised Cronica of 1322 , Villani shortened Dante 's biography and the amount of quotations taken from his Divine Comedy . Villani 's actions are explained by Richard H. Lansing and <unk> <unk> , who write : " Evidently two decades after the poet 's death a conservative writer closely identified with the Florentine state still felt obliged to distance himself from the most outspoken critic of the basis of that state 's prestige . " 
 Historian Louis Green writes that the Cronica was written with three general assumptions about morality which shaped the organization of the work , " [ channeling ] events into recurring patterns of significance . " These general assumptions were that excess brings disaster , that history is governed by a struggle between right and wrong , and that there is a direct connection between the events of the natural world and the overriding , supernatural and divine will of God who intercedes in these events . For example , Villani described the story of Count Ugolini of Pisa , who at the height of attaining his ill @-@ gotten wealth and power was overthrown and eventually starved to death along with his sons . Green writes that this story in the Cronica bears a resemblance to the ancient Greek story of Polycrates and his ring in the work of Herodotus . However , Green notes that Villani 's " cautionary tales " disembarked from the Classical Greek tradition of the arrogant and haughty rich falling from fortune due to the Greek belief in equalizing forces determining one 's unavoidable fate , which Green calls " excessive good fortune having to be balanced by an appropriate measure of sorrow . " Villani 's adherence to Medieval Christianity allowed him to suggest retribution was delivered because of sin and insult to God . He stressed that those who gained prestige would fall prey to pride ; confidence in their position would then lead them to sin , and sin would bring on a stage of decline . Villani wrote : 
 ... it seems that it happens in the lordships and states of earthly dignitaries , that as they are at their highest peak , so presently does their decline and ruin follow , and not without the providence of divine justice , in order to punish sins and so that no one should place his trust in fallacious good fortune . 
 For Villani , this theory of sin and morality being tied directly with fate and fortune fit well with the ultimate fate of the Capetian dynasty of France . The House of Capet was once the champion of the Church and ally of the papacy . However , Villani correlated Philip the Fair 's defiance of Pope Boniface VIII and seizure of the Templar 's wealth with later Capetian misfortunes , such as Philip 's death in a hunting accident , the adultery of the wives of his three sons , the death of his heirs , and even French defeats in the Hundred Years ' War . Green points out that in Villani 's writing there are two significant earthly powers that seem to be exempt or immune from this theory of immorality leading to downfall : Florence and the papacy . The interests of these two powers represent , as Green states , " the kingpin of Villani 's scheme of historical interpretation . " 
 Besides Divine Providence , Villani acknowledged other events that he believed were explainable via the supernatural . He wrote of many instances where holy men offered prophetic statements that later proved true , such as Pope Clement IV 's prophecy on the outcome for the Battle of Tagliacozzo . He believed that certain events were really omens of what was to come . For instance , when a lion was sent to Florence as a gift by Boniface VIII , a donkey purportedly killed the lion . He interpreted this as an omen that foretold the Pope 's beating and untimely death shortly after fighting Philip IV at Anagni ; Villani wrote : " when the tamed beast kills the King of Beasts , then the dissolution of the Church will begin . " He also believed in astrology and changes in the heavens as indication of political changes , the deaths of rulers and popes , and natural calamities . However , he noted that the movement of the heavens would not always <unk> the actions of men and did not trump the divine plan of God . 
 Marilyn <unk> Lavin states that Villani was most likely serving as a Peruzzi representative in Flanders when he heard the story of the French Jew who in 1290 tried to destroy Host bread ( of the Eucharist ) but was unsuccessful as the bread allegedly bled profusely as he stabbed it , and turned into flesh as he attempted to boil it in water . In the original account by the Ghent monk Jean de <unk> in 1294 , the Jew was compelled to convert to Christianity , but Villani 's account followed that of the later Chronicles of Saint @-@ Denis ( 1285 – 1328 ) which told that the Jew was burned to death for his crime . Villani 's Cronica marks the first appearance in Italian literature of this legend , while " Villani 's report includes details which establish an independent Italian branch of the tradition " according to Lavin . St. Antoninus , archbishop of Florence , repeated the story of Villani in his Latin Chronicles , while Villani 's illustrated Cronica featured a scene of this French Jew that later appeared in a painting by Paolo Uccello . 
 = = Death and continuation of Villani 's work = = 
 Villani wrote during the bubonic plague : " The priest who confessed the sick and those who nursed them so generally caught the infection that the victims were abandoned and deprived confession , sacrament , medicine , and nursing ... And many lands and cities were made desolate . And this plague lasted till _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ " ; Villani left the " _ _ _ _ _ _ _ " in order to record the time in which the plague was to end . Villani was unable to finish the line as he succumbed to the same plague . He was buried in the Church of Santissima Annunziata , Florence . 
 Villani 's Cronica was considered an important work at the time , valuable enough for his brother and nephew to continue it . Little is known of Villani 's brother , Matteo , save that he was twice married , that he died of the plague in 1363 , and that he continued work on the Cronica until his death . Filippo Villani , Matteo 's son , flourished in the latter half of the 14th century and ended the Cronica at 1364 ; his portion includes details of the lives of many Florentine artists and musicians , including Giotto di Bondone and Francesco <unk> . Filippo 's chronicles were approved by the Chancellor of Florence , Coluccio Salutati , who made corrections to the work and added commentary . The 15th @-@ century Florentine historian Domenico di Leonardo <unk> also featured in the first two chapters of his Istoria Fiorentina a summary of Villani 's Cronica . 
 By the 16th century , more than one edition of the Cronica was available in printed form . There was also an abundance of handwritten illuminated manuscripts , including one from Venice by <unk> Zanetti <unk> in 1537 and one from Florence by Lorenzo <unk> in 1554 . 
 = = Legacy and criticism = = 
 Historian J.K. Hyde states that the Nuova Cronica of Villani is representative of the strong vernacular tradition in Florence , appealing to the people of the time as a narrative that was " easy to read , full of human interest and occasionally spiced with novella @-@ type anecdotes . " Hyde also notes that Villani 's criticisms of the commune politics in Florence promoted a trend of personal expression amongst later chroniclers that defied official conformity . The Cronica is also an incredibly rich historical record ; its greatest value to modern historians is its descriptions of the people , data , and events experienced by Villani during his lifetime . Historian Mark Phillips states that all subsequent Florentine accounts of the tyrannical regime of Walter VI of Brienne — including those by Leonardo Bruni and Niccolò Machiavelli — were based upon the primary source of Villani 's Cronica . Villani 's written work on Dante Alighieri and the age in which he lived has provided insight into Dante 's work , reasoning , and psyche . The reprinting of new editions of Villani 's work in the early 20th century provided material for a resurgence in the study of Dante . However , Villani 's descriptions of events which preceded him by centuries are riddled with inaccurate traditional accounts , popular legend , and hearsay . 
 In regard to his own time , Villani provides modern historians with valuable details on Florentine social and living habits , such as the growing trend and craze of wealthy Florentines in building large country homes far outside of the city . However , the early 20th @-@ century historian Philip Wicksteed stated of Villani , " When dealing with his own times , and with events immediately connected with Florence , he is a trustworthy witness , but minute accuracy is never his strong point ; and in dealing with distant times and places he is hopelessly unreliable . " For example , although Nicolai Rubinstein acknowledged that Villani 's chronicles were much more matured and developed than earlier ones , Villani still relied on legend and hearsay to account for the origins of cities such as Fiesole . On Villani 's estimation that a third of Antwerp 's population died off during the Great Famine of 1315 @-@ 1317 , the early 20th @-@ century historian Henry S. Lucas wrote , " not much faith can be placed in such statistics which are little better than guesses . " Louis Green notes Villani 's limitation as a chronicler and not a full @-@ fledged historian : 
 Recording as he did incidents in the order of their occurrence without any of the historian 's pretensions to a thematic organization of his material , he could not feed back the lessons of a changing present into a reinterpreted past . Nor did his devotion to the justification and glorification of Florence permit him to see in the altered fortunes of his city a repetition of the pattern of decline he had illustrated in the histories of the great dynasties of his age . 
 Louis Green asserts that Giovanni 's Cronica expressed the outlook of the merchant community in Florence at the time , but also provided valuable indications of " how that outlook was modified in a direction away from characteristically medieval to <unk> modern attitudes . " Green writes that Villani 's Cronica was one of three types of chronicles found in the 14th century , the type which was largely a universal history . Other types would be chronicles of particular historic episodes such as Dino <unk> 's account of the White Guelphs and Black Guelphs or the more domestic chronicle that focused on the fortunes and events of one family , as written by Donato <unk> or Giovanni Morelli . 
 = SAS Institute = 
 SAS Institute ( or SAS , pronounced " sass " ) is an American multinational developer of analytics software based in Cary , North Carolina . SAS develops and markets a suite of analytics software ( also called SAS ) , which helps access , manage , analyze and report on data to aid in decision @-@ making . The company is the world 's largest privately held software business and its software is used by most of the Fortune 500 . 
 SAS has developed a model workplace environment and benefits program designed to retain employees , allow them to focus on their work , and reduce operating costs . It provides on @-@ site , subsidized or free healthcare , gyms , daycare and life counseling services . 
 SAS Institute started as a project at North Carolina State University to create a statistical analysis system ( hence the proper name , Statistical Analysis System ) that was originally used primarily by agricultural departments at universities in the late 1960s . It became an independent , private business led by current CEO James Goodnight and three other project leaders from the university in 1976 . SAS grew from $ 10 million in revenues in 1980 to $ 1 @.@ 1 billion by 2000 . A larger proportion of these revenues are spent on research and development than at most other software companies , at one point more than double the industry average . 
 = = History = = 
 The Statistical Analysis System ( SAS ) began as a project at North Carolina State University 's agricultural department . It was originally led by Anthony James Barr in 1966 , then joined by NCSU graduate student James Goodnight in 1967 and John Sall in 1973 . In the early 1970s , the software was primarily leased to other agricultural departments in order to analyze the effect soil , weather and seed varieties had on crop yields . The project was funded by the National Institutes of Health and later by a coalition of university statistics programs called the University Statisticians of the Southern Experiment Stations . 
 By 1976 the software had 100 customers and 300 people attended the first SAS user conference in Kissimmee , Florida that year . Goodnight , Barr , Sall and another early participant , Jane Helwig , founded SAS Institute Inc. as a private company on July 1 , 1976 , in offices across the street from the university . Barr and Helwig later sold their interest in the company . 
 SAS ' tradition of polling users for suggestions to improve the software through the <unk> Ballot was adopted during its first year of operation . Many of the company 's employee perks , such as fresh fruit , reasonable work hours and free M & M 's every Wednesday became part of the company 's practices that first year . In the late 1970s , the company established its first marketing department . 
 SAS started building its current headquarters in a forested area of Cary , North Carolina in 1980 . Later that year it started providing on @-@ site daycare in order to keep an employee that was planning on being a stay @-@ at @-@ home mom . By 1984 , SAS had begun building a fitness center , medical center , on @-@ site cafe and other facilities . It had also developed some of its other benefits programs . SAS became known as a good place to work and was frequently recognized by national magazines like BusinessWeek , Working Mother and Fortune for its work environment . 
 During the 1980s , SAS was one of Inc . Magazine 's fastest growing companies in America from 1979 and 1985 . It grew more than ten percent per year from $ 10 million in revenues in 1980 to $ 1 @.@ 1 billion by 2000 . In 2007 , SAS revenue was $ 2 @.@ 15 billion , and in 2013 its revenue was $ 3 @.@ 02 billion . By the late 1990s , SAS was the largest privately held software company . The Associated Press reported that analysts attributed the growth to aggressive R & D spending . It had the highest ratio of its revenues spent on R & D in the industry for eight years , setting a record of 34 percent of its revenues in 1993 , as it was working on a new menu @-@ based interface . The company began its relationship with Microsoft and development for Windows operating systems in 1989 . Shortly afterwards it established partnerships with database companies like Oracle , <unk> and <unk> . 
 An education division was created in 1997 to create software for schools , including the newly formed Cary Academy . In 2003 the Bank of America Foundation purchased and donated licenses for the software to 400 schools in North Carolina . SAS funded its first advertising program in 2000 with a $ 30 million television and radio campaign . 
 The company considered making 25 percent of the company available on the stock market and providing employees with stock @-@ options during the dot @-@ com bubble before the following downturn , but ultimately chose not to . SAS was one of the few technology companies that did well during the downturn and hired aggressively to take advantage of available staff . 
 In 2009 , SAS filed a lawsuit against World Programming Ltd . , alleging World Programming System — a software product designed to use the features of the SAS language — violated their copyright as it was reverse engineered from the functionality of SAS Learning Edition . The European Court of Justice ruled that functionality and language elements were not protected and the case was discussed in Oracle v. Google 
 SAS introduced its first reseller program intended to grow sales with small to medium @-@ sized businesses in 2006 . Leading up to 2007 , SAS provided funding and curriculum assistance to help start the Master of Science in Analytics program at nearby North Carolina State University . The company 's cloud @-@ based products grew in revenues by 35 percent in 2014 and the construction of Building Q was completed late that year to house its corresponding operations . 
 In March 2014 , SAS launched its SAS Analytics U initiative to provide free foundational technologies and support to teachers and students . 
 = = Operations = = 
 SAS Institute has grown in revenue each year since it was incorporated in 1976 . About 20 @-@ 30 % of the company 's revenues are spent on research and development , which is the highest ratio among software companies of its size . In 1994 , Computerworld found that out of the world 's 50 largest software companies , SAS spent 2 @.@ 5 times the industry average on R & D. As of 2010 revenues come relatively evenly from Europe , Africa , the Middle East and the Americas . According to the company 's 2014 financial reporting , its revenues are currently 46 @.@ 7 percent from the Americas , 41 @.@ 4 from Europe , Middle East and Africa , and 11 @.@ 9 percent from Asia @-@ Pacific . SAS has about 5 @,@ 200 employees at its headquarters in Cary , North Carolina , 1 @,@ 600 employees elsewhere in the US and 6 @,@ 900 in Europe , Asia , Canada or Latin America . CEO James Goodnight owns about two @-@ thirds of the company and co @-@ founder John Sall owns the other one @-@ third . 
 = = Workplace = = 
 SAS is well known for its workplace culture . The company was used as a model for workplace perks at Google and is taught as a case study in management seminars at Stanford . SAS has been identified as a " Best Company to Work For " in Fortune 's annual rankings each year since the list 's inception in 1997 . In 2014 , SAS ranked No. 2 on the elite Top 25 World 's Best Multinational <unk> list from Great Place to Work as well as No. 2 among Fortune ’ s 2014 Best Companies to Work For in the US . SAS was No. 1 on the US list in 2010 and 2011 . On March 5 , 2015 , Fortune ranked SAS No. 4 on its annual list of best companies to work for in the US . On March 5 , 2016 , Fortune ranked SAS No. 8 , down from number 4 in 2015 on its annual list of best companies to work for in the US . It is also regularly in Working Mother Magazine 's " 100 Best Companies for Working Mothers " list . 
 = = = Benefits = = = 
 SAS offers on @-@ site day care services to its employees for 850 children for about a third of the normal cost . Medical services are provided to employees and their families for free and 80 % of the cost is covered for specialists . Employees are encouraged to work 35 @-@ hour weeks and have free access to a recreation and fitness center as well as life counseling services . It also hosts a summer camp for children and operates on @-@ site cafeterias and cafes . 22 @.@ 5 tons of M & Ms are provided each year , in jars that are re @-@ filled every Wednesday . Similar amenities are provided at its other offices besides its headquarters . 
 95 percent of a company ’ s assets drive out the front gate every night , the CEO must see to it that they return the following day . 
 SAS spokespeople say its employee benefits are provided for business , not altruistic , reasons . The company evaluates new benefits using three criteria : whether it would benefit the company culture , whether it would serve a significant number of employees and whether it would save more money than is spent on it . According to academics , the company 's practices improve the loyalty , focus and creativity of its staff . Professor Jeffrey Pfeffer from the Stanford Graduate School of Business estimated that the company saves $ 60 – $ 80 million annually in expenses related to employee turnover . SAS has an annual employee turnover of three to five percent , while the software industry 's average is 20 to 25 percent . According to USA Today , the workplace culture has created " intensely loyal " staff who care about the company 's well @-@ being . Even though there are unlimited sick days , the average employee takes only two . The 40 @,@ 000 free medical visits provided to employees annually are estimated to cost the company $ 4 @.@ 5 million USD , but save it $ 5 million USD due to the employee productivity lost when staff spend their work @-@ hours in waiting rooms at other hospitals . 
 = = = Structure and culture = = = 
 SAS has a limited corporate hierarchy and an egalitarian culture . As the company grew it created new divisions , instead of layers of management , creating a flat , simple organizational structure . According to professor Jeffrey Pfeffer from Stanford , there are only three levels in the organization and CEO Jim Goodnight has 27 people who directly report to him . The organizational structure is fluid and employees can change roles rapidly . 
 Managers are involved in the day @-@ to @-@ day work with their employees . Employees are given a large extent of autonomy and developers are encouraged to pursue experimental product ideas . Input from customers guides the company 's marketing and software development . According to SAS , 80 percent of suggestions for product improvements are incorporated into the software . The dress code is informal . According to Fast Company , employees describe the environment as " relaxed . " 
 Employees are encouraged to do volunteer work and the company makes donation to non @-@ profits where employees are involved . The company primarily focuses its philanthropic efforts on improving education . It funds pilot programs for new education models , donates laptops and provides free online software for classrooms called Curriculum Pathways . 
 = = Acquisitions = = 
 = = Software = = 
 As of 2012 , SAS is the largest privately owned software company in the world . It develops , supports and markets a suite of analytics software also called SAS ( statistical analysis system ) , which captures , stores , modifies , analyzes and presents data . The SAS system and SAS programming language are used by most of the Fortune 500 . The SAS software includes a Base SAS component that performs analytical functions and more than 200 other modules that add graphics , spreadsheets or other features . SAS Institute also sells the JMP suite of statistical analysis software , which consists of JMP , JMP Pro , JMP Clinical and JMP Genomics . 
 Some of the uses for SAS ' software include analyzing financial transactions for indications of fraud , optimizing prices for retailers , or evaluating the results of clinical trials . As of 2012 , SAS is the largest market @-@ share holder in the advanced analytics segment with a 36 @.@ 2 percent share and the fifth largest for business intelligence software with a 6 @.@ 9 percent share . SAS typically sells its software with an emphasis on subscription models that include support and updates , as opposed to software licenses . 
 = = User community = = 
 The SAS certification program was established in 1999 @.@ and SAS Publishing was created in 2000 as a separate entity that works to increase the availability of SAS @-@ related books . SAS Publishing hosts an online bookstore , develops product documentation and publishes SAS @-@ related books authored by users . There are more than 200 SAS users groups devoted to a specialty , an individual client , or a geography . There are local , regional , national and international users groups 
 = Typhoon Betty ( 1987 ) = 
 Typhoon Betty , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Herming , was a powerful and destructive tropical cyclone that struck the Philippines in August 1987 . The seventh typhoon and second super typhoon of the active typhoon season , it formed from the monsoon trough that spawned a tropical cyclone on August 8 while around positioned well to the east of the Philippines . It drifted northwestward , becoming a tropical storm on August 9 and a typhoon on August 10 . Betty turned westward , where it rapidly intensified before attaining peak intensity on August 11 . The next day , Typhoon Betty made landfall in the central Philippines . Betty weakened rapidly over the country , but restrengthened somewhat over the South China Sea . Land interaction weakened Betty slightly before it hit central Vietnam on August 16 . The next day , Betty dissipated . 
 Across the Philippines , Typhoon Betty brought widespread flooding , which resulted in severe destruction . Damage added up to $ 100 million ( 1987 USD ) . In the Maguindanao and Albay provinces alone , 10 @,@ 000 people were evacuated and 1 @,@ 000 were homeless . However , the capital city of Manila avoided any serious damage . Nationwide , around 200 @,@ 000 people were reportedly homeless , 18 @,@ 000 of winch were from Marinduque and another 11 @,@ 400 resided on Mindoro Island . In the former , 4 @,@ 000 dwellings sustained damage , and all of the banana crop there was lost . In all , 25 @,@ 518 homes received damage . Roughly 400 @,@ 000 people were directly affected by the storm . Overall , 85 people were killed and 324 others were wounded . After striking the Philippines , six people were killed by Betty in Vietnam . Approximately 10 @,@ 000 structures were damaged and 103 people were injured . Elsewhere , in northern Thailand , one person was killed and three others were hurt by the typhoon . Several villages were flooded , and numerous streets were damaged . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Typhoon Betty can be traced back to a tropical disturbance that was embedded in the monsoon trough on August 7 , which extended from the Marshall Islands westward to the Philippines . Intensity estimates via the Dvorak technique yielded winds of 50 km / h ( 30 mph ) around 65 km ( 40 mi ) north @-@ northwest of <unk> in the western Caroline Islands . Following a rapid increase in organization , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert ( TCFA ) for the system early on August 8 . Meanwhile , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) started tracking the system . Around this time , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration also monitored the storm and assigned it with the local name Herming . Early on August 9 , Betty intensified into a tropical storm about 1 @,@ 320 km ( 820 mi ) east @-@ southeast of Manila during the morning of August 9 . 
 Betty continued to intensify , and by midday , the storm attained winds of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) . By the evening of August 9 , the JMA upgraded Betty to a severe tropical storm . At 0000 UTC on August 10 , both the JMA and JTWC believed that Betty attained typhoon intensity . Tracking westward Betty began an episode of explosive deepening as expected by the JTWC . At noon , the JTWC reported that Betty attained winds of 160 km / h ( 99 mph ) , equivalent to a Category 2 hurricane on the United States Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale ( SSHWS ) . By 0000 UTC on August 11 , the agency upgraded Betty to an equivalent of a Category 4 hurricane . Later that day , the JMA estimated that Betty attained its peak maximum sustained wind of 190 km / h ( 120 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 890 mbar ( 26 inHg ) . However , the JTWC indicated that the system was considerably stronger , with maximum sustained winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) . This concluded the storm intensification period ; according to the JTWC , Betty strengthened 93 mbar ( 2 @.@ 7 inHg ) in a 37 @-@ hour time frame . Furthermore , Betty was the deepest storm of the season , and one of the most powerful storms ever recorded . 
 At peak , which it maintained for 12 hours , Betty exhibited a small but well @-@ defined eye surrounded by very cold cloud tops . Thereafter , Betty began to weaken as it moved over the central Philippines . Accelerating , Betty continued on a westward track while passing south of a subtropical ridge . According to the JTWC , winds quickly decreased to 190 km / h ( 120 mph ) , and by the time it emerged into the South China Sea early on August 13 , the typhoon 's winds had diminished to 180 km / h ( 110 mph ) , equivalent to a high @-@ end Category 2 on the SSHWS . The JMA estimated that Betty was slightly weaker , with winds of 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) . Moving west @-@ northwest , Betty began to deepen over open water . By midday , the JMA increased the intensity of Typhoon Betty to 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) . On the morning of August 14 , the JTWC remarked that Betty reached its secondary peak intensity of 210 km / h ( 130 mph ) . Despite this , intensity estimates from the JMA note that Betty did not intensify any further . 
 After attaining its secondary peak intensity , Betty began to deteriorate as it began to interact with Vietnam . After entering the Gulf of Tonkin , Betty made landfall 350 km ( 215 mi ) south of Hanoi in northern Vietnam on August 16 . At the time of landfall , the JMA estimated winds of 135 km / h ( 85 mph ) and the JTWC estimated winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . According to the JMA , Betty weakened to a tropical storm on evening of August 16 . It then swept across Laos and eventually dissipated over northern Thailand near Chiang Mai during the evening of August 17 . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 Under the anticipation that Betty would strike the Philippines , weather alerts were issued in 11 provinces . Manila was placed on " stage three " alert initially , but after the storm passed south of the city , it was downgraded to " stage two " alert . School classes were suspended and residents in low @-@ lying areas were asked to be ready to evacuate . Warnings urging residents to prepare for the storm were broadcast via television . Eighteen ships were also evacuated . Many radio stations were closed . 
 Typhoon Betty battered the Philippines at peak intensity , bringing heavy rains while also becoming the deepest tropical cyclone to affect the island nation since Typhoon Ike of the 1984 Pacific typhoon season . It also leveled trees and crops , demolished houses , and knocked down power lines . Many highways , crops , buildings , and homes were destroyed . 
 Eight @-@ five people perished as a result of Typhoon Betty while 17 were reported missing . Two people were killed in San Pablo ; four died in the city of Batangas . Five people were killed when they drowned in when their boat was capsized in the rough waters of the Pacific . One person was missing and five others were injured . In the Laguna province , three people , including a 6 year old boy were killed . In the resort of Tagaytay , many homes lost their roofs . Communication was lost in the Quezon province . Elsewhere , roughly 2 @,@ 500 individuals were evacuated to shelter in Legazpi , many of whom were houses in schools and churches . However , the metropolis of Manila escaped any major damage , although power was lost in some places . 
 Along the Maguindanao and Albay provinces , 10 @,@ 000 people were evacuated and crop damage totaled $ 50 @,@ 000 ; in the latter alone , 1 @,@ 000 families were displaced . Typhoon Betty also destroyed 70 homes on Masbate Island , forcing the evacuation of 412 . Five people were also killed on the island . In Marinduque , five casualties occurred and at least 4 @,@ 000 houses were damaged . There , 100 % of all banana and coconut trees were destroyed . The Sorsogon province sustained the worst effects from the storm , where there were 18 fatalities and at least 57 @,@ 000 homes were demolished . Moreover , 19 people died on Samar Island . Six fisherman were also listed as missing . 
 Along southern Luzon , railway service was suspended and 11 domestic flights in and out of the country on August 12 were cancelled . The next day , Philippine Airlines called off all domestic flights , including three flights each to Hong Kong , Taipei and Tokyo were cancelled . Trading was suspended on the Manila and Makati stock exchanges for a day . 
 Overall , damage amounted to more than PHP 2 billion ( $ 100 million 1987 USD ) , including $ 6 million in the provinces of Batangas and Samar . Damage to roads totaled $ 2 @.@ 1 million . Nationwide , around 200 @,@ 000 people were reportedly homeless , including 18 @,@ 000 in Marinduque and 11 @,@ 400 on Mindoro Island . A total of 25 @,@ 518 homes were damaged . Roughly 400 @,@ 000 people were directly affected by the storm , 371 of which were injured . A few months following the passage of Betty , the nation itself was hit by Typhoon Nina . 
 After striking the Philippines , six people were killed by Betty in Vietnam . Approximately 10 @,@ 000 structures were damaged and 103 people were wounded . Nearly 25 @,@ 000 acres ( 10 @,@ 000 ha ) of rice fields were destroyed and nearly 10 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @,@ 000 ha ) of other farmland sustained damage In northern Thailand , one person was killed and three others were hurt by the typhoon . Several villages were flooded , and many roads were damaged . 
 Following the storm , Philippine President Corazon Aquino declared a state of calamity in more than a dozen provinces . Within a few days after Betty hit , the Philippine Airlines resumed normal flight schedules and schools were reopened . 
 = Ontario Highway 403 = 
 King 's Highway 403 ( pronounced " four @-@ oh @-@ three " ) , or simply Highway 403 , is a 400 @-@ series highway in the Canadian province of Ontario that travels between Woodstock and Mississauga , branching off from and reuniting with Highway 401 at both ends and travelling south of it through Hamilton and Mississauga . It is concurrent with the Queen Elizabeth Way ( QEW ) for 22 km ( 14 mi ) from Burlington to Oakville . Highway 403 is also known as the Chedoke Expressway within Hamilton . Although the Highway 403 designation was first applied in 1963 to a short stub of freeway branching off of the QEW , the entire route was not completed until August 15 , 1997 , when the Brantford to the then @-@ still independent Town of Ancaster section was opened to traffic . The section of Highway 403 between Woodstock and Burlington was formally dedicated as the Alexander Graham Bell Parkway on April 27 , 2016 . 
 The majority of Highway 403 is surrounded by suburban land use , except west of Ancaster , where it passes through agricultural land ; Brantford is the only urban area through this section . In Hamilton , Highway 403 descends the Niagara Escarpment . It wraps around the northern side of Burlington Bay to encounter the QEW . From there , it travels straight through Burlington and Oakville with the QEW , departing to the north at the Mississauga – Oakville boundary . The freeway then crosses through the centre of Mississauga in an east – west direction , serving its city centre , before turning north . It continues north of Highway 401 as Highway 410 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Woodstock to Burlington = = = 
 Highway 403 begins at a junction with Highway 401 on the outskirts of Woodstock . The eastbound lanes split from eastbound Highway 401 , whereas the westbound lanes merge into westbound Highway 401 . It travels along the back lot lines of the second concession south of former Highway 2 . It passes beneath Oxford County Road 55 ( formerly Highway 53 ) and curves southeast . After crossing into the third concession , it curves back to the east . The highway travels straight for several kilometres , meeting with the southern leg of Highway 24 , which travels south to Simcoe . 
 The highway crosses the Grand River to the south of Paris , then passes over former Highway 2 as it enters into Brantford . As it passes through Brantford , the highway angles southeast and passes beneath the northern leg of Highway 24 and then the Wayne Gretzky Parkway . The route exits the small city to the east and curves northeast shortly thereafter . It travels between <unk> Road and former Highway 2 to Ancaster , jogging to avoid cutting through <unk> Lake . As the freeway enters Ancaster , it once again crosses former Highway 2 and dips through the southern side of the town . 
 East of Ancaster , the freeway passes through a short greenbelt , with Hamilton Golf and Country Club lying to the north . A divided segment of Highway 6 meets the freeway and continues concurrently with it through Hamilton ; to the south , Highway 6 travels to John C. Munro International Airport , Caledonia and Jarvis at Highway 3 . Continuing east , Highway 403 and Highway 6 curve north into Hamilton and meet the Lincoln M. Alexander Parkway before abruptly curving to the east and descending the Niagara Escarpment . Scenic views of Hamilton , its harbour , and Lower Princess Falls are located along this steep descent . At the bottom of the escarpment the highway travels through a narrow , heavily developed corridor alongside former Highway 8 . It passes beneath multiple bridges in a depressed trench , eventually curving north at a sharp corner and passing beneath more bridges . This section features a reduced speed limit of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) as opposed to 100 km / h ( 60 mph ) . The highway returns to ground level alongside the Chedoke Creek , a now @-@ channelized river from which the freeway may take its name . 
 As the freeway continues north , it crosses an isthmus between Hamilton Harbour and Cootes Paradise alongside several roads which it has served to replace . It circles around the northern shore of Hamilton Harbour and returns to an eastward orientation . The concurrency with Highway 6 ends at an interchange where Highway 403 continues east and Highway 6 travels north towards Guelph . The freeway continues straight for several kilometres and meets the Queen Elizabeth Way and Highway 407 at the Freeman Interchange . 
 = = = Oakville to Mississauga = = = 
 Highway 403 travels concurrently with the QEW for 22 @.@ 6 km ( 14 @.@ 0 mi ) between Freeman and Oakville , a straight section surrounded almost entirely by commercial units and warehouses . At the Ford Assembly Plant near the Halton – Peel regional boundary , Highway 403 branches off from the QEW and heads north for 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) along the western edge of Mississauga . At that point it again meets Highway 407 . Both freeways interchange , but curve to avoid each other . Highway 407 continues to the north and west , while Highway 403 curves east to follow alongside a hydro corridor through the centre of Mississauga . From this interchange to Highway 401 , high @-@ occupancy vehicle ( HOV ) lanes are present in the shoulder lanes for vehicles with at least one passenger . Sandwiched between residential subdivisions on both sides , the freeway passes beneath Erin Mills Parkway and crosses the Credit River . 
 On the other side of the river , the freeway skirts to the north of downtown Mississauga , as well as the Square One Shopping Centre . It passes beneath Hurontario Street ( once a section of Highway 10 ) and begins to widen before abruptly curving to the north as it approaches Cawthra Road . As the curve ends , the freeway widens further into ten lanes . This short section of highway passes beneath Eglinton Avenue and begins to diverge into a sprawling interchange approaching Highway 401 . Access to Highway 410 , which continues northward to Brampton , is provided from the collector lanes . 
 = = History = = 
 Highway 403 , although one of the first divided highways conceived for Ontario , is one of the most recently completed freeways in the province ; the multiple segments of the route did not become continuous until 2002 . Planning for the route was underway by 1958 , with the completion of the Freeman Bypass along the QEW providing a three @-@ legged junction for the new freeway . Sections of Highway 403 through Hamilton opened between December 1963 and September 1969 . An isolated section known as the Brantford Bypass was opened in October 1966 , and would remain unconnected to other freeways for over 20 years . Plans for a third segment through Mississauga were contemplated throughout the 1960s , but were not finalized until late 1977 , after which construction began . Portions opened at both ends in 1980 and 1981 , while the central gap , crossing the Credit River , was completed in December 1982 . 
 Construction to bridge the gaps in Highway 403 between Ancaster and Woodstock was carried out over three major phases . The first phase was a short extension of the Brantford Bypass beginning in 1975 . Later , work began to connect that extension with Highway 401 near Woodstock , opening in 1988 . The last phase , between Ancaster and Brantford , was opened in 1997 . The final discontinuity , between Burlington and Oakville , was signed as a concurrency with the QEW in 2002 . Originally , this section was to have travelled along the corridor occupied by Highway 407 , until budget shortfalls in 1995 resulted in a change of plans . 
 = = = Predecessors = = = 
 The corridor that connects London and Hamilton has always been considered important to Ontario . In late October 1793 , Captain Smith and 100 Queen 's Rangers returned from carving The Governor 's Road 32 km ( 20 mi ) through the thick forests between Dundas and the present location of Paris . John Graves Simcoe was tasked with defending Upper Canada from America following the revolution and with opening the virgin territory to settlement . After establishing a " temporary " capital at York , Simcoe ordered an inland route constructed between Cootes Paradise at the tip of Lake Ontario and his proposed capital of London . By the spring of 1794 , the road was extended as far as La Tranche , now the Thames River . Today , most of this route forms part of former Highway 2 and former Highway 5 . 
 The paving of the divided four @-@ lane Middle Road , with gentle curves , a grass median and grade @-@ separated interchanges , would set the stage for the freeway concept . It was the first intercity freeway in North America when it opened in June 1939 . Thomas McQueston , the new minister of the Department of Highways and the man most responsible for the Middle Road , decided to apply the concept to sections of Highway 2 plagued with congestion . A portion east of Woodstock was rebuilt in this fashion , but World War II would put an end to the ambitions of McQueston , at least temporarily . 
 = = = Initial construction = = = 
 The end of the Korean War heralded the resuming of freeway construction in Ontario ; the advances in machinery more than made up for lost time . The construction of Highway 401 across the province took first priority . However , the opening of the section from Highway 4 near London to Highway 2 east of Woodstock on May 31 , 1957 would complete part of the route required between London and Hamilton . By 1958 , planning on the Chedoke Expressway , or Controlled Access Highway 403 was well underway , though plans for a four lane freeway between Woodstock and Hamilton were around as early as 1954 . The opening of the Freeman Bypass of the QEW in August 1958 provided a connection point for a new freeway , and construction began the same day that the Burlington Bay Skyway opened : October 31 , 1958 . Highway 403 between Longwood Road ( Highway 2 ) and the QEW was opened to traffic on December 1 , 1963 at a length of 9 @.@ 0 km ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) . Work was already underway on the next section of the route that would extend it to Aberdeen Avenue . That section opened on July 9 , 1965 , extending the freeway by 3 @.@ 7 km ( 2 @.@ 3 mi ) . 
 Meanwhile , to the west , work had begun on a bypass of Brantford . The new freeway passed north of the city between Paris Road in the west and the junction of Highway 2 and Highway 53 in the east , a distance of 10 @.@ 3 km ( 6 @.@ 4 mi ) ; it opened October 31 , 1966 . A portion of the Brantford Bypass was itself bypassed in 1997 when the final section of Highway 403 was completed and is known as Garden Avenue . However , the Brantford Bypass would remain an isolated section of Highway 403 for over 20 years . 
 In Hamilton , work was underway on an extension of the Chedoke Expressway to Mohawk Road , crossing the Niagara Escarpment . This tedious project , which required extensive rock blasting , was soon accompanied by further construction from Mohawk Road to Highway 2 near Ancaster . Both projects were completed together and originally scheduled to be opened with a ribbon @-@ cutting ceremony on August 22 , 1969 . However , local residents complained that the new section lacked any barriers preventing children from wandering onto the highway , postponing the ceremony until August 27 as temporary snow fencing was erected . This proved inadequate and protests grew more vocal over the following week . Several petitions were presented to Deputy Highway Minister H. Howden on August 26 , and the ceremonies were promptly cancelled . Over the following week , the Minister of Highways George Gomme met with residents and reached a compromise whereby a 24 – hour patrol was established to watch for children until a proper fence could be constructed . The route was subsequently opened on September 3 , without any ceremony . This completed the Hamilton section of Highway 403 . 
 = = = Mississauga = = = 
 Planning for the segment of Highway 403 through Mississauga dates back to the late 1950s when the Hamilton Expressway appeared on the Metropolitan Toronto 's regional transportation plan . It was to be a continuation of the Richview Expressway , which was ultimately never built , continuing from Toronto to Hamilton . The plan featured the expressway 's eastern terminus at the Highway 401 and Highway 427 interchange . As Toronto 's anti @-@ expressway movement gained momentum , provincial plans shifted the Hamilton Expressway to the west near Etobicoke Creek . In 1962 , the right @-@ of @-@ way alongside the hydro corridor between Burlington and Etobicoke Creek was protected after traffic studies indicated the need for a future freeway . On May 25 , 1965 , the Department of Highways unveiled the Toronto Region Western Section Highway Planning Study . The plan designated Highway 403 north from Burlington and then parallel with the QEW to Highway 401 near Highway 27 . 
 By the time construction was actually underway , plans had been completely modified to connect the overburdened QEW at Oakville with Highway 401 at the new Highway 410 interchange . This interchange was a better connection point for Highway 403 , but would also require the widening of Highway 401 from six lanes to twelve . Plans were submitted and approved in December 1977 by Mississauga city council , and construction began . 
 The new freeway opened in sections during the early 1980s . The first section between Cawthra Road and Highway 401 was opened August 18 , 1980 . This was followed by a short section from Highway 5 ( Dundas Street ) south to the QEW at Ford Drive , which opened in mid @-@ 1981 . Later that year , an extension to Erin Mills Parkway was opened on November 17 , 1981 . The final section to be opened took the longest to complete , involving construction of two bridges over the Credit River valley ; it opened on December 2 , 1982 . The cost of the entire 22 km ( 13 @.@ 7 mi ) Mississauga segment was $ 87 million . 
 Around the same period , the Ministry of Transportation began to study upgrading Highway 401 to a collector – express system between Renforth Drive and Highway 403 , and along Highway 403 between Highway 401 and Highway 10 . This took place between late 1982 and the summer of 1985 ; the existing outermost ramps from Highway 403 to Highway 401 eastbound were re @-@ designated to serve collector traffic , as a pair of flyover ramps were added inside the interchange to serve motorists in the express lanes . 
 The right @-@ of @-@ way originally intended for Highway 403 between Cawthra Road and Etobicoke Creek was eventually used for a controlled access arterial extension called Eastgate Parkway , which was planned beginning in 1982 . The extension was built between 1988 and 1994 , incorporating a portion of Fieldgate Drive at the eastern end . The first section , between Cawthra Road and Dixie Road , opened in early 1991 . This was followed several years later by the section from Dixie Road to Eglinton Avenue that opened in late 1994 . 
 In the fall of 1991 , alongside the widening of Highway 410 into a full freeway , construction began on the connecting ramps between Highway 403 and Highway 410 , which pass under the existing bridge structures for Highway 401 collector traffic , while new overpasses were constructed in the centre for Highway 401 express lanes . The loop ramp from Highway 410 southbound to Highway 401 eastbound was replaced by a semi @-@ directional high @-@ speed flyover , while a new directional ramp and semi @-@ direction flyover were added to serve westbound Highway 401 commuters . Prior to the opening of this link , traffic from both freeways was forced onto eastbound Highway 401 . The 2 @.@ 2 km ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) link opened on November 2 , 1992 at a cost of $ 7 @.@ 3 million . 
 = = = Bridging the gaps = = = 
 In 1975 , construction began on a westward extension of the Brantford Bypass , from Highway 2 ( Paris Road ) to Rest Acres Road , which would become Highway 24 . This work consisted of the twin bridges over the Grand River and an interchange at Rest Acres Road . The Canadian National Railway underpass west of Highway 2 was built by the railway . By the beginning of 1978 , this work was completed . Work resumed west of Highway 24 during the spring of 1982 to connect with Highway 401 near Woodstock in order to relieve the high traffic volumes along Highway 2 . This included interchanges at Brant County Road 25 and Highway 53 . A section from Highway 24 to County Road 25 was opened in November 1984 , followed by the section west of there to Highway 53 one year later . Construction of the gap between Highway 53 and Highway 401 began in late 1985 , followed by the Highway 401 overpass for the westbound lanes , which began in 1987 . Transportation minister Ed Fulton ceremoniously opened the new freeway connection on September 26 , 1988 , completing the Woodstock to Brantford link . 
 Highway 403 was briefly left with three discontinuous sections : Woodstock – Brantford , Ancaster – Burlington , and Oakville – Mississauga . Between Brantford and Ancaster , traffic was defaulted onto Highway 2 , a four @-@ lane road with numerous private driveways and at @-@ grade intersections . On March 24 , 1987 , Chris Ward , MPP for Wentworth North officially announced that construction of the missing link between Brantford and Ancaster would begin in 1989 . Construction did not actually begin until the summer of 1990 . It included interchanges at Garden Avenue , Highway 52 and Highway 2 . A continuous construction program was carried out over the next seven years , with the link opening on August 15 , 1997 . Highway 2 , which was the only parallel route before the completion of Highway 403 , was subsequently downloaded to regional jurisdiction . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Though some officials considered Highway 403 to be a perfect example of a freeway construction process , it was not built without its share of controversy . In addition to the previously mentioned issues that occurred in 1969 , portions of the freeway through Mississauga were built alongside established communities , leading to angry homeowners associations pressuring the province for noise mitigation measures and compensation . 
 In the late 1980s and early 1990s , the Mississauga section of Highway 403 was the site of more than two dozen fatal accidents over a five @-@ year period , one of the highest rates in North America at the time , despite being up to modern road standards . This led Peel Regional Police and the media to nickname it the ' Death Highway ' . In particular , the stretch from Mavis Road to Erin Mills Parkway has been the site of numerous accidents . Highway 403 features a downward slope as motorists head eastbound towards the Mavis Road interchange ; drivers complain of having to slam the brakes when traffic comes to a standstill , leading to rear @-@ end collisions . There is also glare from the sun that causes vision problems throughout the day . 
 = = = Recent construction = = = 
 The Hamilton @-@ Brantford and Mississauga sections of Highway 403 were initially planned to be linked up along the corridor that is now occupied by Highway 407 . However , these plans were altered by the Bob Rae government in 1995 , due to budgetary constraints . It was also announced that the Mississauga section of Highway 403 would be renumbered as Highway 410 . Ultimately , this never came to pass . Consequently , Highway 403 was signed concurrently along the Queen Elizabeth Way in 2002 , remedying the discontinuity . 
 In early 2001 , high @-@ mast lighting was scheduled to be added to the previously unlit Mississauga section between Highway 407 and Eastgate Parkway . In 2003 , the right shoulders between Erin Mills Parkway and Mavis Road were widened for GO Transit and Mississauga Transit to run express bus services . These projects preceded the widening of Highway 403 between Highway 407 and Highway 401 / 410 , through which a high @-@ occupancy vehicle ( HOV ) lane was added in each direction ; the project started in summer of 2004 and these opened on December 13 , 2005 . The HOV lanes and the dividing Ontario Tall Wall concrete barrier were constructed using the existing right @-@ of @-@ way provided by the grass median . Highway 403 between Woodstock and Burlington was formally dedicated as the Alexander Graham Bell Parkway on April 27 , 2016 . 
 Sufficient right @-@ of @-@ way exists at the Highway 401 / 403 / 410 junction for a loop ramp from Highway 403 eastbound to Highway 401 westbound , and a directional ramp for the opposite movement . This would give Highway 401 eastbound traffic direct access to Cawthra Road , making it a full four @-@ way interchange . These links are to be completed as Highway 401 is widened to a 12 @-@ lane collector @-@ express system west of the interchange . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 403 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = Seal of Dartmouth College = 
 The Seal of Dartmouth College is the official insignia of Dartmouth College , an Ivy League university located in Hanover , New Hampshire , United States . Anglo @-@ American law generally requires a corporate body to seek official government sanction , usually in the form of a charter , in order to operate . Such chartered bodies normally authenticate their official acts by marking them with a distinctive seal . The seal 's design is usually complicated to avoid counterfeiting , but it can also express something about the institution 's history or mission . Dartmouth College is one such chartered body , and it obtained its official seal in 1773 . 
 = = Design and creation = = 
 Dartmouth College received a royal charter on December 13 , 1769 through New Hampshire 's colonial governor John Wentworth . The charter required a seal that was to be : 
 Nevertheless , on March 13 , 1770 , founder Eleazar Wheelock wrote to the trustees of the English fund that was supporting the College ( rather than the American trustees of the institution itself , as the charter stipulated ) to suggest that his : 
 The English trustees , including Lord Dartmouth , did not take up the suggestion . Evidence exists that they were annoyed with Wheelock 's acquisition of a charter for a college ; they were under the impression that the funds under their control were to be used to support Wheelock 's efforts at educating and Christianizing Native Americans at Moor 's Indian Charity School at Lebanon , Connecticut . Wheelock then designed a seal for his college bearing a striking resemblance to the seal of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel , a missionary society founded in London in 1701 , in order to maintain the illusion that his college was more for mission work than for higher education . Wheelock arranged for Nathaniel Hurd , a Boston silversmith , to engrave the seal . Hurd had engraved many coats of arms and appears in a John Singleton Copley portrait of ca . 1765 with two books , one of which is A Display of Heraldry by John <unk> ( 1610 ) . Wheelock wrote to Governor Wentworth on May 22 , 1772 , saying " I hope that Mr Hurd will have the College Seal compleated by Commencement . " The seal ( a single @-@ sided " female " die used to form impressions in wax ) was ready by Commencement of 1773 , and Portsmouth resident and former Chief Justice and Treasurer of the Province of New Hampshire George Jaffrey donated it to the College . The trustees officially accepted the seal on August 25 , 1773 , describing it as : 
 = = History and revisions = = 
 Former College Librarian William Woodward hid the seal from Dartmouth 's officers along with the charter and four account books after the state of New Hampshire purported to take over the operation of Dartmouth College ( and purported to make Woodward Treasurer of Dartmouth University ) . The Dartmouth College Case named Woodward as the defendant and technically sought to recover the items that he had hidden . The College 's success in the Supreme Court returned the seal to its possession and extinguished the University . 
 In 1876 , the College switched from having its seal impress wax to having it impress paper . This required a second , " male " die to fit under the original . The seal design was also carved in sandstone on the exterior of Rollins Chapel in 1886 ( see above ) and in wood on the interior of Commons in the Collis Center in 1901 ( see right ) . 
 On October 28 , 1926 , the trustees affirmed the charter 's reservation of the seal for official corporate documents alone . The College Publications Committee under Ray Nash commissioned typographer W. A. Dwiggins to create a line @-@ drawing version of the seal in 1940 that saw widespread use . 
 Dwiggins ' design was modified during 1957 to change the date from " 1770 " to " 1769 , " to accord with the date of the College Charter . The trustees commissioned a new set of dies with a date of " 1769 " to replace the old dies , now badly worn after almost two hundred years of use . The 1957 design continues to be used under trademark number 2305032 . 
 = John Hugill = 
 John William Hugill ( October 3 , 1881 – January 13 , 1971 ) was a Canadian lawyer and politician who served as Attorney General of the province of Alberta from 1935 until 1937 . Born in England , he came to Canada and studied law before setting up a practice in Calgary . He became a prominent resident of that city , and served two years on its city council . In the early 1930s , he was one of the few prominent and respectable Calgarians to support William Aberhart 's Social Credit League . He ran as a candidate for it in the 1935 provincial election and , when it won , was named Attorney General by Aberhart . 
 Hugill 's time as Member of the Legislative Assembly ( MLA ) was dominated by differences of opinion with Aberhart . Hugill did not believe that social credit could be legally implemented by a provincial government and did not support the government 's attempts to do so . When asked by Lieutenant Governor John Campbell Bowen whether he considered three of the government 's acts to be constitutional , he replied honestly that he did not ; this prompted Aberhart to request his resignation . Thereafter Hugill was an outspoken opponent of the Aberhart government , though he did not seek re @-@ election in the 1940 election . He retired from the practice of law in 1949 , and died in 1971 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Hugill was born in West Hartlepool , Yorkshire , October 3 , 1881 . He studied at the City of London School before immigrating to Canada in 1896 . Settling in Nova Scotia , he attended King 's Collegiate School to complete his matriculation , after which he attended King 's College , from which he earned a Bachelor of Civil Law and later a Doctor of Civil Law . Beginning in 1898 , he worked for Furness @-@ Withy & Company , Limited , a steamship operator , in Canada and England . From 1904 until 1907 he was a political agent in London , after which he returned to Canada to read law in the Calgary office of future Prime Minister of Canada R. B. Bennett . He was called to the bars of Alberta and Saskatchewan in 1910 , and subsequently earned a Bachelor of Laws from the University of Manitoba . 
 After being called to the bar , Hugill worked for several years as a lawyer for the Canadian Pacific Railway . In 1920 , he opened his own practice in Calgary , and was made King 's Counsel in July 1921 . On July 10 , 1913 , he married <unk> Cameron Templeton , with whom he would have three children . 
 Hugill was active in Calgary society , and specifically with the Anglican Church of Canada , the Masons , the Calgary Board of Trade , the Calgary <unk> 's Club , the Calgary Polo Club , the Calgary Golf & Country Club , and the Calgary branch of Canadian Authors . He was also a major in the Calgary Highlanders . Outside of Calgary , he was a member of the Edmonton Club and London 's British Empire Club . His hobbies included golf , polo , and big game hunting . He was also held a lifetime membership in the Alpine Club , which he was awarded for reaching the summit of Mount Stephen . Hugill was consul to Sweden and vice consul to the Netherlands for fifteen years . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Hugill served as Calgary alderman from 1921 – 1923 . During this term , he was twice acting Mayor of Calgary . One of these occasions included a visit to Calgary by Julian Byng , 1st Viscount Byng of Vimy , the Governor General . 
 In the early 1930s , Hugill was one of the few members of Calgary 's social and business elite to support William Aberhart 's burgeoning Social Credit League . Despite this , he was not an adherent of social credit monetary theories , but joined Social Credit because he viewed it as a vehicle of reform . He was also concerned about the constitutionality of a provincial government legislating on banking and monetary issues , as was advocated by many Social Crediters , and sought ( and , by his account , received ) assurances from Aberhart that no such legislation would be forthcoming from a Social Credit government . Athabasca University historian Alvin Finkel suggest that Hugill 's initial support of Social Credit was opportunistic , and not born of any belief in its rightness . 
 If Hugill 's allegiance to Social Credit was incongruous , his allegiance to Aberhart was even more so . Aberhart , a radio evangelist , did not share Hugill 's taste for fine wines , cigars , or flippant humour . Hugill , for his part , objected to Aberhart 's belief in the occult , and in particular to his practice of numerology . About his eventual presence in cabinet , McGill University 's J. R. Mallory said " one can imagine the discomfort of an experienced barrister ... moderate in his political views and absorbed principally in his departmental duties , confronted by a cabinet of hot <unk> , presided over by the Messianic Mr. Aberhart . " 
 = = = Election as MLA = = = 
 Whatever the surface incompatibilities between Hugill and the Social Credit movement , in the runup to the 1935 provincial election Aberhart found his team lacking both mainstream respectability and legal expertise , and so recruited Hugill to run as a Social Credit candidate in Calgary . During the campaign , Hugill attracted attention by refusing ( on Aberhart 's instructions , and like other Social Credit candidates ) to accept questions from the floor at political meetings . The Calgary Albertan took note of this practice , commenting " it must be rather irritating for a gentleman like J. W. Hugill , a practitioner at the bar and a King 's Counsel withal , skilled and experienced in the art of debate , not to be free to make use of it " . 
 On August 22 , Hugill was elected one of Calgary 's six Members of the Legislative Assembly ( MLAs ) . On the initial ballot count he was in fifth place of twenty candidates , but after the redistribution of votes in accordance with the single transferable vote system in use in Calgary at the time , he fell to sixth place , and was not elected until the eighteenth and final count . Aberhart named him Attorney General several days later , and he was sworn in with the rest of Aberhart 's cabinet on September 3 , 1935 . 
 = = = Attorney General = = = 
 Hugill 's service as Attorney General was brief and eventful . Three days after their swearing @-@ in , he and Aberhart embarked for Ottawa to meet with Bennett , now prime minister , and seek a federal loan to prevent Alberta from defaulting on its bond and payroll obligations . Despite needing C $ 18 million , they secured only $ 2 @.@ 25 million from Bennett . They then set out for Detroit to meet with Henry Ford — who had financed many of his projects without involving banks , Social Credit 's sworn enemies — but , on their arrival , discovered that he was away at his summer home . Returning home still in need of funding , Aberhart authorized Hugill to negotiate for the services of Robert J. Magor , a Montreal financier who had successfully assisted the government of Newfoundland in emerging from dire financial straits . Magor 's acceptance of a $ 600 per month appointment raised the ire of Social Crediters loyal to C. H. Douglas , the originator of social credit , and of Douglas himself , who saw Magor as a tool of eastern financial interests and Hugill as their man inside the government . 
 Magor 's financial advice led to the government tabling a very conservative 1936 budget that was decidedly not in keeping with social credit ideals . Partly in response to the situation , British social <unk> John Hargrave visited Alberta to advise the government on how it might implement social credit . At a cabinet meeting with Hargrave present , Hugill expressed that the Canadian Constitution did not give to the provinces sufficient powers to implement social credit , and that doing so would necessitate the use of the federal power over banking and currency . Hargrave , referring to Social Credit 's election promises to implement social credit , responded , " surely the public ought to be told " . After the meeting , Hargrave — by his account , at Aberhart 's request — prepared an eleven @-@ point plan on implementing social credit in Alberta ; Aberhart rejected it , but the Social Credit caucus invited Hargrave to explain it . That meeting featured the following exchange between Hugill and Hargrave : 
 Hugill : You realise , Mr. Hargrave , that this scheme you are putting forward would not be legal ? 
 Hargrave : I am not interested in legal <unk> : What would you do if your legislation was disallowed and your parliament dissolved ? 
 Hargrave : There is only one way in which such a government could be " dissolved " , and that is by sending in troops to throw it out , physically , neck and crop , down the steps of this parliament house . Does the Attorney @-@ General suggest that any authority anywhere in Ottawa or elsewhere would , in those circumstances , march troops into Alberta ? 
 Much of the caucus , frustrated by the government 's failure to implement social credit or even take tangible steps towards doing so , sided with Hargrave , and Hugill 's cabinet colleagues did not come to his defense . Hargrave 's presentation to Social Credit MLAs precipitated the 1937 Social Credit backbenchers ' revolt , in which much of the Social Credit caucus threatened to bring down the government over its failure to introduce social credit . The revolt was muted with the creation of the Social Credit Board , which was to oversee the introduction of social credit . 
 The first legislation recommended by the Social Credit Board included the Credit of Alberta Regulation Act , which provided for provincial licensing and supervision of banks , the Bank Employees Civil Rights Act , which prohibited unlicensed banks and their employees from instigating legal proceedings , and the Judicature Act , which prohibited challenges to the constitutionality of Alberta legislation . Hugill did not believe that the acts were within the province 's legislative competence , but avoided saying so publicly . In response to a question posed in the legislature on the province 's authority over banking , he said that he could not conclusively answer such an academic question , but referred the questioner to the British North America Act , 1867 . In a caucus meeting , in response to a request from Aberhart that he " [ assure ] us that he feels in a position on every count to recommend that the Lieutenant @-@ Governor gives his assent to every Social Credit Measure " , Hugill was more open in his beliefs . 
 On August 6 , 1937 , after the three acts were approved by the legislature , John Campbell Bowen , Lieutenant Governor of Alberta requested a meeting with Aberhart and Hugill before he granted royal assent to the legislation . He asked Hugill whether he considered the bills constitutional , and Hugill replied in the negative . Aberhart immediately said that he would take personal responsibility for the legislation 's constitutionality , and Bowen granted assent . In journalist John Barr 's telling , as Aberhart and Hugill left the meeting the premier said " your resignation is accepted , Hugill " , while according to Elliott and Miller he said only " you know what this means , don 't you ? " Whatever the words used , Hugill resigned later that afternoon . 
 Historians have debated the propriety of Hugill 's actions in undercutting his own government 's legislation . Elliott and Miller believe that he could have refused to answer Bowen 's question , but that by not doing so he " obeyed the letter of the Alberta law that set out his duties " . They see his cabinet duties conflicting with his responsibility as a legal adviser , and that by giving Bowen his honest opinion he was upholding the oath he took as a barrister . Mallory disagrees , citing rules dating from 1882 stating that the Lieutenant Governor should use — or consider using — his powers of reservation only as a Dominion officer , and never on the advice of his ministers , including the Attorney General . He speculates that neither Bowen nor Hugill was aware of this rule , and criticizes the federal government for not monitoring the situation and advising Bowen as to the proper use of his power of reservation . 
 = = = Post @-@ resignation = = = 
 Having left the government , Hugill also left the Social Credit caucus , and served the rest of his term as an independent . He joined the People 's League , a collection of all mainstream elements opposed to Aberhart which ran nominally independent candidates in the 1940 and 1944 elections , and denounced Aberhart 's government as a " tyrannical dictatorship " and the premier as the most sadistic man he had ever met . 
 One of Hugill 's last acts as Attorney General had been attending a Toronto meeting of the Canadian Bar Association . In response to Hugill 's comments about his government , Aberhart refused reimbursement of Hugill 's expenses from that trip . Later , when Aberhart received word that Ryerson Press was going to publish an expose of his government authored by Hugill , he threatened to cancel Ryerson 's contracts to print Alberta 's school textbooks unless the company reconsidered . The expose was not published . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Hugill did not seek re @-@ election at the conclusion of his term in 1940 , and returned to practicing law in Edmonton and Calgary . During the Second World War , he served on the mobilization board . He retired to Victoria in 1949 , the year after the death of his wife , and died there in 1971 . 
 = Black Friday ( 1945 ) = 
 On 9 February 1945 , a force of Allied Bristol Beaufighter aircraft suffered heavy casualties during an unsuccessful attack on the German destroyer Z33 and its escorting vessels ; the operation was labelled " Black Friday " by the surviving Allied aircrew . The German ships were sheltering in a strong defensive position in Førde Fjord , Norway , forcing the Allied aircraft to attack through heavy anti @-@ aircraft fire . The Beaufighters and their escort of Mustang IIIs ( North American P @-@ 51 Mustang ) fighters from the RAF 's No. 65 Squadron were also intercepted by twelve German Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 fighters of the Luftwaffe fighter wing Jagdgeschwader 5 . In the resulting attack , the Allies damaged at least two of the German ships for the loss of seven Beaufighters shot down by flak guns . Another two Beaufighters and one Mustang were shot down by the Fw 190s . Four or five German fighters were shot down by the Allied aircraft , including one flown by German Ace Rudi Linz . 
 The decision to attack Z33 and her escorts rather than a nearby group of merchant ships was in accordance with RAF Coastal Command 's orders from the British Admiralty . The heavy casualties sustained in the raid led to merchant ships being prioritised over destroyers and small warships in subsequent operations . In addition , another squadron of P @-@ 51 Mustangs was assigned to protect Allied aircraft operating near Norway from German fighters . 
 = = Background = = 
 Due to Allied victories in France and Eastern Europe , Germany 's surface shipping was largely confined to the lower Baltic and Norwegian waters by late 1944 . This left ports in Norway as Germany 's last remaining bases to continue the Battle of the Atlantic and conduct trade with Sweden . When the Baltic iced over during the winter of 1944 – 45 , Germany was forced to transport its vital imports of Swedish iron ore from the port of Narvik in northern Norway . 
 In response to the growing importance of German maritime transport routes through Norwegian waters , the Royal Air Force 's Coastal Command transferred seven squadrons of anti @-@ shipping aircraft from bases in eastern England to northern Scotland during September and October 1944 . Three squadrons equipped with Mosquito light bombers were stationed at RAF Banff while a wing made up of four squadrons operating Beaufighter heavy fighters was based at RAF Dallachy . The Dallachy Wing comprised the British No. 144 Squadron , Canadian No. 404 Squadron , Australian No. 455 Squadron and New Zealand No. 489 Squadron . These four squadrons were veterans of many anti @-@ shipping operations over the North Sea . 
 Attacks by the Banff Wing quickly forced German ships travelling along the Norwegian coast to sail at night and take shelter in deep fjords during the day where they were very difficult to attack . In order to locate German ships the two wings sent out aircraft on almost daily patrols along the Norwegian coastline from the Skagerrak to Trondheim . During this period the Allied squadrons developed a tactic of sending two ' outriders ' ahead of the main body of the patrol ; these aircraft were manned by experienced aircrew and penetrated into fjords in search of shipping which might not be spotted by the other aircraft . By December 1944 patrols were also routinely escorted by RAF Mustang Mk III fighters and accompanied by Vickers Warwick air @-@ sea rescue aircraft . Only a single squadron of Mustangs was available , however , as these long @-@ ranged fighters were needed to escort daylight raids by heavy bombers against Germany . German fighters began to be encountered off the Norwegian coast in December , and from the end of the month onwards it was common for Allied wing @-@ sized operations near Norway to be attacked by groups of up to 30 fighters . In March 1945 the Luftwaffe had 85 single @-@ engined and about 45 twin @-@ engined aircraft operating from ten or twelve airfields south of Trondheim . 
 During the first weeks of 1945 the Allied strike wings flew few operations due to severe weather . On 15 January , the Banff Wing was intercepted by 30 Fw 190 fighters from the III . Gruppe of Jagdgeschwader 5 ( III . / JG 5 ) during a raid on the town of <unk> . In the resulting fighting five Mosquitos and five Fw 190s were shot down . By 9 February , the Ninth and Twelfth Squadrons of <unk> were based at Herdla near Bergen , about 65 miles ( 105 km ) to the south of Førde Fjord . These units were equipped with Fw 190s and the Twelfth Squadron was commanded by Leutnant Rudi Linz , a 28 @-@ year @-@ old flying ace with 69 ' kills ' to his credit . 
 The German Narvik @-@ class destroyer Z33 entered service in February 1943 . She served in Norwegian waters from July of that year and saw combat on several occasions . She was the last German destroyer to leave northern Norway , and sailed for Germany on 5 February 1945 . It was intended that Z31 , which had completed initial repairs at Bergen after being heavily damaged in the Action of 28 January 1945 , would join her to make a joint passage to the Baltic . However , Z33 ran aground in <unk> on 7 February , damaging her port shaft and propeller and causing both engines to fail . She was subsequently taken under tow to be repaired in Trondheim . Z33 and the two tugboats that were towing her chose to shelter in Førde Fjord during the daylight hours of 9 February while en route to Trondheim . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Preliminaries = = = 
 On the morning of 9 February , two New Zealand @-@ crewed Beaufighters from No. 489 Squadron conducted a patrol of the Norwegian coast . These aircraft first sighted a 1 @,@ 500 @-@ ton merchant ship in <unk> Fjord . Continuing north , they were surprised to find a Narvik @-@ class destroyer accompanied by a minesweeper and two flak ships in Førde Fjord . The aircraft continued their patrol and spotted five large merchant ships in the Nord <unk> and two minesweepers and a flak ship near <unk> . Despite the pilots ' surprise , the Allied command was aware that Z33 was in the area from Ultra signals intelligence . 
 The Dallachy Wing was on alert to attack any ships found by the reconnaissance patrol . Although the group of five merchant ships were highly vulnerable to attack and a worthwhile target , Coastal Command came under the operational command of the Admiralty and was bound by its decision to give higher priority to attacking warships than merchant vessels . As a result , the wing was dispatched against Z33 even though the destroyer and its escorts were well protected and in a difficult position for aircraft to attack . 
 Wing Commander Jack Davenport , who had commanded No. 455 Squadron until October 1944 and was now on the staff of No. 18 Group RAF , planned the attack on Z33 . The plan called for two ' outriders ' to precede the main force and confirm the location of the German ships . The Beaufighters would then arrive to the east of the German anchorage , turn to the west and attack the ships before escaping over the sea . Davenport sought to minimise Allied casualties , but the location of the German ships in a narrow and protected fjord meant that the operation was inherently risky . The strike leader was Wing Commander Colin Milson , the 25 @-@ year @-@ old commanding officer of No. 455 Squadron , and a veteran of anti @-@ shipping operations against Italian and German ships in the Mediterranean and North Seas . Milson had reservations about making what was likely to be a costly raid , particularly given that the war was clearly coming to an end , but carried out the order to attack Z33 to the best of his ability . 
 After being spotted , the German ships in Førde Fjord sailed further up the fjord and prepared for an Allied attack . Z33 and several of her escorts anchored close to the steep southern slopes of the fjord near the village of <unk> . Meanwhile , other ships moored near the northern shore after breaking up pack ice with gunfire . ( I ) This anchorage was also protected by flak batteries on the shore of the fjord . 
 = = = Attack = = = 
 At 1 : 30 pm on 9 February , Milson led 31 or 32 Beaufighters into the air from Dallachy . The strike force was joined by either ten or twelve P @-@ 51 Mustang fighters from No. 65 Squadron RAF and two Warwick air @-@ sea rescue aircraft from No. 279 Squadron RAF carrying life rafts to help any aircrew forced to ditch . ( II ) All four of the Dallachy Wing 's squadrons contributed aircraft to the force . The No. 404 and No. 455 Squadron Beaufighters were armed with " <unk> " rockets while the aircraft from No. 144 Squadron and the single No. 489 Squadron Beaufighter dispatched were armed only with their four 20 mm cannon and six machine guns . 
 After the attackers crossed the Norwegian coastline at 3 : 40 pm , two Beaufighters from No. 144 and No. 489 Squadrons detached themselves from the main force and pressed ahead as outriders . The two ' outriders ' crossed Førde Fjord near where the German ships had been sighted that morning . At 3 : 50 pm they sent Milson a radio message stating that they could not see the ships . The ' outriders ' then turned to the east and overflew the town of Førde before searching the next fjord to the north ; during their flight near Førde Fjord they did not spot the German warships in their new position . Meanwhile , the Ninth and Twelfth Squadrons of <unk> were scrambled from Herdla at 3 : 50 pm and ordered to attack the Dallachy Wing and its escorts . 
 Several minutes later , the main body of the raid reached the southern shore of Førde Fjord travelling north . To their surprise , the Allied planes passed directly over the German ships and came under intense attack from anti @-@ aircraft guns , though no aircraft were hit . In response , Milson wheeled his force to the right in an attempt to attack the ships from east to west as planned . The steep walls of the fjord protected Z33 from attack from this direction , however . As a result , Milson led the force west to near the mouth of the fjord and ordered the Beaufighters to attack in relays from west to east . This required the aircraft to fly into the face of alerted German defences and then escape over steep mountains . The narrow confines of the fjord also meant that the Beaufighters had to attack individually from a single direction and would not be able to swamp the German defences as they normally sought to do . 
 Milson led the first group of Beaufighters into Førde Fjord at about 4 : 10 pm . His aircraft escaped undamaged after attacking a flak ship and other Beaufighters followed him into the fjord . At about this time 12 Fw 190s arrived at Førde Fjord and flew through German flak to intercept the Beaufighters that were waiting their turn to attack . The British Mustangs were taken by surprise , but dived to intercept the German fighters . This led to an intense air battle , with over 50 aircraft either engaged in dogfights or diving to attack the German ships ; it was the largest aerial conflict ever fought over Norway . 
 The fighting continued until 4 : 25 pm . By that time the German ships had shot down seven Beaufighters . Fw <unk> had claimed another two Beaufighters and a Mustang III . The Allied losses included six of the eleven No. 404 Squadron aircraft involved in the attack . Overall , the Germans killed 14 Allied airmen and took four prisoner of war . The Allies damaged Z33 and several of the other German ships and shot down either four or five Fw 190s . ( III ) Linz and another German pilot were killed . Kriegsmarine fatalities included four sailors on Z33 and three on the converted trawler <unk> ; both of these ships were damaged during the attack . There may also have been fatalities on the other German ships . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After departing the Førde Fjord area , the surviving Beaufighters , many of which were damaged , returned to RAF Dallachy . Several had difficulty making safe landings , and two were forced to land on their bellies due to undercarriage damage , but no further aircraft were lost . The air and ground crew were shocked by the scale of the losses , and the battle became known as " Black Friday " . The losses suffered by the Dallachy Wing on 9 February were the highest any of Coastal Command 's strike wings sustained in a single operation during the war . 
 The German fighters , many of which were short of fuel and ammunition , also broke off at about 4 : 25 pm and returned to base . On the night of 9 / 10 February , the German ships left Førde Fjord and continued their journey to Trondheim . A subsequent Allied attack on the ships by a different strike wing was also unsuccessful . Z33 arrived in Trondheim on 11 February and was repaired . She subsequently departed for Germany on 26 March and safely arrived in Swinemünde on 2 April . She did not see any further combat , and was decommissioned at Brunsbüttel in late April as the Navy lacked the fuel needed to operate her . 
 The losses incurred during the raid on Førde Fjord led to changes in the tactics used by RAF Coastal Command 's anti @-@ shipping squadrons . Following the attack , the Admiralty agreed to a proposal by Air Chief Marshal Sir Sholto Douglas , the commander of Coastal Command , to assign a higher priority to attacking merchant vessels than to destroyers and small warships . A second squadron of Mustangs was also assigned to protect Coastal Command aircraft operating near Norway from early March . Milson was awarded a bar to his Distinguished Service Order on 13 July 1945 for his leadership and personal courage during the raid on Førde Fjord , which was described in the citation as a " brilliantly executed operation " . 
 The raid was commemorated in Norway after the war . A monument to the aircrew killed in the battle was dedicated in the town of Førde on 8 May 1985 , the 40th anniversary of Norway 's liberation . This monument was later moved to Bergen Airport . The Air Combat Museum in the town of <unk> also houses photos , maps , aircraft parts and other artifacts relating to the battle . 
 Two of the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 fighters of JG 5 that flew against the RAF Beaufighters and Mustangs survive to this day — one , an F @-@ model airframe with factory serial number , or Werknummer of 931 862 , that crashed as a result of the " Black Friday " aerial engagements was found and recovered as a salvageable aircraft wreck in September 1983 . It currently resides in Stow , Massachusetts , and had been under restoration by the " White 1 Foundation " of Kissimmee , Florida towards a resumption of full flightworthy status , until its 2012 transfer to the Collings Foundation 's facilities in the Bay State to complete the work towards full flightworthy status . While still in Florida , in 2005 its last pilot , the former Luftwaffe Unteroffizier Heinz Orlowski visited it and sat one final time in the cockpit of his " under @-@ restoration " Fw 190F @-@ 8 , some sixty years after he last flew it and five years before his death in 2010 . The other example , an Fw 190A @-@ 8 bearing the Werknummer 732 183 was flown by Luftwaffe 70 @-@ victory ace Rudi Linz in the engagement . His Fw 190A @-@ 8 is displayed in the Cottbus Hangar of the Military Aviation Museum in Pungo , Virginia , USA as of 2014 . 
 The locations of several of the Beaufighter planes — gravesites — were found by marine archeologist Rob Rondeau and diving crew 60 years later . One site was given a commemorative plaque , in the presence of one surviving Canadian airman , Herbert ( Bert ) Ramsden , who participated in the action and a sister of an airman who died there . 
 = James Moore ( Continental Army officer ) = 
 James Moore ( c . 1737 – c . April 15 , 1777 ) was a Continental Army general during the American Revolutionary War . Born into a prominent political family in North Carolina , he was one of only five generals from the state to serve in the Continental Army . Moore spent much of his childhood and youth on his family 's estates in the lower Cape Fear River area , but soon became active in the colonial military structure in North Carolina . 
 Moore served in the colonial militia during the French and Indian War , and commanded the colonial governor 's artillery at the Battle of Alamance , which ended the War of the Regulation . In addition to his military involvement , he was active in the independence movement , despite having been a supporter of the colonial government during his early career . Moore played a prominent role in the local Sons of Liberty organizations , and assisted in organizing the colony @-@ wide extra @-@ legal Provincial Congress . In 1775 , he was elected the first commander of a Continental Line regiment in North Carolina , which had been raised pursuant to instructions of the Continental Congress . 
 After distinguishing himself in the campaign that led to the Patriot victory at the Battle of Moore 's Creek Bridge , and the battle 's aftermath on February 27 , 1776 , Moore was promoted to brigadier general in the Continental Army . He maintained his headquarters in North Carolina during early 1776 in order to thwart a threatened British invasion of the state but , in the latter part of the year , received orders to move his command to South Carolina . Moore briefly held de facto command of the Southern Department before his death due to illness in April 1777 . He is remembered as a competent military commander whose early death ended a promising career . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 James Moore was born in New Hanover County in the Cape Fear region of the Carolinas in about 1737 . His family had extensive landholdings at Rocky Point , located at a bend in the Cape Fear River about 15 miles ( 24 km ) north of Wilmington . He was the son of Maurice Moore and his second wife , Mary Porter . His older brother , also named Maurice Moore , would go on to become a Patriot political leader in North Carolina during the American Revolution . His sister , Rebecca Moore , would marry a Revolutionary War leader , militia General John Ashe . 
 Moore was , through his father 's side , a grandson of Governor James Moore , who was governor of the Province of Carolina when North and South Carolina were a single colony . Maurice Moore had championed settlement of the Cape Fear region under Governor George Burrington . Additionally , Moore 's uncle , Colonel James Moore , was a military leader during the Yamasee War . Moore 's nephew , Alfred Moore , served in the Continental Army under Moore 's command , and would go on to become an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court . Moore 's niece , Mary , would later marry Moore 's Continental Army colleague Francis Nash . 
 Moore 's extended relatives constituted the single most powerful family in the region , and were known by local settlers simply as " the Family " . His nine aunts and uncles , and seventeen siblings and cousins on his father 's side , married into other affluent families , developing a strong network in the region that perpetuated their wealth and influence , and increased their <unk> in each successive generation . By the time of the American Revolution , six of the ten largest slaveholders in the lower Cape Fear region were in some way related to Moore . The Moore family relied on the production of naval stores and lumber , as the lower Cape Fear was unsuited to mass cultivation of more profitable products and crops like rice and indigo . 
 One early description of Moore states that he spent his early years on his father 's plantation , until that tract sold in 1761 . In his adulthood , Moore married Anna Ivey , with whom he had two sons and two daughters , all of whom survived him at his death . One son , James Moore , Jr . , would serve in the American Revolutionary War as a lieutenant before being permanently disabled by wounds received at the Battle of Eutaw Springs . 
 = = Colonial political and military service = = 
 James Moore had experience as a military officer prior to the American Revolution . In 1758 , Governor Arthur Dobbs appointed him as the captain of a company of militia at Fort Johnston , and Moore remained in command of that unit during the French and Indian War . During that conflict , Moore was captain of a company he led to South Carolina to defend that colony against Cherokee attacks brought on by the Anglo @-@ Cherokee War . By 1759 , he was appointed a justice of the peace . In protest of the Stamp Act in 1766 , Moore led an armed mob that occupied the de facto capital town of Brunswick , North Carolina . The mob appointed Moore as its delegate to confront Governor William Tryon and the royal comptroller of customs , William Pennington , who had taken refuge at Tryon 's home . Pennington gave in to the demands of the mob , and resigned his post , swearing that he would not enforce the provisions of the Stamp Act . 
 Moore served as a colonel of an artillery company in the colonial militia during the War of the Regulation , a revolt by western settlers against perceived injustices in the colonial government of North Carolina in the decade immediately preceding the American Revolution . At the Battle of Alamance , Moore served as the commander of Governor Tryon 's artillery company . Moore 's orders in that engagement were to fire his cannons once Tryon had determined the Regulators would not surrender , thus signalling the beginning of the battle . During the conflict , however , the governor 's artillery functioned poorly , and the Regulators were able to gain an initial advantage by fighting in an irregular fashion . The governor 's forces eventually succeeded in crushing the armed farmers , thus ending the Regulator rebellion . Moore went on to serve in the North Carolina House of Commons from 1764 to 1771 and again in 1773 , representing his home county of New Hanover . In 1772 , he purchased a plantation of 500 acres ( 200 ha ; 0 @.@ 78 sq mi ) on the Cape Fear River several miles upriver from Wilmington . 
 = = American Revolution = = 
 = = = Revolutionary activities = = = 
 Moore participated in the Wilmington chapter of the Sons of Liberty beginning in 1770 , and through them organized a boycott of imported British goods on the Cape Fear River . On July 21 , 1774 , Moore was elected to a Wilmington @-@ based committee tasked with organizing the First North Carolina Provincial Congress with other counties . Moore also participated in the New Hanover Committee of Safety , and worked with other local citizens to raise supplies for Boston , whose port had been closed to all commerce in 1774 by the Boston Port Act . In August 1775 he was elected to the Third Provincial Congress , which organized the colonial militia and placed Moore in command of the first regiment raised to be trained as regular soldiers . At the time , Loyalist @-@ sympathizer and Cape Fear @-@ area diarist Janet Schaw described her fear of Moore as the commander of the Patriot militia , stating : 
 He is a man of free property and a most unblemished character , has amiable manners , and a virtuous life has gained him the love of everybody , and his popularity is such that I am assured he will have more followers than any other man in the province . He acts from a steady tho ' mistaken principle , and I am certain has no view or design , but what he thinks right and for the good of the country . He urges not war of words , and when my brother told him he would not join him , for he did not approve the cause , ' Then do not , ' said he , ' let every man be directed by his own ideas of right or wrong . ' If this man commands , be assured , he will find his enemies work . 
 Moore 's appointment as commander of the first regiment of what would become the North Carolina Line came at the expense of his brother @-@ in @-@ law , John Ashe , who actively sought the appointment . Moore bested Ashe by only a single vote in the Provincial Congress . 
 = = = Moore 's Creek Bridge campaign = = = 
 On February 15 , 1776 , Moore was given command of the 1st North Carolina Regiment raised at the direction of the Second Continental Congress , and placed in charge of the defense of the Cape Fear region . At the same time , the colonial government in New Bern organized militia units under Colonel Richard Caswell , and sent this force south to meet up with Moore 's regiment of regulars and several other units of militia . A force of approximately 1 @,@ 400 Highland Scots denizens of North Carolina who remained loyal to Britain was organized shortly after the outbreak of hostilities in 1775 . This force , concentrated around the Loyalist hotbed of Cross Creek ( near modern @-@ day Fayetteville , North Carolina ) , alarmed the Patriot government , who dispatched Moore and Caswell to contain the growing army . 
 The British Army and Royal Navy , in cooperation with the Loyalist elements of the colonial government under Governor Josiah Martin , planned an invasion of North Carolina near Wilmington , a burgeoning and strategically located seaport in the Cape Fear region . The Highlander units at Cross Creek were directed to join up with British Army units , which General Thomas Gage intended to land in North Carolina . Moore led his command upriver along the south bank of the Cape Fear , and fortified a river crossing at Rockfish Creek , which would have been the Loyalists ' most direct path to Wilmington . At this site , Moore continued to gather reinforcements , eventually commanding approximately 1 @,@ 100 men . Brigadier General Donald MacDonald , who commanded the militia of approximately 1 @,@ 500 Highlanders , sent an envoy to Moore , demanding that he join the Loyalist cause or be faced with an attack . Moore , delaying in his reply in order to buy time , eventually declined that demand , essentially calling MacDonald 's bluff . MacDonald , whose men lacked the morale for an immediate confrontation , received word that Caswell 's militia had been ordered to join with Moore . Sensing that time was of the essence , MacDonald withdrew , and led the Loyalist contingent away from Moore toward a crossing further downriver . 
 Moore next set about devising a trap for MacDonald 's Loyalist contingent . He positioned a detachment of men at Cross Creek , and ordered the regiments of Colonels Caswell and Alexander Lillington to a location downriver in the path of the Loyalist militia . The Loyalist force managed to slip past Caswell , at which point Moore ordered Caswell to join up with Lillington at a location known as Moore 's Creek Bridge . Simultaneously with Caswell 's corrective maneuver , Moore floated his troops 60 miles ( 97 km ) downriver , where they disembarked and joined in the pursuit of MacDonald 's force . In the Battle of Moore 's Creek Bridge , the Loyalists attempted to cross over the creek in the early morning hours of February 27 , 1776 , where they were met with fierce resistance from Caswell and Lillington 's united forces . The Patriots routed the Loyalists in less than three minutes , inflicting severe casualties on MacDonald 's men and capturing 850 loyalist soldiers and officers , while themselves suffering only a single casualty . 
 Moore did not participate directly in the battle , but arrived shortly after it was decided , and pursued the remaining Loyalist units . Moore 's Creek Bridge stopped the British plan for the conquest of North Carolina , and was celebrated by Patriots throughout the colonies . The British press of the time downplayed the victory as a defeat of Loyalist forces rather than of regular British Army units . On March 4 , 1776 , the Provincial Congress in New Bern passed a resolution thanking Moore for his service in suppressing the Loyalists . 
 = = = Continental Army general = = = 
 On March 1 , 1776 , the Continental Congress voted to give Moore a commission as a brigadier general in the Continental Army , and placed him in command of all of the regular army forces in North Carolina . Moore was one of only five North Carolinians to achieve the rank of brigadier general or higher in the Continental Army . As a brigadier , he served under General Charles Lee , commander of the army 's Southern Department , and was tasked with guarding Wilmington from attacks by British ships lurking in the Cape Fear area after the Battle of Moore 's Creek Bridge . In that capacity , Moore alternately harassed and observed the British and their Loyalist auxiliaries while simultaneously improving Wilmington 's defenses by erecting two new coastal batteries , and by sinking ships in the main channel of the Cape Fear River south of the city to bar passage by larger vessels . In April and May 1776 , some British units from the approximately 7 @,@ 000 @-@ strong force of General Henry Clinton disembarked near Wilmington , and threatened to confront Moore 's garrison of 1 @,@ 847 men . Clinton soon decided that North Carolina was not an ideal objective , and the majority of the British fleet and army made its way south to Charleston on May 30 , 1776 . 
 After the near @-@ engagement at Wilmington , Moore devised a plan by which the Provincial Congress raised five additional companies of men to defend North Carolina 's coast . He saw this as necessary because the Continental Army units in North Carolina could be ordered out of the state , which would have left North Carolina relatively defenseless . Lee was recalled to the north to aid in the defense of New York in September 1776 and Moore was placed in command of the Southern Department . Initially , the Continental Congress ordered Moore to join General George Washington in the north , but owing to the continued threat of a British attack in North or South Carolina , Congress suspended Moore 's orders and gave North Carolina 's Provincial Council discretion over his disposition . On October 23 , 1776 , the Council ordered Moore to remain in North Carolina and winter his troops in New Bern and Wilmington . This order was confirmed by the Continental Congress on November 16 , along with instructions for Moore to assist in repelling any invasion attempts in South Carolina or Georgia , if necessary . 
 Moore then led his command of about 2 @,@ 035 men south to Charleston , South Carolina , in November to assist the Patriot forces there after the attempted British assault at Sullivan 's Island . Moore 's brigade arrived in January , but Moore spent most of his time traveling between Charleston and North Carolina , lobbying for funds and clothing for his poorly equipped soldiers , and recruiting more men . He went so far as to obtain a private loan from Thomas Polk , a planter in Mecklenburg County , for $ 6 @,@ 250 in South Carolina currency to pay for rations for his command . Moore 's unit engaged in daily drills under his supervision and that of Colonel Francis Nash . Despite these efforts , the North Carolinians suffered from rampant colds and pneumonia , and many of the enlisted men deserted in order to join the South Carolina line because of the high bounty being offered by that state for service . 
 In February 1777 , the Continental Congress commanded Moore to bring North Carolina 's Continental Army troops north to aid Washington , but a lack of supplies and provisions stalled that plan . Moore himself had returned to North Carolina on January 8 , 1777 , in an attempt to alleviate the poor conditions in which his soldiers found themselves , and to raise funds to pay his men , leaving the Southern Department under the command of Brigadier General Robert Howe . Howe countermanded Moore 's instructions to bring the Continental Army units north by refusing to permit the North Carolina brigade to leave Charleston out of fear of a British attack in the south . Because of Moore 's failing health , Francis Nash was promoted to brigadier general , and assumed command of the brigade on its march north . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 While preparing to march north in the spring of 1777 , Moore became ill . He died of what was called " a fit of gout in his stomach " on about April 15 , 1777 . Oral tradition holds that Moore died on the same day and in the same house as his brother , Maurice . Anne , Moore 's wife , died a few months thereafter . 
 Moore , who had not been directly involved in any military engagement , was nonetheless able to construct a working military force out of the disparate parts provided for him by North Carolina . Samuel A 'Court Ashe , an early North Carolina historian , described Moore as " perhaps the most masterful military man furnished by North Carolina to the war of independence . " Another historian speculated that Moore 's " actions had held the promise of greatness . " Moore 's strategic command before and during the Battle of Moore 's Creek Bridge has been acclaimed as a major factor in the Patriot victory there . 
 The Wake Forest , North Carolina chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution and a U.S. Army battery at the now defunct Fort Casey in Washington state were named in his honor . In 1940 , the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources erected a North Carolina highway historical marker in Pender County near Moore 's former home at Rocky Point commemorating his life and Revolutionary War service . 
 = Yttrium = 
 Yttrium is a chemical element with symbol Y and atomic number 39 . It is a silvery @-@ metallic transition metal chemically similar to the lanthanides and has often been classified as a " rare earth element " . Yttrium is almost always found in combination with lanthanide elements in rare earth minerals , and is never found in nature as a free element . 89Y is the only stable isotope , and the only isotope found in the Earth 's crust . 
 In 1787 , Carl Axel Arrhenius found a new mineral near Ytterby in Sweden and named it ytterbite , after the village . Johan Gadolin discovered yttrium 's oxide in Arrhenius ' sample in 1789 , and Anders Gustaf Ekeberg named the new oxide yttria . Elemental yttrium was first isolated in 1828 by Friedrich Wöhler . 
 The most important uses of yttrium are LEDs and phosphors , particularly the red phosphors in television set cathode ray tube ( CRT ) displays . Yttrium is also used in the production of electrodes , electrolytes , electronic filters , lasers , superconductors , various medical applications , and tracing various materials to enhance their properties . 
 Yttrium has no known biological role and exposure to yttrium compounds can cause lung disease in humans . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Properties = = = 
 Yttrium is a soft , silver @-@ metallic , lustrous and highly crystalline transition metal in group 3 . As expected by periodic trends , it is less electronegative than its predecessor in the group , scandium , and less electronegative than the next member of period 5 , zirconium ; additionally , it is of comparable electronegativity to its successor in its group , lutetium , due to the lanthanide contraction . Yttrium is the first d @-@ block element in the fifth period . 
 The pure element is relatively stable in air in bulk form , due to passivation of a protective oxide ( Y 
 2O 
 3 ) film that forms on the surface . This film can reach a thickness of 10 µm when yttrium is heated to 750 ° C in water vapor . When finely divided , however , yttrium is very unstable in air ; shavings or turnings of the metal can ignite in air at temperatures exceeding 400 ° C. Yttrium nitride ( YN ) is formed when the metal is heated to 1000 ° C in nitrogen . 
 = = = Similarity to the lanthanides = = = 
 The similarities of yttrium to the lanthanides are so strong that the element has historically been grouped with them as a rare earth element , and is always found in nature together with them in rare earth minerals . Chemically , yttrium resembles those elements more closely than its neighbor in the periodic table , scandium , and if physical properties were plotted against atomic number , it would have an apparent number of 64 @.@ 5 to 67 @.@ 5 , placing it between the lanthanides gadolinium and erbium . 
 It often also falls in the same range for reaction order , resembling terbium and dysprosium in its chemical reactivity . Yttrium is so close in size to the so @-@ called ' yttrium group ' of heavy lanthanide ions that in solution , it behaves as if it were one of them . Even though the lanthanides are one row farther down the periodic table than yttrium , the similarity in atomic radius may be attributed to the lanthanide contraction . 
 One of the few notable differences between the chemistry of yttrium and that of the lanthanides is that yttrium is almost exclusively trivalent , whereas about half the lanthanides can have valences other than three . 
 = = = Compounds and reactions = = = 
 As a trivalent transition metal , yttrium forms various inorganic compounds , generally in the oxidation state of + 3 , by giving up all three of its valence electrons . A good example is yttrium ( III ) oxide ( Y 
 2O 
 3 ) , also known as yttria , a six @-@ coordinate white solid . 
 Yttrium forms a water @-@ insoluble fluoride , hydroxide , and oxalate , but its bromide , chloride , iodide , nitrate and sulfate are all soluble in water . The Y3 + ion is colorless in solution because of the absence of electrons in the d and f electron shells . 
 Water readily reacts with yttrium and its compounds to form Y 
 2O 
 3 . Concentrated nitric and hydrofluoric acids do not rapidly attack yttrium , but other strong acids do . 
 With halogens , yttrium forms trihalides such as yttrium ( III ) fluoride ( YF 
 3 ) , yttrium ( III ) chloride ( <unk> 
 3 ) , and yttrium ( III ) bromide ( <unk> 
 3 ) at temperatures above roughly 200 ° C. Similarly , carbon , phosphorus , selenium , silicon and sulfur all form binary compounds with yttrium at elevated temperatures . 
 <unk> chemistry is the study of compounds containing carbon – yttrium bonds . A few of these are known to have yttrium in the oxidation state 0 . ( The + 2 state has been observed in chloride melts , and + 1 in oxide clusters in the gas phase . ) Some <unk> reactions were generated with <unk> compounds as catalysts . These syntheses use <unk> 
 3 as a starting material , obtained from Y 
 2O 
 3 and concentrated hydrochloric acid and ammonium chloride . 
 <unk> is a term to describe the coordination of a group of contiguous atoms of a ligand bound to the central atom ; it is indicated by the Greek character eta , η . Yttrium complexes were the first examples of complexes where <unk> ligands were bound to a <unk> @-@ metal center through a <unk> @-@ hapticity . <unk> of the graphite intercalation compounds graphite – Y or graphite – Y 
 2O 
 3 leads to the formation of endohedral fullerenes such as Y @ <unk> . Electron spin resonance studies indicated the formation of Y3 + and ( <unk> ) 3 − ion pairs . The carbides <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> can be hydrolyzed to form hydrocarbons . 
 = = = Nucleosynthesis and isotopes = = = 
 Yttrium in the Solar System was created through stellar nucleosynthesis , mostly by the s @-@ process ( ≈ 72 % ) , but also by the r @-@ process ( ≈ 28 % ) . The r @-@ process consists of rapid neutron capture of lighter elements during supernova explosions . The s @-@ process is a slow neutron capture of lighter elements inside pulsating red giant stars . 
 Yttrium isotopes are among the most common products of the nuclear fission of uranium in nuclear explosions and nuclear reactors . In the context of nuclear waste management , the most important isotopes of yttrium are <unk> and 90Y , with half @-@ lives of 58 @.@ 51 days and 64 hours , respectively . Though 90Y has a short half @-@ life , it exists in secular equilibrium with its long @-@ lived parent isotope , strontium @-@ 90 ( 90Sr ) with a half @-@ life of 29 years . 
 All group 3 elements have an odd atomic number , and therefore few stable isotopes . Scandium has one stable isotope , and yttrium itself has only one stable isotope , 89Y , is also the only isotope that occurs naturally . However , the lanthanide rare earths contain elements of even atomic number and many stable isotopes . Yttrium @-@ 89 is thought to be more abundant than it otherwise would be , due in part to the s @-@ process , which allows enough time for isotopes created by other processes to decay by electron emission ( neutron → proton ) . Such a slow process tends to favor isotopes with atomic mass numbers ( A 
 = protons + neutrons ) around 90 , 138 and 208 , which have unusually stable atomic nuclei with 50 , 82 , and 126 neutrons , respectively . 89Y has a mass number close to 90 and has 50 neutrons in its nucleus . 
 At least 32 synthetic isotopes of yttrium have been observed , and these range in atomic mass number from 76 to 108 . The least stable of these is <unk> with a half @-@ life of > 150 ns ( <unk> has a half @-@ life of > 200 ns ) and the most stable is <unk> with a half @-@ life of 106 @.@ 626 days . Apart from the isotopes <unk> , <unk> , and 90Y , with half @-@ lives of 58 @.@ 51 days , 79 @.@ 8 hours , and 64 hours , respectively , all the other isotopes have half @-@ lives of less than a day and most of less than an hour . 
 Yttrium isotopes with mass numbers at or below 88 decay primarily by positron emission ( proton → neutron ) to form strontium ( Z = 
 38 ) isotopes . Yttrium isotopes with mass numbers at or above 90 decay primarily by electron emission ( neutron → proton ) to form zirconium ( Z = 40 ) isotopes . Isotopes with mass numbers at or above 97 are also known to have minor decay paths of β − delayed neutron emission . 
 Yttrium has at least 20 metastable ( " excited " ) isomers ranging in mass number from 78 to 102 . Multiple excitation states have been observed for <unk> and <unk> . While most of yttrium 's isomers are expected to be less stable than their ground state , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> have longer half @-@ lives than their ground states , as these isomers decay by beta decay rather than isomeric transition . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1787 , army lieutenant and part @-@ time chemist Carl Axel Arrhenius found a heavy black rock in an old quarry near the Swedish village of Ytterby ( now part of the Stockholm Archipelago ) . Thinking that it was an unknown mineral containing the newly discovered element tungsten , he named it ytterbite and sent samples to various chemists for analysis . 
 Johan Gadolin at the University of Åbo identified a new oxide ( or " earth " ) in Arrhenius ' sample in 1789 , and published his completed analysis in 1794 . Anders Gustaf Ekeberg confirmed the identification in 1797 and named the new oxide yttria . In the decades after Antoine Lavoisier developed the first modern definition of chemical elements , it was believed that earths could be reduced to their elements , meaning that the discovery of a new earth was equivalent to the discovery of the element within , which in this case would have been yttrium . 
 In 1843 , Carl Gustaf Mosander found that samples of yttria contained three oxides : white yttrium oxide ( yttria ) , yellow terbium oxide ( confusingly , this was called ' erbia ' at the time ) and rose @-@ colored erbium oxide ( called ' <unk> ' at the time ) . A fourth oxide , ytterbium oxide , was isolated in 1878 by Jean Charles Galissard de Marignac . New elements were later isolated from each of those oxides , and each element was named , in some fashion , after Ytterby , the village near the quarry where they were found ( see ytterbium , terbium , and erbium ) . In the following decades , seven other new metals were discovered in " Gadolin 's yttria " . Since yttria was found to be a mineral and not an oxide , Martin Heinrich Klaproth renamed it gadolinite in honor of Gadolin . 
 Yttrium metal was first isolated in 1828 when Friedrich Wöhler heated anhydrous yttrium ( III ) chloride with potassium : 
 <unk> + 3 K → 3 KCl + Y 
 Until the early 1920s , the chemical symbol <unk> was used for the element , after which Y came into common use . 
 In 1987 , yttrium barium copper oxide was found to achieve high @-@ temperature superconductivity . It was only the second material known to exhibit this property , and it was the first known material to achieve superconductivity above the ( economically important ) boiling point of nitrogen . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 = = = Abundance = = = 
 Yttrium is found in most rare earth minerals , it is found in some uranium ores , but is never found in the Earth 's crust as a free element . About 31 ppm of the Earth 's crust is yttrium , making it the 28th most abundant element , 400 times more common than silver . Yttrium is found in soil in concentrations between 10 and 150 ppm ( dry weight average of 23 ppm ) and in sea water at 9 ppt . Lunar rock samples collected during the American Apollo Project have a relatively high content of yttrium . 
 Yttrium has no known biological role , though it is found in most , if not all , organisms and tends to concentrate in the liver , kidney , spleen , lungs , and bones of humans . Normally , as little as 0 @.@ 5 milligrams is found in the entire human body ; human breast milk contains 4 ppm . Yttrium can be found in edible plants in concentrations between 20 ppm and 100 ppm ( fresh weight ) , with cabbage having the largest amount . With as much as to 700 ppm , the seeds of woody plants have the highest known concentrations . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Since yttrium is chemically so similar to the lanthanides , it occurs in the same ores ( rare earth minerals ) and is extracted by the same refinement processes . A slight distinction is recognized between the light ( LREE ) and the heavy rare earth elements ( HREE ) , but the distinction is not perfect . Yttrium is concentrated in the HREE group because of its ion size , though it has a lower atomic mass . 
 Rare earth elements ( REEs ) come mainly from four sources : 
 Carbonate and fluoride containing ores such as the LREE bastnäsite ( [ ( Ce , La , etc . ) ( CO3 ) F ] ) contain an average of 0 @.@ 1 % of yttrium compared to the 99 @.@ 9 % for the 16 other REEs . The main source for bastnäsite from the 1960s to the 1990s was the Mountain Pass rare earth mine in California , making the United States the largest producer of REEs during that period . 
 Monazite ( [ ( Ce , La , etc . ) PO4 ] ) , which is mostly phosphate , is a placer deposit of sand created by the transportation and gravitational separation of eroded granite . Monazite as a LREE ore contains 2 % ( or 3 % ) yttrium . The largest deposits were found in India and Brazil in the early 20th century , making those two countries the largest producers of yttrium in the first half of that century . 
 <unk> , a REE phosphate , is the main HREE ore containing as much as 60 % yttrium as yttrium phosphate ( <unk> ) . The largest mine is the Bayan Obo deposit in China , making China the largest exporter for HREE since the closure of the Mountain Pass mine in the 1990s . 
 Ion absorption clays or <unk> clays are the weathering products of granite and contain only 1 % of REEs . The final ore concentrate can contain as much as 8 % yttrium . Ion absorption clays are mostly in southern China . Yttrium is also found in samarskite and fergusonite . 
 One method for obtaining pure yttrium from the mixed oxide ores is to dissolve the oxide in sulfuric acid and <unk> it by ion exchange chromatography . With the addition of oxalic acid , the yttrium oxalate precipitates . The oxalate is converted into the oxide by heating under oxygen . By reacting the resulting yttrium oxide with hydrogen fluoride , yttrium fluoride is obtained . When quaternary ammonium salts are used as <unk> , most yttrium will remain in the aqueous phase . When the counter @-@ ion is nitrate , the light lanthanides are removed , and when the counter @-@ ion is thiocyanate , the heavy lanthanides are removed . In this way , yttrium salts of 99 @.@ 999 % purity are obtained . In the usual situation , where yttrium is in a mixture that is two @-@ thirds heavy @-@ lanthanide , yttrium should be removed as soon as possible to facilitate the separation of the remaining elements . 
 Annual world production of yttrium oxide had reached 600 tonnes by 2001 , with reserves estimated at 9 million tonnes . In 2013 it was 7100 tonnes of Y 
 2O 
 3 . Only a few tonnes of yttrium metal are produced each year by reducing yttrium fluoride to a metal sponge with calcium magnesium alloy . The temperature of an arc furnace of greater than 1 @,@ 600 ° C is sufficient to melt the yttrium . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Consumer = = = 
 The red component of color television cathode ray tubes is typically emitted from an yttria ( Y 
 2O 
 3 ) or yttrium oxide sulfide ( Y 
 2O 
 2S ) host lattice doped with europium ( III ) cation ( Eu3 + ) phosphors . The red color itself is emitted from the europium while the yttrium collects energy from the electron gun and passes it to the phosphor . Yttrium compounds can serve as host lattices for doping with different lanthanide cations . <unk> + can be used as a doping agent to produce green luminescence . 
 <unk> is used as a sintering additive in the production of porous silicon nitride . It is used as a common starting material for material science and for producing other compounds of yttrium . 
 Yttrium compounds are used as a catalyst for ethylene polymerization . As a metal , yttrium is used on the electrodes of some high @-@ performance spark plugs . Yttrium is used in gas mantles for propane lanterns as a replacement for thorium , which is radioactive . 
 Currently under development is yttrium @-@ stabilized zirconia as a solid electrolyte and as an oxygen sensor in automobile exhaust systems . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Yttrium is used in the production of a large variety of synthetic garnets , and yttria is used to make yttrium iron garnets ( Y 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 12 , also " <unk> " ) , which are very effective microwave filters . Yttrium , iron , aluminium , and gadolinium garnets ( e.g. Y3 ( Fe , Al ) <unk> and Y3 ( Fe , Ga ) <unk> ) have important magnetic properties . <unk> is also very efficient as an acoustic energy transmitter and transducer . Yttrium aluminium garnet ( Y 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 12 or YAG ) has a hardness of 8 @.@ 5 and is also used as a gemstone in jewelry ( simulated diamond ) . Cerium @-@ doped yttrium aluminium garnet ( YAG : Ce ) crystals are used as phosphors to make white LEDs . 
 YAG , yttria , yttrium lithium fluoride ( <unk> 
 4 ) , and yttrium orthovanadate ( <unk> 
 4 ) are used in combination with dopants such as neodymium , erbium , ytterbium in near @-@ infrared lasers . YAG lasers can operate at high power and are used for drilling and cutting metal . The single crystals of doped YAG are normally produced by the Czochralski process . 
 = = = Material enhancer = = = 
 Small amounts of yttrium ( 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 2 % ) have been used to reduce the grain sizes of chromium , molybdenum , titanium , and zirconium . Yttrium is used to increase the strength of aluminium and magnesium alloys . The addition of yttrium to alloys generally improves workability , adds resistance to high @-@ temperature recrystallization , and significantly enhances resistance to high @-@ temperature oxidation ( see graphite nodule discussion below ) . 
 Yttrium can be used to <unk> vanadium and other non @-@ ferrous metals . <unk> stabilizes the cubic form of zirconia in jewelry . 
 Yttrium has been studied as a <unk> in ductile cast iron , forming the graphite into compact nodules instead of flakes to increase ductility and fatigue resistance . Having a high melting point , yttrium oxide is used in some ceramic and glass to impart shock resistance and low thermal expansion properties . Those same properties make such glass useful in camera lenses . 
 = = = Medical = = = 
 The radioactive isotope yttrium @-@ 90 is used in drugs such as Yttrium Y 90 @-@ DOTA @-@ <unk> @-@ octreotide and Yttrium Y 90 <unk> <unk> for the treatment of various cancers , including lymphoma , leukemia , liver , ovarian , colorectal , pancreatic and bone cancers . It works by adhering to monoclonal antibodies , which in turn bind to cancer cells and kill them via intense β @-@ radiation from the yttrium @-@ 90 ( see Monoclonal antibody therapy ) . 
 A technique called <unk> is used to treat hepatocellular carcinoma . <unk> is a low toxicity , targeted liver cancer therapy that uses millions of tiny beads made of glass or resin containing radioactive yttrium @-@ 90 . The radioactive <unk> are delivered directly to the blood vessels feeding specific liver tumors / segments or lobes . It is minimally invasive and patients can usually be discharged after a few hours . This procedure may not eliminate all tumors throughout the entire liver , but works on one segment or one lobe at a time and may require multiple procedures . 
 Also see <unk> in the case of combined cirrhosis and <unk> carcinoma . 
 Needles made of yttrium @-@ 90 , which can cut more precisely than scalpels , have been used to sever pain @-@ transmitting nerves in the spinal cord , and yttrium @-@ 90 is also used to carry out radionuclide <unk> in the treatment of inflamed joints , especially knees , in sufferers of conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis . 
 A neodymium @-@ doped yttrium @-@ aluminium @-@ garnet laser has been used in an experimental , robot @-@ assisted radical prostatectomy in canines in an attempt to reduce collateral nerve and tissue damage , and erbium @-@ doped lasers are coming into use for cosmetic skin resurfacing . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Yttrium is a key ingredient in the yttrium barium copper oxide ( YBa2Cu3O7 , aka ' YBCO ' or ' 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 ' ) superconductor developed at the University of Alabama and the University of Houston in 1987 . This superconductor is notable because the operating superconductivity temperature is above liquid nitrogen 's boiling point ( 77 @.@ 1 K ) . Since liquid nitrogen is less expensive than the liquid helium required for metallic superconductors , the operating costs for applications would be less . 
 The actual superconducting material is often written as YBa2Cu3O7 – d , where d must be less than 0 @.@ 7 for superconductivity . The reason for this is still not clear , but it is known that the vacancies occur only in certain places in the crystal , the copper oxide planes , and chains , giving rise to a peculiar oxidation state of the copper atoms , which somehow leads to the superconducting behavior . 
 The theory of low temperature superconductivity has been well understood since the BCS theory of 1957 . It is based on a peculiarity of the interaction between two electrons in a crystal lattice . However , the BCS theory does not explain high temperature superconductivity , and its precise mechanism is still a mystery . What is known is that the composition of the copper @-@ oxide materials must be precisely controlled for superconductivity to occur . 
 This superconductor is a black and green , multi @-@ crystal , multi @-@ phase mineral . Researchers are studying a class of materials known as <unk> that are alternative combinations of these elements , hoping to develop a practical high @-@ temperature superconductor . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 Yttrium currently has no biological role , and it can be highly toxic to humans and other animals . 
 Water @-@ soluble compounds of yttrium are considered mildly toxic , while its insoluble compounds are non @-@ toxic . In experiments on animals , yttrium and its compounds caused lung and liver damage , though toxicity varies with different yttrium compounds . In rats , inhalation of yttrium citrate caused pulmonary edema and dyspnea , while inhalation of yttrium chloride caused liver edema , pleural effusions , and pulmonary <unk> . 
 Exposure to yttrium compounds in humans may cause lung disease . Workers exposed to airborne yttrium europium vanadate dust experienced mild eye , skin , and upper respiratory tract irritation — though this may be caused by the vanadium content rather than the yttrium . Acute exposure to yttrium compounds can cause shortness of breath , coughing , chest pain , and cyanosis . The Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) limits exposure to yttrium in the workplace to 1 mg / m3 over an 8 @-@ hour workday . The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH ) recommended exposure limit ( REL ) is 1 mg / m3 over an 8 @-@ hour workday . At levels of 500 mg / m3 , yttrium is immediately dangerous to life and health . Yttrium dust is flammable . 
 = Italian ironclad Affondatore = 
 Affondatore was an armoured ram of the Regia Marina ( Italian Royal Navy ) , built in the 1860s by Harrison , Millwall , London . Construction commenced in 1863 ; the ship , despite being incomplete , was brought to Italy during the Third Italian War of Independence . Affondatore , which translates as " Sinker " , was initially designed to rely on her ram her only weapon , but during construction she was also equipped with two 300 @-@ pounder guns . 
 The ship arrived off the island of Lissa shortly before the eponymous battle in July 1866 . There , she served as the flagship of Admiral Carlo Pellion di Persano . During the action , she was involved in a melee with Austrian warships and was hit many times by Austrian guns . She sank in a storm in August , potentially as a result of the damage she incurred at Lissa , but was refloated and rebuilt between 1867 and 1873 . She thereafter served with the main Italian fleet . She served as a guard ship in Venice from 1904 to 1907 , and then as a depot ship in Taranto . The ultimate fate of the ship is unknown . 
 = = Design = = 
 On 11 October 1862 , the Italian Navy placed an order with the British shipyard Mare of Millwall , London , for an armoured steam ram , to a design by the Italian naval officer Simone Antonio Saint @-@ Bon , but financial problems resulted in the order being transferred to the shipyard Harrison , also of Millwall . Saint @-@ Bon had originally intended the ship to be unarmed , relying only on its ram to sink enemy ships , but an engineer at Harrison revised the plan to include two large @-@ caliber guns . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 Affondatore had a length of 89 @.@ 56 metres ( 293 ft 10 in ) between perpendiculars and 93 @.@ 89 metres ( 308 ft 0 in ) overall , with a beam of 12 @.@ 20 metres ( 40 ft 0 in ) and a draught of 6 @.@ 35 metres ( 20 ft 10 in ) . She displaced 4 @,@ 006 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 943 long tons ; 4 @,@ 416 short tons ) normally and up to 4 @,@ 307 t ( 4 @,@ 239 long tons ; 4 @,@ 748 short tons ) at full load . As built , the ship had a very minimal superstructure , with only a small conning tower . She had a crew of 309 officers and enlisted , which later increased to 356 . 
 The ship was powered by one single @-@ expansion steam engine that drove a single propeller shaft . Steam was provided by eight rectangular boilers , which were trunked into two funnels placed amidships . The engines generated 2 @,@ 717 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 026 kW ) , giving a top speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Sufficient coal was carried to give a range of 1 @,@ 647 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 050 km ; 1 @,@ 895 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . To supplement the steam engine on long @-@ range voyages , Affondatore was fitted with a two @-@ masted schooner rig . 
 = = = Armament and armour = = = 
 As built , Affondatore carried a main gun armament of two 300 @-@ pounder Armstrong guns in single turrets fore and aft . The exact diameter of the guns is unknown , but they were either 220 mm ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) or 228 mm ( 9 @.@ 0 in ) . She also carried two 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) guns to be used in landings . A 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) long ram was fitted . The ship had an iron hull , with sides and turrets protected by 127 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) of wrought iron armour , with a 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick armoured deck . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Affondatore was laid down on 11 April 1863 and launched on 3 November 1865 . With Italy preparing to declare war against Austria in June 1866 , the Italian government ordered Affondatore 's crew to move the incomplete ship from British waters to Cherbourg for fitting out , in order to avoid the threat of the ship being confiscated by the British . Affondatore left Cherbourg on 20 June , the day Italy declared war , sailing to join the main Italian fleet which was operating in the Adriatic Sea . The Third Italian War of Independence was fought concurrently with the Austro @-@ Prussian War . The Italian fleet commander , Admiral Carlo Pellion di Persano , initially adopted a cautious course of action ; he was unwilling to risk battle with the Austrian Navy , despite the fact that the Austrian fleet was much weaker than his own . Persano claimed he was simply waiting for Affondatore to arrive , but his inaction weakened morale in the fleet , with many of his subordinates openly accusing him of cowardice . The ship passed through Gibraltar on 28 June , making her way into the Mediterranean . 
 = = = Battle of Lissa = = = 
 On 16 July , Persano took the Italian fleet out of Ancona , bound for Lissa , where they arrived on the 18th . With them , they brought troop transports carrying 3 @,@ 000 soldiers ; the Italian warships began bombarding the Austrian forts on the island , with the intention of landing the soldiers once the fortresses had been silenced . In response , the Austrian Navy sent the fleet under Tegetthoff to attack the Italian ships . After arriving off Lissa on the 18th , Persano spent two days unsuccessfully trying to suppress the Austrian gun batteries on the island so he could land the soldiers . This resulted in a significant expenditure of ammunition , which would affect the outcome of the coming battle . Affondatore joined the fleet after it had arrived off Lissa on 19 July , but her crew were not fully worked up and had struggled to handle the ship while sailing to Italy and the Adriatic . Persano decided to make a third attempt to force a landing on the 20th , but before the Italians could begin the attack , the dispatch boat Esploratore arrived , bringing news of Tegetthoff 's approach . Persano 's fleet was in disarray ; the three ships of Admiral Giovanni Vacca 's 1st Division were three miles to the northeast from Persano 's main force , and three other ironclads were further away to the west . 
 Persano immediately ordered his ships to form up with Vacca 's , first in line abreast formation , and then in line ahead formation ; Affondatore was initially located on the disengaged side of the Italian line . Shortly before the action began , Persano decided to leave his flagship , Re d 'Italia , and transfer to Affondatore , though none of his subordinates on the other ships were aware of the change . Persano used Affondatore to steam up and down the Italian line , issuing various orders to the individual ships , but as the ship captains were not aware that he was aboard Affondatore , they ignored his signals . The Italians were thus left to fight as individuals without direction . More dangerously , by stopping Re d 'Italia , he allowed a significant gap to open up between Vacca 's three ships and the rest of the fleet . Tegetthoff took his fleet through the gap between Vacca 's and Persano 's ships , though he failed to ram any Italian vessels on the first pass . The Austrians then turned back toward Persano 's ships , and took the leading ships under heavy fire . Persano initially kept his ship out of the action , until after Re d 'Italia had been rammed and sunk by the Austrian flagship , Erzherzog Ferdinand Max . 
 After the Austrians began targeting the ironclad Re di Portogallo , Persano decided to finally commit his ship to the battle , by attempting to ram the Austrian wooden ship of the line Kaiser , though he failed to make a direct strike . Kaiser then rammed Re di Portogallo , before Affondatore made a second , unsuccessful attempt to ram her . Affondatore did , however , score a hit with one of her guns , badly damaging Kaiser , killing or wounding twenty of her crew . By this time , the Austrian ironclads disengaged from the melee to protect their wooden ships . Persano made an attempt to follow them with Affondatore , but he broke off the attempt when only one of his other ironclads followed him . His crews were badly demoralized by the battle , and his ships were low on ammunition and coal . The Italian fleet began to withdraw , followed by the Austrians ; as night began to fall , the opposing fleets disengaged completely , heading for Ancona and Pola , respectively . In the course of the battle , she had been hit by 22 Austrian shells . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Affondatore sank in a storm in Ancona harbour on 6 August 1866 , which may have been due to damage received during the Battle of Lissa . According to naval historians Greene and <unk> , however , Affondatore merely took on too much water due to her low freeboard ; the damage sustained at Lissa had nothing to do with her sinking . After refloating , Affondatore was rebuilt at La Spezia from 1867 to 1873 . The ship 's masts and sails were removed , with a single mast carrying a fighting top fitted in their place . In 1883 – 1885 , she was fitted with new boilers and engines , rated at 3 @,@ 240 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 420 kW ) , and giving a speed of 13 knots ( 24 km / h ; 15 mph ) . During the annual fleet maneuvers held in 1885 , Affondatore served in the 2nd Division of the " Western Squadron " ; she was joined by the ironclad Roma and five torpedo boats . The " Western Squadron " attacked the defending " Eastern Squadron " , simulating a Franco @-@ Italian conflict , with operations conducted off Sardinia . 
 Affondatore was present during a naval review held for the German Kaiser Wilhelm II during a visit to Italy in 1888 . From 1888 to 1889 , Affondatore was significantly modernized . Her main battery guns were replaced with two 10 in ( 250 mm ) guns in new turrets . A new , larger superstructure was built to house a new secondary armament , and a second military mast was fitted . Her new secondary battery consisted of six 4 @.@ 7 in ( 120 mm ) guns in single mounts , one 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) QF gun , eight 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) QF guns , and four 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss revolver cannon . In 1891 , Affondatore became a torpedo training ship , and was fitted with two torpedo tubes . 
 The ship served in the 3rd Division of the Active Squadron during the 1893 fleet maneuvers , along with the ironclad Enrico Dandolo , the torpedo cruiser Goito , and four torpedo boats . During the maneuvers , which lasted from 6 August to 5 September , the ships of the Active Squadron simulated a French attack on the Italian fleet . As of 1899 , By 1899 , Affondatore was in service with the 2nd Division , which also included the ironclads Sicilia and Castelfidardo , and the torpedo cruisers Partenope and Urania . In 1904 , she was assigned to the defence of Venice , serving as a guard ship until 1907 . She was stricken on 11 October 1907 , and thereafter served as a floating ammunition depot at Taranto . Her ultimate fate is unknown . 
 = The Boat Race 1995 = 
 The 141st Boat Race took place on 1 April 1995 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Marko Banovic became the first rower from Croatia to participate in the event . Cambridge won by four lengths . 
 In the reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie defeated Oxford 's Isis , while Cambridge won the Women 's Boat Race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1994 race by six @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , with Cambridge leading overall with 71 victories to Oxford 's 68 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . The race was sponsored by Beefeater Gin for the ninth consecutive year . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 Oxford saw former coach and Blue Dan Topolski return as director of coaching following his departure after the 1992 race . Topolski , who rowed for the Dark Blues in the 1967 race , had coached Oxford to ten consecutive victories from 1976 to 1985 . He noted : " We know we are underdogs . We started with only one man from a previous Blues race and no internationals . Nothing but big hearts and lungs " . Cambridge 's boat club president Richard Phelps was upbeat : " We 're buoyant , tails up , the boat 's been going fast . " Cambridge were coached by Robin Williams who was reserved in his assessment , noting his crew needed to be " comfortable with the situation of rowing side @-@ by @-@ side . " 
 = = Crews = = 
 The official weigh @-@ in took place at The Hurlingham Club five days before the race . The Oxford crew weighed on average 2 @.@ 5 pounds ( 1 @.@ 1 kg ) more than their opponents . Cambridge saw the return of four former Blues while Oxford 's crew featured two . The Oxford crew contained two native British rowers to Cambridge 's five . Cambridge 's crew also featured the first rower from Croatia in the Boat Race , in Marko Banovic . Oxford 's cox , 19 @-@ year @-@ old Abbie Chapman , became the ninth female cox in the history of the contest , and as a result of her diminutive stature , standing 4 ft 10 in ( 1 @.@ 47 m ) tall , her seat was raised to afford her the visibility required to steer . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station . In a stiff headwind , Oxford took an early lead but as Cambridge 's rhythm improved , they closed the gap and took the lead . Aggressive steering from Oxford 's Chapman resulted in warnings from the umpire , yet by Craven Cottage , Cambridge held a lead of two @-@ thirds of a length , and were a second ahead at the Mile Post . A length ahead by Harrods Furniture Depository , a push at Hammersmith Bridge increased the lead to a length @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half and allowed Cambridge a clear water advantage by Chiswick Eyot . Although rating considerably lower than Oxford , Cambridge held their lead and passed the finishing post four lengths ahead , in a time of 18 minutes 4 seconds . 
 In the reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie won by fourteen lengths over Isis , the largest margin of victory since the 1971 race , and Cambridge 's eighth victory in nine years . Cambridge won the 50th Women 's Boat Race by one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ third lengths in a time of 6 minutes and 2 seconds , their sixth victory in seven years . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Cambridge 's Croatian international Banovic said " Matching them over the first two minutes and delaying our effort to Hammersmith was part of our plan . " His president , Phelps , confirmed " We knew they had four or five minutes in them ... we waited for them to crack . " Topolski reflected : " We had a great first seven minutes ... Cambridge are on a roll that has taken years to build up . " He continued : " You cannot expect our system to bear fruit in just a year " . The race was watched by around seven million viewers in the United Kingdom , the fifth most @-@ viewed sports event of the year . 
 = The Final Fantasy Legend = 
 The Final Fantasy Legend , known in Japan as Makai Toushi Sa · Ga ( <unk> Sa ・ Ga , lit . " Warrior in the Tower of the Spirit World ~ Sa · Ga " ) , is a video game released for the Game Boy in December 1989 by Square Co . It is the first game in the SaGa series and the first role @-@ playing video game for the system . Square translated the game into English for worldwide release and renamed it , linking it with the Final Fantasy series to improve marketing . Sunsoft re @-@ released it in North America during 1998 ; Square followed with an enhanced remake released for the WonderSwan Color and mobile phones in 2002 and 2007 respectively . 
 The Final Fantasy Legend operates on a turn @-@ based system similar to that of Final Fantasy II . The game 's characters battle monsters and fiends using a variety of weapons , armor , and skills that develop through the player 's actions . The game follows the story of four heroes who attempt to scale a tower at the center of the world that supposedly leads to paradise . The four heroes may belong to one of three character classes , each housing a unique customization path . 
 The Final Fantasy Legend was conceived by Nobuyuki Hoshino and developed under director Akitoshi Kawazu ; renowned composer Nobuo Uematsu wrote its score . The game is Square 's first million seller with 1 @.@ 37 million units shipped . Though released to mixed reception , it has since been described as one of the Game Boy 's greatest games and cited as an influence for series such as the Pokémon franchise . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In The Final Fantasy Legend , the player navigates a character throughout the game world with a party of up to four characters , exploring areas and interacting with non @-@ player characters . Most of the game occurs in towns , castles , caves , and similar areas . To aid exploration on the field screen , the game makes use of various signs within towns . The player is initially limited to the World of Continent to explore , and given access to later worlds as his or her party climbs the Tower . Players can save their game anytime and anywhere when not in combat to a save slot for later play . 
 Players can journey between field screen locations via the world map , a downsized representation of Final Fantasy Legend 's various worlds . Players can freely navigate around the world map screen unless restricted by terrain , such as water or mountains . The goal in each world is to find the entrance to the next level of the Tower . Random enemy encounters occasionally interrupt travel across the world map screen and hostile areas , as in other Final Fantasy related games . 
 = = = Classes = = = 
 At the beginning of the game , the player must choose a character class , gender , and name for the group 's " party leader " . There are three available classes : humans , mutants ( espers in the Japanese version ) , and monsters , each with its own strengths and weaknesses . Character classes cannot be changed once the game has begun . The player may recruit up to three additional party members through a similar process via " Member Guilds " in various towns . Characters may also be recruited to replace fallen party members , though the party leader is irreplaceable . Higher @-@ level party members may be recruited at later towns in the game . 
 A character 's performance in battle is determined by numerical values ( " statistics " ) for four categories . Each statistic has a range of 1 to 99 . The categories are strength , the effectiveness of physical attacks ; defense , the ability to reduce damage received ; agility , the effectiveness of ranged weapons or skills and at avoiding attacks ; and mana , the effectiveness of magical attacks . A character 's health is measured in hit points ( HP ) , consisting of a current HP statistic and a maximum HP statistic , ranging from 0 to 999 . Character statistics are relative to their class — humans have higher HP levels , strength , and defense , and mutants are physically weaker but enjoy a higher mana statistic . Human and mutant statistics can be amplified by worn equipment of different types . Monster @-@ class characters are dependent on their sub @-@ class , and their statistics vary greatly . 
 Humans raise their statistics through items that grant permanent bonuses , such as " <unk> " or " <unk> " . Mutant attributes simply increase by random increments after battles , and new abilities may be gained ( or lost ) in the process . Monsters change in power by consuming " meat " dropped in battles ; depending the monster 's current sub @-@ class and the meat 's origin , the monster may transform into a stronger or weaker sub @-@ class or fully recover health . Later versions of the game released upon the WonderSwan and mobile phones removed the latter effect entirely . 
 = = = Equipment and abilities = = = 
 The basic function of equipment in SaGa games is to increase character attributes . Arming a character with a gold helmet increases his or her base defense statistic , for example . The amount of equipment that can be placed on any one character at any time depends on the character 's class . Humans can hold eight , mutants four , and monsters none . There are five types of armor : shields , helmets , breastplates , gauntlets , and shoes . Only one of each at a time may be added to one character and cannot be added to monsters . Weapons , consisting of swords , hammers , whips , spell books , and guns , utilize either the strength , agility or mana attribute of a character , and can be used only a certain number of times before breaking and being removed from the player 's inventory . Shields can be used as items in combat , most with a limited number of uses , and allow the user to evade enemy attacks . 
 Mutants and monsters have different spells and abilities depending on their battle experience and sub @-@ class . These come in one of four categories : attack , non @-@ combative , healing , and resistances / weaknesses . When used in combat , attack spells and abilities will damage a target by an elemental type , while non @-@ combative spells and abilities inflict various status ailments ( such as " blindness " ) or grant benefits upon a target . Healing spells and abilities restore a target 's HP and can be used outside of combat . Certain spells and abilities have added traits , like affecting a group of enemies or draining HP from a target . Each spell and ability has a finite number of uses , and once depleted the party must visit an inn to recharge them . <unk> and weaknesses are abilities that are active throughout combat . Represented by an " O " or " X " next to the related element or status ailment , they respectively give the user either resistance or weakness to one or more types of attack ; status ailments grant immunity against a particular ailment . 
 <unk> items can be found or purchased in the game through various means , each with a limited number of uses and able to be activated from a character 's inventory or the items sub @-@ menu to restore HP or remove a status ailment in or out of combat from a single target . Like other inventory items , in order to be used during combat these must be placed in a party member 's equipment slot prior to battle . 
 = = = Combat = = = 
 Combat is initiated when the player encounters an enemy , which changes the map to the " battle screen " . The enemy appears at the top , above the current party characters ; each battle uses a menu @-@ driven turn @-@ based system . At the beginning of each turn , the player selects whether to fight or attempt to run . If the fight option is selected , the player selects an action for each party member from his or her equipment or skills to attack , defend , use magic , or use equipped items . Once the player has chosen actions for each player character , the player characters and enemy begin battle . Participants move one at a time determined by their agility statistic . If the player tries the " attempt to run " option and it fails , the party skip their turn and the enemy attacks . Combat ends if the party successfully flees , all enemies are defeated , or all player characters are defeated ; in the last case , the game ends and must be reloaded from the last save . 
 Winning battles may award the player money ( GP ) and items . Enemy monsters occasionally drop meat , which can be consumed by monster @-@ class characters . Mutant classes may " evolve " at this point , randomly gaining either increased statistics or a new random magic spell or ability , possibly overwriting an existing one . Party members that lose HP during combat can have them restored via curative items , spells , inns , or elements of the world such as healing fountains . If a party member other than the starting character is defeated in battle , he or she loses a " heart " and must be resurrected in a town via the building with a large heart @-@ shaped symbol on it . Defeated characters with no remaining hearts cannot be revived . An item can be bought at significant expense to restore a heart to a character . Alternatively , a fallen party member can also be replaced completely with a new character recruited from a town guild , regardless of the number of hearts they have remaining . 
 = = Story = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The Final Fantasy Legend takes place on several worlds centered around a large tower , built by the Creator in ancient times ( God in the Japanese version ) to link worlds . There are four unique major worlds that make up different layers of the tower : the World of Continent at the base , the World of Ocean on the 5th floor , the World of Sky on the 10th , and the World of Ruins on the 16th . Time does not flow at a constant pace between levels of the tower , rendering some worlds more technologically advanced than others . Various monsters come forth from the tower into each world ; many are hostile , but some of them are friendly to humans and willing to coexist . An offshoot of the human race ( named mutants ) also exists in each world ; they are the magic @-@ attuned descendants of a union between humans and the World of Continent 's older races . 
 The World of Continent is a large land mass ruled by three kings in constant war for control of their world . They each carry an object needed to open the tower 's entrance . The World of Ocean consists of various small islands surrounded by water , each connected by small caves . Pirates roam the sea of this world , forbidding travel by ship . The World of Sky contains large land masses suspended in clouds , and is ruled by a powerful dictator from his flying castle . The World of Ruins is a technologically advanced cityscape , reduced to a post @-@ apocalyptic wasteland by constant monster attacks . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Standing in front of the tower , the hero and party learn that they cannot climb it to paradise without first unsealing its base door . In the base world , three kings named Armor , Sword , and Shield fight for dominance using a piece of legendary equipment corresponding to their names . Visiting King Armor , the party learns that he is in love with a girl who returns his feelings , but cannot marry him , as a bandit holds her village hostage in return for her love . They defeat the bandit , and the king gives them his armor in gratitude . King Sword attacks the heroes , who vanquish him and take the sword . Lastly , King Shield is murdered by his own steward , and after a short fight , the party recovers his shield . Restoring the items to a statue of a great hero , they receive the Black Sphere , but are attacked by Gen @-@ bu , the first of four fiends controlled by Ashura . They defeat him and use the power of the Sphere to enter the tower . 
 They climb the tower and come to another door ; inside lies a second world surrounded by large bodies of water . By navigating caves , they find a floating island which allows them to travel around the world by air . They locate an old man , Ryu @-@ O , and solve his riddle to obtain the <unk> , allowing them to breathe underwater and enter the undersea palace . They encounter the second fiend , Sei @-@ ryu ; they defeat him and recover half of the second sphere . Upon returning to Ryu @-@ O , he reveals himself to be the guardian of the other half of the sphere , and the two halves form the Blue Sphere . 
 Using the Blue Sphere to continue up the tower , the party comes to a world of clouds , dominated by Byak @-@ ko and an army of thugs . They learn that Byak @-@ ko recently wiped out an underground resistance movement , except for Millie and Jeanne , the two daughters of its leader . The party temporarily joins Byak @-@ ko 's gang to find the girls , and attempt to defend them until Millie betrays Jeanne and the party is captured . Breaking free , they confront the fiend , who tries to kill Millie ; Jeanne takes the blow and the party engages the fiend . They defeat him , recover the White Sphere , and continue their journey . 
 The fourth world is a post @-@ apocalyptic wasteland ; Su @-@ Zaku roams the surface defended by an impenetrable forcefield . The party retreats to an abandoned subway for refuge and meets Sayaka , who directs them to the nearest town . There the party is confronted by the leader of a biker gang , So @-@ Cho , but his sister Sayaka intervenes and the two groups agree to work together to defeat Su @-@ Zaku . As they gather the needed parts for a device to deactivate the forcefield , So @-@ Cho sacrifices his life to guide the party through an atomic power plant . Beasts then ambush the town , and Su @-@ Zaku kidnaps Sayaka . The party defeats Su @-@ Zaku , earns the Red Sphere and travels on . 
 Climbing the tower , the party discovers the remains of a family that attempted to reach Paradise but failed , and a library suggesting Ashura is controlled by someone else . They encounter him at the top , guarding the final door ; he offers each of them control of one of the worlds , but they refuse and defeat him . Before they can pass through the door , a trap drops them to the bottom floor . Encountering the allies they made along their journey , they decide to <unk> the tower . As they climb stairs that wrap outside of the tower , they engage each of the fiends revived and defeat them . They find the Creator at the summit , and learn that the fiends and the tower itself are actually part of a game created by him to see heroes defeat evil ; for succeeding they would be granted a wish as a reward . Angry at his manipulation , they reject the reward and challenge the Creator , who insists that because he created everything he was allowed to use them as he saw fit . They then attack and defeat the Creator in a fierce battle . The heroes then discover a door leading to an unknown location ; they consider entering , but decide to return to their own world . 
 = = Development = = 
 The Final Fantasy Legend was conceived by Nobuyuki Hoshino and developed under director Akitoshi Kawazu two years after Final Fantasy was released . It was the first installment of the SaGa series in Japan and the first Game Boy game produced by Square . Square president Masafumi Miyamoto requested developers create a Game Boy game after he noticed the success of Tetris and the popularity of handheld system . Kawazu and partner Koichi Ishii decided that instead of creating a game similar to Tetris , they would produce what they felt customers desired most : a role @-@ playing game . 
 Square 's concept for the game was a title that could be completed in six to eight hours , based on the duration of an airplane flight between Narita , Japan and Honolulu , Hawaii . Developers sought to optimize the game for short bursts of gameplay , as if played by a train passenger between stations . Square raised random battle encounter rate relative to its other role playing games , ensuring players would have at least one enemy encounter during short playtime to maintain an interesting experience . The Final Fantasy Legend was designed to be difficult and feature advanced gameplay , described by Kawazu as the main difference between the SaGa and Final Fantasy series . Square implemented several other ideas to distance the games , notably the " meat " system to allow players to collect enemy abilities , though these proved difficult to portray at first . 
 Kawazu took a direct hand in shaping the game 's scenario development , working alongside Ishii , Takashi Tokita , and Hiroyuki Ito , who were involved in other Square projects at the time . Ishii and Ito developed the game 's world layout and geography as well ; Ryōko Tanaka designed the background graphics . Tokita developed character concept art and handled the in @-@ game sprites . The monochrome screen of the Game Boy proved an obstacle , as some graphics such as fire were more difficult to portray without color . As a result , they had to develop a world that " works in black and white " . Tanaka later revealed that the 2 @-@ megabit capacity of contemporary Game Boy cartridges severely limited their designs ; the team removed some elements from the finished game to ensure peak performance . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The Final Fantasy Legend 's soundtrack was composed by Nobuo Uematsu and consists of sixteen tracks . Uematsu struggled with composition at first , as the Game Boy 's sound hardware was different from the Famicom 's , featuring a new stereo option , unique waveforms , and only three musical notes . Kawazu wanted the game 's music to resemble that of Square 's two preceding Final Fantasy titles , but Uematsu chose to develop new waveforms . Despite Game Boy 's limited audio capabilities , Uematsu expressed desire to compose music for it again in 2000 , though added regarding the notion of a remake " it would be better to have high quality music and graphics , but we need to make sure that the users enjoy the game . " 
 Square has reused several songs from the game ( notably the " Battle " theme ) in later titles and released them on compilation soundtracks . The introductory music , titled " Prologue " , appeared remixed as the opening for the next two SaGa games . " Heartful Tears " ( also known as " Wipe Your Tears Away " ) became a staple for later SaGa titles , used in five of the games and arranged differently each time . Fifteen tracks were later included in the 1991 two @-@ disc All Sounds of SaGa soundtrack , encompassing the Game Boy SaGa series and re @-@ released by Square Enix in December 2004 as SaGa <unk> Shu . The final track of the set , " Journey 's End " , is a synthesizer @-@ arranged version of six of the game 's tracks combined into one by Uematsu . In the liner notes for All Sounds of SaGa , Uematsu states he enjoys listening to the track while remembering scenes from the game . The Kanagawa Philharmonic Orchestra played the song in the Press Start 2008 -Symphony of Games- concert as part of the " When Nobuo Uematsu Was Young " medley , while the " Main Theme " was played alongside " Save the World " from Final Fantasy Legend II on July 9 , 2011 at the Symphonic Odysseys concert . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 Several items of merchandise have been released for the game , including books and telephone cards . Futabasha Publishers Ltd. released a book in February 1990 titled Makai Toushi Sa · Ga — <unk> no <unk> ( <unk> ? , Requiem of their Adventures ) . Written by Misa Ikeda , the 287 @-@ page book was part of Futabasha 's Game Boy Adventure series for children , and detailed a hero 's trek to the top of the tower to reach Paradise . In August , Square featured the game in Final Fantasy <unk> Dan - Knights ( = <unk> ? , Final Fantasy Dragon Knights ) , a fan book which consisting of reactions and artworks to the series . The game was one of four titles featured in October 1992 by Game Player 's magazine on a video tape named Game Player 's <unk> for Game Boy Games , which demonstrated the game and offered a gameplay tutorial . 
 = = Versions and re @-@ releases = = 
 Square released the game December 1989 in Japan as Makai Toushi Sa · Ga and included a map for the four major worlds in the game ; a revised version followed shortly after . Square translated it to English in March 1990 , and planned to release it in North America with new artwork as The Great Warrior Saga . Square retitled it The Final Fantasy Legend before releasing it on September 30 , 1990 to tie into the popularity of the Final Fantasy video game . Developers made slight modifications for this version , such as removing the game 's credits and adjusting the longevity of certain weapons . Changes to the text were also made , including the omission of some of Ryu @-@ O 's riddles , removal of mention about self @-@ sacrifice and a hint of the Tower 's true purpose . Notably , the exchange between the player 's party and the Creator , where the latter reveals that he created Asura simply out of boredom , is altered . In 1998 , Sunsoft acquired the license to the Game Boy " Final Fantasy " games , re @-@ releasing them in North America the same year . Despite advertising compatibility with Nintendo 's Game Boy Color handheld , the re @-@ released version featured no enhancements . 
 Square announced in September 2001 a re @-@ release of The Final Fantasy Legend for Bandai 's WonderSwan Color unit ; the Japan @-@ exclusive port debuted March 2002 under the Japanese title . Toshiyuki Itahana redrew the concept art and graphics , and Square added animated cutscenes . Developers also enabled players to see in advance what a monster would transform into before eating meat left behind after battle . The port allowed playthrough of the intact original Game Boy version . Among other changes and additions were gameplay tweaks , a bestiary , and an added feature that allowed players to automatically target an enemy for attack in combat . 
 As of January 30 , 2007 , Square Enix had renewed their trademark on the Japanese name for the game , and at Square Enix 's 2007 Tokyo Game Show in September made a mobile phone port of the Wonderswan version available for play . Square released the game for download in late 2008 for Japanese i @-@ mode , EZweb compatible phones , and Yahoo ! Mobile compatible phones . The port removed the bestiary mode and original Game Boy version of the game , and condensed some of the in @-@ game cutscenes . It added Japanese kanji support and extra shops with new equipment throughout the quest . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Final Fantasy Legend is Square 's first game to sell over a million copies ; the Game Boy version alone shipped 1 @.@ 37 million copies worldwide ( 1 @.@ 15 million in Japan ) as of March 31 , 2003 . Square quickly released two sequels for the Game Boy , and marketed subsequent SaGa games on other video game consoles . The one @-@ eyed monster featured on the Japanese box art later became the series ' mascot , appearing in the sequel as a character named " Mr. S " . Game Freak founder Satoshi Tajiri cited the game 's influence behind the Game Boy Pokémon series , stating it gave him the idea that the system could handle more than action games . 
 Upon release , Makai Toushi Sa · Ga was acclaimed by Japanese critics . Famitsu awarded the game an overall score of 35 out of 40 . Among its panel of four reviewers , three gave it 9 out of 10 , while one gave it 8 out of 10 . This made it one of their two highest @-@ rated games of 1989 , along with <unk> I & II . In addition , up until 1989 , it was one of only seven games to have received a score of at least 35 out of 40 or above from Famitsu . 
 Western critics had a few complaints , but gave mostly positive reviews . The Chicago Tribune called the game " a little slow in spots , but , like Final Fantasy , worth your patience " , and a " good quest " . The newspaper gave the game ratings of 8 out of 10 and 7 out of 10 . German gaming magazine Power Play gave the game a score of 78 % , and praised it for showing potential for the Game Boy as the first role @-@ playing game on the platform . IGN called The Final Fantasy Legend a " compelling RPG with a complex gameplay system and a solid soundtrack " , but complained about the game 's difficulty and " dated " graphics . Allgame praised the title on its merits as a role @-@ playing game , but criticized its high difficulty and lack of a sense of direction . 1UP 's Retronauts described its gameplay as a successor to Final Fantasy II 's , though added that the systems involved were not properly refined until its sequel ; they further stated that the randomness of the mutant and monster character classes made the game very difficult . 
 Other Western publications reacted to The Final Fantasy Legend more favorably . Author Jeff Rovin heavily praised the title in the book How to Win at Game Boy Games , citing the thorough manual and considering the game a " masterful achievement for the Game Boy unit , and a superlative game of [ its ] kind " , though not as complex as The Legend of Zelda . Spencer Yip of Siliconera named it as a game he was thankful for playing , citing it as opening his mind to story @-@ based games more so than titles like Dragon Quest , and in part led to the creation of the website . In May 1991 , Nintendo Power named the game the third all @-@ around best Game Boy game of the previous year , and in September 1997 they ranked it 70th on their list of the " Top 100 " games to appear on a Nintendo system , stating that it had " stayed true to the Square Soft tradition " . TechnoBuffalo 's Ron Duwell acknowledged while it was regarded less favorably than its sequels , its flaws could be worked around and added " There is nothing quite like The Final Fantasy Legend . Not before it , [ ... ] and only a single sequel to follow up on its ideas . " . 1UP.com 's Jeremy Parish called it one of the " essential " games for the Game Boy as well as one of the best of 1989 , noting its introduction of new ideas that contrasted the Final Fantasy series and calling it " a pretty decent portable RPG in its own right " . GameDaily named it a definite game for Game Boy alongside the related Final Fantasy titles , describing it as providing " hours of role @-@ playing excitement , whether you were waiting in a dentist 's office or on the way to Grandma 's house . " Andrew Vanden <unk> described the game as " unusual " amongst Japanese roleplaying games , describing its narrative as " loosely connected experiences rather than the sort of epic narrative the RPG genre is commonly thought of " . As a result , the off @-@ screen deaths of non @-@ player characters felt more " poignant " and an example of memento mori . However , he also felt the monster class system as counter @-@ intuitive , as frequently said classes emphasized the point of enemies as " designed to pose challenges , not overcome them " . Electronic Gaming Monthly , Game Informer , Pocket Games , and GameSpot shared this sentiment ; the latter three named it one of the top fifty games for the Game Boy . 
 The difficulty and significance of the game 's final boss , the Creator , has elicited several mentions . GamePro named him one of the " 47 Most Diabolical Video @-@ Game Villains of All Time " , placing him 37th on the list and adding " You gotta wonder ... how many hit points did the developers give God ? " 1UP.com described the battle as " epic " , considering it part of a recurring theme of Japanese role @-@ playing games in which characters band together to kill God . Comedian Jackie <unk> referenced the Creator on Comedy Central Presents , describing the game 's final battle as " the worst premise ever of any video game " , and recalling how she still tried for eight months to defeat the boss . Despite the final boss ' difficulty , it can be killed easily by the instant @-@ death " chainsaw " weapon . In 2009 , Square Enix battle planner Nobuyuki Matsuoka paid homage to the fact in the game Final Fantasy XIII , by deliberately giving the title 's final boss a similar vulnerability . 
 = The Boat Race 1957 = 
 The 103rd Boat Race took place on 30 March 1957 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The race was umpired by former Oxford rower Gerald Ellison . Despite Oxford being favourites and with the heaviest crew in the history of the event , Cambridge won by two lengths in a time of 19 minutes 1 second . The victory took the overall record to 57 – 45 in their favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1956 race by one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths , and led overall with 56 victories to Oxford 's 45 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge 's coaches were James Crowden ( who had rowed for the Light Blues in the 1951 and 1952 races ) , D. K. Hill ( who had rowed for Cambridge in 1953 and 1954 ) , Derek Mays @-@ Smith ( who had represented Cambridge in the 1955 and 1956 races and James Owen . Oxford were coached by J. H. Page , L. A. F. Stokes ( a Dark Blue in 1951 and 1952 ) and R. A. <unk> ( who had rowed in the 1954 race ) . The race was umpired by Gerald Ellison , the Bishop of Chester , who had rowed for Oxford in the 1932 and 1933 races . 
 According to the rowing correspondent of The Times , " never in the past 10 years has there been such unanimity in Boat Race forecasts as this year , when only the staunchest Cambridge supporters could see more than an outside chance of a light blue victory " . He described the Oxford crew as " exceptionally strong and mechanically quite efficient " yet " lacks polish and uniformity " and while Cambridge were demonstrated uniformity , they rowed in a way which " does look like hard work " . In the build @-@ up to the race , Oxford 's time in their second full course row was 45 seconds quicker than that rowed by Cambridge the previous day . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 13 st 3 lb ( 83 @.@ 7 kg ) , 5 @.@ 75 pounds ( 2 @.@ 6 kg ) per rower more than their opponents , making them the heaviest crew on record . Cambridge 's crew featured a single rower with Boat Race experience : their number six and boat club president Michael <unk> had rowed in the previous year 's race . Oxford saw four rowers return who had previously participated in the event . Two members of each crew were registered as non @-@ British : Oxford 's Roderick Carnegie was Australian while their cox A. Said was from Pakistan . Cambridge 's crew included two Americans in J. R. Meadows and their cox R. C. Milton . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Cambridge . Both crews rowed 38 strokes in the first minute , with the Light Blues holding a canvas @-@ length lead . While Oxford dropped their stroke rate to 32 strokes per minute , Cambridge continued at pace , rating 35 strokes per minute in an attempt to extend their early lead through to Beverley Brook . Oxford 's longer stroke saw them pass Cambridge to pass the Mile Post around a length ahead . At the Crab Tree pub , Cambridge pushed on while the Dark Blues maintained their rhythm , with the rowing correspondent for The Times suggesting this was " Oxford 's tactical error " . 
 The Dark Blues ' lead was down to half a length by the time the crews passed Harrods Furniture Depository and by Hammersmith Bridge Cambridge had edged ahead . Still out @-@ rating Oxford , the Light Blues gradually pulled away and were a length and a half ahead by Chiswick Steps . With no response from Oxford , Cambridge extended their advantage further to around two lengths by Barnes Bridge , a lead which they held at the finishing post in a time of 19 minutes 1 second . They secured their third consecutive victory and their ninth win in eleven years and taking the overall record in the race to 57 – 45 in their favour . At the post @-@ race dinner , held at the Royal Automobile Club in Pall Mall , the Oxford boat club president Carnegie defended his crew 's style : " The style was all right but we did not match up to it " . His counterpart <unk> suggested that had the race been held ten days prior , Oxford would have won . 
 = Nokomis Library = 
 Nokomis Library , formerly Nokomis Community Library , is a branch library serving the Nokomis East area of Minneapolis , Minnesota . One of 41 libraries in the Hennepin County Library System , Nokomis was designed by Buetow and Associates , Inc and opened in 1968 as a replacement for the nearby Longfellow Community Library . After being deemed crowded and outdated in 1999 , the library underwent a renovation beginning in 2009 that saw it gain a number of environmentally friendly features and an expansion of 4 @,@ 300 square feet ( 399 m2 ) . The building reopened in 2011 and includes a restored Wind and Water Chime , a stabile that was part of the original library and that was refurbished and reinstalled by July 2013 . The library contains over 35 computers , a public meeting room , and a Spanish @-@ language collection of materials . 
 = = History = = 
 Nokomis was the newest branch added to the Minneapolis Public Library system in 1967 ; the previous one was the Linden Hills Community Library , which was completed in 1931 . It was built to replace the former Longfellow Community Library that had served the Nokomis East area for many years . In 1967 , the City of Minneapolis had Buetow and Associates , Inc design the new library building , which was modeled after a tepee from the poem The Song of Hiawatha by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow . Additionally , the library was named for Nokomis in said poem , making the branch the only library in the system to be named after a fictional character . The library featured a reading loft , basement meeting room , and 13 @,@ 426 square feet ( 1 @,@ 247 m2 ) . Construction on it began in 1967 and concluded the next year . The project utilized limestone produced by Mankato Kasota Stone , a local stone company quarrying in the Minnesota River Valley that had been responsible for providing stone for Minneapolis 's Stone Arch Bridge . The library opened in September 1968 and immediately doubled the circulation of the old Longfellow branch . 
 A decreased budget led to Nokomis losing its Saturday operating hours in 2004 . The Nokomis East Neighborhood Association , <unk> Financial for Lutherans , and members of the community subsequently put funds towards keeping the library open on Saturdays until in mid @-@ 2005 when money was reallocated in the budget for continued Saturday operation . Further budget woes continued to plague the Minneapolis Public Libraries as of early 2007 , by which point the system had had to temporarily close three different branches in part due to a loss of local government aid . A merger with the Hennepin County Libraries was approved by both systems ' boards along with the Minneapolis City Council and Nokomis reopened at 10 am on January 2 , 2008 , as a Hennepin County Library . It remained the only building in the newly expanded 41 @-@ library system to be named for a fictional character . 
 = = Renovation = = 
 In 1999 , the Minneapolis Library Board issued a report entitled Outlook Twenty Ten identifying the changing needs of each of the system 's libraries . Deeming Nokomis crowded and outdated , the report proposed three options . Option A proposed combining Nokomis with the nearby Roosevelt Community Library in a 25 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 323 m2 ) space and closing both Nokomis and Roosevelt . This would have allowed the library to operate out of a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art building at an undecided location . Option B recommended moving Nokomis to a different site without moving Roosevelt . The new library there would have been 18 @,@ 000 square feet ( 1 @,@ 672 m2 ) . Option C included capital improvements to Nokomis , such as replacing carpeting , signs , and the roof . A 2003 update to the report identified a project start date of 2007 , with full closure in 2008 and a reopening in 2009 . 
 In 2007 , the Minneapolis City Council appropriated a portion of its $ 1 @.@ 35 billion 2008 budget for improvements to Nokomis and Northeast Community Library . $ 5 @.@ 2 million of the $ 7 million project came from the city ; Hennepin County put forward $ 1 @.@ 8 million for environmental additions to the library and other features . The new building was designed by <unk> Architects with significant input from a citizen advisory committee . Ebert , Inc. was hired as the general contractor . The old building 's last day of operation was September 12 , 2009 , at which time it was reported in the Longfellow / Nokomis Messenger that the renovated library was expected to reopen sometime in the fall of the next year . During the construction , patrons were encouraged to make use of nearby libraries including East Lake , Roosevelt , Washburn , and Southdale . 
 The renovation included expanding the size of the library about 4 @,@ 300 square feet ( 399 m2 ) to a total size of 17 @,@ 340 square feet ( 1 @,@ 611 m2 ) . A new lighting system that automatically adjusts based on the levels of light within the building was installed , along with a geothermal heating apparatus . Other environmentally friendly interior features included carpeting constructed from recycled fibers and low @-@ flow faucets . A stormwater management system and native planting were utilized on the building 's exterior . The library once again incorporated materials from Mankato Kasota Stone , making the difference between the old and new exterior surfaces virtually indistinguishable . The teen section was significantly expanded and a new ground @-@ floor meeting room was built . The children 's section was also subject to improvements , gaining new nature @-@ inspired design elements including bird light fixtures . Collections were updated and expanded as well , including the purchasing of new books , DVDs , and CDs . The library finally reopened on April 30 , 2011 , after being closed for 19 months of renovation . 
 = = Wind and Water Chime = = 
 Pre @-@ renovation Nokomis featured a hanging sculpture called Wind and Water Chime which hung above a fountain . Classified as a stabile , a piece of artwork similar to a mobile only not intended to move , Wind and Water Chime consisted of 4 @,@ 000 individual components , including small brass and phosphorus bronze rectangles strung on 600 yards ( 549 m ) of filament lines . The piece was designed and built by Donald <unk> , a conceptual artist who taught at Macalester College in Saint Paul , Minnesota . The installation was intended to evoke the nearby Minnehaha Falls , which , like Nokomis , was referenced in Longfellow 's The Song of Hiawatha . 
 After Nokomis 's closure for renovation , Wind and Water Chime was taken out of the library and stored . Hennepin County projects costing more than $ 1 million are subject to the One Percent for Art program , wherein 1 % of a project 's budget is dedicated to the " selection , purchase and installation " of artwork within the space of the project . At the recommendation of the Nokomis Library Public Art Selection Committee , Nokomis 's $ 52 @,@ 000 art budget was spent hiring Kristin <unk> to polish , clean , protect , and <unk> the entire installation with the aim of returning it to its initial appearance . It was reinstalled in Nokomis by Joel Pieper Fine Arts , now hanging near the building 's entrance on the library 's west side in an adult reading area . A ceremony celebrating the stabile 's return was held on July 13 , 2013 . 
 = = Services = = 
 As of 2015 , Nokomis Library is open six days per week , from Monday though Saturday . The library hosts 37 computer workstations , 24 more than before the renovation , and has its own Wi @-@ Fi network . The building is home to a publicly <unk> meeting room that was designed for a capacity between five and 36 persons . Nokomis holds a Spanish @-@ language collection , including materials intended for adults and children . A teen gaming group meets weekly in Nokomis 's meeting room . The library has a 17 @,@ 700 square feet ( 1 @,@ 644 m2 ) parking lot accessible from 51st Street . In 2008 , Nokomis 's patrons , 53 % of whom were adults and 47 % of whom were children , checked out a total of 240 @,@ 334 items from the library . 
 The Friends of Nokomis Library is an organization through which community members may support the library . 
 = New York State Route 114 = 
 New York State Route 114 ( NY 114 ) is a state highway on the far eastern sections of Long Island in New York in the United States . It serves as a connector between the two " forks " of Long Island , crossing Shelter Island in the process . This is the only connection between the North and South forks east of Riverhead . NY 114 is the easternmost signed north – south state route in all of New York . Additionally , the route is the last in a series of sequential state routes on Long Island . The series begins with NY 101 in western Nassau County and progresses eastward to NY 114 . 
 NY 114 was assigned in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York and has remained intact since . The highway has had two proposed spurs by Suffolk County that were failed to be constructed . NYSDOT has also marked most of the road as New York State Bicycle Route 114 ( NY Bike Route 114 ) with diversions onto local streets in Sag Harbor , and north and west of the northern terminus along NY 25 in Greenport . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The southern end of NY 114 is at NY 27 ( Montauk Highway ) , just a block from the downtown area of East Hampton . It quickly relinquishes its status as a local road and becomes a two @-@ lane rural highway called East Hampton – Sag Harbor Turnpike , which leads to Sag Harbor . The wooded landscape between these two resort towns is dotted with large manors and estates , many of which are set far back from the roadway . 
 After several miles , NY 114 finds itself in the village of Sag Harbor . This colonial whaling port is today a picturesque village of boutiques and shops along the waterfront of Sag Harbor Bay , an arm of <unk> Bay . NY 114 makes several turns as it navigates the village 's centuries @-@ old street pattern , before crossing over Sag Harbor Cove on its way north . 
 After leaving Sag Harbor , NY 114 encounters a modern roundabout at the intersection of Short Beach Road ( County Route 60 or CR 60 ) and Tyndall Road . NY 114 makes a turn through the roundabout and then travels one more mile through North Haven before reaching the first of two ferries along its route . Shelter Island 's two ferries , both of which technically carry NY 114 , are operated by two different companies . The South Ferry ( between North Haven and Shelter Island ) is operated by the South Ferry Company and the North Ferry ( between Shelter Island Heights and Greenport ) is operated by the North Ferry Company . Since the two entities are separate , there is no incentive to use both ferries , although both companies offer discounts for round trip fares and for Shelter Island residents . 
 On Shelter Island itself , NY 114 acts as the main thoroughfare , once again turning along different local roads . It traverses the length of the island , and ends in historic Shelter Island Heights at the North Ferry terminal . Once across to Greenport , NY 114 ends quickly at NY 25 , again just a block or so from the heart of the village . Despite the short distance between the North Ferry terminal and the northern terminus , NY 114 includes three streets in Greenport . Northbound Route 114 runs on Third Street from the ferry terminal to NY 25 . Southbound NY 114 runs along Fifth Street then one block later turns left onto Wiggins Street , where it heads eastbound until it passes the historic Greenport Railroad Station , and terminates at Third Street and the North Ferry terminal . The portion of NY 114 within Greenport is maintained by the village . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1840 the Bull Head Turnpike Company built a private toll road known today as the Sag Harbor Turnpike , which operated successfully until a competing railroad line opened in the 1880s . In 1906 the town of Southampton took control of the now dilapidated road and removed the toll gates . NY 114 was assigned to its current alignment as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York and is known in part as the Sag Harbor Turnpike . The bridge carrying NY 114 between Sag Harbor and North Haven is an arched bridge that serves as a village landmark . In 1999 , residents successfully fought state proposals to replace it with a girder bridge . Instead , the bridge was replaced with a new , wider bridge with ornamental lamps that closely resembles the original and is in the same location . 
 Suffolk County once had plans to upgrade CR 59 ( Long Lane ) into a four @-@ lane highway bypassing East Hampton to the north . Another formerly proposed Suffolk County built realignment was the North Haven Spur ( CR 44 ) , which was planned for a future bridge to Shelter Island . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Suffolk County . 
 = DJ Hero 2 = 
 DJ Hero 2 is a rhythm video game and a sequel to DJ Hero , a spinoff of the Guitar Hero series . DJ Hero 2 uses a special turntable @-@ controller , the same as introduced in DJ Hero , to simulate turntablism , the act of creating a new musical work from one or more previously recorded songs using record players and sound effect generators . The game is developed by FreeStyleGames and is published by Activision , and was released worldwide in October 2010 . 
 Similar to DJ Hero , players in DJ Hero 2 follow specific actions on the turntable controller in time to marked scrolling indicators on the game 's screen , earning points for correctly performing actions in time . The game includes a new freestyle mode , giving the player the chance to freely crossfade between tracks , scratch a section of a mix , or add sample effects during marked sections . The game features 83 mixes on disc comprising over 100 different songs , with further mixes available as downloadable content . Most mixes have been assembled by FreeStyleGames , but other professional DJs , including David Guetta , deadmau5 , DJ Qbert , Tiësto and RZA , have provided both their mixing skills and character avatar for the game . Players can challenge these mixes at any time in a Quickplay mode , progress through them in the single @-@ player Empire mode , or play cooperatively or competitively with a second user in offline and online game modes . A third player can also participate through singing the mix ' vocals . 
 DJ Hero 2 was well received by critics , receiving praises for maintaining and improving upon the core elements of the first game , and for a soundtrack featuring a wide selection of genres . However , sales for the title were low , failing to reach similar numbers as DJ Hero from the previous year . In conjunction with poor sales from the Guitar Hero franchise , Activision announced the cancellation of further development in February 2011 , leaving DJ Hero 2 as the final multi @-@ platform iteration of the DJ Hero franchise . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 DJ Hero 2 follows from its predecessor in simulating the performance of a disc jockey mixing one or two songs using a special turntable controller . The controller , the same unit as shipped previously with DJ Hero , includes a rotatable turntable to use for recording scratching , three " stream " buttons to match notes from the two music tracks and an effects track , and a slider to control the crossfade between tracks . These actions are presented to the players through on @-@ screen notation that scrolls in time with the music . Players score points by performing the actions correctly , but are not penalized otherwise . By successfully completing a consecutive set of actions , the player can increase their scoring multiplier up to 4x ; the multiplier returns to 1x should they miss any actions . Certain marked sections , when played correctly , fill a " Euphoria " ( the " Star Power " for this game ) meter which can be unleashed using another button on the controller and will temporarily double the scoring . The player can also earn the ability to rewind a song by a few seconds by playing a long string of consecutive notes . They can rewind the song by quickly spinning the turntable in reverse ; the rewind effect can be used to either correct a mistake or further boost one 's scoring . 
 Small changes have been made in the turntable playback within DJ Hero 2 : freestyle effects samples , previously based on game @-@ wide preselected " effect packs " , are mix @-@ specific , and the game does not penalize the player for small variations in fast scratching sections as long as it follows the general beat of the song . Specially marked freestyle sections , previously limited to only added sample effects over the track , allow the player to freely mix between the two tracks , use their own scratch effects , or add effects hits while within these sections . The display for these freestyle sections shows marks where switching between the tracks would achieve a strong audio effect , and the player is graded on how well they hit these markers after the end of each mix . 
 In addition to using a turntable , players have the option to sing or rap to the mixes ' lyrics , similar to vocal parts in current Guitar Hero or Rock Band games using a compatible microphone controller from most previous rhythm games . The game will score vocals based on the matching of pitch , beat and rhythm . 
 DJ Hero 2 ' features an improved single @-@ player career mode called " Empire " . Empire provides more structure for the player to proceed through the game than the simple set lists used in DJ Hero . Through Empire mode , the player works though a number of pre @-@ determined setlists and boss battles ( as described below ) with the celebrity avatars and fictional DJ 's at one of six different venues , earning stars that unlock additional venues to play at . Completing certain setlists or battles unlock new characters , outfits for those characters , and virtual turntable decks for the player . Five of these decks are " power decks " that slightly change the scoring mechanism or play style of the game ; one increases the maximum multiple to 5x , while another one increases the rate that notes are displayed but increases the base scoring system . 
 The primary focus of DJ Hero 2 has been the social aspects , according to FreeStyleGames ' creative director Jamie Jackson ; as such , many of the games ' new modes feature multiplayer considerations . The game supports the " Party Play " mode introduced in Guitar Hero 5 , allowing players to jump into a song , alter the difficulty during gameplay , change between turntable and vocals , and leave at any time , while the game continues to run in a jukebox mode . Several new competitive modes engage two DJ players against each other ; some modes have both DJs performing alongside each other but with competitive edges such as a " Checkpoint " race where each DJ attempts to earn the best score within a section of a song . DJ Battles see two DJ 's performing call @-@ and @-@ response style along with open freestyle sections . The online mode includes a simple role @-@ playing video game mechanic whereby participating and winning battles with other players earns the player DJ Points that lead to level increases and additional perks . 
 The game does not include " DJ vs Guitar " mode that was featured in DJ Hero , where a second player could use a compatible guitar controller to play alongside the DJ player . 
 = = Development = = 
 DJ Hero 2 was officially announced in June 2010 for release in the last quarter of 2010 . Prior to the game 's announcement , Activision revealed a month before the game 's release that it is actively seeking artists for downloadable content and a sequel to the game . David Guetta has stated that he was set to work on the game 's sequel , to arrive late in 2010 . Activision CEO Bobby Kotick stated that despite low sales of DJ Hero , they are committed to continuing the series , with the sequel due in 2010 . The sequel , DJ Hero 2 , was further confirmed during an Activision investors report for 2009 , citing it as one of only 2 major Guitar Hero titles to be expected from Activision in 2010 , with an expected late @-@ 2010 release date . 
 Work on DJ Hero 2 started some months after the first game was completed , as the development team had endured heavy working hours to meet the release deadline . FreeStyleGames ' creative director Jamie Jackson said that DJ Hero 2 took about seven months to complete . While they were able to easily build on the existing framework for DJ Hero , FreeStyleGames wanted to do more than just include new mixes , and sought to include additional features such as the Battle Mixes into the game . Many of the game 's new features are a result of feedback from players , including the game 's social modes and improvements in the game 's interface to provide a cleaner look and instantaneous visual feedback to the player . The team also worked at improving the game 's graphics ; the appearance of DJ Hero 's graffiti @-@ based menus gave the impression of being a hip @-@ hop game , but FreeStyleGames wanted to distance DJ Hero 2 from that . They also wanted to clean up the gameplay 's interface , providing better feedback to the player and making it easily to tell when they were winning or losing . While DJ Hero 2 does not use Kinect or PlayStation Move motion @-@ sensing technology , Jackson had not ruled them out for a future iteration of the game . 
 Another step to move the game from the apparent hip @-@ hop nature was through its song selection . Jackson felt the first game was weighted too heavily to the genre , with about 60 % of the songs being hip @-@ hop . The songs in DJ Hero 2 represent a wider variety of music , including dance , drum and bass , and techno , along with some contributions from hip @-@ hop . Jackson noted that they were able to work better with artists and publishers for DJ Hero 2 , after the successful launch of the first game ; with artists and publishers now knowing what to expect , " there is more understanding , so it has opened the doors to us in terms of getting more popular music " , according to Jackson . However , licensing for such music remained a difficult barrier . Mixes for DJ Hero 2 are made first through computer @-@ aided mixing of the two song tracks combined with effects noises , with simultaneous authoring of the gameplay markers . Noise for the scratching sections are filled in by recording the sounds of the tracks actually scratched on a DJ deck . 
 Usher contributed his song " OMG " featuring will.i.am for DJ Hero 2 , which he and will.i.am performed live at the 2010 Electronic Entertainment Expo . Usher had previously been approached by Kotick before the release of DJ Hero for future projects for Activision . Usher found , after following the success of DJ Hero , that the game was " very interesting " as a means of connecting younger gamers to music such as his that they would not be able to experience live at a club , leading to his desire to be a part of the sequel . 
 FreeStyleGames found that by selecting mix artists such as Deadmau5 and Tiësto who are more widely known than some artists in the first game , they were able to give DJ Hero 2 a different feel , embracing the theatrics of these artists . FreeStyleGames had tried to include Tiësto within the first game , but could not do it within the deadline , but instead was used as part of the first game 's promotion , and later would be used as Activision 's " ambassador " for the game to Europe . Furthermore , the game 's soundtrack has been selected to include more dance and pop tracks taken from European artists to make the game more Euro @-@ friendly . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 A demo for DJ Hero 2 was released to the PlayStation network and the Xbox Live on September 7 , 2010 . The demo contains four mixes , two of which were playable : Pussycat Dolls featuring Busta Rhymes - " Don ’ t Cha " vs. Pitbull - " I Know You Want Me ( Calle Ocho ) " and Lady Gaga featuring Colby O 'Donis - " Just Dance " vs. deadmau5 - " Ghosts N Stuff " . The mix Estelle featuring Kanye West - “ American Boy ” vs. Chic - " Good Times " was used as a tutorial and the mix MSTRKRFT featuring <unk> - " Bounce " ( Beat <unk> ) could be heard in the menu background . 
 A viral browser game , DJ Hero 2 Mix <unk> , was released on October 17 , 2010 . The viral game was made by digital agency fish in a bottle and features a cut down version of the full game product . Three mixes are included in the viral and are all playable : Lady Gaga featuring Colby O 'Donis - " Just Dance " vs. Deadmau5 - " Ghosts N Stuff " , <unk> featuring <unk> <unk> and RZA - " <unk> and Sense " and Tiësto and Sneaky Sound System - " I Will Be Here " vs. Tiësto - " Speed Rail " . Unique to the viral game is a " Create A Mix " mode which allows players to create their own mixes , share them and challenge friends through email , Twitter , <unk> and Myspace . 
 DJ Hero 2 was sold with various promotional items . Within Europe and select stores in North America , players that purchased the game in one of two bundle packages ( either with one or two turntable controllers ) received the predecessor DJ Hero free . Other North American stores offered carrying cases for the turntables , MP3 versions of selected mixes , or redemption codes for in @-@ game customization options . 
 = = = Post @-@ release = = = 
 A glitch was observed by players on Xbox 360 where , if they were playing while online and had exactly 100 friends attached to their account , the game would freeze and / or they would be unable to play online . Activision issued a patch to correct this a few days after release . 
 The music video for Tiësto 's " Speed Rail " is composed only of footage from DJ Hero 2 including the Tiësto avatar . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 DJ Hero 2 's setlist includes 83 mashups from nearly 100 songs from about 85 different artists . Game Informer stated that the game 's soundtrack still strongly represents the genre of hip @-@ hop , but adds more elements from electronica , pop , and dance . David Guetta , Deadmau5 , DJ Qbert , Tiësto and RZA are playable avatars within the game and they will help create mixes for the game . 
 DJ Hero 2 supports downloadable content in the form of new mixes that can be purchased from the consoles ' respective online stores . In addition , through an additional free add @-@ on released in November 2010 , players will be able to purchase existing downloadable content from the first game to use within DJ Hero 2 . Activision 's February 2011 decision to shutter their Guitar Hero development initially stated that no further downloadable content will be forthcoming for the title , but due to " continued support " from their fanbase , Activision has since decided it will continue to release downloadable content for the game through at least March and April 2011 with packs that were in the works prior to the closure of Guitar Hero . 
 = = Reception = = 
 DJ Hero 2 was well received by critics , who felt the game was a significant improvement in both gameplay , presentation , and song selection from its predecessor . Michael Brown of 1UP.com noted while there was very little overall change to the gameplay , " it 's the minor tweaks that make it a definite improvement over the original " . Keza MacDonald of Eurogamer believed that DJ Hero 2 was " much slicker , clearer and more tasteful " with changes in presentation and interface that quickly allows the players to jump into the game . Ben Kuchera of Ars Technica called the title " the best kind of sequel " as it retained the best features of DJ Hero and added further improvements atop of those . Matt Wales of IGN noted that the early difficulty levels of the game were much more suited to beginners " to make for a more convincing DJing experience , without sacrificing that all @-@ important accessibility " . 
 Critics praised the new freestyle features into gameplay , citing the overuse of the Flavor Flav default sample in the first game . MacDonald favored how FreeStyleGames transformed the limited freestyle sections of the first game into " an integral part " of the sequel . Matt Helgeson of Game Informer stated that the nature of DJ Hero 2 's freestyling made him feel that he was " helping craft the mix , not just hitting buttons in time " . While the addition of new multiplayer modes was well @-@ received , many felt the vocal track addition did not work out well . Chris Watters of GameSpot noted that " the singing evaluation doesn 't feel as slick as in other games " , and unless the player knows the music from both tracks of a mix , singing the back @-@ and @-@ forth mix " isn 't all that fun " . Helgeson commented that attempting to sing lyrics from two separate songs " feels like playing karaoke game in the grips of a seizure " . 
 Reviewers found the soundtrack to provide a wider range of genres , moving away from hip @-@ hop and into house and dance genres , to appeal to more players . Helgeson considered that the mixes were " uniformly great " , and balanced popular artists with skilled DJ mixers . MacDonald stated the soundtrack was " faultless " and that while featuring a large number of songs from the club scene , the soundtrack is " still a powerful draw if you don 't know or even like the music " . Official Xbox Magazine UK 's Mike Channell believed the " mashups also feel even more playful this time around " , creating new interpretations of the lyrics of songs through the mixing . Cian Hassett of <unk> called the setlist " the most incredible fusion of contrasting genres known to man " . Some critics commented that they felt the first game 's tracklist was better ; Damien Hatfield of IGN felt there was " more variety " in the original game 's mix and better representation within certain genres , while Brown favored DJ Hero 's set for " how it mixed together frequently disparate tracks " and that many mixes in the sequel favored too much of one song in the mix . 
 The NPD Group 's North American sales estimates for DJ Hero 2 during its launch month were 59 @,@ 000 units . Combined sales in North America of DJ Hero 2 and Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock were below one million in 2010 , 63 % below the total sales of Guitar Hero 5 , DJ Hero , and Band Hero from 2009 . As a result of faltering sales for its Guitar Hero series , Activision shuttered its Guitar Hero division , cancelling at least one planned game for 2011 . The closure also affects the DJ Hero series , as Activision has stated that they do not expect to publish a music game during 2011 . 
 = Two for the Road ( Lost ) = 
 " Two for the Road " is the 20th episode of the second season of the American drama television series Lost , and the show 's 45th episode overall . The episode was written by supervising producer Elizabeth Sarnoff and producer Christina M. Kim , and directed by Paul Edwards . It first aired in the United States on May 3 , 2006 , on the American Broadcasting Company . In the episode , flashbacks reveal more about Ana Lucia 's past , while in present time , Ana Lucia tries to get a gun to kill Henry , and Michael returns to the rest of the survivors . 
 " Two for the Road " was generally well @-@ received by critics who were shocked that Ana Lucia and Libby were killed off . Many people , however , anticipated the two deaths as actresses Michelle Rodriguez and Cynthia Watros had widely publicized drunk driving charges several months before the airing of the episode . The producers later claimed in several interviews that the deaths had been planned for over a year . The episode was watched by 15 @.@ 03 million American viewers , which represented a decrease compared to the previous year 's rating . Sarnoff and Kim were nominated for the Writers Guild of America ( WGA ) Award for Best Episodic Drama at the February 2007 ceremony for writing the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 Flashbacks begin directly after Ana Lucia Cortez ( Michelle Rodriguez ) shooting Jason ( Aaron Gold ) in " Collision " . Upon arriving at the police station the following day , Ana Lucia 's mother Teresa Cortez ( Rachel <unk> ) is suspicious of her daughter and questions her , causing Ana Lucia to quit the police department . While working at an airport , she meets Christian Shephard ( John Terry ) who hires her as a bodyguard for his trip to Australia . One night , Ana Lucia and a drunk Christian go to a home , where Christian demands to see his daughter from a blonde woman ( Gabrielle Fitzpatrick ) . After seeing that the argument is getting out of control , Ana intervenes and pulls Christian back into the car . Ana Lucia eventually gets tired of Christian 's antics and leaves him at a bar , where they briefly encounter Sawyer when Christian opens his car door . Ana goes to the airport and calls her mother , apologizing and telling her that she wishes to make things right . Teresa says she will be waiting for Ana Lucia in Los Angeles . 
 = = = On the Island = = = 
 In the present , Ana Lucia starts questioning Henry Gale in the hatch , but suddenly he attacks her , and is only stopped when John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) knocks him unconscious . Locke asks Henry why he attacked Ana Lucia , but has never tried to hurt him . Henry says that Locke is " one of the good ones " . Although Libby ( Cynthia Watros ) advises Ana Lucia not to try to get revenge on Henry , she is determined and asks James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) for a gun , but is rejected . Ana Lucia returns and after Sawyer still refuses to give her a gun , she has sex with him , and is able to distract him long enough to steal the gun . Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) and Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) return with Michael Dawson ( Harold Perrineau ) . Michael wakes up and tells everyone in the hatch that he tracked the Others down and found out that they are living worse off than the survivors . He also says that once he is healthy , he will organize a rescue mission to reclaim his son Walt Lloyd ( Malcolm David Kelley ) . After Locke and Jack begin to plan a rescue mission for Walt , they realize that they need more guns , and go to Sawyer , who realizes that Ana Lucia has stolen his . Elsewhere , Hugo " Hurley " Reyes ( Jorge Garcia ) has planned a romantic picnic for himself and Libby , but Hurley gets lost and leads them back to the survivors ' beach . There , he realizes that he forgot to pack a blanket and Libby offers to go back to the hatch to retrieve one . She also suggests that Hurley ask Rose and Bernard for some wine for the picnic , a suggestion that Hurley is delighted to hear . Meanwhile , back in the hatch , Michael asks Ana Lucia what is going on and she explains a few things : Sawyer has all the guns , Jack , Locke , and Kate left to get the guns , and they currently have one of the Others , Henry , in captivity inside the armory . She mentions that Henry tried to kill her earlier in the day and that although she was about to kill Henry , she was not able to pull the trigger . Michael offers to do it , but after she hands him the gun he turns around and shoots her dead . Libby walks in with the blankets and startles Michael causing him to shoot her too . Michael then walks into the armory where Henry is being held . Instead of shooting Henry , Michael shoots himself in the arm . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Two for the Road " was the second episode of the series directed by Paul Edwards . Edwards had previously directed the episode " What Kate Did " . The episode was written by Elizabeth Sarnoff and Christina M. Kim , the third episode that the two had written together . 
 Numerous locations on Oahu were used as filming locations for the episode . The rooftop on Dole Cannery was filmed as the Los Angeles Police Department rooftop . The kitchen of Hawaii Convention Center was altered so that the Lost cast and crew could use it as a morgue , the Convention Center was also used for the airport scenes . The bar that Christian Shephard went to in the flashbacks is actually the Fisherman 's Wharf restaurant at <unk> Basin Harbor . The scene at Ana Lucia 's hotel room was filmed at the Renaissance <unk> Waikiki Hotel . The scenes on the beach were shot at Oahu 's Papa <unk> Beach as usual . 
 The deaths of Ana Lucia and Libby caused speculation that they were killed off due to the DUIs that actresses Michelle Rodriguez and Cynthia Watros received within fifteen minutes of each other on December 1 , 2005 . Watros pleaded guilty , was fined $ 370 , and had her license suspended for 90 days . Rodriguez initially pleaded innocent , but in April pleaded guilty , and was sentenced to five days in Oahu correctional facility , but ended up serving only 65 hours due to jail overcrowding . In February 2006 , US Weekly claimed that an insider told them that the Lost producers were frustrated with Rodriguez 's behavior and were going to kill her character off . Soon after , " Two for the Road " aired , writers Damon Lindelof and Carlton Cuse told TV Guide that when talking to Rodriguez about the part of Ana Lucia , she said that she would be interested , but only for a year . After sitting down with her , the two were very impressed with her energy , and decided to adjust their plan to make her character only last one season . Since audiences had a negative reaction to Ana @-@ Lucia , the producers thought her death would not generate enough sympathy from fans , so they decided that Libby , who was well liked , should also be killed for emotional impact . Lindelof recalled that after they found out that both Rodriguez and Watros got the DUIs , he was concerned that it would look like killing Ana and Libby was the producers attempt to say " Don 't drive drunk ! " , and even considered re @-@ writing the script so it wouldn 't seem that way , but the producers decided just to keep it like it was . Lindelof also denied rumors that Rodriguez was killed off because she was hard to deal with , saying that Michelle was " totally professional and got along well with all the other actors . " According to Lindelof and Cuse , Watros was very sad about Libby being killed off , and the producers felt bad for her , so they helped her get in a pilot for a show on CBS called My Ex @-@ Life , although it was not picked up by the network . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Two for the Road " was viewed by 15 @.@ 03 million American viewers , which was 1 @.@ 5 million less than the ratings compared to the previous year . The episode received generally positive reviews from critics . TV Squad 's C. K. Sample wrote that " Two for the Road " was " a great episode that I thoroughly enjoyed " , although he did feel " badly for Sawyer and Hugo " . Sample also wrote that although he suspected that Ana @-@ Lucia and Libby were going to die , he thought what " was amazing was who shot them " . Mac Slocum of Filmfodder.com wrote that the episode contained the " Biggest ... twist ... ever . " Slocum went on to say that if you had not seen the episode , " <unk> [ sic ] are you in for a treat " , and called the two murders " a doozy " . Slocum call Ana Lucia " a drama queen " . He also felt that Libby 's death was " one of the most tragic things we 've seen " , and said that it was " equivalent to a nuclear weapon wiping out all the characters in the M * A * S * H finale . Television Without Pity graded the episode with a B + . Supervising producer Elizabeth Sarnoff and producer Christina M. Kim were nominated for the Writers Guild of America ( WGA ) Award for Best Episodic Drama at the February 2007 ceremony for writing the episode . 
 = Yugoslav submarine Osvetnik = 
 The Yugoslav submarine Osvetnik ( Avenger ) was the first of the Osvetnik @-@ class diesel @-@ electric submarines built by Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire , Nantes , France for the navy of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) . She was launched in 1929 , and was built to a partial double hull Simonot design similar to the French Circé class . She was armed with six 550 mm ( 22 in ) torpedo tubes , one 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) gun , and one 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun , and could dive to 80 metres ( 260 ft ) . 
 Prior to World War II she participated in several cruises to Mediterranean ports . During the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , she was captured by Italian forces at the Bay of Kotor . Initially designated N1 , her armament was changed and her conning tower modified . Due to her age and shallow diving depth , when she was commissioned into the Regia Marina as Francesco Rismondo her service was limited to training and experimentation . She was scuttled off the island of Corsica by the Germans shortly after her capture in September 1943 following the Italian surrender . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 Yugoslav naval policy in the interwar period lacked direction until the mid @-@ 1920s , although it was generally accepted that the Adriatic coastline was effectively a sea frontier that the naval arm was responsible for securing with the limited resources made available to it . In 1926 , a modest ten @-@ year construction program was initiated to build up a force of submarines , coastal torpedo boats , torpedo bombers and conventional bomber aircraft to perform this role . The Osvetnik @-@ class submarines were one of the acquisitions aimed at developing a naval force capable of meeting this challenge . 
 Osvetnik was built for the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) by the Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire company at Nantes , France . Her partial double hull design , was based on a Simonot design , similar to the French Circé class . Her Serbo @-@ Croatian name translates as " Avenger " . Along with her sister submarine Smeli , she had an overall length of 66 @.@ 5 m ( 218 ft 2 in ) , a beam of 5 @.@ 4 m ( 17 ft 9 in ) , and a surfaced draught of 3 @.@ 8 m ( 12 ft 6 in ) . Her surfaced displacement was 630 long tons ( 640 t ) , or ( 809 long tons ( 822 t ) submerged , and her crew consisted of 43 officers and enlisted men . She had an operational depth of 80 m ( 260 ft ) . 
 She had two shafts driven by two MAN ( Maschinenfabrik ) diesel engines ( when surfaced ) or two Nancy electric motors ( when submerged ) , and carried 25 tonnes ( 25 long tons ) of fuel oil . The diesel engines were rated at 1 @,@ 480 bhp ( 1 @,@ 100 kW ) and the electric motors at 1 @,@ 000 shp ( 750 kW ) , and she was designed to reach a top speed of 14 @.@ 5 knots ( 26 @.@ 9 km / h ; 16 @.@ 7 mph ) under diesel power while surfaced , and 9 @.@ 2 knots ( 17 @.@ 0 km / h ; 10 @.@ 6 mph ) on her electric motors when submerged . She was armed with six 550 mm ( 22 in ) torpedo tubes ( four bow @-@ mounted , two stern @-@ mounted ) , one 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) gun , and one 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . She had a surfaced radius of action of 3 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 500 km ; 4 @,@ 000 mi ) at 9 knots ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) , and 75 nautical miles ( 139 km ; 86 mi ) at 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ; 5 @.@ 8 mph ) submerged . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Osvetnik was the first of her class , and the third submarine of the navy of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes , which subsequently became the Royal Yugoslav Navy . She and her sister submarine Smeli arrived in the Bay of Kotor on 9 December 1929 . In 1932 , the British naval attaché reported that Yugoslav ships engaged in few exercises , maneuvers or gunnery training due to reduced budgets . In September 1933 , Osvetnik and the British @-@ designed submarine Nebojša cruised the southern part of the central Mediterranean . In August 1935 , Osvetnik visited Malta , this time in company with the British @-@ designed submarine Hrabri . In August 1936 , Nebojša and Osvetnik visited the Greek island of Corfu . 
 When the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia began on 6 April 1941 , she was located in the Bay of Kotor on the southern Adriatic coast along with the three other submarines of the flotilla . On 10 April , Osvetnik and Hrabri received orders for an operation against the Italian enclave of Zara on the Dalmatian coastline , but the mission did not proceed . She was subsequently captured by the Italian XVII Corps at the Bay of Kotor . 
 Still in good condition , she was taken as war booty , and initially designated N1 . She was refitted and modernised at Pola in the upper Adriatic , which involved the replacement of some of her armament and modifications to her conning tower . After these modifications , her displacement was 665 long tons ( 676 t ) ( 822 long tons ( 835 t ) submerged ) . She was commissioned by the Italians as the Bajamonti @-@ class Francesco Rismondo , named after Francesco Rismondo , a Dalmatian @-@ born Italian hero of World War I. Despite her submerged stability and good diving rate , her age and shallow diving depth meant that she was only used for training and experimentation . On 14 September 1943 , she was captured by the Germans at Bonifacio at the southern tip of the island of Corsica , and they scuttled her four days later . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = New Jersey Route 10 = 
 Route 10 is a 23 @.@ 51 mi ( 37 @.@ 84 km ) state highway in the northern part of the U.S. state of New Jersey . It runs from an intersection with U.S. Route 46 ( US 46 ) in Roxbury Township , Morris County east to County Route 577 ( CR 577 ) / CR 677 ( Prospect Avenue ) in West Orange , Essex County . Route 10 is a major route through northern New Jersey that runs through Ledgewood , East Hanover , and Livingston . It is a four @-@ lane highway for most of its length with the exception of the easternmost part of the route . Route 10 features intersections with many major roads including Route 53 and US 202 in Morris Plains and Interstate 287 ( I @-@ 287 ) in Hanover Township . 
 Route 10 was designated in 1927 to run from Jersey City to Dover , following the former Newark and Mount Pleasant Turnpike west of Newark . The route continued east from its present @-@ day routing on current CR 577 , Park Avenue , CR 508 , and Route 7 to end at US 1 / 9 at the Tonnele Circle . An alignment of Route 10 farther to the north of its current alignment in Essex County was proposed in 1952 ; however , it was never constructed with the route being designated to its present alignment a year later . Since 1953 , Route 10 has seen improvements that eliminated the Ledgewood Circle at the western terminus in 1998 and improved safety along the portion of the route in Hanover and East Hanover Townships in the mid @-@ 2000s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 10 begins at US 46 in the Ledgewood section of Roxbury Township at the former Ledgewood Circle , heading to the southeast on a four @-@ lane divided highway with some jughandles . The road passes by the Ledgewood Mall , the Roxbury Mall , and many other businesses . The route enters Randolph Township , where the road becomes less commercial in nature and passes Randolph Lake , reaching an interchange with CR 617 . Past this interchange , Route 10 crosses over forested Mine Hill . The route crosses CR 513 and passes by the County College of Morris past that intersection , with suburban development becoming more frequent again . Route 10 widens to six lanes and then runs through the southwestern corner of Denville before heading into the Mt . Tabor section of Parsippany @-@ Troy Hills . 
 The route then forms the border between Parsippany @-@ Troy Hills to the north and Morris Plains to the south , coming to an interchange with Route 53 and crossing US 202 . The route fully enters Parsippany @-@ Troy Hills again before crossing into Hanover Township , coming to an interchange with Dryden Way , where the route widens to eight lanes . Past Dryden Way , Route 10 features an interchange with I @-@ 287 and narrows to four lanes . The road heads through the Whippany section of Hanover Township , where it has an interchange with CR 511 and passes by the Whippany Railway Museum . Route 10 crosses into East Hanover Township at the crossing of Whippany Brook . Along Route 10 in East Hanover , the road passes several businesses . 
 Route 10 crosses the Passaic River into Livingston , Essex County , where it becomes Mt . Pleasant Avenue . The route comes to the Livingston Circle , a realigned traffic circle , with CR 508 and CR 609 ( Eisenhower Parkway ) . Past this traffic circle , the divided highway becomes a four @-@ lane undivided road with some businesses and homes along the road . The route crosses CR 527 and narrows to two lanes a short distance past that intersection . The route enters West Orange at the point it crosses Nance Road . In West Orange , Route 10 ends at the Prospect Avenue intersection where radio station <unk> @-@ FM 's studios and <unk> 's transmitter <unk> are located . At this intersection , CR 577 heads east on Mt . Pleasant Avenue and north on Prospect Avenue while CR 677 ( signed as CR 577 Spur ) heads south on Prospect Avenue . 
 = = History = = 
 The Newark and Mount Pleasant Turnpike was established along the present @-@ day alignment of Route 10 east of Dover on March 12 , 1806 , existing as a turnpike until before 1833 . Route 10 was designated in 1927 to run from Jersey City west to Route 6 ( now US 46 ) west of Dover , passing through Newark . This routing of Route 10 followed its current alignment and ran east along present @-@ day CR 577 , Mt . Pleasant Avenue , and Park Avenue to Newark , where it followed CR 508 and Route 7 to US 1 / 9 at the Tonnele Circle in Jersey City . 
 In 1952 , Route 10 was designated to run along a new , never @-@ built alignment farther to the north , running through Belleville , Bloomfield , Glen Ridge , Montclair , West Orange , and along the Livingston / Roseland border , roughly along much of the routing of present @-@ day CR 611 ( Eagle Rock Avenue ) , and following its current alignment through Morris County to Ledgewood . A spur of the route was also planned in 1952 to run from Montclair south to Orange . A year later , in the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 10 was defined onto its current alignment , with its eastern terminus moved to Prospect Avenue in West Orange . In 1998 , the Ledgewood Circle at the western terminus of the route was replaced with a signalized T @-@ intersection . In the mid @-@ 2000s , a $ 11 @.@ 5 million project was undertaken to improve safety on the portion of Route 10 in Hanover and East Hanover Townships by widening existing lanes and adding turning lanes to the road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Ana Lucia Cortez = 
 Ana Lucia Cortez is a fictional character on the ABC television series Lost , played by Michelle Rodriguez . Ana Lucia made her first appearance as a guest star in the first season finale , and became part of the main cast for season two . After Oceanic Flight 815 splits in mid @-@ air , the tail section and fuselage crash on opposite sides of a mysterious island . Ana Lucia becomes the leader of the tail section . Flashbacks in her two centric episodes , " Collision " and " Two for the Road " , show her life as a police officer before the crash . 
 Rodriguez provoked controversy after being stopped by the police for driving under the influence a few weeks before her character was killed , leading to speculation that this was the reason for her death . The producers of Lost stated that Rodriguez was only interested in appearing for one season , so Ana Lucia 's death was written in from the beginning . She is shot and killed by Michael Dawson . 
 = = Arc = = 
 Prior to the crash Ana Lucia Cortez is an officer in the Los Angeles Police Department who becomes pregnant , but loses the baby after being shot by a suspect at a burglary scene . She spends several months in physical and psychological therapy , and when the suspect is arrested , she refuses to identify him . After his release , she kills him outside a bar . Ana Lucia decides to leave the force and eventually finds work as an airport security guard . She meets Christian Shephard ( John Terry ) at the airport bar , who asks her to accompany him to Sydney as a bodyguard , however in Sydney the two part ways . Ana Lucia buys a ticket on Oceanic Flight 815 to return to Los Angeles . In a brief flashback in the first season finale , she flirts with Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) at a bar at the airport , unaware he is Christian 's son . The pair arrange to continue their conversation during the flight . During the flight the plane splits in half , with the two parts crashing on different sides of an island ; Ana Lucia is one of the tail section survivors . 
 The story of how the tail section survivors cope during their first forty @-@ eight days on the Island is shown in " The Other 48 Days " . After landing in the ocean , Ana Lucia does her best to help everyone in need . That night , some of the survivors are kidnapped by the Others , the mysterious inhabitants of the Island , then a few nights later , nine more are taken . During the second raid , Ana Lucia kills one of the Others and finds a list on him , which has descriptions of the victims . Suspecting fellow survivor Nathan ( Josh Randall ) as a traitor , she moves everyone inland , digs a pit and throws him in it until he confesses . That night , Goodwin ( Brett Cullen ) tricks Nathan and kills him . The small group heads further inland , discovering a bunker known as the Arrow . Ana Lucia and Goodwin trek atop a hill , where she tells Goodwin she has worked out he is the real traitor . After a struggle , she impales him on a broken stick , then returns to the group and tells them they are safe . Fellow tail section survivors Libby ( Cynthia Watros ) and Cindy ( Kimberley Joseph ) bring Jin ( Daniel Dae Kim ) to her after discovering him washed up on shore . He breaks free , so Ana Lucia follows and finds Michael ( Harold Perrineau ) and Sawyer ( Josh Holloway ) . Jin , Michael and Sawyer are thrown into the pit , and Ana Lucia follows , pretending to have also been captured . Once she believes they are fellow 815 survivors she releases them , and they travel to the camp of the other survivors . When they near the camp , Ana Lucia mistakes Shannon ( Maggie Grace ) for an Other and shoots her fatally . The on @-@ island events of " Collision " show her guilt after Shannon 's death . She has Shannon 's lover Sayid ( Naveen Andrews ) tied up and refuses to let the group move on . After some reasoning from Libby , she reluctantly lets them go . She is invited into a bunker the fuselage survivors found to interrogate a man claiming to be Henry Gale ( Michael Emerson ) , and manages to receive a map to his crashed balloon . She takes Sayid and Charlie ( Dominic Monaghan ) with her , and eventually discovers the crash site , and the body of the real Henry Gale . In her second centric episode , " Two for the Road " , Ana Lucia attempts to speak to Henry again , but she is assaulted by him and nearly killed . Seeking revenge , she seduces Sawyer and steals his gun . She returns to the hatch and attempts to kill Henry , but is unable to bring herself to do it . She confides in Michael , who offers to kill him on her behalf . 
 But when she hands him the gun , he shoots her in the heart , killing her . She is buried next to Libby , who was also killed by Michael . After her death she makes three further appearances : in a dream to Mr. Eko ( Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje ) in " ? " , as a vision that Hurley ( Jorge Garcia ) has in " The Lie " , and in a flash sideways in " What They Died For " . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Ana Lucia was described by Melanie McFarland of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer as " demanding " , " hostile " and a " bully " . She called Ana Lucia a " brooding , broken ex @-@ cop " with a " perpetual scowl " . McFarland described the character as someone with a " take @-@ charge nature " , and an " inability to be reasoned away from her dictatorial decisions " . Anna Johns from AOL 's TV Squad felt Ana Lucia is " abrasive and lacking common sense or civility " . C. K. Sample , also from TV Squad , thought Ana Lucia was " angry " , " power mad " and a " total nut job " . According to supervising producer Leonard Dick , " Ana Lucia is somebody who does not want to be a victim . She was a victim once and she swore to herself she would never be a victim again " . Rodriguez described the character as " very intuitive " , adding " I like that the character is pretty much always aware and suspicious " . She is " street smart " and has a " speak @-@ her @-@ mind quality " . 
 = = Development = = 
 In February 2005 , Lost producers began looking for a Latina woman in her mid @-@ thirties who would be the leader of the tail section , and a romantic interest for Jack . The agent of Michelle Rodriguez ( who was 26 at the time ) called the producers , informing them Rodriguez was interested in the role , but only for a year . Rodriguez , producers Damon Lindelof and Carlton Cuse , and Lost creator J. J. Abrams met , and Rodriguez explained she would only be interested in one season because she was a " nomadic spirit " , but would like to do one " kickass arc " as she called it . The producers liked her energy , so agreed , with the plan to kill Ana Lucia at the end of the season . Rodriguez felt she had been typecast in tough female roles , so wanted this role to be different . Ana Lucia was planned to start as a tough character , because that is what the audience would expect , then the layers of the character would be gradually peeled back . Rodriguez described Ana Lucia as an " animalistic type creature ... tamed by the Island . " They reconstructed the character slightly to fit what they liked about Rodriguez , such as making her more " street smart " with a " speak @-@ her @-@ mind quality . " Ana Lucia made her first appearance in the penultimate episode of season one , in order to set up her character becoming part of the cast in the next season . All Rodriguez was told about her character was both she and her mother were in the police force . Ana Lucia 's style of leadership deliberately contrasts Jack 's ; Jack is a reluctant leader , whereas Ana Lucia quickly takes charge on her own . In her early appearances , Ana Lucia is shown to be very tough , so the flashbacks in " Collision " , where it is revealed she lost her baby , were used to show a softer side to her . 
 When it came time to kill off Ana Lucia , the character of Libby was killed at the same time to create an emotional impact . This happened amidst rumours that the characters were killed off because both actresses in question had been arrested for DUI while filming on location in Oahu . The producers denied that Ana Lucia was killed off because of Rodriguez 's behaviour on set , saying although they had no interaction with her , they had been told she had been professional . Rodriguez felt comfortable on the series , but was happy to leave as she felt this would help her grow personally , and become a woman . She had mixed feelings about leaving Hawaii , where Lost is filmed ; her allergies were hard to deal with , but she loved the scenery . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Melanie McFarland from Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer described Ana Lucia as " one of the most intensely hated characters on television [ in the ] fall [ of 2005 ] " , due to her being " hostile " and a " bully " . She added Ana Lucia murdering Shannon , " the least deserving of sympathy of all the previously known survivors " , made fans hate Ana Lucia even more . McFarland found this makes " the creation of her character , and Rodriguez 's hire , strokes of brilliant writing and casting on the part of Lost producers J.J. Abrams and Damon Lindelof " , and described her as a " hero stewed in pathos " . Anna Johns from TV Squad was unhappy at the prospect of Ana Lucia 's death , feeling Ana Lucia was important because she was a " love to hate " character , she disrupted the Jack @-@ Kate @-@ Sawyer love triangle , and created conflicts , which make the show interesting . Amy Amatangelo from Zap2it admitted she " enjoyed kind of loathing Ana Lucia " . In a later article , she described Ana Lucia 's death as " a brilliant move " , because " one of their own become one of them " . She added " nobody liked the Ana Lucia character anyway " , but that did not stop it being " one of [ the second ] season 's most jaw @-@ dropping moments " . Alan Stanley Blair from SyFy Portal " cheered when she was shot " . Ana Lucia 's death was second in IGN 's list of the top ten Lost deaths , as she made an " immediate impact on the series " with an " unexpected end " . On the second season DVD , supervising producer Leonard Dick says " Michelle brought real strength , a dynamic element , to the role " . In 2006 , Michelle Rodriguez co @-@ won the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series with the cast of Lost . She also won an ALMA Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Television Series . 
 = Bryan v. Itasca County = 
 Bryan v. Itasca County , 426 U.S. 373 ( 1976 ) , was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a state did not have the right to assess a tax on the property of a Native American ( Indian ) living on tribal land absent a specific Congressional grant of authority to do so . 
 The case arose when a Minnesota county taxed an Indian 's mobile home located on the reservation . The Court ruled that the state did not have the authority to impose such a tax or , more generally , to regulate behavior on the reservation . Bryan has become a landmark case that has led to Indian gaming on reservations and altered the economic status of almost every Indian tribe . Later decisions , citing Bryan , ruled that Public Law 280 allows states to enact prohibitions , or crimes , that would apply on reservations , but could not impose regulations on conduct that was otherwise allowed . The case has also called into question the ability of the states to impose any sort of regulations on tribal reservations , such as labor standards and certain traffic regulations . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Background information = = = 
 Generally , no state has the authority to tax an Indian tribe or an individual Indian living on a reservation without authorization from Congress . This is based primarily on the Commerce Clause of the Constitution , which states , " Congress shall have Power ... To regulate Commerce with foreign Nations , and among the several States , and with the Indian Tribes . " This doctrine is based on Worcester v. Georgia , 31 U.S. 515 ( 1832 ) which stated that Indian tribes are considered to be dependent sovereign nations which deal directly with the federal government , and that states have no authority to regulate or control the tribes . Congress can authorize the states to have some control over the tribes . Minnesota is a Public Law 280 state , one where Congress has granted the state total criminal and limited civil jurisdiction on tribal land and reservations . 
 = = = History = = = 
 Russell Bryan was an enrolled member of the White Earth Band of Ojibwe , which is a component band of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe . He married Helen <unk> in 1957 . Helen was an enrolled member of the Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe , which was also a part of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe . They raised their children on reservation land and lived in a mobile home which they purchased in 1971 . The mobile home was located on the Greater Leech Lake Indian Reservation near Squaw Lake in Itasca County , Minnesota . Bryan 's mobile home , had it not been on the reservation , would have been subject to taxes from Itasca County . In June 1972 , Itasca County notified Bryan that the mobile home was subject to US $ 147 @.@ 95 in taxes . The Bryans could not afford to pay the tax , and contacted the Leech Lake Reservation Legal Services Project ( Legal Services ) for help , noting that the mobile home was on Indian land . 
 = = = Lower courts = = = 
 On behalf of Bryan , Legal Services attorney Patrick Moriarty then sued the state and Itasca County in the District Court of Itasca County , seeking declaratory relief and an injunction which would prevent the state and county from collecting taxes from Indians on tribal land . This was filed as a class action suit . There was no dispute as to the facts of the case , so the matter was submitted as a question of law to Judge James F. Murphy . In 1973 , the district court held that the state and county were authorized to collect such taxes under Public Law 280 . Murphy noted that while the Chippewa had at one time been a sovereign Indian nation , their members were now citizens of Minnesota and received benefits from the state such as county services , the court system , and other like services . 
 At about the same time as the district court made its decision , Legal Services hired a new director , Gerald " Jerry " Seck . Seck was not well versed on Indian law , so he contacted the Native American Rights Fund ( NARF ) . With their help , Bryan appealed to the Minnesota Supreme Court . The Minnesota Chippewa tribe and the United States both filed amicus <unk> briefs with the court that supported Bryan 's position , and NARF attorneys appeared on his behalf . In March 1975 , the Minnesota Supreme Court affirmed the decision of the trial court by a unanimous decision , holding that Public Law 280 showed Congressional intent to allow such taxation . The Minnesota Supreme Court based its decision primarily on Omaha Tribe of Indians v. Peters , 382 F.Supp. 421 ( D. Neb . 1974 ) . Bryan appealed this decision , and the United States Supreme Court granted certiorari . 
 = = Opinion of the Court = = 
 = = = Arguments = = = 
 By the time the appeal was prepared , Seck had left Legal Services but was still the attorney of record . The tribe paid to fly him to Washington , D.C. to prepare the brief with Dan Israel of NARF and Bernie Becker , the tribe 's attorney who would argue the case before the Supreme Court . At oral arguments on April 20 , 1976 , Becker pointed out that Public Law 280 gave the state jurisdiction over criminal matters and civil " causes of actions " – a legal term for lawsuits . Since Congress had also passed other Indian laws at the same time , such as the various Indian Termination Acts , which specifically authorized states to collect taxes from Indians , its silence in this area meant Congress did not intend to do so with Public Law 280 . Becker brought up the leading article on Public Law 280 , by UCLA law professor Carole Goldberg , that argued that the law was established to address the problem of crime on reservations . He also noted that tribes which had adequate law @-@ and @-@ order processes , such as the Red Lake Band of Chippewa , were excluded from state jurisdiction in Minnesota . Arguing for the State of Minnesota was C. H. Luther of the State Attorney General 's office . Luther argued four points for the tax being valid : a ) the language of the statute ; b ) the legislative history of Public Law 280 ; c ) prior judicial opinions ; and d ) public policy . Luther conceded that if the trailer was a fixed house or real property , it would be exempt from taxation . Luther also stated that other taxes – such as gasoline , sales , income and other taxes of general applicability – would apply to Indians . 
 = = = Unanimous opinion = = = 
 Justice William J. Brennan , Jr. delivered the unanimous opinion of the court on June 14 , 1976 . Brennan stated that Public Law 280 was not designed to eliminate all restrictions on the states as they dealt with Indian tribes . Brennan noted that under the Supreme Court 's prior decisions of Mescalero Apache Tribe v. Jones , 411 U.S. 145 ( 1973 ) and McClanahan v. Arizona State Tax Comm 'n , 411 U.S. 164 ( 1973 ) , states had no authority to tax Indians " absent Congressional consent . " Since Itasca County was claiming Public Law 280 granted that consent , Brennan evaluated the statute in regards to the taxation of Indians . 
 Brennan noted that the Minnesota Supreme Court had found that the statute did grant the right to tax personal property as an inherent power , even though the law did not specifically mention the power to tax . He rejected this argument , noting that the primary purpose of the law was to provide for " state criminal jurisdiction over offenses committed by or against Indians on the reservations . " Nothing in the legislative history of the law provided support for Itasca County 's interpretation . Brennan also noted that the several tribal termination acts which were considered at the same time specifically discussed the taxation of Indians , while Public Law 280 was silent . 
 Brennan then noted that the principles of statutory construction as regards to Indians were very specific . Any differences in possible interpretation must be resolved in favor of the tribe or the Indian . Since Minnesota 's interpretation did not meet any of these tests regarding either the consent of Congress to tax or of statutory construction , Brennan stated that the Supreme Court would not follow the state 's reasoning , and reversed the lower court 's decision . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 When the decision was announced , it was reported as a substantial victory for Indians by both the local and national press . Bryan is a landmark case on the taxation of Indians and tribal sovereignty , having been cited over 380 times as of July 2010 . The case has had a significant impact on Indian gaming with its broad holding that Public Law 280 did not confer " general state civil regulatory control over Indian reservations . " This ruling in a challenge to a tax bill of under $ 200 had the effect of enabling Indian tribes nationwide to earn over $ 200 billion in gaming revenue as of 2007 . The first cases influenced by Bryan involved bingo , which many states allowed , but regulated . The cases which were decided all cited Bryan in holding that the various states had no legal grounds to regulate games on tribal land . Many analysts point to the Bryan case as being the grounds upon which California v. Cabazon Band of Mission Indians 480 U.S. 202 ( 1987 ) was decided . The Supreme Court noted that California was not able to impose civil regulations against an Indian tribe on tribal land . In that case , the court noted that California not only allowed gaming , but promoted its own state lottery . Therefore , the prohibition against gaming was regulatory in nature , not criminal , notwithstanding the fact that the games were open to non @-@ Indians as well as Indians . After the decision , Congress passed the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act to provide for a system of regulation of the Indian gaming industry . 
 The case is often cited to support the concept which first " coalesced " in the 1968 case , Menominee Tribe of Indians v. United States , 391 U.S. 404 ( 1968 ) , that tribal rights would not be abrogated without an explicit intent of Congress to do so . It has been opined by a number of legal scholars that tribes would not be subject to state labor laws . In some instances , Bryan and Cabazon have been viewed as not allowing the state jurisdiction over the traffic violations of non @-@ member Indians on another tribe 's reservation . Bryan is extensively discussed in both major legal textbooks on Native American law and in numerous other high school and college texts . 
 = Freedom Party of Austria = 
 The Freedom Party of Austria ( German : <unk> Partei <unk> , FPÖ ) is a right @-@ wing populist political party in Austria . The party , led by Heinz @-@ Christian Strache , is a member of the Europe of Nations and Freedom group in the European Parliament . 
 The FPÖ was founded in 1956 as the successor to the short @-@ lived Federation of Independents ( VdU ) . The party 's first leader was Anton Reinthaller , a former Nazi functionary and SS officer and , like the Nazis and Italian fascists of the 1920s , claimed to represent a " Third Camp " in politics , placing his party in opposition to both the traditional left @-@ wing ( socialists ) and right @-@ wing ( conservatives and Catholic Church ) of the political spectrum . The party claimed to represent pan @-@ Germanists and national liberals . 
 In the Austrian party system , the FPÖ was from its foundation a third party with only modest support until it entered into government together with the Social Democratic Party ( SPÖ ) , following the 1983 legislative election . In 1979 , the party was admitted to the Liberal International . When Jörg Haider was chosen as new FPÖ party leader in 1986 , the party started an ideological turn towards right @-@ wing populism . This new political course soon resulted in a strong surge in electoral support , although it also led the SPÖ to break its ties with the party . In 1993 , after a controversial proposal on immigration issues , the adherents of a position closer to classical liberalism broke away from the FPÖ and formed the Liberal Forum ( LiF ) . This new party took over the FPÖ 's membership in the Liberal International , since the FPÖ considered itself forced to leave . 
 In the 1999 legislative election the FPÖ won 26 @.@ 9 % of the vote , its best @-@ ever result in a nationwide election , and came ahead of the Austrian People 's Party ( ÖVP ) by a small margin . This led the ÖVP to agree to form a coalition government with the FPÖ in 2000 . The FPÖ soon became uncomfortable with governing and fell sharply in the 2002 legislative election , where it gained only 10 @.@ 0 % of the vote ; however , the two parties agreed to continue their coalition following the election . In 2005 increasing internal disagreements in the FPÖ led Haider and many leading party members ( including the party 's ministers ) to defect and form the Alliance for the Future of Austria ( BZÖ ) , which replaced the FPÖ as government partner . 
 Since then , under Strache 's leadership , the party has again attracted an increase in its popular support . In the 2013 legislative election the FPÖ won 20 @.@ 5 % of the vote and , more recently , it came ahead either of the SPÖ or the ÖVP in some state elections , entered in a SPÖ @-@ led government in Burgenland and gained more than 30 % of the vote in Vienna . Finally , in the 2016 presidential election , FPÖ member Norbert Hofer won the first round , receiving 35 @.@ 1 % , but was narrowly defeated by Green Party 's candidate Alexander Van der <unk> , 49 @.@ 7 % against 50 @.@ 3 % , in the run @-@ off . However , on 1 July 2016 , the results were invalidated by the Constitutional Court of Austria due to potential fraud , after an appeal by the party 's leader , Heinz @-@ Christian Strache . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Political background = = = 
 The FPÖ is a descendant of the pan @-@ German and national liberal camp ( Lager ) dating back to the Revolutions of 1848 in the Habsburg areas . During the interwar era , the national liberal camp ( gathered in the Greater German People 's Party ) fought against the mutually @-@ hostile Christian Social and Marxist camps in their struggles to structure the new republic according to their respective ideologies . After a short civil war , the Federal State of Austria , an authoritarian Christian Social dictatorship , was established in 1934 . By 1938 , with the Anschluss of Austria into Nazi Germany , the national liberal camp ( which had always striven for an inclusion of Austria into a Greater Germany ) had been swallowed whole by Austrian National Socialism and all other parties were eventually absorbed into Nazi totalitarianism . Both Socialists and Christian Socials were persecuted under the Nazi regime , and the national liberal camp was scarred after the war due to guilt by association with National Socialism . 
 In 1949 , the Federation of Independents ( VdU ) was founded as a national liberal alternative to the main Austrian parties — the Social Democratic Party ( SPÖ ) and the Austrian People 's Party ( ÖVP ) , successors to the interwar era Marxist and Christian Social parties . The VdU was founded by two liberal Salzburg journalists — former Nazi Germany prisoners — who wanted to stay clear of the mainstream socialist and Catholic camps and feared that hostility following the hastily devised postwar denazification policy ( which did not distinguish between party members and actual war criminals ) might stimulate a revival of Nazism . Aiming to become a political home to everyone not a member of the two main parties , the VdU incorporated an array of political movements — including free @-@ market liberals , populists , former Nazis and German nationalists , all of whom had been unable to join either of the two main parties . The VdU won 12 % of the vote in the 1949 general election , but saw its support beginning to decline soon afterward . It evolved into the FPÖ by 1955 / 56 after merging with the minor Freedom Party in 1955 ; a new party was formed on 17 October 1955 , and its founding congress was held on 7 April 1956 . 
 = = = Early years ( 1956 – 1980 ) = = = 
 The first FPÖ party leader was Anton Reinthaller , a former Nazi Minister of Agriculture and SS officer . He had been asked by ÖVP Chancellor Julius Raab to take over the movement rather than let it be led by a more socialist @-@ leaning group . While the majority of former Nazis had probably joined the two main parties in absolute numbers , they formed a greater percentage of FPÖ members due to the party 's small size . Nevertheless , none of them were real revolutionaries and they pursued pragmatic , non @-@ ideological policies . The FPÖ served as a vehicle for them to integrate in the Second Republic ; the party was a welcome partner with both the SPÖ and ÖVP in regional and local politics , although it was excluded at the national level . The ÖVP and the FPÖ ran a joint candidate for the 1957 presidential election , who lost . 
 Reinthaller was replaced as leader in 1958 by Friedrich Peter ( also a former SS officer ) , who led the party through the 1960s and 1970s and moved it towards the political centre . In 1966 the ÖVP @-@ SPÖ Grand Coalition which had governed Austria since the war was broken , when the ÖVP gained enough votes to govern alone . SPÖ leader Bruno Kreisky ( himself a Jew ) defended Peter 's past and initiated a political relationship — and a personal friendship — with Peter ; in 1970 the FPÖ was , for the first time , able to tolerate an SPÖ minority government . In 1967 the more extreme faction in the FPÖ broke away and established the National Democratic Party , seen by some observers as a final shedding of the party 's Nazi legacy . Under the influence of Kreisky , a new generation of liberals brought the FPÖ into the Liberal International in 1978 . During the years under Peter the party never won more than 8 % of the national vote in general elections , and generally did not have much political significance . 
 = = = Steger leadership ( 1980 – 1986 ) = = = 
 Liberal Norbert Steger was chosen as new FPÖ party leader in 1980 ; in an effort to gain popularity , he helped the FPÖ become established as a moderate centrist liberal party . His vision was to transform the FPÖ into an Austrian version of the German Free Democratic Party , focusing on free @-@ market and anti @-@ statist policies . In the 1980s , the Austrian political system began to change ; the dominance of the SPÖ and ÖVP started to erode , and the Austrian electorate began to swing to the right . SPÖ leader Bruno Kreisky had encouraged the FPÖ 's move to the centre , in order to establish an SPÖ @-@ FPÖ alliance against the ÖVP . The 1983 general election was a watershed ; the SPÖ lost its absolute majority in Parliament , which resulted in the formation of an SPÖ @-@ FPÖ " Small Coalition " . Ironically , the 1983 election result was the worst for the FPÖ in its history ( it received slightly less than 5 % of the vote ) , and during the next few years the party saw 2 @-@ 3 % support — or even less — in opinion polls . As a consequence , the party was soon torn by internal strife . 
 In 1983 , the right @-@ wing Jörg Haider took over the leadership of the FPÖ 's significant Carinthia branch . Its importance dated to the <unk> <unk> ( Carinthian defensive struggle ) following World War I , and subsequent anti @-@ Slavic sentiment arising from a fear of being taken over by Yugoslavia . Encouraged by the mass media , a struggle soon developed between Steger and Haider over the future of the party . In the 1985 Reder case , for instance , Haider staunchly supported FPÖ Minister of Defence <unk> <unk> when the latter welcomed convicted Waffen @-@ SS war criminal Walter Reder in person when Reder arrived at Graz Airport after his release from Italy . While the FPÖ struggled with its low support at the national level in the mid @-@ 1980s , this was in sharp contrast to the party 's position in Haider 's Carinthia ( where the party had increased its support from 11 @.@ 7 % in the 1979 provincial election to 16 % in 1984 ) . 
 During the 1986 National Convention in Innsbruck , the internal struggle developed into an open conflict ; this led Haider to victory as new FPÖ party leader with 58 % of the vote , supported by conservative and pan @-@ German factions . However , incoming SPÖ Chancellor Franz <unk> — who also entered office in 1986 — had strong negative feelings towards Haider , whom he felt was too far @-@ right . <unk> subsequently announced an election in 1986 , in the process disbanding the SPÖ @-@ FPÖ " Small Coalition " and , after the election , entered into a coalition with the ÖVP . Under Haider 's leadership , the FPÖ increased its vote to 9 @.@ 7 % , while the party gradually became more right @-@ wing and its former liberal influence waned . As the FPÖ increased its electoral support with Haider 's radical @-@ populist rhetoric , the party reduced its chances of forming coalitions with other parties . 
 = = = Haider leadership ( 1986 – 2000 ) = = = 
 With Jörg Haider as the new party leader , the 1989 Carinthia provincial election caused a sensation ; the SPÖ lost its majority and the ÖVP was relegated to third @-@ party status , as the FPÖ finished second with 29 % of the vote . The FPÖ formed a coalition with the ÖVP , with Haider as Governor of Carinthia ( at this point his greatest political triumph ) . By the 1990 general election the party had moved away from the liberal mainstream course , instead focusing on immigration and becoming increasingly critical of the political establishment and the EU . Following a remark made by Haider in 1991 about the " decent employment policy " of Nazi Germany ( in contrast to that of the current Austrian government ) , he was removed as governor by a joint SPÖ @-@ ÖVP initiative and replaced by the ÖVP 's Christof <unk> . Later that year , however , the FPÖ saw gains made in three provincial elections ( most notably in Vienna ) . 
 While Haider often employed controversial rhetoric , his expressed political goals included small government with more direct democracy rather than centralized totalitarianism . Following the increasing importance of immigration as a political issue , in 1993 the party decided to launch the " Austria First ! " initiative ( calling for a referendum on immigration issues ) . The initiative was controversial and five FPÖ MPs , including Heide Schmidt , left the party and founded the Liberal Forum ( LiF ) . The FPÖ 's relations with the Liberal International also became increasingly strained , and later that year the FPÖ left the LI ( which was preparing to expel it ) . In turn , the LiF soon joined the Liberal International instead . In 1999 , Haider was again elected Governor of Carinthia . 
 = = = Coalition government ( 2000 – 2005 ) = = = 
 In the 1999 general election the FPÖ won 27 % of the votes , more than in any previous election — beating the ÖVP for the first time by a small margin . In February 2000 , the ÖVP agreed to form a coalition government with the FPÖ . Normally , Haider should have become federal chancellor . However , due in part to international criticism of the FPÖ 's participation in the government , Wolfgang <unk> of the ÖVP took the post instead . As a concession to the FPÖ , the party was given power to appoint the Ministers of Finance and Social Affairs . Later that month Haider , who was deemed too controversial to be part of the government even in a junior minister 's role , stepped down as party chairman , replaced by Susanne Riess @-@ Passer . Having threatened a diplomatic boycott of Austria , the other fourteen European Union ( EU ) countries introduced sanctions after the government had been formed ; other than formal EU meetings , contacts with Austria were reduced . The measures were justified by the EU , which stated that " the admission of the FPÖ into a coalition government legitimises the extreme right in Europe . " 
 The party had been kept on the sidelines for most of the Second Republic , except for its brief role in government in the 1980s . Along with the party 's origins and its focus on issues such as immigration and questions of identity and belonging , the party had been subjected to a strategy of cordon sanitaire by the SPÖ and ÖVP . The EU sanctions were lifted in September , after a report had found that the measures were effective only in the short term ; in the long run , they might give rise to an anti @-@ EU backlash . Some observers noted an inconsistency in that there had been no sanctions against Italy when the post @-@ fascist Italian Social Movement / National Alliance had entered government in 1994 . 
 The FPÖ struggled with its shift from an anti @-@ establishment party to being part of the government , which led to decreasing internal stability and electoral support . Its blue collar voters became unhappy with the party 's need to support some neo @-@ liberal ÖVP economic reforms ; the government 's peak in unpopularity occurred when tax reform was postponed at the same time that the government was planning to purchase new interceptor jets . Internecine strife erupted in the party over strategy between party members in government and Haider , who allied himself with the party 's grass roots . Several prominent FPÖ government ministers resigned in the 2002 " <unk> Putsch " after strong attacks by Haider , which led to new elections being called . 
 In the subsequent election campaign , the party was deeply divided and unable to organise an effective political strategy . It changed leaders five times in less than two months , and in the 2002 general election decreased its share of the vote to 10 @.@ 2 % , almost two @-@ thirds less than its previous share . Most of its voters sided with the ÖVP , which became the largest party in Austria with 43 % of the vote . Nevertheless , the coalition government of the ÖVP and FPÖ was revived after the election ; however , there was increasing criticism within the FPÖ against the party 's mission of winning elections at any cost . 
 = = = Haider 's departure for BZÖ = = = 
 After an internal row had threatened to tear the FPÖ apart , former chairman Jörg Haider — followed by then @-@ current chairman and his sister Ursula <unk> , vice chancellor Hubert <unk> and the entire FPÖ contingent of the government — left the party and on 4 April 2005 founded a new political party called the Alliance for the Future of Austria ( BZÖ ) . Austria 's chancellor Wolfgang <unk> followed , changing his coalition with the FPÖ into cooperation with the BZÖ . In Haider 's stronghold of Carinthia , the local FPÖ branch became the Carinthia branch of the BZÖ . 
 = = = Strache leadership ( 2005 – present ) = = = 
 The FPÖ fared much better than the BZÖ in polls following the 2005 split , with the first tests in regional elections in Styria and Burgenland . On 23 April 2005 Heinz @-@ Christian Strache was elected as new chairman of the FPÖ , taking over from interim leader Hilmar <unk> . As most of the party 's office @-@ seeking elite had gone over to the BZÖ , the FPÖ was again free from responsibility . Under Strache the party 's ideology grew more radical , and it returned to its primary goal of vote @-@ maximising . The FPÖ did reasonably well in October 's Vienna election , in which Strache was the leading candidate and ran a campaign directed strongly against immigration . It took a 14 @.@ 9 % share , while the BZÖ won just 1 @.@ 2 % . 
 By the 2006 general election , the FPÖ returned to promoting anti @-@ immigration , anti @-@ Islam and Eurosceptic issues . It won 11 % of the vote and 21 seats in parliament , while the BZÖ only barely passed the 4 % threshold needed to enter Parliament . The subsequent coalition between the SPÖ and the ÖVP left both parties in opposition . In the 2008 general election both the FPÖ and the BZÖ rose significantly at the expense of the SPÖ and the ÖVP . Both parties increased their percentage of the vote by about 6 @.@ 5 % , with the FPÖ at 17 @.@ 4 % and the BZÖ at 10 @.@ 7 % — together gaining 28 @.@ 2 % , and thus both breaking the record vote for the FPÖ in the 1999 election . In the 2009 European Parliament election the FPÖ doubled its 2004 results , winning 12 @.@ 8 % of the vote and 2 seats . 
 In December 2009 the local Carinthia branch of the BZÖ , its stronghold , broke away and founded the Freedom Party in Carinthia ( <unk> ) ; it cooperated with the FPÖ at the federal level , modeling itself on the German CDU / CSU relationship . The leader of the branch , Uwe <unk> , had fallen out with BZÖ leader Josef Bucher after the latter had introduced a " moderate , right @-@ wing liberal " and more economically oriented ideology . In the 2010 Vienna elections , the FPÖ increased its vote to 25 @.@ 8 % ( slightly less than the record result of 1996 ) ; this was seen as a victory for Strache , due to his popularity among young people . This was only the second time in the postwar era that the SPÖ lost its absolute majority in the city . 
 After its convention in early 2011 midway between general elections , the FPÖ had a support in opinion polls of around 24 @-@ 29 % — at par with the SPÖ and ÖVP , and above the BZÖ . Among people under 30 years of age , the FPÖ had the support of 42 % . In June 2015 the main part of the federal party section of Salzburg split of and formed the Free Party Salzburg . 
 In the 2016 Austrian presidential election , Freedom Party candidate Norbert Hofer won the first round of the election , receiving 35 @.@ 1 % of the vote , making that election the Freedom Party 's best ever election result in its history . However , in the second round , Hofer was defeated by Alexander Van der <unk> , who received the support of 50 @.@ 3 % compared to Hofer 's 49 @.@ 7 % . On July first the Constitutional Court of Austria voided the results of the second round due to mishandling of postal votes ; although the court did not find evidence of deliberate manipulation . The re @-@ vote will take place on 2 October 2016 according to Austrian Chancellor Christian Kern . 
 = = Ideology = = 
 Under the leadership of Heinz @-@ Christian Strache , the FPÖ has focused on describing itself as a Heimat and social party . This means that the party promotes its role as a guarantor of Austrian identity and social welfare . Economically , it supports regulated liberalism with privatisation and low taxes , combined with support for the welfare state ; however , it maintains that it will be impossible to uphold the welfare state if current immigration policies are continued . 
 The present FPÖ has variously been described as right @-@ wing populist , national conservative , " right @-@ conservative " , " right @-@ national " , and far right . The party has traditionally been part of the national liberal camp , and generally identifies with a <unk> ( libertarian ) profile . Leading current party members such as Andreas <unk> and Harald <unk> have considered themselves as national liberal " cultural Germans " , while Barbara <unk> has considered her ideology as national conservative . 
 = = = Individual freedom = = = 
 The principle of individual freedom in society was already one of the central points in the FPÖ ( and VdU 's ) programme during the 1950s . The party did not regard its liberalism and its pan @-@ German , nationalist positions as contradictory . From the late 1980s through the 1990s , the party developed economically , supporting tax reduction , less state intervention and more privatisation . In the late 2000s , the party combined this position with support for the welfare state . It criticised unemployment and alleged welfare @-@ state abuse by immigrants which , it said , threatened the welfare state and pensioners ' benefits . 
 = = = Anti @-@ establishment = = = 
 During the 1980s and 1990s , Austrian voters became increasingly disaffected with the rule by the two major parties ( SPÖ and ÖVP ) . This coincided with the leadership of Haider , who presented the FPÖ as the only party which could seriously challenge the two parties ' dominance . The party strongly criticised the power concentrated in the hands of the elite , until the FPÖ joined the government in 2000 . In the 1990s the party advocated replacing the present Second Austrian Republic with a Third Republic , since it sought a radical transformation from " a party state to a citizens ' democracy . " The party wanted to provide more referendums , directly elect the federal president , significantly reduce the number of ministries , and devolve power to the federal states and local councils . Surveys have shown that anti @-@ establishment positions were one of the top reasons for voters to vote for the FPÖ . Its anti @-@ establishment position proved incompatible with being in government during the first half of the 2000s , but was renewed after most of the parliamentary group left to join the BZÖ in 2005 . 
 = = = Immigration and Islam = = = 
 Immigration was not a hot @-@ button issue in Austria until the 1980s . Under Haider 's leadership , on the list of most important issues for voters immigration went from being practically non @-@ existent before 1989 , to the 10th @-@ most @-@ important in 1990 , and the second @-@ most @-@ important in 1992 . In 1993 , the controversial " Austria First ! " initiative attempted to collect signatures for a referendum on immigration restrictions and asserted that " Austria is not a country of immigration . " 
 The party maintained that " the protection of cultural identity and social peace in Austria requires a stop to immigration , " maintaining that its concern was not against foreigners , but to safeguard the interests and cultural identity of native Austrians . Although during the late 1990s the party attacked the influence of radical Islam , this was later expanded to include " Islamisation " and the increasing number of Muslims in general . According to The Economist , the hostility to Muslims is " a strategy that resonates with voters of Serbian background , whom the party has assiduously cultivated . " The party has also vowed to outlaw the distribution of free copies of the Koran . 
 During the period of ÖVP @-@ FPÖ government , many amendments were introduced to tighten the country 's immigration policies . The number of new asylum applications , for example , was reduced from 32 @,@ 000 in 2003 to 13 @,@ 300 in 2006 . 
 = = = Heimat = = = 
 From the mid @-@ 1980s , the concept of Heimat ( a word meaning both " the homeland " and a more general notion of cultural identity ) has been central to the ideology of the FPÖ , although its application has slightly changed with time . Initially , Heimat indicated the feeling of national belonging influenced by a pan @-@ Germanic vision ; the party assured voters in 1985 that " the overwhelming majority of Austrians belong to the German ethnic and cultural community . " Although it was noted then that Austria was the mother country which held the national traditions , this would later be favoured more explicitly over the pan @-@ German concept . In 1995 Haider declared an end to pan @-@ Germanism in the party , and in the 1997 party manifesto the former community of " German people " was replaced with the " Austrian people " . Under the leadership of Strache , the concept of Heimat has been promoted and developed more deeply than it had been previously . After his reelection as chairman in 2011 , the German aspects of the party 's programme were formally reintroduced . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 At the end of the Cold War , the FPÖ became more eurosceptic , which was reflected by its change from pan @-@ Germanism to Austrian patriotism . The party 's opposition to the European Union grew stronger in the 1990s . The FPÖ opposed Austria 's joining the EU in 1994 , and promoted a popular initiative against the replacement of the Austrian <unk> with the Euro in 1998 , but to no avail . Owing to perceived differences between Turkish and European culture , the party opposes the accession of Turkey to the EU ; it has declared that should this happen , Austria must immediately leave the EU . 
 The party 's views on the United States and the Middle East have evolved over time . Despite the anti @-@ American views of some right @-@ wing forums in the 1970s and 1980s ( that chiefly were rooted in worries over US cultural expansion and hegemonic role in world politics at the expense of Europe ) , the FPÖ were more positively inclined towards the United States under Haider 's leadership in the late 1980s and 1990s . However , this changed in 2003 following Haider visiting Saddam Hussein on the eve of the Iraq War ; he subsequently condemned US foreign policy and derided George W. Bush for not being very different from Hussein . This move was strongly criticised by the FPÖ , which was part of the then @-@ current government . Nevertheless , in the mid- to late 2000s the FPÖ too criticised US foreign policy as promoted by Bush , which it saw as leading to increased levels of violence in the Middle East . The party also became more critical of Israel 's part in the Israel @-@ Palestine conflict . 
 By 2010 , under Heinz @-@ Christian Strache 's leadership , the party became more friendly towards Israel . In December 2010 the FPÖ ( along with the representatives of like @-@ minded rightist parties ) visited Israel , where they issued the " Jerusalem Declaration " , which affirmed Israel 's right to exist and defend itself , particularly against Islamic terror . At the FPÖ 's invitation , Israeli Deputy Minister Ayoob Kara of the Likud party subsequently visited Vienna . Strache , at about the same time , said he wanted to meet with the front figures of the American Tea Party movement ( which he described as " highly interesting " ) . He has also declared himself " a friend of the Serbs " , who constitute one of the largest immigrant groups in Austria . Siding with Serbia , the FPÖ rejects the independence of Kosovo . 
 Presently the FPÖ advocates the introduction of a hard north Euro and a soft south Euro . 
 = = International relations = = 
 While the FPÖ is currently not a member of any European or international organisations , the party has ties with several European political parties and groupings . From 1978 to 1993 , under the party 's liberal leadership , the party was a member of the Liberal International . In the early years of Haider 's leadership , meetings were held with figures such as Jean @-@ Marie Le Pen of the French National Front and Franz <unk> of the German Republicans . In the late 1990s he however chose to distance himself from Le Pen , and refused to join Le Pen 's <unk> project . Following the FPÖ 's entrance in government in 2000 , Haider sought to establish his own alliance of right @-@ wing parties . For his project , Haider tried to establish stable cooperations with the Vlaams Blok party in Belgium and the Northern League party in Italy , as well as some other parties and party groupings . In the end , the efforts to establish a new alliance of parties were not successful . 
 Under the leadership of Strache , the party has cooperated mainly with the Northern League , Vlaams Belang ( successor to the Vlaams Blok , which it has traditionally maintained good ties with ) , and the Pro Germany Citizens ' Movement in Germany . The FPÖ also has contacts with the Danish People 's Party , the Slovak National Party , the Sweden Democrats , the Lithuanian Order and Justice , IMRO – Bulgarian National Movement , the Dutch Party for Freedom , Alternative for Germany and the German Freedom party . In 2007 , the party 's then @-@ only MEP was a member of the short @-@ lived Identity , Tradition and Sovereignty grouping in the European Parliament . Outside the EU , it has contacts with Tomislav Nikolić of the Serbian Progressive Party ( formerly of the Serbian Radical Party ) , the Swiss People 's Party , the Israeli Likud , the U.S. Republican Party and the United Russia party . At a conference in 2011 , Strache and the new leader of the French National Front , Marine Le Pen , announced deeper cooperation between their parties . Shortly thereafter , the FPÖ attempted to become a member of the Europe for Freedom and Democracy group , but was vetoed by some of its parties . The FPÖ 's two MEPs are individual members of the establishing European Alliance for Freedom . After the 2014 European elections , the party joined the National Front , the Northern League , Vlaams Belang and the Czech Civic Conservative Party in forming the Movement for a Europe of Nations and Freedom , and participated along with these parties , the Dutch Party for Freedom , the Polish Congress of the New Right and a former member of the UK Independence Party in the Europe of Nations and Freedom parliamentary group . 
 = = Election results = = 
 = = = National Council = = = 
 = = = European Parliament = = = 
 = = Party leaders = = 
 The following is a list of the party leaders of the FPÖ : 
 Anton Reinthaller ( 1956 – 1958 ) 
 Friedrich Peter ( 1958 – 1978 ) 
 Alexander Götz ( 1978 – 1979 ) 
 Norbert Steger ( 1979 – 1986 ) 
 Jörg Haider ( 1986 – 2000 ) 
 Susanne Riess @-@ Passer ( 2000 – 2002 ) 
 Mathias <unk> ( 2002 ) 
 Herbert Haupt ( 2002 – 2004 ) 
 Ursula <unk> ( 2004 – 2005 ) 
 Heinz @-@ Christian Strache ( 2005 – ) 
 = Ohio State Route 167 = 
 State Route 167 ( SR 167 ) is a 14 @.@ 08 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 22 @.@ 66 km ) east – west state highway in the northeastern portion of the U.S. state of Ohio . Its western terminus is at the northern end of the SR 46 and SR 307 concurrency in Jefferson , and its eastern terminus is at the Pennsylvania state line about 13 miles ( 21 km ) south of <unk> , where Pennsylvania Route 198 ( PA 198 ) continues east . The route was designated in 1923 , and has been rerouted three times since . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 167 starts at SR 46 / 307 , on the northern edge of Jefferson . The route , known as Beech Street , travels east and crosses a railroad owned by Ashtabula , Carson & Jefferson . SR 167 shifts slightly northeastward , and three miles later , it meets SR 11 at a diamond interchange . Later , the road intersects SR 193 in the middle of Denmark Township . After intersecting Stanhope – <unk> Road , the route moves north a bit , then slowly moves back south and continues eastward . At the small village of Pierpont , SR 167 becomes concurrent with SR 7 , and heads north for 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) . After that , the route starts heading east again , and becomes PA 198 after crossing the Ohio – Pennsylvania state line . The majority of the road is next to farmland . The highest traffic count is in Jefferson , where 2 @,@ 260 vehicles travel on the road on average . The lowest traffic count is near the state line , where 330 vehicles travel on the road on average . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 167 was designated in 1923 as a short connector from SR 7 to the Pennsylvania state line east of Richmond Center , an unincorporated village . In 1928 , the route was rerouted from Jefferson to the Pennsylvania state line east of Pierpoint . The new western terminus was in SR 46 / 84 ( now SR 307 ) in Jefferson , and the eastern terminus was the state line , north of Richmond Center . The route became concurrent with US 6 beginning in 1932 , between SR 7 and the Pennsylvania state line . In 1939 , the highway was rerouted north of its concurrency with US 6 , replacing SR 538 . In about 1969 , SR 11 opened at SR 167 as an at @-@ grade intersection , and seven years later , an interchange replaced the intersection . Between 1979 and 1981 , the route was rerouted to the north side of Jefferson to its current alignment . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Ashtabula County . 
 = Mufarrij ibn Daghfal ibn al @-@ Jarrah = 
 Mufarrij ibn Daghfal ibn al @-@ Jarrah al @-@ Tayyi ( fl. ca . 977 – 1013 ) , in some sources erroneously called Daghfal ibn Mufarrij , was an emir of the Jarrahid family and leader of the Tayy tribe . Mufarrij was engaged in repeated rebellions against the Fatimid Caliphate , which controlled southern Syria at the time . Although he was several times defeated and forced into exile , by the 990s Mufarrij managed to establish himself and his tribe as the de facto autonomous masters of much of Palestine around Ramlah ( the district of Jund Filastin ) with Fatimid acquiescence . In 1011 , another rebellion against Fatimid authority was more successful , and a short @-@ lived Jarrahid @-@ led Bedouin state was established in Palestine centred at Ramlah . The Bedouin even proclaimed a rival Caliph to the Fatimid al @-@ Hakim , in the person of the Alid Abu 'l @-@ Futuh al @-@ Hasan ibn Ja 'far . Bedouin independence survived until 1013 , when the Fatimids launched their counterattack . Their will to resist weakened by Fatimid bribes , the Bedouin were quickly defeated . At the same time Mufarrij died , possibly poisoned , and his sons quickly came to terms with the Fatimids . Among them , Hassan ibn Mufarrij al @-@ Jarrah managed to succeed to his father 's position , and became a major player in the politics of the region over the next decades . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Mufarrij was the son of Daghfal ibn al @-@ Jarrah , a member of the Banu Tayy who was the first of the Jarrahid family to rise to prominence , as an ally of the Qarmatians in their wars with the Fatimids in the early 970s . During this time , the Jarrahids emerged to lead the Banu Tayy opposition to the first attempts by the Fatimids , who had just captured Egypt , to impose their control over Palestine . 
 Mufarrij first appears in the aftermath of the Battle of Ramlah in 977 , where the Turkish ruler of Damascus , Alptekin , was defeated by the forces of the Fatimid caliph al @-@ Aziz . Alptekin fled the field and almost died of thirst in the desert , until he was found by Mufarrij , who had in earlier times befriended him . Mufarrij rescued Alptekin and brought him to his home , but while his guest rested , he went to al @-@ Aziz and betrayed <unk> in exchange for the 100 @,@ 000 gold dinars the Caliph had promised as a reward for his capture . 
 Mufarrij next appears in 979 , when the Hamdanid emir Abu Taghlib arrived in Palestine fleeing from the Buyid conquest of his domains in the Jazira , and became embroiled in the complex power struggles between the Fatimid government and local elites . Abu Taghlib with his followers established himself in <unk> and endeavoured to gain recognition by the Fatimids as governor of Damascus , but the rebel general al @-@ Qassam , who held the city , repulsed him . Under attack by the <unk> , and with members of his family starting to desert him , Abu Taghlib moved further south to the region of Lake Tiberias . Hoping to sow disunion among the Arab tribes and weaken their power to the benefit of the Fatimids , the local Fatimid general al @-@ Fadl ibn Salih promised Ramlah to Abu Taghlib , even though he himself had previously handed Mufarrij a document from al @-@ Aziz that gave the city to the Jarrahids . When Abu Taghlib , joined by Mufarrij 's rivals , the Banu Uqayl , attacked Ramlah , Mufarrij called upon al @-@ Fadl for aid . Al @-@ Fadl agreed , and in the ensuing battle on 29 August Abu Taghlib was defeated and taken captive by Mufarrij . After parading him through Ramlah tied to a camel , Mufarrij killed his prisoner with his own hands to prevent him from being used by the Fatimids against him in the future . This episode cemented Mufarrij 's control over Ramlah and marked his and his tribe 's rise to a powerful position in local affairs . With their rivals defeated , the Tayy now became " the major bedouin power in the area " , according to Hugh Kennedy , and a continuing nuisance to the Fatimids , since although they recognized Fatimid authority , in practice Mufarrij and his followers acted as independent agents . 
 = = Rebellions against the Fatimids and exile = = 
 The accord between Mufarrij and al @-@ Fadl soon ended , and the Fatimid general turned against the Jarrahids , but through diplomatic means Mufarrij succeeded in getting al @-@ Aziz to order his general to cease the attacks on him . Nevertheless , Mufarrij and his men followed this up with destructive raids across Palestine in 980 . On 7 July 981 , while the Fatimid army was engaged in besieging Qassam in Damascus , Mufarrij openly rebelled against the Fatimids , and was joined by Bishara , the governor of Tiberias , who joined the bedouin along with many of his men , mostly former Hamdanid soldiers . The Fatimids responded by dispatching another army , headed by Rashiq al @-@ Azizi , which quickly routed the Jarrahids . The latter fled south into the Hejaz , where they attacked a caravan of Hajj pilgrims returning from Mecca in June 982 , before in turn destroying a pursuing Fatimid army under Muflih al @-@ <unk> at Ayla . 
 After this success Mufarrij and his men returned to Palestine where they confronted Rashiq , but were again defeated and forced to flee across the desert to Homs , where Bakjur , the local governor on behalf of the Hamdanid emir of Aleppo , Sa 'd al @-@ Dawla , took them in and catered for them , probably in winter 982 . Despite this hospitality , the Tayy now went north and sought to enter the service of the Byzantine Empire . Emperor Basil II accepted their request , and a few months later , in autumn 983 , the Tayy fought alongside the Byzantines under the doux of Antioch , Bardas Phokas , when he went to relieve Aleppo from an attack by Bakjur , who had rebelled against Sa 'd al @-@ Dawla . 
 Soon afterwards , Mufarrij apparently obtained a pardon ( aman ) for himself and his followers from al @-@ Aziz , although when he returned to the Fatimid domains in late 983 or early 984 he allied himself with Bakjur , who was now the Fatimid governor of Damascus , against the Fatimid vizier Ibn Killis . In the end , in 988 Ibn Killis prevailed upon al @-@ Aziz to oust Bakjur , and an army was sent against the allies . The Fatimid commander , Munis , took Ramlah , but the Jarrahids withdrew north towards Damascus . Munis recruited the other Arab tribes , rivals of the Tayy , in his ranks , and in a battle at Dariya , near Damascus , his forces defeated the troops of Bakjur and Mufarrij . This forced Bakjur to relinquish his post on 29 October and retreat with his followers north to ar @-@ Raqqah on the Euphrates . Mufarrij and his men followed Bakjur , and in 989 are recorded as attacking yet another Hajj caravan in north Arabia . 
 = = Return to Palestine = = 
 It was only after the death of Ibn Killis in 991 , that Mufarrij was able to return to Palestine . Ibn Killis had remained implacably opposed to Mufarrij , whom he regarded a dangerous individual : even on his deathbed , the vizier had urged al @-@ Aziz to have Mufarrij executed should he fall into Fatimid hands , but in the event , the Caliph gave the Jarrahid a full pardon . In 992 al @-@ Aziz invited Mufarrij to participate in the campaign against Aleppo under the Turkish general Manjutakin , but it is unclear whether Mufarrij fought in this or the subsequent campaigns , as he is not mentioned again until 996 . 
 Al @-@ Aziz died in October 996 and was succeeded by his under @-@ age son , al @-@ Hakim , whereupon a fierce factional struggle erupted between the Turkish troops , led by Manjutakin , on the one hand , and the Kutama Berbers , who under al @-@ Hasan ibn ' Ammar moved to seize control of the caliphal government . Mufarrij sided with Manjutakin and fought alongside him in the battle outside Ascalon , but the Berber general Sulayman ibn Ja 'far ibn <unk> was victorious . Mufarrij , however , managed once more to emerge unscathed . As the orientalist Marius Canard writes , " following his usual tactics " , he " did not hesitate to desert [ Manjutakin ] and to cross over to Sulayman 's camp " , and it was his son Ali who pursued and took Manjutakin prisoner . 
 In 997 , Mufarrij tried to capture Ramlah and devastated the surrounding lands , but was attacked by the new governor of Damascus , Jaysh ibn Samsama , and forced to once again flee to the lands of his fellow Tayy in the mountains of northern Hejaz . There , Canard says , " on the point of being captured he took part in a little comedy , sending the old women of his tribe to ask for aman and pardon , which were granted " . In 1005 / 6 , Mufarrij sent his sons Ali , Hassan and Mahmud to lead a Bedouin army to assist the Fatimid army sent to quell the rebellion of Abu <unk> . In the next year , however , he is again found holding up one of the pilgrim caravans from Baghdad while it was crossing Tayy territory , and forcing them to pay tribute to him . 
 = = Renewed uprising and autonomous rule = = 
 In 1011 , Abu 'l @-@ Qasim al @-@ Husayn , son of the executed Abu 'l @-@ Hasan Ali ibn al @-@ Husayn al @-@ Maghribi , fled to Palestine , where he sought refuge in Hassan ibn Mufarrij 's camp . In response , al @-@ Hakim charged the Turk Yarukh with assembling an army to bring Abu 'l @-@ Qasim and his Jarrahid protectors to heel . Mufarrij 's two other sons , Mahmud and Ali , were in Egypt at the time , and , having learned of the Caliph 's preparations , rushed to their father to warn him . Together , Abu 'l @-@ Qasim and the younger Jarrahids convinced Mufarrij of the danger represented by Yarukh and the need to confront him before he reached Ramlah . Consequently , the Jarrahids prepared to attack the Fatimid army at Gaza . Yarukh was informed of this , and planned to catch the ambushers by surprise by having 1 @,@ 000 cavalry from the Ramlah garrison strike them in the rear along with his own troops . In the event , however , the messenger he sent to Ramlah to inform the garrison was captured by the Jarrahids , and Hassan managed to ambush Yarukh and capture him and his family near <unk> . Upon Abu 'l @-@ Qasim 's suggestion , the Jarrahids now raised all the tribesmen of the Jund Filastin to open revolt and recruited them for an attack on Ramlah , the provincial capital . Ramlah fell and was pillaged by the Bedouin , who had been offered " a general licence to despoil and plunder " ( M. Gil ) . 
 Learning of these events , al @-@ Hakim wrote to Mufarrij and reproached him , demanding the safe return of Yarukh to Egypt , while at the same time offering the sum of 50 @,@ 000 dinars if the Jarrahids would again submit . Abu 'l @-@ Qasim , who feared that Mufarrij was inclined to accept , persuaded Hassan to have Yarukh executed . The Jarrahids followed this open act of rebellion by recognizing an anti @-@ caliph in the person of the Alid Sharif of Mecca , Abu 'l @-@ Futuh al @-@ Hasan ibn Ja 'far , in July 1012 . Abu 'l @-@ Qasim himself journeyed to Mecca , where he persuaded Abu 'l @-@ Futuh to accept the role . The latter , assuming the title of al @-@ Rashid bi <unk> ( " Righteous with God " ) , succeeded in winning the recognition of the holy cities of Mecca and Medina , and went to Ramlah . On his arrival there in September , he was greeted with jubilation by the Bedouin , and the local preacher read the Friday prayer in his name . 
 Mufarrij also tried to win support among the Christians , and possibly curry the favour of the Byzantine Empire as well , by sponsoring works to restore the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem , which had only recently been demolished on the orders of al @-@ Hakim , and by arranging the re @-@ appointment of a Patriarch to the vacant see . In general , the Jarrahids seem to have had close relations with the Christians and maintained contact with Byzantium , a fact which would play a role in later events . 
 This period marked the apogee of the Bedouin power in Palestine : as the contemporary historian Yahya of Antioch writes , the entire interior of the land , " from al @-@ <unk> to Tiberias " , was under their control , with only the coastal cities resisting the siege attempts , and coins were minted in Abu 'l @-@ Futuh 's name . Although in the end short @-@ lived , this period of Bedouin domination had a considerable negative impact on the region . Kennedy remarks that " it was marked by the destruction and desolation of many of the settled communities , and as elsewhere in the Fertile Crescent at this period , the extension of nomad @-@ controlled area at the expense of the urban and agricultural areas . " 
 Despite its apparent success , Bedouin power was fragile , as the Jarrahids proved susceptible to bribery . Al @-@ Hakim sent large sums and gifts to Mufarrij and his sons , with Hassan in return sending back the grandsons of Jawhar al @-@ Siqilli , who had been entrusted to his care , to be executed . Abu 'l @-@ Futuh began to have second thoughts , as the Jarrahids increasingly treated him disrespectfully after the money he had brought with him ran out . Eventually he returned to Mecca and Fatimid allegiance . Abu 'l @-@ Qasim too feared a Jarrahid rapprochement with the Fatimids , and fled for Iraq , eventually rising to become a vizier for the Marwanid and Uqaylid rulers of the Jazira . Finally , in July / August 1013 , al @-@ Hakim sent a 24 @,@ 000 @-@ strong army under Ali ibn Ja 'far ibn <unk> against the Bedouin . The latter were heavily defeated in the field and lost Ramlah . Ali and Mahmud surrendered , and at the same time , Mufarrij died , possibly poisoned by agents of the Caliph . Thereupon Hassan too secured a pardon , and managed to retain his father 's lands in Palestine . Although initially loyal to the Fatimids , he too held ambitions to rule Palestine as an autonomous ruler . From 1024 , he launched a series of rebellions , allied with the Christians of Palestine and the Byzantines . Like his father , however , he failed to achieve but ephemeral success . 
