 Throughout 25 February , the storm 's eye expanded to an asymmetrical 95 by 185 km ( 60 by 115 mi ) diameter . By 1200 UTC , Rusty had intensified into a severe tropical cyclone — a Category 3 or higher on the Australian cyclone intensity scale ; this was supported by measurements of sustained 125 km / h ( 78 mph ) at Rowley Shoals . The large circulation began contracting later that day and into 26 February . Intensification resumed later that day and into 27 February . Favorable outflow , enhanced by a mid @-@ latitude trough to the south , allowed for deep convection to form around the eyewall . Rusty attained its peak strength early on 27 February with sustained winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) , with gusts up to 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) , and an estimated central pressure of 945 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 91 inHg ) . The JTWC estimated one @-@ minute sustained winds at this time to have been 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , equivalent to a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Shortly thereafter , the ridge over Australia began to rebuild and prompted Rusty to drift south @-@ southeast . Interaction with the Australian mainland incited weakening of the cyclone . As it approached the Pilbara coastline , the eastern eyewall collapsed and its eye became increasingly cloud @-@ filled . Bedout Island , which took a direct hit from the eyewall , only recorded 98 km / h ( 61 mph ) sustained winds with gusts to 119 km / h ( 74 mph ) . 
 Around 0900 UTC on 27 February Rusty made landfall near Pardoo Station , roughly 110 km ( 70 mi ) east of Port Hedland , with winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) . Once onshore , steady weakening ensued . Within six hours , the eye dissipated and deep convection diminished , becoming more confined to the southern side of the circulation . A combination of increasing shear and land interaction ultimately caused the storm to weaken below cyclone strength early on 28 February , at which time it was situated roughly 70 km ( 43 mi ) southeast of Nullagine . The remnants continued southward over Western Australia , eventually opening up into a trough on 3 March . The system subsequently moved back over water that day before being absorbed by an approaching extratropical cyclone by 5 March . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The Port of Port Hedland was shut down for 86 hours as the cyclone slowly moved by , causing significant disruptions to shipping . Twenty @-@ six ships were evacuated from the port prior to the storm 's arrival . Onshore mining was suspended for similar durations nearby . BHP Billiton , Rio Tinto Group , and Fortescue Metals Group temporarily shut down or scaled back all operations in the area . The prolonged closure of the port resulted in a 2 @.@ 4 % drop in iron ore prices . Losses from lack of productivity and revenue associated with the port closures were estimated to be as high as A $ 500 million ( US $ 480 million ) . 
 Coastal areas of Pilbara were placed on red alert on 26 February , meaning residents were on full lock down until the cyclone 's passage . Approximately 500 people sought refuge in public shelters during the storm . As a preventative measure , a 60 km ( 37 mi ) stretch of the Great Northern Highway between Port Hedland and Sandfire was shut down for several days . The road closures caused food and gas shortages in some areas ; however , police eventually let trucks with supplies through the closed roads . As the remnants of Rusty moved south , flood warnings were raised across the Goldfields @-@ Esperance region by 2 March and flood @-@ prone roads were shut down . A local race was cancelled due to the storm in Esperance . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Owing to the slow movement of Rusty , many areas along coastal Pilbara experienced prolonged periods of gale @-@ force winds and heavy rain . Sustained gales affected Port Hedland for a record @-@ breaking 39 hours straight . Gusts reached 124 km / h ( 77 mph ) on Bedout Island before the anemometer failed . Port Hedland International Airport recorded gusts up to 119 km / h ( 74 mph ) . A large swath of Western Australia experienced heavy rains from the cyclone , with accumulations of at least 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) stretching from northwestern areas of Kimberley to central areas of the state . A storm maxima rainfall of 374 mm ( 14 @.@ 7 in ) was measured at De Grey Station ; however , an unofficial report of 428 @.@ 5 mm ( 16 @.@ 87 in ) was received from Pardoo Station . Another report from Pardoo stated that the area received 520 mm ( 20 in ) of rain in three days . Over five days , 276 mm ( 10 @.@ 9 in ) fell at the Anna Plains Station , accounting for 65 % of its seasonal rainfall . Many farmers in Western Australia considered the rain to be beneficial as it caused little damage outside Pardoo . Farther south in the Goldfields @-@ Esperance region , accumulations peaked at 117 mm ( 4 @.@ 6 in ) in Lorna Glen . Kalgoorlie experienced its wettest March day ever , with a 24 ‑ hour total of 88 @.@ 2 mm ( 3 @.@ 47 in ) ; it was also on track to be the fourth wettest March on record in just two days . 
 Major flooding took place along the De Grey River as it rose to 17 @.@ 23 m ( 56 @.@ 5 ft ) , just short of the all @-@ time record of 17 @.@ 76 m ( 58 @.@ 3 ft ) set in 2000 . Discharge also reached a tremendous 7 @,@ 843 m3 / s ( 276 @,@ 973 ft3 / 2 ) . Between 26 February and 2 March , an estimated 1 @.@ 4 million megalitres ( 370 billion gallons ) of water flowed the river . The effects of flooding from the river were mainly confined to Pardoo Station , where significant cattle loss took place . Many of the station 's buildings were flooded and roughly 300 km ( 190 mi ) of roads were washed away . The Nullagine , <unk> , and <unk> rivers rose above flood levels . Only minor damage took place in Port Hedland while some flooding took place in Kalgoorlie and <unk> , with some homes damaged . Downed tree limbs and power lines in Port Hedland left 55 homes without power . Along the beach , a dolphin was washed ashore during the storm . It was brought to a tidal pool by Department of Environment and Conservation officers and cared for five hours before being released back into the ocean . 
 The storm also weakened the seasonal monsoon trough over southern areas of the country in early March , triggering an intense heat wave across the region . Areas recently affected by the cyclone in Pilbara experienced temperatures up to 45 ° C ( 113 ° F ) , the highest temperatures in six years . Melbourne , Victoria , saw a record nine days of high temperatures above 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) as the air mass moved east . Records in the city began in 1856 . The city subsequently broke its record for continuous days with minimum temperatures of at least 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) , reaching seven on 13 March . The Australian Energy Market Operator reported record electrical demands across the state of Victoria , with usage reaching more than 9 @,@ 500 MW on 12 March . Owing to the prolonged heat , incidents requiring paramedics increased by 25 percent from the previous week . 
 Immediately following Rusty 's landfall , the Department of Fire and Emergency Services placed 30 personnel on standby and began aerial surveys to determine if residents needed aid . Residents in Pilbara were warned of the dangers of asbestos in damaged or destroyed structures in early March as they were allowed to return home . A week after Rusty passed through Pilbara , an algal bloom the size of Tasmania appeared offshore . Unprecedented turbidity from the storm stirred up a large column of nutrients from the seafloor and brought it to the surface , causing the rapid increase in algae . Despite its size , it was not expected to have any lasting effects in the region . 
 Later in 2013 , Rusty was retired from the list names in the Australian Basin . During November 2014 the name <unk> was chosen to replace Rusty . 
 = New Jersey Route 36 = 
 Route 36 is a state highway in Monmouth County , New Jersey , United States . The 24 @.@ 40 @-@ mile ( 39 @.@ 27 km ) long route , shaped as a backwards C , begins at an intersection with Garden State Parkway and County Route 51 ( Hope Road ) in Eatontown and runs east to Long Branch . From Long Branch , the route follows the Atlantic Ocean north to Sea Bright and turns west , running to the south of the Raritan Bay . Route 36 ends in Keyport at an interchange with the Garden State Parkway and Route 35 . It varies in width from a six @-@ lane divided highway to a two @-@ lane undivided road . The route is signed east – west between Eatontown and Long Branch and north – south between Long Branch and Keyport . 
 Route 36 was created in 1927 to run from Keyport to Highlands along a winding route that went through the downtowns of Keyport , Keansburg , and Atlantic Highlands . In 1929 , the route was modified to bypass the downtown areas . Route 36 was extended to Eatontown in 1940 with only the portion within Eatontown and West Long Branch built . The remainder of the route was created with the takeover of Joline Avenue in Long Branch and Ocean Avenue in Monmouth Beach and Sea Bright from Monmouth County on October 17 , 1972 and the completion of Ocean Boulevard in Long Branch in late 1983 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 36 begins at the intersection with County Route 51 ( Hope Road ) and Exit 105 of the Garden State Parkway in Eatontown , heading east along a four @-@ lane divided highway . Soon after beginning , it features ramps that provide access to Route 18 in both the westbound and eastbound directions . The route widens to six lanes and crosses County Route 547 ( Wyckoff Road ) . After that intersection , Route 36 passes by the Monmouth Mall and intersects Route 35 at the former Eatontown Circle , which has been reconstructed to an at @-@ grade intersection with ramps . Route 36 continues east through commercial development and crosses into West Long Branch , where it comes to an intersection with Route 71 . The route heads northeast , becoming Monmouth Park Highway , and crosses County Route 537 ( Eatontown Boulevard / Broadway ) . Route 36 meets County Route 11 ( <unk> Avenue ) and comes to the entrance to the Monmouth Park Racetrack . 
 Route 36 narrows to a two @-@ lane undivided highway and crosses into Long Branch , where it becomes Joline Avenue . In Long Branch , the route crosses County Route 29 ( Myrtle Avenue ) and New Jersey Transit ’ s North Jersey Coast Line . Route 36 heads toward the Atlantic Ocean , where at the intersection with County Route 57 ( Ocean Boulevard ) , the route turns north and runs along the Atlantic Ocean on Ocean Boulevard , a four @-@ lane divided road . Route 36 intersects County Route 29 ( Atlantic Avenue ) and crosses into Monmouth Beach , where it narrows to a two @-@ lane undivided road and takes on the name Ocean Avenue . It continues through Monmouth Beach and enters Sea Bright , where Route 36 heads north onto a narrow peninsula between the Shrewsbury River and the Atlantic Ocean , meeting the eastern terminus of County Route 520 ( Rumson Road ) . The route continues north along the peninsula to a trumpet interchange that provides access to Gateway National Recreation Area at Sandy Hook . 
 Route 36 turns west and crosses the Shrewsbury River on the four @-@ lane Highlands @-@ Sea Bright Bridge , continuing into Highlands . It intersects County Route 8 at an interchange and continues west on Navesink Avenue , a four @-@ lane , divided highway with a Jersey barrier and some intersections featuring jughandles that runs a short distance to the south of the Raritan Bay . The route then forms the border between Highlands and Middletown Township , with Highlands to the north and Middletown Township to the south . Route 36 intersects two separate sections of County Route 8 , Linden Avenue and Ocean Boulevard soon after , before intersecting County Route 8B ( Navesink Avenue ) and fully entering Middletown Township . The name changes to Memorial Parkway and Route 36 crosses into Atlantic Highlands . In Atlantic Highlands , the route intersects County Route 8A ( Valley Drive East ) and another section of County Route 8 ( First Avenue ) . It crosses back into Middletown Township and meets the eastern terminus of County Route 516 ( Leonardville Road ) . 
 Route 36 passes under Normandy Road , which serves as a road and railroad link between the two sections of Naval Weapons Station Earle , with an entrance present to Normandy Road . The route drops the Memorial Parkway name and meets County Route 36 ( Thompson Avenue ) . It then crosses County Route 7 ( Palmer Avenue / Main Street ) and forms the border between Hazlet Township to the south and Keansburg to the north . Route 36 eventually fully enters Hazlet Township and intersects County Route 7 ( Munroe Avenue ) again . The route then forms the border between Hazlet Township to the south and Union Beach to the north and passes over <unk> Lake . It intersects County Route 39 ( Union Avenue ) and then County Route 6 ( Stone Road ) , where Route 36 fully enters Hazlet Township again . The route crosses County Route 516 ( Middle Avenue ) and later enters Keyport . Route 36 intersects County Route 4 ( Broad Street ) and continues to its terminus at an interchange with Route 35 and the Garden State Parkway at Exit 117 . The overall shape of Route 36 is that of a backwards C. 
 = = History = = 
 Route 36 was established by the Laws of 1927 , Chapter 319 to run between Keyport and Highlands . The route was to run up Broad Street from Front Street in Keyport , follow First Street east to the Second Street Bridge , and run east along Stone Road to Keansburg . It would pass through Keansburg on Church Street and follow Shore Road east to the Belford drawbridge and then on through more rural fields and meadows . Route 36 would head along Center Avenue from Ocean View to Atlantic Highlands , where it would turn north on First Avenue and run east along Ocean Boulevard to Navesink Avenue in Highlands . The route would follow Navesink Avenue east to the drawbridge over the Shrewsbury River . This routing as proposed was considered impractical as it consisted entirely of local roads , went through the downtown areas of Keyport , Keansburg and Atlantic Highlands , and contained many hazardous sharp curves . This was remedied in 1929 , when Route 36 was designated to bypass the downtowns and sharp curves . 
 In 1940 , Route 36 was extended south to Route 35 in Eatontown , but only a portion was constructed in Eatontown and West Long Branch . As a result , this extension remained unsigned in the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering . Additional parts of this extension were taken over on October 17 , 1972 , with the takeover of County Route 9 , which was Ocean Avenue between the Long Branch / Monmouth Beach border and the Sea Bright / Middletown Township border , and County Route 44 , which was Joline Avenue between <unk> Avenue and Ocean Avenue in Long Branch . County Route 9 was initially taken over as a county highway by resolution of the Monmouth County Board of Chosen Freeholders on September 1 , 1903 running from Rumson Road north to the Middletown Township border at Sandy Hook . It was extended to the southern border of Monmouth Beach by two resolutions dated February 4 , 1920 . County Route 44 was taken over as a county road on October 18 , 1939 . Following the takeover of County Routes 9 and 44 , a short gap of Route 36 remained in Long Branch ( Ocean Avenue between Joline Avenue and the Monmouth Beach border ) that was municipally maintained ; with the completion of Ocean Boulevard in late 1983 that link has been added . 
 Between 2008 and 2011 , the Highlands @-@ Sea Bright Bridge , which was originally a drawbridge , was replaced with a fixed span with a clearance 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) higher than its predecessor . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The " Marina Diner " from the 1997 film Chasing Amy , now known as the King Arms II Diner , is located along Route 36 in Belford . Additionally , the " Quick Stop <unk> " and " RST Video " stores from the 1994 film Clerks are located just north of the highway 's intersection with Leonard Avenue in Leonardo . Both films were created by former New Jersey resident Kevin Smith . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Monmouth County . 
 = Clumber Spaniel = 
 The Clumber Spaniel is a breed of dog of the spaniel type , developed in the United Kingdom . It is the largest of the spaniels , and comes in predominantly white with either lemon or orange markings , but can sometimes be either brown or lemon predominantly . The name of the breed is taken from Clumber Park in Nottinghamshire where the breed was first developed . It is a gundog that specialises in hunting in heavy cover . They are gentle and loyal , and can act aloof with strangers . They have several habits which could be considered disadvantages , including a constant shedding of its coat and snoring . 
 The history of the breed is uncertain prior to the mid @-@ 19th century with two theories being prevalent . Clumber Spaniels have been kept and bred by various British Monarchs , including Prince Albert , King Edward VII and King George V. They were introduced into Canada in 1844 , and in 1884 became one of the first ten breeds recognised by the American Kennel Club . The breed can suffer from a variety of breed @-@ specific ailments varying in severity from temporary lameness due to bone growth whilst young to hip dysplasia or spinal disc herniation . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Appearance = = = 
 The Clumber Spaniel is the largest of the spaniels , and is long and heavy @-@ bodied , standing only 17 to 20 inches ( 43 to 51 cm ) in height but weighing from 55 to 85 pounds ( 25 to 39 kg ) . It is similar in shape to the smaller Sussex Spaniel . The Clumber has a heavy bone structure , has a massive ' melting ' head with a mournful and sleepy expression , a square nose and muzzle , and large vine @-@ leaf shaped ears . <unk> on the muzzle and front legs are common . Its coat is dense , weather @-@ resistant , straight , and flat with feathering around the ears , belly and legs . Clumbers are predominantly white in colour with lemon , brown , or orange markings around the eyes , and at the base of the tail . 
 = = = Temperament = = = 
 Their temperament is described as gentle , loyal and affectionate , but dignified and aloof with strangers . They can appear to be a sedate breed and enjoy curling up on the couch , eating and sleeping . 
 Clumber Spaniels shed at a medium pace . Clumbers tend to drool because of their very droopy <unk> . Clumbers have minds of their own . Puppies are especially curious and playful . The breed has a trophy mentality and the dog has an incessant need to carry something most of the time ; unfortunately this can lead to health issues as they may ingest the items . 
 The breed has been used to hunt pheasant and partridge , in both small packs and alone . It is well @-@ suited for work in upland hunting in dense cover , and although the Clumber is rather slow in the field compared to other spaniels , it is a quiet worker with a fine nose and good stamina . The broad muzzle of the breed allows it to retrieve a variety of game . 
 = = Health = = 
 Because Clumber Spaniels are large boned and fast growing , they can suffer from temporary lameness from between six and twelve months of age , with this lameness subsiding when bone growth is complete . Another common condition that the breed suffers from are impacted anal sacs and the dog may require them to be emptied by a veterinarian . The final common condition that the breed has is heat sensitivity : if Clumber Spaniels are left without shade , they can become uncomfortably hot and dehydrated . 
 In addition , Clumbers often have difficulties conceiving and giving birth , and may require caesarian sections . Some dogs may suffer from sensitivity to anaesthesia . The most common severe health conditions in the Clumber Spaniel are entropion / ectropion eye conditions , spinal disc herniation and hip dysplasia . They have a median lifespan of around 10 years . 
 = = = <unk> / <unk> = = = 
 <unk> is the inward rolling of the eyelid , commonly the lower lid . This in turn irritates the cornea of the eye and can cause visual impairment . It is a hereditary disorder seen in both English and American Cocker Spaniels , King Charles Spaniels , English Springer Spaniels plus a variety of non spaniel breeds . 
 <unk> is the outward rolling of the eyelid , which abnormally exposes the eye , resulting in irritation . Because of the increased exposure , the dog can develop allergic or bacterial conjunctivitis or keratoconjunctivitis sicca also known as dry @-@ eye syndrome . It is most commonly found in breeds with exaggerated facial features such as the Boxer , Bloodhound , Gordon Setter as well as the English and American Cocker Spaniels , and the English Springer Spaniel . 
 The treatment for ectropion varies depending on the severity of the condition . The only treatment for entropion is surgical , and may be delayed until the dog reaches adulthood as whilst a puppy the facial structures of the animal are still growing and changing . Dogs who have surgical correction for defects such as entropion or ectropion may not be exhibited in the show ring . 
 = = = Spinal disc herniation = = = 
 Spinal disc herniation occurs when the <unk> disc bulges or ruptures into the vertebral canal where the spinal cord resides . Once the cord is compressed , the dog experiences symptoms ranging from mild back / neck pain to leg paralysis , loss of sensation , and urinary and fecal incontinence . The most commonly location seen is the mid @-@ back area , but it may occur anywhere along the spine . Cases that do not result in paralysis can be treated medically by confining the animal to restrict movement to a minimum for several weeks , and this can be accompanied by medication for the pain . Surgery can restore sensation to a dog 's legs following paralysis but the success rate depends on how severe the herniation was . 
 = = = Hip dysplasia = = = 
 Hip dysplasia is a hereditary condition which occurs in most dog breeds to some extent , according to scores from a 2001 UK Kennel Club scheme , the Clumber Spaniel has the second worst breed mean scores . Furthermore , a survey conducted by the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals found that 45 @.@ 7 % of Clumber Spaniels tested were affected by the condition . Initial signs are usually first noted when the dog is between five and twelve months old , and may include a swaying hindleg gait , hindleg lameness , muscle wastage around the hindquarters , reluctance to and fatigue during exercise , inability to climb stairs or jump up . The dog can appear hunched up with an arched back , and in the very worst cases may wince with pain when moving its hindlegs . Medical treatment can vary from the administration of painkillers to surgical correction depending on the severity of the condition . 
 = = History = = 
 The breed 's history is uncertain before the middle of the 19th century . One theory is that it originated in France , stating that the Duc de Noailles at the time of the French Revolution gave his kennel of prized spaniels to the Duke of Newcastle at Clumber Park in Nottinghamshire . The theory goes , that the now extinct Alpine Spaniel was breed with Basset Hounds , and the Pyrenean Mountain Dog also known as the Great Pyrenees . A second theory is that it is descended from the old type of <unk> Spaniel , which was later to be incorporated into the King Charles breed of Spaniel . Originally these dogs were large gundogs , colored lemon and white whereas the modern breed of them is a much smaller lap / toy breed of dog . 
 What is certain is that the breed took its name from Clumber Park and that the Duke of Newcastle 's gamekeeper , William Mansell , is credited with their development and improvement . Prince Albert , the Prince consort of Queen Victoria , was a fancier and promoter of the breed , as was his son King Edward VII , who bred them at the Sandringham estate in Norfolk . The breed was shown in England from 1859 onward . They are referred to in Queen Victoria 's diary : on October 16 , 1840 , she wrote , " Walked out directly after breakfast before Albert went to shoot . He had his 7 fine Clumber Spaniels with us and we went into the Slopes , with such a funny old Gamekeeper , Walters , in order that I should see how the dogs found out their game . They are such dear , nice dogs . " 
 Until the mid 19th century the breeding of the Clumber Spaniel was mostly restricted to the nobility . During World War I breeding was stopped entirely causing their numbers to decrease to a record low . In 1925 , King George V re @-@ developed a line of Clumbers in the Royal Kennel and were used in the fields in the Sandringham Estate . 
 Sh . Ch . Raycroft Socialite , bred by Rae Furness and owned by Ralph Dunne of County Cavan , Ireland , won the coveted honor of Best In Show at the 1991 Crufts Centenary Show . 
 The Clumber Spaniel is currently recognised as a Vulnerable Native Breed by the UK Kennel Club , which means it is a breed which fewer than 300 new registrations each year . Other spaniels recognised as such are the Field Spaniel , Irish Water Spaniel and Sussex Spaniel . 
 = = = Clumber Spaniels in North America = = = 
 While the breed was not shown widely in the United States prior to the late 1960s , in 1844 , Lieutenant Venables , an officer of the British regiment stationed in Halifax , Nova Scotia , introduced the Clumber Spaniel to North America . The first Clumber Spaniel listed in the AKC registry , recorded for the date of 1878 was <unk> , an orange and white dog owned by Benjamin Smith of Nova Scotia . The Clumber Spaniel became one of the first ten breeds recognised by the American Kennel Club in 1884 . 
 The first Clumber Spaniel was entered in the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show in 1878 . Champion <unk> Country Sunrise ( " Brady " ) , bred by Doug Johnson and owned by Richard and Judith Zaleski of Florida , became the only Clumber to win Best in Show there in 1996 . 
 = Morleigh Steinberg = 
 Morleigh Steinberg is an American choreographer and dancer with the production company Arcane Collective . She is the wife of the musician The Edge from the rock group U2 . 
 Raised in Los Angeles and schooled in modern dance , Steinberg became a formative member of the dancer @-@ illusionist company MOMIX in 1983 . They became known for their visual humour and contorted positions . In 1986 , she co @-@ founded the ISO dance company , which embodied an approach they called " serious fun " and sometimes collaborated with a singing group , and gave performances around the country and abroad . In both companies she did choreography as well as dancing . She staged her own experimental dance solo production and did choreographic work for films and music videos . Starting in the mid @-@ 1990s , she branched out into lighting design and film directing as well , with dance usually being the subject matter . She has continued with various projects into the 2010s , often collaborating with the Japanese choreographer and dancer Oguri . Together they are co @-@ founders of the production company Arcane Collective . 
 Steinberg became involved with U2 when she appeared in the 1987 music video for " With Or Without You " , then was hired as a choreographer , and subsequently as a belly dancer for " Mysterious Ways " , during their 1992 – 1993 Zoo TV Tour . By the end of the tour she was in a relationship with The Edge . The couple has two children together , married in 2002 , and live at residences in Ireland , France , and the United States . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Steinberg was born and raised in Los Angeles under affluent circumstances . Her father , Robert , is a lawyer in Los Angeles . Her mother , a successful interior designer , came from a film industry heritage and grew up on the Universal Studios lot . She has two sisters , Roxanne , older and Eliza , younger . Her family is Jewish . 
 Morleigh was tutored in modern dance and her instructors included Bella <unk> . Steinberg attended Beverly Hills High School " where she was part of its Advanced Dance Group which gave modern dance performances . At age 16 , she spent time at the Interlochen Arts Academy in Michigan and when 17 , left with her sister for a year of dancing in Paris . She also attended Hampshire College in Amherst , Massachusetts , for two weeks . She later said that her training in dance had " stressed relationships to objects and to poems . " 
 = = Early career and work with U2 = = 
 In 1983 , on her way back from Paris , Steinberg began dancing in the studio of Moses Pendleton , who had founded the modern dance company Pilobolus . She had been attracted to Pilobolus growing up : " I was taller than most girls my age , and I thought that was a company I could be with because the women were always lifting the men . " There she joined up with Daniel <unk> , Jamey Hampton , and Ashley Roland , and the four created the Connecticut @-@ based , dancer @-@ illusionist company MOMIX . From 1983 to 1986 , Steinberg toured nationally with MOMIX . The group became known for their visual humour , contorted positions , and Trompe @-@ l 'œil effects . 
 However , the dancers felt financially insecure , because Pendleton owned the MOMIX name , and also felt artistically stagnant . The four split from MOMIX in 1986 and founded the ISO ( " I 'm So Optimistic " ) dance company . With ISO , they set their acro dance moves against the new @-@ wave a cappella singing of The Bobs in combined performances . The dancers labelled their new approach as " serious fun " . 
 Steinberg 's first association with U2 came in February 1987 . The group 's lead singer , Bono , was a fan of ISO and she was cast for the music video of their hit " With or Without You " . In it , director Matt Mahurin portrayed Steinberg in an abstract style , swirling in various positions in shots interposed with the band performing . During a Los Angeles stop on the band 's subsequent Joshua Tree Tour , Steinberg met The Edge ( actual name Dave Evans ) in person for the first time during a party at her house . He came and had a conversation with her and her sister . 
 Steinberg did choreographic work for two feature films , Earth Girls Are Easy ( 1988 ) and Wild Orchid ( 1990 ) . She did the choreography for Paula Abdul 's 1991 – 1992 Under My Spell Tour . She additionally did concert or music video choreographic work for David Bowie , Rod Stewart , Sting , and Lenny Kravitz . She also ran her own dance school . 
 By 1990 , ISO was performing not just in the US but also abroad . The troupe was regularly reviewed by The New York Times . A 1988 review said that , " Unfortunately , many of [ the troupe 's ] effects looked too self @-@ consciously clever . " A 1990 review concluded that , " It is easy to be optimistic about ISO ; its shows are goofy fun . But the apparently casual silliness derives from great theatrical shrewdness . " A 1991 review said that , " The evening got off to a good , punchy start , then dwindled irretrievably into sophomoric hijinks . " A 1993 review stated that , " Iso is after laughs and it gets them . But its targets are threadbare just when dance could use some sharp satirists . " In one 1990 performance , Steinberg used elastic bands to playfully reshape her arms and legs as noodles , then flew from wires like an angel . By 1992 , Steinberg was living in the Venice neighborhood of Los Angeles . She sometimes toured with the informal company Daniel <unk> and Friends . A St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch review of one such show in 1994 described Steinberg 's role as that of " a gorgeous , aloof woman in a red dress " . She also performed a solo work , the 1992 experimental show called <unk> at the La Boca performance space in Los Angeles , which featured original music from Brian Eno and Paul Chavez . The work featured her in a variety of strange poses and settings cued by video and lighting effects . The Los Angeles Times said her composition represented " a descent into autism , achieved with frightening integrity . Everything she reveals is without self , the be @-@ all and end @-@ all of madness . " 
 After meeting U2 in 1987 , Steinberg stayed in touch with Bono and when the group was putting the Zoo TV Tour together in 1992 , the lead singer thought it would be good to have a choreographer to critique his moves on stage . Steinberg worked during the tour 's pre @-@ production to show the group how to communicate their ideas all the way to the last rows of a venue . Recognizing Bono was not a dancer , she focused on movements he could do , and sought to help him pace himself and not get lost visually in the show 's enormous stage set . The group 's hit " Mysterious Ways " had featured a belly dancer in its music video , and the group decided to incorporate one in their on @-@ stage performance of the song . The original dancer left when the tour moved to its outdoor stadium legs . According to Steinberg , having a belly dancer on the tour originated as " a bit of a joke " . Steinberg began by training the dancer , and when that dancer left the tour , a replacement was needed . Bono asked Steinberg if she would like to take over and she agreed , although she had never belly danced before and by her own description did not have the voluptuous body usually associated with the form . 
 In the role of belly dancer , Steinberg engaged in dramatic interaction with Bono , especially upon entrance and exit from the stage . At times Bono would sing to the belly dancer 's image on the giant video screens around the stage . During the tour , Steinberg changed the colours of her outfit to match certain occasions , such as wearing orange and black around Halloween . Steinberg was originally reluctant to put her own activities on hold to continue on to the " Zooropa " leg of the tour , but eventually agreed . Unlike others in the tour entourage , Steinberg exhibited a professional independence from the group and did not wait on their whims . In 1993 , while still on tour , Steinberg appeared in U2 's Kevin Godley @-@ directed music video for their single " Numb " , first with her feet as part of the video 's assault on The Edge and then with her back as she belly danced . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 The Edge had been married to his first wife Aislinn since 1983 . They had three children together , but had separated in March 1991 . Morleigh and The Edge developed a friendship during the Zoo TV Tour , and by August – September 1993 , towards the tour 's end , it was clear to observers and the couple themselves that the friendship developed into a relationship , and Steinberg broke up with her boyfriend of the time . Following the tour 's completion , Steinberg and The Edge discovered they missed each other ; she moved to Dublin in 1994 , and the relationship became firm . Having grown up around Hollywood , the prospect of being associated with a famous rock star did not faze her . On his part , the relationship with Steinberg improved his frame of mind after a long period of unhappiness . 
 The couple 's daughter , Sian Beatrice , was born in Los Angeles in 1997 and their son , Levi , was born in 1999 in the same city . She had kept her home and many of her possessions in Los Angeles even after moving to Dublin ; only after she began raising her children in Ireland did Steinberg start feeling that country was her home . 
 Steinberg continued some professional activity with U2 , directing one of the music videos made for their 1997 single " Staring at the Sun " . The video featured close @-@ ups of each of the band members set off by an array of lighting effects . Following the September 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , she was one of the backing singers during the coda of " Walk On " for the America : A Tribute to Heroes telethon . 
 The couple married on 17 June 2002 . They had a small civil service in the Dublin registry office and a few days later at a ceremony on the top of a mountain in the South of France . The Edge said " the Dublin ceremony was just a necessary formality " , the only people present there were his two best men : Bono and antiques dealer Chantal O 'Sullivan . Four days later , their French wedding was held with 200 or more guests at the hilltop village of Èze overlooking the Côte d 'Azur followed with a party by the sea . The ceremony was led by Steinberg 's father Robert and combined elements of both Christian and Jewish services . 
 The couple bought and renovated a € 4 million house in Killiney outside Dublin during 2002 – 2003 , where they were living mostly for their children 's primary education . Their daughter , Sian had leukaemia at age 7 , which required three years of treatment , in Dublin and in California . After discussion with the family , U2 went forward with its 2005 – 2006 Vertigo Tour , but with changed scheduling , reduced dates , and a long postponement of the final leg , all to enable Edge to get home more often . Bono later termed Steinberg a heroine for having to take up more of the parental burden and said that without her , the tour would never have taken place at all . After their daughter was declared free of leukaemia , Steinberg and The Edge learned that she was dyslexic and relocated to New York so that she could attend a special learning centre there . 
 With Bono and his wife Ali Hewson , the couple co @-@ own a 20 @-@ room villa in Èze in the Alpes @-@ Maritimes in the South of France , where they often meet with other celebrities . By 2010 , Morleigh and Edge altogether had residences in Dublin , New York , the South of France , and Los Angeles . The couple 's five @-@ year battle to gain approval for a large , five @-@ home development atop a hill in Malibu , California , opposed by environmentalists , was rejected by the California Coastal Commission in 2011 , despite the efforts of Robert Steinberg to argue on its behalf . The project was reactivated and the battle over it was still continuing as of 2014 . 
 = = Subsequent career = = 
 Morleigh Steinberg has been working together with Japanese choreographer and dancer Oguri since the early 1990s , documenting Oguri 's severe , <unk> @-@ derived style of dance in various environments , including Joshua Tree National Park and Los Angeles . She made her directorial debut in 1994 with the short subject Traveling Light , which featured the interpretive dance of Oguri and her sister Roxanne , who is also a modern dancer and choreographer and married to Oguri . A review of the film on DVD Talk said that " <unk> Steinberg 's dance @-@ filled daydream about relationships in freefall will be difficult for some to appreciate ( the mostly modern dance is very insular and odd ) , but the brilliant cinematic mood created by the director helps us over the slightly strange nature of it all . " ( In 2006 the film was included in a DVD release of the Francis Ford Coppola @-@ produced claymation film of William S. Burroughs ' The <unk> 's Christmas . ) Despite having no formal training in it , Steinberg also began working as a lighting designer , serving in that role for 1995 and 1997 productions of Oguri works . In 1999 , Steinberg was selected for a ten @-@ week National Dance / Media Project fellowship at the University of California , Los Angeles . 
 Steinberg next came up with the idea of showing Oguri moving through two busy Los Angeles intersections . The result is the 11 @-@ minute dance film " Xing " , which was screened in 2003 at the Getty Center during Dance Camera West . " Nothing was choreographed beforehand . Oguri does not choreograph , he improvises . But the shots are very specific and the direction is very specific . He knows that he has to get from point A to point B , but I do not mind how . " Steinberg made her first feature @-@ length documentary , Height of Sky , about Oguri , and it was shown on the Sundance Channel in 2008 . 
 Since Steinberg settled in Ireland , she has been involved in a number of projects , including doing the lighting for a Royal Hibernian Academy fringe gallery exhibition in 2001 and for Rex <unk> ' dance production Bread & Circus in 2007 , which showcases her collaborator Liz Roche . A short dance film she directed , Unsung , which featured Roche 's choreography , won a 2008 Dance on the Box award from RTÉ and was shown on that channel as part of the Dublin Dance Festival . Steinberg provided the inspiration behind the dropped @-@ from @-@ on @-@ high steering @-@ wheel microphone that was a striking visual feature of the 2009 – 2011 U2 360 ° Tour . 
 She was the artistic director of the 2010s Dance Homage to Irish painter Louis le Brocquy , entitled Cold Dream Colour . The work had its world première in Dublin . Le Brocquy later died , in 2012 . The Edge had brought le Brocquy 's work to Steinberg 's attention , and she became convinced that his paintings could be interpreted through dance . The music for Cold Dream Colour is composed by The Edge in collaboration with Paul Chavez ( known for his experimental electronic compositions under the project name <unk> ) . Besides sharing in the choreography and lighting design for the work , Steinberg also staged a solo dance as well as a duet with her sister . Oguri also had roles as choreographer and dancer . The work had its US première at <unk> in Los Angeles in 2012 ; a review in the Los Angeles Times said that " Visceral expressionism and a prodigious visual beauty coalesced ... a striking visual success " , but that it was less certain whether the nature of le Brocquy 's paintings had been conveyed to the less @-@ familiar American audience . Excerpts from Cold Dream Colour were performed at the Guggenheim Museum 's Works & Process series for two nights in 2013 in New York , with Irish broadcaster John Kelly moderating a discussion of the work with its creators . The US Cold Dream Colour was presented by Arcane Collective , a production company that Steinberg and Oguri had co @-@ founded in Spring 2011 . 
 = HMS Delight ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Delight was a D @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy in the early 1930s . Delight was initially assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet before she was transferred to the China Station in early 1935 . She was temporarily deployed in the Red Sea during late 1935 during the Abyssinia Crisis , before returning to her duty station where she remained until mid @-@ 1939 . Delight was transferred back to the Mediterranean Fleet just before the Second World War began in September 1939 . She served with the Home Fleet during the Norwegian Campaign . The ship was sunk by German dive @-@ bombers on 29 July 1940 while attempting to transit the English Channel in daylight . 
 = = Description = = 
 Delight displaced 1 @,@ 375 long tons ( 1 @,@ 397 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 890 long tons ( 1 @,@ 920 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 329 feet ( 100 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 36 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 27 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Delight carried a maximum of 473 long tons ( 481 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 870 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 870 km ; 6 @,@ 760 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 145 officers and men . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Delight had a single 12 @-@ pounder ( 3 @-@ inch ( 76 @.@ 2 mm ) ) gun between her funnels and two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 = = Career = = 
 Delight was ordered on 2 February 1931 under the 1930 Naval Estimates and was laid down at the yards of the Fairfield Shipbuilding and Engineering Company , Govan , Scotstoun on 22 April 1931 . She was launched on 2 June 1932 and completed on 31 January 1933 , at a total cost of £ 229 @,@ 378 , excluding equipment supplied by the Admiralty , such as weapons , ammunition and wireless equipment . 
 The ship was used to carry out sea trials on the Mark IX torpedo after working up until 24 April 1933 . Delight then joined the 1st Destroyer Flotilla in the Mediterranean and made a brief deployment to the Persian Gulf in September – November 1933 . The ship was refitted at Portsmouth between 3 September and 25 October 1934 for service on the China Station with the 8th ( later the 21st ) Destroyer Flotilla and arrived there in January 1935 . She was attached to the Mediterranean Fleet in the Red Sea from September to November 1935 during the Abyssinian Crisis . As war with Germany loomed , Delight was assigned to the Mediterranean and departed 29 August 1939 in company with several of her sisters . She arrived at Aden on 19 September and later at Alexandria where she operated with the Mediterranean Fleet for the next three months . The ship was transferred to the Home Fleet in December and arrived at Portsmouth on 30 December . 
 She was refitted until 27 January 1940 before she joined the 3rd Destroyer Flotilla . Delight was damaged in heavy weather on 8 April and forced to return to port for repairs . During the Norwegian Campaign , Delight escorted the aircraft carrier HMS Furious as she returned to Scapa Flow on 25 April to replenish her aircraft . On 1 May , she ferried troops to the light cruisers HMS Manchester and HMS Birmingham of the 18th Cruiser Squadron during the evacuation from Åndalsnes . Delight supported the Allied troops on 27 – 28 May as they recaptured Narvik before she was sent to Bodø the next day to investigate reports of a German amphibious landing . Over the next two nights , the ship and seven other destroyers evacuated British troops from Bodø . On 7 – 8 June , Delight escorted a troop convoy evacuating Allied troops from Narvik ( Operation Alphabet ) . 
 The ship went to the assistance of the armed merchant cruiser HMS Scotstoun after she had been torpedoed by U @-@ 25 on 13 June . Delight had her superheater tubes replaced at Rosyth from 21 June to 24 July . In the meantime , the Battle of Britain began on 10 July 1940 and the English Channel became the main battle ground until August . After departing Portland Harbour in daylight on 29 July , contrary to orders , the ship was detected by a Freya radar at Cherbourg and the Luftwaffe was alerted . At 19 : 25 12 Ju 87s belonging to III . / Sturzkampfgeschwader 2 led by Gruppenkommandeur Walter <unk> attacked Delight , which was by now some 20 miles ( 32 km ) off Portland Bill . She was hit by a bomb on her fo <unk> , which caused a major fire and a subsequent explosion . The ship sank later that evening having lost six of her company in the attack . 
 Delight currently lies at a maximum depth of 62 metres ( 203 ft ) , broken into several sections . Her centre is upside down , her bow is broken off , and the stern is upright . As the wreck is designated as a protected place under the Protection of Military Remains Act 1986 it is illegal to enter the wreck without a license or to interfere with the wreck or debris field in any way . 
 = Alou Diarra = 
 Alou Diarra ( French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> <unk> ] ; born 15 July 1981 ) is a French international footballer who plays for English club Charlton Athletic . 
 He primarily plays as a defensive midfielder , but can also deputise as a centre @-@ back if necessary . Diarra is described as a player who is " strong , athletic and very powerful " and possesses a " combative edge " similar to former French international Patrick Vieira . Diarra is also known for his leadership ability and has served as captain of both Bordeaux domestically and France internationally . 
 Diarra began his career playing for clubs based in Seine @-@ Saint @-@ Denis , such as CSL Aulnay and hometown club FC Villepinte . In 1997 , he joined Louhans @-@ Cuiseaux and made his professional debut with the club in the 1999 – 2000 season while the club was playing in the second division . In 2000 , Diarra was recruited by German club Bayern Munich . He spent two years playing on the club 's reserve team , Bayern Munich II . In 2002 , he was signed by compatriot Gérard Houllier as part of the manager 's French Revolution to play for English club Liverpool . Diarra 's stint at the club was deemed a disappointment as he spent both years at the club on loan in France playing for Le Havre , Bastia , and Lens . 
 After a successful 2004 – 05 season with Lens , Diarra made a permanent return to France joining the club from Liverpool on a permanent deal . He spent two seasons at the club amassing over 70 appearances before signing with the then five @-@ time defending champions Lyon . At Lyon , Diarra struggled for playing time and left the club to join Bordeaux after one year . He did earn a winner 's medal as a result of the club winning the 2006 – 07 Ligue 1 title . With Bordeaux , Diarra was ever @-@ present within the team under manager Laurent Blanc . He was a prominent figure on the Bordeaux team that won the league and league cup double in the 2008 – 09 season . Diarra has also won two Trophée des champions while playing for the club . 
 Diarra is also a France international . Prior to playing at senior level , he played at under @-@ 20 and under @-@ 21 level . With the under @-@ 20 team , Diarra played on the team that participated in the 2001 FIFA World Youth Championship . He made his senior international debut in October 2004 in a friendly match against the Republic of Ireland . Diarra has participated in both the 2006 and 2010 editions of the FIFA World Cup . In the 2006 competition , he appeared in a group stage match against Togo and the final match against Italy as a substitute . In the 2010 edition , Diarra captained France for the first time in the team 's final group stage match against South Africa . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Diarra was born in the commune of Villepinte in the department of Seine @-@ Saint @-@ Denis to Malian parents . He has three younger brothers and one sister . One of his brothers , <unk> , is also a footballer and currently plays for French club Quevilly in the Championnat National , the third division of French football . He had previously played for the reserve team of professional club Paris Saint @-@ Germain , but was released in 2010 . Another brother , <unk> , assists in running a social networking site that helps amateur footballers find a club . Diarra and his siblings were raised in the neighborhood of Rose des Vents located in the nearby commune of Aulnay @-@ sous @-@ Bois , where his parents still reside . He is currently married and has two children . On 28 May 2010 , ahead of the 2010 FIFA World Cup , Diarra departed the national team 's training camp to be beside his wife as she gave birth to his second child . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Diarra began his football career at hometown club CSL Aulnay . After six years in Aulnay , Diarra moved back to his birth city to join FC Villepinte . While in the youth academy of Villepinte , he struggled to attract the attention of professional clubs often personally contacting clubs in order to earn trials . Diarra was ultimately denied several opportunities , most notably by Le Mans and , according to his brother , the struggle made the elder Diarra " very motivated to succeed " . 
 In 1997 , Diarra was signed to an amateur contract by professional club CS Louhans @-@ Cuiseaux who were playing in Ligue 2 , the second level of French football , and was inserted into the club 's youth academy . In the 1998 – 99 season , Diarra was promoted to the club 's reserve team and spent two seasons playing there . In the latter part of the 1999 – 2000 season , he was called up to the senior team by manager Philippe <unk> . On 15 April 2000 , Diarra made his professional debut in a 2 – 1 defeat to Toulouse picking up a yellow card . Two weeks later , he made his first professional start in the team 's 3 – 2 loss to Niort . In his final appearance with Louhans @-@ Cuiseaux , Diarra received his first red card of his career after incurring two yellow card infractions in a 2 – 1 defeat to Le Mans . Louhans @-@ Cuiseaux finished the campaign in last place and were relegated to the semi @-@ professional Championnat National , the third division of French football . After the season , Louhans @-@ Cuiseaux attempted to tie down Diarra on a long @-@ term deal and offered the player a trainee contract . Diarra refused the deal and was subsequently available to sign with any club on a free transfer . 
 = = = Bayern Munich = = = 
 During the summer of 2000 , Diarra was signed by German club Bayern Munich after the club saw him play one match with Louhans @-@ Cuiseaux . Upon his arrival to the club , he was immediately placed onto the club 's reserve team , Bayern Munich II , in the Regionalliga Süd , the ( then ) third level of German football . Diarra was a regular within the team playing alongside the likes of Owen Hargreaves , Philip Lahm , Bastian Schweinsteiger , and Zvjezdan <unk> . In his first season with the reserve team , he appeared in 28 matches scoring four goals . Diarra 's influence in the team was immediate as he scored his first goal for the team in the first league match of the season against <unk> Mannheim in a 4 – 2 defeat . His combative style of play also began to take shape as he collected nine yellow cards during the campaign with seven of them coming in the team 's first 17 matches . The season was ultimately a success for Diarra partly due to the player being promoted to the senior team for the 2001 – 02 season by manager Ottmar Hitzfeld . He was assigned the number 30 shirt . 
 Diarra began the 2001 – 02 season by making the bench in several of the team 's league matches in August and September , but failing to make an appearance . In October 2001 , he was dropped back down to the club 's reserve team and appeared in four matches before earning promotion back to the senior team for its 2001 Intercontinental Cup showdown with Argentine club Boca Juniors . Diarra made the bench for the match , but did not feature as Bayern won the match courtesy of an extra time goal from Samuel <unk> . The victory gave Diarra his first major honour of his career . Afterwards , he returned to the reserve team and later suffered an injury , which required a lengthy absence . Diarra rejoined the team in March 2002 under new manager Hermann Gerland and made nine more appearances . Following the season , Diarra was offered a new three @-@ year contract with the club , but rejected it citing his limited playing time . Despite his disappointing stint with Bayern , which included failing to make an appearance with the club 's senior team , in 2009 , Diarra stated " I have very fond memories of my time in Bayern " . Following Diarra 's success at Bordeaux , Bayern 's general manager Uli Hoeneß admitted that Diarra 's rise to prominence as a footballer is " one of the seven wonders of the world " . Hoeneß admitted that he was surprised by Diarra 's resurgence stating " If somebody had told me [ he would return for a UEFA Champions League game ] five years ago and made a bet with me , I would have lost a fortune " . Since Diarra departing the club in 2002 , due to FIFA compensation laws , Bayern have recouped over € 800 @,@ 000 as a result of the player 's future transfers . 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 On 3 July 2002 , English club Liverpool confirmed its interest in signing Diarra under the guidance of manager Gérard Houllier who had likened the player to Patrick Vieira . Liverpool were also in competition with Italian club Juventus and several French clubs . On 9 July , Liverpool confirmed that the club had signed the player from Bayern Munich . Diarra agreed to a five @-@ year contract and made his club debut against Le Havre during the club 's pre @-@ season . A day after the match against Le Havre , it was reported that Diarra was on a verge of a loan move to the same club . On 1 August , the loan was confirmed . 
 = = = = Loan stints in France = = = = 
 Diarra made his debut for Le Havre on 17 August 2002 in the team 's 1 – 1 draw with Strasbourg appearing as a substitute . He was a frequent starter for the majority of the fall season , but , following the winter break , began appearing primarily as a substitute . In September 2002 , Diarra 's contract dispute with Louhans @-@ Cuiseaux came into the spotlight after his former club admitted that the player was reportedly banned from playing in France professionally for three years due to moving abroad without Louhans @-@ Cuiseaux receiving a trainers ' compensation fee . Louhans @-@ Cuiseaux reported the situation to FIFA , however , the organization ruled in favor of Diarra who was allowed to continue his career with Le Havre . Diarra scored his first professional goal on 25 January 2003 in a 2 – 1 defeat to Laval in the Coupe de France . He finished the campaign with 28 total appearances . 
 In the 2003 off @-@ season , Diarra admitted that he would love to return to Liverpool stating " I 'm someone who is ambitious and I hope to win my place at Anfield next season " . However , in July 2003 , Houllier confirmed that Diarra would remain in France on loan , this time with Corsican club Bastia . Upon his arrival to the club , Diarra was inserted as a starter by manager Gérard Gili and paid immediate dividends scoring in back @-@ to @-@ back weeks in a 4 – 2 win against Guingamp and a 4 – 1 loss to Auxerre in September . On 7 March 2004 , he scored a goal in Bastia 's surprising 4 – 1 win over Marseille . Diarra ultimately finished the campaign with 38 total appearances and four goals . After the season , Diarra returned to Liverpool for pre @-@ season training , however , not under the guidance of his recruiter Houllier , but under Spanish coach Rafael Benítez . As a result , he was , for the third consecutive season , linked with a loan move . His non @-@ inclusion on the club 's roster for its North America tour meant a loan move was inevitable and , on 27 July 2004 , he was loaned to Lens . 
 Similar to his stint at Bastia , Diarra was included in the team as a starter by coach Joël Muller . The season was a major success for Diarra as he was the only player in the team to start every league match he played for the club . He also served as captain for a majority of the season . His consistent performances led to his call up to the senior national team . Diarra scored his first goal of the campaign in a 1 – 1 draw with Ajaccio . He scored the goal in the opening minute of the match . On 6 February 2005 , Diarra scored the opener in team 's 2 – 0 win over Paris Saint @-@ Germain at the Parc des Princes . He finished the campaign with 37 total appearances and two goals . Diarra also collected 11 yellow cards . 
 = = = Lens = = = 
 After establishing himself as a premier player in France and an international during the 2004 – 05 campaign , Benítez declared that Diarra still had a future at Liverpool stating " I think it 's still early days for him , but it 's good news for us to see a young player doing so well . If he continues to play well for his club and is in the national team , we will be reminding everyone he is our player " . However , in April 2005 , Diarra revealed that he wanted to stay with Lens for the long @-@ term . After finishing the season , on 24 June 2005 , Liverpool granted his request after Lens reached an agreement with the club on a transfer fee , purported to be € 3 @.@ 2 million . Diarra finished his Liverpool career with no first @-@ team appearances and only one club appearance , which came in a pre @-@ season friendly . 
 Diarra remained a starter at Lens and also retained his consistency appearing in a career @-@ high 44 matches , scoring two goals , and providing four assists . His two goals came in a 2 – 1 away win over Nancy and a 2 – 2 draw with Nice . Diarra also played European football for the first time in his career playing in the 2005 – 06 edition of the UEFA Cup . He made his European debut on 3 July 2005 in a UEFA Intertoto Cup second round tie against Polish club Lech Poznań . Diarra ultimately appeared in ten matches in the club 's European campaign as Lens reached the Round of 32 where the club was defeated 3 – 1 on aggregate by Italian outfit Udinese . 
 = = = Lyon = = = 
 Following the 2006 FIFA World Cup , Diarra was linked with a move to the then five @-@ team defending champions Lyon where he could reunite with former manager Gérard Houllier . On 23 August 2006 , the move came to fruition following the departure of Diarra 's namesake , <unk> , who moved to Spanish club Real Madrid for a fee of € 26 million . The transfer fee was priced at € 6 @.@ 25 million and Diarra was assigned the number 18 shirt . Diarra struggled to make an impact at the club as Houllier preferred the younger Jérémy <unk> and Tiago Mendes as his starting defensive midfielder and box @-@ to @-@ box midfielder , respectively . He made his club debut late in the season on 16 September 2006 in the team 's 3 – 1 away win over Lorient . Diarra scored his first goal for the club on 6 December 2006 in the club 's final UEFA Champions League group stage match against Romanian club Steaua Bucureşti . The match ended in a 1 – 1 draw . Two weeks later , he scored his second goal in the team 's 3 – 1 win over Nancy in the Coupe de la Ligue quarterfinals . 
 Following the winter break , Diarra struggled with a thigh injury and didn 't appear with the team for almost three months . In March 2007 , he finally returned to the team in its 3 – 1 win over Derby du Rhône rivals Saint @-@ Étienne appearing as a substitute . During the season , Diarra complained twice with regards to playing time , which led to Houllier equivocally questioning Diarra 's ego . The feud culminated on 6 April when Houllier dropped Diarra from the squad to face Valenciennes the following day and then ordered him to play for the club 's reserve team in the Championnat de France amateur , the fourth level of French football . Diarra refused the orders and Houllier responded by reportedly threatening not to play him for the rest of the season . The Lyon manager later stated the Diarra should issue an apology to him and the team . The defensive midfielder did not budge and , subsequently , missed the team 's next four league matches , as well as the 2007 Coupe de la Ligue Final . Diarra returned to the team on 28 April playing the entire match in a 3 – 1 win over Le Mans . He repeated this feat in three of the team 's last five matches as Lyon were crowned champions for the sixth consecutive season . Included in one of those three matches was Diarra 's first league goal for the club , which came in a 3 – 0 victory over his former club Lens . 
 = = = Bordeaux = = = 
 = = = = 2007 – 2009 = = = = 
 After the 2006 – 07 season with Lyon , Diarra sought to play for another club and was linked primarily to English clubs Manchester City and Portsmouth . In July 2007 , Lyon president Jean @-@ Michel Aulas confirmed that the club had accepted a bid of £ 5 million from Portsmouth . However , Aulas also revealed that Diarra refused the move and preferred to stay in France and join Bordeaux . On 20 July , after a week @-@ long negotiation , Bordeaux confirmed the signing of Diarra . The midfielder signed a four @-@ year contract and the transfer fee was priced at € 7 @.@ 75 million . Diarra stated his primary reason for joining Bordeaux over Portsmouth was because Bordeaux " wants to play for the first positions in Ligue 1 and I am attracted to that " . Diarra was signed as a replacement for the departed Rio Mavuba who ventured to Spain . His arrival to the club also coincided with the insertion of former football player Laurent Blanc as manager . 
 Diarra was assigned the number 4 shirt and made his competitive debut for the club on 4 August 2007 in a 1 – 0 league win over his former club Lens receiving a yellow card . On 29 August , he scored his first goal for the club in its 1 – 0 win over Metz . Diarra was a regular within the starting lineup for the entire season starting all 36 league matches he appeared in . He formed excellent midfield partnerships with box @-@ to @-@ box midfielders Alejandro Alonso and Fernando <unk> who gave Diarra the freedom to distribute the ball and dismantle impending attacks from the opposition . On 2 December , Diarra scored a goal in Bordeaux 's 4 – 3 win over Derby de la Garonne rivals Toulouse . 
 Diarra also participated in European competition with Bordeaux during the season . He played in four matches during the club 's UEFA Cup campaign . Bordeaux reached the Round of 32 where the club was eliminated by Belgian club Anderlecht on a 3 – 2 aggregate scoreline . In the Coupe de France , Bordeaux reached the quarter @-@ finals . Diarra appeared in all four matches the team contested , which included playing 120 minutes in back @-@ to @-@ back rounds . He scored two more goals for the club ; both of which came in the league in wins over Metz and Rennes . Bordeaux finished the season in second place ; four points behind the champions Lyon . It was the closest gap Lyon had endured since the 2003 – 04 season when the club won the league by three points over Paris Saint @-@ Germain . Diarra finished the season with 44 total appearances and four goals . 
 In the 2008 – 09 season , Diarra remained a starter as Bordeaux was boosted by the arrival of the influential Yoann Gourcuff . He appeared in Bordeaux 's 5 – 4 win on penalties in the 2008 Trophée des Champions . Bordeaux capitalized on the momentum by going undefeated in eight of its nine opening league matches . Included in those matches was Diarra 's first red card for the club , which came in a 1 – 0 win over Grenoble after he collected two yellow cards . The two infractions came within a span of five minutes . On 21 December 2008 , Diarra scored the second team goal in Bordeaux 's 4 – 3 comeback win over Monaco at the Stade Louis II . Bordeaux had trailed 3 – 0 with 40 minutes to go in the match . In the Coupe de la Ligue , Bordeaux won the competition . Diarra missed the final match due to injury , but did play in the semi @-@ final match , a 3 – 0 win over Paris Saint @-@ Germain , that resulted in Bordeaux qualifying for the final . In the 2008 – 09 edition of the UEFA Champions League , Diarra appeared in all six group stage matches Bordeaux played in and scored a goal against English club Chelsea in a 1 – 1 draw . The club 's third @-@ place finish in its group meant a return to the UEFA Cup where Bordeaux was eliminated in the Round of 32 for the second consecutive season . 
 On 19 April 2009 , Diarra scored the only goal in Bordeaux 's 1 – 0 win over title rivals Lyon at the Stade de Gerland . The victory helped the club create a gap between itself and Lyon . Bordeaux , subsequently , went on a six @-@ match winning streak to close out the season , which resulted in the club capturing the sixth title in its history and its first since 1999 . Bordeaux also recorded its second ever double , as a result of its league cup title . Diarra finished the season with a career @-@ high 45 total appearances and three goals . 
 = = = = 2009 – 2011 = = = = 
 Ahead of the 2009 – 10 season , following the replacement of captain Ulrich <unk> as the starting goalkeeper , Blanc tipped Diarra as his replacement to wear the armband . He began the season claiming his fourth silverware with Bordeaux on 25 July 2009 , winning the 2009 Trophée des Champions title in a 2 – 0 victory over Guingamp . In the third match of the league , Diarra scored his first goal of the season in a 3 – 0 win over Nice . Diarra appeared frequently in the starting lineup during the first half of the campaign , but struggled with injuries through January – March . He missed the first leg of the team 's Round of 16 tie with Greek club Olympiacos . In the second leg , Diarra returned to the team , but was ejected from the match in the second half after receiving two yellow card infractions . The ejection meant Diarra would miss the first leg of the team 's quarter @-@ final tie with league rivals Lyon . Bordeaux lost the tie 3 – 2 on aggregate . Diarra returned to league play on 13 March 2010 and played the rest of the league campaign missing only one match . Due to injuries to Gourcuff and the declining form of Marouane Chamakh , Bordeaux suffered a dip in form in the spring season , which resulted in Bordeaux failing defend its title or qualify for European competition . 
 Prior to the start of the 2010 – 11 season , Diarra was heavily linked with a move to the champions Marseille . On 14 July , Marseille manager Didier Deschamps confirmed that the club was negotiating with both Diarra and Bordeaux for a transfer . A week later , Bordeaux president Triaud stated that Marseille had failed to meet the player 's € 7 @.@ 75 million release clause and that Diarra was likely not going to be leaving the club . Despite Marseille remaining hopeful a deal could go through , on 30 July , a deal was declared dead . Diarra later stated that he was happy to remain at Bordeaux and see out the rest of his contract . The defensive midfielder opened the new campaign scoring two goals in the first six matches of the season in wins over Paris Saint @-@ Germain and Lyon . 
 On 16 October 2010 , Diarra was involved in a controversial dispute , which resulted in the player being banned from playing league football for six matches . After receiving a yellow card booking from referee <unk> Bien in the team 's 1 – 0 win over Auxerre , Diarra responded by pushing the referee with both hands . He was immediately shown a red card and dismissed from the match . After walking off the field , Diarra turned back , walked over to Bien and apologized for the confrontation . After the match , Diarra apologized again for the incident . He was supported by his former coach Laurent Blanc who stated that Diarra made a simple mistake that he immediately regretted as soon as he realized what he did . Diarra was initially suspended for three matches , however , following a November tribunal by the Ligue de Football Professionnel , his suspension was upgraded to six matches . Diarra returned to the team on 27 November playing only the first half in the team 's 1 – 1 draw with Lille . 
 = = = Marseille = = = 
 On 4 July 2011 , Diarra completed his much @-@ anticipated move from Bordeaux to league rivals Marseille agreeing to a three @-@ year contract . The transfer fee was undisclosed , but is reported to be in the region of € 5 million . 
 = = = West Ham United = = = 
 On 10 August 2012 , Diarra moved back to England to join West Ham United on a three @-@ year contract , for an undisclosed fee . After joining West Ham United , Diarra said he was delighted to join the club and was looking forward to play in the Premier League . Chairman Vincent <unk> said he had been sold in order to reduce the wage bill . 
 Diarra made his debut for West Ham on 25 August in a 3 – 0 away defeat to Swansea City coming on as a 69th @-@ minute substitute for Mohamed Diamé . Having made three appearances , Diarra first team opportunities soon became limited when he soon suffered thigh strain during training in September . In the January transfer window , Diarra made a request to leave the club and criticised Sam Allardyce for holding him back by not explaining his [ Allardyce ] team selection . Diarra also said that his time at West Ham United has become a waste of time 
 After the move , Diarra claimed he was conned when his " well known " agent lied to him to join West Ham United . Diarra criticized West Ham United for his pre @-@ season training schedule , having finished Euro 2012 . Despite his comments Diarra returned to West Ham for the beginning of the 2013 – 14 season . In his second game of the season , a League Cup game against Cheltenham Town , he was carried @-@ off injured after 34 minutes having damaged his anterior cruciate ligament . He was expected to miss the whole of the season due to this injury . Unexpectedly , Diarra returned to fitness in 2013 making his return in a 2 – 1 away win against Tottenham Hotspur on 18 December 2013 in the League Cup . On 9 July 2014 , he left West Ham on a mutual agreement to terminate his remaining one @-@ year deal . 
 = = = = Loan move to Rennes = = = = 
 On 31 January 2013 ( the transfer deadline ) , Diarra joined Rennes , on loan until the end of season . Several days after returning to France , Diarra made his debut , coming on as a substitute and providing assist for debutant Axel <unk> , who scored his first goal for the club to settle a draw with Lorient . Diarra made twelve appearances before returning to West Ham United after manager Frédéric <unk> publicity criticised him , claiming " he has not been able to give all that he could give " . 
 = = = Charlton Athletic = = = 
 On 23 February 2015 , Diarra signed a deal with Championship side Charlton Athletic to last until the end of the season . He later signed an extension till the summer of 2016 , with the option of an extra year . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = Youth = = = 
 Diarra is a former French youth international having earned caps at under @-@ 20 and under @-@ 21 level . He earned his first international youth call up in 2001 by coach Raymond Domenech ahead of the 2001 FIFA World Youth Championship . Diarra played in the first group stage match ; a 5 – 0 hammering of Iran . In the 30th minute of the match against Iran , Diarra was substituted out due to an injury . The injury was deemed severe and Diarra missed the rest of the tournament . France ultimately crashed out of the competition in the quarter @-@ finals losing 3 – 1 to a Javier Saviola @-@ led Argentina . Diarra 's only other confirmed appearance with the under @-@ 20 team was in a 1 – 0 win over Egypt in April 2002 . 
 Diarra earned his first call up to the under @-@ 21 team in August 2002 for a friendly match against Cyprus . He made his debut in the match as France cruised to a 1 – 0 victory . Diarra featured regularly within the team as France attempted to qualify for both the 2004 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship and the football tournament at the 2004 Summer Olympics . France failed to qualify for both competitions , which resulted in the end of Diarra 's youth career . He appeared in 10 competitive matches with the team and scored his only goal in a 3 – 1 UEFA U21 tournament qualification win over Israel . In December 2003 , Diarra was called up to the Mali national team to participate in the 2004 Africa Cup of Nations . Diarra turned down the opportunity to represent the nation of his parents in order to continue his career with his home country France . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 On 13 August 2004 , Diarra was named to the senior national team for the first time by Domenech to participate in a friendly match against Bosnia and Herzegovina . He did not make his debut in the match , but was named to the team again in October for 2006 FIFA World Cup qualification matches against the Republic of Ireland and Cyprus . Diarra earn his debut cap in the match against Ireland appearing as a substitute for Olivier Dacourt in a 0 – 0 draw . He featured with the team heavily in World Cup qualification primarily as a substitute for either Patrick Vieira or Claude Makélélé and , following France 's qualification for the tournament , was named to the team to participate in the competition . In the competition , Diarra appeared in two matches . He appeared as a substitute for Vieira in the team 's final group stage match against Togo and repeated this in the final match against Italy . France lost the final 5 – 3 in a penalty shootout , which Diarra did not participate in . 
 After appearing in a November 2006 friendly match against Greece , Diarra was absent from the national team for nearly two years , partly due to his struggle for playing time in Lyon . As a result , he missed UEFA Euro 2008 , although he was named to the competition 's preliminary squad . After regaining his form at Bordeaux , Diarra began making his way back into the team and participated in seven 2010 FIFA World Cup qualifying matches . He was later selected to participate in his second consecutive FIFA World Cup . France endured a disastrous campaign as the players went on strike in response to its disagreement over the expulsion of striker Nicolas Anelka from the team . In the team 's final group stage match against hosts South Africa , with several veteran players missing from the squad , Diarra was rewarded with the captaincy for the first time in his international career and led the team to a 2 – 1 loss , which resulted in its elimination from the competition . 
 Diarra was one of several players retained by incoming coach Laurent Blanc , his former manager . After missing the August 2010 friendly due to suspension , he returned to the team in September playing the entire match in 2 – 0 wins over both Bosnia and Herzegovina and Romania . Diarra served as captain in both matches . On 9 February 2011 , he captained the team for the fifth time in his career in their 1 – 0 victory over Brazil . Though , Blanc has yet to declare a permanent captain , Diarra has been declared the favorite to land the armband by several French news publications . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of 19 June 2012 
 = Terminator Salvation = 
 Terminator Salvation ( also referred to as simply Terminator 4 , T4 or TS ) is a 2009 American science fiction post @-@ apocalyptic action @-@ war film directed by McG and starring Christian Bale and Sam Worthington . It is the fourth installment of the Terminator film series . In a departure from the previous installments , which were set between 1984 and 2004 and used time travel as a key plot element , Salvation is a post @-@ apocalyptic film set in the year 2018 and focuses on the war between Skynet machines and humanity , with the human Resistance fighting against Skynet 's killing machines . Bale portrays John Connor , Resistance fighter and central character to the franchise , while Worthington portrays cyborg Marcus Wright . Terminator Salvation also featured Anton Yelchin as a young Kyle Reese , a character first introduced in The Terminator , and the film depicts the origin of the T @-@ 800 ( Model 101 ) Terminator . 
 After a troubled pre @-@ production , with The Halcyon Company acquiring the rights for the franchise from Andrew G. Vajna and Mario Kassar and several writers working on the screenplay , filming began in May 2008 in New Mexico and ran for 77 days . Terminator Salvation was released on May 21 , 2009 in the United States and Canada , followed by early June releases in the United Kingdom , Australia , New Zealand , and South Africa . Warner Bros. handled the North American release while Columbia Pictures handled the international release . The film grossed over $ 371 million worldwide and met with mixed reviews . A sequel was released on July 1 , 2015 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 2003 , Dr. Serena Kogan ( Helena Bonham Carter ) of Cyberdyne Systems convinces death row inmate Marcus Wright ( Sam Worthington ) to sign over his body for medical research following his execution . One year later , the automated Skynet system is activated , becomes self @-@ aware , begins to perceive humans as a threat , and eradicates much of humanity with nuclear weapons in the event known as " Judgment Day " . 
 In 2018 , John Connor ( Christian Bale ) leads an attack on a Skynet base , where he discovers human prisoners and schematics for a new type of Terminator , incorporating living tissue ( The T @-@ 800 ) . He is the only survivor of the assault after the base is destroyed in a nuclear explosion . Following Connor 's departure , Marcus emerges from the base 's wreckage and begins walking towards Los Angeles , after taking the clothing from a Resistance soldier , who died in the explosion . 
 John returns to Resistance headquarters , located aboard a nuclear submarine , and tells General Ashdown ( Michael Ironside ) of his findings . Meanwhile , the Resistance has discovered a radio signal believed to have been an order to shut down Skynet 's machines . Working on this intelligence , the human militia plan to launch an offensive against the Skynet base in San Francisco in four days ; in response to an intercepted " kill list " created by Skynet with a plan to terminate the Resistance 's command staff . John Connor learns he is second on this list , following Kyle Reese . The Resistance leaders are unaware of Kyle 's importance , but John knows Kyle will eventually go back in time and become his father . John returns to his base and meets with his pregnant wife Kate ( Bryce Dallas Howard ) and his second @-@ in @-@ command Barnes ( Common ) . 
 Arriving at the ruins of Los Angeles , Marcus sees a T @-@ 600 Terminator and yells at it grasping its attention , but before Marcus is killed he is saved by Kyle Reese ( Anton Yelchin ) and a mute child named " Star " ( <unk> Berry ) . Kyle then signs to Star and she sets off a trap for the T @-@ 600 that kills it off . After such , Kyle confronts Marcus with a gun and snaps at him about the blood red ribbon on his left arm ( <unk> Resistance ) . Marcus snags Kyle 's weapon and points it at him instead asking of the year . Kyle tells Marcus about the war between humanity and Skynet and the year . After , Kyle takes Marcus to their base were Marcus finds a broken radio , he fixes it effortlessly and a broadcast appears on it , after hearing John 's radio broadcast the three fall asleep . The three leave in search of others in the Resistance . They survive an attack at a gas station ; yet Kyle , Star , and several other people are taken prisoner . 
 Later , two Resistance A @-@ 10 airplanes are shot down while trying to intercept a machine transport . Marcus locates downed pilot Blair Williams ( Moon Bloodgood ) and they make their way to Connor 's base , where Marcus is wounded by a magnetic land mine . Attempting to save his life , the Resistance fighters discover that Marcus is , indeed , a cyborg , with a mechanical endoskeleton and a partially artificial cerebral cortex . Although Marcus believes himself to be human , John thinks that Marcus has been sent to execute him and , orders him to be killed . Blair helps Marcus escape . During the pursuit , Marcus saves John 's life from Skynet 's <unk> and the two make a bargain : Marcus will enter Skynet 's headquarters in San Francisco , to help John rescue Kyle and the other prisoners , if he lets Marcus live . 
 John pleads with the General to delay the offensive defense , but Ashdown refuses and relieves John of his command . However , the Resistance forces disobey Ashdown 's orders and , instead , await John 's signal . Marcus enters the base , interfaces with the computer , and disables perimeter defenses so that John can infiltrate the cellblock and release human prisoners . Marcus learns from Skynet ( which assumes the form of Dr. Kogan on a screen ) that he was created and built to lure John to this base ; when the Resistance launches its attack , John will be killed , achieving the goal that Skynet had failed to accomplish so many times before . The radio signal that the Resistance received is revealed to have been a ruse , and Skynet uses it , to track down and destroy the command submarine with the Resistance 's leaders aboard . 
 Marcus tears out the hardware linking him to Skynet and assists John in battling the new T @-@ 800 ( Model 101 ) Terminator . Marcus is soon outclassed in strength and temporarily disabled until John revives him , but John is mortally wounded during the fight . Marcus jumps the T @-@ 800 when it is distracted and defeats it , while John destroys the Skynet base by rigging together several Terminator fuel cells to explode and detonates them as he , Marcus , Kyle , and Star are airlifted out . Kate attempts to save John 's life , but his heart is too badly damaged . Marcus offers his own heart for transplant , sacrificing himself to save John . Recovering , John radios to other Resistance fighters that , although this battle has been won , the war is still not over . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Christian Bale as John Connor . Director McG deemed Bale " the most credible action star in the world " during development . McG wanted Bale for Marcus , but the actor — even though he " can 't really remember why " — wanted to play John , and that led to the character 's role getting expanded in rewrites of the script . Bale was the first person to be cast and signed on for the role in November 2007 . McG talked extensively with Bale in the UK about the role while the latter was filming The Dark Knight , and they both agreed to proceed . Although a fan of the Terminator series , he was at first uninterested until McG convinced him the story would be character @-@ based and not rely on special effects . They kept working on the story every day , along with Worthington . McG said Bale broke his hand punching a Terminator prop during filming . Bale also spent six to eight hours each day with McG in the editing room to advise the finished product . 
 Sam Worthington as Marcus Wright , a Skynet human @-@ terminator hybrid experiment . Worthington compared Marcus to Dorothy Gale and Alice due to being " this person waking up in another world [ who then ] tries to find himself " . Terminator creator James Cameron personally recommended Worthington ( whom he directed in Avatar ) to McG . Russell Crowe also recommended him to McG . The director decided Worthington looked tougher than the " great many of today 's [ <unk> ] young male actors " . Worthington recalled Cameron told him " the Terminator to make is the one with the war " . Worthington tore his intercostal muscles during the first weeks of filming , but nevertheless insisted on performing his own stunts . McG once expressed interest in casting Christian Bale , Daniel Day @-@ Lewis or Josh Brolin in the part . Brolin did talk to Bale and read a draft of the screenplay , which he found " interesting and dark ; ultimately , though , I didn 't think it felt right " . 
 Anton Yelchin as Kyle Reese , a teenage refugee and admirer of John Connor and the Resistance . As portrayed by Michael Biehn in The Terminator , he was sent back in time to 1984 to protect Sarah Connor to ensure the survival of the human race , and fathered John with her . Yelchin said he wanted to portray Kyle as Biehn did and not make him appear weaker because it was a younger version of the character . The difference in his portrayal lies in showing Kyle as intense , but not concentrated until he joins the resistance proper . Yelchin tried to convey Kyle 's intensity by focusing on how fast Biehn appeared when running in the original film . 
 Moon Bloodgood as Blair Williams , a " no @-@ nonsense and battle @-@ hardened " pilot of the Resistance who suffers from survivor 's guilt and serves as a romantic interest for Marcus . McG characterizes her as continuing the feminine strength that has been prominent throughout the franchise . 
 Bryce Dallas Howard as Kate Connor , John 's wife . Charlotte Gainsbourg was originally set to play the part , but left due to scheduling conflicts with another film . As portrayed by Claire Danes in the third film , Kate was a veterinarian ; but in this film , she is now a physician . Howard suggested , as part of the character 's backstory , that Kate studied medical books and interviewed many surviving doctors after the events of Judgment Day . The film 's subject matter reminded her of developing countries , devastated by war and lacking basic supplies such as clean water , which " reflects things that are going on currently in this privileged world that we are living in where there hasn 't been an apocalypse and robots haven 't taken over the world . I think that 's something definitely for us to reinvestigate and that we continue to make choices for our own future to take that into consideration " . Howard also focused on Kate " being accustomed to fear and loss " because the character was a military brat . 
 Common as Barnes , John 's right @-@ hand man . Common stated the character was not overly developed , being " only just a bad @-@ ass character , you know , really the big heavy of the movie " , before McG 's intervention . Common agreed with this , as " I didn ’ t want to just be the big , bulky guy there " and worked on the emotional side , " thinking about how it would be in a world that ’ s post @-@ apocalyptic , a world where , you know , things have been destroyed and we ’ re really fighting for survival . " 
 Helena Bonham Carter as Dr. Serena Kogan / Skynet : an ex @-@ Cyberdyne scientist who convinces Marcus to donate his body for her research . Her face is later used by the Skynet computer to communicate with Marcus . Tilda Swinton was originally considered for the part , but Bonham Carter replaced her before filming . She accepted the part because her domestic partner , Tim Burton , is a Terminator fan . Her role was a " small but pivotal " one and would only require ten days of shooting . On July 20 , 2008 , Bonham Carter delayed filming by a day , and was given an indefinite leave due to the death of four of her family members in a minibus accident in South Africa . 
 Michael Ironside as General Ashdown , the leader of the Resistance . 
 Roland Kickinger as The Terminator / T @-@ 800 ( Model 101 ) : the first Terminator covered in living tissue . <unk> and actor Kickinger , who previously portrayed Schwarzenegger in the 2005 biographical film See Arnold Run , was his physical double on set . When asked about his role , Kickinger said it is " Arnold 's character in the first Terminator . That 's basically my role , but 20 years before , so it establishes how the Terminator came about . " Polish strongman athlete Mariusz <unk> was also considered for doubling Schwarzenegger . If Schwarzenegger had decided not to lend his appearance to the film , then John would have shot the T @-@ 800s face off before the audience got a good look at him . 
 Arnold Schwarzenegger 's facial likeness was utilized via CGI , with a mold of his face made in 1984 scanned to create the digital makeup . 
 <unk> Berry as Star , an 8 @-@ year @-@ old girl in Kyle 's care . Born after Judgment Day , Star is mute due to the trauma of the post @-@ apocalyptic world . However , this has given her the unnatural ability to sense when a Terminator is approaching . 
 Terry Crews as Captain Jericho , Barnes ' brother . 
 Linda Hamilton as Sarah Connor , John 's mother . Sarah 's voice is heard from tapes she recorded before her death prior to the film 's events . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In 1999 , two years after C2 Pictures purchased the rights to the franchise , two Terminator films ' premises were mapped out and were supposed to be developed simultaneously . <unk> Sarafian was hired to write Terminator 3 : Rise of the Machines , which he eventually received shared story credit for , while David C. Wilson was to write Terminator 4 . Before any revisions were done , T3 initially took place in 2001 and revolved around the first attacks between Skynet and humans . T4 would follow immediately afterward and centered primarily on the war seen in the first two films . Warner Bros. gave the film the codename " Project Angel " . 
 Following the release of Terminator 3 in 2003 , producers Andrew G. Vajna and Mario Kassar contracted Nick Stahl and Claire Danes to return as John Connor and Kate Brewster in another film . Director Jonathan Mostow helped develop the script , written by John Brancato and Michael Ferris , and was set to begin production in 2005 after completing another film . It was known by then Arnold Schwarzenegger 's role would be limited , as he had assumed office as Governor of California . The producers sought to have Warner Bros. finance the picture as they did for Terminator 3 . In 2005 , Stahl said John and Kate would be recast as the story jumped forward in time . By 2006 , Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( as successor to Orion Pictures and Hemdale Film Corporation , distributor and producer of the original film , respectively ) was set to distribute the fourth film as part of the new CEO Harry Sloan 's scheme to make the studio a viable Hollywood player . 
 On May 9 , 2007 , it was announced that production rights to the Terminator series had passed from the feuding Vajna and Kassar to the Halcyon Company . The producers hoped to start a new trilogy based on the franchise . The purchase was financed with a loan by Pacificor , a hedge fund from Santa Monica . By July 19 , the project was in legal limbo due to a lawsuit between MGM and Halcyon subsidiary T Asset . MGM had an exclusive window of 30 days to negotiate for distribution of the Terminator films . When negotiating for Terminator 4 , Halcyon rejected their initial proposal , and MGM suspended negotiations . After the 30 days were over , MGM claimed that the period during which negotiations were suspended did not count and their exclusive period was still open . Halcyon asked a court for an injunction allowing them to approach other distributors . Later , the lawsuit was settled and MGM got a 30 @-@ day right of first refusal to finance and distribute the fifth Terminator film . 
 Finally , Warner Bros. paid $ 60 million to acquire the United States distribution rights of Terminator Salvation ; Sony Pictures also paid just over $ 100 million to acquire this film 's distribution rights in all international territories . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 McG signed on to direct as the first two films were among his favorites , and he had even cast Robert Patrick ( who played the T @-@ 1000 ) in his films . Though he was initially unsure about " flogging a dead horse , " he felt the post @-@ apocalyptic setting allowed the film to be different enough so as not to be just an inferior sequel . The idea that events in Terminator 2 : Judgment Day and Terminator 3 : Rise of the Machines altered the future also allowed them to be flexible with their presentation of the futuristic world . McG met with the series ' co @-@ creator James Cameron , and , although he neither blessed nor denigrated the project , Cameron told the new director he had faced a similar challenge when following Ridley Scott 's Alien with Aliens . He maintained two elements of the previous films ; that John is an outsider to the authorities , and someone of future importance is being protected , and in this film it is Kyle Reese . 
 The first full screenplay for the film was written by Terminator 3 writers John Brancato and Michael Ferris , who received full screenplay credit . Paul Haggis rewrote Brancato and Ferris 's script , and Shawn Ryan made another revision three weeks before filming . Jonathan Nolan also wrote on set , which led to McG to say , " I would have to characterize Jonah as the lead writer of the film . I don ’ t know how the WGA rules work " . Nolan contributed to the film after Bale signed on and created Connor 's arc of becoming a leader . Anthony E. Zuiker contributed to the script as well . So extensive were the rewrites that Alan Dean Foster decided to rewrite the entire novelization after submitting it to his publisher , because the compiled shooting script was very different from the one he was given beforehand . 
 In the early script drafts , John was a secondary character . Producer James Middleton explained " Ben @-@ Hur was influenced by Jesus Christ , but it was his story . Much in that way , this [ new main ] character will be influenced by John Connor . " The original ending was to have John killed , and his image kept alive by the resistance by grafting his skin onto Marcus ' cybernetic body . Marcus would have then murdered Kate , Barnes , Kyle , and Star . However , after the ending was leaked on the Internet , Warner Bros. decided to completely change the entire third act of the film . McG and Nolan did continue the Christ element of John 's character though , in which he has some followers who believe what he knows about Skynet , and others who do not . 
 McG described the film 's theme as " where you draw the line between machines and humans " . The friendship between Marcus — who was executed ( for murder ) when humanity still ruled the world — and Kyle Reese illustrates how war and suffering can bring out the best in people , such as when they worked together to survive during the Blitz . The title was derived from this second chance given to humanity and to Marcus , in addition to John 's efforts to save humanity from the machines . The film 's original title was Terminator Salvation : The Future Begins , but this was dropped during filming . 
 Throughout writing , the cast and crew would watch scenes from the three films to pick moments to reference or tribute , including " Come with me if you want to live " and " I 'll be back " , which is uttered by John in this film . McG found himself having to decide which ideas for references would be included and which would not . An opening scene has John fighting a Terminator on a crashed helicopter , which was storyboarded as a homage to the climax of the original film , where his mother Sarah , having broken her leg , is chased by a crippled Terminator . McG did this to reflect the skills John learned from her . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Terminator Salvation had a $ 200 million budget . Shooting of the film started on May 5 , 2008 in New Mexico . Filming also took place at Kirtland Air Force Base in the state , after the United States Air Force agreed to provide the crew guidance and aircraft . The filmmakers had originally intended to begin filming on March 15 in Budapest or Australia , but a 25 percent tax rebate and absence of an interest rate cap and floor made the filmmakers seek the cheaper New Mexico , because of their elevated budget . To avoid delays caused by a possible 2008 Screen Actors Guild strike in July , all exterior scenes were completed by then , so production could restart easily . The shoot ended on July 20 , 2008 , though some pick @-@ ups took place in January 2009 . 
 In addition to Bale breaking his hand and Worthington hurting his back , special effects technician Mike <unk> almost lost his leg filming an explosion . The sequence required a manhole cover being blown into the air , which hit <unk> and partially severed his leg . McG noted it was testament to the gritty style of the film . " I say with respect , I didn 't want that Star Wars experience of everything 's a blue screen , tennis balls , and go for it . I had Stan Winston build all the machines . We built all the sets , the explosive power , the explosive power so you feel that wind and that percussion and that heat blowing your eyebrows off . And with that you get a couple bumps and bruises on the way , but you get it in an integrity and a realism that hopefully echoes Apocalypse Now . You couldn 't say , ' Let 's just shoot Apocalypse Now in Burbank , I think it 's going to feel just as good . ' " 
 The film used Technicolor 's Oz process during post @-@ production . This is a partial silver retention on the interpositive , similar to bleach bypass , which will be used to lend to the sense of detachment from the modern world McG was looking for . Industrial Light & Magic developed shader programs to make the desaturated lighting of the CGI realistic and well @-@ integrated to the on @-@ set footage . The filmmakers consulted with many scientists about the effects of an abandoned world and nuclear winter . McG cited Mad Max 2 , the original Star Wars trilogy and Children of Men , as well as the novel The Road , as his visual influences . He instructed his cast to read the latter as well as Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep ? Like Children of Men , McG would storyboard scenes so that it would be edited together to resemble a seamless , continuous shot . It took two weeks to film a two @-@ minute shot of Connor getting caught up in a bombing on the Skynet base where he discovers plans for the T @-@ 800 . 
 = = = Design and special effects = = = 
 McG sought to create as many " in @-@ camera " elements as possible to make the film more realistic . Many of the settings were hand @-@ built , including an entire gas station for the Harvester attack scenes . The Terminator factory was built on an abandoned factory , and the design crew consulted robot manufacturer companies for a more realistic depiction . A 20 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) model built and detonated by Kerner Optical was used for the explosion of Skynet 's 30 @-@ story San Francisco @-@ based lab . 
 The majority of the machines were designed by Martin Laing , a crew member on Cameron 's Titanic and Ghosts of the Abyss . McG described many of the machines as having an H. R. Giger influence . McG 's intent was to create a gritty , tactile 2018 on screen , and Laing concurred the robots would have to be black and degraded as none of them are new . Laing devised Aerostats , which are smaller versions of the Aerial Hunter Killers from the previous films . The Aerostats send a signal to the 60 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 18 m ) humanoid Harvesters . They are very big and slow , so they use <unk> to capture humans , and the Harvesters place them in Transporters . Laing was unsure of how to design the Transporters until he saw a cattle transport while driving through Albuquerque . 
 The film also features the first aquatic Skynet robot , the <unk> , which Laing modeled on eels , and was built by the animatronics crew with its exterior made of metal @-@ looking rubber so it could be used in the aquatic scenes . 
 The film features rubber @-@ skinned T @-@ 600 and T @-@ 700 robots . McG interpreted Kyle Reese 's description in the original film of the T @-@ 600 as being easy to spot by making them tall and bulky . For scenes of humans fighting with Terminators , the actors interacted with stuntmen wearing motion capture suits , later replaced by digital robots . For the Moto @-@ Terminators , Ducati designers were hired to create the robots , and the on @-@ screen robot was a combination of stuntmen driving actual <unk> and a Moto @-@ Terminator mock @-@ up , as well as a digital Moto @-@ Terminator . Visual effects studio Imaginary Forces created the Terminator point @-@ of @-@ view sequences , and tried to depict a simple interface , " free of the frills — anything that a machine would not purely need " , and with more software bugs and anomalies since the robots of Salvation were not as advanced as the Terminators from the previous films . 
 The majority of the special effects were done by Industrial Light & Magic . Salvation was one of the last films that Stan Winston , the visual effects supervisor on the first three films , worked on . He died on June 15 , 2008 from multiple myeloma , and McG dedicated the film to him in the end credits . John <unk> and Charlie Gibson replaced Winston , and McG commented that they are " trying to achieve something that 's never been done before " and " push the envelope " . Asylum Visual Effects created digital plates , Marcus ' endoskeleton and a digital T @-@ 600 ; and Rising Sun Pictures did the digital correction of day for night scenes , the destruction of the submarine and Marcus ' robot hand . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Danny Elfman began composing the score in January 2009 . Beforehand , McG wanted to hire Gustavo Santaolalla to work on the music for the human characters , while having either Thom Yorke or Jonny Greenwood for Skynet 's themes . He also wanted to discuss scoring the film with Hans Zimmer but he was unable to arrange a meeting . McG met with The Terminator and Terminator 2 composer Brad Fiedel , but was not interested in repeating the sounds Fiedel achieved in his films . However , McG wanted Elfman to give those themes and ambient sounds a " Wagnerian quality " . 
 Reprise Records released the soundtrack on May 19 , 2009 , which included 15 tracks . While Common had expressed interest in writing a song for the soundtrack , Alice in Chains ' " Rooster " is the only featured song . Although not included in the soundtrack , " You Could Be Mine " by Guns N ' Roses , which was featured in Terminator 2 : Judgment Day , can be heard briefly in a scene of the film as well . Nine Inch Nails ' " The Day The World Went Away " is played on the film 's theatrical trailer , but is not included in the film or soundtrack . 
 All music composed by Danny Elfman except Rooster . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 During filming , Bale became angry with director of photography Shane Hurlbut for walking onto a set during a scene ; he swore and screamed at Hurlbut and threatened to leave the film . Audio of Bale 's tirade leaked to the public and went viral . Bale apologized publicly and said he resolved his differences with Hurlbut , explaining that he sometimes has a problem with someone walking on set , and that when the incident took place they continued to work together for a number of hours that day . 
 In March 2009 , producer Moritz Borman filed a lawsuit against the Halcyon Company , seeking $ 160 million . Borman , who had arranged the transfer of the Terminator rights to Halcyon in May 2007 , claimed the company 's two managers , Derek Anderson and Victor Kubicek , had " hijacked " the production and refused to give him his $ 2 @.@ 5 million share of the production . Borman alleged budget overruns were the reasons Anderson and Kubicek did not pay him and that they had $ 1 million in debt . Nevertheless , an " amicable " resolution was reached a month later . 
 Further complications occurred on May 20 , 2009 , when executive producer Peter D. Graves , who informed Anderson and Kubicek about the Terminator rights , filed a breach @-@ of @-@ contract claim for arbitration , alleging that they owe him $ 750 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film was released in North America on May 21 , 2009 with Warner Bros. setting the American premiere on May 14 , 2009 at the Grauman 's Chinese Theatre in Hollywood . Elsewhere , Sony Pictures Entertainment released the film in most overseas territories on different dates in June . One exception was Mexico , however , because of the swine flu outbreak in the country , which forced Sony to push the release date to July 31 , 2009 . 
 It is rated PG @-@ 13 by the Motion Picture Association of America for " intense sequences of sci @-@ fi violence , action , and language , " unlike the first three films which are rated R. The decision to release the film with a PG @-@ 13 rating has met with much criticism from fans , as well as the media . The rating decision was made after McG cut out a shot of Marcus stabbing a thug with a screwdriver , as the director felt disallowing the young audience due to that one shot was unfair . He also deleted a topless scene for Moon Bloodgood because , " It was a soft moment between a man and a woman that was designed to echo the Kelly McGillis / Harrison Ford moment in Witness [ but ] in the end , it felt more like a gratuitous moment of a girl taking her top off in an action picture , and I didn 't want that to <unk> the story or the characters . " The producers had expected the rating because of the modern leniency towards violence in PG @-@ 13 films , such as the 2007 action film , Live Free or Die Hard . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that the film received a 33 % approval rating with an average rating of 5 / 10 based on 267 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " With storytelling as robotic as the film 's iconic villains , Terminator Salvation offers plenty of great effects but lacks the heart of the original films . " By comparison , Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the film has received an average score of 49 , based on 46 reviews , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film 2 out of 4 stars , saying that " After scrutinizing the film , I offer you my summary of the story : Guy dies , finds himself resurrected , meets others , fights . That lasts for almost two hours . " Michael Rechtshaffen of the Hollywood Reporter wrote that the film isn 't the same without Arnold Schwarzenegger and that it misses its dramatic element . Likewise , Claudia Puig of USA Today gave the film a 2 / 4 and called it " predictable " with the " dramatic elements flat @-@ lin [ ing ] " . She considered Christian Bale 's performance " one @-@ dimensional " , but found his co @-@ stars to " come off better " , saying Sam Worthington had " a quiet intensity marred only by yelling " <unk> ! " three times in about 10 minutes " and that Anton Yelchin had " some of the best lines " . 
 Total Film 's review gave the film 4 / 5 with its verdict : " The Terminator story recharges with a post @-@ apocalyptic jolt of energy . Frantic and full of welcome ties to the past , it also ploughs new ground with purpose . Fingers crossed McG will follow Cameron 's lead and serve up a worthy sequel . " Devin Faraci of Empire magazine also gave a positive rating of four out of five stars , saying : " McG has sparked a moribund franchise back to life , giving fans the post @-@ apocalyptic action they 've been craving since they first saw a metal foot crush a human skull two decades ago . " However , on <unk> , the latter said , " Bale 's desire to star as John Connor was probably the most fatal blow to the film ; it completely distorted the shape of the story as it existed . " Furthermore , he expressed that the third act was when the film began falling apart , saying , " McG and Nolan muddied the end of the picture , delivering action <unk> ( yet another Terminator fight in a factory ) while never finding their own hook that would give this movie more of an impact than you would get from an expanded universe novel . " In contrast , James Berardinelli considered the ending the best part of the film , feeling that the first two @-@ thirds were " rambling and disjointed " and that the lack of a central villain was only fixed when the T @-@ 800 appeared . 
 Betsy Sharkey of the Los Angeles Times stated that " [ Bale 's ] strengths do not serve him , or the movie , as well here " and that " when the story starts to crumble around Bale , Worthington is there to pick up the pieces " . Craig Sharp of <unk> gave the film 3 / 5 , saying " If you 're looking for action then this is one damn good film ! If it 's character depth you 're after then move along please . " A.O. Scott of the New York Times said the film has " a brute integrity lacking in some of the other seasonal franchise movies " and " efficient , reasonably swift storytelling " . Ben Lyons and Ben Mankiewicz gave the film a " See It " and " Skip It " , respectively , on their show At the Movies with the latter mentioning that it " is the worst big budget summer release I 've seen in some time " . 
 Arnold Schwarzenegger , star of the preceding three films in the series , initially remarked that Terminator Salvation was " a great film , I was very excited " , but later reversed this position and said it was " ... awful . It tried hard , not that they didn 't try , the acting and everything . It missed the boat . " Terminator series creator James Cameron considered it an " interesting film " that he " didn 't hate as much as I thought I was going to " , and praised Sam Worthington 's performance , but also said he would not return to the franchise : " [ The series ] has kind of run its course [ ... ] frankly , the soup 's already been pissed in by other film makers " . He also felt his two films were better than either of the later films . Linda Hamilton , who portrayed Sarah Connor in The Terminator and Terminator 2 : Judgment Day and lent her voice to Terminator Salvation , wished the film " all the best " but expressed her opinion that the series " was perfect with two films . It was a complete circle , and it was enough in itself . But there will always be those who will try to milk the cow " . 
 In Reel Power : Hollywood Cinema and American Supremacy , Matthew Alford argued that with the fourth installment , " the franchise had made a clear shift towards supporting establishment narratives , despite its earlier reservations " and that a " central theme " is whether John Connor " should prioritise striking a decisive military blow against the machines or rescue some captured humans , who are entombed — with shades of Auschwitz — by the Terminators " . " [ T ] he flashforwards from the first three Terminator films hinted at a horrible <unk> of pain , deprivation and ad @-@ hoc guerrilla warfare " , he writes , but " in contrast , producer Jeffrey Silver explained that the Department of Defense gave ' fantastic cooperation [ to Salvation ] because they recognized that in the future portrayed in this film , the military will still be the men and women who protect us , no matter what may come ' " . Alford concludes that " for a world that is set just fifteen years after a global nuclear holocaust the survivors are fancifully healthy , not to mention hairy " and that this " <unk> the unthinkable " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film 's first nationwide U.S. screenings were at 12 A.M. on Thursday , May 21 , 2009 , making $ 3 million from midnight screenings and earning $ 13 @.@ 3 million in its first day and grossed an additional $ 42 @,@ 558 @,@ 390 on its 4 @-@ day Memorial Day opening weekend from 3 @,@ 530 theaters . It debuted at # 2 behind Night at the Museum : Battle of the Smithsonian , giving it a lower first weekend take than its predecessor , becoming the first film in the series not to open at # 1 and failing to meet Boxoffice Magazine predictions by 50 % . Terminator Salvation was more successful in its international release , opening at # 1 in 66 of 70 territories through the first week of June , and continuing to be the highest @-@ grossing film in the following week . The film 's total domestic gross was $ 125 @,@ 322 @,@ 469 , along with $ 246 @,@ 030 @,@ 532 from overseas territories , for a worldwide gross of $ 371 @,@ 353 @,@ 001 . As of December 2009 , the film ranks 14th for the year internationally and 23rd domestically ( U.S. and Canada ) , which puts it below initial expectations in terms of domestic gross and first weekend , as well as overall global take . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc of the film was released on December 1 , 2009 . The former contains the theatrical cut of the film with a featurette on the Moto @-@ Terminators . The Blu @-@ ray features both the theatrical cut and the R @-@ rated Director 's cut , which is three minutes longer ( 118 minutes ) , with bonus material including Maximum Movie Mode , a video commentary in which director McG talks about the film while it plays , featurettes , a video archive , and a digital comic of the first issue of the official film prequel comic . Both versions include a digital copy of the theatrical cut for portable media players . Target Stores will be the only retailer to carry the Director 's Cut on DVD . On its first week of retail , Terminator Salvation debuted at the top spot of the Blu @-@ ray charts , and on second in the DVD charts , behind Night at the Museum : Battle of the Smithsonian . The film made $ 29 @,@ 811 @,@ 432 in domestic DVD sales bringing its total gross to $ 401 @,@ 439 @,@ 971 
 = = = Tie @-@ ins = = = 
 In addition to the novelization by Alan Dean Foster , a prequel novel titled From the Ashes by Timothy Zahn was released . Two further books were inspired by the film — Cold War by Greg Cox , and Trial by Fire , again by Zahn . IDW Publishing released a four @-@ issue prequel comic , as well as an adaptation . It follows Connor rallying together the resistance in 2017 , as well as examining normal people overcoming their intolerances to defeat Skynet . Playmates Toys , Sideshow Collectibles , Hot Toys , Character Options , and DC Unlimited produced merchandise , while Chrysler , Sony , Pizza Hut , and 7 @-@ Eleven were among the product placement partners . On May 23 , 2009 , a roller coaster named after the film opened at Six Flags Magic Mountain . In 2011 the ride was no longer licensed and renamed to Apocalypse . 
 A third @-@ person shooter video game of the same name was released on the same week of the release of the film . Christian Bale declined to lend his voice , so Gideon Emery voiced the character of John Connor . The game , however , features the voices of Common and Moon Bloodgood as Barnes and Blair Williams , respectively . Despite not appearing in the film , Rose McGowan voiced the character of Angie Salter , an ex @-@ high school teacher . The game is set in 2016 , after the events of Terminator 3 : Rise of the Machines and before the events of Terminator Salvation . 
 In May 2009 , Machinima released Terminator Salvation : The Machinima Series , a prequel series set before the 2009 film Terminator Salvation , comprising six episodes . It is about the character Blair Williams ( voiced by Moon Bloodgood ) and her reaction to the apocalyptic war between machines and humans . It was also distributed by Warner Premiere , Wonderland Sound and Vision and The Halcyon Company . It is currently for download in iTunes , Xbox Live , PlayStation Network and Amazon Video . 
 = = = Award nominations = = = 
 = = Cancelled Sequels and reboot = = 
 While Terminator Salvation was initially intended to begin a new trilogy , production of a fifth film was halted by legal trouble , as well as The Halcyon Company filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection . While some anonymous sources insisted that Terminator 5 would be moving forward , the majority of analysts predicted that its future was in jeopardy . 
 In late September 2009 , it was announced that the rights for the franchise were once again up for sale as The Halcyon Company tried to pull itself out of bankruptcy . In late October 2009 , Halcyon announced it would auction off the rights to future Terminator material and was seeking $ 60 – 70 million , though the only offer made was by director Joss Whedon for $ 10 @,@ 000 . In December 2009 , Halcyon issued a statement saying that they were looking at various options including sale and refinancing of the rights with an announcement on the outcome no later than February 1 , 2010 . On February 8 , 2010 , an auction was held to determine the owner of the Terminator rights . After studios Sony Pictures and Lionsgate bid separately , Pacificor , the hedge fund that pushed Halcyon into bankruptcy , made a deal for $ 29 @.@ 5 million . Pacificor hired an agency to sell off the rights to the franchise . 
 In August 2010 , it was reported that a new Terminator film was being developed . The new film would not be a direct sequel to Salvation , but rather an animated reboot of the original series . It would have been entitled Terminator 3000 and would be shot by Hannover House . However , Pacificor , the owner of the rights to the Terminator franchise , had not given any official license to Hannover House to develop a new film . 
 On February 16 , 2011 , it was announced that Universal Studios was considering a fifth Terminator film with Arnold Schwarzenegger returning as the star and with Fast Five 's Justin Lin directing along with Chris Morgan as the screenwriter . The discussions for the film had been in the very early stages . On April 27 , 2011 , it was announced that a rights package to a Terminator film , to which Schwarzenegger , Lin , and producer Robert W. Cort were attached , but no screenwriter , had been circulating among the studios . Universal , Sony and Lionsgate , and CBS Films had been some of the interested companies . According to sources close to Schwarzenegger , he had only wanted to commit fully if a good script could be created . 
 It was reported on May 13 , 2011 , that Megan Ellison and her production company Annapurna Pictures won the rights to make at least two more Terminator films , including Terminator 5 , in an auction deal that is rumored to have hit the $ 20 million mark . While Schwarzenegger was claimed to be up for a substantial role , the film would not be anchored by him ; instead a young male actor would take the lead . On December 4 , 2012 , a year and a half after negotiations were entered , the deal was finally closed . Ellison said that she and her brother David Ellison were " starting from scratch as they seek out a screenwriter to plot the end " . 
 The new film , now titled Terminator Genisys , intended to be the first in a new trilogy , was announced in the summer of 2013 with Schwarzenegger confirming to reprise his role as the T @-@ 800 . Filming began on April 21 , 2014 and the film was released on July 1 , 2015 . 
 = Patagosaurus = 
 Patagosaurus ( meaning " Patagonia reptile " ) is an extinct genus of <unk> dinosaur from the Middle Jurassic of Patagonia , Argentina . It was first found in deposits of the Cañadon Asfalto Formation , which date from around 165 to 161 million years ago . Although originally twelve specimens were assigned to the taxon , at least one of them may belong to a different genus . Patagosaurus probably lived alongside genera such as Piatnitzkysaurus , <unk> , Volkheimeria and another unnamed sauropod . 
 Since Patagosaurus is known from many specimens , including at least one juvenile , its anatomy and growth are fairly well understood . Both ages exhibit the typical features of a sauropod , a long neck , small head , a long tail , and being quadrupedal . The juvenile exhibits features different from the adult in regions like the mandible , pectoral girdle , pelvis and hindlimb , although overall their anatomy is quite similar . The many known specimens help fill in gaps in the anatomy of the genus , such as the forelimb and skull . Parts of the skeleton , like the pectoral girdle , tibia and pubis , are more robust , while others , like the forelimb and ischium , are more gracile . The material of Patagosaurus is similar to closely related taxa like Cetiosaurus and Volkheimeria , more primitive genera such as Barapasaurus and Amygdalodon , and more derived sauropods like Diplodocus and Camarasaurus . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 In the 1970s , many specimens of a previously unidentified were found associated together in the same bed and locality , a pebbly stratum near a route to Cerro Condor . The specimens were first described by Jose Bonaparte in 1979 . For the fossil he erected the genus Patagosaurus , as well as its type species P. <unk> . The generic name of Patagosaurus comes from the location of its find in Patagonia , and the fact that it is a reptile . The specific name honours Ricardo Farias , on whose land the initial discovery was made . The genus was originally known from an almost complete postcranial skeleton lacking a skull as the holotype , and many referred specimens however in 2003 it was found that a dentary was referable to the species , so more specimens are probably this taxon . Its skeleton was found near those of Piatnitzkysaurus and Volkheimeria in the Callovian to Oxfordian aged Patagonian deposits of the Cañadon Asfalto Formation . Patagosaurus is almost completely known , with many articulated specimens found covering almost all of the skeleton , including parts of the skull . Over twelve specimens have been referred to the species , although some of the material is probably from a unique taxon . Bonaparte ( 1986 ) assigned three specimens other than the holotype PVL 4170 , PVL 4076 , MACN CH 934 , and MACN CH 933 to the genus . While the holotype includes a post cranial skeleton , the others are known from cranial material and a nearly complete juvenile skeleton and skull . MACN CH 933 is directly comparable with the type material of Patagosaurus , which confirms its association with the genus . A specimen first referred to Patagosaurus in 2003 , MPEF @-@ PV 1670 ( which includes just a lower jaw ) , is also very similar to MACN CH 934 , and differences can be associated with age , so therefore , MPEF @-@ PV 1670 presumably represents adult cranial material . However , the teeth of MACN CH 934 are very different from those of both lower jaws ( MACN CH 933 and MPEF @-@ PV 1670 ) , so it can be identified as another sauropod from the same deposit as Patagosaurus . Thus , the taxon only certainly includes PVL 4170 , MACN CH 933 , and MPEF @-@ PV 1670 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Patagosaurus is a sauropod that possessed a general and unspecialized bauplan of being quadrupedal , having an elongate neck , a small head , and a very long tail . Therefore , it is similar to Cetiosaurus and other related genera , who possessed the same morphology . It has been estimated that it was about 16 @.@ 5 m ( 54 ft ) long and weighed about 7 @.@ 88 t ( 7 @.@ 76 long tons ; 8 @.@ 69 short tons ) An earlier estimate by John S. McIntosh and his colleagues in 1997 , found that Patagosaurus was approximately 15 m ( 49 ft ) long , and also 9 @.@ 44 metric tons ( 10 @.@ 41 short tons ; 9 @.@ 29 long tons ) in weight , similar to the later estimates by Holtz . A 2006 study by Donald M. Henderson calculated the weight of Patagosaurus to be 7 @.@ 89 t ( 7 @.@ 77 long tons ; 8 @.@ 70 short tons ) , a smaller estimate than McIntosh 's . 
 The skull of Patagosaurus is not very well known , with a 2003 revision by Oliver <unk> determining only a few jaws are certainly referrable to it , as opposed to nearly the entire skull . MPEF @-@ PV 1670 shows what the morphology of the adult or subadult skull was like , while MACN CH 933 represents a juvenile individual . Based upon how broad , high and short the adult articulated mandibles of Patagosaurus are , its snout would have been short , high and broad as well , a typical feature of most sauropods . 
 The teeth of Patagosaurus are reminiscent of more derived sauropods . They are similar in morphology to Euhelopus , being concave on one side as well as having crowns with fairly great expansions . They are also similar to Camarasaurus , although the latter genus has less of a concavity and expansion . The teeth also possess marginal denticles on the crown . Based on histological studies , an individual of Patagosaurus would have replaced all its teeth within 58 days , similar to 62 days for Camarasaurus , and 34 days for Diplodocus . 
 = = = Postcranial skeleton = = = 
 Most of the postcranial skeleton is known in Patagosaurus . The cervical , caudal , and dorsal vertebrae are generally similar to Camarasaurus , although the sacrum possesses many distinct features . The sacrum is well @-@ preserved , showing that Patagosaurus possessed five sacral vertebrae . All the vertebrae but the fifth are fused together . All the neural spines are tall , and the centra are occasionally transversely narrow . The neural canal of the vertebrae is unique among sauropods however . Starting from the very end of the first vertebra , and extending to almost the end of the third there is an enlargement of the canal , forming a well @-@ defined cavity . Even though the sacrum itself is distinguishing , its sacral ribs resemble Camarasaurus . The sacral vertebrae have a total length of 540 mm ( 21 in ) , with the total sacral length being 920 mm ( 36 in ) . 
 The pelvic girdle is well @-@ preserved and well studied . In the holotype , the pelvic girdle is almost complete , only lacking the proximal ends of each ischium . The ilia of the holotype are well known , and show many distinct features . The pubic peduncle , where the ilium articulates with the pubis , is long and straight and has an expansion on the end , as in many sauropods . The upper edge of the iliac blade is curved and thick , with <unk> ( rough spots ) for cartilage attachment . The pubic elements are large and robust in adults , more so than in juveniles . They are flat when viewed from in front , and convex when seen from behind . Lapparentosaurus resembles Patagosaurus when comparing their pubes . The ischia are much more gracile than the pubes , and only have a small distal expansion . While the ilia resemble Barapasaurus , and the pubes resemble Lapparentosaurus , the ischia are most similar to Diplodocus and Apatosaurus . 
 The hindlimbs of Patagosaurus are based on scant material , some femora , a tibia , and a few nondescript pedal bones . Two femora come from an adult , with a single additional bone known from the juvenile . The adult femora are proportionately different from the juvenile , being mostly straighter and more ovoid in cross @-@ section . The femoral head is well preserved , although lacking the greater trochanter . The distal end is rather symmetrical when viewed from behind , with two similarly sized <unk> surfaces . In the juvenile , the fourth trochanter is completely in the proximal end . The tibia has a well @-@ developed cnemial crest , and is also short and robust . The surface that would have articulated with the astragalus in life has the anterior half raised , and the posterior half lowered . 
 The pectoral girdle is well known . Both the left and right scapulae and coracoids are known , though incomplete . The scapulae are large , and robust , and thicken as they near the <unk> . The scapular blades are flat , although they are both convex along the anterior edge . Where the scapulae and coracoids articulate , the coracoids are thickest , and they become gradually thinner as they gain distance from the scapulae . The younger specimen of Patagosaurus possesses a slightly different morphology of the pectoral girdle , with slightly differing proportions , such as a slightly smaller scapular blade . The coracoids resemble Barapasaurus in shape , and differ from Camarasaurus , although they cannot be directly compared with those of Cetiosaurus . 
 The forelimbs of Patagosaurus are only based on three bones from the juvenile specimen , and no manual elements are preserved . The humeri are slender and elongate , lacking great proximal and distal expansions . The incomplete deltoid crest , only shows that it was wide , and likely had a projection below and behind . Like the humeri , the radius is slender , and lacks large expansions on either end . On the edge closest to the ulna , the radius possesses a ridge along its edge , which corresponds to where <unk> ligaments would have attached . The ulna is complete , although sediment @-@ filled breaks might have altered its original shape . The forelimb of Patagosaurus is much more gracile and different from the robust later sauropods like Camarasaurus , and Apatosaurus , and instead resembles more Diplodocus . 
 = = Classification = = 
 When originally described , Patagosaurus was identified as a relative of Cetiosaurus in the family Cetiosauridae . It can be distinguished from Cetiosaurus , a similar genus , by features of the ischium and vertebrae . Another genus also identified as a <unk> by Bonaparte , Volkheimeria , was named in the same paper as Patagosaurus . Features uniting the genera were identified in the pelvic structure and vertebrae , specifically the caudal neural spines and the ilium and ischium . These characteristics show that the genera are more derived than Amygdalodon , yet more primitive than Haplocanthosaurus . 
 Later in 1995 , Paul Upchurch published a paper on early sauropods , finding Patagosaurus as a <unk> again . He found that although earlier works had distinguished two groups , the <unk> and <unk> , in the family , but that Shunosaurus and relatives were actually closer to Euhelopus , and <unk> ( Cetiosaurus , Patagosaurus and Amygdalodon ) were the only true <unk> . Upchurch noted however that further work on the group might reveal different conclusions . 
 In a 2009 revision of Euhelopus , Jeffrey A. Wilson and Upchurch published a joint analysis on primitive <unk> relationships . They found that Patagosaurus was in fact not a sister taxon of Cetiosaurus , but instead more basal than the genus , effectively invalidating Cetiosauridae . Their results are shown below : 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 Patagosaurus was uncovered in the Middle Jurassic Cañadon Asfalto Formation , which preserves a large variety of flora and fauna . In fact , <unk> et al. noted that " the fossil record of this formation represents the most completely known biota from the continental Middle to Late Jurassic of the Southern Hemisphere and one of the most complete of the entire world " . The Cañadon Asfalto Formation , which was deposited about 165 to 161 million years ago , was a lush ecosystem , in which many organisms lived . In the Middle Jurassic , the region would have been part of the great southern landmass of Gondwana . Most of the plants are conifers , although ferns and <unk> are also abundant . Directly below the formation is a layer of ash , indicating a nearby volcano . 
 The fauna is dominated by tetrapods , ranging from aquatic amphibians to terrestrial turtles , mammals , and dinosaurs . The sole amphibian known is <unk> ; turtles are represented by a distinct form that was named <unk> ; mammals are known from a few genera , including <unk> , Asfaltomylos , and Henosferus ; multiple dinosaurs have been identified , including the sauropods Volkheimeria , Patagosaurus , and a potential third genus that is yet unnamed , and theropods include the related Piatnitzkysaurus and <unk> . 
 = European Council = 
 The European Council , charged with defining the EU 's overall political direction and priorities , is the institution of the European Union ( EU ) that comprises the heads of state or government of the member states , along with President of the European Council and the President of the European Commission . The High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy also takes part in its meetings . Established as an informal summit in 1975 , the European Council was formalised as an institution in 2009 upon entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon . Its current President is Donald Tusk . 
 = = Scope = = 
 While the European Council has no formal legislative power , it is a strategic ( and crisis @-@ solving ) body that provides the union with general political directions and priorities , and acts as a collective presidency . The European Commission remains the sole initiator of legislation , but the European Council is able to provide an impetus to guide legislative policy . 
 The meetings of the European Council , still commonly referred to as EU summits , are chaired by its president and take place at least twice every six months ; usually in the Justus Lipsius building , the headquarters of the Council of the European Union in Brussels . Decisions of the European Council are taken by consensus , except where the Treaties provide otherwise . 
 = = History = = 
 The first summits of EU heads of state or government were held in February and July 1961 ( in Paris and Bonn respectively ) . They were informal summits of the leaders of the European Community and were started due to then @-@ French President Charles de Gaulle 's resentment at the domination of supranational institutions ( e.g. the European Commission ) over the integration process , but petered out . The first influential summit held , after the departure of De Gaulle , was The Hague summit of 1969 , which reached an agreement on the admittance of the United Kingdom into the Community and initiated foreign policy cooperation ( the European Political Cooperation ) taking integration beyond economics . 
 The summits were only formalised in the period between 1974 and 1988 . At the December summit in Paris in 1974 , following a proposal from then @-@ French president Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , it was agreed that more high level , political input was needed following the " empty chair crisis " and economic problems . The inaugural European Council , as it became known , was held in Dublin on 10 and 11 March 1975 during Ireland 's first Presidency of the Council of Ministers . In 1987 , it was included in the treaties for the first time ( the Single European Act ) and had a defined role for the first time in the Maastricht Treaty . At first only a minimum of two meetings per year were required , which resulted in an average of three meetings per year being held for the 1975 @-@ 1995 period . Since 1996 , the number of meetings were required to be minimum four per year . For the latest 2008 @-@ 2014 period , this minimum was well exceeded , by an average of seven meetings being held per year . The seat of the Council was formalised in 2002 , basing it in Brussels . Three types of European Councils exist : Informal , Scheduled and Extraordinary . While the informal meetings are also scheduled 1 ½ year in advance , they differ from the scheduled ordinary meetings by not ending with official Council conclusions , as they instead end by more broad political Statements on some cherry picked policy matters . The extraordinary meetings always end with official Council conclusions - but differs from the scheduled meetings by not being scheduled more than a year in advance , as for example in 2001 when the European Council gathered to lead the European Union 's response to the 11 September attacks . 
 Some meetings of the European Council are seen by some as turning points in the history of the European Union . For example : 
 1969 , The Hague : Foreign policy and enlargement . 
 1974 , Paris : Creation of the Council . 
 1985 , Milan : Initiate IGC leading to the Single European Act . 
 1991 , Maastricht : Agreement on the Maastricht Treaty . 
 1992 , Edinburgh : Agreement ( by treaty provision ) to retain at Strasbourg the plenary seat of the European Parliament . 
 1993 , Copenhagen : Leading to the definition of the Copenhagen Criteria . 
 1997 , Amsterdam : Agreement on the Amsterdam Treaty . 
 1998 , Brussels : Selected member states to adopt the euro . 
 1999 ; Cologne : Declaration on military forces . 
 1999 , Tampere : Institutional reform 
 2000 , Lisbon : Lisbon Strategy 
 2002 , Copenhagen : Agreement for May 2004 enlargement . 
 2007 , Lisbon : Agreement on the Lisbon Treaty . 
 2009 , Brussels : Appointment of first president and merged High Representative . 
 2010 , European Financial Stability Facility 
 As such , the European Council had already existed before it gained the status as an institution of the European Union with the entering into force of the Treaty of Lisbon . Indeed , Article 214 ( 2 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community provided ( before it was amended by the Treaty of Lisbon ) that ‘ the Council , meeting in the composition of Heads of State or Government and acting by a qualified majority , shall nominate the person it intends to appoint as President of the Commission ’ ( emphasis added ) ; this may be seen as an early codification of the European Council in the Treaties . In the event , Article 15 of the Treaty on European Union ( amended by the Treaty of Lisbon ) officially introduces the term European Council as a substitute for the phrase " Council [ of the European Union ] meeting in the composition of the Heads of State or Government " , which was previously sometimes used in the treaties to refer to this body . 
 The Treaty of Lisbon made the European Council a formal institution distinct from the ( ordinary ) Council of the EU , and created the present longer term and full @-@ time presidency . As an outgrowth of the Council of the EU , the European Council had previously followed the same Presidency , rotating between each member state . While the Council of the EU retains that system , the European Council established , with no change in powers , a system of appointing an individual ( without them being a national leader ) for a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year term - which can be renewed for the same person only once . Following the ratification of the treaty in December 2009 , the European Council elected the then @-@ Prime Minister of Belgium Herman Van Rompuy as its first permanent president ( resigning from Belgian Prime Minister ) . 
 = = Powers and functions = = 
 The European Council is an official institution of the EU , mentioned by the Lisbon Treaty as a body which " shall provide the Union with the necessary impetus for its development " . Essentially it defines the EU 's policy agenda and has thus been considered to be the motor of European integration . Beyond the need to provide " impetus " , the Council has developed further roles : to " settle issues outstanding from discussions at a lower level " , to lead in foreign policy — acting externally as a " collective Head of State " , " formal ratification of important documents " and " involvement in the negotiation of the treaty changes " . 
 Since the institution is composed of national leaders , it gathers the executive power of the member states and has thus a great influence in high profile policy areas as for example foreign policy . It also exercises powers of appointment , such as appointment of its own President , the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , and the President of the European Central Bank . It proposes , to the European Parliament , a candidate for President of the European Commission . Moreover , the European Council influences police and justice planning , the composition of the Commission , matters relating to the organisation of the rotating Council presidency , the suspension of membership rights , and changing the voting systems through the <unk> Clause . Although the European Council has no direct legislative power , under the " emergency brake " procedure , a state outvoted in the Council of Ministers may refer contentious legislation to the European Council . However , the state may still be outvoted in the European Council . Hence with powers over the supranational executive of the EU , in addition to its other powers , the European Council has been described by some as the Union 's " supreme political authority " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The European Council consists of the heads of state or government of the member states , alongside its own President and the Commission President ( both non @-@ voting ) . The meetings used to be regularly attended by the national foreign minister as well , and the Commission President likewise accompanied by another member of the Commission . However , since the Treaty of Lisbon , this has been discontinued , as the size of the body had become somewhat large following successive accessions of new Member States to the Union . 
 Meetings can also include other invitees , such as the President of the European Central Bank , as required . The Secretary @-@ General of the Council attends , and is responsible for organisational matters , including minutes . The President of the European Parliament also attends to give an opening speech outlining the European Parliament 's position before talks begin . 
 Additionally , the negotiations involve a large number of other people working behind the scenes . Most of those people , however , are not allowed to the conference room , except for two delegates per state to relay messages . At the push of a button members can also call for advice from a Permanent Representative via the " <unk> Group " in an adjacent room . The group is composed of diplomats and assistants who convey information and requests . Interpreters are also required for meetings as members are permitted to speak in their own languages . 
 As the composition is not precisely defined , some states which have a considerable division of executive power can find it difficult to decide who should attend the meetings . While an MEP , Alexander Stubb argued that there was no need for the President of Finland to attend Council meetings with or instead of the Prime Minister of Finland ( who was head of European foreign policy ) . In 2008 , having become Finnish Foreign Minister , Stubb was forced out of the Finnish delegation to the emergency council meeting on the Georgian crisis because the President wanted to attend the high profile summit as well as the Prime Minister ( only two people from each country could attend the meetings ) . This was despite Stubb being head of the Organisation for Security and Co @-@ operation in Europe at the time which was heavily involved in the crisis . Problems also occurred in Poland where the President of Poland and the Prime Minister of Poland were of different parties and had a different foreign policy response to the crisis . A similar situation arose in Romania between President Traian <unk> and Prime Minister Călin Popescu @-@ <unk> in 2007 – 2008 and again in 2012 with Prime Minister Victor Ponta , who both opposed the president . 
 = = = Eurozone summits = = = 
 A number of ad hoc meetings of Heads of State or Government of the Euro area countries were held in 2010 and 2011 to discuss the Sovereign Debt crisis . It was agreed in October 2011 that they should meet regularly twice a year ( with extra meetings if needed ) . This will normally be at the end of a European Council meeting and according to the same format ( chaired by the President of the European Council and including the President of the Commission ) , but usually restricted to the ( currently 17 ) Heads of State or Government of countries whose currency is the euro . 
 = = = President = = = 
 The President of the European Council is elected by the European Council by a qualified majority for a once @-@ renewable term of two and a half years . The President must report to the European Parliament after each European Council meeting . 
 The post was created by the Treaty of Lisbon and was subject to a debate over its exact role . Prior to Lisbon , the Presidency rotated in accordance with the Presidency of the Council of the European Union . The role of that President @-@ in @-@ Office was in no sense ( other than protocol ) equivalent to an office of a head of state , merely a primus inter pares ( first among equals ) role among other European heads of government . The President @-@ in @-@ Office was primarily responsible for preparing and chairing the Council meetings , and had no executive powers other than the task of representing the Union externally . Now the leader of the Council Presidency country can still act as president when the permanent president is absent . 
 = = = Members = = = 
 European People 's Party ( 9 ) ( 2 from the European institutions ) Party of European Socialists ( 8 ) Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe ( 7 ) Alliance of European Conservatives and Reformists ( 2 ) Party of the European Left ( 1 ) Independent ( 3 ) 
 Notes 
 = = = Political parties = = = 
 Almost all members of the European Council are members of a political party at national level , and most of these are members of a European @-@ level political party . These frequently hold pre @-@ meetings of their European Council members , prior to its meetings . However , the European Council is composed to represent the EU 's states rather than political parties and decisions are generally made on these lines , though ideological alignment can colour their political agreements and their choice of appointments ( such as their president ) . 
 The table below outlines the number of leaders affiliated to each party and their total voting weight . The map to the right indicates the alignment of each individual country . 
 = = Seat and meetings = = 
 Meetings of the European Council usually take place four times a year in Brussels . Meetings traditionally last for two days , sometimes even longer when contentious issues were on the agenda . However , former President Van Rompuy preferred to keep the summit to a single day . Until 2002 , the venue of the council meeting rotated between member states , as its location was decided by the country holding the rotating presidency . However , the 22nd declaration attached to the Treaty of Nice stated that ; " As from 2002 , one European Council meeting per Presidency will be held in Brussels . When the Union comprises 18 members , all European Council meetings will be held in Brussels . " 
 Between 2002 and 2004 , half the councils were held in Brussels and , after the 2004 enlargement , all were . The European Council uses the same building as the Council of the European Union , i.e. , the Justus Lipsius building . However , some extraordinary councils have taken place in the member state holding the Presidency , e.g. , 2003 in Rome or 2005 in Hampton Court Palace . A new building ( the " Europa building " ) is currently being built at the northern end of the adjacent historical <unk> Palace complex for use as a purpose built summit building by the European Council and the Council . It had been due to be completed in 2013 , but various delays have made late 2016 the opening date . 
 The choice of a single seat was due to a number of factors , mostly logistical ( organising the meetings became ever more onerous with the enlargement of the EU , especially for smaller countries ) and security ( the experience of the Belgian police in dealing with protesters ( a protester in Gothenburg was shot by police ) ) as well as Brussels having fixed facilities for the Council and journalists at every meeting . Having a permanent seat in Brussels also emphasised that the European Council is an EU institution rather than a summit of sovereign States in the manner of the G20 . Some have argued it is the de facto EU government , while others underline that it is the Commission that is the EU 's day @-@ to @-@ day government and the European Council can best be compared to a collective head of state . 
 In 2007 , the new situation for locating meetings became a source of contention with the Portuguese government wanting to sign the Lisbon Treaty in Lisbon , Portugal . The Belgian government , however , was keen not to set a precedent and insisted that the regular end of year summit took place in Brussels as usual . This meant that after the signing , photo suit , and formal dinner , the attendees of the summit were transferred from Lisbon to Brussels . Mirrored with the " travelling circus " of the European Parliament , this garnered protests from environmental groups describing the hypocrisy of demanding lower carbon emissions while flying across Europe for the same summit for political reasons . 
 There are no current plans to hold meetings outside of Brussels , except for force majeure ( for instance a strike by air traffic controllers nearly caused the January 2012 informal meeting to be switched to Luxembourg ) . 
 = = President 's cabinet = = 
 Although the European Council is , under the terms of the Lisbon treaty , a separate institution of the EU , it does not have its own administration . The administrative support for both the European Council and its president is provided by the General Secretariat of the Council of the European Union . The president does have , however , his own private office ( cabinet ) of close advisers . Van Rompuy chose as his chief of staff ( chef de cabinet ) Baron Frans van <unk> , formerly Belgian ambassador to , variously , the USA , the UN , the EU and NATO and chief of staff of several Belgian foreign ministers . Also in his team are the former UK Labour MEP Richard Corbett , former Hungarian Ambassador to NATO Zoltán <unk> , former head of the EU 's economic & financial committee Odile Renaud @-@ Basso , and Van Rompuy 's long standing press officer Dirk De Backer . 
 = David Icke = 
 David Vaughan Icke ( / <unk> / , born 29 April 1952 ) is an English writer and public speaker . A former footballer and sports broadcaster , Icke has made his name since the 1990s as a professional conspiracy theorist , calling himself a " full time investigator into who and what is really controlling the world . " He is the author of over 20 books and numerous DVDs , and has lectured in over 25 countries , speaking for up to 10 hours to audiences that cut across the political spectrum . 
 Icke was a BBC television sports presenter and spokesman for the Green Party , when a psychic told him , in 1990 , that he had been placed on Earth for a purpose and would begin to receive messages from the spirit world . The following year he announced that he was a " Son of the Godhead " , and that the world would soon be devastated by tidal waves and earthquakes , a prediction he repeated on the BBC 's primetime show Wogan . The show changed his life , turning him from a respected household name into someone who was laughed at whenever he appeared in public . 
 He continued nevertheless to develop his ideas , and over the next seven years — in The Robots ' Rebellion ( 1994 ) , And the Truth Shall Set You Free ( 1995 ) , The Biggest Secret ( 1999 ) , and Children of the Matrix ( 2001 ) — he set out a worldview that combined New Age spiritualism with a denunciation of totalitarian trends in the modern world . At the heart of his theories lies the idea that many prominent figures belong to the Babylonian Brotherhood , a group of shapeshifting reptilian humanoids who are propelling humanity toward a global fascist state , or New World Order . The reptilians use the rings of Saturn and the Moon , all reptilian constructs , to broadcast our " five @-@ sense prison " : an " artificial sense of self and the world " that humans perceive as reality . 
 Michael Barkun has described Icke 's position as New Age conspiracism , writing that Icke is the most fluent of the genre . Richard Kahn and Tyson Lewis argue that Icke 's reptilian hypothesis may be Swiftian satire , offering a narrative with which ordinary people can question what they see around them . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Family and education = = = 
 The middle child of three boys born seven years apart , Icke was born in Leicester General Hospital to Beric Vaughan Icke and Barbara J. Icke , née Cooke , who were married in Leicester in 1951 . Beric had wanted to be a doctor , but the family had no money , so he joined the Royal Air Force as a medical orderly . He was awarded a British Empire Medal for gallantry in 1943 after an aircraft crashed into the Chipping Warden air base in Northamptonshire . Along with a squadron leader , Beric ran into the burning aircraft , without protective clothing , and saved the life of a crew member who was trapped inside . 
 After the war Beric became a clerk in the Gents clock factory . The family lived in a terraced house on Lead Street in the centre of Leicester , an area that was demolished in the mid @-@ 1950s as part of the city 's slum clearance . When Icke was three , in around 1955 , they moved to the Goodwood estate , one of the council estates the post @-@ war Labour government built . " To say we were skint , " he wrote in 1993 , " is like saying it is a little chilly at the North Pole . " He recalls having to hide under a window or chair when the council man came for the rent ; after knocking , the rent man would walk around the house peering through windows . His mother never explained that it was about the rent ; she just told Icke to hide . He wrote in 2003 that he stills get a fright when someone knocks on the door . 
 Always a loner , he spent hours playing with toy trains , preferring to cross the street rather than speak to anyone . He attended Whitehall Infant School , then Whitehall Junior School , feeling nervous and shy to the point of feeling faint during morning assembly and having to leave before he passed out . The family doctor suggested a referral to a child psychologist , but his father would have none of it . 
 = = = Football = = = 
 Icke made no effort at school , but when he was nine , he was chosen for the junior school 's third @-@ year football team . It was the first time he had succeeded at anything , and he came to see football as his way out of poverty . He played in goal , which he wrote suited the loner in him and gave him a sense of living on the edge between hero and villain . 
 After failing his 11 @-@ plus exam in 1963 , he was sent to the city 's Crown Hills Secondary Modern ( rather than the local grammar school ) , where he was given a trial for the Leicester Boys Under @-@ Fourteen team . He left school at 15 after being talent @-@ spotted by Coventry City , who signed him up in 1967 as their youth team 's goalkeeper . He also played for Oxford United 's reserve team and Northampton Town , on loan from Coventry . 
 Rheumatoid arthritis in his left knee , which spread to the right knee , ankles , elbows , wrists and hands , stopped him from making a career out of football . Despite often being in agony during training , he managed to play part @-@ time for Hereford United , including in the first team when they were in the fourth , and later in the third , division of the English Football League . He was earning up to ₤ 33 a week . But in 1973 , at the age of 21 , the pain in his joints became so severe that he was forced to retire . 
 = = = First marriage = = = 
 Icke met his first wife , Linda Atherton , in May 1971 at a dance at the <unk> Grange Hotel near Leamington Spa ; she was working as a van driver for a garage . Shortly after they met , Icke had another of the huge rows he had started having with his father — always a domineering man , his father was upset that Icke 's arthritis was interfering with his football career — so he packed his bags and left home . He moved into a bedsit and worked in a travel agency , travelling to Hereford twice a week in the evenings to play football . 
 He and Atherton were married on 30 September that year , four months after they met . A daughter arrived in March 1975 , followed by one son in December 1981 and another in November 1992 . The couple divorced in 2001 but remained good friends , and Atherton continued to work as Icke 's business manager . 
 = = = Journalism , sports broadcasting = = = 
 The loss of Icke 's position with Hereford meant that he and his wife had to sell their home , and for several weeks they lived apart , each moving in with their parents . In 1973 Icke found a job as a reporter with the weekly Leicester Advertiser , through a contact who was a sports editor at the Daily Mail . He moved on to the Leicester News Agency , and through them did some work for BBC Radio Leicester as their football reporter , then worked his way up through the Loughborough Monitor , the Leicester Mercury , and BRMB Radio in Birmingham . 
 He worked for two months in Saudi Arabia in 1976 , helping with their national football team . It was supposed to be a longer @-@ term position , but he missed his wife and new daughter and decided not to return after his first holiday back to the UK . BRMB gave him his job back , after which he successfully applied to Midlands Today at the BBC 's Pebble Mill Studios in Birmingham , a job that included on @-@ air appearances . One of the earliest stories he covered for them was the murder of Carl Bridgewater , the paperboy who was shot during a robbery in 1978 . 
 In 1981 Icke became a sports presenter for the BBC 's national programme , Newsnight , which had just started . Two years later , on 17 January 1983 , he appeared on the first edition of the BBC 's Breakfast Time , British television 's first national breakfast show , and presented the sports news for them until 1985 , which meant getting up at two o 'clock in the morning five days a week . In the summer of 1983 he achieved his ambition when he co @-@ hosted Grandstand , at the time the BBC 's flagship national sports programme . He also published his first book that year , It 's a Tough Game , Son ! , about how to break into football . 
 Icke and his family moved in 1982 to Ryde on the Isle of Wight . His relationship with Grandstand was shortlived – he wrote that a new editor arrived in 1983 who appeared not to like him – but he continued working for BBC Sport until 1990 , often on bowls and snooker programmes , and at the 1988 Summer Olympics . He was by then a household name , but a career in television began to lose its appeal ; he wrote that he found television workers insecure , shallow and sometimes vicious . In August 1990 his contract with the BBC was terminated when he refused to pay his Community Charge , a controversial local tax introduced that year by Margaret Thatcher . He did end up paying it , but his announcement that he was willing to go to jail rather than pay prompted the BBC , by charter an impartial public @-@ service broadcaster , to distance itself from him . 
 = = New Age interests = = 
 = = = Green Party , Betty Shine = = = 
 Icke had begun to flirt with alternative medicine and New Age philosophies in the 1980s , in an effort to relieve his arthritis , and this encouraged his interest in Green politics . Within six months of joining the Green Party , he was given a position as one of its four principal speakers , positions created in lieu of a single leader . The Observer called him " the Greens ' Tony Blair " . 
 His second book , It Doesn 't Have To Be Like This , an outline of his views on the environment , was published in 1989 , and he was regularly invited to high @-@ profile events . That year he discussed animal rights during a televised debate at the Royal Institute of Great Britain , alongside Tom Regan , Mary Warnock and Germaine Greer , and in 1990 his name appeared on advertisements for a children 's charity , along with Audrey Hepburn , Woody Allen and other celebrities . 
 Despite his success , Icke wrote that 1989 was a time of considerable personal despair , and it was during this period that he said he began to feel a presence around him . He often describes how he felt it while alone in a hotel room in March 1990 , and finally asked : " If there is anybody here , will you please contact me because you are driving me up the wall ! " Days later , in a newsagent 's in Ryde , he felt a force pull his feet to the ground , he wrote , and heard a voice guide him toward some books . One of them was Mind to Mind ( 1989 ) by Betty Shine , a psychic healer in Brighton . He read the book , then wrote to her requesting a consultation about his arthritis . 
 Icke visited Shine four times . During the third meeting , on 29 March 1990 , Icke felt something like a spider 's web on his face , and Shine told him she had a message from Wang Ye Lee of the spirit world . Icke had been sent to heal the Earth , she said , and would become famous but would face opposition . The spirit world was going to pass ideas to him , which he would speak about to others . He would write five books in three years ; in 20 years a new flying machine would allow us to go wherever we wanted and time would have no meaning ; and there would be earthquakes in unusual places , because the inner earth was being destabilized by having oil taken from the seabed . 
 In February 1991 Icke visited a pre @-@ Inca <unk> burial ground near Puno , Peru , where he felt drawn to a particular circle of waist @-@ high stones . As he stood in the circle , he had two thoughts : that people would be talking about this in 100 years , and that it would be over when it rained . His body shook as though plugged into an electrical socket , he wrote , and new ideas poured into him . Then it started raining and the experience ended . He described it as the kundalini ( a term from Indian yoga ) activating his chakras , or energy centres , triggering a higher level of consciousness . 
 = = = Turquoise period = = = 
 There followed what Icke called his " turquoise period " . He had been channelling for some time , he wrote , and had received a message through automatic writing that he was a " Son of the Godhead " , interpreting " Godhead " as the " Infinite Mind " . He began to wear only turquoise , often a turquoise shell suit , a colour he saw as a conduit for positive energy . He also started working on his third book , and the first of his New @-@ Age period , The Truth Vibrations . 
 In August 1990 , before his visit to Peru , Icke had met Deborah Shaw , an English psychic living in Calgary , Alberta . When he returned from Peru they began a relationship , with the apparent blessing of Icke 's wife . In March 1991 Shaw began living with the couple , a short @-@ lived arrangement that the press called the " turquoise triangle " . Shaw changed her name to Mari <unk> , while Icke 's wife became Michaela , which she said was an aspect of the Archangel Michael . 
 The relationship with Shaw led to the birth of a daughter in December 1991 , although she and Icke had stopped seeing each other by then . Icke wrote in 1993 that he decided not to visit his daughter and had seen her only once , at the request of Shaw . Icke 's wife gave birth to the couple 's second son in November 1992 . 
 = = = Press conference = = = 
 In March 1991 Icke resigned from the Green Party during a party conference , telling them he was about to be at the centre of " tremendous and increasing controversy " , and winning a standing ovation from them after the announcement . A week later , shortly after his father died , Icke and his wife , Linda Atherton , along with their daughter and Deborah Shaw , held a press conference to announce that Icke was a son of the Godhead . He told reporters the world was going to end in 1997 . It would be preceded by a hurricane around the Gulf of Mexico and New Orleans , eruptions in Cuba , disruption in China , a hurricane in Derry , and an earthquake on the Isle of Arran . The information was being given to them by voices and automatic writing , he said . Los Angeles would become an island , New Zealand would disappear , and the cliffs of Kent would be under water by Christmas . 
 Icke wrote in 1993 that he heard his voice predict the end of the world and was appalled . " I was speaking the words , but all the time I could hear the voice of the brakes in the background saying , ' David , what the hell are you saying ? ' " His predictions were splashed all over the next day 's front pages , to his great dismay . 
 = = = Wogan interview = = = 
 The headlines attracted requests for interviews , including from Nicky Campbell for BBC Radio One , Terry Wogan for his prime @-@ time Wogan show , and Fern Britton for her ITV chat show . The Wogan interview , on 29 April 1991 , was the most damaging . ( Wogan interviewed Icke again in 2006 , acknowledging that his comments had been " a bit sharp " . ) 
 Wogan introduced the 1991 segment with " The world as we know it is about to end . " Amid laughter from the audience , Icke prevaricated when asked if he was the son of God , replying that Jesus would have been laughed at too , and repeating that Britain would soon be devastated by tidal waves and earthquakes . Without these , " the Earth will cease to exist . " When Icke said laughter was the best way to remove negativity , Wogan replied of the audience : " But they 're laughing at you . They 're not laughing with you . " 
 The interview proved devastating for Icke . The BBC was criticized for allowing it to go ahead ; Des Christy of The Guardian called it a " media crucifixion " . Icke disappeared from public life for a time , unable to walk down the street without people mocking him . His children were followed to school by journalists and ridiculed by schoolmates , and his wife would open the back door to get the washing in only to find a camera crew filming her . In May 1991 police were called to the couple 's home after a crowd of over 100 youths gathered outside , chanting " We want the Messiah " and " Give us a sign , David . " Icke told Jon Ronson in 2001 : 
 One of my very greatest fears as a child was being ridiculed in public . And there it was coming true . As a television presenter , I 'd been respected . People come up to you in the street and shake your hand and talk to you in a respectful way . And suddenly , overnight , this was transformed into " Icke 's a nutter . " I couldn 't walk down any street in Britain without being laughed at . It was a nightmare . My children were devastated because their dad was a figure of ridicule . 
 = = Writing and lecturing = = 
 = = = Publishing = = = 
 The Wogan interview set every bridge to Icke 's past ablaze , he wrote in 2003 , although he considered it the making of him in the end , giving him the courage to develop his ideas without caring what anyone thought . His book The Truth Vibrations , inspired by his experience in Peru , was published in May 1991 , and he continued to write , turning himself into a popular author and speaker . 
 Between 1992 and 1994 he wrote five books , all published by mainstream publishers , four in 1993 . Love Changes Everything ( 1992 ) , influenced by the " channelling " work of Deborah Shaw , is a theosophical work about the origin of the planet , in which Icke writes with admiration about Jesus . Days of Decision ( 1993 ) is an 86 @-@ page summary of his interviews after the 1991 press conference ; it questions the historicity of Jesus but accepts the existence of the Christ spirit . Icke 's autobiography , In the Light of Experience , was published the same year , followed by Heal the World : A Do @-@ It @-@ Yourself Guide to Personal and Planetary Transformation ( 1993 ) . 
 = = = The Robots ' Rebellion = = = 
 Icke 's fifth book of that period , The Robots ' Rebellion ( 1994 ) , published by Gateway , attracted allegations that his work was antisemitic . According to Nicholas Goodrick @-@ Clarke , the book contains " all the familiar beliefs and paranoid clichés " of the US conspiracists and militia . It claims that a plan for world domination by a shadowy cabal , perhaps extraterrestial , was laid out in a notorious antisemitic literary forgery , The Protocols of the Elders of Zion ( c . 1897 ) . Icke 's reliance on the Protocols is the first of several instances of his moving close to antisemitism , <unk> argues . 
 The Protocols of the Elders of Zion is a notorious antisemitic literary forgery , probably written under the direction of the Russian secret police in Paris , that purported to reveal a conspiracy by the Jewish people to achieve global domination . It was exposed as a work of fiction in 1920 by Lucien Wolf and the following year by Phillip Graves in The Times . Once exposed , it disappeared from mainstream discourse , Barkun writes , until interest in it was renewed by the American far right in the 1950s . Its use was spread further by conspiracy groups on the internet . 
 Icke took both the extraterrestial angle and the focus on the Protocols from Behold a Pale Horse ( 1991 ) by Milton William Cooper , who was associated with the American militia movement ; chapter 15 of Cooper 's book reproduces the Protocols im full . The Robots ' Rebellion refers repeatedly to the Protocols , calling them the Illuminati protocols , and defining Illuminati as the " Brotherhood elite at the top of the pyramid of secret societies world @-@ wide " . Icke adds that the Protocols were not the work of the Jewish people , but of Zionists . 
 The Robots ' Rebellion was greeted with dismay by the Green Party 's executive . Despite the controversy over the press conference and Wogan interview , they had allowed Icke to address the party 's annual conference in 1992 — a decision that led one of its principal speakers , Sara Parkin , to resign — but after the publication of The Robot 's Rebellion they moved to ban him . Icke wrote to the Guardian in September 1994 denying that The Robots ' Rebellion was antisemitic , and rejecting racism , sexism and prejudice of any kind , while insisting that whoever had written the Protocols " knew the game plan " for the 20th century . 
 = = = David Icke Books = = = 
 Icke 's next manuscript , And the Truth Shall Set You Free ( 1995 ) , contained a chapter questioning aspects of the Holocaust , which caused a rift with his publisher , Gateway . Sam Taylor of the Observer argued that the chapter is not antisemitic , but that Icke was " tapping into a seriously paranoid , aggressive strain in U.S. society " . After borrowing ₤ 15 @,@ 000 from a friend , Icke set up Bridge of Love Publications , later called David Icke Books , and self @-@ published that book and all his work thereafter . He wrote in 2004 that And the Truth was one of his proudest achievements . 
 According to Lewis and Kahn , Icke set about consolidating all conspiracy theories into one project with unlimited explanatory power . His books sold 140 @,@ 000 copies between 1998 and 2011 , at a value of over £ 2 million . Thirty thousand copies of The Biggest Secret ( 1999 ) were in print months after publication , according to Icke , and it was reprinted six times between 1999 and 2006 . Alice in Wonderland and the World Trade Center Disaster ( 2002 ) became a long @-@ standing top @-@ five bestseller in South Africa . By 2006 his website was getting 600 @,@ 000 hits a week , and by 2011 his books had been translated into 11 languages . 
 Icke became known , in particular , for his lengthy lectures . By 2006 he had lectured in at least 25 countries , attracting audiences of several thousand each time . He lectured for seven hours to 2 @,@ 500 people at the Brixton Academy , London , in 2008 , and the same year addressed the University of Oxford 's debating society , the Oxford Union . His book tour for Human Race Get Off Your Knees : The Lion Sleeps No More ( 2010 ) included a sell @-@ out talk to 2 @,@ 100 in New York and £ 83 @,@ 000 worth of ticket sales in Melbourne . In October 2012 he delivered a 10 @-@ hour lecture to 6 @,@ 000 people at London 's Wembley Arena . 
 = = = Second marriage , politics , television = = = 
 In 1997 Icke met his second wife , Pamela Leigh Richards , in Jamaica . He and Linda Atherton divorced in 2001 , and he and Richards were married the same year . The couple separated in 2008 and divorced in 2011 . 
 Icke stood for parliament in the 2008 by @-@ election for Haltemprice and Howden ( an East Yorkshire constituency ) , on the issue of " Big Brother — The Big Picture " . He came 12th , with 110 votes ( 0 @.@ 46 % ) , resulting in a lost deposit . He explained that he was standing because " if we don 't face this now we are going to have some serious explaining to do when we are asked by our children and grandchildren what we were doing when the global fascist state was installed . ' I was watching EastEnders , dear ' will not be good enough . " 
 In November 2013 Icke launched an internet television station , The People 's Voice , broadcast out of London . He founded the station after crowdsourcing over ₤ 300 @,@ 000 and worked for it as a volunteer until March 2014 . As of that year the station appeared to have stopped broadcasting . 
 = = Key ideas = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Icke combines New Age philosophical discussion about the universe and consciousness with conspiracy theories about public figures being reptilian humanoids and paedophiles . He argues in favour of reincarnation ; a collective consciousness that has intentionality ; modal realism ( that other possible worlds exist alongside ours ) ; and the law of attraction ( that good and bad thoughts can attract experiences ) . 
 In The Biggest Secret ( 1999 ) , he introduced the idea that many prominent figures derive from the Anunnaki , a reptilian race from the Draco constellation . In Human Race Get Off Your Knees : The Lion Sleeps No More ( 2012 ) , he identified the Moon ( and later Saturn ) as the source of holographic experiences , broadcast by the reptiles , that humanity interprets as reality . 
 = = = <unk> hypothesis = = = 
 In his ancient @-@ astronaut narrative , Icke argues that humanity has been genetically manipulated by the Babylonian Brotherhood , a hybrid race of human – extraterrestial reptilians , also known as the Illuminati . He briefly introduced the extraterrestrial hypothesis in The Robot 's Rebellion ( 1994 ) , citing Bill Cooper 's Behold a Pale Horse ( 1991 ) , and expanded it in And the Truth Shall Set You Free ( 1995 ) , citing Barbara <unk> 's <unk> of the Dawn ( 1992 ) . 
 In The Biggest Secret ( 1999 ) , Icke identified the Brotherhood as descendants of reptilians from the constellation Draco , who live in caverns inside the earth . They are the deities known as the Anunnaki in the Babylonian creation myth , Enûma Eliš , and the fallen angels , the Watchers , who mated with human women in the Biblical apocrypha . He said in an interview : 
 When you get back into the ancient world , you find this recurring theme of a union between a non @-@ human race and humans — creating a hybrid race . 
 From 1998 , I started coming across people who told me they had seen people change into a non @-@ human form . It 's an age @-@ old phenomenon known as shape @-@ shifting . The basic form is like a scaly humanoid , with reptilian rather than humanoid eyes . 
 Robertson writes that Icke 's reptilian idea is adapted from Zecharia Sitchin 's The 12th Planet ( 1976 ) , combined with material from Credo <unk> , a Zulu healer . Sitchin suggested that the Anunnaki came to Earth for its precious metals . Icke maintains that they came for monatomic gold , a non @-@ existent mineral ( only gases can exist in a monatomic state ) that , he writes , increases the capacity of the nervous system ten thousandfold . After ingesting it , the reptilians can process vast amounts of information , speed up trans @-@ dimensional travel , and shapeshift from reptilian to human . 
 The first reptilian @-@ human breeding programmes took place 200 @,@ 000 – 300 @,@ 000 years ago ( perhaps creating Adam ) , and the third ( and latest ) 7 @,@ 000 years ago . The hybrids of the third programme , more Anunnaki than human , today control the world : " The Brotherhood which controls the world today is the modern expression of the Babylonian Brotherhood of reptile @-@ Aryan priests and ' royalty ' which came together there after the flood . " By " Aryan " he explains that he means " white " ; this includes most Jews , whom he regards as having originated in the Caucasus . 
 = = = Brotherhood aims and institutions = = = 
 At the apex of the Babylonian Brotherhood stands the Global Elite , and at the top of the Global Elite are the Prison Wardens . The goal of the Brotherhood , their " Great Work of Ages " , is a microchipped population and fascist world government . 
 The Brotherhood created and controls the United Nations , International Monetary Fund , Round Table , Council on Foreign Relations , Chatham House , Club of Rome , Royal Institute of International Affairs , Trilateral Commission and Bilderberg Group , as well as the media , military , CIA , Mossad , science , religion and the Internet , with <unk> or unwitting support from the London School of Economics . 
 As of 2003 the reptilian bloodline encompassed 43 American presidents , three British and two Canadian prime ministers , several Sumerian kings and Egyptian pharaohs , and a smattering of celebrities , including Bob Hope , Chris Christopherson and Boxcar Willie . Key bloodlines are the Rockefellers , Rothschilds , various European aristocratic families , the establishment families of the Eastern United States , and the British House of Windsor . Icke confirmed to Andrew Neil in May 2016 that he believes the British Royal Family are shapeshifting lizards . He identified the Queen Mother in 2001 as " seriously reptilian " , and said he had seen Ted Heath 's eyes turn black while the two waited for a Sky News interview in 1989 . Lewis and Kahn argue that Icke is using allegory to depict the alien , and alienating , nature of global capitalism . Icke has said he is not using allegory . 
 = = = Dimensions = = = 
 The reptilians not only come from another planet , but are also from another dimension , the lower level of the fourth dimension ( the " lower astral dimension " ) , the one nearest the physical world . Barkun argues that the introduction of different dimensions allows Icke to skip awkward questions about how the reptilians got here . Icke writes that the universe consists of an infinite number of dimensions that share the same space , just like television and radio frequencies . Some people can tune their consciousness to other wavelengths , and it is from one of these other dimensions that the Anunnaki control the planet , although just as fourth @-@ dimensional reptilians control us , they in turn are controlled by a fifth dimension . 
 = = = Problem – reaction – solution = = = 
 Icke writes that the Brotherhood uses human anxiety as energy . " Thus we have the encouragement of wars , " he wrote in 1999 , " human genocide , the mass slaughter of animals , sexual perversions which create highly charged negative energy , and black magic ritual and sacrifice which takes place on a scale that will stagger those who have not studied the subject . " 
 In Tales From The Time Loop ( 2003 ) , Icke argues that the reptilians creat religious , racial , ethnic and sexual division to divide and conquer humanity . Incidents and issues he attributes to the Global Elite include the Oklahoma City bombing , Dunblane , Columbine , 9 / 11 , 7 / 7 , global warming , chemtrails , water fluoridation , and Agenda 21 . The incidents allow the reptilians to respond in whatever way they intended to act in the first place , a concept Icke calls " order out of chaos " or " problem – reaction – solution " . One of their methods is to create fake opposites , or " <unk> " , such as the Axis and Allied powers of World War II . The movement of societies toward totalitarianism because of these conflicts he calls " totalitarian tiptoe " . 
 = = = Red Dresses = = = 
 In Infinite Love is the Only Truth ( 2005 ) , Icke introduces his three categories of people . The Brotherhood are " interactive software programs " , or " Red Dresses " . They lack consciousness and free will , and their human bodies are holographic veils . A second group , the " sheeple " ( the vast majority of humanity ) , are conscious , but do as they are told and are the Brotherhood 's main energy source . They include the " repeaters " , people in positions of influence who repeat what other people tell them ; he cites doctors , teachers and journalists as examples . 
 The third and smallest group are those who see through the illusion ; they are usually dubbed dangerous or mad . The Red Dress genetic lines interbreed obsessively to make sure their bloodlines are not weakened by the second or third levels of consciousness , because consciousness can rewrite the software . 
 = = = Saturn – Moon Matrix = = = 
 The Moon Matrix is introduced in Human Race Get Off Your Knees : The Lion Sleeps No More ( 2010 ) , in which Icke suggests that the Earth and collective human mind are manipulated from the Moon , a spacecraft and inter @-@ dimensional portal controlled by the reptilians . The Moon Matrix is a broadcast from that spacecraft to the human body – computer , specifically to the left hemisphere of the brain , which gives us our sense of reality : " We are living in a dreamworld within a dreamworld — a Matrix within the virtual @-@ reality universe — and it is being broadcast from the Moon . " Unless people force themselves to become fully conscious , their minds are the Moon 's mind . 
 This idea is further explored in Icke 's Remember Who You Are : Remember ' Where ' You Are and Where You ' Come ' From ( 2012 ) , where he introduces the concept of the " Saturn – Moon Matrix " . In this more recent conceptualization , the rings of Saturn ( which Icke believes were artificially created by reptilian spacecraft ) are the ultimate source of the signal , while the Moon is merely a sort of amplifier . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Icke has emerged as a professional conspiracy theorist within a global counter @-@ cultural movement that combines New World Order conspiracism , the <unk> movement and anti @-@ globalization , with an extraterrestrial conspiracist subculture ( Roswell , alien abduction , crop circles , men in black , The X @-@ Files ) . Thanks to Icke 's prominence , public figures are regularly asked whether they are lizards . An Official Information Act request was filed in New Zealand in 2008 to ask this of John Key , the prime minister , and Facebook 's Mark Zuckerberg was asked during a Q & A in 2016 . ( Both men said they were not lizards . Key added that he had taken the unusual step of consulting not only a doctor but a vet . ) In a 2013 survey in the United States by Public Policy Polling , four percent believed that " ' lizard people ' control our societies . 
 Icke 's audiences consist of all ages and political persuasions , from the far @-@ right Christian Patriots to New Agers . Barkun categorizes Icke as a New Age conspiracist , describing his work as " improvisational millennialism " , with an end @-@ of @-@ history scenario involving a final battle between good and evil . Barkun defines improvisional millennialism as an " act of bricolage " : because everything is connected in the conspiracist world view , every source can be mined for links . 
 Barkun argues that Icke has actively tried to cultivate the radical right : " There is no fuller explication of [ their ] beliefs about ruling elites than Icke 's . " In 1996 Icke spoke to a conference in Reno , Nevada , alongside opponents of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act , including Kirk Lyons , a lawyer who has represented the Ku Klux Klan . Icke was dogged for a few years by allegations that his work is antisemitic ; the focus on the Protocols was taken to mean that Icke 's reptilians were really Jews , which Icke called " friggin ' nonsense " . After complaints from the Canadian Jewish Congress in 2000 , he was briefly detained by immigration officials in Canada where he was booked for a speaking tour , and his books were removed from Indigo Books , a Canadian chain . Several stops on the tour were cancelled by the venues , as was a lecture in London . 
 Despite his relationships with the far right , Icke 's New Age beliefs create a division between him and them , according to Barkun . Although Icke regards Christian patriots as the only Americans who understand the New World Order , he also told a Christian patriot group : " I don 't know which I dislike more , the world controlled by the Brotherhood , or the one you want to replace it with . " James Ward argues that Icke 's underlying message is hopeful , and that therein lies his appeal : as Icke said at Wembley in 2012 , " If we want a world of love and peace , we have to be loving and peaceful with everyone , even people we don 't like . " 
 Relying on Douglas Kellner 's distinction between clinical paranoia and a " critical paranoia " that confronts power , Lewis and Kahn argue that Icke displays elements of both , and that his " postmodern metanarrative " may be allegorical , a Swiftian satire used to give ordinary people a narrative with which to question what they see around them and to alert them to the emergence of a global fascist state . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Books 
 Videos 
 = Devadasu ( 1953 film ) = 
 Devadasu is a 1953 Indian bilingual romance film , directed by <unk> Raghavaiah and produced by D. L. Narayana for <unk> Pictures . Aluri Chakrapani wrote the script based on Sharat Chandra Chattopadhyay 's novel , Devdas . C. R. Subbaraman composed the film 's music . The film was edited by P. V. Narayanan , while B. S. Ranga provided the cinematography . 
 The film focuses on Devadasu and Parvati , who have been in love since childhood . Parvati 's father objects to the relationship and forces her to marry a middle @-@ aged zamindar . Unable to cope with his failure to win Parvati , Devadas turns into a drunkard , and the rest of the film is about whether or not Devadas meets Parvati again . 
 The film was produced in Telugu and Tamil ( as Devadas ) with slightly different casts . Akkineni Nageswara Rao , Savitri , and Lalitha played the lead roles in both versions ; supporting roles were played by S. V. Ranga Rao , Chilakalapudi Seeta Rama Anjaneyulu , <unk> and Surabhi Kamalabai in the Telugu version , and by M. N. Nambiar , Sachu and <unk> in the Tamil version . Devadasu is the inaugural recipient of the Filmfare Award for Best Film – Telugu . 
 Devadasu was released on 26 June 1953 , and the Tamil version was released three months later , on 11 September 1953 . Both versions were critically and commercially successful . The Telugu version has since achieved cult status , with terms and phrases from the film being widely cited . Both versions proved to be a major breakthrough in Nageswara Rao 's career . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Devadasu , the son of <unk> zamindar Narayana Rao , and Parvati , daughter of his poor neighbour Neelakantham , are childhood friends . The zamindar enrolls his son in a boarding school in the city . When the grown @-@ up Devadasu returns to the village after finishing his education , his childhood friendship with Parvati turns into love . 
 When Parvati 's grandmother talks of the alliance , the zamindar refuses the proposal . Irritated , Neelakantham vows to find a wealthier prospective son @-@ in @-@ law and arranges Parvati 's marriage with the zamindar of Durgapuram , an elderly widower with children . However , Parvati secretly meets Devadasu and asks him to accept her as his wife . 
 Devadasu is surprised at her visit , sends her away , and goes back to the city . He writes to Parvati that he cannot defy his parents , so Parvati marries the old zamindar . Unable to forget her , Devadasu is despondent . He takes to drinking alcohol excessively and is encouraged by his friend Bhagawan , who also introduces him to Chandramukhi , a prostitute . 
 While Parvati settles into her new house , Devadasu chooses the path of self @-@ destruction . On the advice of Chandramukhi , he leaves for his village , but goes to Durgapuram to keep a promise he had made to Parvati that he visit her before his death . Devadasu breathes his last in front of her house . Parvati rushes to see him , but the door is closed by her family and she collapses . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Telugu version 
 Akkineni Nageswara Rao as Devadasu 
 Savitri as Parvati 
 Lalitha as Chandramukhi 
 S. V. Ranga Rao as Narayana Rao 
 Chilakalapudi Seeta Rama Anjaneyulu as the zamindar of Durgapuram 
 Doraswamy as Neelakantham 
 Surabhi Kamalabai as Parvati 's grandmother 
 <unk> Sivaram as Bhagawan 
 Master Sudhakar as young Devadasu 
 Baby Anuradha as young Parvati 
 Tamil version 
 M. N. Nambiar 
 Sachu 
 <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 D. L. Narayana signed Vedantham <unk> to direct a bilingual film Devadasu in Telugu and Tamil under the production banner of <unk> Studios . The film 's script , which was written by Aluri Chakrapani , was based on Devdas by Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay . The story of Devadasu revolves around a feudal lord 's son Devadas falling in love with a poor girl Parvati . Due to differences in their social and economic status , Devadas cannot marry his childhood love and Parvati marries an old man . Unable to forget her , he becomes alcoholic . Samudrala <unk> and <unk> wrote the dialogue for the Telugu and Tamil versions , respectively . B. S. Ranga was recruited as the director of photography , and P. V. Narayanan edited the film . Vali and <unk> were the art directors . 
 Nageswara Rao and Sowcar Janaki were chosen as the lead pair . Arani Sathyanarayana portrayed the role of Devadasu 's man Friday . <unk> Sivaram , who went on to become a famous director , portrayed the role of Bhagawan . S. V. Ranga Rao , Chilakalapudi Seeta Rama Anjaneyulu , and Surabhi Kamalabai were selected to portray supporting roles . Seetharam appeared in a minor role as a <unk> . Lalitha of the Travancore Sisters was signed to play Chandramukhi , the " golden @-@ hearted prostitute " . 
 After a week of shooting , the film was shelved due to the view that such a story might not succeed in Telugu ; the production company then produced Shanti , which became a failure . D. L. Narayana decided to revive the film after being encouraged by the success of Stri <unk> . Janaki , who was originally chosen for the character of Parvati , opted out of the film as she could not spare the time ; she was then replaced by Savitri . 
 Principal photography commenced with <unk> Rao , a still photographer shooting some stills of Nageswara Rao in the guise of Devadasu , with a glass in his hand and the looks of a drunkard . Rao also took shots of Savitri in Parvati 's make @-@ up in <unk> 's Studio . Impressed with these stills , Narayana decided to use the same make @-@ up for the real shooting of the film . He showed these make @-@ up stills to <unk> , the make @-@ up man , who followed the same . Nageswara Rao , who portrayed the titular character , recalled that <unk> , being a Kuchipudi dance exponent and an experienced stage actor , used to enact the scenes before the actors , thereby making their job easy . He even recalled that the character 's half asleep makeup was a result of hard work by the make @-@ up man <unk> , and that the director shot him only at night so that he could get a " natural " feel to the hero 's drunken look ; those scenes were shot over 53 days . 
 = = Music = = 
 The official soundtracks of Devadas were composed by C. R. Subbaraman . The lyrics were written by Samudrala <unk> and Thanjai N. Ramaiah Dass and K. D. Santhanam for the Telugu and Tamil versions , respectively . There was a controversy regarding crediting the lyricist in the film . Though Samudrala is credited as the lyrics writer in the film , the researcher V. A. K. Ranga Rao claims that <unk> Ramakrishna <unk> actually wrote some of the lyrics . C. R. Subbaraman died before the film 's release , and the remaining songs were composed by his assistants M. S. Viswanathan and T. K. Ramamoorthy . 
 The soundtracks of the Telugu and Tamil versions were released on 31 December 1953 ; both were marketed by HMV . The soundtracks were a huge commercial success , with " <unk> Maaya " and " Kala <unk> " , in particular , achieving cult status . Songs like " <unk> <unk> " and " O Devadas " became popular among the Tamil diaspora . The song " Kudi <unk> " was composed using the Kalyani raga . The song " <unk> <unk> " is composed in various ragas . 
 The soundtracks received positive reviews from critics . Reviewing the Tamil version , Randor Guy of The Hindu noted that the songs " contributed to the [ film 's ] success " . Reviewing the Telugu version , M. L. Narasimham from the same newspaper also praised the songs , noting , " The major contribution to the film 's success , however , came from the music director , a genius called C. R. Subbaraman . Every song he composed is a hit to this day . " S. Theodore Baskaran in his book The Eye of the Serpent noted , " One factor that sustains the popularity of this film to this is the songs [ sic ] " . On " <unk> <unk> " , <unk> M. of The Hans India noted , " The ' pallavi ' and ' charanam ' are in <unk> , second ' charanam ' is in Ranjani and the last one is in Mohana . The switching from ' charanam ' to ' pallavi ' and vice versa is so smooth , one forgets to notice the change in ' <unk> ' and ' <unk> ' . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The Telugu version , Devadasu , was released on 26 June 1953 , and the Tamil version was released three months later on 11 September 1953 . Both versions were released with an approximate final reel length of 5 @,@ 260 metres ( 17 @,@ 260 ft ) and were given a " U " ( Universal ) certificate by the Central Board of Film Certification , with a run time of 190 and 192 minutes , respectively . Both versions were commercially successful , with the Telugu version completing a run of 100 days . The film is the inaugural recipient of the Filmfare Award for Best Film – Telugu . 
 Devadasu received positive reviews from critics upon its release . M. L. Narasimham of The Hindu praised the performances of the film 's cast , particularly that of Nageswara Rao . He added that B. S. Ranga 's " excellent " cinematography and C. R. Subbaraman 's music were the film 's highlights apart from Vedantham Raghavaiah 's direction . Reviewing Devadasu , Randor Guy wrote that the film was remembered for " empathetically brilliant performance of Nageswara Rao in the title role and equally impressive acting by Savithri " . <unk> wrote , " The superb direction by Sri Vedantham Raghavaiah made [ Devadasu ] an immortal classic " . Hindustan Times stated that Nageswara Rao 's performance " remains a classic portrayal of the character that has been adapted on @-@ screen several times " . 
 = = Legacy and influences = = 
 Devadasu and Devadas are regarded as among the most successful films in Telugu and Tamil cinema respectively . Later films that followed the same theme include Vasantha <unk> ( 1972 ) and <unk> <unk> ( 1982 ) . Upon release , the dialogue <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> ( English : If I drink , I can forget , but they don 't let me drink ; if I forget , I can drink , but they don 't let me forget ) became famous . The film proved to be a major breakthrough in Nageswara Rao 's career . The success of the film made him known as the " Tragedy King " of Telugu cinema and also led to his becoming typecast in similar roles . In order to shed the tragic @-@ romantic hero image , he accepted a comic role in Missamma ( 1955 ) . Savitri too appeared in Missamma , and her character in that film was described by Pa . <unk> of Dinamani as an antithesis of her role in Devadasu . 
 In July 2007 , S. R. Ashok Kumar of The Hindu asked eight Tamil directors to list ten of their favourite films . Balu Mahendra named Devadas as one of his top ten Tamil films . He added that the film had " superb lighting by B. S. Ranga , excellent performances by A. Nageswara Rao and Savithri , and haunting music by C. R. Subbaraman " . Actor Sivakumar stated , " You can ’ t reproduce movies like Parasakthi , Pasamalar , Devadas , Veerapandiya Kattabomman or Ratha Kanneer [ ... ] By remaking such films , you are lowering yourself , while it enhances the original artists ’ image . " <unk> Chowdary titled his 2006 comedy film Devadasu , though it had no similarity with this film . In May 2012 , Radhika Rajamani of Rediff.com mentioned Devadasu for the letter D in her list , " The A to Z of Telugu Cinema " . During a programme titled " Telugu Cinema <unk> " organised by the film society of Vishakhapatnam , writer and actor Ravi Kondala Rao placed Devadasu among other Telugu films like Raja Harishchandra ( 1913 ) , Bhakta Prahlada ( 1932 ) , Mala Pilla ( 1938 ) , Pathala Bhairavi ( 1951 ) and Lava Kusa ( 1963 ) during a speech on the role of Telugu cinema in the hundred years of Indian cinema . In April 2013 , CNN @-@ News18 included the film in its list of " 100 greatest Indian films of all time " . Indo @-@ Asian News Service described Devadasu as one of Nageswara Rao 's " best films " . Dilip Kumar , who portrayed Devadas in the 1955 film directed by Bimal Roy , admitted that <unk> Rao 's performance as the character was better than his own , remarking , " There is only one Devadas ( 1953 ) , and that is Akkineni Nageswara Rao . " 
 = HIStory : Past , Present and Future , Book I = 
 HIStory : Past , Present and Future , Book I ( usually shortened to HIStory ) is the ninth and penultimate studio album by American recording artist Michael Jackson . It is his fifth studio album released through Epic Records . It was released on June 18 , 1995 . This is Jackson 's first album on his own label , MJJ Productions , and consists of two discs : the first disc ( HIStory Begins ) is a compilation of some of his greatest hits from 1979 onward , while the second disc ( HIStory Continues ) is a studio album composed entirely of new material . The majority of the second disc 's tracks were written and produced by Jackson , often in conjunction with collaborators . 
 HIStory was Jackson 's return to releasing music following his eighth studio album Dangerous ( 1991 ) . Many of the 15 songs pertain to the accusations and Jackson 's mistreatment in the media , specifically the tabloids . The songs ' themes include environmental awareness , isolation , greed , suicide and injustice . 
 HIStory is Jackson 's most controversial album . Jackson was accused of using anti @-@ Semitic lyrics in " They Don 't Care About Us " . Jackson stated that he did not mean any offense and on multiple occasions denied anti @-@ Semitism . The dispute regarding the lyrics ended with Jackson re @-@ recording them . R. Kelly was accused of plagiarizing one of the album 's songs , " You Are Not Alone " . In 2007 a judge ruled that the song was plagiarized and the song was subsequently banned from radio stations in Belgium . 
 Six singles and two promotional singles were released from HIStory : " Scream " / " Childhood " , " You Are Not Alone " , " Earth Song " , " This Time Around " , " They Don 't Care About Us " and " Stranger in Moscow " . " This Time Around " was released as a radio @-@ only single , and " Earth Song " , " They Don 't Care About Us " and " Stranger in Moscow " were less successful within the United States , but were successful internationally ; all three peaked within the top ten in multiple countries . 
 The album was generally well received by music critics and was also commercially successful , debuting and peaking at number one in many countries , including the United States , Canada , Australia , France and the United Kingdom , as well as charting within the top ten in Spain , India and Mexico . The album was certified six times platinum by the end of 1996 in Europe , making it the best selling album of the year in the combined European market . The album was nominated for five Grammy Awards , winning one for Best Music Video – Short Form for " Scream " . The greatest hits disc of the album was reissued as a single disc on November 13 , 2001 , under the name Greatest Hits : HIStory , Volume I and has reportedly sold four million copies worldwide as of early 2010 . The second half of the album , consisting of 15 new songs , was finally released separately in selected European countries in 2011 and History : Past Present Future Book I is the Best Selling Double Disk Album of All Time with between 20 – 30 million copies ( 40 – 60 million units ) sold worldwide . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 HIStory is primarily directed at the tabloid press . Starting in the late 1980s , Jackson and the press had a difficult relationship . In 1986 , the tabloids ran a story claiming that Jackson slept in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber , which Jackson stated was not true . It was reported that Jackson had offered to buy the bones of Joseph Merrick ( the " elephant man " ) . Jackson described the story as " a complete lie " . These stories inspired the pejorative nickname " Wacko Jacko " , which Jackson despised . He stopped leaking untruths to the press , so the media began making up their own stories . In 1989 , Jackson released the song and music video " Leave Me Alone " , a song about his perceived victimization at the hands of the press . The video shows Jackson poking fun not only at the press but also the situation he was in . 
 In 1993 , the relationship between Jackson and the press crumbled entirely when he was accused of child sexual abuse . Although he was not charged with a crime , Jackson was subject to intense media scrutiny while the criminal investigation took place . Complaints about the coverage and media included : using sensational headlines to draw in readers and viewers when the content itself did not support the headline ; accepting stories of Jackson 's alleged criminal activity in return for money ; accepting confidential , leaked material from the police investigation in return for money paid ; deliberately using pictures of Jackson 's appearance at its worst ; a lack of objectivity ; and using headlines that strongly implied Jackson 's guilt . In 1994 , Jackson said of the media coverage , " I will say I am particularly upset by the handling of the matter by the incredible , terrible mass media . At every opportunity , the media has dissected and manipulated these allegations to reach their own conclusions . " 
 Jackson began taking painkillers , Valium , Xanax and Ativan to deal with the stress of the allegations . A few months after the allegations became news , Jackson had stopped eating . Soon after , Jackson 's health had deteriorated to the extent that he cancelled the remainder of his tour and went into rehabilitation . Jackson booked the whole fourth floor of a clinic and was put on Valium IV to wean him from painkillers . When Jackson left the United States to go into rehabilitation , the media showed Jackson little sympathy . In 1993 , The Daily Mirror held a " Spot the Jacko " contest , offering readers a trip to Disney World if they could correctly predict where Jackson would appear next . The same year , a Daily Express headline read , " Drug Treatment Star Faces Life on the Run " , while a News of the World headline accused Jackson of being a fugitive ; these tabloids also falsely alleged that Jackson had travelled to Europe to have cosmetic surgery that would make him unrecognisable on his return . In early November 1993 , Geraldo Rivera set up a mock trial , with a jury made up of audience members , even though Jackson had not been charged with a crime . 
 The new material on HIStory : Past , Present and Future , Book I was recorded from September 1994 to March 1995 . Jackson co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced a majority of the songs featured on the album . Aside from Jackson , other writers include Dallas Austin , The Notorious B.I.G. , Bruce Swedien , R. Kelly and René Moore and other producers include David Foster and Bill Bottrell . HIStory was Jackson 's first studio album since his 1991 album Dangerous four years prior , and his first new material to be released since being accused of child sexual abuse in 1994 . HIStory was released as a two @-@ disc album ; disc one ( HIStory Begins ) contains already released material from Jackson , and the second disc ( HIStory Continues ) comprises new material . <unk> first disc had fifteen songs from Jackson 's four previous studio albums , Off the Wall ( 1979 ) , Thriller ( 1982 ) , Bad ( 1987 ) and Dangerous ( 1991 ) . Physically , the album was available on double gold CD , double cassette , and , due to the format 's running time limitations , triple vinyl . Musically , HIStory 's themes are credited as , R & B , pop , rock , dance , urban , new jack swing , funk , and hip @-@ hop . HIStory was released on June 16 , 1995 by Sony Music 's Epic Records . 
 = = Composition = = 
 HIStory , similar to Jackson 's previous studio albums Thriller and Bad , contains lyrics that deal with paranoia . The majority of the new songs were written by Jackson . Several of the album 's fifteen new songs pertain to the child sexual abuse allegations made against him in 1993 and Jackson 's perceived mistreatment by the media , mainly the tabloids . Because of this , the album has been described as being Jackson 's most " personal " . Two of the album 's new tracks were covers . The genres of the album 's music span R & B , pop , hard rock and ballads . The lyrics pertain to isolation , greed , environmental concerns , injustice . " Scream " is a duet with Jackson 's younger sister Janet ; contemporary critics noted that it was difficult to distinguish their voices apart . It was noted that the " refrain " of the song 's lyrics " Stop <unk> ' me ! " is " compelling , " and that Jackson " spits out the lyrics with drama and purpose " . " Scream " ' s lyrics are about injustice . 
 The lyrics for the R & B ballad " You Are Not Alone " , written by R. Kelly , pertain to isolation . Two Belgian songwriters , brothers Eddy and Danny Van Passel , claimed to have written the melody in 1993 ; In September 2007 , a Belgian judge ruled the song was plagiarized from the Van Passel brothers , and it was subsequently banned from airwaves in Belgium . " D.S. " is a hard rock song , whose lyrics were interpreted by music critics as an attack on the district attorney of Jackson 's child sexual abuse case , Thomas Sneddon . Multiple critics reviewed the song in connection with Sneddon , Fox News Channel and CNN , noting that the " cold man " in the lyrics is Sneddon ; when the name " Dom S. Sheldon " from the chorus is sung , it resembles " Thomas Sneddon " . 
 " Money " was interpreted as being directed at Evan Chandler , the father of the boy who accused Jackson of child sexual abuse . The lyrics of " Childhood " pertain to Jackson 's own childhood . Similar to " Scream " , the lyrics to " They Don 't Care About Us " pertain to injustice , as well as racism . In " This Time Around " , Jackson asserts himself as having been " falsely accused " . The song features The Notorious B.I.G. ( aka Biggie Smalls ) two years before his death in 1997 . Jackson worked with Biggie again posthumously in 2001 on Jackson 's following album , Invincible on the song " Unbreakable " ; this made him the only rapper to appear on multiple Jackson LPs . " Earth Song " was described as a " slow blues @-@ operatic " , and its lyrics pertain to environmental concerns . On HIStory , Jackson covered Charlie Chaplin 's " Smile " and The Beatles ' " Come Together " . " Stranger in Moscow " is a pop ballad that is interspersed with sounds of rain . Jackson described the lyrics as being a " swift and sudden fall from grace " . " Tabloid Junkie " is a hard funk song with lyrics instructing listeners to not believe everything they read in the media and tabloids . The album 's title track , " HIStory " contained multiple samples , including Martin Luther King Jr . ' s " I Have a Dream " speech . " HIStory " was not released as a single from HIStory , but its remix was from Blood on the Dance Floor : HIStory in the Mix in 1997 . 
 As an introduction for " Little Susie " , Michael used his own variation of Pie Jesu from Maurice <unk> 's Requiem . The inspiration behind the song more likely came from an artist called Gottfried Helnwein . Michael admired the artist 's work and he had purchased some of his paintings . One of them , " Beautiful Victim " , inspired the song . Helnwein is considered quite provocative as he paints about the human condition depicting wounded children , among others . Helnwein later painted a portrait of Michael . There appears to be a similarity between the " Beautiful Victim " painting and the artwork included for the song in HIStory . 
 = = Controversy and influence = = 
 = = = Dispute regarding lyrics of " They Don 't Care About Us " = = = 
 The possibility that the lyrics to " They Don 't Care About Us " contained antisemitism was first raised publicly by The New York Times on June 15 , 1995 , one day before the album 's release . The publication highlighted the lyrics , " Jew me , sue me , everybody do me / Kick me , kike me , don 't you black or white me " and labeled them " slurs " . Jackson responded directly to the publication , stating : 
 When questioned further about the lyrics , Jackson denied that " They Don 't Care About Us " was antisemitic , commenting " It 's not anti @-@ Semitic because I 'm not a racist person ... I could never be a racist . I love all races . " That same day , Jackson received support from his manager and record label , who described the lyrics as " brilliant " , that they were about opposition to prejudice and taken out of context . The following day , David A. Lehrer and Rabbi Marvin Hier , leaders of two Jewish organizations , stated that Jackson 's attempt to make a song critical of discrimination had backfired . They expressed the opinion that the lyrics used were unsuitable for young audiences because they might not understand the song 's context and that the song was ambiguous for some of the listeners . They acknowledged that Jackson meant well and suggested that he write an explanation in the album booklet . 
 On June 17 , Jackson issued another public apology to anyone offended by his choice of words and promised that future copies of the album would include an apology , Jackson concluded , " I just want you all to know how strongly I am committed to tolerance , peace and love , and I apologize to anyone who might have been hurt " . The next day , in his review of HIStory , Jon Pareles of The New York Times alleged , " In ... ' They Don 't Care About Us ' , he gives the lie to his entire catalogue of brotherhood anthems with a burst of anti @-@ Semitism : ' Jew me , sue me , everybody do me / Kick me , kike me , don 't you black or white me ' " . 
 On June 23 , Jackson decided , despite the cost incurred , he would return to the studio and alter the offending wording on future copies of the album ; " Jew me " and " Kike me " would be substituted with " do me " and " strike me " . He reiterated his acceptance that the song was offensive to some . Spike Lee , who would direct the music videos for " They Don 't Care About Us " , stated that he felt there was a double standard in the music industry , commenting that the use of the word nigger , in music , does not cause controversy . Additionally , rapper Notorious B.I.G. , used the word nigga on another song on the HIStory album , " This Time Around " , but it did not attract media attention . The song " They Don 't Care About Us " is covered by Christian Rock Band P.O.D. in 1999 as a special edition of their album " Fundamental Elements of Southtown . " 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 HIStory 's music videos displayed different themes and elements . Certain music videos , such as " They Don 't Care About Us " , helped bring awareness of poverty and had positive effects on the locations . " They Don 't Care About Us " ' s music video was directed by Spike Lee , Jackson said that Lee chose to direct the video because the song " has an edge , and Spike Lee had approached me . It 's a public awareness song and that 's what he is all about . It 's a protest kind of song ... and I think he was perfect for it " . Jackson also collaborated with 200 members of the cultural group Olodum , who played music in the video . The media interest surrounding the music video exposed Olodum to 140 countries around the world . It brought them worldwide fame and increased their credibility in Brazil . Lúcia Nagib , of The New Brazilian Cinema , said of the music video : 
 In 2009 , Billboard described the area as " now a model for social development " and stated that Jackson 's influence was partially responsible for this improvement . For the first time in Jackson 's career , he made a second music video for a single . This second version was filmed in a prison with cell mates ; the video shows Jackson handcuffed and contains real footage of police attacking African Americans , the Ku Klux Klan , genocide , execution , and other human rights abuses . Jackson 's music video for " Earth Song " received praise for its environmental recognition . In 1995 , the video received a Genesis Award for Doris Day Music Award , given each year for animal sensitivity . In 2008 , a writer for the Nigeria Exchange noted , " ' Earth Song ' drew the world 's attention to the degradation and bastardization of the earth as a fall out of various human activities " . 
 Two other music videos from HIStory have been influential . Jackson 's " Stranger In Moscow " music video influenced the advertising campaign for International Cricket Council Champions Trophy 2004 , which featured " a series of smart outdoor ads and a classy TV spot " . The television commercial was inspired by " Stranger In Moscow " s video where " the maiden in black splash about in the rain , with kids playing cricket for company " . " Scream " was a creative influence on other music videos such as the 1999 release of the award winning " No Scrubs " by TLC . This influence was also present on the 2008 release of " Shawty Get Loose " by Lil Mama and Chris Brown . Reacting to the comparisons made between the videos , Mama explained , " I feel honored , because that was one of the initial goals , and I feel that it was executed well " , she added that the emulation was intentional and that Brown was the only logical choice to step into Michael Jackson 's role . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Sony Music spent $ 30 million to promote the album . Prior to the album 's release , the music press were anticipating how well it would sell . One analyst for SoundScan expressed the opinion that the press were out of touch with the public when it came to Jackson ; the public liked him , while the press did not . He believed that " naysayers " in the media would be left surprised with the commercial reception to the HIStory campaign . " Smile " , " This Time Around " and " D.S. " were released as promotional singles in 1995 and December 1997 . Due to lack of radio airplay , " Smile " and " D.S. " did not chart on any music charts worldwide . " This Time Around " , was released as radio @-@ only single in the United States in December 1995 . The song peaked at number twenty @-@ three on the Billboard Hot R & B Singles chart and at number eighteen on the Billboard Hot Dance Music / Club Play chart solely off radio airplay . 
 To promote the album , Jackson embarked on the commercially successful world concert tour , titled HIStory World Tour . The HIStory World Tour was Jackson 's third , and last , concert tour as a solo artist . The HIStory World Tour , beginning in Prague , Czech Republic on September 7 , 1996 , attracted more than 4 @.@ 5 million fans from 58 cities in 35 countries around the world . The average concert attendance was 54 @,@ 878 and the tour lasted 82 tour dates . Jackson did not perform any concerts in the United States , besides two concerts in January 1997 in Hawaii . VIP seats cost , on average , $ 200 per person . Each concert lasted an estimated two hours and ten minutes . The HIStory World Tour concluded in Durban , South Africa on October 15 , 1997 . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Several singles were released from HIStory . " Scream " / " Childhood " , released as a double A @-@ side , was the first single released from HIStory in May 1995 . " Scream " was sung and performed by Jackson and his sister Janet Jackson . The single had the best ever debut at number five - where it peaked , on the Billboard Hot 100 . The song received a Grammy nomination for " Best Pop Collaboration With Vocals " . The music video for " Scream " is one of Jackson 's most critically acclaimed songs and music videos , receiving numerous awards . With a US $ 9 million music video production budget , " Scream " is the most expensive music video ever made as of 2015 . 
 " You Are Not Alone " was the second single released from HIStory . Having debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 on September 2 , 1995 , it would become the first song ever to debut at number one on the chart , succeeding the record previously held from Jackson 's " Scream " single . " You Are Not Alone " was released in August 1995 , and it topped the charts in various international markets , including the United Kingdom , France , and Spain . The song was seen as a major artistic and commercial success . 
 " Earth Song " was the third single released in November 1995 . " Earth Song " did not chart on Billboard 100 . Internationally , the song topped four countries ' charts , as well as charting within the top @-@ ten in nine other nations . The song topped the UK Singles Chart for six weeks over Christmas in 1995 and sold one million copies there , making it his most successful United Kingdom single , surpassing the success of his single " Billie Jean " . 
 " They Don 't Care About Us " was the fourth single . " They Don 't Care About Us " peaked at number thirty on the Billboard 100 , and it charted within the top @-@ ten of Billboard 's Hot Dance Music and Hot R & B Singles Charts . The song charted better in other countries , compared to the United States , managing to chart within the top @-@ ten in fourteen countries . " They Don 't Care About Us " topped the German Singles chart for three weeks , while peaking at number two in Spain , number three in Austria , Sweden , and Switzerland , as well as charting at number four in France , the United Kingdom and the Netherlands . 
 " Stranger in Moscow " was released as the fifth and final single in November 1996 . The song was well received by critics . In the United States , the song peaked at number ninety one on the Billboard Hot 100 . Outside of the United States , the song was a success , topping in Spain and Italy , while peaking within the top @-@ ten in the United Kingdom , Switzerland , and New Zealand , among others . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 HIStory received generally positive reviews . Arguably Jackson 's most angry , raw , emotional album , the new tracks on HIStory revealed a musician worn and torn by years of superstardom , now reportedly reacting against people who tried to bring him down . This reaction is what some people say ultimately stunted his previous skill at creating cutting edge musical trends , with Jon Pareles of The New York Times writing that " It has been a long time since Michael Jackson was simply a performer . He 's the main asset of his own corporation , which is a profitable subsidiary of Sony " . Some reviewers commented on the unusual format of a new studio album being accompanied by a " greatest hits " collection , with Q magazine saying " from the new songs ' point of view , it 's like taking your dad with you into a fight . " Fred Shuster of the Daily News of Los Angeles described " This Time Around " , " Money " and " D.S. " as " superb slices of organic funk that will fuel many of the summer 's busiest dance floors " . 
 James Hunter of Rolling Stone gave HIStory four @-@ out @-@ of @-@ five stars and noted that it " unfolds in Jackson 's outraged response to everything he has encountered in the last year or so . It makes for an odd , charmless second chapter to a first that includes miraculous recordings like ' Billie Jean , ' ' The Way You Make Me Feel , ' ' Black or White ' and ' Beat It . ' In relation to " This Time Around " , Hunter described it as a " dynamite jam " that 's " ripe for remixes " and described " Scream " and " Tabloid Junkie , " as being " adventurous " while noting that " Earth Song " as a " noble sentiments " that sounds " primarily like a showpiece " . Jim Farber of the New York Daily News gave the album a generally mixed review and commented that he would give the album 's first disc three stars if it was released on its own . Jon Pareles of The New York Times believed that Jackson " muttered " lyrics such as " They thought they really had control of me " . Chris Willman of the Los Angeles Times said of " This Time Around " , " a tough , rhythm @-@ guitar @-@ driven track co @-@ written and co @-@ produced by hit @-@ maker Dallas Austin that sports one of the album 's better grooves " . 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic gave HIStory three @-@ out @-@ of @-@ five stars , but commented that it was a " monumental achievement " of Jackson 's ego . Erlewine remarked that on the HIStory Begins CD , it contains " some of the greatest music in pop history " but that it leaves some hits out , citing " Say Say Say " and " Dirty Diana " — commenting that " yet it 's filled with enough prime material to be thoroughly intoxicating " . Erlewine noted that HIStory Continues is " easily the most personal album Jackson has recorded " and that its songs ' lyrics referencing the molestation accusations create a " thick atmosphere of paranoia " . He cited " You Are Not Alone " and " Scream " as being " well @-@ crafted pop that ranks with his best material " , but concludes that " nevertheless , HIStory Continues stands as his weakest album since the mid- ' 70s . " David Browne of Entertainment Weekly , gave " HIStory Begins " an " A- " grade but the album 's new material a " C- " , which " winds up a B " for the entire album . Browne commented that the music " rarely seems to transport him ( and thereby us ) to a higher plane . " The album was nominated for five Grammy Awards at the 1996 and 1997 ceremonies respectively , winning one award . " You Are Not Alone " was nominated for Best Pop Vocal Performance – Male , " Scream " was nominated for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals and " Scream " won Best Music Video - Short Form and " Earth Song " was nominated for the same award the following year . The album itself was nominated for Album of the Year . At the 1995 MTV Video Music Awards , " Scream " received ten nominations , winning in three categories . 
 HIStory debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums charts selling over 391 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The album was certified seven times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America on October 22 , 1999 in the United States . Because HIStory is double disc album , its CDs are therefore counted separately for certification purposes , meaning the album achieved platinum status in the United States after 500 @,@ 000 copies were shipped , not one million . In Europe , the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry certified HIStory six times platinum , denoting six million shipments within the continent , including 1 @.@ 5 million in Germany and 1 @.@ 2 million shipments in the United Kingdom . As of 2010 , HIStory has sold 20 – 30 million copies ( 40 – 60 million units ) worldwide and is the best selling multiple @-@ disc release , making it one of the best @-@ selling albums of all time . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 The earliest French , German , and Dutch pressings of the album contain a hidden track on HIStory Begins , which is a 20 @-@ second message from Michael to his fans in the matching countries . 
 Some of the earlier versions of the album contain a different intro in the title track , " HIStory " which was sampled from " The Great Gate of Kiev " in Modest Mussorgsky 's Pictures at an Exhibition . Later versions replaced it with a similar orchestra piece . 
 The earliest pressings of this album contain " They Don 't Care About Us " with the uncensored lyrics . 
 = = Album credits = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = Bert T. Combs = 
 Bertram " Bert " Thomas Combs ( August 13 , 1911 – December 4 , 1991 ) was a jurist and politician from the U.S. state of Kentucky . After serving on the Kentucky Court of Appeals , he was elected the 50th Governor of Kentucky in 1959 on his second run for the office . Following his gubernatorial term , he was appointed to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals by President Lyndon B. Johnson , serving from 1967 to 1970 . 
 Combs rose from poverty in his native Clay County , Kentucky , to obtain a law degree from the University of Kentucky and open a law practice in Prestonsburg . He was decorated for prosecuting Japanese war criminals before military tribunals during World War II , then returned to Kentucky and his law practice . In 1951 , Governor Lawrence Wetherby appointed him to fill a vacancy on the Kentucky Court of Appeals . Later that year , he was elected to a full term on the court , defeating former governor and judge Simeon S. Willis . Kentucky 's Democratic Party had split into two factions by 1955 when Earle C. Clements , the leader of one faction , chose Combs to challenge A. B. " Happy " Chandler , who headed the other , in the upcoming gubernatorial primary . Combs ' uninspiring speeches and candidness about the need for more state revenue cost him the primary election . Chandler , who went on to win the governorship , had promised that he would not need to raise taxes to meet the state 's financial obligations , but , ultimately , he did so . This damaged Chandler 's credibility and left Combs looking courageous and honest in the eyes of the electorate . Consequently , in 1959 , Combs was elected governor , defeating Harry Lee Waterfield , Chandler 's choice to succeed him in office , in the primary . Early in his term , Combs secured passage of a three percent sales tax to pay a bonus to the state 's military veterans . Knowing a tax of one percent would have been sufficient , he used the excess revenue to enact a system of reforms including expansion of the state 's highway and state park systems . He also devoted much of the surplus to education . 
 Following his term in office , Combs was appointed to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals by President Johnson . He served for three years before resigning and running for governor again in 1971 . He lost in the Democratic primary to Wendell H. Ford , his former executive secretary . In 1984 , Combs agreed to represent sixty @-@ six of the state 's poor school districts in a lawsuit challenging the state 's system of financing public education . The suit , Rose v. Council for Better Education , resulted in the Kentucky Supreme Court declaring the state 's entire system of public schools unconstitutional . In response , the Kentucky General Assembly drafted a sweeping education measure known as the Kentucky Education Reform Act in 1991 . On December 3 , 1991 , Combs was caught in a flash flood while driving home from his law office . His body was found in the Red River near Rosslyn , in Powell County , the following morning . The coroner determined that he died of hypothermia . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The Combs family was one of the oldest European families in the United States . John Combs , the family patriarch , arrived in Jamestown , Virginia , in 1619 , and in 1775 , Benjamin John Combs came westward from Virginia into Clark County , Kentucky . He was followed into Kentucky in 1790 by two of his brothers , including Jack Combs , Bert Combs ' great @-@ grandfather . 
 Bert Combs was born in the Town Branch section of Manchester , Kentucky , on August 13 , 1911 ; he was one of seven children of Stephen Gibson and Martha ( Jones ) Combs . Combs ' father Stephen , a part @-@ time logger and farmer , was active in local politics , despite being a Democrat in a county where a large majority of residents were Republicans . His mother was a teacher , and she impressed upon her children the importance of a good education . Bert 's first school was the two @-@ room Beech Creek grade school . When he reached the seventh grade , his parents sent him and his sister to Oneida Baptist Institute in nearby Oneida , Kentucky because its school term was 8 to 9 months long , as opposed to the 5- to 6 @-@ month terms at Beech Creek . Later , Combs and his sister began riding a donkey every day to Clay County High School . Combs excelled academically and skipped some grades , graduating as valedictorian of his class in 1927 at age 15 . 
 Unable to afford college tuition , Combs worked at a local drug store and did small jobs for various residents of his community . In 1929 , his mother arranged for him to work at a coal company in Williamsburg , Kentucky , and attend Cumberland College ( then a junior college ) . The coal company job did not materialize , but Combs was able to afford three semesters at Cumberland by sweeping floors and firing furnaces in campus buildings . In mid @-@ 1930 , he began working as a clerk for the state highway department . This was one of several patronage jobs that were usually awarded by the governor , but the Democratically controlled state legislature had stripped Republican Governor Flem D. Sampson of his statutory appointment powers , giving them instead to a three @-@ man highway commission composed of Democratic Lieutenant Governor James Breathitt , Democratic Highway Commissioner Ben Johnson , and Dan Talbott . This allowed Combs , a Democrat , to secure the position . 
 Combs worked for the highway department for three years in order to earn enough money to attend the University of Kentucky College of Law in Lexington . While at the university , he was managing editor of the Kentucky Law Journal . In 1937 , he graduated second in his class , earning a Bachelor of Laws degree and qualifying for the Order of the Coif , a national honor society for the top ten percent of graduating law students . He was admitted to the bar , and returned to Manchester to begin practicing law . It was also in 1937 that Combs married Mabel Hall , with whom he had two children , Lois Ann Combs and Thomas " Tommy " George Combs . 
 = = Early legal career and service in World War II = = 
 Of his law practice in Manchester , Combs later noted : " I had too many <unk> and friends in Manchester , and they all expected me to handle things as a favor ... Then they 'd get their feelings hurt if I charged them . I was taking in a lot of cases , but not sending out many bills . " In 1938 , Combs accepted an offer from a law school classmate named LeRoy Combs ( no relation ) to join his father and uncle 's law firm in Prestonsburg . Prestonsburg was closer to his wife 's home in Knott County . Combs ' son Tommy suffered from a form of mental retardation , the result of an injury sustained at birth . After moving to Prestonsburg , Combs started a class for individuals with mental retardation , in part so Tommy could attend the class . 
 On December 22 , 1943 , Combs enlisted as a private in the U.S. Army for service in World War II . He received his basic training at Fort Knox and participated in the Volunteer Officer Candidate Program , which would have allowed him to attend Officer Candidate School ( OCS ) immediately after basic training . Instead , he was briefly assigned to teach cartography at the Aberdeen Proving Ground in Aberdeen , Maryland before completing OCS in Ann Arbor , Michigan , joining the Judge Advocate General 's Corps , and attaining the rank of captain . On July 1 , 1945 , he was sent to the South Pacific . He served as chief of the War Crimes Investigating Department under General Douglas MacArthur in the Philippine Islands , conducting tribunals for Japanese war criminals . Upon his discharge in 1946 , he was awarded the Bronze Star and the Military Merit Medal of the Philippines . 
 After the war , Combs returned to Prestonsburg , forming the law firm of Howard and Combs with J. Woodford Howard as his partner . He served as president of the Junior Bar Association of Kentucky in 1946 and 1947 . Combs often represented coal companies in workers ' compensation cases against Carl D. Perkins , later a U.S. Representative , who served as legal counsel for the mine workers . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Combs began his political career with his election to the office of city attorney in Prestonsburg in 1950 . Later that year , Governor Lawrence Wetherby appointed him to fill a vacancy in the office of Commonwealth 's Attorney for Kentucky 's 31st Judicial District . Combs announced , however , that he would serve only until a new election could be held . In April 1951 , Governor Wetherby appointed Combs to fill a vacancy on the Kentucky Court of Appeals caused by the death of Judge Roy Helm . Later that year , he sought a full eight @-@ year term on the court . His opponent was Simeon S. Willis , a popular former Republican governor who had previously sat on the court . Combs won the election by a vote of 73 @,@ 298 to 69 @,@ 379 . In George Robinson 's oral history , Combs attributed his victory to Willis 's advanced age ( 68 ) and the fact that many of Willis ' supporters assumed that their candidate would win and did not vote . 
 = = = 1955 gubernatorial race = = = 
 A.B. " Happy " Chandler , who had served as Kentucky 's governor from 1935 to 1939 and was a leader of a faction of the state 's Democratic Party , announced his intention to seek a second term in 1955 . Members of the anti @-@ Chandler faction scrambled to find a candidate to oppose him . The most likely candidate was Emerson " Doc " Beauchamp , the sitting lieutenant governor , but Beauchamp was not a good campaigner and his ties to Logan County – where politics were dominated by sometimes @-@ corrupt political bosses – gave the anti @-@ Chandler faction pause . Instead , the leader of the faction , former governor and sitting U.S. Senator Earle C. Clements , selected Combs as the faction 's nominee , and Combs resigned from his position on the Court of Appeals to enter the race . 
 In Combs ' first speech of the primary campaign , he admitted that the state needed to raise $ 25 million ( $ 221 million in 2016 dollars ) in new revenue and that a sales tax should be considered . Chandler , the more experienced politician , attacked Combs for this suggestion , maintaining that an experienced governor like himself would not need to raise taxes to meet the state 's obligations . Combs ' speech was also attacked as dry and uninspiring , partly because he read it verbatim from prepared notes . " And you said I couldn 't give a speech , " Doc Beauchamp later complained to Clements . Hugh Morris , chief of the Louisville Courier @-@ Journal 's Frankfort bureau , commented that " Combs opened and closed his campaign on the same night " . 
 With little but Combs ' inexperience to run against , Chandler portrayed Combs as a pawn of former governors Clements and Wetherby , whom he derisively nicknamed " Clementine " and " Wetherbine " . He accused both administrations of wasteful spending , specifically attacking the construction of the Kentucky Turnpike and Freedom Hall as unnecessary expenditures . Some of Chandler 's attacks were more personal in nature ; he charged that when Clements was governor , he spent $ 20 @,@ 000 ( $ 176 @,@ 671 in 2016 dollars ) on a new rug for his office , and that Wetherby had used African mahogany to panel his office , instead of " good , honest Kentucky wood " . Though receipts later showed that carpeting for the entire first floor of the capitol had cost only $ 2 @,@ 700 and that Wetherby 's paneling had been purchased from and installed by a Kentucky contractor , Chandler 's charges remained effective at keeping the Combs campaign on the defensive . 
 Two weeks before the primary , Combs was endorsed by former Vice @-@ President and native Kentuckian Alben W. Barkley , but Combs felt the endorsement came too late to be much help . Chandler defeated Combs in the primary by a vote of 259 @,@ 875 to 241 @,@ 754 and went on to win his second term as governor . Combs returned to Prestonsburg , set up a savings and loan company , and re @-@ established his law practice . During the four years of Chandler 's term , Combs accepted a number of speaking engagements , but otherwise remained out of the public eye . Meanwhile , the state 's need for funds compelled Chandler to raise the state sales tax and other taxes , despite his campaign promises not to do so . Consequently , Chandler lost credibility and Combs gained a reputation as a courageous , forthright , and honest politician for having acknowledged the state 's financial need during the campaign . 
 = = = 1959 gubernatorial race = = = 
 Barred by the state constitution from seeking consecutive terms , Chandler endorsed his lieutenant governor , Harry Lee Waterfield , to succeed him . Wilson Wyatt , who had managed Adlai Stevenson 's presidential campaign in 1952 , was the first anti @-@ Chandler candidate to declare his intention to seek the governorship in the 1959 election , doing so on April 9 , 1958 . Wyatt received several endorsements from leaders in Jefferson County , which contained his home city of Louisville and was vehemently anti @-@ Chandler . Four days after Wyatt 's announcement , Combs declared that he would again seek the office , and he was endorsed by Clements a week later . For the remainder of 1958 , the anti @-@ Chandler faction 's support remained split between Wyatt and Combs . In January 1959 , Clements held an all @-@ night meeting at the <unk> Airport Hotel in Louisville in which he brokered a deal whereby Combs would run for governor and Wyatt for lieutenant governor . Clements promised Wyatt his support in future political races . 
 In the primary campaign against Waterfield , Combs attacked the Chandler administration . He was especially critical of a rumor which held that Chandler had placed a two @-@ percent assessment on state employees ' salaries and had stored the funds in a Cuban bank so they could not be traced . According to the rumor , when Fidel Castro seized power during the Cuban Revolution , the funds Chandler had deposited in Cuba were lost . Chandler countered on Waterfield 's behalf with charges that Combs was a " Clements parrot " . Combs succeeded in uniting the anti @-@ Chandler base , and defeated Waterfield by 25 @,@ 000 votes ; he went on to win the governorship that fall , defeating Republican nominee John M. Robsion , Jr. by 180 @,@ 093 votes . The victory margin was a record for a governor 's race in Kentucky , and was the second highest margin of victory for any election in the state , trailing only Franklin D. Roosevelt 's 185 @,@ 858 @-@ vote victory over Herbert Hoover in 1932 . Combs was the first governor elected from Eastern Kentucky since Flem D. Sampson in 1927 and was the first veteran of World War II to hold the office . 
 = = = Governor of Kentucky = = = 
 One of Combs ' first official actions as governor was to call a special session of the legislature on December 19 , 1959 , to consider revising the state 's constitution , which had been in effect since 1891 . Calling a constitutional convention required that the General Assembly approve putting the issue of a convention on the ballot in two consecutive legislative sessions . The call then had to be approved by Kentucky voters . Despite near @-@ universal agreement by legal scholars that the constitution was badly in need of updating , Kentucky voters had rejected calls for a constitutional convention in 1931 and 1947 and had only approved 19 amendments since 1891 . Combs wanted to address the issue during his four @-@ year term , hence the haste in calling the special legislative session . The General Assembly easily approved the call for a convention during the special legislative session and again during the subsequent regular legislative session in 1960 . Combs signed the measure and the question of a constitutional revision was put on the ballot in November 1960 , when Kentucky voters defeated it by a margin of almost 18 @,@ 000 votes . This was the closest Kentucky has come to replacing the 1891 constitution , which remains in effect today . 
 = = = Kentucky 's first billion @-@ dollar budget = = = 
 During the campaign , Combs had advocated a progressive platform that included increased funding for education , highways , parks , industry , and airports . Soon after his election , he won approval for a three @-@ percent sales tax to pay a bonus to military veterans , although he could have funded the bonuses with a one @-@ percent tax . He had asked for the larger tax in order to fund his other priorities . As a result of the sales tax , Combs presided over the state 's first billion @-@ dollar budget . One study showed that Kentucky doubled its per capita expenditures between 1957 and 1962 , growing its appropriations faster than any other state . Combs held large public relations events for each tax @-@ funded project that was completed , declaring in dedication speeches that the sales tax had made the project possible . 
 In 1960 , Kentucky had one of the highest dropout rates in the nation , and ranked second only to Arkansas in the number of one @-@ room schools . Fewer than half of the state 's high school graduates attended college . Many teachers educated in Kentucky sought higher salaries available in other states . Combs ' biennial budget , passed by the General Assembly in 1960 , used money from the new sales tax to increase school funds by fifty percent and establish the state community college system ( now the Kentucky Community and Technical College System ) . It also increased funding for free textbooks by more than $ 3 million and allocated another $ 2 million to vocational education . It allocated over $ 5 million to the state universities for new buildings and another $ 10 @.@ 5 million to fund completion of the Albert B. Chandler Hospital , a facility at the University of Kentucky named in honor of Combs ' political foe . 
 The state 's roads were in poor condition when Combs became governor . The Automotive Safety Foundation found that two @-@ thirds of Kentucky 's federal roads were below standards for existing traffic demands . It further found that twenty percent of the state 's major city streets were inadequate , that another fifty @-@ five percent would soon be inadequate due to increasing traffic , and that half of the state 's secondary roads were unfit for modern industrial traffic . To address these problems , Combs issued $ 100 million in bonds to increase funding for highways , appointing Earle Clements as state highway commissioner to oversee the correction of the road issues . One of the new roads , the Mountain Parkway , which connected Combs ' native Eastern Kentucky to Central Kentucky , was later renamed the Bert T. Combs Mountain Parkway in Combs ' honor . Because of generous funding in Combs ' budget , Kentucky finished its portions of the Interstate Highway System much sooner than surrounding states such as Virginia and Tennessee . 
 Combs also won approval of a $ 10 million bond issue to benefit the state parks , which had poor lodging and few amenities . Combs combined the bond issue with $ 10 million in revenue bonds and effected major renovations at all 26 of the state 's parks . Though his dreams of seeing privately owned tourist facilities spring up around the parks did not come to fruition , out @-@ of @-@ state tourism to Kentucky more than doubled during his administration , accounting for about sixty percent of state park visitors and fifty @-@ three percent of the overnight visitations to the parks . Journalist John Ed Pearce recounts that Kentucky natives began to complain that they could not get reservations in the parks during peak seasons and called for limitations on the number of out @-@ of @-@ state visitors or a reservation system that favored Kentuckians , although nothing was done to address these complaints . 
 On April 10 , 1961 , Combs appropriated $ 50 @,@ 000 from the governor 's contingency fund to construct a floral clock on the lawn of the state capitol . Combs had seen a similar clock in Edinburgh , Scotland , and believed it would be a colorful addition to the capitol grounds . In a subsequent gubernatorial campaign , Happy Chandler mocked the clock , declaring " Well , they don 't say it 's half past 2 in Frankfort anymore . They say it 's two petunias past the <unk> weed . " Chandler 's derision became the minority view in time , however ; according to John Ed Pearce , the clock became one of the most talked @-@ about and visited tourist attractions in the state and the most visited place in Frankfort . 
 = = = Ethical reforms = = = 
 Combs created a merit system for state government workers , ensuring that officials could not be hired or fired for political reasons . This provision attracted more well @-@ qualified individuals to public service careers . Such careers were made even more attractive when , in 1962 , the state courts declared that the salaries of state employees , the amounts of which were specified in the state constitution , could be adjusted for inflation . Combs demanded that state employees stick strictly to the rules governing their offices . In one instance , Combs ordered a state audit of Carter County superintendent Heman McGuire , who was known to use his office for political gain . While Combs did not have the authority to remove McGuire directly , the audit showed McGuire 's misappropriation of funds and abuse of power . The state school board investigated these findings and removed the county school board members from office ; the replacement board members then ousted McGuire . 
 In 1961 , a group of citizens from Newport , Kentucky , asked Combs for help in cracking down on crime in their city . Just across the Ohio River from Cincinnati , Newport had gained a reputation as a haven for prostitution , gambling , and illegal alcohol . After receiving an affidavit from the citizens , Combs sent agents from the department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to the city . They cited six bars for violating laws governing liquor sales , and instructed Attorney General John B. Breckinridge to prosecute four local officials for failure to enforce the laws . When allegations of civil rights violations in a related trial surfaced , U.S. Attorney General Robert Kennedy sent federal Justice Department officials to Newport , prompting the resignation of the sheriff and a circuit judge . Two other local officials were barred from office for four years . 
 Some of Combs ' crackdowns on corruption were politically damaging , including the so @-@ called " truck deal " . In 1961 , Kyle Vance , a reporter for the Louisville Courier @-@ Journal reported that that the state was about to purchase some dump trucks from one of Combs ' former campaign officials for $ 346 @,@ 800 , far more than they were worth , according to the report . The newspaper , long antagonistic toward Highway Commissioner Clements , painted the deal as a political payoff orchestrated by the highway commissioner . In the interest of preserving his reputation as an honest governor , Combs canceled the proposed deal . This angered Clements , who took Combs ' action as a public rebuke . The incident caused a rift between him and Combs that never fully healed ; Clements later resigned , ostensibly to work on the presidential campaign of his friend and former Senate colleague , Lyndon B. Johnson . Thereafter , he worked against Combs at every opportunity , even joining with Happy Chandler to ensure Wilson Wyatt 's defeat in his 1962 race for the Senate , in a reversal of his previous promise to support Wyatt . 
 Combs also formed the state 's first Human Rights Commission and ordered the desegregation of all public accommodations in Kentucky . The latter action was commended in a letter to Combs from President John F. Kennedy . In 1961 , Combs was awarded an honorary Doctor of Laws degree from the University of Kentucky , and on February 17 , 1962 , he received an award from Keep America Beautiful for his work on cleaning up Kentucky 's highways , including securing passage of a bill requiring that auto junkyards near major roadways be screened from view by fences . 
 Among Combs ' other accomplishments as governor were requiring voting machines in state elections and passage of a law making the assessment of state employees for political campaign funds a felony . At the end of his term , Combs backed Edward T. Breathitt to succeed him as governor . Breathitt defeated Happy Chandler in the Democratic primary , then went on to defeat Republican Louie B. Nunn in the general election . It was the only time in the 20th century that a Kentucky governor 's preferred successor won election . 
 = = = Later political career = = = 
 Following his term as governor , Combs returned to his legal practice . He was a charter member and chairman of the Eastern Kentucky Historical Society and a trustee at <unk> College . In 1963 , he was awarded the Joseph P. Kennedy International Award for " outstanding contributions and leadership in the field of mental <unk> . " He was named Kentucky 's outstanding attorney in 1964 , and in the spring of that year , he served as a visiting professor in the Political Science Department at the University of Massachusetts . In 1965 , he was inducted into the University of Kentucky 's Hall of Distinguished Alumni . 
 In August 1964 , Combs declined a nomination to the bench of the United States District Court for the Western District of Kentucky . During the administration of Combs ' successor , Ned Breathitt , Republicans gained strength within the state behind the leadership of Louie Nunn , Marlow Cook , and William O. <unk> . The Republican rise , coupled with Democratic factionalism , prompted many prominent state Democrats to approach Combs about seeking another term as governor . Combs wavered on whether to seek the Democratic nomination until October 1966 , when he publicly declared his support for Henry Ward . In a later interview with historian George W. Robinson , Combs recounted that he " would have run at that time except for a personal family situation " . Ward handily defeated his primary opponents , Happy Chandler and Harry Lee Waterfield , but lost in the general election to Louie Nunn . 
 On January 16 , 1967 , President Lyndon Johnson nominated Combs to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals , replacing the deceased Shackelford Miller , Jr . , and the Senate confirmed the nomination on April 5 , 1967 . Because of the rules of the federal judiciary , Combs had to liquidate his business and banking assets and severely restrict contact with many of his political acquaintances to avoid potential conflicts of interest with cases he might adjudicate on the Court of Appeals . He expressed frustration that the cases that came before the court were frequently appealed to the Supreme Court , which often gave little weight to the opinions rendered by the Court of Appeals . Consequently , he resigned from the court on June 5 , 1970 , and joined the Louisville law firm of Tarrant , Combs , and Bullitt ( later Wyatt , Tarrant , and Combs ) . 
 With the end of Governor Nunn 's term approaching , a rivalry for leadership of the state Democratic party developed between Lieutenant Governor Wendell H. Ford , who had served as Combs ' chief administrative assistant during his gubernatorial term , and Julian M. Carroll , speaker of the state House of Representatives . As soon as Combs resigned from the Court of Appeals , Democratic leaders began asking him to seek the party 's gubernatorial nomination in 1971 , uniting the party behind him rather than splintering it between Ford and Carroll . In June 1970 , Carroll announced his intent to run for lieutenant governor , indicating that he would like to serve under Combs as governor . While Combs considered whether or not to seek the nomination , Ford declared his candidacy . Days later , Combs also entered the race . 
 Combs and Ford proclaimed advocated platforms , but Combs encouraged the state 's teachers to become more politically active , negotiating higher salaries and better benefits for themselves , while Ford was critical of educators becoming involved in politics and only advocated more spending on education if the state could afford it . In his oral history of Combs , Robinson noted that Ford , thirteen years Combs ' junior , " came across better on television " and that many voters in the state felt that Combs must have ulterior motives in leaving a judgeship that paid a salary of $ 42 @,@ 500 for the governorship , which paid only $ 30 @,@ 000 annually . Catholics were also upset that Combs had married his second wife , Helen Clark <unk> , just forty @-@ three days after his divorce from Mabel Hall was finalized on July 18 , 1969 . ( Combs and Hall had been separated for five years prior to finalizing the divorce . ) Despite these handicaps , many Democrats assumed that Combs , the proven candidate , would easily defeat the newcomer Ford , and fewer than one @-@ third of registered Democrats voted in the primary . In what the Courier @-@ Journal called a " stunning defeat " , Ford defeated Combs in the Democratic primary and went on to win the governorship . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After the 1971 primary , Combs retired from politics and resumed his law practice , maintaining an office in Frankfort . He continued to represent large coal companies , drawing the ire of local environmentalist and author Harry M. Caudill , who asserted that Combs claimed to represent the powerless while actually representing the powerful . He was active in the formation of the Rural Housing and Development Corporation and served on the Council on Higher Education . He also served on President Jimmy Carter 's General Advisory Committee on Arms Control and Disarmament . 
 Combs ' second marriage ended in divorce on May 19 , 1986 . On December 30 , 1988 , he married his law assistant , Sara M. Walter . 
 = = = Rose v. Council for Better Education = = = 
 On October 3 , 1984 , leaders of the Council for Better Education asked Combs to represent them in a legal challenge to Kentucky 's school financing system , which it claimed unfairly discriminated against poorer school systems in the state . Combs felt the lawsuit would be difficult to win and could cause retaliation against his other clients by state government officials . He needed this lawsuit " about like a hog needs a side saddle " , he would later claim ; nevertheless , he agreed to take the case if the Council could convince thirty to forty percent of the state 's school boards to join it . The Council eventually persuaded 66 of the 177 school boards to join . Working pro bono , Combs assembled a legal team that included Kern Alexander , a Kentucky native and education law expert who was named president of Western Kentucky University in November 1985 . 
 Combs first attempted to gain legislative concessions that might preclude the need for a lawsuit . Governor Martha Layne Collins proposed an education reform agenda and called the legislature into special session in mid @-@ 1985 to consider it . The legislature enacted a corporate income tax to raise $ 300 million aimed at reducing class sizes , but the Council was seeking more fundamental structural changes to the system and deemed the increased funds insufficient to equalize its members ' standing with that of more affluent school districts . Dissatisfied with the results of the special session , Combs and the Council filed their suit , Rose v. Council for Better Education , on November 20 , 1985 . The governor , state superintendent , state treasurer , leaders of both houses of the state legislature , and every member of the state board of education were named as defendants in the case . 
 The defendants ' request for a summary judgment dismissing the case was not granted , and the trial began in Franklin circuit court on August 4 , 1987 . During the trial , a new state superintendent was elected . The new superintendent , John Brock , announced that his office would drop its defense and side with the Council , a major blow to the defense . On May 31 , 1988 , Judge Ray Corns found in favor of the plaintiffs , declaring that the school finance system was " unconstitutional and discriminatory " . Two days later , the defense announced that it would appeal the ruling to the Kentucky Supreme Court , but recently elected governor Wallace G. Wilkinson refused to join the appeal and supported Judge Corns ' ruling . 
 Opening arguments in the appeal began December 7 , 1988 . The defense argued that the Council lacked standing to bring the suit ; Combs rebuffed this argument and cited statistics that ranked Kentucky as the most illiterate state in the nation to show how inequitable financing had adversely affected the state 's students . On June 8 , 1989 , the court handed down a 3 – 2 ruling declaring Kentucky 's entire public school system unconstitutional and giving the General Assembly until the end of their next legislative session , which would convene in January 1990 , to create a replacement . Commenting on the ruling , Combs said " My clients asked for a thimble @-@ full , and [ instead ] they got a bucket @-@ full " . 
 The court set out nine minimum standards . In response to the court 's ruling , the General Assembly passed the 1990 Kentucky Education Reform Act , which radically altered Kentucky 's school system , providing mechanisms to equalize funding among school districts and implementing some of the toughest accountability standards in the United States . Of the legislature 's actions , Combs opined " Kentucky has now , by reason of this legislation , decided to become educated — and we have embarked on a crusade for that purpose . Don 't be surprised if we should within the next decade develop a first class , world @-@ wide educational system . " 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 On December 3 , 1991 , Combs left his law office during a flash flood about 5 : 30 pm . He was reported missing hours later , and the following day , he was found dead of hypothermia just downstream from his car in the Red River near Rosslyn , in Powell County . He was buried in the Beech Creek Cemetery in Manchester . 
 In addition to the Bert T. Combs Mountain Parkway , Bert T. Combs Lake , an artificial lake constructed in 1963 in Clay County , is named in Combs ' honor . On April 20 , 2007 , two life @-@ sized statues of Combs were dedicated — one in Stanton , Kentucky , near the parkway that bears his name and another in the county courthouse in Prestonsburg . Combs ' widow , Sara Walter Combs , became the first woman to serve on the Kentucky Supreme Court in 1993 and currently sits on the Kentucky Court of Appeals , where she was chief judge from 2004 to 2010 , also a first for a woman . Combs ' daughter , Lois ( Combs ) Weinberg , unsuccessfully challenged incumbent Mitch McConnell for his Senate seat in 2002 . 
 = Cedric Howell = 
 Cedric Ernest " Spike " Howell DSO , MC , DFC ( 17 June 1896 – 10 December 1919 ) was an Australian fighter pilot and flying ace of the First World War . Born in Adelaide , South Australia , he enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force in 1916 for service in the First World War and was posted to the 46th Battalion on the Western Front . During November 1916 , he was accepted for a transfer to the Royal Flying Corps and was shipped to the United Kingdom for flight training . Graduating as a pilot , he was commissioned as a second lieutenant and posted to No. 45 Squadron RFC in France during October 1917 ; two months later the unit sailed to the Italian theatre . 
 Howell spent eight months flying operations over Italy , conducting attacks against ground targets and engaging in sorties against aerial forces . While in Italy , he was credited with shooting down a total of nineteen aircraft . In one particular sortie on 12 July 1918 , Howell attacked , in conjunction with one other aircraft , a formation of between ten and fifteen German machines ; he personally shot down five of these planes and was awarded the Distinguished Service Order . Howell had previously been awarded the Military Cross and Distinguished Flying Cross for his gallantry in operations over the front . He was posted back to the United Kingdom in July 1918 . In 1919 , Howell was killed while taking part in the England to Australia air race . Piloting a Martinsyde A1 aircraft , he attempted to make an emergency landing on Corfu but the plane fell short , crashing into the sea just off the island 's coast . Both Howell and his companion subsequently drowned . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Cedric Ernest Howell was born in Adelaide , South Australia , on 17 June 1896 to Ernest Howell , an accountant , and his wife Ida Caroline ( née <unk> ) . He was educated at the Melbourne Church of England Grammar School from 1909 , and was active in the school 's Cadet unit . On completing his secondary studies in 1913 , Howell gained employment as a draughtsman . By 1914 , he held a commission in the 49th ( Prahran ) Cadet Battalion , Citizens Military Force , as a second lieutenant . 
 = = First World War = = 
 = = = Australian Imperial Force to Royal Flying Corps = = = 
 On the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 , Howell attempted to enlist in the newly raised Australian Imperial Force but was initially rejected . The following year , he resigned his commission in the Citizens Military Force and re @-@ applied to join the Australian Imperial Force for active service in the war ; he was accepted on 1 January 1916 . Due to his age , Howell was ineligible for a commission in the force and was instead granted the rank of private . Allotted to the 16th Reinforcements of the 14th Battalion , he embarked aboard HMAT Anchises in Melbourne , Victoria , on 14 March . Arriving in France , he was posted to the newly raised 46th Battalion on 20 May and promoted to corporal four days later . While the unit was engaged in action along the Somme , Howell was temporarily raised to sergeant in July , before taking part in the Battle of Pozières the following month . He relinquished his temporary appointments and reverted to lance corporal in August . Considered an expert shot , Howell had been trained as a sniper during his service with the 46th Battalion . 
 On 11 November 1916 , Howell was among a group of 200 Australian applicants selected for a transfer to the Royal Flying Corps to undergo flight training . Shipped to the United Kingdom , he was posted to No. 1 Royal Flying Officers ' Cadet Battalion at Durham for his initial instruction . On graduating as a pilot , he was formally discharged from the Australian Imperial Force on 16 March 1917 and commissioned as a probationary second lieutenant in the Royal Flying Corps the following day . Howell was posted to No. 17 Reserve Squadron in April , where his rank was made substantive . Appointed a flight officer on 25 July , he was attached to the Central Flying School for duties . On 12 September , Howell wed Cicely Elizabeth Hallam Kilby in a ceremony at St Stephen 's Anglican Church , Bush Hill Park . 
 = = = Fighter pilot over Italy = = = 
 In October 1917 , Howell was posted to No. 45 Squadron RFC in France , piloting Sopwith Camels . Just prior to joining the unit , Howell had suffered a bout of malaria while still in England giving him a " tall , thin and dismal looking " appearance ; he was consequently nicknamed " Spike " . His service over the Western Front was short @-@ lived , however , as the squadron moved to Italy in late December . While operating over the Italian Front , Howell was engaged in both aerial combat missions and ground @-@ attack sorties , which included " destroy [ ing ] enemy transport crossing the Alps " . On 1 April 1918 , the Royal Flying Corps and Royal Naval Air Service were combined to form the Royal Air Force , with personnel from the former services transferred to the new branch ; Howell thus became a lieutenant in the new service from this date . 
 Throughout the first half of 1918 , Howell conducted several raids on ground targets , including one on an electrical power plant . From a height of approximately 100 feet ( 30 m ) , Howell , with " great skill " , scored three direct hits with his bombs on the facility . He was also active in aerial engagements against Central aircraft during this period , achieving flying ace status early in the year . During a particular patrol with two other members of his squadron on 13 May , the trio intercepted a party of twelve rival planes . In the ensuring battle , Howell " carried out a most dashing attack " , being personally credited with the destruction of three of the aircraft and with driving a fourth down out of control , despite suffering " frequent jams in both of his machine guns " . Cited for his " conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty " in carrying out ground @-@ attack missions , coupled with his destruction of seven Central aircraft , Howell was awarded the Military Cross . The announcement of the decoration was promogulated in a supplement to the London Gazette on 16 September 1918 . 
 Promoted to temporary captain on 1 June 1918 , Howell led a party of three machines out on patrol eight days later . The trio spotted a formation of six Austrian scout planes and went in to attack ; Howell shot down two of the aircraft . Later that month , he took off on a similar sortie with two other aircraft . They intercepted a party of nine machines , and during the consequent battle no less than six of the Central planes were destroyed with a seventh shot down as out of control ; Howell was credited with two of these . Described as a " fine fighting officer , skilful and determined " , Howell was commended for his efforts in destroying five aircraft during June , which resulted in his award of the Distinguished Flying Cross . The notice for the decoration was gazetted on 21 September 1918 . 
 Howell was out on patrol on 15 June 1918 when German and Austrian forces initiated the Battle of the Piave River by striking Allied lines on the opposite bank . After landing back at base at 11 : 40 , he was the first to bring news of the attack . With the aircraft refuelled and loaded with bombs , he — in company with the rest of the squadron — then led his flight on a total of four sorties against the enemy insurgents . No. 45 Squadron succeeded in destroying with its bombs a pontoon bridge , a boat , and a trench filled with soldiers , before inflicting at least a hundred casualties with machine gun fire . Heavy rain washed other bridges away and by 18 June the stranded Austrian forces on the Allied bank of the river were routed by a counterattack . 
 On 12 July 1918 , Howell and Lieutenant Alan Rice @-@ Oxley took to the sky in their Camels . The pair were soon confronted by a formation of between ten and fifteen Central aircraft . As the consequent dogfight raged , Howell destroyed four of the aircraft and sent a fifth down out of control . Two days later , Howell was credited with bringing down another plane , forcing the machine to crash down in Allied @-@ held territory . On 15 July , he led a trio of Camels in an assault on sixteen scout planes ; he destroyed two of the machines . The two scouts were to prove Howell 's final aerial victories of the war , bringing his total to nineteen aerial victories which were composed of fifteen aircraft destroyed , three driven down as out of control and one captured . His total made him No. 45 Squadron 's second highest @-@ scoring ace after Matthew Frew , although some sources place Howell 's score as high as thirty aerial victories . Late in July , following ten months of active service in the cockpit , Howell was posted back to the United Kingdom where he spent the remainder of the war attached to training units as a flight instructor . Cited for his " distinguished and gallant services " in Italy , he was mentioned in the despatch of General Rudolph <unk> , 10th Earl of Cavan on 26 October 1918 . For his efforts in destroying eight aircraft over a four @-@ day period in July , Howell was awarded the Distinguished Service Order . A supplement of the London Gazette carried the announcement on 2 November 1918 , reading : 
 Air Ministry , 2nd November , 1918 . 
 His Majesty the KING has been graciously pleased to confer the undermentioned Rewards on Officers and other ranks of the Royal Air Force , in recognition of gallantry in Flying Operations against the Enemy : — 
 <unk> THE DISTINGUISHED <unk> ORDER . 
 Lieut . ( T. / Capt. ) Cedric Ernest Howell , M.C. , <unk> 
 This officer recently attacked , in company with one other machine , an enemy formation of fifteen aeroplanes , and succeeded in destroying four of them and bringing one down out of control . Two days afterwards he destroyed another enemy machine , which fell in our lines , and on the following day he led three machines against sixteen enemy scouts , destroying two of them . Captain Howell is a very gallant and determined fighter , who takes no account of the enemy 's superior numbers in his battles . 
 = = England @-@ to @-@ Australia flight and legacy = = 
 While stationed in England , Howell attended an investiture ceremony at Buckingham Palace on 13 December 1918 , where he was presented with his Distinguished Service Order and Military Cross by King George V. Howell was discharged from the Royal Air Force on 31 July 1919 . During 1919 , the Australian Government offered a prize of £ 10 @,@ 000 to the first aviator to pilot a British or Commonwealth @-@ built aircraft from England to Australia within a period of 30 days . On 15 August , Howell was approached by British aircraft manufacturer Martinsyde to take part in the race flying their Type A Mk.I aircraft , powered by a Rolls @-@ Royce engine ; he accepted the offer . He was to be accompanied by Lieutenant George Henry Fraser , a qualified navigator and engineer who had served with the Australian Flying Corps during the war . 
 On 4 December 1919 , Howell and Fraser took off in their Martinsyde from Hounslow Heath Aerodrome . The pair , however , soon ran into poor weather and were forced to land the aircraft in Dijon , France later that day . Airborne again , they reached Pisa , Italy the following day , where a replacement tail skid was fitted to the A1 ; by 6 December , the pair were in Naples . On 10 December , Howell and Fraser took off in their fully fuelled plane from Taranto in the afternoon . They intended to reach Africa next , but poor weather conditions forced them to alter their plan and they instead headed for Crete . Their Martinsyde was reported flying over St George 's Bay , Corfu at 20 : 00 that evening . For unknown reasons , Howell and Fraser attempted to execute an emergency landing at Corfu . They were , however , unable to make it to the coast and were forced to crash into the sea . Citizens in the area later reported that they heard cries for help coming from the sea that night , but that a rescue was not possible in the rough conditions . Both Howell and Fraser were drowned . 
 Howell 's body later washed ashore and was returned to Australia for burial ; Fraser 's remains were never discovered . Howell was accorded a funeral with full military honours , which took place at <unk> Cemetery , Heidelberg on 22 April 1920 , with several hundred mourners in attendance ; his widow , parents and sister were chief among these . A firing party of the Royal Australian Garrison Artillery led the gun carriage bearing the coffin to the cemetery . Captains Adrian Cole , Frank Lukis and Raymond Brownell acted as pallbearers along with five other officers who had served in either the Royal or Australian Flying Corps . On 12 February 1923 , a stained @-@ glass window dedicated to the memory of Howell was unveiled by General Sir Harry Chauvel at St. Anselm 's Church of England in Middle Park ; Howell had been a member of the congregation there in his youth . Following the closure of St. Anselm 's in 2001 , the window was moved to St. Silas 's Church , Albert Park , which is now also the parish church for the former parish of St. Anselm . 
 = Central Park ( skyscraper ) = 
 Central Park is a 51 @-@ storey office tower in Perth , Western Australia . The building measures 226 m ( 741 ft ) from its base at St Georges Terrace to the roof , and 249 m ( 817 ft ) to the tip of its communications mast . Upon its completion in 1992 , the tower became the tallest building in Perth . It is also currently the equal seventh tallest building in Australia and the tallest building in the Western half of Australia . 
 The approval of the tower was controversial due to the plot ratio concessions made by the Perth City Council to the developers . These concessions enabled the developers to construct a tower more than twice the height which would otherwise be allowable on the site . There was also opposition to the Council 's decision to ignore its own town planning experts in allowing a large car park to be constructed underneath the site . 
 The building is formed by a composite steel and concrete frame , with various setbacks in its profile , meaning the upper floors are much smaller in area than lower levels . Outrigger trusses at the top of the building and at the various setbacks help to stiffen the building 's reinforced concrete core against the strong winds prevalent in the area . The base of the building features a small park , for which the tower is named . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Department stores = = = 
 From as early as the 1930s , the site was home to a Foy & Gibson department store , which was known by the locals as Foy 's . The store extended all the way through from St Georges Terrace to Hay Street , featured a popular cafeteria and " had great areas of window display with island windows beyond the street frontage " . 
 The store changed to a David Jones department store upon the purchase by that chain of Foy 's Western Australian operations . By the late 1970s , David Jones had withdrawn from the Western Australian market , and the site stood vacant after decades as a landmark of St Georges Terrace . The site was later acquired by Central Park Developments , a joint venture of the Superannuation Board of Western Australia , Bond Corporation and L. R. Connell and Partners , and in 1986 had a value of A $ 20 million . 
 = = = Planning approval = = = 
 A planned $ 150 million redevelopment of the 1 @.@ 5 @-@ hectare ( 3 @.@ 7 @-@ acre ) site was announced in October 1985 . The plans included a 45 @-@ storey office tower , underground car parking , a landscaped park and the extension of the Hay Street Mall westwards to alongside the development . Demolition of the site had started by October 1986 , by which time the planned tower had been expanded slightly to 47 floors . 
 The 1987 approval of the redevelopment by the Perth City Council was controversial . The Council 's own Town Planning Scheme imposed a limit on the number of parking bays in the central business district to ensure that the city streets could handle increased traffic levels coming from extra parking . Under the Scheme the site was only entitled to 300 car @-@ parking bays . The developers sought approval for 1 @,@ 175 car @-@ parking bays , which Council planning experts had said would cause traffic to back up to King Street waiting for entry . The Council wanted the developers to consider constructing a road tunnel from Mounts Bay Road to the underground parking to reduce traffic congestion around the tower , however the developers only agreed to consider building a pedestrian underpass beneath St Georges Terrace . 
 The final planning approval for the redevelopment was ultimately passed by the Council in an 18 – 9 decision on 19 October 1987 , after a discussion of over two hours . The Council made various planning concessions to allow the development to have 1 @,@ 175 car @-@ parking bays and exceed the allowable plot ratio . The Council allowed the developers to transfer 15 storeys worth of plot ratio from the landscaped park at the corner of William and Hay streets , and gave bonuses of 10 storeys for actually building the park and 4 storeys for the public space and the quality of the development . As a result , more than half of the tower 's eventual 51 floors came from these planning concessions . Councillors Peter Gallagher , Les Johnston and Michael Hale argued that the approval of the redevelopment set a " dangerous precedent " , and the State 's Planning Minister Bob Pearce said that the building was " too big " and that the Council should not have granted the extra parking bays to the developers . At the time of the planning approval , the site was owned by AMP , the Reserve Bank of Australia and Central Park Developments ( the Bond @-@ Connell corporation ) . The State Government approved the plans in November 1987 and the construction contract was awarded to Multiplex . 
 = = = Construction : 1988 to 1992 = = = 
 Construction on the tower started in 1988 , with South Perth firm <unk> Gilchrist & Evans as the project engineers . The building was constructed in a modular method , whereby floor slabs were pre @-@ cast off @-@ site and simply dropped into the steel frame of the tower as construction progressed . Over 60 @,@ 000 m2 ( 650 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of pre @-@ cast floor units , both rectangular and triangular , were supplied for use in Central Park , the largest such contract ever awarded to an Australian company . The modular construction principle even extended to the restrooms of the tower : they arrived on the building site as completely enclosed modules , ready to be fixed into position on each floor and have external services connected . 
 Major structural work on Central Park concluded with the installation in 1992 of its communications mast . The first tenants , accounting firm BDO Nelson Parkhill , moved into their offices in May 1992 , followed by further tenants including Ernst & Young in December 1992 . Following structural completion of the tower , the public park was landscaped in early 1993 . 
 Construction of Central Park cost $ 186 @.@ 5 million , and upon completion the building overtook the R & I Tower ( now the BankWest Tower ) as the tallest skyscraper in Perth . It was also the city 's largest office tower by combined floor area , a title which was taken by <unk> when that building opened in 1994 . 
 = = = Post @-@ construction = = = 
 Since its completion , Central Park has been regarded as one of Perth 's leading premium office towers . However , in the years following its opening Central Park faced a sluggish office rental market and experienced high vacancy rates for several years . The tower now has a stated 66 @,@ 500 m2 ( 716 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of office and retail space across 51 occupied floors . Major current tenants include miners Rio Tinto , <unk> , law firm DLA Piper , and internet service provider Westnet . St George Bank also occupies some space in the building and in mid @-@ 2007 the St George logo was installed at the top of the tower and was removed in mid <unk> in mid 2015 the Rio Tinto logo has been installed on the top four sides of the tower 
 In September 1999 , high winds during a heavy storm resulted in the dislodgement of some domes in the canopy over the building 's forecourt . This led to the closure of St Georges Terrace entrance as a safety precaution . The building 's then @-@ owner , the Government Employees Superannuation Board , subsequently initiated legal action against the tower 's builder Multiplex . 
 Since 2001 , the tower has played host to an annual stair climb race up 53 flights of stairs to the roof . In 2008 the event raised $ 103 @,@ 719 for MS Australia . 
 Central Park has remained the tallest building in Perth since its completion . However , it was suspected to be overtaken in height by the newly constructed City Square which originally was expected to be 270 metres ( 890 ft ) tall . 
 = = Design = = 
 Central Park was the fourth and largest stage in the plan by architects Forbes & Fitzhardinge for the surrounding commercial precinct , which included the AMP Building , the Commonwealth Bank building and the Wesley Centre . The design of the tower changed several times as the prospect of different planning concessions changed . The building as ultimately constructed measures 226 m ( 741 ft ) from St Georges Terrace to the roof of the mechanical penthouse , and 249 m ( 817 ft ) to the tip of its communications antenna . 
 The tower has a composite steel and concrete frame featuring a pre @-@ stressed , reinforced slip @-@ form concrete core , which is stiffened by an outrigger truss at the top of the tower and at the various side setbacks . At the time of its completion , Central Park was the tallest core @-@ stiffened building in Australia . The core stiffening method minimises the sway of the building in winds , which even after the core stiffening is around 30 cm ( 12 in ) at the tower 's top . 
 The use of a service core structure for the building minimised the number of internal columns that were needed , with only two on the largest floors , which maximised usable space . The 1 @,@ 200 @-@ millimetre ( 47 in ) diameter columns for the tower are made of composite steel and concrete , encased within a permanent formwork of <unk> tubing . The pre @-@ cast floor slabs are supported by fire @-@ treated steel beams and provided with a composite action by in @-@ situ topping . 
 The profile of the building has multiple setbacks , to provide for variable floor areas to cater to the needs of different tenants . The plan of the tower is based upon a square , with triangular wings extending from opposite sides . The building was oriented to make best use of the relatively narrow frontage onto St Georges Terrace . The tower is clad with aluminium and glass curtain walls . The building has 5 @,@ 000 sheets of glass , which get cleaned twice per year . Because of high winds , it can take up to 3 months to complete one window @-@ washing circuit of the building . To clean the exterior faces of the building , the window cleaners have to move vertically over 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) . 
 Central Park was noted upon its opening for being technologically advanced , with " fully computerised air conditioning " , which uses data from 1 @,@ 400 sensors on each floor to regulate temperatures in an energy @-@ efficient way . From its uppermost floors , there are views out to Kings Park and the Indian Ocean . However , members of the public are not permitted to observe from the building except on designated charity days . 
 The podium of the building is clad with stone to complement the surrounding street frontages , and the foyer is decorated with murals by artist Brian McKay on 223 m2 ( 2 @,@ 400 sq ft ) of aluminium wall panels . In addition to the 64 @,@ 000 m2 ( 690 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of office space , 3 @,@ 000 m2 ( 32 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of retail space and 1 @,@ 030 basement car @-@ parking bays in the project at completion , the site also includes a 5 @,@ 000 m2 ( 54 @,@ 000 sq ft ) landscaped park , which leads towards the intended focal point of the precinct , the restored Wesley Church on the opposite side of Hay Street . The architects intended the park to act as a " breathing space in the hard linear nature of the Hay Street Mall " . The park contains sunken seated areas and raised grassed areas , as well as a fountain as the centrepiece . There is also a fountain and a large plaza area which provides a pedestrian thoroughfare to St Georges Terrace . It has been variously described as " magnificent " , " one of the few green strips in the city outside the grassed area on the river foreshore " , the " green lungs of the city " , and " a backyard @-@ sized patch of grass " . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Fort Al Jalali = 
 Fort al @-@ Jalali , or Ash Sharqiya Fort , is a fort in the harbor of the old city of Muscat , Oman . The fort was built by the Portuguese in the 1580s to protect the harbor after Muscat had twice been sacked by Ottoman forces . It fell to Omani forces in 1650 . During the civil wars between 1718 and 1747 , the fort was twice captured by Persians who had been invited to assist one of the rival Imams . The fort was extensively rebuilt later . 
 At times , al Jalali served as a refuge or a jail for a member of the royal family . For much of the 20th century it was used as Oman 's main prison , but this function ended in the 1970s . Fort al @-@ Jalali was restored in 1983 and converted into a private museum of Omani cultural history that is accessible only to dignitaries visiting the country . Exhibits include cannons , old muskets and matchlocks , maps , rugs and other artifacts . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The Portuguese called the structure Forte de São João ( Fort St. John ) . The origin of the present name " Al Jalali " is disputed . One theory is that it comes from the Arabic Al Jalal , which means " great beauty " . Another is that it is named after a Persian leader called " Jalal Shah " . And there may have been a Baluchi or Arab commander called Jalal — however , this is not supported by any historical record . Al Jalali Fort is also known as the Ash Sharqiya Fort . 
 = = Location = = 
 " Muscat " means " anchorage " . True to its name , Old Muscat is a natural port in a strategic location between the Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean . It lies on the coast of the Gulf of Oman on a bay about 700 metres ( 2 @,@ 300 ft ) long , protected from the sea by a rocky island . The port is surrounded by mountains , making it difficult to access from the landward side . Muscat may have been described by the geographer Ptolemy in the 2nd century , who noted a " concealed harbor " in the region . 
 Al Jalali Fort lies on a rocky outcrop on the east side of the Muscat harbor . It faces Fort Al @-@ Mirani , which is built on another outcrop on the west side . Muscat was strongly defended against attack from the sea by these twin forts , by the <unk> fort further to the west and by other fortifications on the rocky ridges surrounding the bay . Until recently , the fort was only accessible from the harbor side by way of a steep flight of stone steps . Land reclamation on the seaward side of the rock has now provided space for a heliport . A funicular railway makes the fort more accessible . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In the early 15th century Muscat was a minor port , used by ships as a place to collect water . By the start of the 16th century it was becoming an important trading center . At this time the interior of Oman was ruled by an Arab Imam , but the coast on which Muscat lay was subject to the Persian King of Hormuz . In 1497 the Portuguese navigator Vasco da Gama found a route around the southern cape of Africa and east to India and the Spice Islands . The Portuguese quickly began trying to establish a monopoly on the trade in spices , silk and other goods . They came into conflict with Mamluk Egypt , whose trade with Europe through the Red Sea was threatened . Hormuz was the main center for the trade route with modern Iraq and Iran through the Persian Gulf . The Portuguese wanted control of this route , too . 
 On 10 August 1507 , an expedition of six ships under Admiral Afonso de Albuquerque left the newly established Portuguese base on Socotra with Hormuz as the objective . The Portuguese sailed along the Oman coast destroying ships and looting the towns . At <unk> , which they took after a hard fight , the Portuguese mutilated their captives , killed the inhabitants regardless of sex or age , and despoiled and burned the town . Muscat , at first , surrendered unconditionally to avoid the same fate . However , the people withdrew their submission when reinforcements arrived . Albuquerque launched a successful assault against Muscat . He slaughtered most of the inhabitants , and then plundered and burned the town . 
 The Portuguese continued along the coast . The governor of Sohar agreed to transfer his allegiance to the king of Portugal and to pay tribute . The Portuguese arrived at Hormuz on 26 September 1507 . They took the town after fierce resistance on 10 October 1507 . Albuquerque signed a treaty under which the Portuguese were free of customs duties and could build a fort and trading factory at Hormuz . Muscat now became a regular port of call for the Portuguese . Diogo Fernandes de Beja came there in 1512 to collect the tribute . Albuquerque , now Viceroy of India , visited in March 1515 . In 1520 a fleet of twenty three Portuguese ships anchored in the harbor en route from the Red Sea to Hormuz . When a general revolt against Portuguese rule over Hormuz broke out in November 1521 , Muscat was the one place where the Portuguese were not attacked . 
 = = = Portuguese stronghold = = = 
 In 1527 the Portuguese began to construct a barracks , warehouse and chapel at Muscat , apparently completed in 1531 . A force of four Ottoman galiots entered the harbor in 1546 and bombarded the town , but did not land . To make their base more secure the Portuguese sent an engineer to build a fort to the west of the harbor , where al @-@ Mirani stands today . The Portuguese built this first Muscat fort in 1550 . In April 1552 an Ottoman fleet of twenty four galleys and four supply ships under Piri Reis left Suez en route to Hormuz , aiming to eliminate Portuguese presence in the region . An advance force landed at Muscat in July 1552 . After an eighteen @-@ day siege of Muscat the town fell and the fort was destroyed . The commander , João de Lisboa , and 128 Portuguese were taken captive . The main Ottoman fleet arrived , and the combined fleet went on to Hormuz . The Portuguese regained the town two years later , and in 1554 repulsed another attack by the Turks . 
 Fort Al Jalali was built after the Ottomans sacked Muscat for a second time in 1582 . In 1587 Captain <unk> <unk> was sent to Muscat to build the fortress , which was named Forte de São João . The top of the prominence on which the fort stands was first leveled , and the rock was scarped . <unk> built a cistern to hold water for the occupants and armed the fort with cannon . It seems to have been built on older foundations . The main improvement made by the Portuguese was to construct a gun deck looking over the harbor . Fort al @-@ Jalali and the twin Fort al @-@ Mirani were both completed between 1586 and 1588 . 
 The Portuguese faced growing competition in the region from English and Dutch traders . In 1622 a joint Persian @-@ English force took Hormuz . After this the Portuguese built forts in other ports on the Omani coast , although they abandoned most of them in 1633 – 34 , concentrating on defending Muscat . After 1622 the Portuguese began to strengthen Fort al Jalali , apparently with the intention of making it the main fort . However , in 1623 Forte do Almirante ( today 's Fort Al @-@ Mirani ) was still considered the more important of the two forts , and was used as a residence in the hot weather by the governor of Muscat . 
 In 1625 the Portuguese built walls and towers around Muscat to improve the defenses . Remains of these fortifications exist today . Muscat was a drain on Portuguese finances , with its requirement to maintain large military and naval forces to defend it . Trade did not prosper as hoped since the Persian market was closed to them until 1630 . By then the Dutch and English dominated trade in the Persian Gulf . 
 Nasir bin Murshid ( r . 1624 – 49 ) was the first Imam of the <unk> dynasty in Oman , elected in 1624 . He was able to unify the tribes with a common goal of expelling the Portuguese . Nasir bin Murshid drove the Portuguese out of all their bases in Oman except Muscat . He was succeeded by his cousin Sultan bin Saif in 1649 . In December 1649 the forces of Sultan bin Saif captured the town of Muscat . About 600 Portuguese managed to escape by sea , while others fled into Forte do Almirante ( al Mirani ) . They surrendered on 23 January 1650 . The capture of Muscat from the Portuguese marked the beginning of an expansion of Omani sea power in which the Portuguese possessions in India and East Africa soon came under threat . 
 = = = Persian invasions = = = 
 After the death in 1718 of the fifth <unk> Imam of Oman , Sultan bin Saif II , a struggle began between rival contenders for the <unk> . Fort al @-@ Jalali was damaged during this civil war . The country became divided between Saif bin Sultan II and his cousin Bal <unk> bin Himyar , rival Imams . Finding his power dwindling , Saif bin Sultan II asked for help from Nader Shah of Persia . In 1738 the two forts were surrendered to the Persian forces . The Persians reembarked for Persia , taking their loot with them . 
 A few years later Saif bin Sultan II , who had been deposed , again called for help . A Persian expedition arrived at <unk> around October 1742 . The Persians made an unsuccessful attempt to take Muscat , defeated by a stratagem of the new Imam Sultan bin Murshid . Later in 1743 the Persians returned , bringing Saif bin Sultan II with them . They took the town of Muscat , but the al @-@ Jalali and al @-@ Mirani forts held out and Saif bin Sultan II would not order them to yield . Omani historians say that the Persian commander , Mirza Taki , invited Saif to a banquet on his ship . Saif became stupefied by wine and his seal was taken from him . It was used to forge orders to the forts ' commanders to surrender , a ruse that was successful . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 Ahmad bin Said al @-@ <unk> , the first ruler of the Al Said dynasty , blockaded Muscat and captured the forts in 1749 . He renovated them , particularly al @-@ Jalali . The function of al @-@ Jalali changed from passive defense of the harbor to a base from which troops could be dispatched . In the decades that followed the large central buildings and the round towers were added . 
 Early in 1781 two of Ahmad bin Said 's sons , Sultan and Saif , took control of the forts of al @-@ Mirani and al @-@ Jalali . When the governor of Muscat tried to recover the forts , Sultan and Saif began a damaging bombardment of the town . The two brothers gained the support of the powerful Sheikh Sarkar , who marched on the capital in April 1781 . Their father agreed to an amnesty , letting his rebellious sons hold both the forts . He changed his mind and took al Mirani , while the brothers held al <unk> for some months . 
 Sultan and Saif then kidnapped their brother Said bin Ahmad and imprisoned him in al Jalali . The Imam , their father , hurried to Muscat which he reached in January 1782 . He ordered the commander of al Mirani to fire on al Jalali while his ships joined in from the east of the fort . While this was in progress Said bin Ahmad bribed his jailer and escaped . Isolated and without a hostage , the two brothers agreed to surrender . The Imam took Saif and held him under surveillance to prevent a fresh rebellion . Said bin Ahmad ruled from 1783 to 1789 . During his reign his son was held prisoner in Fort al @-@ Jalali for a period by the governor of Muscat , until another of his sons managed to free him . 
 The fort is mentioned several times in the history of 19th century Oman . While the ruler of Oman was away on a pilgrimage to Mecca early in 1803 , his nephew Badr bin Saif made an attempt to get control of Fort Jalali . The story is that he was being smuggled into the fort in a large box , but was detected by a Hindu trader . He managed to escape and took refuge in Qatar . In June 1849 the governor of Sohar made a treaty with the British resident to suppress the slave trade . This triggered a revolt by the religious party in which the governor was killed and his father , Hamad , was made governor . The Sultan of Oman , then residing in Zanzibar , arranged for Hamad to be seized and thrown in jail in Fort al Jalali . Hamad died on 23 April 1850 , either from starvation or from poison . In 1895 the tribes sacked Muscat . Sultan Faisal bin Turki took refuge in Fort al @-@ Jalali until his brother , who was holding Fort al @-@ Mirani , regained control of the town . 
 For most of the 20th century Fort al @-@ Jalali was the main prison in Oman , holding about 200 prisoners . Some were Omanis from the interior captured during the Jebel Akhdar War ( 1954 – 59 ) , or taken after that war . Other prisoners were taken during the Dhofar Rebellion ( 1962 – 76 ) . It was the most notorious of Omani prisons , which were known for their appalling conditions . Colonel David Smiley , commander of the Sultan 's armed forces at Muscat , called the prison " a veritable <unk> " . In 1963 forty four prisoners escaped in a well @-@ planned break @-@ out , but most were quickly recaptured , handicapped by their weakened physical condition . In 1969 a guard helped two members of the royal family escape , but they were caught after a few days . The prison was closed in the 1970s . 
 = = Structure and exhibits = = 
 Fort al @-@ Jalali was restored in 1983 . Today little remains of the Portuguese period apart from a few inscriptions in that language . It has been converted into a museum of Omani cultural history . It is open to important people such as visiting heads of state , but not to the public . 
 The fort is made up of two towers with a connecting wall pierced by gun ports for cannon . The interior is now landscaped with fountains and pools , trees and gardens . The result has been described as " <unk> " . In the center of the fort there is a courtyard planted with trees . Around it on various levels are rooms , enclosures and towers accessible through a complex set of stairways that may have once had a defensive purpose . Massive doors with protruding iron spikes protect sections of the fort . 
 Exhibits include cannons at the gun ports with shot , ropes and firing equipment , and old muskets and matchlocks . There are maps and other illustrations of historical times , including a plaque that depicts the winds and the currents in Muscat bay . One room , with a ceiling made from palm @-@ logs , is filled with cultural relics of Oman . The square central tower holds the main museum exhibits including rugs , pottery , jewelry , weapons , household utensils and incense holders . A dining hall overlooks the courtyard for use by the distinguished visitors . An old breeze @-@ maker has been preserved in this room , once manually operated but now mechanized . 
 The fort plays a role in special events where the royal dhow and yacht sail in state through the harbor , fireworks are launched and <unk> play on the battlements . 
 = Peter Turnbull ( RAAF officer ) = 
 Peter St George Bruce Turnbull , DFC ( 9 February 1917 – 27 August 1942 ) was an Australian fighter ace of World War II , credited with twelve aerial victories . Born in Armidale , New South Wales , he was an electrician before he joined the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) in January 1939 . After pilot training he was posted to No. 3 Squadron , which departed for action in the Middle East in July 1940 . Flying Gloster Gladiator , Hawker Hurricane and P @-@ 40 Tomahawk fighters during the North African and Syria @-@ Lebanon campaigns , Turnbull was credited with nine victories and awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross . Posted to the South West Pacific in March 1942 , he joined No. 75 Squadron at Port Moresby , New Guinea , operating P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks . During the ensuing Battle of Port Moresby , he claimed three Japanese aircraft . Turnbull took over command of No. 76 Squadron in May , leading it into the Battle of Milne Bay later that year . He was killed during a mission on 27 August 1942 ; an Allied airfield in New Guinea was subsequently named for him . 
 = = Early career = = 
 The son of Archibald and Maud Turnbull , Peter Turnbull was born on 9 February 1917 in Armidale , New South Wales . After leaving school with an Intermediate Certificate , he was employed as an electrician in Glen Innes , where his family owned property . In 1938 , Turnbull enlisted in the 12 / 24th Light Horse Regiment , a militia unit . He joined the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) as an air cadet on 16 January 1939 , and underwent instruction at No. 1 Flying Training School in Point Cook , Victoria . Graduating on 20 October 1939 , he was commissioned a pilot officer and assigned to No. 3 ( Army Cooperation ) Squadron , which operated Hawker Demons out of RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales . He was promoted to flying officer on 20 April 1940 , and posted to the Middle East with his unit on 15 July , disembarking at Suez , Egypt , the following month . 
 = = Combat service = = 
 = = = Middle East = = = 
 During the North African campaign in late 1940 , Turnbull undertook close air support in Gloster <unk> and fighter missions in Gloster Gladiators . He was credited with probably destroying a Fiat CR.42 during the Battle of Bardia on 26 December , and with damaging a Fiat G.50 on 25 January 1941 , the last sortie No. 3 Squadron flew with the Gladiator before converting to Hawker Hurricanes . On 3 April , he claimed four Messerschmitt Bf 110 heavy fighters in a single sortie flying a Hurricane he had christened <unk> ; his commanding officer praised him as " quick to the kill " . 
 After converting to P @-@ 40 Tomahawks , No. 3 Squadron took part in the Syria @-@ Lebanon campaign . Turnbull became an ace — the first flying the new fighter — on 15 June 1941 , when he destroyed a Vichy French Martin 167 bomber in southern Syria . He shot down two more of the same type over Palmyra less than two weeks later , and followed this up by claiming two Vichy Dewoitine D.520 fighters during escort duty on 10 July . He was promoted to flight lieutenant the same month . With his tally of victories in the Middle East standing at nine , Turnbull was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for the 116 operational sorties and 200 hours he had flown , numerous enemy aircraft destroyed in the air and on the ground , and " magnificent fighting spirit and great skill " . The decoration was promulgated in the London Gazette on 10 October 1941 , and eventually presented to his father after Turnbull 's death . He returned to Australia that November to serve in the South West Pacific . 
 = = = South West Pacific = = = 
 Turnbull was posted to No. 24 Squadron at RAAF Station Archerfield , Queensland , in December 1941 . He then served on the staff of No. 3 Service Flying Training School , Amberley , during January and February 1942 . In March , he joined No. 75 Squadron in New Guinea as a flight commander under Squadron Leader " Old John " Jackson , another veteran and ace from No. 3 Squadron in the Middle East . Operating P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks , No. 75 Squadron quickly became engaged in the defence of Port Moresby , one of the crucial early battles in the New Guinea campaign . Even before seeing combat in the area , Turnbull was shot at . As he brought a flight of four Kittyhawks in to land for the first time at Moresby 's Seven Mile aerodrome on 21 March , nervous Australian anti @-@ aircraft gunners opened fire and damaged at least three planes before they landed . The next day , Turnbull took part in a surprise raid against Lae airfield . Five Kittyhawks led by Jackson attacked and destroyed a dozen Japanese planes on the ground , while four others led by Turnbull provided protective cover above ; he shot down one of three Mitsubishi Zeros that intercepted the Australian formation . He claimed two further victories during the battle of Port Moresby — a pair of Zeros on 10 April , according to one account — which brought his score to twelve . On 17 April , the commander of No. 76 Squadron , attached to No. 75 for combat experience , was killed in action , resulting in Turnbull being posted back to Australia to take over the former unit . 
 In May 1942 , Turnbull was formally appointed commanding officer of No. 76 ( Kittyhawk ) Squadron , then based in Townsville , Queensland . He was promoted to acting squadron leader on 8 June . Turnbull returned to New Guinea with No. 76 Squadron on 25 July , arriving at Milne Bay in company with a re @-@ equipped No. 75 Squadron . During the Battle of Milne Bay , Turnbull 's unit was engaged in air defence against Japanese raiders and offensive strikes against shipping and other targets in support of Australian ground forces . On 7 August , inclement weather forced Turnbull and another pilot to crash land on Goodenough Island ; they were later picked up by an Allied patrol . Nos. 75 and 76 Squadrons attacked the main Japanese invasion convoy as it steamed towards Milne Bay on 25 August . Two days later , Turnbull was patrolling for Japanese tanks with another member of his squadron , Flight Lieutenant Ron <unk> . While diving on an enemy target , his Kittyhawk was seen to flip on to its back at 200 feet ( 61 m ) and crash into the jungle . The cause of the incident was never fully established ; ground fire was considered a likely explanation , although mud on the control surfaces , causing a high @-@ speed stall , was also postulated . Initially posted as missing , Turnbull was confirmed dead on 4 September when troops from the 2 / 12th Battalion found the wreckage of his plane and his body inside . According to the official history of the Australian Army during World War II , the " soldiers much admired and appreciated the work of the two R.A.A.F. squadrons and , for them , the gallant Turnbull had epitomised the courage and skill of all the airmen " . Squadron Leader " Bluey " Truscott took over Turnbull 's command . By 7 September the Japanese had withdrawn their troops from the Milne Bay area ; Generals Sydney Rowell and Cyril Clowes both described the efforts of Nos. 75 and 76 Squadrons as " the decisive factor " in repulsing the invading forces . 
 Turnbull was credited with a total of twelve aerial victories during the war , plus one probable and two damaged . Initially buried at <unk> <unk> , Milne Bay , he was subsequently interred in Bomana War Cemetery , Port Moresby . His name appears on panel 104 of the Commemorative Area at the Australian War Memorial , Canberra , and on the Glen Innes Roll of Honour . Milne Bay 's No. 3 Airstrip was renamed Turnbull Field in his honour ; it marked the furthest westward advance of the Japanese in the area . 
 = Jack Dormand = 
 John Donkin Dormand , Baron Dormand of Easington ( 27 August 1919 – 18 December 2003 ) , known as Jack Dormand , was a British educationist and Labour Party politician from the coal mining area of Easington in County Durham , in the north @-@ east of England . He was Member of Parliament ( MP ) for the Easington constituency from 1970 until his retirement in 1987 . 
