 Described as an " old @-@ style centre @-@ right socialist " , Dormand was a working @-@ class child who progressed through grammar school education to study at Oxford and Harvard to a career as an educational administrator before entering Parliament at the age 50 , where he was noted as an advocate for education and for mining areas . He never achieved ministerial office , but as a skilled administrator he played a significant role as a government whip in the 1970s , and as Chair of the Parliamentary Labour Party when the party was in opposition in the 1980s . An atheist and a staunch republican , he reluctantly accepted a life peerage when he retired from the House of Commons and was an active working peer until his death 16 years later . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dormand was born near Easington at the workingmen 's club in the village of Haswell , when his father Bernard , a former miner , was steward . He was educated locally at Wellfield Grammar School . Although he later took up rugby , he was a skilled footballer in his youth , good enough to have professional trials with both Manchester United and Charlton Athletic . Sport remained a major part of his life ; until his death he remained a member Houghton @-@ le @-@ Spring Rugby Club and of <unk> Cricket Club , last playing both games at the age of 63 . 
 After training as a teacher at Bede College , Durham University , he was not called up for military service during World War II , because teaching was a reserved occupation . After the war he improved his qualifications by taking a Postgraduate Certificate in Education ( <unk> ) at Loughborough College in 1947 . In the 1950s he studied at St Peter 's College , Oxford , where he was awarded a diploma in public and social administration with distinction and won a Fulbright Scholarship to Harvard in his second year ( 1954 ) , becoming a friend of the future Senator Ted Kennedy . 
 From 1940 to 1948 Dormand worked as a teacher in the coal mining community of Easington , teaching at Hordern Modern School and his old school , now renamed Wellfield A.J. Dawson Grammar School . In 1948 , he gave up teaching to become an education advisor to Durham County Council , and in 1957 moved to be adviser to the National Coal Board . He stayed with the NCB for only two years before returning to Durham to be Further Education organiser ; from 1963 to 1970 he was Director of Education for Easington Rural District Council . He was also the President of the Easington branch of the National Union of Teachers . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Dormand had been a member of the Labour Party since the age of 18 . He was elected to Haswell parish council at the age of 26 , and at 30 to Easington rural district council . 
 Manny Shinwell , the then 85 @-@ year @-@ old veteran Labour Member of Parliament ( MP ) for the Easington constituency , announced in 1969 that he would not contest the next general election . Dormand , who had been secretary of the Easington Constituency Labour Party throughout the 1960s and Shinwell 's presumed successor , was selected as the new Labour candidate to contest the ultra @-@ safe seat ( Shinwell had been re @-@ elected in 1966 with over 80 % of the votes ) . At the 1970 general election in which Harold Wilson 's Labour government was defeated , Dormand was returned to the House of Commons with a barely reduced 79 @.@ 8 % share of the vote . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 His maiden speech on 8 July 1970 focused on education and on the needs of Durham as an " excepted district " , and in particular on those classed as " slow learners " . It was well received , and the then Secretary of State for Education Margaret Thatcher was seen to be making notes . Dormand 's views on education were supportive of comprehensive education , and in July 1973 he urged the abolition of private schools ( attacking particularly those Labour MPs who sent their children to be educated privately ) . 
 Dormand opposed Britain 's membership of the European Economic Community ( EEC ) , and at the time of the referendum on EEC membership in 1975 he was an advocate for the United Kingdom leaving the EEC and rejoining the European Free Trade Association . His main work in opposition was as a member of select committee on nationalised industries , where his knowledge and inquisitorial skills won him the respect of the committee 's left @-@ wing chair Ian Mikardo . In February 1972 he called for employment for miners who had been made redundant , and became Secretary of the Parliamentary Labour Party 's Northern Group in 1973 . 
 = = = Republicanism = = = 
 Dormand later described himself as " a republican for as long as I can remember having an interest in politics " and was a long @-@ serving secretary of the all @-@ party Parliamentary republican group . He spoke out in opposition to the monarchy , declaring in 1971 that " the whole of the royal establishment from the Queen downwards could go , lock stock and barrel tomorrow " . He extended his criticism to the hereditary peerage in February 1973 . In 1974 he and fellow Labour MP Willie Hamilton took the required oath declaring their allegiance to the Queen , then admitted that they had not meant it . The same year , he criticised the number of Royal servants who appeared on the biannual honours lists , calling instead for " scores of miners " to be honoured as they were just as worthy . 
 = = Government whip = = 
 Labour was returned to government at the February 1974 general election , and Dormand was appointed as an assistant government whip under Bob Mellish . He was promoted to be a Lord of the Treasury ( full Government whip ) in a reshuffle after the October election . 
 The post of a Whip normally required silence in the chamber of the House of Commons , but in February 1976 Dormand was involved in a difficult situation which required him to give an explanation . The Conservative opposition had called a vote censuring the Secretary of State for Industry Eric Varley by reducing his salary to £ 1 @,@ 000 . Dormand was appointed as one of the tellers to count the vote , but both he and his Conservative opposite number <unk> and lost the true count . When Mellish announced the confusion to the Speaker , the Speaker agreed to hold another vote . Embarrassingly for Dormand , many Labour MPs had not stayed to hear the result and were no longer present , resulting in the Conservatives winning the vote by a majority of five . The Government decided that the result was not a true indication of the House 's opinion and overturned the vote a few days later . 
 When James Callaghan succeeded Wilson as Prime Minister in 1976 , Mellish resigned and was replaced by Michael Cocks , and Dormand was promoted within the Whip 's office to be the pairing whip , a job which involved co @-@ ordinating agreed absences by MPs from one party with those of another so that the outcome of parliamentary votes is not affected . The Home Secretary Merlyn Rees had urged Callaghan to appoint Dormand as Chief Whip rather than Michael Cocks . 
 The role of the pairing whip remained a crucial one as the government 's slim majority turned to a minority through defeats at by @-@ elections , and Dormand was credited with a central role in helping the government stay in office , telling Wilson that he was too " bloody knackered at the end of the day " to record the events surrounding the late @-@ night votes . In January 1978 Dormand was named in a report by the Serjeant @-@ at @-@ Arms as having assisted in blocking one of the Division lobbies in an attempt to prevent a vote on part of the Government 's legislation to devolve power to Scotland . 
 On free votes he did not always help the Government . In July 1977 , Dormand voted against the European Assembly Elections Bill which brought in direct elections to the European Parliament . 
 = = In opposition = = 
 When Labour lost the 1979 general election , Dormand served for two years as an opposition whip . He was an active opposition frontbencher who was particularly vocal in criticising the effects of the Thatcher government 's economic policy on the manufacturing industry of the Northern region : in June 1980 he said that the policies were " crucifying " the region and it was " becoming a scene of devastation " . He specifically called on Chancellor of the Exchequer Sir Geoffrey Howe to abandon monetarism . 
 = = = Parliamentary Labour Party chair = = = 
 In the 1970s , Dormand had opposed left @-@ wing infiltration into the Labour Party , and in foreign affairs , he was pro @-@ American and pro @-@ NATO at a time when the party 's left @-@ wing was becoming increasingly hostile to both . In October 1981 , Dormand stood for the vacant position of Chairman of the Parliamentary Labour Party , supported by the centre @-@ Right Manifesto Group of Labour MPs . The strength of the left @-@ wing in the Constituency Labour Parties at the time had spurred the Manifesto group to improve its organisation , and Dormand ( nominated by former Prime Minister James Callaghan ) defeated the main challenger , left @-@ wing MP Ian Mikardo by 102 votes to 65 , and Mikardo then withdrew . The other three candidates were Harry Ewing ( 22 votes ) , Willie Hamilton ( 11 votes ) and Frank Hooley ( 11 votes ) but all withdrew so no second ballot was held . Dormand held the chairmanship until he retired from the House of Commons in 1987 . 
 Dormand had a difficult job in trying to unite a fractious Parliamentary party at a time when the Labour Party was growing unpopular . In November 1982 , amidst rumours that a majority of Labour MPs wanted to replace party leader Michael Foot , Dormand gave a radio interview insisting that " I have absolutely no doubt whatever that the vast majority think that Michael Foot is the man for the job at the moment , and will take us into the next general election " . In response , Foot 's critics noted Dormand 's use of the words " at the moment " . 
 = = = Kingmaker for the Speaker = = = 
 After the 1983 general election , Dormand played a key role in the accession to the Speakership of Bernard Weatherill , seconding his nomination for the post . Weatherill had been an opposition whip when Dormand had been working in the Government whip 's office in the late 1970s , but had not been appointed to the Thatcher government ; in supporting him , Dormand pointed out to Labour cheers that Weatherill " is his own man " and would " ensure that the rights of backbenchers were safeguarded " . In July 1983 he worked with his Conservative opposite number Edward du Cann ( Chairman of the 1922 Committee ) to agree an increase in MPs ' pay over that which the Government proposed . 
 Like most Labour MPs , Dormand opposed the decision of National Union of Mineworkers president Arthur Scargill to call a national strike in 1984 to 1985 , but he supported the miners in the Durham coalfield when his local Easington Colliery and others joined the strike . He accused the Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of washing her hands of the dispute like " Pontius Pilate " . 
 Despite his age , he remained physically active . In the 1970s he had campaigned successfully for the establishment of a parliamentary gym , continued playing cricket and rugby until the age of 63 , and cycled from the House of Commons to his flat near Millbank . The then Leader of the House of Commons , John <unk> , recounted how Dormand would " swathe himself in luminous strips " before setting off , and although he abandoned the bicycle in 1987 , deterred by London 's heavy traffic , he took up walking instead . 
 = = = House of Lords = = = 
 Labour leader Neil Kinnock was expected to ask him to be government chief whip if Labour won the 1987 general election , but Dormand thought it right to retire at the age of 67 . His successor John Cummings was the first miner to become MP for the area . 
 A staunch republican who deplored all forms of social privilege , including hereditary peerages , he accepted Kinnock 's offer of a seat in the House of Lords with some reluctance , receiving a life peerage as Baron Dormand of Easington , of Easington in the County of Durham on 13 October 1987 . 
 However , once in the Lords he thrived , serving on numerous select committees , including education , trade and industry , and the liaison and procedure committees . He was also appointed as deputy chairman of the Teesside Development Corporation , whose 12 @,@ 000 acres ( 49 km2 ) of de @-@ industrialised land included part of his former constituency . The Corporation was later condemned by Labour MP Ashok Kumar for having left a legacy of limited and " often inappropriate and threadbare development " . 
 His areas of expertise included the film industry and tourism , continuing the work he had begun in the Commons as chair of the all @-@ party parliamentary tourism committee in seeking the promotion of tourism in previously overlooked parts of the United Kingdom . He was also a member of the select committee on committee structure of the House of Lords and its chairman at the end of 1991 , and later became Labour Peer ’ s Representative on the Shadow Cabinet . 
 Dormand had been brought up a Christian , an allegiance which continued into adulthood , when he sat on the parochial church council . He described his adoption of atheism as the result of " some years of very considerable thought " , and once freed from the fear of offending religious constituents , his atheism became more outspoken in the Lords ; in July 2000 he called for the disestablishment of the Church of England . He helped form the All Party Humanist Group , and became Vice @-@ President of the British Humanist Association . As a former teacher , he sought parity in schools for religions and humanism , seeking to have both described neutrally rather than propagated . After his death , Michael Turnbull , the former Bishop of Durham , wrote in The Times of how Dormand had pursued this and other causes " without prejudice " and with " a warm affection for others " . 
 He continued to live in Easington after leaving the Commons , but moved in 1991 to Clipsham , Rutland , to be closer to the House of Lords . He described the move as " traumatic " , but remained active in the Lords until his death , pursuing his interests in education and continuing his opposition to the monarchy . Of some 20 Labour peers opposed to the monarchy , Dormand was the most outspoken , asking the government in November 2001 " whether they will call a referendum on the abolition of the monarchy " ( the Lord Chancellor 's answer was " No , my Lords " ) , and asked in March 2003 for a Select Committee to consider the future of the Monarchy . 
 He recovered from a double heart bypass in 2001 , and received an honorary doctorate of letters in July 2003 from Loughborough University . His last contribution to the House of Lords debates was on 19 November 2003 , when he criticised the situation of " having to borrow money from the state to undertake a degree course " as " a considerable deterrent to poorer families " . The following week was awarded an Honorary Doctorate of Laws by the University of Sunderland , taking the opportunity to repeat his criticism of funding for students by saying " it is very important that young people should not be prevented from going to university " . 
 That was Dormand 's last visit to his native North @-@ East . He went into hospital in Peterborough four days later , and died on 18 December 2003 , aged 84 . Tony Blair described him as " a life @-@ long servant of the Labour Party " ; When asked by a journalist to choose his own epitaph , the answer had been " he was a canny lad . " A care home in Peterlee is named after him . 
 = = Family = = 
 In 1963 , Dormand married Doris Robinson ( née Pearson ) , a former teacher who survived him . He had one stepson , and one stepdaughter from Doris 's previous marriage . 
 = 1906 Tour de France = 
 The 1906 Tour de France was the fourth Tour de France , and second to use the point system . Taking place from 4 to 29 July 1906 the total race distance was 4 @,@ 545 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 824 mi ) run over 13 stages , with the winner averaging 24 @.@ 463 kilometres per hour ( 15 @.@ 201 mph ) . New in this year were the mountain climbs in the Massif Central . Like its predecessors , it still had cheating and sabotage taking place . Four competitors were disqualified for taking trains as a shortcut and spectators threw nails in the road . However , this did not stop René Pottier from taking a big lead in the first stages . Free of tendinitis that plagued his 1905 chances , he dominated the entire race . 
 = = Changes from the 1905 Tour de France = = 
 Tour organiser Henri Desgrange had been happy with the increased length of the 1905 Tour de France , and decided to put even more stages in the 1906 version . The introduction of mountain stages had also been successful , so this year not only the Vosges were included , but also the Massif Central . 
 The increased length made it possible to follow the borders of France , and in 1906 the perimeter was closely followed . 
 The points system in the 1905 Tour de France had been successful enough in reducing cheating , so the Tour organisers used it again in the 1906 Tour de France , with a few changes : whereas in 1905 , time differences still had some effect on the points distribution , in 1906 time differences were unimportant , and points were only given for the order in which the cyclists finished . The winner of the stage received one point , the second rider two points , et cetera . After the eighth stage , only 16 cyclists were remaining , and the results from the first eight stages were recalculated , with only the remaining cyclists , and the points were redistributed among the remaining riders in accordance with their positions in those stages . 
 The first stage ended in Lille and the second stage started in Douai ; this was the first time that a stage did not start where the previous stage ended . Also for the first time , the Tour went outside France : in the second stage , Germany ( Alsace @-@ Lorraine was then part of Germany ) was visited . The 1906 Tour also saw the introduction of the flamme rouge ( red flame ) , a red flag that indicates that the cyclists only have one kilometre to go . 
 = = Participants = = 
 There were 100 cyclists signed up for the race , but only 76 of them came to the start . One of the absentees was Henri Cornet , winner of the 1904 Tour de France . Four cyclists were Belgian , one was Luxembourgian ( later winner François Faber ) , one was German , and the rest were French . Louis Trousselier , winner of the 1905 Tour de France , was present . The riders were not grouped in teams , but some cyclists had the same sponsor , even though they were not allowed to work together . Before the race started , most was expected from Cadolle , Aucouturier , Georget , Pottier , Trousselier , <unk> and Petit @-@ Breton . 
 As in 1905 , the cyclists were divided in two categories , the coureurs de vitesse and the coureurs sur machines poinçonnées , where the riders in the first category were allowed to change bicycles , which could be an advantage in the mountains , where they could use a bicycle with lower gears . In 1905 , sponsors had not been so enthusiastic about entering their cyclists in this category , but in 1906 they had learned that it had a commercial advantage to have cyclists starting in the poinçonnées category , because the average French citizen could identify more with them . In 1906 , more than half of the cyclists started in the poinçonnées category , including Lucien Petit @-@ Breton , one of the pre @-@ favourites . 
 = = Race details = = 
 As in previous years , the spectators tried to assist their preferred riders by trying to impede their opponents . On the first stage , nails had been thrown on the road , and all cyclists except Lucien Petit @-@ Breton punctured . This stage was won by Emile Georget in a sprint . In the second stage , René Pottier , who had shown his climbing abilities in the previous edition , aimed for the victory . He was stopped after 175 kilometres ( 109 mi ) with mechanical failure , and he lost 58 minutes . The other main contenders worked together to stay away from Pottier , but Pottier chased them for 200 kilometres ( 120 mi ) , caught them 25 kilometres ( 16 mi ) before the finish , and even left them behind , winning the stage with a margin of 1 ' 30 " on Petit @-@ Breton and more than 9 minutes on the rest . In the third stage , four cyclists ( Julien <unk> , Henri <unk> , Gaston <unk> and Maurice Carrere ) were disqualified for taking the train . The Ballon d 'Alsace , which had been the first real mountain in the Tour de France the previous year , was featured again . Just as the year before , it was mounted first by Pottier . The stage was also won by Pottier , more than 45 minutes ahead of the rest . 
 Pottier also won the fourth stage . In the fifth stage , he was leading by one hour at the halfway point . A cycling legend says that he decided to stop , entered a bar and ordered a bottle of wine , and drank it almost completely . When he saw the first other cyclists passing by , Pottier mounted his bicycle again , went after them , and won the stage . 
 By this point , Pottier was leading the overall classification firmly . The winner of the 1905 Tour de France , Louis Trousselier , had had a bad first half of the Tour , and was many points behind . Trousselier rediscovered his form in the second half of the race , won the 7th , 9th , 10th and 11th stages , and was challenging the second place of Georges Passerieu . Passerieu defended his position by winning the 12th stage . In the last stage , Pottier showed his strength by winning the stage , after finishing together in Paris with Passerieu . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Stage results = = = 
 After the 13th stage , the race was followed by two timed exhibition laps on the Velodrome in Paris , the result of which was not counted for the overall classification . The winner was Emile Georget , who finished the 1 @,@ 332 metres ( 4 @,@ 370 ft ) in 2 : 07 @.@ 20 . 
 = = = General classification = = = 
 One hundred cyclists had entered for the 1906 Tour de France ; only 82 of them showed up at the start . Only 49 cyclists finished the first stage , and the number of active cyclists quickly fell to 37 in stage two , 29 in stage three , until 16 after stage eight . At that point , the points given in the first eight stages were redistributed among the remaining riders in accordance with their positions in those stages . At the end of the Tour de France , only 14 cyclists finished . The cyclists were not grouped in teams ; some cyclists had the same sponsor , but they were not allowed to work together . 
 = = = Other classifications = = = 
 Lucien Petit @-@ Breton was the winner of the " machines poinçonnées " category . 
 The organising newspaper l 'Auto named René Pottier the meilleur grimpeur . This unofficial title is the precursor to the mountains classification . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Tour organisers did not make many changes the rules or route for the next race , because they had worked in the 1906 Tour de France . The revised points system would be kept in this form until 1911 , only to be changed a little bit in 1912 before being replaced by the time system in 1913 . The flamme rouge that was introduced in 1906 to indicate the final kilometre of a stage was kept and is still in use . 
 René Pottier would not defend his title in the 1907 Tour de France , because he would commit suicide before , after discovering that his wife had had an affair while he was riding the Tour . Petit @-@ Breton and Georget would start again in the 1907 Tour and duel for the overall victory , which would be won by Petit @-@ Breton . 
 To honor Pottier 's achievements on the Ballon d 'Alsace , a monument was placed for him on top of that mountain . 
 = Murder of Selena = 
 Selena Quintanilla @-@ Pérez ( April 16 , 1971 – March 31 , 1995 ) was an American singer who achieved international fame as a member of Selena y Los Dinos and for her subsequent solo career . Her father and manager , Abraham Quintanilla , Jr . , appointed Yolanda Saldívar president of Selena 's fan club in 1991 after Saldívar had repeatedly asked permission to start one . In January 1994 , Saldívar was promoted to manager of the singer 's boutiques . Selena 's employees , fashion designer , and cousin began complaining about Saldívar 's management style . In January 1995 , Quintanilla , Jr . , began receiving telephone calls and letters from angry fans who had sent membership payments and had received nothing in return . He began investigating their complaints and found evidence that Saldívar had embezzled $ 60 @,@ 000 from the fan club and the boutiques using forged checks . After the Quintanilla family confronted her , Saldívar bought a gun , lured Selena to a motel room , and shot her in the back . Although doctors tried to revive Selena , she was pronounced dead from loss of blood and cardiac arrest . 
 The Hispanic community was deeply affected by the news of Selena 's death ; some people traveled thousands of miles to visit her house , boutiques , and the crime scene , while churches with large congregations of Hispanics held prayers in her name . All major television networks in the United States interrupted their regular programming to break the news . The public reaction to Selena 's death was compared to those that followed the deaths of John Lennon , Elvis Presley , and John F. Kennedy . Some Americans who were unaware of the singer and her popularity criticized the attention she and her murder received from both the media and the Hispanic community . Radio personality Howard Stern mocked Selena 's murder , burial , and her mourners and criticized her music , playing her songs with gunshots in the background , causing an uproar among the Hispanic population . On April 12 , 1995 — two weeks after her death — then @-@ Texas governor George W. Bush declared her birthday Selena Day in Texas . Some Americans were offended because Selena Day that year coincided with Easter . 
 At the time of Selena 's death , Tejano music was one of the most popular Latin music subgenres in the United States . She was called the " Queen of Tejano music " and became the first Hispanic artist to have a predominantly Spanish @-@ language album — Dreaming of You ( 1995 ) — debut and peak at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart . After her death , the popularity of Tejano music waned . During Saldívar 's trial for the murder — called the " trial of the century " and the most important trial for the Hispanic population — she said she accidentally shot Selena while attempting suicide . Saldívar was found guilty of murder and was sentenced to life imprisonment . Jennifer Lopez was cast as Selena in a 1997 biopic film about her life and became famous after the film 's release . Spanish @-@ language networks in the U.S. often broadcast documentaries about Selena on the anniversary of her death ; they are among the most @-@ watched programs in the history of American television and often score high ratings 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = The Selena fan club = = = 
 Selena was born on April 16 , 1971 , in Lake Jackson , Texas , to Abraham Quintanilla , Jr . , a former musician , and Marcella Ofelia Quintanilla ( née Samora ) . Selena was introduced to the music industry by her father , who saw " a way back into the music business " after discovering Selena 's " perfect timing and pitch " . He quickly organized his children into a band called Selena y Los Dinos , which included A.B. Quintanilla III on bass , Suzette Quintanilla on drums , and Selena as the lead singer . The band became the family 's main source of income after they were evicted from their home during the Texas oil bust of 1982 . They filed for bankruptcy after Quintanilla , Jr . ' s Mexican restaurant suffered as a result of the oil bust . The family moved to Corpus Christi , Texas , and Selena y Los Dinos began recording music professionally . In 1984 , the band released its first LP record , Selena y Los Dinos , with a small , independent record company . Quintanilla , Jr . , wanted his children to record Tejano music — a male @-@ dominated music genre popularized by Mexican Americans in the United States . Selena 's popularity as a singer grew after she won the Tejano Music Award for Female Vocalist of the Year in 1987 . She landed her first major record deal with Capitol EMI Latin in 1989 . 
 Yolanda Saldívar became a fan of Tejano music in the mid @-@ 1980s . She disliked Selena because she had won awards that Saldívar 's favorite Tejano musicians were nominated in . In mid @-@ 1991 , Saldívar attended one of Selena 's concerts in San Antonio , Texas with her niece . She became an ardent Selena fan ; she particularly enjoyed the singer 's stage presence and especially liked the song " Baila Esta Cumbia " . The day after the concert , Saldívar unsuccessfully searched news stands for a souvenir of the event . She got the idea of starting a Selena fan club in the San Antonio area to promote the singer . According to Quintanilla , Jr . , Saldívar tried contacting him and left him fifteen messages ; she said she left only three . Quintanilla , Jr . , contacted her to discuss her idea of starting a fan club . After meeting with Saldívar , he approved of her idea and gave her permission to proceed . 
 Saldívar became the founder and acting president of the Selena fan club in San Antonio in June 1991 . As president , she was responsible for membership benefits and collecting $ 22 in exchange for products promoting Selena , a T @-@ shirt bearing the singer 's name , exclusive interviews with the band , a fact sheet about Selena y Los Dinos , and notifications of upcoming concerts . Proceeds from the fan club were donated to charities . Suzette was the contact person between Saldívar and the Quintanilla family ; Saldívar did not meet Selena until December 1991 . The two became close friends and the Quintanilla family trusted her . By 1994 , Saldívar had signed up more than 8 @,@ 000 fans . According to television news reporter and anchorwoman María Celeste Arrarás , Saldívar had become the " most efficient assistant " the singer ever had . Arrarás wrote that people noticed how eager Saldívar was to impress Selena , and did anything the singer told her to do . One person told Arrarás , " if Selena would say , ' Jump ! ' , [ Saldívar ] would jump three times " . Saldívar gave up her career as an in @-@ home nurse for patients with terminal cancer and respiratory diseases . She decided to fully invest her time in running the Selena fan club , although she was earning less than she had as a nurse . 
 = = = Selena Etc. boutiques = = = 
 In 1994 , Selena opened two boutiques called Selena Etc. in Corpus Christi and San Antonio ; they were equipped with in @-@ house beauty salons . Quintanilla , Jr . , thought Saldívar was a potential candidate to run the businesses because the family would be touring the country . He believed she was the best choice because of her success running the fan club . The family agreed ; in January 1994 , Saldívar became the manager of the boutiques . In September 1994 , Selena signed Saldívar as her registered agent in San Antonio . After being hired to run the boutiques , Saldívar moved from South San Antonio to Corpus Christi to be closer to Selena . In an interview with Primer Impacto in 1995 , Quintanilla , Jr . , said he " always mistrusted Saldívar " , though the family never found anything odd about Saldívar 's behavior . Saldívar was authorized to write and cash checks , and had access to bank accounts associated with the fan club and boutiques . 
 Selena gave Saldívar her American Express card for the purpose of conducting company business . Saldívar , however , instead used it to rent Lincoln Town Cars , entertain associates in upmarket restaurants , and buy two cellular telephones which she carried . Staff at Selena Etc. complained that Saldívar was always " nice " when Selena was around ; when she was not Saldívar treated everyone terribly . In December 1994 , the boutiques began to suffer . The company 's bank accounts lacked sufficient funds to pay bills . Staff levels at both stores had been reduced from thirty @-@ eight to fourteen employees , mainly because Saldívar fired those she did not like . The remaining employees began complaining to Selena about Saldívar , but Selena did not believe her friend would hurt her or her business . The employees then began to take their concerns to Quintanilla , Jr . , who warned Selena that Saldívar might be a dangerous person . Selena did not believe Saldívar would turn on her ; her father had a habit of distrusting people . 
 In January 1995 , Debra Ramirez , Selena 's cousin , was hired to work in the boutiques and to help Selena expand the business into Mexico . Ramirez quit within a week , telling Saldívar she was dissatisfied with the failure of staff members to report sales . Ramirez also found receipts were missing from the sale of several boutique items . Saldívar told her to " mind [ her ] business " and that it was not her concern . Saldívar frequently clashed with Martin Gomez , Selena 's fashion designer , who complained that Saldívar was mismanaging Selena 's affairs . Their animosity intensified during Selena 's fashion shows ; Gomez accused Saldívar of mutilating or destroying some of his original creations and said she never paid bills . Gomez stated that Saldívar had " established a reign of terror " ; the two were constantly complaining about each other to Selena . Saldívar began recording their conversations without Gomez 's consent to persuade Selena he was not working for the boutiques ' best interests . Gomez was relegated to a supporting role when Selena decided to design her clothes herself . Between late 1994 and early 1995 , Saldívar often traveled to Monterrey , Mexico , to expedite the process of opening another Selena Etc. store . When Saldívar visited the factory in Mexico , she intimidated the seamstresses by telling them to either side with her or leave . 
 = = = Selena and Saldívar 's relationship = = = 
 Saldívar was receiving " tokens of affection from [ Selena ] " , which she was not accustomed to . Her room was covered with Selena posters and pictures , burning votive candles , and a library of Selena videos which she played to entertain guests . During an interview with Saldívar in 1995 , reporters from The Dallas Morning News said her devotion to Selena bordered on obsession . Saldívar told employees at Selena Etc. she wanted to " be like Selena " . According to an unnamed former employee , Saldívar was " possessive " of her relationship with Selena , and tried to distance Selena from the other employees . This person believed that Saldívar 's goal was to " have more control over [ the employees ] and over Selena " . Saldívar said her reason for distancing the employees from Selena was to " shield " the singer from the " petty issues " of managing her boutiques . Along with the responsibility of running the boutiques , Saldívar accompanied Selena on trips and had keys to the singer 's house . 
 When Saldívar became a business associate , their relationship began to deteriorate . In September 1994 , Selena met Ricardo Martinez , a doctor who lived in Monterrey , Mexico . Selena wanted to expand the number of boutiques by opening a Selena Etc. store in Monterrey . Martinez said he had contacts in Mexico who could help her grow her business . Martinez became a business adviser to Selena , though her family said he was simply a fan who posed in several pictures with her . Saldívar became envious of Selena 's dependency on Martinez . He began sending flowers to Selena 's hotel room . Saldívar warned the singer that Martinez might have unprofessional intentions . Selena began visiting Monterrey more frequently , often in disguise . Sebastian D 'Silva , Martinez 's assistant , would pick up Selena at the airport ; he said he noticed she was wearing wigs and using her husband Chris Pérez 's surname so others would not identify her . According to Martinez , he had lent several thousand dollars to Selena because she was short on cash . 
 = = = Saldívar 's termination of employment = = = 
 Starting in January 1995 , Quintanilla , Jr . , began receiving telephone calls and letters from angry fans who claimed to have paid their enrollment fees but had not received the promised memorabilia . Upon investigation , Quintanilla , Jr . , discovered Saldívar had embezzled more than $ 60 @,@ 000 using forged checks from both the fan club and the boutiques . Saldívar 's brother , Armando Saldívar , supposedly contacted Gomez and " made up a story " that Saldívar was stealing money from the fan club . Gomez then contacted one of Selena 's uncles by telephone ; the uncle told Quintanilla , Jr . Armando said he was angry with Saldívar but did not want the reason to be made public ; later he said he felt guilty for starting the rumor . He appeared on the Spanish @-@ language television news program Primer Impacto but reporters found his comments illogical . 
 Quintanilla , Jr . , held a meeting on March 9 , 1995 , with Selena and Suzette Quintanilla at Q @-@ Productions to confront Saldívar . Quintanilla , Jr . , presented Saldívar with evidence concerning the missing funds . He said Saldívar simply stared at him without answering any of his questions . Quintanilla , Jr . , told Saldívar he would involve police if she did not produce evidence that disproved his accusations . When Quintanilla , Jr. asked her why fans were not receiving the promised gift packages , Saldívar said those fans were trying to get the items for free . Quintanilla , Jr . , discovered Saldívar had opened the fan club 's bank account under her sister 's name , " Maria Elida " . When asked why she had done this , she replied that the bank would not allow her to open an account in her name ; she did not know the reason for this refusal . Saldívar abruptly left the meeting . Quintanilla , Jr . , then banned Saldívar from contacting Selena . However , Selena did not want to end their friendship ; she felt Saldívar was essential to the success of her clothing line in Mexico . Selena also wanted to keep Saldívar close because she had bank records , statements , and financial records necessary for tax purposes . 
 After the meeting , Quintanilla , Jr . , discovered the fan club 's checks were signed with Maria Elida 's signature in handwriting identical to Saldívar 's . He concluded that Saldívar was writing forged checks using her sister 's name then cashing them and keeping the funds . When Quintanilla , Jr . , was trying to retrieve the fan club 's bank statements , he said they had " vanished " . He found a letter in Saldívar 's handwriting stating that Maria Elida had to close the bank account because of a major problem . According to the letter , a member of the fan club , Yvonne Perales , was sent to the bank to deposit $ 3 @,@ 000 but Perales did not deposit the money and could not be found . The letter stated that Maria Elida found out about the situation " too late " and that Perales and the money were missing . Maria Elida then wrote checks to be cashed by Saldívar , even though the bank account had no funds . The letter said Maria Elida was closing the account for that reason and that the bank would have to cover the checks . Quintanilla , Jr . , confronted Saldívar about Perales ' identity ; he said Saldívar knew nothing about her . Quintanilla , Jr . , said Saldívar did not trust the treasurer of the fan club but she had trusted a complete stranger to deposit $ 3 @,@ 000 . He told Saldívar to " tell that lie to someone else " . He concluded that Perales did not exist , since none of the fan club workers had ever met her . 
 = = = Failed attempts to kill Selena = = = 
 The day after Saldívar was banned from contacting Selena , Quintanilla , Jr . , drove to Q @-@ Productions and chased her from the premises and told her she was no longer welcome there . The same day , Selena and Saldívar argued by telephone ; Selena hung up and told Pérez she could no longer trust Saldívar . According to Quintanilla , Jr . , there were four attempts to murder Selena . Selena removed Saldívar 's name from the boutique 's bank account on March 10 , 1995 ; she was replaced as fan club president by Irene Herrera . The next day , Saldívar purchased a gun at A Place to Shoot , a gun shop and shooting range in San Antonio . She bought a Taurus Model 85 snub @-@ nosed .38 @-@ caliber revolver and .38 caliber hollow @-@ point bullets ; the bullets were designed to cause more extensive injuries than normal bullets . Saldívar told the clerk she needed protection in her job as an in @-@ home nurse because a patient 's relatives had threatened her . 
 On March 13 , Saldívar went to her lawyer and wrote her resignation , which Quintanilla , Jr . , believed was her alibi . The same day , Saldívar drove to Corpus Christi and checked into the Sand and Sea Motel . Selena was in Miami , Florida , at the time . Quintanilla , Jr . , believed this would have been the first attempt to kill Selena . When Selena arrived in Corpus Christi on March 14 , Saldívar contacted her to schedule a meeting . Saldívar told Selena there was too much traffic and asked her to meet her at a parking lot twenty @-@ five miles away from Corpus Christi . Upon arriving , Selena told Saldívar she could remain in charge of her business affairs in Mexico . According to Quintanilla , Jr . , Selena wanted to continue employing Saldívar until she could find a replacement . Saldívar showed Selena the gun she had bought ; Selena told her to " get rid of it " and said she would protect Saldívar from her father , according to Saldívar and Pérez . This , Quintanilla , Jr . , believed , had calmed Saldívar and was the reason she did not kill Selena in the parking lot . The next day , Saldívar returned the gun to the shop saying her father had given her a .22 @-@ caliber pistol . On March 26 , Saldívar stole a perfume sample and more bank statements from Selena in Mexico . 
 Saldívar accompanied Selena on a trip to Tennessee while the singer finished recording a song for her crossover album . Selena told Saldívar some bank statements were missing and asked her to return them as soon as they returned to Texas . Saldívar re @-@ purchased the gun on March 27 and asked Selena to meet her alone at a motel room ; this was her second attempt to kill Selena . News of Selena 's arrival spread and she was soon mobbed by fans . Quintanilla , Jr . , believed her fans saved her that day ; there were " too many witnesses " . According to him , the third attempt to kill Selena was during Saldívar 's trip to Monterrey in the last week of March . Dr. Martinez received telephone calls from Saldívar crying hysterically and saying she had been raped on March 29 . The next day , Saldívar again called Dr. Martinez , who said the calls sounded as though someone was trying to snatch the telephone away from Saldívar . He sent an employee to her motel room to investigate ; the employee found she had left a few minutes earlier . 
 On March 30 , Saldívar returned from her Monterrey trip and checked into a Days Inn motel . She contacted Selena and told her she had been raped . According to Quintanilla , Jr . , this was the last message they received from Saldívar ; he believed this claim was her new alibi . Saldívar asked Selena to visit her at her motel room alone , however , Perez accompanied her . According to Perez , he waited by his truck as Selena went alone to Saldívar 's motel room . As Perez was driving back to their house , Selena noticed Saldívar had failed to give her the correct bank statements she needed . Saldívar tried contacting Selena through her pager ; she desperately wanted Selena to take her to a hospital that night . She told Selena she was bleeding due to her rape . Quintanilla , Jr . , believed Saldívar was trying to get Selena to return to the motel alone . Pérez told Selena it was " too late " and did not want her to go out alone . Unbeknownst to Pérez , Selena agreed to meet Saldívar the next morning . 
 = = Murder = = 
 On March 30 , 1995 , Selena contacted Leonard Wong about the perfume samples he had made for her . According to Wong , Selena told him she would be meeting Saldívar the next morning to pick up the samples that had been stolen from her . The same day , she told another employee at the boutique she was expecting to fire Saldívar . At 7 : 30 a.m. ( CST ) March 31 , Selena rose from her bed , donned green workout sweats , and left for Saldívar 's motel room . At the motel , Saldívar told Selena she had been raped in Mexico . Selena took her to Doctors Regional Hospital , where medical staff noticed Saldívar showed symptoms of depression . Saldívar told a doctor she had bled " a little " . The doctor noticed Selena was angry at Saldívar and told her Saldívar said she had been bleeding copiously the day before . The doctor found no evidence of rape and told Saldívar she should go to San Antonio to get a gynecological examination . According to Texas rape case law , they were unable to perform the examination because Saldívar was a resident of San Antonio and the rape had occurred outside the country . While driving back to the motel , Selena told Saldívar it would be best if they stayed apart for a while to avoid upsetting Quintanilla , Jr . , . According to Dr. Martinez , Selena had tried to contact him that morning but he could not speak on the telephone because he was performing surgery . At 10 : 00 a.m. ( CST ) , Quintanilla , Jr . , contacted Pérez to determine the whereabouts of Selena ; she was due to record a song at Q @-@ Productions that morning and had not arrived . Pérez called Selena on her cellular telephone and reminded her of the scheduled recording . She told him she had forgotten the session and she was " taking care of one last [ item of ] business " and would be at Q @-@ Productions soon after . This was the last telephone call Selena answered and was the last time Pérez heard her voice . 
 At the motel room , Selena and Saldívar began arguing . Motel guests complained about loud noises coming from Saldívar 's room . They said they heard two women arguing about business matters . Selena told Saldívar she could no longer be trusted , and demanded Saldívar return her financial papers . Selena then dumped Saldívar 's satchel containing bank statements onto the bed and saw the gun . At 11 : 48 a.m. ( CST ) , Saldívar pointed it at Selena . As Selena tried to flee , Saldívar shot her once on the lower right shoulder , severing an artery and causing a massive loss of blood . Trinidad Espinoza , the hotel 's maintenance man , reported hearing a " loud bang " , which he likened to a car engine misfiring . Selena was critically wounded ; she ran towards the lobby , leaving a trail of blood 392 feet ( 119 m ) long . She was seen clutching her chest screaming , " Help me ! Help me ! I 've been shot ! " ; Saldívar was still chasing after her , pointing the gun at her , and calling her a " bitch " . According to Carlos Morales , who was waiting outside the motel , he heard screaming and saw Selena running towards him . She grabbed Morales and screamed , " they 'll shoot me again " . Selena collapsed on the floor at 11 : 49 a.m. ( CST ) as hotel General Manager , Barbara Schultz telephoned the emergency services . The singer identified Saldívar as her assailant and gave the number of the room where she had been shot . Shawna Vela and hotel sales manager Ruben DeLeon tried to stop the flow of blood . Selena 's condition began to deteriorate rapidly as motel staff attended to her . Selena screamed at the staff , telling them , " lock the door , she 'll shoot me again " . DeLeon tried to talk to Selena but noticed she was beginning to lose consciousness ; he said she was moaning and moving less often . DeLeon noticed Selena 's eyes had rolled back and that she went limp . 
 An ambulance arrived at the scene in one minute and 55 seconds . The paramedics tore away the green sweater where the bleeding was taking place and applied a Vaseline gauze to Selena 's wound , which stopped the surface bleeding . Selena 's heartbeat was now very slow ; a paramedic performed cardiopulmonary resuscitation to keep her blood circulating . Paramedic Richard Fredrickson said " it was too late " when he arrived in the lobby . He found a " thick [ pool of blood ] from her neck to her knees , all the way around on both sides [ of her body ] " . Fredrickson could not locate a pulse ; when he placed his fingers on her neck , he felt only muscle twitches . 
 A paramedic tried inserting an intravenous needle into Selena , but her veins had collapsed because of the massive blood loss and low ( or no ) blood pressure , making the insertion extremely difficult . Local police closed off Navigation Boulevard . When paramedics delivered Selena to Corpus Christi Memorial Hospital at 12 : 00 p.m. ( CST ) , her pupils were fixed and dilated , there was no evidence of neurological function , and she had no vital signs . Doctors were able to establish an " erratic heartbeat " long enough to transfer her to the trauma room . Doctors began blood transfusions in an attempt to re @-@ establish blood circulation after opening Selena 's chest and finding massive internal bleeding . Selena 's right lung was damaged , her collarbone was shattered , and her veins were emptied of blood . Doctors widened her chest opening , administered drugs into her heart , and applied pressure to her wounds . Dr. Louis Elkins said a " pencil @-@ size artery leading from the heart had been cut in two by the hollow @-@ point bullet " and that six units of blood from the transfusion had spilled out from her circulatory system . After 50 minutes the doctors realized the damage was irreparable . Selena Quintanilla @-@ Pérez was pronounced dead at 1 : 05 p.m. ( CST ) from blood loss and cardiac arrest . 
 = = = Standoff and post @-@ mortem examination = = = 
 After the shooting , Saldívar entered her red 1994 GMC pickup truck and tried to leave the motel parking lot . Motel employee Rosario Garza saw Saldívar leave her room with a wrapped towel . It was later thought she was going to Q @-@ Productions to shoot Quintanilla , Jr . , and others who were waiting for Selena . However , she was spotted by a responding police officer in a vehicle . The officer left his vehicle , drew his gun , and ordered Saldívar out of the truck . Saldívar did not comply ; she backed up and parked adjacent to two cars . Her truck was then blocked in by the police vehicle . Saldívar picked up the pistol , pointed it at her right temple , and threatened to commit suicide . A SWAT team and the FBI Crisis Negotiation Unit were brought in . Musicologist <unk> Novas later said the event was reminiscent of O.J. Simpson 's planned suicide 10 months earlier . 
 Larry Young and Isaac Valencia began negotiating with Saldívar . They ran a telephone line to their base of operations adjacent to Saldívar 's pickup truck as the standoff continued . Lead negotiator Young tried to establish a rapport with Saldívar and persuade her to give herself up . Valencia suggested the shooting was accidental ; Saldívar later changed her story , saying the " gun went off " by itself . She spoke to relatives in addition to speaking with police . Motel guests were ordered to remain in their rooms until police escorted them out . 
 During the third hour after the shooting , an autopsy was performed due to overwhelming media interest . It revealed that the bullet had entered Selena 's lower back , passed through her chest cavity , severed the right subclavian artery , and exited her right upper chest . Doctors said that if the bullet had been only one millimeter higher or lower , the wound would have been less severe . Later that afternoon , police drained the gasoline from the gas tank of Saldívar 's car and turned on floodlights . 
 After the standoff entered its fourth hour , Valencia succeeded in getting Saldívar to confess that she had intended to shoot herself . Saldívar said when she placed the gun to her own head , Selena tried to tell her not to kill herself . When Selena opened the door to leave , Saldívar said she told her to close it . She also said the gun went off when Selena left . During the sixth hour , Saldívar agreed to give herself up , but when she saw a police officer pointing a rifle at her , she panicked , ran back to her truck , picked up the revolver , and pointed it at her head again . Saldívar surrendered after more than nine hours . By then , hundreds of Selena 's fans had gathered at the scene ; many wept as police took Saldívar away . A press conference was called within hours of Selena 's murder ; Saldívar had not yet been named in media reports . Assistant Police Chief Ken Bung and Quintanilla , Jr . , told the press the possible motive was Selena 's intention to terminate Saldívar 's employment ; Rudy Treviño , director of the Texas Talent Music Association , and sponsor of the Tejano Music Awards , declared that March 31 , 1995 would be known as " Black Friday " . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Media response = = = 
 When radio station <unk> @-@ AM broke the news of Selena 's death , many people accused the staff of lying because the next day was April Fools ' Day . In San Antonio , major Spanish @-@ language radio stations including Tejano 107 , <unk> @-@ FM , <unk> @-@ FM and <unk> @-@ AM , began monitoring developments . All major U.S. networks interrupted their regular programming to break the news . The lead item on national television network evening news programs in Corpus Christi had been the end of the 1994 – 95 Major League Baseball strike ; within thirty minutes of its announcement , Selena 's murder was the lead item on all television stations in South Texas . Her death was front @-@ page news in The New York Times for two days , and was featured prominently on BBC World News . News of the singer 's death reached Japan , where David Byrne first heard of the shooting . Univision and Telemundo were among the first national news stations to arrive at the crime scene . Carlos Lopez of <unk> @-@ 105 @.@ 1 told the Corpus Christi Caller @-@ Times that " Tejano music is dead for at least today " and compared the reactions to Selena 's death to reactions to the Wall Street Crash of 1929 and called March 31 , 1995 , " Black Friday " . Radio stations in Texas began playing Selena 's music non @-@ stop and taking telephone calls from distressed fans . 
 News stands were swarmed by people looking for items concerning Selena . A line for the April 1 , 1995 , edition of the Corpus Christi Caller Times formed ; the company added 11 @,@ 000 copies to their print run and later printed 20 @,@ 000 more copies to meet continued demand for the paper . A People magazine issue was released several days after her murder . Its publishers believed interest would soon wane ; they released a commemorative issue within a week when it became apparent that interest was growing . The issue sold nearly a million copies , selling the entire first and second run within two weeks . It became a collector 's item — a first in the history of People . Betty Cortina , editor of People , told Biography , " it was unheard of " for an issue to completely sell out . In the following months , the success of the Selena issue led the company to release People en Español aimed at the Hispanic market . This was followed by Newsweek en Espanol and Latina magazine . 
 Puerto Rican @-@ American actress Jennifer Lopez was cast to play Selena in the 1997 biopic film about her life ; this choice drew criticism because of Lopez ' ancestry . After the film 's release , fans changed their views on Lopez after seeing her performance in the movie . Lopez became famous after the film 's release . 
 Selena 's life and career were covered by a number of television programs , including The Oprah Winfrey Show , E ! True Hollywood Story , VH1 's Behind The Music , American Justice , Snapped , and Famous Crime Scene . Other networks including MTV , Investigation Discovery , The Biography Channel , and A & E Network have aired special programs about Selena , while Spanish @-@ language networks regularly show documentaries to commemorate the anniversary of her death . These Spanish @-@ language documentaries are among the most @-@ watched programs in the history of American television , and often score record ratings for networks . A documentary titled Selena , A Star is <unk> — one of the first about her — was broadcast on <unk> 's Primer Impacto on 4 April 1995 ; it was watched by 2 @.@ 09 million people and became the second @-@ most @-@ viewed Spanish @-@ language show in the history of American television at the time . Networks competed with each other to interview Saldívar about the shooting . When news that Arrarás was able to interview her broke , Univision was inundated with requests to use the interview from major networks as far away as Germany . The interview on Primer Impacto was watched by 4 @.@ 5 million viewers ; it was the most @-@ watched program that night according to the Nielsen ratings , and became one of the most @-@ watched Spanish @-@ language programs in American television history . 
 = = = Hispanic community = = = 
 The news of Selena 's death deeply affected the Hispanic community ; many people traveled thousands of miles to visit Selena 's house , boutiques , and the crime scene . By mid @-@ afternoon , police were asked to form a detour as a line of automobiles began backing up traffic from the <unk> ' house . On the street where Selena had lived , gang graffiti and cacti distinguished the blue @-@ collar community from other subdivisions across America . A chain @-@ link fence in front of Selena 's house became a shrine festooned with mementoes as fans from across America left messages to Selena and the Quintanilla family . Most car drivers in Corpus Christi , and those driving cars on Interstate 37 from Mexico , turned their headlights on in her memory . Fans scribbled notes and messages , and placed them on the door and doorstep of the room in which Selena had been shot . 
 Soon after learning of Selena 's death , people began speculating about the identity of her murderer . Some fans thought Emilio Navaira 's wife had shot Selena ; they believed she was jealous of Selena and Navaira 's relationship . Johnny <unk> , Emilio 's brother @-@ in @-@ law and manager , frantically called radio stations in an attempt to quash the rumor . Among the celebrities who believed the rumor were record producer Manny Guerra , Pete Rodriguez , and American singer Ramon Hernandez . According to anchorwoman Arrarás , Selena 's death became " the most important news [ story ] of the year for Hispanics " . Texas Monthly editor Pamela <unk> wrote that reactions to her death were equivalent to those following a political assassination . Reactions were compared to those that followed the deaths of John Lennon , Elvis Presley , and John F. Kennedy . 
 Selena had a " cult @-@ like " following among Hispanics ; after her death she became a household name in the United States and a part of the American pop culture . She was more popular after her death than when she was alive . Selena became a cultural icon for Latinos and was seen as " a woman who was proud of her roots [ who had ] achieved her dreams " . According to Antonio Lopez of the Santa Fe New Mexican , the day Selena was killed " is a bookmark in time in the memories of many Latinos " . According to Arrarás , " women imitated her , men worshiped her " . In the aftermath of Selena 's murder , two linked deaths in California were reported . A drag queen planned to dress as Selena for a performance ; he was hit by a car and left to die . Actor Gloria de la Cruz auditioned for the role of Selena ; her body was later found in a dumpster in Los Angeles . Her killer had strangled her and set her body on fire . 
 = = = Celebrities ' and politicians ' reactions = = = 
 Spanish singer Julio Iglesias interrupted a recording session in Miami for a moment of silence . Among the celebrities who contacted the Quintanilla family following the news were Gloria Estefan , Celia Cruz , Iglesias , and Madonna . Concerts throughout Texas were canceled ; La Mafia canceled their concert in Guatemala and flew back to Texas . Tejano singer Ramiro Herrera and dozens of other Tejano artists also canceled their concerts . Ben Benavidez , radio personality and owner of Tejano Review , told Corpus Christi Caller Times that March 31 would be remembered as " the worst day in Corpus Christi history " . American singer @-@ songwriter Rhett Lawrence published an advertisement in Billboard magazine 's 22 April 1995 issue ; it said , " music I heard with you was more than music . You will be deeply missed . " Other celebrities interviewed on radio stations , including Stefanie Ridel , Jaime DeAnda ( of Los <unk> ) , Elsa Garcia , and Shelly Lares , expressed their thoughts about Selena 's death . Talk show host Oprah Winfrey called Selena 's life " short but significant " during a March 1997 episode of The Oprah Winfrey Show . American singer @-@ songwriter Mariah Carey told MTV Selena 's death was shocking to her because of " the way it had happened so abruptly in a young life " . State senator Carlos <unk> and state representative Solomon P. Ortiz reportedly mourned Selena 's death . American music industry executive Daniel Glass told Texas Monthly he believed Selena would have enjoyed greater career success had it not been for her death . A few days after her death , president of the United States Bill Clinton and his wife Hillary sent a letter of condolence to Selena 's husband Chris Pérez . 
 A few days later , Howard Stern mocked Selena 's murder , burial , and mourners , and criticized her music . Stern said , " This music does absolutely nothing for me . Alvin and the Chipmunks have more soul ... Spanish people have the worst taste in music . They have no depth . " He then played Selena 's songs with gunshot noises in the background . Stern 's comments and actions outraged and infuriated the Hispanic community in Texas . After an arrest warrant for disorderly conduct was issued for him , Stern made an on @-@ air statement , in Spanish , saying his comments were not made to cause " more anguish to her family , friends and those who loved her " . The League of United Latin American Citizens found Stern 's apology unacceptable and urged a boycott of his show . Texas retailers removed products related to Stern . Sears and McDonalds sent a letter expressing their disapproval of Stern 's comments to the media because fans believed they sponsored his show . Within a week , on NBC 's The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , Stern and his co @-@ host Robin Quivers were asked if Stern 's remarks about Selena were acceptable . Quivers decided not to talk about the situation to avoid arguing with Stern . When Linda Ronstadt , a pop singer of Mexican @-@ American heritage , appeared on the show , she and Quivers argued when Ronstadt defended Selena . 
 = = = Other reactions = = = 
 On April 12 , 1995 , two weeks after Selena 's death , Texas governor George W. Bush declared her birthday Selena Day in Texas . Bush said Selena represented " the essence of south Texas culture " . On Selena Day , approximately a thousand fans gathered at her grave and began singing traditional Mexican folk songs ; police were brought in to control the crowd . On the same day , a crowd of three thousand attended an organized mass of the resurrection for Selena at <unk> Concert Park . 
 In April and May that year , some European @-@ Americans in Texas wrote to the editor of the <unk> Facts questioning the fuss over her death ; some were offended because Selena Day coincided with Easter Sunday . Others said , " Easter is more important than Selena Day " , and believed people should let Selena rest in peace and get on with their lives . Mexican @-@ Americans living in Texas also wrote to the newspaper ; some agreed that others were too critical of Selena Day , stating they did not need to celebrate the day and should not have responded to its announcement so rudely . This was also seen by the Corpus Christi Caller Times , which said it had printed several of the negative comments left by people and that many comments were " unprintable " . Hispanic filmmaker Lourdes Portillo said she did not know who Selena was when she heard about the shooting . 
 When the news of Selena 's death broke , some Americans asked who she was and said she was " not that important " , suggesting Hispanics " get over it " . Author and Texas Monthly magazine contributor Joe Nick Patoski said Anglo @-@ Americans and Mexican @-@ Americans were divided in their reactions to Selena 's death . Patoski said that Anglo @-@ Americans " didn 't understand what all the fuss was about " . This was echoed in the Corpus Christi Caller Times , where they found racial divisions in the reactions to Selena 's death . Educators who had observed the reactions said , " the emergence of an icon in a minority culture can be both bewildering and threatening to Anglos " . <unk> Rothschild said some Americans often do not understand " the cultural role models of groups who have felt discriminated against " . Following Selena 's death , cultural confrontations were <unk> some vocally opposed any memorials to the singer , feeling they would be costed to taxpayers . Others complained to newspapers about the media interest in Selena 's death . Many media outlets received negative comments from people around the <unk> some were baffled that the <unk> massacre , which occurred around the same time of Selena 's death , did not generate the same amount of media exposure . Mayor Mary Rhodes said many of the people complaining about the media exposure Selena was receiving had never heard of her . 
 In the 1997 biopic film about Selena , a store manager asks Hispanics running towards the singer for an autograph , " Who 's Selena ? " . Americans felt the scene was " irrelevant " and " over dramatized " . One Selena fan said the event depicted in the scene " happens all the time " to Hispanics and their friends , and that they feel their community has been " ignored " . <unk> Miller said , " Selena has opened my eyes " , and that Miller had become " more American " . Another fan said , " nobody ever lets you forget you are Mexican American " in the U.S. 
 = = = Music industry = = = 
 At the time of Selena 's death , 52 % of all Latin music sales were generated by regional Mexican music ; most of this was Tejano , which had become one of the most popular Latin music genres . Selena 's music led the genre 's 1990s revival and made it marketable for the first time . Many media outlets described her as the " Queen of Tejano music " . Major record companies including EMI Records , SBK Records , Warner Music Group , CBS Records , and Sony Music began signing Tejano artists to compete in the Latin music market . Following Selena 's death , the Tejano music market suffered and its popularity waned . Radio stations in the United States that played Tejano music switched to regional Mexican music , and by 1997 , <unk> was the only radio station playing non @-@ stop Tejano music . By the mid @-@ 2000s , radio stations in the United States no longer played Tejano music , large auditoria stopped hosting Tejano artists by 2007 , and major record companies abandoned their Tejano artists after 1995 . Selena remains the best @-@ selling Tejano artist of all time , and continues to outsell living Tejano artists . She remains the only Tejano musician whose recordings continue to chart on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart . After her death , Tejano music was replaced with Latin pop as the most popular Latin music genre in the United States . 
 Within hours of Selena 's murder , record stores sold out of her albums ; EMI Latin began pressing several million CDs and cassettes to meet the expected demand . Gloria Ballesteros , a sales representative of Southwestern Wholesalers in San Antonio , told Billboard their inventory of 5 @,@ 000 copies of Selena albums was sold out by the afternoon of her death . Record stores ordering more copies of her recordings were told by EMI Latin representatives they would not be able to restock for a few days . EMI Latin shipped 500 @,@ 000 units of Selena 's recordings to stores in the two weeks following her death . Her song " Fotos y Recuerdos " was number four on the US Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart the day she was killed ; it peaked at number one on April 15 , 1995 . Selena 's singles " No Me Queda Mas " , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " , " Como la Flor " , and " Amor Prohibido " , re @-@ entered the Hot Latin Tracks and the Regional Mexican Airplay chart in the issue of Billboard magazine dated April 15 , 1995 . Selena 's 1994 album Amor Prohibido re @-@ entered the Billboard 200 chart at number 92 , representing a 520 percent increase in sales . 12 @,@ 040 units sold the week Selena was murdered . The following week , the album rose to number 32 with 28 @,@ 238 units sold representing a 135 percent increase . Amor Prohibido , which was positioned at number four on March 31 , peaked at number one on the Top Latin Albums chart in the issue dated April 15 , 1995 . Three albums , Entre a Mi Mundo ( 1992 ) , Live ! ( 1993 ) , and 12 Super Exitos ( 1994 ) , re @-@ entered the Top Latin Albums chart , while Selena 's albums took chart positions one to four on the Regional Mexican Albums chart that same week . Her albums sparked a buying frenzy for Latin music in Japan , Germany , and China . 
 Dreaming of You , the crossover album Selena was working on at the time of her death , was released in July 1995 . On the day of its release , 175 @,@ 000 copies were sold in the U.S. — a record for a female vocalist — and 331 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first week . Selena became the third female artist after Janet Jackson and Mariah Carey to sell over 300 @,@ 000 units in one week . It debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart , becoming the first album by a Hispanic artist to do so . Dreaming of You was the first posthumous album by a solo artist to debut at number one . The recording was among the top ten best @-@ selling debuts for a musician , and was the best @-@ selling debut by a female act . Dreaming of You joined five of Selena 's studio albums on the Billboard 200 chart simultaneously , making her the first female artist in Billboard history to accomplish this feat . The Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified it <unk> platinum for shipping more than 3 @.@ 5 million copies in the U.S. As of 2015 , the recording has sold five million copies worldwide , becoming the best @-@ selling Latin album of all @-@ time in the United States . Five of Selena 's albums generated $ 4 million in sales within five years . Selena was inducted into the Billboard Latin Music Hall of Fame , the Hard Rock Cafe 's Hall of Fame in 1995 , the South Texas Music Hall of Fame , and the Tejano Music Hall of Fame in 2001 . In December 1999 , she was named the " top Latin artist of the ' 90s " and " best @-@ selling Latin artist of the decade " by Billboard for her fourteen top @-@ ten singles — including seven number @-@ one hits — in the Top Latin Songs chart . 
 = = Funeral and tributes = = 
 On the day Selena was killed , vigils and memorials were held throughout Texas and California . Radio station Tejano 107 sponsored a candlelight vigil at the Sunken Gardens , while <unk> @-@ FM sponsored another at South Park Mall on March 31 which was attended by 5 @,@ 000 people . Radio stations in Texas played her music non @-@ stop . On April 1 , Bayfront Plaza in Corpus Christi held a vigil which drew 3 @,@ 000 fans . During the event , it was announced that a public viewing of the casket would be held at the Bayfront Auditorium the following day . Fans lined up for almost a mile . An hour before the doors opened , rumors that the casket was empty began circulating , which prompted the Quintanilla family to have an open @-@ casket viewing . About 30 @,@ 000 to 40 @,@ 000 fans passed by Selena 's casket . More than 78 @,@ 000 signed a book of condolence . Flowers for the casket viewing were imported from The Netherlands . At the request of Selena 's family , video and flash photography was banned . The same day , an unannounced bilingual Sunday morning mass for Selena featuring a mariachi choir was held at the San Fernando Cathedral in downtown San Antonio . In the United States , churches with a high proportion of Hispanic worshippers held prayers for Selena . A reporter noticed that many " mythic symbols " such as the Christian symbols of angels , saints , healers , and saviors , were " attached to Selena " by fans . There was a tribute for the singer during a St. Patrick 's Day celebration in a Catholic church in Houston , Texas . Priest Father Sal DeGeorge decided to hold a tribute to Selena that day after people — especially children — asked him what was being planned for the singer . That same day , a disc jockey played Selena 's music near the church in a small park . 
 On April 3 , 1995 , six hundred guests — mostly family members — attended Selena 's burial at Seaside Memorial Park , which was broadcast live by a Corpus Christi and San Antonio radio station without the consent of her family . A Jehovah 's Witness minister from Lake Jackson preached in English , quoting Paul the Apostle 's words in 1 Corinthians 15 . Hundreds of people began circling the area in their vehicles . Among the celebrities who attended the funeral were Roberto Pulido , Bobby Pulido , David Lee Garza , Navaira , Laura Canales , Elsa Garcia , La Mafia , Ram Herrera , Imagen Latina , and Astudillo . A special mass held the same day at Los Angeles Sports Arena drew a crowd of 4 @,@ 000 . Selena had been booked to play there that night for her Amor Prohibido Tour . The promoter charged an admission fee , which upset Quintanilla , Jr . Modesto Lopez Portillo drove from El Salvador to Los Angeles to be the officiating priest for the gathering ; the consul general of El Salvador attended as well . In Lake Jackson , a thousand fans and friends of Selena gathered at the municipal park in neighboring Clute , where she had played at the Mosquito Festival in July 1994 . The next day , Our Lady of the Pillar , a church in Spain , held a mass for Selena which drew 450 people to the 225 @-@ seat church . In the weeks following her death , cars throughout Texas were seen with pictures of Selena painted on them . On April 28 , during a fireworks display for Buccaneer Days in Corpus Christi , the music was reworked to include " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " in her memory . Selena Etc. boutiques became shrines to the singer as fans left balloons , flowers , pictures , and poems . Street murals of Selena were found across Texas after her death . In the months following Selena 's death , an average of 12 @,@ 000 people visited her grave site and the Days Inn motel where the shooting occurred . The motel 's manager rearranged its room numbers so guests would not know in which room Selena had been shot . The singer became part of the Day of the dead celebration . In 1997 , Selena was commemorated with a museum and a life @-@ sized bronze statue , Mirador de la Flor , in Corpus Christi , which are visited by hundreds of fans each week . Fans flocked to her statue and murals , seeing them as a symbols of self @-@ identity , unionism , religious expression , resistance , self @-@ expression , equality , liberation , passion , optimism , possibility , and " encouragement and hope to the poor " . 
 Musicians used music to express their thoughts about Selena or recorded compositions as tributes to her . These included American country artist Tony Joe White , Haitian singer @-@ songwriter Wyclef Jean , American Tejano artist Pete Astudillo , Puerto Rican American group the Barrio Boyzz , Mexican American singer Graciela Beltran , American Tejano artist Jennifer Pena , American hip @-@ hop singer Lil Ray , American Tejano artists Emilio <unk> , Bobby Pulido , Cuban salsa singer Celia Cruz , Dominican salsa singer José Alberto " El Canario " , Puerto Rican American salsa singers Ray Sepulveda , Michael Stuart , Manny Manuel , Puerto Rican American jazz singer Hilton Ruiz , American singer Jenni Rivera , Mexican singer <unk> Rivera , Venezuelan rock singer Mikel <unk> , Puerto Rican American singer Tony Garcia , and American rapper King L. 
 Selena 's family and her former band Los Dinos held a tribute concert a week after the 10th anniversary of her murder on April 7 , 2005 . The concert , titled Selena ¡ VIVE ! , was broadcast live on Univision and achieved a 35 @.@ 9 household rating . It was the highest @-@ rated and most @-@ viewed Spanish @-@ language television special in the history of American television . It was the most @-@ watched program — regardless of language — among adults ages 18 to 34 in Los Angeles , Chicago , and San Francisco ; it tied for first in New York , beating that night 's episode of Fox 's American Idol . Among Hispanic viewers , figures for Selena ¡ VIVE ! exceeded those for Super Bowl XLV between the Packers and the Steelers and the telenovela Soy Tu <unk> , during what was the " most @-@ watched NFL season ever among Hispanics " . 
 In January 2015 , it was announced that a two @-@ day annual event called Fiesta de la Flor would be held in Corpus Christi by the Corpus Christi Visitors Bureau as a tribute to Selena . Musical acts for the first annual event included Kumbia All @-@ Starz , Chris Pérez , Los Lobos , Jay Perez , Little Joe y la Familia , Los Palominos , Stefani Montiel of Las 3 Divas , Girl in a Coma 's Nina Diaz , Las Fenix , and The Voice competitor Clarissa Serna . The event raised $ 13 million and was attended by 52 @,@ 000 people , 72 % of whom lived outside Corpus Christi . The event sparked interest from people in thirty @-@ five U.S. states and five countries including Mexico , Brazil , and Ecuador . 
 = = Trial = = 
 Within twenty minutes of Saldívar 's surrender , she was taken to the downtown police station in Corpus Christi and placed in an interrogation room with investigators Paul and Ray Rivera . Paul Rivera , who had investigated homicides since 1978 , informed Saldívar of her right to an attorney , which she waived . When police investigators surrounded Saldívar 's truck , she had cried out , " I can 't believe I killed my best friend " . Within hours , she was saying the shooting was accidental . Saldívar 's bail bond was initially set at $ 100 @,@ 000 , but District Attorney Carlos Valdez persuaded the presiding judge to raise it to $ 500 @,@ 000 . When bail was announced , fans asked why the death penalty had not been sought . The Nueces County jail was deluged with death threats and there were public calls for vigilante justice . Some gang members in Texas were reported to have taken up collections to raise the bond for Saldívar so they could kill her when she was released . In prison , she faced more death threats from inmates . The Mexican Mafia , a dominant gang in the Texas penal system , reportedly placed a price on her head and spread the word that anyone who committed the crime would be a hero . 
 Saldívar 's crime was punishable by up to ninety @-@ nine years in prison and a $ 10 @,@ 000 fine . Saldívar was kept at Nueces County Jail under a suicide watch before her trial . The state had difficulty arranging defense counsel for Saldívar ; a spokesperson said any lawyer defending Saldívar could face death threats . She was assigned attorney Douglas Tinker , paid for by the people of Texas . Tinker 's wife feared they would suffer from community retribution and asked him not to take the case . Tinker chose Arnold Garcia , a former district prosecutor , as his legal counsel . Valdez , who lived a few blocks away from the Quintanilla family , chose Mark <unk> as his legal counsel . Mike <unk> presided over the case , which was moved to the Harris County Courthouse in Houston , Texas , to ensure an impartial jury . According to the Chicago Tribune , the Selena murder trial 's publicity " rivaled that of the O.J. Simpson proceedings " . <unk> ordered that the trial would not be televised or taped , and limited the number of reporters in the courtroom to avoid a " repeat of the Simpson circus " . The Chicago Tribune reported the division of interest in the trial between Hispanics and white Americans . Donna Dickerson , a white American magazine publisher , told the Chicago Tribune she had no interest in the trial because of Selena 's " Hispanic background " , and said Mexican @-@ Americans had not shown the same enthusiasm when Elvis Presley was found dead . The Selena murder trial was called the " trial of the century " and the most important trial to the Hispanic population . The trial generated interest in Europe , South America , Australia , and Japan . 
 Saldívar pleaded not guilty , saying the shooting was accidental . In his opening statement , Valdez said he believed Saldívar " deliberately killed Selena " . Valdez also called it a " senseless and cowardly " act because Selena was shot in the back . Tinker said the shooting was accidental and denied rumors Saldívar wanted to be romantically involved with Selena . On October 23 , 1995 , the jury deliberated for two hours before finding Saldívar guilty of murder . She received the maximum sentence of life in prison with no eligibility of parole for 30 years . On November 22 , 1995 , she arrived at the Gatesville Unit — now the Christina Crain Unit — in Gatesville , Texas , for processing . As of 2015 , Saldívar is serving her sentence in Gatesville at the Mountain View Unit , which is operated by the Texas Department of Criminal Justice . She will be eligible for parole on March 30 , 2025 . Because of multiple internal death threats from incarcerated Selena fans , Saldívar was placed in isolation and spends twenty @-@ three hours a day alone in her 9 by 6 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 by 1 @.@ 8 m ) cell . 
 = Kenny Easley = 
 Kenneth Mason Easley , Jr . ( born January 15 , 1959 ) is a former American college and professional football player who was a strong safety in the National Football League ( NFL ) for seven seasons during the 1980s . He played college football for the University of California , Los Angeles , and was a three @-@ time consensus All @-@ American . A first @-@ round pick in the 1981 NFL Draft , Easley played professionally for the NFL 's Seattle Seahawks from 1981 to 1987 . He is considered one of the greatest Seahawks players of all @-@ time and one of the greatest safeties in NFL history . 
 In 1984 , Easley was named the NFL Defensive Player of the Year by the Associated Press . He was a four @-@ time All – Pro selection and was elected to the Pro Bowl five times in his career . Easley 's career ended after the 1987 season , when he was diagnosed with severe kidney disease . 
 After retirement , Easley owned a Cadillac dealership , and later , the Norfolk Nighthawks AF2 team from 1999 – 2003 . In 1998 , he was inducted into the Virginia Sports Hall of Fame . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Easley was born in Chesapeake , Virginia . Easley graduated from Oscar F. Smith High School in Chesapeake , VA where he became the first player in the history of Virginian high school football to rush and pass for over 1 @,@ 000 yards in a single season . As a result , he was named as an All @-@ State and All @-@ American selection at quarterback . On September 6 , 1996 , Oscar F. Smith High School honored Easley and two other football graduates Ed Beard and Steve DeLong by naming its football stadium " Beard – DeLong – Easley Field " . 
 = = College career = = 
 Allegedly recruited by 350 colleges , Easley selected UCLA for his college football career . He started 10 games his freshman year , recording nine interceptions and was named to his first all Pac @-@ 10 squad . His 93 tackles established a school @-@ record for tackles by a true freshman . Later , he became the first player in conference history to be honored as all @-@ conference for four consecutive years . Playing from 1977 to 1980 , Easley finished his college career with a school @-@ record nineteen interceptions and 324 tackles . Easley was selected as a three @-@ time consensus All @-@ American selection — ( 1978 , 1979 , and 1980 ) and finished ninth in the Heisman Trophy balloting in 1980 . His jersey number was retired by the school , and in 1991 he was elected to the UCLA Athletic Hall of Fame and the College Football Hall of Fame . He also played basketball at the junior varsity level for UCLA and was drafted by the Chicago Bulls in the tenth round of the 1981 NBA Draft but did not play . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Easley was selected as the fourth overall pick in the first round of the 1981 NFL Draft by the Seattle Seahawks . He became an immediate starter as a rookie , recording three interceptions for 155 yards and one touchdown , earning him AFC Defensive Rookie of the Year honors . In 1983 , the Seahawks hired former Buffalo Bills coach Chuck Knox as their head coach and Easley immediately became the " backbone " of Knox 's defense . In his first season playing for Knox , Easley won the AFC Defensive Player of the Year Award and recorded seven interceptions . In 1984 , Easley led the NFL in interceptions with ten , which tied a club record . He returned two of them for touchdowns and was named as the NFL Defensive Player of the Year , the first safety awarded since Dick Anderson in 1973 . On November 4 , 1984 , during a 45 – 0 win against the Kansas City Chiefs , the Seahawks returned four interceptions for touchdowns , including one caught by Easley , breaking the record for most touchdowns scored from an interception in a game . He also took over the role of the team 's main punt returner when Paul Johns got injured earlier in the season . 
 After the season , Easley signed a five @-@ year contract to stay with the Seahawks , averaging $ 650 @,@ 000 a year plus incentives . The contract made him one of the highest paid defensive players in the league . In 1985 , Easley was selected for his fourth consecutive Pro Bowl , a team record until defensive tackle Cortez Kennedy was selected for his fifth consecutive Pro Bowl in 1995 . 
 Easley was injured for most of the 1986 season . He injured his knee against the San Diego Chargers on October 11 , and the next month , missed the remainder of the season due to ankle surgery . In December , Easley was rumored to be in the trading block as the Seahawks was attempting to get the first overall pick in the 1987 NFL Draft from the Tampa Bay Buccaneers , in order to draft quarterback Vinny Testaverde . 
 In 1987 , Easley was the Seahawks player representative , and a leading figure in the 1987 NFL strike . Seeking a new collective bargaining agreement with free agency a major factor , the head of the National Football League Players Association Gene Upshaw managed to convince Easley and hundreds of his fellow NFL players to go on strike . As a response , the league decided to use replacement players to fill up their rosters , along with a few veterans that crossed the " picket line " . When former teammate Jim Zorn offered his services to the Seahawks , Easley said 
 He obviously is either desperate to play in the NFL or desperate for money . Here 's a guy who played in the NFL for a long time and who was adored and was admired by his fans and teammates . Now , he turns his back on us . 
 Easley also warned his fellow players that he was against the idea of using violence against the replacement players in order to prove a point . Once the strike ended , Easley had an off @-@ year as the Seahawks passing defense fell to 25th in the league . His last game was a 23 – 20 loss against the Houston Oilers during the 1987 NFL playoffs in overtime . 
 = = = Trade and retirement = = = 
 Prior to the 1988 season , the Seahawks offered Easley to several clubs in an attempt to get a quarterback in return . Easley 's declining play , which was partially blamed on his work during the strike , and the blossoming of Easley 's backup Paul Moyer , had made Easley expendable . On April 22 , 1988 , the Seahawks traded Easley to the Phoenix Cardinals for quarterback Kelly Stouffer . During the mandatory team physical , Easley was diagnosed with idiopathic nephrotic syndrome , a severe kidney disease that voided the trade . Easley had told Moyer that he thought his days with the Seahawks were numbered because of his involvement in the player 's strike . He was not surprised when the trade happened , but the kidney diagnosis had " shocked " him . The Seahawks offered several draft picks as compensation to the Cardinals to complete the trade , and Easley announced his retirement a few months later . 
 Easley filed a lawsuit against the Seahawks , their team trainer , and the team doctors stating that an overdose of Advil ( ibuprofen ) for an ankle injury a few years before was the cause of his kidney failure . He knew as early as 1986 that there were issues with his kidney , but finally realized the severity of it when he failed the Cardinals physical . Easley claimed that he took 15 to 20 Advil 's daily for three months to reduce the swelling in his ankle , before a doctor interfered and told him to stop . A former teammate said that Advil and other medications were easily obtainable in the Seahawks locker room in " large dispensers " without proper medical supervision . Easley 's physicians claimed that they never told him to take the quantity of Advil 's Easley claimed he took . His case made national headlines and formed discussion involving the safe use of over the counter medication like Advil . The lawsuit was later settled out of court . 
 Easley received a new kidney two years later at the University of Washington Medical Center . After his retirement Easley cut most of his ties with the Seahawks organization , citing the lawsuit , how his " dignity " was affected by the Stouffer trade , and how no one from the organization offered condolences after his transplant . 
 = = After retirement = = 
 In 1991 , Easley bought into a car dealership ( along with partner Rick Johnson ) , Alderwood Oldsmobile & Cadillac in Lynnwood Washington , ( which later moved to Shoreline , Washington in 1996 , taking advantage of a General Motors program that made it easier for African @-@ Americans and other minorities to own an auto dealership . The dealership became successful and Easley was named president of the African American Dealers Association . 
 In 1999 , Easley , along with Buffalo Bills defensive end Bruce Smith , were named as the new owners of the Norfolk Nighthawks of the AF2 , a semi @-@ professional arena football league branched out from the Arena Football League . The day after the city announced Easley and Smith as owners , a controversy arose with Mark <unk> and Page Johnson , the owners of the Hampton Roads Admirals minor league hockey team , and the city of Norfolk , Virginia . <unk> and Johnson stated that they participated in the original AF2 meetings and asked the city for exclusive rights to own the franchise , providing a $ 5 @,@ 000 down payment . Instead , the city allowed Easley and Smith to pay the league 's $ 75 @,@ 000 franchise fee . The AF2 started playing their first games in the summer of 2000 . In his first season as owner , the Nighthawks averaged 6 @,@ 500 fans at their home field per game , and sold 3 @,@ 200 season tickets . The team made the AF2 playoffs , but lost money in their first season , which Easley blamed as " rookie mistakes " and startup costs . The team disbanded prior to the 2004 season . 
 Easley was named an honorary captain during Super Bowl XLIX . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In his seven @-@ year career , Easley recorded 32 interceptions for 538 yards and three touchdowns , while also returning 27 punts for 302 yards . In 2002 , Easley was elected to the Seattle Seahawks Ring of Honor after several attempts by the Seahawks to nominate him , but he was not interested . He was also named to the NFL 1980s All @-@ Decade Team . 
 = The Boat Race 1920 = 
 The 72nd Boat Race took place on 27 March 1920 . Generally held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . As a result of the First World War , this was the first race for six years : Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the previous race held in 1914 . Both universities had participated in various Peace Regattas in 1919 . In this year 's race , umpired by former rower Frederick I. Pitman , Cambridge won by four lengths in a time of 21 minutes 11 seconds . The victory took the overall record to 39 – 32 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1914 race by four and a half lengths , and led overall with 39 victories to Cambridge 's 31 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 The First World War caused a six @-@ year hiatus in the event : during the conflict , at least 42 Oxbridge Blues were killed , including four of the previous race 's Cambridge crew and one from the Oxford boat . No race was arranged for 1919 , but the crews participated in the Peace Regatta at the Henley Royal Regatta that year . Taking part in the King 's Cup , Cambridge were defeated by the Australian Army crew in the semi @-@ final , the latter going on to defeat Oxford in the final . The Light Blues also took part in the Inter Allied Peace Regatta in Paris the same year , victorious in the final against New Zealand and Australia crews . 
 Oxford were coached by R. W. Arbuthnot ( who had rowed for Cambridge four times between 1909 and 1912 ) , Harcourt Gilbey Gold ( Dark Blue president for the 1900 race and four @-@ time Blue ) and E. D. Horsfall ( who had rowed in the three races prior to the war ) . Cambridge 's coaches were Steve Fairbairn ( who had rowed in the 1882 , 1883 , 1886 and 1887 races ) and Sidney Swann ( who had rowed in the previous four races ) . For the twelfth year the umpire was Old Etonian Frederick I. Pitman who rowed for Cambridge in the 1884 , 1885 and 1886 races . He was accompanied on his launch by Prince Albert and Prince Henry , Duke of Gloucester . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 9 lb ( 80 @.@ 1 kg ) , 1 @.@ 25 pounds ( 0 @.@ 6 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . As a result of the six @-@ year hiatus , none of the participants had rowed in the Boat Race prior to this year . Three of the participants in the race were registered as non @-@ British : Oxford 's Hugh Cairns and Neil Harcourt MacNeil , and Cambridge 's John Alan Campbell were all Australian . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . The race started at 5 : 40 p.m. with a fair tide in front of " immense crowds " ; The Times reported that the attendance was the largest in the race 's history despite a rainstorm an hour before the race start . Both crews rowed 38 strokes and were level for the first minute until Cambridge , slightly reducing their rating began to pull ahead , holding a canvas @-@ length lead by the Mile Post . 
 As the crews passed below Hammersmith Bridge , the Light Blues held a three @-@ quarter length lead and with the bend in the river in their favour , pulled further ahead to be a quarter of a length clear by The Doves pub . Facing a strong headwind , Oxford pulled in behind Cambridge and attempted a " bold bid for the inside of the Barnes corner " . Cambridge spurted in response and passed below Barnes Bridge three lengths ahead , and extended their lead to four lengths by the time they passed the finishing post in a time of 22 minutes 11 seconds . According to author and former Oxford rower George Drinkwater , Cambridge " rowed and in nice easy fashion " while Oxford " were very uneven at times and the crew seemed to labour badly in the rough water . " It was Cambridge 's second consecutive victory , albeit over a six @-@ year span , and took the overall record in the event to 39 – 32 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = Mate . Feed . Kill . Repeat . = 
 Mate . Feed . Kill . Repeat. is the first release by American metal band Slipknot . Released originally on October 31 , 1996 , it was limited to production of 1 @,@ 000 copies . The band originally self @-@ distributed some of these copies , but went on to release the remaining units through <unk> Recordings in 1997 . Due to its limited release , the album has become much sought by fans since Slipknot 's rise in fame . 
 Despite considering it their first album upon release , the band now considers Mate . Feed . Kill . Repeat. to be a demo and have evolved and released the majority of the songs on future releases , albeit usually in radically altered forms . It was recorded in Des Moines , Iowa , over a period of four months . The music of the album contains many influences including funk , jazz , and disco which weren 't as apparent in later material . Many of the lyrics and the album 's title are derived from the role playing game Werewolf : The Apocalypse . The songs contain an " emphasis on non @-@ traditional songwriting " and melodic themes more than subsequent releases . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 In late 1995 Slipknot and producer Sean McMahon entered SR Audio , a studio in the band 's home town of Des Moines , Iowa to work on what they intended to be their debut album . Retrospectively McMahon said that the band was " driven " because they spent the majority of their time in the studio for the four months it took to produce the album . Slipknot self @-@ financed the production , which came to an estimated $ 40 @,@ 000 . The band expressed how much of a learning process this time was with it being the first time they had recorded their music , specifically the additional percussion elements were challenging to capture . The band were aiming for a tribal sound but encountered problems including minuscule timing errors and during this period they refined their percussive sound , they experimented with erecting walls to isolate the drums and re @-@ arranging parts . In February 1996 during the mixing process , guitarist Donnie Steele decided to leave the band for religious reasons , as a result Craig Jones joined the band to fill the spot . However the band realized that they were incorporating too many samples on their recordings and could not produce these sounds live . In order to solve this problem Jones moved to full @-@ time sampler and Mick Thomson joined as a guitarist . Mate . Feed . Kill . Repeat. was released on October 31 , 1996 with a release party at The Safari , a local club where the band played a lot of their earliest gigs . 
 = = Musical and lyrical themes = = 
 The musical style of Slipknot is constantly contested due to the genres their music covers , however Mate . Feed . Kill . Repeat. is the band 's most experimental release and is significantly different from the heavier style the band became known for . One of the band 's initial aims was to mix many genres of music to achieve their own style ; an early incarnation of the band was called " Meld " based upon this . However , there are still similarities in the sound of which Slipknot became known for . Tracks such as " Slipknot " , " Some Feel " and " Only One " feature a dominantly heavy metal influence , specifically in that of the guitars . Tracks such as " Tattered & Torn " , " Killers Are Quiet " and " Gently " also include the slow , cerebral angst build up style that the band also retained in some of their more recent work . The album implements elements of jazz and funk , although " Confessions " is the only track on the album dominantly led by these styles . The funk metal song " Do Nothing / Bitch Slap " is the album 's most complex song , combining both of these dominant styles as well as implementing areas of disco . The album also incorporates elements of death metal . The album title and the majority of the lyrics are references to the role @-@ playing game Werewolf : The Apocalypse . Vocalist Anders Colsefni and percussionist Shawn Crahan shared a mutual interest in the game which was a large influence on the band , Colsefni said : " The attraction was being able to play a different person " , declaring that this was the essence of Slipknot . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The original pressing of the album was limited to 1 @,@ 000 copies and since the band 's rise to fame in 1999 it has been a sought after rarity for Slipknot fans . Upon its initial release the band distributed the album independently , handing them out to fans , radio stations , and record labels . On June 13 , 1997 , <unk> Recordings took over the distribution of the remaining copies of the album . These original pressings have since grown in value considerably . Due to the large amount of interest in the album and the low numbers of originals there have been many bootlegged versions of the album sold including CD , MP3 and even vinyl . Reportedly , as of 2003 , no member of the band owns a copy of Mate . Feed . Kill . Repeat . 
 There is often deliberation whether Mate . Feed . Kill . Repeat. is a demo or actually the band 's debut album . The band currently strictly consider it to be a demo due to the drastic change in sound and major changes in the line @-@ up before the band 's self @-@ titled debut . The band would also rework the majority of the songs on later albums , and the title of their album Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) shows that the band has disregarded Mate . Feed . Kill . Repeat . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Slipknot . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Collector 's information = = 
 Website detailing differences between fake and <unk> copies of the album , owner 's list , and known sale prices for the genuine CD 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Arnopp , Jason ( 2001 ) . Slipknot : Inside the Sickness , Behind the Masks . Ebury . ISBN 0 @-@ 09 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 McIver , Joel ( 2003 ) . Slipknot : Unmasked ( again ) . Omnibus . ISBN 0 @-@ 7119 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 = Aberdour Castle = 
 Aberdour Castle is located in the village of Easter Aberdour , Fife , Scotland . Parts of the castle date from around 1200 , making Aberdour one of the two oldest datable standing castles in Scotland , along with Castle Sween in Argyll , which was built at around the same time . 
 The earliest part of the castle comprised a modest hall house , on a site overlooking the Dour Burn . Over the next 400 years , the castle was successively expanded according to contemporary architectural ideas . The hall house became a tower house in the 15th century , and was extended twice in the 16th century . The final addition was made around 1635 , with refined Renaissance details , and the whole was complemented by a walled garden to the east and terraced gardens to the south . The terraces , dating from the mid @-@ 16th century , form one of the oldest gardens in Scotland , and offer extensive views across the Firth of Forth to Edinburgh . 
 The castle is largely the creation of the Douglas Earls of Morton , who held Aberdour from the 14th century . The earls used Aberdour as a second home until 1642 , when their primary residence , Dalkeith House , was sold . A fire in the late 17th century was followed by some repairs , but in 1725 the family purchased nearby Aberdour House , and the medieval castle was allowed to fall into decay . Today , only the 17th @-@ century wing remains roofed , while the tower has mostly collapsed . Aberdour Castle is now in the care of Historic Scotland , and is open to the public all year . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The barony of Aberdour was acquired in 1126 , by Sir Alan de Mortimer , on his marriage to <unk> , daughter of Sir John de Vipont . Sir Alan built St Fillan 's Church , which still stands , next to the castle , in around 1140 , and his family probably built the original hall house in around 1200 , or possibly even earlier . In 1216 , another Alan de Mortimer is recorded granting land to the monks of Inchcolm Abbey . There is no record of what happened to the de Mortimers , but in the early 14th century , King Robert the Bruce granted Aberdour to his kinsman , Thomas Randolph , Earl of Moray ( d . 1332 ) . Moray 's grandson granted the barony in turn to Sir William Douglas of Liddesdale ( c . 1300 @-@ 1353 ) , in 1342 . 
 In 1351 , Sir William Douglas gave the lands of Aberdour to his nephew , Sir James Douglas of Dalkeith , although he retained the castle for himself until his death two years later . The grant was confirmed by King David II in 1361 . In 1386 Aberdour and Dalkeith were combined to form a single barony , with the principal seat at Dalkeith , near Edinburgh , and Aberdour as a secondary residence . James , fourth Lord Dalkeith , succeeded to the joint barony in 1456 , and was created Earl of Morton in 1458 , prior to his marriage to Joanna , the deaf @-@ mute daughter of James I. The newly created earl expanded the existing hall house , heightening and rebuilding the structure to suit his elevated status . The second earl carried out extensions to Aberdour Castle around 1500 , building a new stair tower and south block . 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 In 1538 James V summoned the 3rd Earl of Morton before the Privy Council , accusing him of non @-@ payment of his feudal dues , and in 1540 he banished the Earl to Inverness . Morton reached Brechin , in Angus , where he signed a deed resigning his lands to his kinsman Robert Douglas of Lochleven . Lochleven was compelled to resign the lands in turn to James V , although he was permitted to keep Aberdour Castle . After James V 's death in late 1542 , George Douglas of <unk> and the Earl of Arran assisted Morton in reclaiming his lands , including Aberdour . In return their sons were to marry two of Morton 's three daughters . <unk> 's son James ( 1525 @-@ 1581 ) married the heiress , Elizabeth , and succeeded , in 1553 , as 4th Earl of Morton . 
 Aberdour Castle was reserved to his mother @-@ in @-@ law , Countess Katherine , until 1564 , when Mary , Queen of Scots , confirmed Morton 's right to the whole barony of Dalkeith and Aberdour . In 1566 , Morton was involved in planning a rebellion against the Queen , which resulted in the murder of Queen Mary 's secretary , David Riccio , but failed to gain further momentum , and Morton was forced to flee to England . However , by the end of the year he had returned , and by July the following year , Mary was imprisoned and had been forced to abdicate by the Scottish noblemen . Morton was appointed Regent of Scotland , for the child King James VI in 1572 . He undertook extensions to the castle in the 1570s , rebuilding the south block of c . 1500 , and extending it further south to form the present central range . He also drew inspiration from contemporary gardens in England , such as Hampton Court , in laying out the terraced gardens . The Privy Council met at Aberdour Castle in August 1576 , but Morton 's regency came to an end in 1578 . He was later implicated in the 1567 murder of Queen Mary 's husband , Lord Darnley , and executed in 1581 on the orders of the young King . 
 While Morton was in prison , his lands were given to his nephew , Archibald Douglas , 8th Earl of Angus , but were granted to the Earl of Lennox after Morton 's execution . In 1587 , Lennox returned the Morton lands to Angus , who was now acknowledged as the 5th Earl of Morton . On Angus ' death , in 1588 , the earldom of Morton passed to another kinsman , William Douglas of Lochleven ( d . 1606 ) . William 's son predeceased his father , but his widow , Jean Lyon , continued to live at Aberdour with her third husband , Alexander Lindsay , 1st Lord Spynie ( d . 1607 ) . 
 = = = The later Earls = = = 
 William Douglas , 7th Earl of Morton ( 1582 @-@ 1648 ) , sometimes numbered as the 6th Earl , inherited Aberdour from his grandfather in 1606 . He was Treasurer of Scotland from 1630 – 36 , and a strong supporter of the Stewart dynasty during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms ( 1639 @-@ 1651 ) . However , he was compelled to spend much of his fortune in the royal interest , leading him into financial difficulty , and forcing him to sell Dalkeith to the Earl of Buccleuch in 1642 . Earl William built the Renaissance east wing at Aberdour , probably around 1635 . It was certainly standing in 1647 , when an inventory records luxurious furniture , carpets , and tapestries . The walled garden was also built in the 1630s , and improvements made to the terraces . Aberdour was therefore a suitable principal residence for the Earls after the sale of Dalkeith . 
 The Earls of Morton continued to live at Aberdour , although they never regained their earlier high status . In 1688 the castle was badly damaged by fire , and in 1690 the 11th Earl consulted the architect James Smith . Smith surveyed the damage and drew up proposals for repairing and extending the castle with another wing north of the east range . The Earl also sought estimates for the demolition of the tower house and central range . Nothing ever came of these proposals , although repairs were carried out to the east range , being completed in 1703 . 
 = = = Final decline = = = 
 Government troops were stationed at Aberdour Castle during the Jacobite Rising of 1715 . During their stay , a second fire again caused extensive damage . In 1725 , the <unk> bought an adjacent property , <unk> House , which they renamed Aberdour House , and the castle ceased to be a residence . The east range was again repaired , and was used for various purposes , including a school room , a barracks , and a masonic hall . In 1924 the castle and gardens were placed in state care , and continue to be managed by Historic Scotland as a visitor attraction . The south @-@ east wing was initially restored as a home for the custodian , and now houses a cafe . The castle is protected as a Scheduled Ancient Monument , and the castle , dovecot and walled garden are Category A listed buildings , the highest level of protection for a historic building in Scotland . The grounds , and surrounding former parks , are listed on the Inventory of Gardens and Designed Landscapes , the national register of significant gardens . 
 = = Description = = 
 The castle originally comprised the 12th- or 13th @-@ century hall house , which was extended in the 15th century . In the 16th century the central range was built to the south of the tower house , and new inner and outer courtyard walls were constructed . The east part of the inner courtyard wall is reduced to foundations , but the base of a round tower and a porter 's lodge survive . To the west , the inner courtyard wall remains , enclosing the former service courtyard , which comprises a brewery and bakehouse , with ovens . The east range was added in the 17th century , along the south edge of the outer courtyard . The castle was originally approached from the north , with the entrance moved to the west , along with the 17th @-@ century gate , when the Aberdour railway line was constructed in 1890 . 
 = = = The tower house = = = 
 The tower house measures 16 metres ( 52 ft ) by 11 metres ( 36 ft ) on a skewed rectangular plan . The lower two storeys comprise the oldest part of the castle , which can be dated to around 1200 , while the upper parts are of the 15th century . The date for the original building is based on several pieces of evidence . The cubical blocks of masonry , the flat buttress at the north @-@ east , and the splaying , or widening , of the base of the walls , are all indicative of this date . The collapsed part of the south wall also formerly contained an early 13th @-@ century style double @-@ lancet window . The original structure , of a type known as a hall house , was probably of two or three storeys , comprising a first @-@ floor hall over an unvaulted basement , and may have been surrounded by a defensive timber stockade or enclosure . The 15th @-@ century rebuilding added two upper floors , and rearranged the interior . <unk> basements , including a kitchen , and a spiral stair were inserted , and the heightened wall was topped by a parapet with machicolations ; spaces through which objects could be dropped on attackers at the base of the wall . The tower suffered major collapses in 1844 and 1919 , and today just the basement survives , with only a small section of the south @-@ east wall standing to its full height . 
 = = = The central range = = = 
 The central range was begun around 1500 , possibly as a two @-@ storey building containing a great hall , although only fragments of this building remain . The south entrance to the tower house was blocked up , and replaced with a ground floor entrance from the east . A new stair tower , with a broad spiral stair , was built at the south @-@ east corner . Originally topped by a conical roof , this stair gave access to the upper floors in the tower , and to the central range . Around 1570 , the 4th Earl of Morton rebuilt the block , extending it further south to form new apartments . This block , forming the present three @-@ storey central range , includes a vaulted kitchen and cellar in the basement , with suites of rooms above . The two bedrooms on the first floor each have their own closets and garderobes , or privies . The west apartment is accessed from the terraced garden , via another stair to the south @-@ west , and has a private stair which led up to another chamber above , suggesting that these were the Earl and Countesses apartments . The upper storey , whose timber floor is now missing , comprised three more apartments , including one over the stair . The exterior of the block is decorated with a horizontal decorative strip of masonry known as a string course . One first @-@ floor window is decorated with carved stone pilasters and strapwork , in a similar style to windows at Edinburgh Castle and <unk> Castle , in the Borders , both of which were built under Morton 's Regency . 
 = = = The east range = = = 
 The east range , of <unk> , comprises a long , narrow building , with a short projecting wing to the south @-@ east . It is the only part of the castle still roofed . The first floor of the wing is occupied by a long gallery , accessed from the central range , with stables and storerooms below . The long gallery was used for entertaining , and , in 1647 , is recorded as containing 46 pictures and a harpsichord , among other furniture . In the south @-@ east wing are three chambers , one on each floor , linked by a spiral stair . The first @-@ floor room has a 17th @-@ century painted ceiling , decorated with fruit , foliage , and heraldic emblems . The south @-@ east wing has crow @-@ step gables , and a sundial on one corner . The east window of the long gallery is decorated with pilasters and a pediment . The roof is of 18th @-@ century date , and is lower than the original , resulting in the loss of the triangular pediments which once topped each of the side windows . 
 = = = The gardens = = = 
 There were gardens at Aberdour Castle from at least 1540 . The terraced garden dates from the time of the 4th Earl of Morton , who succeeded in 1553 , and comprises four broad L @-@ shaped terraces . At the bottom of the terraces was an orchard , laid out in 1690 , and recently replanted . The extent of the terracing was only rediscovered following excavations in the 1970s , after parts of the garden had been in use as a market garden . Archaeological investigations were undertaken between 1977 and 1980 , to determine whether the lower terraces , which were depicted on a map of 1740 , had indeed existed . Although the foundations of the terraces were found , the remains could not be precisely dated , but are thought to have been constructed in the second half of the 16th century . The high retaining walls were rebuilt in 1981 , and the terraces were laid with grass , since the excavations had not revealed any evidence of historic planting schemes . 
 A 16th @-@ century " beehive " shape doocot , or pigeon house , is located to the south , containing around 600 nesting boxes . The 9 metres ( 30 ft ) structure rises in four steps , divided by " rat courses " ; projecting ribs which prevented rats from climbing inside . 
 The 17th @-@ century walled garden covers around 5 @,@ 000 square metres ( 1 @.@ 2 acres ) , with walls up to 4 metres ( 13 ft ) high . It lies to the west of the outer courtyard , and was originally entered from doors in the south @-@ west and north @-@ east corners . These doors have carved pediments , with strapwork and the Douglas heart emblem over the west door , which led to the terraces . The east door led to St. Fillan 's Church , and is carved with the date 1632 , together with a monogram of the initials of the Earl and Countess . A kitchen garden was located across the Kirk Lane , and bee <unk> are located in the walls . A summer house was built into the south @-@ east garden wall in 1675 , but was demolished in the 18th century . In 1691 , botanist James Sutherland supplied exotic plants , including Persian jasmine , tamarisks and figs , to Aberdour from the Physic Garden in Edinburgh , the forerunner of the Royal Botanic Garden . The later entrance in the west wall dates from around 1740 . During the Second World War , the garden was in use as a market garden and for pig rearing . In the centre of the garden , an early 17th @-@ century polygonal sundial is mounted on a 19th @-@ century base . The sundial was brought here in the 1970s , possibly from Castle Wigg in south @-@ west Scotland . 
 = = Aberdour House = = 
 Originally named <unk> , the house was built in the 17th century , and is dated 1672 . It was enlarged in 1715 by its then owner , the Earl of Moray . The Earl of Morton purchased it in 1725 , finally moving out of the dilapidated castle . In 1731 the 12th Earl consulted James Gibbs on improvements . It is uncertain how much of Gibbs ' proposals were executed , although the doorway has a surround in Gibbs ' style . By the 20th century the house was disused , and was redeveloped as private flats in the 1990s . The house is Category A listed , and formerly had its own extensive gardens , which included the surviving 12 @-@ metre ( 39 ft ) high obelisk of 1744 – 45 , built by the 13th Earl to be visible from his estate at <unk> , across the Firth of Forth . 
 = Eric Hacker = 
 Eric Lynn Hacker ( born March 26 , 1983 ) is an American professional baseball pitcher who plays for the NC Dinos of the Korea Baseball Organization . Hacker stands 6 feet 1 inch ( 1 @.@ 85 m ) and weighs 230 pounds ( 100 kg ) . He throws right @-@ handed but is a switch hitter . He has played for the Pittsburgh Pirates , Minnesota Twins , and San Francisco Giants . He throws a fastball , a slider , a curveball , and a changeup . 
 Hacker was drafted out of Duncanville High School by the New York Yankees in 2002 . He pitched in their minor league system from 2002 – 2009 ( missing 2004 and 2006 with injuries ) before getting traded to the Pirates . He made his major league debut with Pittsburgh on September 22 , 2009 , and pitched in three games for them that season . He signed with the Giants in the offseason and spent the entire 2010 season in the minor leagues . In 2011 , he signed with the Twins and appeared in two games with them . He signed with San Francisco in 2012 and made his first career start in the majors , recording a loss . He also pitched three games in relief for the Giants that year . 
 = = High school and personal life = = 
 Hacker was born in Duncanville , Texas ; growing up , he attended Duncanville High School . He was named the starting quarterback on the school 's football team his senior year , but he broke his foot in the second game of the season . Although some colleges were interested in him as a football player , he decided to concentrate on baseball as a result of the injury . As a senior , he was a third @-@ team Class 5A All @-@ State pitcher . Currently , Hacker lives in Corsicana , Texas , with his wife , Christine , whom he married in November 2008 . He is a Dallas Cowboys fan . Two of his hobbies are fishing and pool . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = New York Yankees organization = = = 
 Drafted by the New York Yankees in the 23rd round of the 2002 Major League Baseball draft , Hacker began his career with the GCL Yankees of the rookie @-@ level Gulf Coast League . He appeared in three games with them in 2002 . In 2003 , he appeared in seven games ( five starts ) with them , posting a 3 – 2 record , a 2 @.@ 86 earned run average ( ERA ) , 26 strikeouts , and seven walks in 28 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He also pitched with the Staten Island Yankees of the Class A short @-@ season New York – Penn League , where he had no record and an ERA of 1 @.@ 00 in two starts . He underwent Tommy John surgery in 2004 and missed the entire season . During his time with the GCL Yankees , he was roommates with Brandon Weeden . The two still correspond . 
 In 2005 , Hacker pitched for the Charleston RiverDogs of the Class A South Atlantic League and was named to the league 's All @-@ Star game . On July 2 , he threw eight shutout innings in a 1 – 0 victory over the Rome Braves . However , he was placed on the disabled list the next day and missed the rest of the season with right shoulder inflammation . In 10 starts , Hacker had a 5 – 2 record , a 1 @.@ 60 ERA , 40 strikeouts , 14 walks , and one complete game in 62 innings pitched . Hacker missed the entire 2006 season after undergoing right shoulder surgery . 
 Hacker began 2007 with Charleston , where he had a 9 – 2 record , a 2 @.@ 56 ERA , 54 strikeouts , 18 walks , and 95 innings pitched in 17 starts . He also appeared in nine games ( seven starts ) for the Tampa Yankees of the Class A advanced Florida State League ( FSL ) , posting a 3 – 3 record , a 6 @.@ 10 ERA , 22 strikeouts , and 14 walks in 38 1 ⁄ 3 innings . He finished the season by appearing in one game ( which he won ) with the Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre Yankees of the Class AAA International League ( IL ) . 
 Hacker began 2008 with Tampa . He was named the FSL Pitcher of the Week from April 8 to 14 after throwing 14 scoreless innings . After recording a 2 – 2 record , a 1 @.@ 87 ERA , 31 strikeouts , nine walks , and 53 innings pitched in nine starts , he was promoted to the Trenton Thunder of the Class AA Eastern League on May 28 . In 17 starts with the Thunder , he had a 7 – 4 record , a 2 @.@ 76 ERA , 84 strikeouts , and 28 walks in 95 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . His minor league totals were a 9 – 6 record , a 2 @.@ 43 ERA , 79 strikeouts , 33 walks , and 144 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 26 starts . In the playoffs , he had a 2 – 0 record and a 1 @.@ 54 ERA in two starts as the Thunder won the Eastern League championship . 
 In 2009 , Hacker attended spring training with New York for the first time but was sent to the minors on March 8 after two games . He began the season with Trenton , where he recorded a 1 – 1 record , a 4 @.@ 11 ERA , eight strikeouts , seven walks , and 15 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in three starts . After three starts , he was promoted to Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre , where he had an 0 – 1 record , a 7 @.@ 88 ERA , 12 strikeouts , four walks , and 16 innings pitched in three starts . On May 9 , he was designated for assignment to make room on the 40 @-@ man roster for Brett Tomko . 
 = = = Pittsburgh Pirates = = = 
 On May 16 , Hacker was traded to the Pittsburgh Pirates for Rómulo Sánchez . The Pirates assigned him to the Indianapolis Indians of the International League . He was named the IL Pitcher of the Week for August 3 – 9 after winning both of his starts and striking out 14 hitters during the week . He recorded a 5 – 5 record , a 4 @.@ 02 ERA , 82 strikeouts , 46 walks , and 116 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 21 starts and was called up to the majors for the first time on September 8 following the IL season . Hacker said upon being called up : 
 Hacker made his major league debut on September 22 , allowing two runs in an inning in a 10 – 4 loss to the Cincinnati Reds . He pitched a scoreless inning in a 6 – 0 loss to the Chicago Cubs in his next game on September 29 . In his final game of the year on October 4 , he pitched a scoreless inning in a 6 – 0 loss to Cincinnati . Hacker had no record , a 6 @.@ 00 ERA , one strikeout , two walks , and three innings pitched in his three games with the Pirates . He was outrighted ( sent to the minors and removed from the 40 @-@ man roster ) on November 6 , and he became a minor league free agent on November 9 . 
 = = = San Francisco Giants ( first stint ) = = = 
 On December 18 , 2009 , Hacker signed with the San Francisco Giants . He pitched in four games for the Giants in spring training but was sent to the minors after posting a 14 @.@ 29 ERA . With the Fresno Grizzlies of the AAA Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) , he won eight consecutive decisions from July 4 to August 20 . In 29 starts , Hacker posted a 16 – 8 record , a 4 @.@ 51 ERA , 129 strikeouts , and 62 walks in 165 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He tied for the PCL lead in starts with Lance Lynn while finishing sixth in innings pitched , sixth in ERA , and fourth in strikeouts ( behind Lynn ( 141 ) , Brandon Dickson ( 137 ) , and Michael Kirkman ( 130 ) ) . His 16 wins led the PCL , the highest total since 1995 when Donne Wall won 17 . On November 6 , he became a free agent . 
 = = = Minnesota Twins = = = 
 On November 9 , 2010 , Hacker signed with the Minnesota Twins . He attended spring training but was sent to the minors after posting a 13 @.@ 50 ERA in five games . He was called up to Minnesota on April 19 to replace Alex Burnett ( who was optioned ) in the bullpen ; Twins manager Ron Gardenhire said , " We need a long guy [ in the bullpen ] . " He made his Twins ' debut that day , throwing two scoreless innings in an 11 – 0 loss to the Baltimore Orioles . In his next game on April 27 , he gave up one unearned run in 3 1 ⁄ 3 innings but allowed three inherited runners to score in an 8 – 2 loss to the Tampa Bay Rays . After the game , Hacker was optioned back to Triple @-@ A Rochester to make room on the roster for Anthony <unk> . On July 17 , he was outrighted off the 40 @-@ man roster to make room for Scott Diamond . With the Rochester Red Wings of the International League , Hacker had a 7 – 14 record , a 6 @.@ 10 ERA , 98 strikeouts , 50 walks , and 135 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 26 games ( 25 starts ) . He tied with Diamond for the league lead in losses , ranked sixth in the league in walks , led the league in runs allowed ( 103 ) , and ranked third in the league in earned runs allowed ( 92 , behind Thad Weber 's 95 and Corey <unk> 's 93 ) . On October 4 , he became a free agent . 
 = = = San Francisco Giants ( second stint ) = = = 
 In 2012 , Hacker re @-@ signed with the Giants . He was called up to make his first career start for the Giants on April 27 due to an earlier doubleheader . He allowed three runs and got the loss ( his first career decision ) but recorded seven strikeouts in six innings as the San Diego Padres defeated the Giants 5 – 3 . After the game , he was returned to Fresno to make room for Steve <unk> on the roster . Hacker was selected to the PCL All @-@ Star Game in 2012 . On August 17 , he was called up to be used as a long reliever soon after Brad Penny was placed on the disabled list . The next day , he gave up a run in 1 2 ⁄ 3 innings ( a home run by Carlos Quentin ) in an 8 – 7 victory over San Diego . He gave up a run in one inning ( a home run by Will Venable ) in a 7 – 1 loss to San Diego on August 19 . He allowed a run in one inning in a 7 – 3 loss to the Atlanta Braves in his next outing on August 25 . After the game , Hacker was optioned to Fresno to make room for Eli Whiteside when the Giants decided to have three catchers on their roster . With the Giants , he had an 0 – 1 record , a 5 @.@ 59 ERA , eight strikeouts , two walks , and 9 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in four games ( one start ) . 
 In 26 games ( 25 starts ) with Fresno , Hacker had a 12 – 6 record , a 4 @.@ 01 ERA , 103 strikeouts , and 43 walks in 150 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He tied with Tom Koehler , Ryan Verdugo , and Brad Peacock for fourth in the PCL in wins ( behind John Ely 's and Sean O 'Sullivan 's 14 and Barry Enright 's 13 ) and finished fourth in ERA ( behind Ely 's 3 @.@ 20 , Yusmeiro Petit 's 3 @.@ 46 , and Brad Hand 's 4 @.@ 00 ) . He was designated for assignment on September 4 to make room for Emmanuel <unk> on the Giants ' roster , and he became a free agent four days later . 
 = = = NC Dinos ( KBO ) = = = 
 On January 15 , 2013 , Hacker signed with the NC Dinos of the Korea Baseball Organization . 
 On April 4 , he started against the Lotte Giants . He pitched 7 innings , while allowing 3 earned runs , but no run support and poor defence caused him to take the loss . During the rest of April , Hacker had a lot of trouble in dealing with runners on base , because his pitching motion was vulnerable to stolen bases . So , by the end of April , Hacker was forced to make changes his pitching delivery . 
 On Mar 10 , he faced the Doosan Bears , and delivery was changed . Though he ended up with no decision , there was a bit of hope that he could pitch well . Twelve days later , he got his first win in KBO . 
 However , during the rest of the season , wins were hard to come by , because the batting was especially poor when he was on the mound . Even worse was that the bullpen couldn 't hold the lead he had given them . He ended 2013 season with 4 @-@ 11 with a 3 @.@ 63 ERA . He had 3 completed games , and pitched 178 @.@ 1 innings . 
 However , the Dinos didn 't hesitate to extend his contract . In late 2013 , Hacker re @-@ signed for the 2014 season with NC Dinos . He has since resigned twice with the Dinos . As of June 2015 he was 8 @-@ 3 , 3 @.@ 46 era . 
 = = Pitching style = = 
 Hacker throws four pitches : a fastball , a slider , a curveball , and a changeup . Early in his minor league career , he only threw the fastball and the slider ; former Indians ' pitching coach Ray <unk> believes the other two pitches have helped him keep hitters " off balance . " After his first start ( against the Padres in 2012 ) , Padres ' manager Bud Black said , " He has a deliberate motion out of the windup . " 
 = Burning of Parliament = 
 The Palace of Westminster , the medieval royal palace used as the home of the British parliament , was largely destroyed by fire on 16 October 1834 . The blaze was caused by the burning of small wooden tally sticks which had been used as part of the accounting procedures of the Exchequer until 1826 . The sticks were disposed of in a careless manner in the two furnaces under the House of Lords , which caused a chimney fire in the two flues that ran under the floor of the Lords ' chamber and up through the walls . 
 The resulting fire spread rapidly throughout the complex and developed into the biggest conflagration to occur in London between the Great Fire of 1666 and the Blitz of the Second World War ; the event attracted large crowds which included several artists who provided pictorial records of the event . The fire lasted for most of the night and destroyed a large part of the palace , including the converted St Stephen 's Chapel — the meeting place of the House of Commons — the Lords Chamber , the Painted Chamber and the official residences of the Speaker and the Clerk of the House of Commons . 
 The actions of Superintendent James Braidwood of the London Fire Engine Establishment ensured that Westminster Hall and a few other parts of the old Houses of Parliament survived the blaze . In 1836 a competition for designs for a new palace was won by Charles Barry . Barry 's plans , developed in collaboration with Augustus Pugin , incorporated the surviving buildings into the new complex . The competition established Gothic Revival as the predominant national architectural style and the palace has since been categorised as a UNESCO World Heritage Site , of outstanding universal value . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Palace of Westminster originally dates from the early eleventh century when Canute the Great built his royal residence on the north side of the River Thames . Successive kings added to the complex : Edward the Confessor built Westminster Abbey ; William the Conqueror began building a new palace ; his son , William Rufus , continued the process , which included Westminster Hall , started in 1097 ; Henry III built new buildings for the Exchequer — the taxation and revenue gathering department of the country — in 1270 and the Court of Common Pleas , along with the Court of King 's Bench and Court of Chancery . By 1245 the King 's throne was present in the palace , which signified that the building was at the centre of English royal administration . 
 In 1295 Westminster was the venue for the Model Parliament , the first English representative assembly , summoned by Edward I ; during his reign he called sixteen parliaments , which sat either in the Painted Chamber or the White Chamber . By 1332 the barons ( representing the titled classes ) and burgesses and citizens ( representing the commons ) began to meet separately , and by 1377 the two bodies were entirely detached . In 1512 a fire destroyed part of the royal palace complex and Henry VIII moved the royal residence to the nearby Palace of Whitehall , although Westminster still retained its status as a royal palace . In 1547 Henry 's son , Edward VI , provided St Stephen 's Chapel for the Commons to use as their debating chamber . The House of Lords met in the medieval hall of the Queen 's Chamber , before moving to the Lesser Hall in 1801 . Over the three centuries from 1547 the palace was enlarged and altered , becoming a warren of wooden passages and stairways . 
 St Stephen 's Chapel remained largely unchanged until 1692 when Sir Christopher Wren , at the time the Master of the King 's Works , was instructed to make structural alterations . He lowered the roof , removed the stained glass windows , put in a new floor and covered the original gothic architecture with wood panelling . He also added galleries from which the public could watch proceedings . The result was described by one visitor to the chamber as " dark , gloomy , and badly ventilated , and so small ... when an important debate occurred ... the members were really to be pitied " . When the future Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone remembered his arrival as a new MP in 1832 , he recounted " What I may term corporeal conveniences were ... marvellously small . I do not think that in any part of the building it afforded the means of so much as washing the hands . " The facilities were so poor that , in debates in 1831 and 1834 , Joseph Hume , a Radical MP , called for new accommodation for the House , while his fellow MP William Cobbett asked " Why are we squeezed into so small a space that it is absolutely impossible that there should be calm and regular discussion , even from circumstance alone ... Why are 658 of us crammed into a space that allows each of us no more than a foot and a half square ? " 
 By 1834 the palace complex had been further developed , firstly by John Vardy in the middle of the eighteenth century , and in the early nineteenth century by James Wyatt and Sir John Soane . Vardy added the Stone Building , in a Palladian style to the West side of Westminster Hall ; Wyatt enlarged the Commons , moved the Lords into the Court of Requests and rebuilt the Speaker 's House . Soane , taking on responsibility for the palace complex on Wyatt 's death in 1813 , undertook rebuilding of Westminster Hall and constructed the Law Courts in a Neoclassical style . Soane also provided a new royal entrance , staircase and gallery , as well as committee rooms and libraries . 
 The potential dangers of the building were apparent to some , as no fire stops or party walls were present in the building to slow the progress of a fire . In the late eighteenth century a committee of MPs predicted that there would be a disaster if the palace caught fire . This was followed by a 1789 report from fourteen architects warning against the possibility of fire in the palace ; signatories included Soane and Robert Adam . Soane again warned of the dangers in 1828 , when he wrote that " the want of security from fire , the narrow , gloomy and unhealthy passages , and the insufficiency of the accommodations in this building are important objections which call loudly for revision and speedy amendment . " His report was again ignored . 
 Since medieval times the Exchequer had used tally sticks , pieces of carved , notched wood , normally willow , as part of their accounting procedures . The parliamentary historian Caroline Shenton has described the tally sticks as " roughly as long as the span of an index finger and thumb " . These sticks were split in two so that the two sides to an agreement had a record of the situation . Once the purpose of each tally had come to an end , they were routinely destroyed . By the end of the eighteenth century the usefulness of the tally system had likewise come to an end , and a 1782 Act of Parliament stated that all records should be on paper , not tallies . The Act also abolished sinecure positions in the Exchequer , but a clause in the act ensured it could only take effect once the remaining sinecure @-@ holders had died or retired . The final sinecure @-@ holder died in 1826 and the act came into force , although it took until 1834 for the antiquated procedures to be replaced . The novelist Charles Dickens , in a speech to the Administrative Reform Association , described the retention of the tallies for so long as an " obstinate adherence to an obsolete custom " ; he also mocked the bureaucratic steps needed to implement change from wood to paper . He said that " all the red tape in the country grew redder at the bare mention of this bold and original conception . " By the time the replacement process had finished there were two cart @-@ loads of old tally sticks awaiting disposal . 
 In October 1834 Richard Weobley , the Clerk of Works , received instructions from Treasury officials to clear the old tally sticks while parliament was adjourned . He decided against giving the sticks away to parliamentary staff to use as firewood , and instead opted to burn them in the two heating furnaces of the House of Lords , directly below the peers ' chambers . The furnaces had been designed to burn coal — which gives off a high heat with little flame — and not wood , which burns with a high flame . The flues of the furnaces ran up the walls of the basement in which they were housed , under the floors of the Lords ' chamber , then up through the walls and out through the chimneys . 
 = = 16 October 1834 = = 
 The process of destroying the tally sticks began at dawn on 16 October and continued throughout the day ; two Irish labourers , Joshua Cross and Patrick Furlong , were assigned the task . Weobley checked in on the men throughout the day , claiming subsequently that , on his visits , both furnace doors were open , which allowed the two labourers to watch the flames , while the piles of sticks in both furnaces were only ever four inches ( ten centimetres ) high . Another witness to the events , Richard Reynolds , the <unk> in the Lords , later reported that he had seen Cross and Furlong throwing handfuls of tallies onto the fire — an accusation they both denied . 
 Those tending the furnaces were unaware that the heat from the fires had melted the copper lining of the flues and started a chimney fire . With the doors of the furnaces open , more oxygen was drawn into the furnaces , which ensured the fire burned more fiercely , and the flames driven further up the flues than they should have been . The flues had been weakened over time by having footholds cut in them by the child chimney sweeps . Although these footholds would have been repaired as the child exited on finishing the cleaning , the fabric of the chimney was still weakened by the action . In October 1834 the chimneys had not yet had their annual sweep , and a considerable amount of creosote had built up inside the flues . 
 A strong smell of burning was present in the Lords chamber during the afternoon of 16 October , and at 4 : 00 pm two gentlemen tourists visiting to see the Armada tapestries that hung there were unable to view them properly because of the thick smoke . As they approached Black Rod 's box in the corner of the room , they felt heat from the floor coming through their boots . Shortly after 4 : 00 pm Cross and Furlong finished work , put the last few sticks into the furnaces — closing the doors as they did so — and left to go to the nearby Star and Garter public house . 
 The first flames were spotted at 6 : 00 pm , under the door of the House of Lords , by the wife of one of the <unk> ; she entered the chamber to see Black Rod 's box alight , and flames burning the curtains and wood panels , and raised the alarm . For 25 minutes the staff inside the palace initially panicked and then tried to deal with the blaze , but they did not call for assistance , or alert staff at the House of Commons , at the other end of the palace complex . 
 At 6 : 30 pm there was a flashover , a giant ball of flame that The Manchester Guardian reported " burst forth in the centre of the House of Lords ... and burnt with such fury that in less than half an hour , the whole interior ... presented ... one entire mass of fire . " The explosion , and the resultant burning roof , lit up the skyline , and could be seen by the royal family in Windsor Castle , 20 miles ( 32 km ) away . Alerted by the flames , help arrived from nearby parish fire engines ; as there were only two hand @-@ pump engines on the scene , they were of limited use . They were joined at 6 : 45pm by 100 soldiers from the Grenadier Guards , some of whom helped the police in forming a large square in front of the palace to keep the growing crowd back from the firefighters ; some of the soldiers assisted the firemen in pumping the water supply from the engines . 
 The London Fire Engine Establishment ( LFEE ) — an organisation run by several insurance companies in the absence of a publicly run brigade — was alerted at about 7 : 00 pm , by which time the fire had spread from the House of Lords . The head of the LFEE , James Braidwood , brought with him 12 engines and 64 firemen , even though the Palace of Westminster was a collection of uninsured government buildings , and therefore fell outside the protection of the LFEE . Some of the firefighters ran their hoses down to the Thames . The river was at low tide and it meant a poor supply of water for the engines on the river side of the building . 
 By the time Braidwood and his men had arrived on the scene , the House of Lords had been destroyed . A strong south @-@ westerly breeze had fanned the flames along the wood @-@ panelled and narrow corridors into St Stephen 's Chapel . Shortly after his arrival the roof of the chapel collapsed ; the resultant noise was so loud that the watching crowds thought there had been a Gunpowder Plot @-@ style explosion . According to The Manchester Guardian , " By half @-@ past seven o 'clock the engines were brought to play upon the building both from the river and the land side , but the flames had by this time acquired such a predominance that the quantity of water thrown upon them produced no visible effect . " Braidwood saw it was too late to save most of the palace , so elected to focus his efforts on saving Westminster Hall , and he had his firemen cut away the part of the roof that connected the hall to the already burning Speaker 's House , and then soak the hall 's roof to prevent it catching fire . In doing so he saved the medieval structure at the expense of those parts of the complex already ablaze . 
 The glow from the burning , and the news spreading quickly round London , ensured that crowds continued to turn up in increasing numbers to watch the spectacle . Among them was a reporter for The Times , who noticed that there were " vast gangs of the light @-@ fingered gentry in attendance , who doubtless reaped a rich harvest , and [ who ] did not fail to commit several desperate outrages . " The crowds were so thick that they blocked Westminster Bridge in their attempts to get a good view , and many took to the river in whatever craft they could find or hire in order to watch better . A crowd of thousands congregated in Parliament Square to witness the spectacle , including the Prime Minister — Lord Melbourne — and many of his cabinet . Thomas Carlyle , the Scottish philosopher , was one of those present that night , and he later recalled that : 
 " The crowd was quiet , rather pleased than otherwise ; <unk> 'd and whistled when the breeze came as if to encourage it : ' there 's a flare @-@ up ( what we call shine ) for the House o ' Lords . ' — ' A judgment for the Poor @-@ Law Bill ! ' — ' There go their <unk> ' ( acts ) ! Such exclamations seemed to be the prevailing ones . A man sorry I did not anywhere see . " 
 This view was doubted by Sir John Hobhouse , the First Commissioner of Woods and Forests , who oversaw the upkeep of royal buildings , including the Palace of Westminster . He wrote that " the crowd behaved very well ; only one man was taken up for <unk> when the flames increased . ... on the whole , it was impossible for any large assemblage of people to behave better . " Many of the MPs and peers present , including Lord Palmerston , the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs , helped break down doors to rescue books and other treasures , aided by passers @-@ by ; the Deputy Serjeant @-@ at @-@ Arms had to break into a burning room to save the parliamentary mace . 
 At 9 : 00 pm three Guards regiments arrived on the scene . Although the troops assisted in crowd control , their arrival was also a reaction of the authorities to fears of a possible insurrection , for which the destruction of parliament could have signalled the first step . The three European revolutions of 1830 — the French , Belgian and Polish actions — were still of concern , as were the unrest from the Captain Swing riots , and the recent passing of the Poor Law Amendment Act 1834 , which altered the relief provided by the workhouse system . 
 At around 1 : 30 am the tide had risen enough to allow the LFEE 's floating fire engine to arrive on the scene . Braidwood had called for the engine five hours previously , but the low tide had hampered its progress from its downriver mooring at Rotherhithe . Once it arrived it was effective in bringing under control the fire that had taken hold in the Speaker 's House . 
 Braidwood regarded Westminster Hall as safe from destruction by 1 : 45 am , partly because of the actions of the floating fire engine , but also because a change in the direction of the wind kept the flames away from the Hall . Once the crowd realised that the hall was safe they began to disperse , and had left by around 3 : 00 am , by which time the fire near the Hall was nearly out , although it continued to burn towards the south of the complex . The firemen remained in place until about 5 : 00 am , when they had extinguished the last remaining flames and the police and soldiers had been replaced by new shifts . 
 The House of Lords , as well as its robing and committee rooms , were all destroyed , as was the Painted Chamber , and the connecting end of the Royal Gallery . The House of Commons , along with its library and committee rooms , the official residence of the Clerk of the House and the Speaker 's House , were devastated . Other buildings , such as the Law Courts , were badly damaged . The buildings within the complex which emerged relatively unscathed included Westminster Hall , the cloisters and undercroft of St Stephen 's , St Mary Undercroft Chapel , the Jewel Tower and Soane 's new buildings to the south . The British standard measurements , the yard and pound , were both lost in the blaze ; the measurements had been created in 1496 . Also lost were most of the procedural records for the House of Commons , which dated back as far as the late 15th century . The original Acts of Parliament from 1497 survived , as did the Lords ' Journals , all of which were stored in the Jewel Tower at the time of the fire . In the words of Shenton , the fire was " the most momentous blaze in London between the Great Fire of 1666 and the Blitz " of the Second World War . Despite the size and ferocity of the fire , there were no deaths , although there were nine casualties during the night 's events that were serious enough to require hospitalisation . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The day after the fire the Office of Woods and Forests issued a report outlining the damage , stating that " the strictest enquiry is in progress as to the cause of this calamity , but there is not the slightest reason to suppose that it has arisen from any other than accidental causes . " The Times reported on some of the possible causes of the fire , but indicated that it was likely that the burning of the Exchequer tallies was to blame . The same day the cabinet ministers who were in London met for an emergency cabinet meeting ; they ordered a list of witnesses to be drawn up , and on 22 October a committee of the Privy Council sat to investigate the fire . 
 The committee , which met in private , heard numerous theories as to the causes of the fire , including the lax attitude of plumbers working in the Lords , carelessness of the servants at Howard 's Coffee House — situated inside the palace — and a gas explosion . Other rumours began to circulate ; the Prime Minister received an anonymous letter claiming that the fire was an arson attack . The committee issued its report on 8 November , which identified the burning of the tallies as the cause of the fire . The committee thought it unlikely that Cross and Furlong had been as careful in filling the furnaces as they had claimed , and the report stated that " it is unfortunate that Mr Weobley did not more effectively superintend the burning of the tallies " . 
 King William IV offered Buckingham Palace as a replacement to parliament ; the proposal was declined by MPs who considered the building " dingy " . Parliament still needed somewhere to meet , and the Lesser Hall and Painted Chamber were re @-@ roofed and furnished for the Commons and Lords respectively for the State Opening of Parliament on 23 February 1835 . The opening included a statement from the King , read by Lord Brougham , the Lord Chancellor , that prorogued parliament until 25 November 1835 . 
 Although the architect Robert Smirke was appointed in December 1834 to design a replacement palace , pressure from the former MP Lieutenant Colonel Sir Edward Cust to open the process up to a competition gained popularity in the press and led to the formation in 1835 of a Royal Commission . This body determined in which style the new construction should be built , and in June they decided that either Elizabethan or gothic styles should be used . The commission also decided that although competitors would not be required to follow the outline of the original palace , the surviving buildings of Westminster Hall , the Undercroft Chapel and the Cloisters of St Stephen 's should all be incorporated into the new complex . 
 There were 97 entries to the competition , which closed in November 1835 ; each entry was to be identifiable only by a pseudonym or symbol . The commission presented their recommendation in February 1836 ; the winning entry , which brought a prize of £ 1 @,@ 500 , was number 64 , identified by a portcullis — the symbol chosen by the architect Charles Barry . <unk> by any English secular Elizabethan or Gothic buildings , Barry had visited Belgium to view examples of Flemish civic architecture prior to drafting his design ; to complete the necessary pen and ink drawings , which are now lost , he employed Augustus Pugin , a 23 @-@ year @-@ old architect who was , in the words of the architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner , " the most fertile and passionate of the <unk> " . Thirty four of the competitors petitioned parliament against the selection of Barry , who was a friend of Cust , but their plea was rejected , and the former prime minister Sir Robert Peel defended Barry and the selection process . 
 = = New Palace of Westminster = = 
 Barry planned an enfilade , or what Christopher Jones , the former BBC political editor , has called " one long spine of Lords ' and Commons ' Chambers " which enabled the Speaker of the House of Commons to look through the line of the building to see the Queen 's throne in the House of Lords . Laid out around 11 courtyards , the building included several residences with accommodation for about 200 people , and comprised a total of 1 @,@ 180 rooms , 126 staircases and 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of corridors . Between 1836 and 1837 Pugin made more detailed drawings on which estimates were made for the palace 's completion ; reports of the cost estimates vary from £ 707 @,@ 000 to £ 725 @,@ 000 , with six years until completion of the project . 
 In June 1838 Barry and colleagues undertook a tour of Britain to locate a supply of stone for the building , eventually choosing <unk> Limestone from the <unk> quarry of the Duke of Leeds . Work started on building the river frontage on 1 January 1839 , and Barry 's wife laid the foundation stone on 27 April 1840 . The stone was badly quarried and handled , and with the polluted atmosphere in London it proved to be problematic , with the first signs of deterioration showing in 1849 , and extensive renovations required periodically . 
 Although there was a setback in progress with a stonemasons ' strike between September 1841 and May 1843 , the House of Lords had its first sitting in the new chamber in 1847 . In 1852 the Commons was finished , and both Houses sat in their new chambers for the first time ; Queen Victoria first used the newly completed royal entrance . In the same year , while Barry was appointed a Knight Bachelor , Pugin suffered a mental breakdown and , following incarceration at Bethlehem Pauper Hospital for the Insane , died at the age of 40 . 
 The clock tower was completed in 1858 , and the Victoria Tower in 1860 ; Barry died in May that year , before the building work was completed . The final stages of the work were overseen by his son , Edward , who continued working on the building until 1870 . The total cost of the building came to around £ 2 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1836 the Royal Commission on Public Records was formed to look into the loss of the parliamentary records , and make recommendations on the preservation of future archives . Their published recommendations in 1837 led to the Public Record Act ( 1838 ) , which set up the Public Record Office , initially based in Chancery Lane . 
 The fire became the " single most depicted event in nineteenth @-@ century London ... attracting to the scene a host of engravers , <unk> and painters " . Among them were <unk> Turner , the landscape painter , who later produced two pictures of the fire , and the Romantic painter John Constable , who sketched the fire from a hansom cab on Westminster Bridge . 
 The destruction of the standard measurements led to an overhaul of the British weights and measures system . An inquiry that ran from 1838 to 1841 considered the two competing systems used in the country , the avoirdupois and troy measures , and decided that avoirdupois would be used forthwith ; troy weights were retained solely for gold , silver and precious stones . The destroyed weights and measures were recast by William Simms , the scientific instrument maker , who produced the replacements after " countless hours of tests and experiments to determine the best metal , the best shape of bar , and the corrections for temperature " . 
 The Palace of Westminster has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1987 , and is classified as being of outstanding universal value . UNESCO describe the site as being " of great historic and symbolic significance " , in part because it is " one of the most significant monuments of neo @-@ Gothic architecture , as an outstanding , coherent and complete example of neo @-@ Gothic style " . The decision to use the Gothic design for the palace set the national style , even for secular buildings . 
 In 2015 the chairman of the House of Commons Commission , John Thurso , stated that the palace was in a " dire condition " . The Speaker of the House of Commons , John Bercow , agreed and said that the building was in need of extensive repairs . He reported that parliament " suffers from flooding , contains a great deal of asbestos and has fire safety issues " , which would cost £ 3 billion to fix . 
 = Law & Order : Criminal Intent ( season 1 ) = 
 The first season of Law & Order : Criminal Intent , an American police procedural television series developed by Dick Wolf and René Balcer , began airing on September 30 , 2001 on NBC , a national broadcast television network in the United States . Law & Order : Criminal Intent is the second spin @-@ off of the long @-@ running crime drama Law & Order , and follows the New York City Police Department 's fictional Major Case Squad , which investigates high @-@ profile murder cases . The first season comprises twenty @-@ two episodes and concluded its initial airing on May 10 , 2002 . Four actors received star billing in the first season ; Vincent D 'Onofrio , Kathryn Erbe , Jamey Sheridan , and Courtney B. Vance . 
 Episodes depict Detectives Robert Goren ( D 'Onofrio ) and Alexandra Eames ( Erbe ) as the squad 's lead investigators . Captain James Deakins ( Sheridan ) is the detectives ' direct supervisor and head of the Major Case Squad . Assistant District Attorney Ron Carver ( Vance ) often attempts to obtain confessions from the suspects , rather than taking them to trial . Law & Order : Criminal Intent focusses on the actions and motives of the criminals , and divides screen time equally between the suspects and victims , and the police 's investigation . The season was filmed on location in New York City , although scenes set inside the Major Case Squad department were filmed in a studio at Chelsea Piers , Manhattan . 
 The season was nominated for four awards , and was described as the most impressive of all the Law & Order series . It was sold to numerous television stations around the world , has been adapted into localized foreign versions in Russia and France , and has been syndicated in the US on a number of cable channels . A DVD box set of the season was released in America on October 21 , 2003 , and episodes are available to purchase at the US iTunes Store and Amazon Video on Demand . 
 = = Production = = 
 Law & Order : Criminal Intent is the third series in the Law & Order crime drama franchise , which was created by Dick Wolf in 1990 . He developed it with René Balcer , who began working on the original series during its first season . During his time on Law & Order , Balcer was promoted to head writer , show runner , and executive producer before leaving in 2000 . News first broke of a new series in late 2000 , when it was reported that NBC , broadcaster of Law & Order and Law & Order : Special Victims Unit , approached Wolf Films and Studios USA about a second spin @-@ off . 
 Balcer and Wolf conceived Law & Order : Criminal Intent as a police procedural crime drama that follows a distinct division of the New York City Police Department : the ' Major Case Squad ' , and its investigations in to high @-@ profile murder cases , such as those involving VIPs , local government officials and employees , and people working in the financial industry and the arts and entertainment world . Unlike the other series in the Law & Order franchise , Law & Order : Criminal Intent gives significant attention to the actions and motives of the criminals , rather than primarily focusing on the police investigation and trial prosecution . Episodes do not contain trials , and end in confessions rather than plea bargains or verdicts . 
 Production began in January 2001 , shooting on location in and around New York City using local color . The main set of One Police Plaza is located at Pier 62 , Chelsea Piers , Manhattan . Thirteen episodes were initially ordered , and were completed by April 2001 , so that production would not be halted by a potential strike from the Writers Guild of America . Balcer was the show runner , executive producer and head writer on the first season of Law & Order : Criminal Intent . Wolf was also credited as an executive producer , as with all other Law & Order series . The first season gave co @-@ executive producers credits to Peter Jankowski , Fred Berner , Geoffrey Neigher , and Arthur W. Forney . John L. Roman , Roz Weinman , and Eric Overmyer were named producers , with Michael <unk> a co @-@ producer . Theresa Rebeck and <unk> Meyer were consulting producers . Twelve people directed , and nine people wrote the twenty @-@ two episodes ; Constantine Makris directed four episodes , and Balcer wrote or co @-@ wrote ten episodes . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Law & Order : Criminal Intent is not an ensemble series , and therefore differs from Law & Order and Law & Order : Special Victims Unit which respectively featured six and eight actors receiving star billing during the same broadcast season . Movie actor Vincent D 'Onofrio was offered the lead role of Detective Robert Goren , a hyper @-@ intuitive contemporary Sherlock Holmes @-@ type investigator who used to work for the US Military Police . Other than a 1998 guest role on Homicide : Life on the Street that earned him an Emmy nomination , this was D 'Onofrio 's first major television role . Goren 's partner , former vice squad detective Alexandra Eames , was played by Kathryn Erbe who had just completed a role on Oz as convicted murderer Shirley Bellinger . Balcer stated Eames was cast because " she just looked like a real cop . " Courtney B. Vance plays Assistant District Attorney Ron Carver , a graduate of John Jay College of Criminal Justice . Jamey Sheridan was the last actor to be cast in a main role , taking the part of James Deakins , a " seasoned " NYPD Captain . In a recurring role , Leslie Hendrix appeared as Assistant Chief Medical Examiner Elizabeth Rodgers , the same character she had played in the other two series . Steve <unk> provides a voice @-@ over at the beginning of each episode 's opening credits , saying " In New York City 's war on crime , the worst criminal offenders are pursued by the detectives of the Major Case Squad . These are their stories . " 
 Many New York @-@ based actors guest @-@ starred in the first season , as either victims , suspects , or their family members . Jake Weber starred as the murderer in the first episode ; Kathleen Chalfant guest @-@ starred in " Smothered " as a murder suspect 's wealthy , socialite mother ; Stephen Henderson played the murder victim in " The Faithful " ; the murder suspect in " Jones " was played by Griffin Dunne and Karen Young played his wife . " Faith " featured guest appearances from Mia Dillon , Remak Ramsay , Adam LeFevre , and Polly Draper . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The first season of Law & Order : Criminal Intent premiered during the 2001 – 2002 television season on the American terrestrial television network NBC . The pilot episode , titled " One " , aired on Sunday September 30 , 2001 at 9 : 00 p.m. EST . Episodes aired weekly until December , when the show took a brief hiatus until January , and took another hiatus during February . The final episode of the season aired at 9 : 00 p.m. on Friday May 10 , 2002 . Under a $ 100 @,@ 000 @-@ per @-@ episode shared or second window syndication agreement that cable channel USA Network made with NBC , USA Network was allowed to broadcast episodes out of primetime a week after their premiere on NBC . The season is also under a regular off @-@ network syndication deal at USA Networks and Bravo . The two channels teamed up late 2004 to pay $ 2 million per episode for the syndication rights to the series , allowing USA Network to air episodes during the week , and Bravo to air episodes at the weekend . In 2007 , Fox Television Stations , a group of Fox Broadcasting Company owned @-@ and @-@ operated stations , entered a syndication deal to broadcast episodes as part of its daytime schedule . From late 2009 , MyNetworkTV will broadcast Law & Order : Criminal Intent , including episodes from season one , having changed their business model from a network broadcaster to a syndication programming service . The series has also been distributed to international broadcasters . It aired in Canada on CTV , in France on TF1 , in the United Kingdom on Hallmark Channel and Five , in Australia on Network Ten , and in New Zealand on TV3 . 
 Episodes of Law & Order : Criminal Intent 's first season have been adapted into localized foreign versions . Russian : <unk> и <unk> : <unk> <unk> ( lit . Law & Order : Criminal Mind ) , premiered in 2007 on NTV ( Russia ) and is produced by Global American Television , <unk> and NTV , Wolf Films and NBC Universal . On May 3 , 2007 , the French Law & Order : Criminal Intent broadcaster , TF1 , began airing Paris <unk> <unk> , a co @-@ production from TF1 and ALMA , Wolf Films and NBC Universal . All eight episodes of Paris <unk> <unk> 's first season , two episodes from the second season , and one third @-@ season episode were adapted from Law & Order : Criminal Intent first season episodes . Wolf stated that Law & Order : Criminal Intent has been sold to foreign networks because it is easier to adapt into local legal systems than Law & Order , where half of each episode occurs in the courtroom . 
 The season is available in a number of new media formats . Universal Studios Home Entertainment released it in a 6 @-@ disc DVD box set on October 21 , 2003 in Region 1 , titled Law & Order : Criminal Intent – The First Year . The pilot episode was also released on a separate DVD on June 3 , 2003 . Consumers in the US can purchase and download episodes from the iTunes Store and Amazon Video on Demand . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Laura Fries of Variety commented on the difference between this series and Law & Order and Law & Order : Special Victims Unit : " By scrutinizing motive and intent , Criminal Intent utilizes a more personal style that sets it apart from its brethren . Wolf 's characters are notoriously devoid of detailed personal lives , but debut [ episode ] hints at a little more introspection on the part of the characters " . In Entertainment Weekly , Ken Tucker wrote that Law & Order : Criminal Intent was the best series of the year from the Law & Order franchise and that while Law & Order suffered from tired , wooden performances from actors with poor chemistry , the acting on Law & Order : Criminal Intent was at " the other end of the spectrum . " Both writers commented on the overpowering screen presence that D 'Onofrio commands in the first episode : " Criminal Intent so far is a one @-@ man show with Vincent D 'Onofrio at its center . [ He ] commands the most attention , tending to overshadow Erbe , who is reduced in the pilot to following Goren with an awe @-@ struck look , " wrote Fries , while Tucker also stated , " D 'Onofrio is so eccentrically entertaining , even his costar Kathryn Erbe seems fascinated " , but complained that Erbe 's role was smaller than D 'Onofrio 's , which " jibes with the subtle range she showed on [ HBO 's ] Oz and proves her professional generosity . " He also said Sheridan " is similarly nonplussed and under @-@ utilized , " but " Vance is terrific [ as Carver ] , who makes defendants wither in the face of his elegantly reasoned cross @-@ examinations . " 
 Law & Order : Criminal Intent 's first season received four nominations from three award ceremonies . " The Faithful " and " Smothered " were given commendations at the Prism Awards in the category for Best TV Drama Series Episode . Vance was nominated in the Outstanding Actor in a Drama Series category at the 2002 NAACP Image Awards . René Balcer received an Edgar Award nomination for " Tuxedo Hill " . Casting director Lynn Kressel was nominated at the Casting Society of America Artios Awards in the category for Best Casting for TV in a Dramatic Pilot . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = Grenade ( song ) = 
 " Grenade " is a song by American singer and songwriter Bruno Mars from his debut studio album , Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans ( 2010 ) . A pop and R & B ballad , " Grenade " was written and produced by The Smeezingtons ( Mars , Phillip Lawrence , Ari Levine ) with additional songwriting by Brody Brown , Claude Kelly , and Andrew Wyatt . The song was developed from an unreleased track with similar lyrical themes played by record producer Benny Blanco to Mars . " Grenade " was completely rearranged and re ‑ recorded two days before the album 's release . The song 's lyrics carry a message of unrequited love and how Mars ' heart was broken , despite his best efforts to show her his love . Initially released as a promotional single on September 28 , 2010 , it was later announced as the album 's second single , released by Atlantic and Elektra Records . 
 " Grenade " was well received by critics , praising the vocals and emotional lyrics of the song and also considered it as one of the stand @-@ out tracks on Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans . The single reached number one in fifteen different countries , giving Mars his third number one single on the Billboard Hot 100 , and topping the Canadian Hot 100 for three non @-@ consecutive weeks . " Grenade " was certified seven times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and six times by Music Canada ( MC ) . Worldwide , it was the second best selling digital single of 2011 with sales of 10 @.@ 2 million copies . 
 A music video for the single , directed by Nabil Elderkin , was released on November 19 , 2010 . In the video , Mars is seen dragging an upright piano through Los Angeles , by the time he arrives at the home of his beloved , he discovers she is with another man , so he decides to leave and ends up by killing himself . Mars performed " Grenade " on The Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans Tour ( 2010 – 12 ) and The Moonshine Jungle Tour ( 2013 – 14 ) . The song has been covered by a variety of performers . It was nominated for both Song of the Year and Record of the Year at the 54th Annual Grammy Awards . 
 = = Background and conception = = 
 " Grenade " was written and produced by The Smeezingtons ( Mars , Phillip Lawrence , Ari Levine ) with additional songwriting by Brody Brown , Claude Kelly , and Andrew Wyatt . The song was recorded at Larrabee Recording Studios and Levcon Studios in Los Angeles , California . In an interview with Idolator , Mars revealed the song 's conception and inspiration , saying that he was with his friend Benny Blanco and he was playing a couple of songs to Mars , including one which lyrics were similar to the ones in " Grenade " . Blanco added that the band to which the song belonged was not signed , and that the CD was not released . Mars replied " I can relate to that so much , I want to take that and make it my own " . Mars confessed that the song was inspired by " his love for a girl who did not love him back " . He admitted to be " a bit of a drama queen in that song " and that the track was therapeutic to him . Afterwards , Blanco contact the dude , and Mars started writing his version . 
 It 's a heartbreaking , heartbreak song , and I think everyone can relate to that . You 're so in love with this woman and you don ’ t understand , ' What am I doing wrong ? What am I not giving to you ? I 'll go as far as putting a bullet in my brain for you , and why can 't I get that kind of love in return ? ' 
 In the same interview , the singer expressed desire to release the song as a single , claiming it was a " personal favorite " . Before the official release of the song as a single it was released on September 28 , 2010 as a promotional single along with " Liquor Store Blues " , which features Damian Marley , an iTunes Store @-@ exclusive prior to Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans album release in October 2010 . On October 21 , 2010 in an interview with Digital Spy , Mars revealed the intention to follow the hit single " Just the Way You Are " with " Grenade " . Elektra Records released the song on September 28 , 2010 through iTunes . On November 29 , 2010 a CD Single was released on Europe to promo the song , " Grenade " . Later , on February 4 , 2011 , it was released a CD single on Germany and on the UK , which included a Carl Louis & Martin Danielle Classic Mix of " Just the Way You Are " and the single " Grenade " . An EP with different versions of Grenade , including the music video for the song was released on May 8 , 2011 , on iTunes . 
 = = Production and writing = = 
 The original version of " Grenade " had an " uptempo 1960 's surf @-@ style sound " and before a live show in New York , Mars " slowed and stripped it down " . The reworked song was the last track added to the album . In an interview with Sound on Sound , engineer Ari Levine from The Smeezingtons , who carried out the recording and instrumentation on " Grenade " , explained that the song was original recorded with " a more guitar ‑ based arrangement " , <unk> faster . Mars ended up by playing the song live in a slower tempo , receiving praise from the label . The song was reproduced in the way you hear it . To do so , the team completely rearranged and re ‑ recorded t , including the vocals , " two days before the album was supposed to be handed in " . Levine , added " There was quite a bit of deadline stress involved in that . " Despite the time that Grenade took to produce , the writing was among the most difficult songs in album since it took several months to complete . Later , on April 21 , 2012 , the team said that the last line of the song was the conflict , since it took two months for them to come up with " but you won 't do the same " . Levine explained which instruments and software was involved in the song : 
 The drums in ‘ Grenade ’ came from a combination of my MPC and some software drums , and I created the piano sound in the <unk> . The rest of the synth sounds came from the Virus , and I use the V ‑ synth and the <unk> on pretty much everything . Bruno and I played the keyboards and Brody Brown played the bass . He ’ s an incredible musician who has a great feel and he can play everything . 
 " Grenade " was recorded at Larrabee Recording Studios and Levcon Studios in Los Angeles , with Ari Levine , Bruno Mars and Brody Brown playing all the instruments on the track and recording them . Levine was also responsible for engineering the song at Levcon Studios in California . The mixing of the track was finished at Larrabee Sound Studios , in North Hollywood by Manny Marroquin , with Christian Plata and Erik Madrid serving as the assistants . Stephen Marcussen mastered the song at Marcussen Mastering in California . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Grenade " is a Power pop and R & B ballad with an instrumentation that features piano , keyboards , drums and bass . The song contains elements of Wilco 's " I 'll Fight " . Mike Senior of Sound on Sound said that the " piano riff sounded like Coldplay 's ' Clocks ' " , adding the idea of a " powerful kick / bass combination and good vocal intelligibility is audible when the chorus hits " and a " snare only added at the start of the second verse " . According to the The New York Times music reviewer , Jon Caramanica , the song contains elements of 1980s pop and is accompanied by drums similar to those used by Kanye West . It has been described by critics as " pure and clean vocals over a pounding drum beat " . 
 According to Sony / ATV Music Publishing " Grenade " is set in the key of D minor and was published in common time , with a moderate tempo of 108 beats per minute . Mars ' vocals span from A3 to D5 and background vocals are heard throughout . The New Zealand Herald 's Scott Kara described its beats as " Shakira @-@ esque " . Both Roberto <unk> for MTV and Robert Copsey from Digital Spy noticed the similarities with Michael Jackson 's ' Dirty Diana ' . The later describe it as an " haunting piano melody and thunderous drum claps " . Spencer Hawk from Little Village notice that the song " doesn 't rely on a hook , and its mostly Mars ’ voice with a simple piano riff and a pulsing drum beat " . On the other hand , Aamir Yaqub of Soul Culture believes that the production of " Grenade " resembles the one in " Just The Way You Are " . 
 Lyrically , the song contains masochistic themes and tells the story of heartbreak caused by a failed relationship : " Gave you all I had / And you tossed it in the trash " . The chorus has Mars singing , " I 'd catch a grenade for ya , " and speaks of unrequited love when the subject girl of his affections " won 't do the same " . Tim Byron , writer for The Vine , " ' Grenade ' is about the feeling of withdrawal " . The critic added , " Mars knows she is bad for him , that 's she 's preventing him from thinking straight , that he can 't actually have her the way he wants , but he still nonetheless has crazy desires for that rush of romantic cocaine that he gets from her . " As Mars commented in an interview to Blues & Soul : " ' Grenade ' represents the OTHER side of love – where you 're in love with a woman and you know for a fact that she doesn 't love you the way you love HER . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 The song received generally positive reviews from most music critics . Robert Copsey of Digital Spy gave a review of four stars out of five , praising Mars ' vocals , " Mars has the vocal chops ... to carry that off " , and emotional lyrics on a track that has a strong influence and similarity to Michael Jackson 's " Dirty Diana " . The latter reminiscent was also noted by Roberto <unk> for MTV , who added that the song was coincidentally covered on several occasions by Mars . CBBC ( a division of BBC ) gave it four stars in their review , praising the " epic chorus " of the song . Entertainment Weekly 's Leah Greenblatt called " Grenade " the " atmospheric opener " of Mars ' debut studio album , adding that is a " captivating masochist ’ s anthem " , enjoying it as one of the album 's highlights , as did The Washington Post 's Sean Fennessey . Rolling Stone 's Jody Rosen recommended it as proof of Mars ' capabilities as a " lavishly gifted melodist " . Tom <unk> @-@ Kozlowski of The Daily Telegraph complimented " the Kanye West @-@ style genre @-@ bending on Grenade and other tracks that joins the dots between Michael Jackson and Bob Marley . " 
 Consequence of Sound 's Kevin Barber praised the track and Mars , since it " showcases his Michael Jackson @-@ esque vocal range " and it 's " heavy , heartbreaking lyrics " . Ken Tucker for NPR noticed that " It 's hard to resist the clever come @-@ on refrain of " Grenade " — " I 'd catch a grenade for ya " , adding that the song had a " creamy melody " . Reviewers , Meredith Whitmore and Adam R. Holz , for <unk> , think that " Grenade " is the reverse side of " Just The Way You Are " , commenting that the song " ponders what happens when that flower fades and dies " . However , Slant 's Eric Henderson dismissed its unrealistic lyrics , while AllMusic 's Tim Sendra thought the song was " over @-@ the @-@ top " — one of the weaker ones on the album . Spencer Hawk from Little Village criticized the song by calling it " fairly innovative " and notice that the shouting of the lyrics " doesn ’ t feel genuine " , however he felt that " It ’ s very safe while being a little risky , and Mars is a solid singer " . Music @-@ News.com , reviewer David Spencer , stated " great pop but little in way of surprise " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 " Grenade " received several nominations . In 2011 , it was nominated for " Choice Music : Break @-@ Up Song " at the 2011 Teen Choice Awards and at the 2011 MTV Europe Music Awards the song received a nomination in the category of Best Song . In 2012 , " Grenade " was nominated for three Grammy Awards , including : Record of the Year , Song of the Year , and the newly introduced Best Pop Solo Performance , losing all of them to British singer Adele . In the same year , the single received a nomination for " Best Hit International " at the Swiss Music Awards . At the 2012 ASCAP Pop Music Awards the song was able to win the title of " Most Performed Song " . The song was nominated for the 2011 The Record of the Year ceremony . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = = North America = = = 
 " Grenade " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 the week of October 16 , 2010 at number 81 and climbed the chart to number five for the week ending December 18 , 2010 . On January 8 , 2011 , it peaked at number 1 , making it Bruno Mars ' third number one single on the chart , the others being B.o.B 's " Nothin ' on You " , on which he was featured , and " Just the Way You Are " . The peak position was reached due to 559 000 downloads and 89 million listener impressions , taking Digital Gainer and Airplay Gainer awards . Around this time , the song had become his second solo single to top the 2 million mark in downloads . The song dropped and rose back to the top spot two more times , making it one of only six singles in Billboard history to have three distinct runs at number one . In February , it topped the 3 million mark . The song spent 36 weeks on the Hot 100 . Months after the RIAA awarded five platinum to the song by selling five million copies in the country . As of October 2015 , the song has sold 6 @.@ 1 million digital copies in the United States . On July 1 , 2016 the single was certified seven times platinum by RIAA . It was Mars ' second single to sell over 5 million , just a week after " Just the Way You Are " achieved that feat , and it was only the third time in Billboard history that back @-@ to @-@ back singles have both sold 5 million copies in the digital era . The song has peaked at number one in the Canada . It replaced " The Time ( Dirty Bit ) " by The Black Eyed Peas , before being dethroned by " Hold It Against Me " by Britney Spears . On February 12 , 2011 it took the top spot from Usher 's song " More " . Two weeks later it was replaced by Lady Gaga 's " Born This Way " . 
 = = = Europe and Oceania = = = 
 In Australia it debuted at number 48 in the ARIA Singles Chart and five weeks later reached number one , taking " The Time ( Dirty Bit ) " by The Black Eyed Peas from the top spot . On its second run in Australia it dethroned " Who 's That Girl " by Guy Sebastian featuring Eve , thus being replaced by the same a week later . After its success in the country , Australian Recording Industry Association certified it five times platinum for selling 350 000 digital copies . In the first week in the UK , the song topped the list with a total of 149 834 copies sold , blocking Lady Gaga 's " Born This Way " . Thus , Mars achieved the best opening week of January on the list since 1996 " Spaceman " by Babylon Zoo debuted with 383 000 units . In July 2013 , the BPI awarded him a platinum record by selling 600 000 copies . In Austria , the song reached the second position and remained there for three non @-@ consecutive weeks . The song was , eventually , certified Platinum by IFPI Austria . In Germany the song debuted at 8 , and three weeks later reached the top spot , where it stayed for six non @-@ consecutive weeks . Then , BVMI gave Mars three gold records for the sale of 450 000 downloads . On the Italian chart it entered at ninth place and then ascended into eight where he spent another week before leaving the count . Although it only spent three weeks in the Italian chart , it has received a platinum by the FIMI . 
 In New Zealand , the song spent twenty @-@ nine weeks on the chart and it was number one for three , after taking " The Time ( Dirty Bit ) " by The Black Eyed Peas from the top spot . Grenade sold 30 000 copies sold , earning a double platinum certification by the RIANZ . Other countries where the song rose to the top include Norway and Denmark , after taking the top spot from <unk> 's single " Out of It " . It was certified platinum by IFPI Denmark . As of February 4 , the song spent 4 weeks on the top of the Irish Singles Chart , on its first week it has replaced Matt Cardle 's " When We Collide " . On the Swedish music chart , " Grenade " dethroned " Born This Way " by Lady Gaga ( on its second run at number one ) . On the Swiss Singles Chart it replaced the duet between Diddy @-@ Dirty Money and Skylar Grey 's " Coming Home " . It was certified three times platinum by the IFPI Switzerland . In the two regions of Belgium the song reached the top ten and received a gold certification in the Ultratop 50 Flanders . In Slovakia and Finland the song peaked at number 3 , while on the Dutch Top 40 the song peaked at number 2 . Nevertheless , the success of " Grenade " was lower in other countries ; it just spent two weeks on the Japan Hot 100 chart and reached the peak position of 36 . Despite its low reception in Spanish territory , it only peaked at number 21 , the song was the ninth most played song in the Spotify streaming service in 2011 . 
 " Grenade " reached number one in fourteen different charts and sold a total of 10 @.@ 2 million digital copies in 2011 , making it the second most sold single of that year , after " Just the Way You Are " . As of March 2015 , the song has sold over 10 @,@ 6 million digital copies worldwide . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development and synopsis = = = 
 Nabil Elderkin directed the music video for the song . In a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes video , Mars explained , " The concept of the video is my struggle , to tell this girl I 'd do anything for her , so I 'm going as far as dragging a piano to get to her just so I can sing my heart out . " Mars , sarcastically , replied to rumors related to the use of special effects : " A lot of people think this is a camera trick , but that is a heavy piano . Luckily , I ’ ve been doing about , you know , 800 to 967 push @-@ ups every day , so it ’ s not a big deal , I can handle it . " Regardless , this achievement , Mars was cautious : " The actions in this video serve as a metaphor , and should not be taken literally . I am aware of the power of visual media , and I encourage everyone who watches this video to understand that it is an artistic interpretation of the song , and not something to imitate " . 
 The music video was released on November 19 , 2010 on MTV and MTV.com. and it involves Mars 's efforts to sing to a woman he loves after dragging an upright piano with a rope tied to it through Los Angeles . Scenes also feature the singer singing in a dark bedroom , looking out of a rainy window . He wears a suit and encounters a gang and a pit bull along the way . When he reaches the woman 's house and finds out she is with another man , he drags himself and the piano in front of a train to attempt suicide . As the train approaches Bruno at full speed , the video cuts to black . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The video received mixed reviews by critics . Robbie Daw of Idolator complemented the video by saying that the " standout track from Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans , and it ’ s given an extra sheen thanks to a quirky , unconventional video that doesn ’ t shy away from the dark tone of the song ’ s lyrics " . Brian Zacher from AXS.com said that the video shares the " greatness " with the previous one , " Just the Way You Are " . James Montgomery of MTV News gave a mixed review on the video , in which he said " after all , it would ’ ve been easy — and expected — to make something slick , sexy and / or saccharine , a glossy thing where he croons from a rooftop somewhere , removes his shirt , and somehow ends up with the girl . None of that happens here . Rather , we see Mars struggling and sweating , being taunted and tempted , falling and rising again ... He ends up alone , unloved . He probably gets flattened by a train " . On another review by Montgomery , the singer redemption is refereed because Mars " distances himself from his <unk> @-@ crooning contemporaries , and he does it simply by being real . Really dramatic , really emotional , really clever . This one ’ s a winner , even if , at the end of it , Mars has lost everything . " 
 The video itself earned Mars three nominations at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards , in Best Male Video , Best Pop Video and Video of the Year . At the 2012 MTV Platinum Video Plays Awards , was given " Double Platinum " award for the number of times played on MTV channels around the world . The video was also one of the most seen online on the United Kingdom , in 2011 . Mark Graham for VH1 ranked the video as the second best of 2011 , the top spot went for " Rolling in the Deep " by Adele . 
 = = Cover versions and remixes = = 
 Some artists made their own versions and remixes of the song . The American group Boyce Avenue covered " Grenade " and included it in their sixth EP , Acoustic Sessions , Vol . 1 , released on December 6 , 2010 . Gavin Mikhail included his version of the song and it 's instrumental in his album , Grenade . American rapper Lil Wayne published the first official remix of the song on February 12 , 2011 . The remix is identical to the song , except for the 16 @-@ bar introduction verse that Wayne provides . Mars was so surprised with the remix when he saw it online , he recalls " I was like , ‘ What ? Press play " . He called it , " Awesome " . MTV critique , Jayson Rodriguez , described it as " Lil Wayne delivering a spoken word @-@ style flow , expressing devotion for his love interest " . RichGirl , a R & B girl group , created a remix to the song , released on their Fall in Love with RichGirl mixtape . 
 Nathaniel Drew and Salt Lake Pops Orchestra remixed the song , with the vocal collaboration of Alex Boye and Lindsey Stirling , it was released as a single on July 13 , 2012 . Gerrie van Dijk @-@ <unk> and Michelle <unk> , contestants on The Voice of Holland and its US version , respectively , sang the theme for the competition and released it digitally through iTunes . Japanese singer Gille included her version of the track on her debut EP Lead the Way , released on May 16 , 2012 . Will Chase , who guest starred as Michael Swift in the TV series Smash , sang the song during the episode titled " Enter Mr. DiMaggio " , which originally aired on January 20 , 2012 . 
 American metalcore band , Memphis May Fire covered the track for the compilation album Punk Goes Pop 5 , which was released on November 6 , 2012 . The song was officially released for digital download on October 2 , 2012 . In order to celebrate its fifteen years in the music industry , Dutch symphonic rock band , Within Temptation covered several songs by other artists , including " Grenade " , during a special program on the Belgian radio station Q music , called Within Temptation Friday . The band chose this song because " It 's a really good song and instead of making a grenade go off on stage , we figured we ’ d make a bomb of astonishment go off in the studio " , in the words of the lead vocalist Sharon den Adel . On April 19 , 2013 Within Temptation 's cover was released and available for download as part of their cover album The Q @-@ Music Sessions . Nevertheless , the song peaked at number 73 , in their home country , on the Dutch Charts . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Mars performed the song at the Bowery Ballroom in New York City on August 25 , 2010 , with him and his four @-@ piece band dressed in blue tuxedos and black skinny ties . John Macdonald for Spin said " Despite a couple pitch problems here and there , Mars proved to be nearly as good a performer as he is a songwriter " . The song was also performed in a similar manner on the October 9 , 2010 episode of Saturday Night Live , as part of a segue from " Nothin ' on You " , the debut single was also performed . His performance was well received by critics . Billboard 's magazine critique Walter Frazier analysed the performance and commented " Mars ' backing band ... dressed as a 1950s rockabilly group , while Mars resembled something of a modern @-@ day Elvis , surely inspiring swoons for the " SNL " audience . " The performance was also praised by Mawuse Ziegbe , MTV reviewer , who wrote : " Mars peppered the performance with hip @-@ swaying moves Elvis would be proud of and wrapped up the set in classic rock @-@ star style with an enthusiastic jump in the air . " On October 21 , 2010 , a soulful arrangement of the song was sung for a Billboard Tastemakers video session . On May 5 , 2011 Mars expressed his apprehension about performing the song because fans have been throwing dummy grenades on stage , some of which are metal and have posed a safety hazard . 
 Additionally , Mars performed on the Late Show with David Letterman , on November 11 , 2010 , with a soul redemption of " Grenade " accompanied by an all @-@ female string section . Robbie Draw from website Idolator wrote a positive review , commenting " Bruno Mars hit up the Late Show With David Letterman last night and left a piece of his heart on the stage after turning out an emotional , bluesy rendition of his new single “ Grenade ” " . Story Gilmore of Neon Limelight also praised the performance , calling it " nothing short of awesome " and noticed that Mars " takes this performing thing seriously . Even when he ’ s doing something as simple as a late night show performance , he makes sure he ’ s on his A game " . The song was performed at NBC ’ s The Today Show on November 22 , 2010 , as part of the Toyota Concert Series and at the 2010 Soul Train Music Awards on November 28 , 2010 . On January 6 , 2011 , Mars performed " Grenade " on The Ellen DeGeneres Show with a guitar , " backed by three background singers , a strings section , and pianist " . He also performed the song on the Dutch television show The Voice of Holland on January 21 , 2011 . On February 13 , 2011 he performed the song live at the 2011 Grammy Awards , along with B.o.B. and Janelle Monáe . In Germany , Mars performed " Grenade " on two different shows Wetten , dass .. ? and at the Echo Awards , on 19 and 28 March 2011 , respectively . It was the eleventh song of his debut worldwide tour , The Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans <unk> was thirteenth on the set list of his second worldwide tour , The Moonshine Jungle Tour ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at : Larrabee Recording Studios and Levcon Studios in Los Angeles , California ; mixed at Larrabee Sound Studios in North Hollywood , California . 
 Personnel 
 Source : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = = Promotional release = = = 
 = = = Single release = = = 
 = John C. " Pappy " Herbst = 
 John C. " Pappy " Herbst ( September 25 , 1909 – July 4 , 1946 ) was an American flying ace who was officially the second highest @-@ scoring fighter pilot in the China Burma India Theater with 18 confirmed victories made during 7 months with the 23d Fighter Group . 23d FG Commander David Lee " Tex " Hill said of Herbst that he was " one of the greatest fighter pilots I ever saw . " 
 Often described as " colorful " , Herbst was one of the more successful aces of the United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) . Herbst first fought with the Royal Canadian Air Force in Europe against German aircraft , possibly downing one . He joined the USAAF as an instructor training fighter pilots stateside . After two years of teaching and intelligence duties , Herbst was sent to China to fight the Japanese . For seven months he led the 74th Fighter Squadron on far @-@ ranging independent missions , operating from advance airfields under crude conditions and in the face of Operation Ichi @-@ Go ; a successful Japanese pincer movement . Herbst scored the majority of his kills during so @-@ called " administrative " flights after he had already completed the theater requirement of 100 combat missions . After the war , Herbst toured in an aerobatic demonstration team flying jets . One day after marrying his second wife he crashed during an aerobatic maneuver and died . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Coleman Herbst was born in 1909 in San Diego County , California , in rural North County near Palomar Mountain , an area he described as " Rancho Palomar " . In his teens , he attended Huntington Park High School in Los Angeles , following which he graduated from the University of Southern California in 1932 with a degree in petroleum engineering . That same year he earned a private pilot 's license . He was married in the 1930s and fathered a son named Tommy in 1933 . After graduating USC , Herbst studied law at night at Loyola Law School while working as a petroleum engineer during the day . As a flyer , he joined the Wings Club of New York City , and for business advancement he joined the California Club in Los Angeles . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In 1941 , Herbst was working as a tax consultant for an American oil company when he left civilian life and joined the Royal Canadian Air Force ( RCAF ) to learn to fly fighters in combat . After training , Herbst was posted to the United Kingdom where he flew in one of the Eagle Squadrons . Herbst may have scored against a Messerschmitt Bf 109 in the Mediterranean Theater of Operations but the kill is unconfirmed . In early 1942 , Herbst returned to the U.S. and joined the USAAF as a flight instructor in the Sarasota , Florida , area . After eight months , he transferred to Eglin Field on the Florida coast to work as a test pilot and to solve air combat tactical problems . While Colonel David Lee " Tex " Hill was recuperating on the beach with his wife , he witnessed a daredevil pilot flying dangerous aerobatics very near the water . Hill ordered the unknown pilot grounded for 60 days ; the penalty fell on Herbst who was flying in the area at the time . After only 30 days Herbst came to Hill 's office to apologize for his stunt flying and to ask for a reprieve from the rest of the punishment . He said , " I can 't stand it any longer , Colonel ; I 've just got to fly . " Hill thought Herbst was an excellent candidate for air combat in the China Burma India Theater ( CBI ) , and determined to get the flyer transferred . However , Herbst was assigned to air combat intelligence duties in Washington , D.C. until February 1944 when Herbst 's request for combat and Hill 's request for Herbst were finally satisfied . Herbst shipped out on February 20 , 1944 , and disembarked onto Chinese soil on May 7 . Herbst was by this time divorced from his first wife . 
 Upon his arrival in the CBI Theater , Herbst acquired the nickname " Pappy " because of his graying hair , his having a son in school , and his much greater age ( 34 ) relative to the other pilots . His ground crew painted a small swastika on his personal fighter aircraft in China , acknowledging his stated German kill though it was not verified . He named his aircraft " Tommy 's Dad " in honor of his son . Herbst initially served with the 5th Fighter Group ( provisional ) without scoring any aerial victories but was transferred to the 76th Fighter Squadron on May 30 , 1944 , serving as the 23d FG Squadron Operations Officer . While flying a P @-@ 51B Mustang gathering weather data north of <unk> on June 17 , 1944 , Herbst shot down a lone Nakajima Ki @-@ 43 fighter to make his first USAAF kill . 
 Nine days later on June 26 , 1944 , Herbst was made commander of the 74th Fighter Squadron , a position he held until February 1945 . Herbst converted to P @-@ 40N @-@ 20 Warhawks as flown by the 74th and soon prevailed again in combat . On August 6 near Hengyang flying against Nakajima Ki @-@ 43s , he scored two more USAAF aerial victories to become an ace . The 74th transitioned to P @-@ 51C @-@ 7 Mustangs in August , and on September 3 Herbst shot down two Japanese aircraft that he reported as Aichi D3A " Val " dive bombers but were probably Mitsubishi Ki @-@ 51 " Sonia " models instead . These were the first P @-@ 51 victories of the 74th FS . By September 16 , Herbst 's USAAF tally reached nine victories , five in a Mustang . Herbst appreciated the ability of the P @-@ 40 to absorb damage in low @-@ level combat such as close support of infantry . For finer work such as dogfighting , dive bombing and skip bombing , he said , " I 'll take the P @-@ 51 every time " . 
 Raised to the rank of major in July 1944 , Herbst was given free rein in his command of the 74th Squadron . Using the radio call sign " Guerrilla " , his squadron fought against Japanese forces conducting Operation Ichi @-@ Go , a successful drive to consolidate communications along rail lines . In his first three months of combat , Herbst completed the required 100 combat sorties and was from that time forward officially restricted to administrative flights . However , Herbst 's idea of " administrative " flights was very broad and aggressive , including weather assessment and new pilot training in areas where Japanese aircraft were known to be operating . He flew as an " observer " on combat missions in which he scored against enemy aircraft . Ten or eleven of Herbst 's aerial victories were achieved during " administrative " flights . 
 On one such flight on September 5 , 1944 , Herbst was ferrying his Mustang fighter to a more sophisticated airfield in <unk> , China , because the ejector chutes of three of its six machine guns were not working properly and needed expert attention . Herbst encountered two groups of enemy fighters , one group at 10 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 km ) and another group at a lower altitude . Alone against the hostile force and with only half of his guns working , Herbst made a head @-@ on attack against the top group , killing the leader . His aircraft was hit repeatedly by enemy rounds , shattering the canopy . More enemy aircraft joined the whirling battle against Herbst . With blood from deep scalp cuts partially blinding him , Herbst continued dogfighting , damaging other fighters and probably killing another flight leader . Finally , his last gun stopped working and he dived away to land safely at <unk> Airfield . The performance earned him a Purple Heart and a Silver Star . Most accounts of this action describe Herbst fighting 32 aircraft total — 16 high and 16 low — but Luther " Luke " <unk> , the intelligence officer of Herbst 's squadron , writes that there were two flights of 8 at 10 @,@ 000 ft protecting an unknown number below . 
 After racking up 18 victories and 2 probables over Japanese aircraft , Herbst was promoted to lieutenant colonel in February 1945 . He had personally flown 144 missions and had greatly increased the morale and effectiveness of his squadron . Under his command , the squadron achieved 64 aerial victories and destroyed 162 enemy aircraft on the ground — all without a squadron pilot being killed in aerial combat . 
 = = Postwar = = 
 Herbst was made commander of Venice Army Airfield in Florida upon his return from China . Venice served as a training base and a prisoner of war camp . He told a reporter that he wanted to fly in the expected invasion of Japan . Instead , the Japanese surrendered and the war was over . During this time , Herbst teamed with Major Carl T. Sigman to write an article for Popular Science entitled " How Planes Fight the ' White Devil ' of the Air ' " , an explanation of the dangers of ice on aircraft , and how it is countered . On November 9 , 1945 , Herbst became the commander of 445th Flight Test Squadron based at March Field in Southern California . 
 In April 1946 , Herbst and Robin Olds formed a jet aerobatics demonstration team , flying the Lockheed P @-@ 80 Shooting Star under Herbst 's leadership . The two pilots performed a coordinated routine that thrilled the crowds at every stop , including an appearance at Washington , D.C. Herbst named his P @-@ 80 " Jeanne " in honor of his bride @-@ to @-@ be . 
 At the age of 36 , Herbst married for the second time on July 3 , 1946 , to Jeanne Eve Murphy , an actress from New York City . The wedding was conducted at the Mission Inn in Riverside , California , near March Field . Herbst 's best man was Phil <unk> , who had served with him in China . On the same day , Herbst was assigned to command the 27th Fighter Squadron in the first American all @-@ jet fighter group — 1st Fighter Group — flying P @-@ 80s . 
 On July 4 , Herbst was fatally injured in front of 30 @,@ 000 people at the San Diego County Fair when his P @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 @-@ LO , 44 @-@ <unk> , part of the 445th Fighter Squadron , 412th Fighter Group , based out of March Field , crashed just west of the Del Mar Fairgrounds . Flying in formation with Olds , Herbst crashed in a dry riverbed near the Del Mar Racetrack after his aircraft stalled during an encore of their routine finale in which the pair of P @-@ 80s did a loop while configured to land . Olds narrowly avoided the same fate . 
 Herbst 's new wife witnessed the accident , as did his 13 @-@ year @-@ old son Tommy . Both rushed to aid in the rescue , but Herbst died shortly thereafter in a nearby naval hospital . 
 = Indonesian National Revolution = 
 The Indonesian National Revolution or Indonesian War of Independence ( Indonesian : Perang Kemerdekaan Indonesia ) was an armed conflict and diplomatic struggle between Indonesia and the Dutch Empire , and an internal social revolution . It took place between Indonesia 's declaration of independence in 1945 and the Dutch recognition of Indonesia 's independence at the end of 1949 . The Indonesian independence movement began in May 1908 , which is commemorated as the <unk> <unk> Bangsa ( Year of National Awakening ) . 
 The struggle lasted for over four years and involved sporadic but bloody armed conflict , internal Indonesian political and communal upheavals , and two major international diplomatic interventions . Dutch military forces were able to control the major towns , cities and industrial assets in Republican heartlands on Java and Sumatra , but could not control the countryside . In 1949 international pressure on the Netherlands became such that , together with the existing partial military stalemate , it recognised Indonesian independence . 
 The revolution marked the end of the colonial administration of the Dutch East Indies , except for Netherlands New Guinea . It also significantly changed ethnic castes , as well as reducing the power of many of the local rulers ( raja ) . It did not significantly improve the economic or political fortune of the majority of the population , although a few Indonesians were able to gain a larger role in commerce . 
 = = Background = = 
 Indonesian nationalism and movements supporting independence from Dutch colonialism , such as Budi <unk> , the Indonesian National Party ( <unk> ) , Sarekat Islam , and the Indonesian Communist Party ( PKI ) , grew rapidly in the first half of the 20th century . Budi <unk> , Sarekat Islam and others pursued strategies of co @-@ operation by joining the Dutch initiated Volksraad ( " People 's Council " ) in the hope that Indonesia would be granted self @-@ rule . Others chose a non @-@ cooperative strategy demanding the freedom of self @-@ government from the Dutch East Indies colony . The most notable of these leaders were Sukarno and Mohammad Hatta , two students and nationalist leaders who had benefited from the educational reforms of the Dutch Ethical Policy . 
 The occupation of Indonesia by Japan for three and a half years during World War II was a crucial factor in the subsequent revolution . The Netherlands had little ability to defend its colony against the Japanese army , and within only three months of their initial attacks , the Japanese had occupied the Dutch East Indies . In Java , and to a lesser extent in Sumatra ( Indonesia 's two dominant islands ) , the Japanese spread and encouraged nationalist sentiment . Although this was done more for Japanese political advantage than from altruistic support of Indonesian independence , this support created new Indonesian institutions ( including local neighbourhood organisations ) and elevated political leaders such as Sukarno . Just as significantly for the subsequent revolution , the Japanese destroyed and replaced much of the Dutch @-@ created economic , administrative , and political infrastructure . 
 On 7 September 1944 , with the war going badly for the Japanese , Prime Minister Koiso promised independence for Indonesia , but no date was set . For supporters of Sukarno , this announcement was seen as vindication for his collaboration with the Japanese . 
 = = Independence declared = = 
 Under pressure from radical and politicised pemuda ( ' youth ' ) groups , Sukarno and Hatta proclaimed Indonesian independence , on 17 August 1945 , two days after the Japanese Emperor ’ s surrender in the Pacific . The following day , the Central Indonesian National Committee ( <unk> ) elected Sukarno as President , and Hatta as Vice @-@ President . 
 = = = Revolution and Bersiap = = = 
 We , the people of Indonesia , hereby declare the independence of Indonesia . 
 Matters which concern the transfer of power and other things will be executed by careful means and in the shortest possible time . 
 Djakarta , 17 August 1945 
 In the name of the people of Indonesia , 
 [ signed ] Soekarno — Hatta 
 ( Translation by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , October 1948 ) 
 It was mid @-@ September before news of the declaration of independence spread to the outer islands , and many Indonesians far from the capital Jakarta did not believe it . As the news spread , most Indonesians came to regard themselves as pro @-@ Republican , and a mood of revolution swept across the country . External power had shifted ; it would be weeks before Allied Forces entered Indonesia , and the Dutch were too weakened by World War II . The Japanese , on the other hand , were required by the terms of the surrender to both lay down their arms and maintain order ; a contradiction that some resolved by handing weapons to Japanese @-@ trained Indonesians . 
 The resulting power vacuums in the weeks following the Japanese surrender , created an atmosphere of uncertainty , but also one of opportunity for the Republicans . Many pemuda joined pro @-@ Republic struggle groups ( <unk> <unk> ) . The most disciplined were soldiers from the Japanese @-@ formed but disbanded <unk> ( PETA ) and Heiho groups . Many groups were undisciplined , due to both the circumstances of their formation and what they perceived as revolutionary spirit . In the first weeks , Japanese troops often withdrew from urban areas to avoid confrontations . 
 By September 1945 , control of major infrastructure installations , including railway stations and trams in Java 's largest cities , had been taken over by Republican pemuda who encountered little Japanese resistance . To spread the revolutionary message , pemuda set up their own radio stations and newspapers , and graffiti proclaimed the nationalist sentiment . On most islands , struggle committees and militia were set up . Republican newspapers and journals were common in Jakarta , Yogyakarta , and Surakarta , which fostered a generation of writers known as <unk> 45 ( ' generation of 45 ' ) many of whom believed their work could be part of the revolution . 
 Republican leaders struggled to come to terms with popular sentiment ; some wanted passionate armed struggle ; others a more reasoned approach . Some leaders , such as the leftist Tan <unk> , spread the idea that this was a revolutionary struggle to be led and won by the Indonesian pemuda . Sukarno and Hatta , in contrast , were more interested in planning out a government and institutions to achieve independence through diplomacy . Pro @-@ revolution demonstrations took place in large cities , including one led by Tan <unk> in Jakarta with over 200 @,@ 000 people , which Sukarno and Hatta , fearing violence , successfully quelled . 
 By September 1945 , many of the self @-@ proclaimed pemuda , who were ready to die for ' 100 % freedom ' , were getting impatient . It was common for ethnic ' out @-@ groups ' – Dutch internees , Eurasian , Ambonese and Chinese – and anyone considered to be a spy , to be subjected to intimidation , kidnap , robbery , murder and organised massacres . Such attacks would continue throughout the course of the revolution , but were most present during the 1945 @-@ 46 period , which is known as the Bersiap . 
 After the Bersiap in 1947 Dutch authorities attempted to retrieve the bodies of the victims and several survivors of the period provided legal testimony to the Attorney General office . Due to continued revolutionary warfare few bodies were found and few cases came to court . Around 3 @,@ 500 graves of Bersiap victims can be found in the <unk> Kuning war cemetery in Surabaya and elsewhere . 
 The Simpang Society Club Surabaya was appropriated by the <unk> of the Partai Rakyat Indonesia ( <unk> ) and made into the headquarters of <unk> commander Sutomo , who personally supervised the summary executions of hundreds of civilians . An archived eyewitness testimony of the events of 22 October 1945 states : 
 " Before each execution Sutomo mockingly asked the crowd what should be done with this " <unk> ( enemy ) of the people " . The crowd yelled " <unk> ! " ( kill ! ) after which the executioner named Rustam decapitated the victim with one stroke of his sword . The victim was then left to the <unk> of boys 10 , 11 and 12 years old . ... [ who ] further mutilated the body . " " Women were tied to the tree in the back yard and pierced through the genitals with " <unk> <unk> " ( bamboo spears ) until they died . " 
 On Sutomo 's orders the decapitated bodies were disposed of in the sea , the women were thrown in the river . 
 The death toll of the Bersiap period runs into the tens of thousands . The bodies of 3 @,@ 600 Indo @-@ Europeans have been identified as killed . However more than 20 @,@ 000 registered Indo @-@ European civilians were abducted and never returned . The Indonesian revolutionaries lost at least 20 @,@ 000 , often young , fighting men . Estimates of the number of Indonesian fighters killed in the lead up and during the Battle of Surabaya range from 6 @,@ 300 to 15 @,@ 000 . The Japanese forces lost around 1 @,@ 000 soldiers and the British forces registered 660 soldiers , mostly British Indians , as killed ( with a similar number missing in action ) . The actual Dutch military were hardly involved , as they only started to return to Indonesia in March and April 1946 . 
 = = = Formation of the Republican government = = = 
 By the end of August , a central Republican government had been established in Jakarta . It adopted a constitution drafted during the Japanese occupation by the Preparatory Committee for Indonesian Independence . With general elections yet to be held , a Central Indonesian National Committee ( <unk> ) was appointed to assist the President . Similar committees were established at provincial and regency levels . 
 Questions of allegiance immediately arose amongst indigenous rulers . Central Javanese principalities , for example , immediately declared themselves Republican , while many raja ( ' rulers ' ) of the outer islands , who had been enriched from their support of the Dutch , were less enthusiastic . Such reluctance among many outer islands was sharpened by the radical , non @-@ aristocratic , and sometimes Islamic nature of the Java @-@ centric Republican leadership . Support did , however , come from South Sulawesi ( including the King of Bone , who still recalled battles against the Dutch from early in the century ) , and from Makassarese and Bugis raja , who supported the Republican Governor of Jakarta , a <unk> Christian . Many Balinese raja accepted Republican authority . 
 Fearing the Dutch would attempt to re @-@ establish their authority over Indonesia , the new Republican Government and its leaders moved quickly to strengthen the fledgling administration . Within Indonesia , the newly formed government , although enthusiastic , was fragile and focused in Java ( where focused at all ) . It was rarely and loosely in contact with the outer islands , which had more Japanese troops ( particularly in Japanese naval areas ) , less sympathetic Japanese commanders , and fewer Republican leaders and activists . In November 1945 , a parliamentary form of government was established and Sjahrir was appointed Prime Minister . 
 In the week following the Japanese surrender , the <unk> ( PETA ) and Heiho groups were disbanded by the Japanese . Command structures and membership vital for a national army were consequently dismantled . Thus , rather than being formed from a trained , armed , and organised army , the Republican armed forces began to grow in September from usually younger , less trained groups built around charismatic leaders . Creating a rational military structure that was obedient to central authority from such disorganisation , was one of the major problems of the revolution , a problem that remains through to contemporary times . In the self @-@ created Indonesian army , Japanese @-@ trained Indonesian officers prevailed over those trained by the Dutch . A thirty @-@ year @-@ old former school teacher , Sudirman , was elected ' commander @-@ in @-@ chief ' at the first meeting of Division Commanders in Yogyakarta on 12 November 1945 . 
 = = Allied counter revolution = = 
 The Dutch accused Sukarno and Hatta of collaborating with the Japanese , and denounced the Republic as a creation of Japanese fascism . The Dutch East Indies administration had just received a ten million dollar loan from the United States to finance its return to Indonesia . 
 = = = Allied occupation = = = 
 The Netherlands , however , was critically weakened from World War II in Europe and did not return as a significant military force until early 1946 . The Japanese and members of the Allied forces reluctantly agreed to act as caretakers . As US forces were focusing on the Japanese home islands , the archipelago was put under the jurisdiction of British Admiral Earl Louis Mountbatten , the Supreme Allied Commander , South East Asia Command . Allied enclaves already existed in Kalimantan ( Indonesian Borneo ) , Morotai ( Maluku ) and parts of Irian Jaya ; Dutch administrators had already returned to these areas . In the Japanese navy areas , the arrival of Allied troops quickly prevented revolutionary activities where Australian troops , followed by Dutch troops and administrators , took the Japanese surrender ( except for Bali and Lombok ) . Due to the lack of strong resistance , two Australian Army divisions succeeded in occupying eastern Indonesia . 
 The British were charged with restoring order and civilian government in Java . The Dutch took this to mean pre @-@ war colonial administration and continued to claim sovereignty over Indonesia . The British and Indian troops did not , however , land on Java to accept the Japanese surrender until late September 1945 . Lord Mountbatten ’ s immediate tasks included the repatriation of some 300 @,@ 000 Japanese , and freeing prisoners of war . He did not want , nor did he have the resources , to commit his troops to a long struggle to regain Indonesia for the Dutch . The first British troops reached Jakarta in late September 1945 , and arrived in the cities of Medan ( North Sumatra ) , Padang ( West Sumatra ) , Palembang ( South Sumatra ) , Semarang ( Central Java ) and Surabaya ( East Java ) in October . In an attempt to avoid clashes with Indonesians , the British commander Lieutenant General Sir Philip Christison , diverted soldiers of the former Dutch colonial army to eastern Indonesia , where Dutch reoccupation was proceeding smoothly . Tensions mounted as Allied troops entered Java and Sumatra ; clashes broke out between Republicans and their perceived enemies , namely Dutch prisoners , Dutch colonial troops ( KNIL ) , Chinese , Indo @-@ Europeans and Japanese . 
 The first stages of warfare were initiated in October 1945 when , in accordance with the terms of their surrender , the Japanese tried to re @-@ establish the authority they had relinquished to Indonesians in the towns and cities . Japanese military police killed Republican pemuda in Pekalongan ( Central Java ) on 3 October , and Japanese troops drove Republican pemuda out of Bandung in West Java and handed the city to the British , but the fiercest fighting involving the Japanese was in Semarang . On 14 October , British forces began to occupy the city . Retreating Republican forces retaliated by killing between 130 and 300 Japanese prisoners they were holding . Five hundred Japanese and 2 @,@ 000 Indonesians had been killed and the Japanese had almost captured the city six days later when British forces arrived . The Allies repatriated the remaining Japanese troops and civilians to Japan , although about 1 @,@ 000 elected to remain behind and later assisted Republican forces in fighting for independence . 
 The British subsequently decided to evacuate the 10 @,@ 000 Indo @-@ Europeans and European internees in the volatile Central Java interior . British detachments sent to the towns of Ambarawa and Magelang encountered strong Republican resistance and used air attacks against the Indonesians . Sukarno arranged a ceasefire on 2 November , but by late November fighting had resumed and the British withdrew to the coast . Republican attacks against Allied and alleged pro @-@ Dutch civilians reached a peak in November and December , with 1 @,@ 200 killed in Bandung as the pemuda returned to the offensive . In March 1946 , departing Republicans responded to a British ultimatum for them to leave the city of Bandung by deliberately burning down much of the southern half of the city in what is popularly known in Indonesia as the " Bandung Sea of Fire " . The last British troops left Indonesia in November 1946 , but by this time 55 @,@ 000 Dutch troops had landed in Java . 
 = = = Battle of Surabaya = = = 
 The Battle of Surabaya was the heaviest single battle of the revolution and became a national symbol of Indonesian resistance . Pemuda groups in Surabaya , the second largest city in Indonesia , seized arms and ammunition from the Japanese and set up two new organisations ; the Indonesia National Committee ( KNI ) and the People 's Security Council ( BKR ) . By the time the Allied forces arrived at the end of October 1945 , the pemuda foothold in Surabaya city was described as " a strong unified fortress " . 
 In September and October 1945 Europeans and pro @-@ Dutch Eurasians were attacked and killed by Indonesian mobs . Ferocious fighting erupted when 6 @,@ 000 British Indian troops landed in the city . Sukarno and Hatta negotiated a ceasefire between the Republicans and the British forces led by Brigadier Mallaby . Following the killing of Mallaby on 30 October , the British sent more troops into the city from 10 November under the cover of air attacks . Although the European forces largely captured the city in three days , the poorly armed Republicans fought on until 29 November and thousands died as the population fled to the countryside . 
 Despite the military defeat suffered by the Republicans and a loss of manpower and weaponry that would severely hamper Republican forces for the rest of the revolution , the battle and defence mounted by the Indonesians galvanised the nation in support of independence and helped garner international attention . For the Dutch , it removed any doubt that the Republic was a well @-@ organized resistance with popular support . It also convinced Britain to lie on the side of neutrality in the revolution ; and within a few years , Britain would support the Republican cause in the United Nations . 
 = = = Installing the Netherlands Indies Civil Administration = = = 
 With British assistance , the Dutch landed their Netherlands Indies Civil Administration ( NICA ) forces in Jakarta and other key centres . Republican sources reported 8 @,@ 000 deaths up to January 1946 in the defence of Jakarta , but they could not hold the city . The Republican leadership thus established themselves in the city of Yogyakarta with the crucial support of the new sultan , Sri Sultan Hamengkubuwono IX . Yogyakarta went on to play a leading role in the revolution , which would result in the city being granted its own Special Territory status . In Bogor , near Jakarta , and in Balikpapan in Kalimantan , Republican officials were imprisoned . In preparation for the Dutch occupation of Sumatra , its largest cities , Palembang and Medan , were bombed . In December 1946 , Special Forces Depot ( DST ) , led by commando and counter @-@ insurgency expert Captain Raymond " Turk " Westerling , were accused of pacifying the southern Sulawesi region using arbitrary terror techniques , which were copied by other anti @-@ Republicans . As many as 3 @,@ 000 Republican militia and their supporters were killed in a few weeks . 
 On Java and Sumatra , the Dutch found military success in cities and major towns , but they were unable to subdue the villages and countryside . On the outer islands ( including Bali ) , Republican sentiment was not as strong , at least among the elite . They were consequently occupied by the Dutch with comparative ease , and autonomous states were set up by the Dutch . The largest , the State of East Indonesia ( NIT ) , encompassed most of eastern Indonesia , and was established in December 1946 , with its administrative capital in Makassar . 
 = = = Defection in British Indian Army = = = 
 The British Indian army participated in this campaign against the Republicans . However , about 600 Muslim soldiers , inspired by the republicans ' " Allahu Akbar " war @-@ cry , defected to the Republic with their weapons . 75 of these soldiers survived the war ; some decided to stay in Indonesia and others returned to India or Pakistan . 
 = = Diplomacy and military offensives = = 
 = = = Linggadjati Agreement = = = 
 The Linggadjati Agreement , brokered by the British and concluded in November 1946 , saw the Netherlands recognise the Republic as the de facto authority over Java , Madura , and Sumatra . Both parties agreed to the formation of the United States of Indonesia by 1 January 1949 , a semi @-@ autonomous federal state with the monarch of the Netherlands at its head . The Republican @-@ controlled Java and Sumatra would be one of its states , alongside areas that were generally under stronger Dutch influence , including southern Kalimantan , and the " Great East " , which consisted of Sulawesi , Maluku , the Lesser Sunda Islands , and Western New Guinea . The Central National Committee of Indonesia ( <unk> ) did not ratify the agreement until February 1947 , and neither the Republic nor the Dutch were satisfied with it . On 25 March 1947 the Lower House of the Dutch parliament ratified a stripped down version of the treaty , which was not accepted by the Republic . Both sides soon accused the other of violating the agreement . 
 = = = Operation Product = = = 
 At midnight on 20 July 1947 , the Dutch launched a major military offensive called Operatie Product , with the intent of conquering the Republic . Claiming violations of the <unk> Agreement , the Dutch described the campaign as <unk> acties ( " police actions " ) to restore law and order . This used to be the task of the KNIL . However , at the time the majority of the Dutch troops in Indonesia belonged to the Royal Netherlands Army . Soon after the end of World War II , 25 @,@ 000 volunteers ( among them 5 @,@ 000 marines ) had been sent overseas . They were later followed by larger numbers of conscripts from the Netherlands . In the offensive , Dutch forces drove Republican troops out of parts of Sumatra , and East and West Java . The Republicans were confined to the Yogyakarta region of Java . To maintain their force in Java , now numbering 100 @,@ 000 troops , the Dutch gained control of lucrative Sumatran plantations , and oil and coal installations , and in Java , control of all deep water ports . 
 International reaction to the Dutch actions was negative . Neighbouring Australia and newly independent India were particularly active in supporting the Republic 's cause in the UN , as was the Soviet Union and , most significantly , the United States . Dutch ships continued to be boycotted from loading and unloading by Australian waterside workers , a blockade that began in September 1945 . The United Nations Security Council became directly involved in the conflict , establishing a Good Offices Committee to sponsor further negotiations , making the Dutch diplomatic position particularly difficult . A ceasefire , called for by UN resolution , was ordered by the Dutch and Sukarno on 4 August 1947 . During the military action , on 9 December 1947 Dutch troops killed many civilians in the village of <unk> ( now <unk> in <unk> , West Java ) . 
 = = = Renville Agreement = = = 
 The United Nations Security Council brokered the Renville Agreement in an attempt to rectify the collapsed <unk> Agreement . The agreement was ratified in January 1948 and recognised a cease @-@ fire along the so @-@ called ' Van Mook line ' ; an artificial line which connected the most advanced Dutch positions . Many Republican positions , however , were still held behind the Dutch lines . The agreement also required referenda to be held on the political future of the Dutch held areas . The apparent reasonableness of Republicans garnered much important American goodwill . 
 Diplomatic efforts between the Netherlands and the Republic continued throughout 1948 and 1949 . Political pressures , both domestic and international , hindered Dutch attempts to decide upon objectives . Similarly , Republican leaders faced great difficulty in persuading their people to accept diplomatic concessions . By July 1948 negotiations were in deadlock and the Netherlands pushed unilaterally towards Van Mook ’ s federal Indonesia concept . The new federal states of South Sumatra and East Java were created , although neither had a viable support base . The Netherlands set up the <unk> voor <unk> <unk> ( BFO ) ( or Federal Consultative Assembly ) , a body comprising the leadership of the federal states , and charged with the formation of a United States of Indonesia and an interim government by the end of 1948 . The Dutch plans , however , had no place for the Republic unless it accepted a minor role already defined for it . Later plans included Java and Sumatra but dropped all mention of the Republic . The main sticking point in the negotiations was the balance of power between the Netherlands High Representative and the Republican forces . 
 Mutual distrust between the Netherlands and the Republic hindered negotiations . The Republic feared a second major Dutch offensive , while the Dutch objected to continued Republican activity on the Dutch side of the Renville line . In February 1948 the Siliwangi Division ( 35 @,@ 000 men ) of the Republican Army , led by Nasution , marched from West Java to Central Java ; the relocation was intended to ease internal Republican tensions involving the Division in the Surakarta area . The Battalion , however , clashed with Dutch troops while crossing Mount Slamet , and the Dutch believed it was part of a systematic troop movement across the Renville Line . The fear of such incursions actually succeeding , along with apparent Republican undermining of the Dutch @-@ established <unk> state and negative reports , led to the Dutch leadership increasingly seeing itself as losing control . 
 = = = Operation Crow and Serangan <unk> ( General Offensive ) = = = 
 Frustrated at negotiations with the Republic and believing it weakened by both the Darul Islam and Madiun insurgencies , the Dutch launched a military offensive on 19 December 1948 which it termed ' Operatie Kraai ' ( Operation Crow ) . By the following day it had conquered the city of Yogyakarta , the location of the temporary Republican capital . By the end of December , all major Republican held cities in Java and Sumatra were in Dutch hands . The Republican President , Vice @-@ President , and all but six Republic of Indonesia ministers were captured by Dutch troops and exiled on Bangka Island off the east coast of Sumatra . In areas surrounding Yogyakarta and Surakarta , Republican forces refused to surrender and continued to wage a guerrilla war under the leadership of Republican military chief of staff General Sudirman who had escaped the Dutch offensives . An emergency Republican government , the <unk> <unk> Republik Indonesia ( <unk> ) , was established in West Sumatra . 
 Although Dutch forces conquered the towns and cities in Republican heartlands on Java and Sumatra , they could not control villages and the countryside . Republican troops and militia led by Lt. Colonel ( later President ) Suharto attacked Dutch positions in Yogyakarta at dawn on 1 March 1949 . The Dutch were expelled from the city for six hours but reinforcements were brought in from the nearby cities of Ambarawa and Semarang that afternoon . Indonesian fighters retreated at 12 : 00 pm and the Dutch re @-@ entered the city . The Indonesian attack , later known in Indonesia as Serangan <unk> ( new spelling : Serangan Umum ' 1 March General Offensive ' ) , is commemorated by a large monument in Yogyakarta . A similar attack against Dutch troops in Surakarta was led by Lt. Col. Slamet Riyadi on 7 August the same year . 
 Once again , international opinion of the Dutch military campaigns was one of outrage , significantly in both the United Nations and the United States . In January 1949 , the United Nations Security Council passed a resolution demanding the reinstatement of the Republican government . United States aid specifically earmarked for Dutch Indonesia was immediately cancelled and pressure mounted within the US Congress for all United States aid to be cut off . This included Marshall Plan funds vital for Dutch post @-@ World War II rebuilding that had so far totalled $ US 1 billion . The Netherlands Government had spent an amount equivalent to almost half of this funding their campaigns in Indonesia . That United States aid could be used to fund " a senile and ineffectual imperialism " encouraged many key voices in the United States – including those amongst the US Republican Party – and from within American churches and NGOs to speak out in support of Indonesian independence . 
 = = Internal turmoil = = 
 = = = Social revolutions = = = 
 The so @-@ called ' social revolutions ' following the independence proclamation were challenges to the Dutch @-@ established Indonesian social order , and to some extent a result of the resentment against Japanese @-@ imposed policies . Across the country , people rose up against traditional aristocrats and village heads and attempted to exert popular ownership of land and other resources . The majority of the social revolutions ended quickly ; in most cases the challenges to the social order were quashed . 
 A culture of violence rooted in the deep conflicts that split the countryside during the revolution would repeatedly erupt throughout the whole second half of the 20th century . The term ' social revolution ' has been applied to a range of mostly violent activities of the left that included both altruistic attempts to organise real revolution and simple expressions of revenge , resentment and assertions of power . Violence was one of the many lessons learned during the Japanese occupation , and figures identified as ' feudal ' , including kings , regents , or simply the wealthy , were often attacked and sometimes beheaded . Rape became a weapon against ' feudal ' women . In the coastal sultanates of Sumatra and Kalimantan , for example , sultans and others whose authority had been shored @-@ up by the Dutch , were attacked as soon as Japanese authority left . The secular local lords of Aceh , who had been the foundation of Dutch rule , were executed , although most of Indonesia 's sultanates fell back into Dutch hands . 
 Most Indonesians lived in fear and uncertainty , particularly a significant proportion of the population who supported the Dutch or who remained under Dutch control . The popular revolutionary cry ' Freedom or Death ' was often interpreted to justify killings under claimed Republican authority . Traders were often in particularly difficult positions . On the one hand , they were pressured by Republicans to boycott all sales to the Dutch ; on the other hand , Dutch police could be merciless in their efforts to stamp out smugglers on which the Republican economy depended . In some areas , the term <unk> rakyat ( ' exercising the sovereignty of the people ' ) – which is mentioned in the preamble of the Constitution and used by pemuda to demand pro @-@ active policies from leaders – came to be used not only in the demanding of free goods , but also to justify extortion and robbery . Chinese merchants , in particular , were often forced to keep their goods at artificially low prices under threat of death . 
 = = = Communist and Islamist insurgencies = = = 
 On 18 September 1948 an ' Indonesian Soviet Republic ' was declared in Madiun , east of Yogyakarta , by members of the PKI and the Indonesian Socialist Party ( PSI ) . Judging the time right for a proletarian uprising , they intended it to be a rallying point for revolt against " Sukarno @-@ Hatta , the slaves of the Japanese and America " . Madiun however was won back by Republican forces within a few weeks and the insurgency leader , Musso , killed . RM Suryo , the governor of East Java , as well as several police officers and religious leaders , were killed by the rebels . This ended a distraction for the revolution , and it turned vague American sympathies based on anti @-@ colonial sentiments into diplomatic support . Internationally , the Republic was now seen as being staunchly anti @-@ communist and a potential ally in the emerging global Cold War between the American @-@ led ' free world ' and the Soviet @-@ led bloc . 
 Members of the Republican Army who had come from Indonesian Hizbullah felt betrayed by the Indonesian Government . In May 1948 , they declared a break @-@ away regime , the Negara Islam Indonesia ( Indonesian Islamic State ) , better known as Darul Islam . Led by an Islamic mystic , <unk> <unk> <unk> , Darul Islam sought to establish Indonesia as an Islamic theocracy . At the time , the Republican Government did not respond , as they were focused on the threat from the Dutch . Some leaders of <unk> sympathised with the rebellion . After the Republic regained all territories in 1950 , the government took the Darul Islam threat seriously , especially after some provinces declared that they had joined Darul Islam . The rebellion was put down in 1962 . 
 = = Transfer of sovereignty = = 
 The resilience of Indonesian Republican resistance and active international diplomacy set world opinion against the Dutch efforts to re @-@ establish their colony . The second ' police action ' was a diplomatic disaster for the Dutch cause . The newly appointed United States Secretary of State Dean Acheson pushed the Netherlands government into negotiations earlier recommended by the United Nations but until then defied by the Netherlands . The Dutch – Indonesian Round Table Conference was held in The Hague from 23 August 1949 to 2 November 1949 between the Republic , the Netherlands , and the Dutch @-@ created federal states . The Netherlands agreed to recognise Indonesian sovereignty over a new federal state known as the ' United States of Indonesia ' ( RUSI ) . It would include all the territory of the former Dutch East Indies with the exception of Netherlands New Guinea ; sovereignty over which it was agreed would be retained by the Netherlands until further negotiations with Indonesia . The other issue on which Indonesia gave concessions was Netherlands East Indies debt . Indonesia agreed to responsibility for this sum of £ 4 @.@ 3 billion , much of which was directly attributable to Dutch attempts to crush the revolution . Sovereignty was formally transferred on 27 December 1949 , and the new state was immediately recognised by the United States of America . 
 Republican @-@ controlled Java and Sumatra together formed a single state in the sixteen @-@ state RUSI federation , but accounted for almost half its population . The other fifteen ' federal ' states had been created by the Netherlands since 1945 . These states were dissolved into the Republic over the first half of 1950 . An abortive anti @-@ Republic coup in Bandung and Jakarta by Westerling 's Legion of Ratu Adil ( APRA ) on 23 January 1950 resulted in the dissolution of the populous <unk> state in West Java , thus quickening the dissolution of the federal structure . Colonial soldiers , who were largely Ambonese , clashed with Republican troops in Makassar during the Makassar Uprising in April 1950 . The predominantly Christian Ambonese were from one of the few regions with pro @-@ Dutch sentiments and they were suspicious of the Javanese Muslim @-@ dominated Republic , whom they unfavourably regarded as leftists . On 25 April 1950 , an independent Republic of South Maluku ( RMS ) was proclaimed in Ambon but this was suppressed by Republican troops during a campaign from July to November . With the state of East Sumatra now being the only federal state remaining , it too folded and fell in line with the unitary Republic . On 17 August 1950 , the fifth anniversary of his declaration of Indonesian independence , Sukarno proclaimed the Republic of Indonesia as a unitary state . 
 = = Impacts = = 
 Although there is no accurate account of how many Indonesians died , they died in far greater numbers than the Europeans . Estimates of Indonesian deaths in fighting range from 45 @,@ 000 to 100 @,@ 000 and civilian dead exceeded 25 @,@ 000 and may have been as high as 100 @,@ 000 . A total of 1 @,@ 200 British soldiers were killed or went missing in Java and Sumatra in 1945 and 1946 , most of them Indian soldiers . More than 5 @,@ 000 Dutch soldiers lost their lives in Indonesia between 1945 and 1949 . Many Japanese died ; in Bandung alone , 1 @,@ 057 died , only half of whom died in actual combat , the rest killed in rampages by Indonesians . Tens of thousands of Chinese and Eurasians were killed or left homeless , despite the fact that many Chinese supported the revolution . Seven million people were displaced on Java and Sumatra . 
 The revolution had direct effects on economic conditions ; shortages were common , particularly food , clothing and fuel . There were in effect two economies – the Dutch and the Republican – both of which had to simultaneously rebuild after World War II and survive the disruptions of the revolution . The Republic had to set up all necessities of life , ranging from ' postage stamps , army badges , and train tickets ' whilst subject to Dutch trade blockades . Confusion and ruinous inflationary surges resulted from competing currencies ; Japanese , new Dutch money , and Republican currencies were all used , often concurrently . 
 Indonesian independence was secured through a blend of both diplomacy and force . Despite their ill @-@ discipline raising the prospect of anarchy , without youth confronting foreign and Indonesian colonial forces , Republican diplomatic efforts would have been futile . The revolution is the turning point of modern Indonesian history , and it has provided the reference point and validation for the country ’ s major political trends that continue to the present day . It gave impetus to communism in the country , to militant nationalism , to Sukarno 's ' guided democracy ' , to political Islam , the origins of the Indonesian army and its role in Indonesian power , the country 's constitutional arrangements , and the centralism of power in Indonesia . 
 The revolution destroyed a colonial administration ruled from the other side of the world , and dismantled with it the raja , seen by many as obsolete and powerless . Also , it relaxed the rigid racial and social categorisations of colonial Indonesia . Tremendous energies and aspirations were created amongst Indonesians ; a new creative surge was seen in writing and art , as was a great demand for education and modernisation . It did not , however , significantly improve the economic or political fortune of the population ’ s poverty @-@ stricken peasant majority ; only a few Indonesians were able to gain a larger role in commerce , and hopes for democracy were dashed within a decade . 
 = Debra Marshall = 
 Debra Gale Marshall ( born March 2 , 1960 ) ( formerly McMichael and Williams ) is an American actress , and retired professional wrestler , having also been a manager and authority figure ( Lieutenant Commissioner ) in professional wrestling . Well known by her ring name Debra , she is notable for her appearances with World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) as Queen Debra between 1995 and 1998 and the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) as Debra between 1998 and 2002 . She began her career in professional wrestling in 1995 , accompanying her husband Steve " Mongo " McMichael to the ring in World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) . 
 She joined the WWF in 1998 , where she managed the tag team of Jeff Jarrett and Owen Hart , until the evening of Hart 's in @-@ ring death in May 1999 . She won the WWF Women 's Championship from Sable in an Evening Gown match in 1999 . She later appeared on @-@ screen with her second husband Stone Cold Steve Austin until 2002 , when the duo left the company . Marshall has also attended the prestigious Lee Strasberg Theatre & Film Institute in New York . She recently graduated from the University of Alabama with honors ( Cum Laude ) and is currently pursuing her master 's degree in Criminal Justice at the University of Alabama . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Raised in Tuscaloosa , Alabama , Marshall became a track @-@ runner , cheerleader , and Homecoming Queen in high school before attending the Lee Strasberg Theatre Institute in New York . She then became a flight attendant . Before her involvement in wrestling , she competed and won the title of 1987 Mrs. Illinois America in Elgin , IL and went on to compete in the Mrs. America pageant that same year in Las Vegas , NV . She later competed and won in the 1992 Mrs. Texas USA pageant held in Houston , TX and went on to compete in the National Mrs. USA pageant . Marshall also attended the University of Alabama . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = World Championship Wrestling ( 1995 – 1997 ) = = = 
 Marshall first appeared in WCW in late @-@ 1995 and early @-@ 1996 , making occasional unnamed appearances as an audience plant , and as part of a group of valets for the team of Hulk Hogan and " Macho Man " Randy Savage . In April 1996 , she began appearing regularly as a valet for her husband announcer Steve " Mongo " McMichael as he transitioned to competing as a wrestler . Based on her real @-@ life participation in beauty pageants , Debra took on the role of a beauty @-@ pageant queen character , giving herself the nickname " The Queen of WCW " and often making remarks about other wrestlers and valets in kayfabe interviews . 
 At The Great American Bash 1996 , Steve McMichael and his partner Kevin Greene competed against two of the The Four Horsemen ( Ric Flair and Arn Anderson ) . Flair won the match after Mongo and Debra turned on Greene by hitting him with a steel briefcase , joining the Horsemen . The briefcase later became one of Debra 's signature objects . At Bash at the Beach in July 1997 , Debra turned on Mongo during his WCW United States Heavyweight Championship match against Jeff Jarrett by handing Jarrett the steel briefcase , which he then used to knock Mongo out and thus to win the match . Next , Debra briefly managed Goldberg and Alex Wright . After her divorce from McMichael , Debra joined the WWF . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = Manager of Jeff Jarrett ; Women 's Champion ( 1998 – 1999 ) = = = = 
 In 1998 , Marshall rejoined Jarrett in the WWF . At the beginning of her WWF career , known simply as Debra , she played the part of a shrewd businesswoman , wearing business suits . She also played the part of Jarrett 's girlfriend . In late 1998 , Jarrett began a feud with Goldust that culminated in December at Rock Bottom : In Your House in a " Striptease match " . During the match , Debra hit Goldust over the head with Jarrett 's trademark guitar , enabling Jarrett to win . WWF Commissioner Shawn Michaels , however , disqualified Jarrett , and Debra had to strip due to the match 's stipulations . As she stripped , The Blue Blazer and Jarrett covered her up . Debra , however , began utilizing a new strategy during matches , distracting Jarrett 's opponents by unbuttoning her blouse . She would willingly take off her blouse to show the crowd her " puppies " , a nickname originally bestowed upon her chest by wrestler Road Dogg and later utilized by commentator Jerry Lawler . 
 The strategy helped Jarrett and partner Hart defeat The Big Boss Man and Ken Shamrock to become World Tag Team Champions in January 1999 . In February , Debra feuded with female professional wrestler Ivory , and Jarrett and Hart retained the tag title in a tag match against Ivory 's associates Mark Henry and D 'Lo Brown at St. Valentine 's Day Massacre . In March , the team lost their tag title to the team of Kane and X @-@ Pac . As Debra continued to manage Jarrett and Hart , a potential storyline developed where Hart and Debra would have an affair , but the creative team vetoed the idea before it played out on @-@ screen . A team name was also in the works — Debra favoring " Talent and Attitude " ( T & A ) — but Hart died in May 1999 at Over the Edge . Later in the event , Debra and Jarrett lost a mixed tag team match against Nicole Bass and Val Venis . Debra and Jarrett were interviewed moments after Hart 's fall from the rafters at Kemper Arena , where Debra was noticeably shaken and fighting back tears of concern for her friend , and was unable to stay in her persona . 
 On May 10 , 1999 , Debra won the Women 's Championship from Sable in an Evening Gown match . Usually , in an Evening Gown match , the woman who forcibly removes her opponent 's dress wins . Because Sable removed Debra 's dress , she therefore should have been the winner . Commissioner Shawn Michaels , however , ruled that he considered the woman who had lost her dress the winner , crowning Debra the new Women 's Champion . Debra lost the Women 's Title to Ivory on June 14 , due to interference from Nicole Bass . 
 At SummerSlam in 1999 Jarrett faced D 'Lo Brown . During the match , Debra and Brown 's former tag @-@ team partner Mark Henry interfered on Jarrett 's behalf , allowing him to win both the European Championship and the Intercontinental Championship . The following night , Jarrett awarded Henry the European title and gave Debra an assistant , Miss Kitty . At Unforgiven on September 26 , Debra turned on Jarrett and hit him over the head with a guitar in the middle of his match against Chyna for the Intercontinental Championship . Chyna pinned Jarrett , but referee Tom Prichard overturned the decision due to Debra 's involvement . 
 = = = = Sporadic appearances ( 1999 – 2002 ) = = = = 
 Debra appeared sporadically thereafter , but she participated in an eight @-@ women Sudden Death match at Survivor Series in 1999 where she teamed with The Fabulous Moolah , Mae Young , and Tori . Debra stayed off television while her new husband Stone Cold Steve Austin recovered from neck surgery . She reappeared in April 2000 , acting as a guest ring announcer at Backlash . In the fall of that year she played the role of Lieutenant Commissioner , the assistant of Commissioner Mick Foley . 
 Meanwhile , the marriage became incorporated into on @-@ screen storylines , and on an episode of Raw , Stone Cold and Debra took on Matt Hardy and Lita . Debra and Lita fought outside the ring until Stone Cold pinned Hardy to win the match . She managed The Rock in 2001 and appeared sporadically thereafter , leaving the company in June 2002 with Austin . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Before becoming involved in wrestling , Marshall studied acting in Texas . Her first acting jobs involved commercials and two music videos for country musician George Strait . She also had a small role in the 1994 film Texas Chainsaw Massacre : The Next Generation as a policewoman . The producers originally offered her the lead in the film , but when the director 's first choice changed her mind and accepted the role , Marshall was given the small role instead . 
 On March 10 , 2002 , Marshall appeared on an episode of The Weakest Link alongside several other members of the WWE roster . In addition , she has a role in the 2010 film Gathering of Heroes . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Marshall 's marriage to National Football League alumnus and professional wrestler Steve McMichael lasted thirteen years . McMichael 's mother , whom Marshall met on an airplane , set up their first meeting as a blind date . They divorced on October 12 , 1998 . 
 Debra met Steve Williams , known on @-@ screen as Stone Cold Steve Austin , in 1998 ; they moved in together in 2000 . On September 13 of that year , they married at The Little White Wedding Chapel in Las Vegas , and she changed her name to Debra Williams . On June 15 , 2002 , police responded to a call to the couple 's residence in San Antonio , Texas , and found Debra with bruises and a bloody nose . On August 14 , the authorities arrested Austin and charged him with misdemeanor assault . He pleaded no contest on November 25 and received a year 's probation , a $ 1 @,@ 000 fine , and an order to carry out eighty hours of community service . Austin filed for divorce from Marshall on July 22 , 2002 , and the divorce was finalized on February 5 , 2003 . Marshall later auctioned her wedding ring off on eBay for $ 27 @,@ 100 and donated a portion of the proceeds to " Safe Place " , an organization which assists the victims of domestic abuse . 
 In June and July 2007 , Marshall made several appearances to discuss the Chris Benoit double murder and suicide . She described steroids and drugs as the cause of Austin hitting her in June 2002 and suggested links between such substances and the death of Benoit and his family . She also alleged that Austin beat her three times . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing Moves 
 Slap 
 Wrestlers Managed 
 Alex Wright 
 Chyna 
 The Kat 
 Dean Malenko 
 D 'Lo Brown 
 Eddie Guerrero 
 Goldberg 
 Goldust 
 Jeff Jarrett 
 Owen Hart 
 Kevin Greene 
 Ric Flair 
 Arn Anderson 
 Steve McMichael 
 Stone Cold Steve Austin 
 The Rock 
 Assistants 
 The Kat 
 Nicknames 
 " Mrs. Rattlesnake " 
 " Puppies ! " 
 " Queen Debra " 
 " Queen Of The Puppies " 
 " The Queen Of WCW " 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI Manager of the Year ( 1999 ) 
 PWI Woman of the Year ( 1999 ) 
 World Wrestling Federation 
 WWF Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = USS Milwaukee ( 1864 ) = 
 The first USS Milwaukee , a double @-@ turreted Milwaukee @-@ class river monitor , the lead ship of her class , built for the Union Navy during the American Civil War . The ship supported Union forces during the Mobile Campaign as they attacked Confederate fortifications defending the city of Mobile , Alabama in early 1865 . She struck a mine in March and sank without loss . Her wreck was raised in 1868 and broken up for scrap that was used in the construction of a bridge in St. Louis , Missouri . 
 = = Description = = 
 Milwaukee was 229 feet ( 69 @.@ 8 m ) long overall and had a beam of 56 feet ( 17 @.@ 1 m ) . The ship had a depth of hold of 8 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 6 m ) and a draft of 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) . She had 970 tons burthen and displaced 1 @,@ 300 long tons ( 1 @,@ 300 t ) . Her crew numbered 138 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ship was powered by two 2 @-@ cylinder horizontal non @-@ condensing steam engines , each driving two propellers , using steam generated by seven tubular boilers . The engines were designed to reach a top speed of 9 knots ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) . Milwaukee carried 156 long tons ( 159 t ) of coal . 
 The ship 's main armament consisted of four smoothbore , muzzle @-@ loading 11 @-@ inch Dahlgren guns mounted in two twin @-@ gun turrets . Her forward turret was designed by James Eads and her rear turret by John Ericsson . Each gun weighed approximately 16 @,@ 000 pounds ( 7 @,@ 300 kg ) and could fire a 136 @-@ pound ( 61 @.@ 7 kg ) shell up to a range of 3 @,@ 650 yards ( 3 @,@ 340 m ) at an elevation of + 15 ° . 
 The cylindrical turrets were protected by eight layers of wrought iron 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) plates . The sides of the hull consisted of three layers of one @-@ inch plates , backed by 15 inches ( 380 mm ) of pine . The deck was heavily cambered to allow headroom for the crew on such a shallow draft and it consisted of iron plates .75 inches ( 19 mm ) thick . The pilothouse , positioned behind and above the fore turret , was protected by 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of armor . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 James Eads was awarded the contracts for all four of the Milwaukee @-@ class ships . He laid down Milwaukee at his Union Iron Works Carondelet , St. Louis in 1862 . The first U.S. Navy ship to be named after the Wisconsin city , she was launched on 4 February 1864 and commissioned on 27 August 1864 . Acting Volunteer Lieutenant James W. <unk> was in command . 
 Milwaukee was initially assigned to the Mississippi Squadron upon commissioning , but saw no action before she was ordered south to join West Gulf Blockading Squadron . The ship departed Mound City , Illinois on 15 October and arrived at New Orleans , Louisiana 12 days later . Lieutenant Commander James H. Gillis relieved <unk> on 22 November . She was still under repair there on 27 November , although Milwaukee reached Mobile Bay by 1 January 1865 . 
 Although the victory at the Battle of Mobile Bay on 5 August 1864 had closed the port of Mobile to blockade runners , the city itself had not been taken . The Confederates fortified the approaches to the city and heavily mined the shallow waters surrounding it . On 27 March 1865 , Milwaukee , together several other Union ships , sortied upriver in an attempt to cut communications between Spanish Fort and Mobile . The following day she and her sister ship Winnebago steamed up the Blakely River to attack a Confederate transport and forced it to retreat . While returning downriver Milwaukee struck a mine in an area previously swept . She remained afloat forward , which permitted her crew to escape without loss . Another of her sisters , Kickapoo , rescued the survivors . 
 In 1868 the wreck was raised and towed to St. Louis and broken up ; her iron was used in the construction of the Eads Bridge across the Mississippi River . 
 = Cyclone Magda = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Magda was a relatively small tropical cyclone that brought minor damage to parts of Western Australia in January 2010 . The third named storm of the 2009 – 10 Australian region cyclone season , Magda originated from a tropical low near the Indonesian island of Roti on 18 January . Quickly strengthening , the system attained tropical cyclone status on 20 January and later reached severe tropical cyclone intensity on 21 January as it approached Western Australia . Late on 21 January , Magda made landfall in the Kimberley region with winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) before quickly weakening over land . The remnants of Magda persisted until 24 January , at which time they dissipated east of Port Hedland . 
 Prior to Cyclone Magda 's arrival , several severe weather warnings were issued for the coastline of Western Australia . Although the storm made landfall with winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) , damage was limited due to the sparsely populated region it struck . The most severe damage was defoliation around Kuri Bay . Following its usage , the name Magda was retired and replaced with Megan . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Magda originated from a tropical low that was first identified by the Australian Bureau of Meteorology ( BOM ) on 18 January 2010 near the Indonesian island of Roti . Initially situated in a weak steering environment , the low drifted towards the southwest and gradually gained intensity . The following day , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) also began monitoring the system . Throughout 19 January , a developing low @-@ level circulation showed improved organization , feature deep convection over its centre . Atmospheric conditions in the region favored further development , featuring low to moderate wind shear . A trough situated near the coast of Western Australia aided in improving the low 's outflow . Later that day , the JTWC issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert on the system ; they expected the low to intensify into a tropical cyclone within the following 24 hours . 
 Early on 20 January , the BOM upgraded the low to a tropical cyclone , at which time it was given the name Magda . However , there is uncertainty whether the system actually obtained this strength or if it strengthened hours later . At the time of the upgrade , Magda featured deep convection over its centre , but banding features extended a little more than halfway around the circulation . Later that day , the small cyclone underwent a period of rapid intensification as an eye feature became apparent in satellite imagery . In response to an approaching trough , Magda tracked towards the southeast . Around 2100 UTC , the JTWC issued their first advisory on Magda , designating it as Tropical Cyclone 08S . Over the following several hours , the eye feature became increasingly defined , allowing the storm to intensify into a severe tropical cyclone by 0000 UTC on 21 January . Upon reaching this strength , Magda attained ten @-@ minute sustained winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 978 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 88 inHg ) . However , shear abruptly increased hours later , causing the low @-@ level circulation of Magda to become displaced from the deepest convection . 
 As the storm continued to near landfall in Australia , it re @-@ intensified as deep convection redeveloped over its centre , combined with the formation of an eye . Around 1800 UTC on 21 January , Magda was classified as a severe tropical cyclone for the second time . Within hours of <unk> severe tropical cyclone status , Magda passed over Augustus Island . Around 2100 UTC , the storm reached its peak intensity with winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) and a pressure of 975 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 79 inHg ) . Initially , the JTWC estimated the system to have peaked as a strong tropical storm with one @-@ minute sustained winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) ; however , further analysis of the system resulted in an upgrade to a minimal Category 1 equivalent with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Further uncertainty in the storm 's peak intensity exists through data from <unk> and CIMSS which estimated peak one @-@ minute sustained winds of 133 km / h ( 83 mph ) and 150 km / h ( 93 mph ) respectively . 
 Around the time when the cyclone made landfall , gale @-@ force winds extended roughly 85 km ( 50 mi ) from the center of Magda , classifying it as a " midget " cyclone . The system made its second landfall near Kuri Bay , a remote area in the Kimberley region , at peak strength before it began to weaken . Early on 22 January , the storm briefly moved back over water , having weakened slightly , before making another landfall east of the Buccaneer Archipelago with winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . Later that day , Magda passed directly over the town of Derby , where winds were measured under gale @-@ force . This prompted the BOM to downgrade the system to a tropical low . Once the trough which initially steered Magda into Western Australia relaxed , the system slowly turned towards the south @-@ southwest before fully dissipating early on 24 January east of Port Hedland . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 As Cyclone Magda approached the Western Australian coastline , severe weather warnings were issued for parts of the Kimberley region . Initial forecasts indicated that it would obtain Category 4 intensity and produce destructive winds up to 250 km / h ( 160 mph ) . A mining company , working in Mount Gibson on <unk> Island , evacuated 228 employees due to the threat of the cyclone . However , 64 members of an emergency crew would remain behind in a cyclone shelter . Hours before the storm made landfall , a red alert , the highest level of storm alert , was issued for areas around where the storm was expected to move onshore . The State Emergency Service warned that all residents around Kuri Bay " need to go to shelter immediately . " Heavy rains in excess of 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) were expected to fall along the storm 's track . Most of the alerts remained in place until Magda weakened to a tropical low on 22 January . 
 Although Magda made landfall as a severe tropical cyclone , it struck a sparsely populated region . Rainfall peaked at 185 mm ( 7 @.@ 3 in ) in Kuri Bay over a three @-@ day span . Near where the storm made landfall , wind gusts were estimated up to 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , resulting in significant defoliation and affecting a few structures . A few homes around Kuri Bay sustained roof damage , but no injuries were reported . Although damage in relation to Magda was limited , its name was retired following its usage and was later replaced with Megan . 
 = Khurshid of Tabaristan = 
 Khurshid ( Middle Persian : , <unk> ; Tabari / Persian : <unk> خورشید , <unk> <unk> ' General <unk> ' ; 734 – 761 ) , erroneously designated Khurshid II by earlier scholars , was the last <unk> ispahbadh of Tabaristan . He succeeded to the throne at an early age , and was supervised by his uncle as regent until he reached the age of fourteen . Khurshid tried to assert his independence from his vassalage to the Caliphate , supported various rebellions and maintained diplomatic contacts with Tang China . Finally , the Abbasids conquered his country in 759 – 760 , and captured most members of his family . Khurshid fled to Daylam , where he ended his life . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Khurshid was born in 734 / 735 , the son of <unk> or <unk> ( died 740 ) and grandson of Farrukhan the Great ( died ca . 728 ) , the first ruler ( ispahbadh ) of the <unk> dynasty from whose reign coins are known . According to the traditional account , the <unk> had established themselves as the quasi @-@ independent rulers of Tabaristan in the 640s , during the tumults of the Muslim conquest of Persia and the collapse of the Sassanid Empire . They owed only the payment tribute and nominal vassalage to the Arab Caliphate , and managed , despite repeated Muslim attempts at invasion , to maintain their autonomy by exploiting the inaccessible terrain of their country . A more recent interpretation of the sources by P. <unk> , however , supports that Farrukhan was the one who actually established the family 's rule over Tabaristan , sometime in the 670s . In earlier works on the dynasty , Khurshid is named Khurshid II , due to erroneous interpretation of numismatic evidence , which led earlier scholars to interpolate a first Khurshid before Farrukhan , whose rule was thought to have begun ca . 710 . 
 Khurshid succeeded his father at the age of only six , and for eight years the regency was exercised by his uncle Farrukhan @-@ i <unk> ( " Farrukhan the Little " ) . When Khurshid came of age , Farrukhan 's own sons refused to recognize his claim and tried to usurp the throne . Their plot was allegedly betrayed to Khurshid by a slave girl , <unk> <unk> . With the help of the sons of his cousin Jushnas , Khurshid managed to defeat and imprison Farrukhan 's sons . He later took <unk> <unk> as his wife , while the sons of Jushnas were given high positions in the state . The historian Ibn <unk> gives a vivid description of the prosperity of Tabaristan at this time , which was a major centre for textile production ( including silk ) , and which traded with the Turks of Central Asia , probably via the Caspian Sea . Khurshid is said to have contributed to this prosperity by building numerous bazaars and caravanserais . Khurshid also tried to consolidate and even extend his royal power , and used the turmoil within the Umayyad Caliphate during the Third Islamic Civil War to this effect , rebelling against Caliph Marwan II ( r . 744 – 750 ) , and even sending an embassy to the Tang court in 746 , which recognized him ( " king Hu @-@ lu @-@ ban " ) as a vassal prince . 
 During the Abbasid Revolution , however , he was forced to submit to the Abbasid armies under Abu Muslim . As one of Abu Muslim 's vassals , he supported the latter in his quarrel with the Caliph al @-@ Mansur ( r . 754 – 775 ) . After the Caliph had Abu Muslim murdered in 755 , Khurshid supported the anti @-@ Abbasid rebellion of Sunbadh , who entrusted part of Abu Muslim 's treasure to Khurshid 's keeping . When Sunbadh 's revolt was defeated , Sunbadh fled to Tabaristan , but was killed there by one of Khurshid 's cousins , ostensibly because he had failed to show the man proper respect . It is possible , however , that the murder was instigated by Khurshid , in the hope of acquiring the remainder of Abu Muslim 's treasure . Al @-@ Mansur sent his son and heir , al @-@ Mahdi ( r . 775 – 785 ) , to recover the treasure of Abu Muslim . Khurshid denied having it , and al @-@ Mansur tried to unseat Khurshid by crowning one of his cousins as ispahbadh . This did not have the desired effect of challenging the loyalty of Khurshid 's subjects , but Khurshid was eventually forced to accommodate the Abbasids by accepting an increase in the annual tribute , which brought it to the level paid to the Sassanids . 
 Soon after , nevertheless , Khurshid took advantage of the rebellion of Abd al @-@ Jabar ibn Abd al @-@ Rahman , the governor of Khurasan , to once again throw off allegiance to the Caliphate . Al @-@ Mansur sent an army into Tabaristan , with the intention of completely subduing the country and making it a province . Khurshid fled to the fortress of al @-@ Tak in the mountains , where he was besieged in 759 – 760 . Although Khurshid himself escaped to nearby Daylam , the fortress eventually fell , and with it his family fell into the hands of the Abbasids and brought to Baghdad . From Daylam , Khurshid tried to regain his kingdom . He raised an army from the mountain dwellers of the region , and invaded Tabaristan in 760 . Repulsed , he returned to Daylam . After learning of his family 's capture , he is said to have exclaimed " after this there is no inclination to life and joy , and death is the very solace and respite itself " , and took poison , probably in 761 . 
 Tabaristan became a regular province of the Caliphate , ruled from Amul by an Arab governor , although the local dynasties of the <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , formerly subject to the <unk> , continued to control the mountainous interior as tributary vassals of the Abbasid government . Coins were minted in Tabaristan in Khurshid 's name until 764 , whereafter the name of the Abbasid governor was substituted . As a result some earlier works also mention 767 as the date of Khurshid 's death . 
 = = Family = = 
 After their capture , Khurshid 's sons , the crown prince <unk> , Hormozd and <unk> @-@ Hormozd , received Arabic names , but otherwise their fate is unknown . According to Chinese sources , on the other hand , one of them was on embassy in the Tang court at the time Tabaristan was conquered . Khurshid 's daughters were distributed as concubines to members of the Abbasid dynasty . The names and genealogy of these princesses are confused , but one was taken by al @-@ Mansur himself and another by his brother , Abbas ibn Muhammad . Al @-@ <unk> , a daughter of Farrukhan @-@ i <unk> , became the concubine of al @-@ Mahdi , and it is reported that another of al @-@ Mahdi 's concubines , <unk> , was a daughter of Khurshid . In 817 , during the Fourth Islamic Civil War , the populace of Baghdad turned to their sons to make them caliphs in opposition to al @-@ Ma 'mun ( r . 813 – 833 ) . Al @-@ <unk> 's son al @-@ Mansur ibn al @-@ Mahdi refused , but his half @-@ brother Ibrahim ibn al @-@ Mahdi accepted and ruled as anti @-@ caliph until 819 . 
 = Jo Harvelle = 
 Joanna Beth " Jo " Harvelle is a fictional character on The CW Television Network 's drama / horror television series Supernatural portrayed by Alona Tal . Aspiring to be a hunter of supernatural creatures like her parents , she was introduced in the second season in order to explore a mother @-@ daughter relationship in the hunting world . Jo was originally intended to serve as a love interest for lead character Dean Winchester , but instead turned into a sister @-@ like figure for him . She was ultimately removed from the series by the end of the second season — Kripke admitted the conception of the character was flawed from the beginning — but returned in the fifth and seventh seasons . While critical reaction to Jo was generally positive , many fans disliked the character . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jo first meets Sam and Dean Winchester in the second season episode " Everybody Loves a Clown " . The brothers look for her mother Ellen at Harvelle 's Roadhouse — a saloon frequented by hunters of supernatural creatures — after she leaves a voice mail message on the phone of their deceased father , John Winchester . Throughout the second season , Jo appears to have romantic feelings for Dean ; though he states that he also has feelings for her , he will not act on them . Wanting to be a hunter like her late father , Bill , to feel connected to him , Jo slips away from the Roadhouse against her mother 's wishes to help the brothers on a hunt in " No Exit " , but they ultimately have to rescue her from a vengeful spirit . An angry Ellen reveals to her that John 's recklessness caused Bill 's death , which strains Jo 's friendship with Sam and Dean . Jo soon leaves the Roadhouse to live the life of a hunter . When the demon Meg Masters is possessing Sam in " Born Under a Bad Sign " , she finds and captures Jo , planning to threaten her life to force Dean to kill his brother . While holding Jo hostage , Meg plays cruel mind games with her by first telling her that Dean doesn 't return her feelings for him and then by telling her that John actually killed Bill to " put him out of his misery " after he incurred fatal wounds , despite Bill 's pleas to see his wife and daughter one more time . Dean rescues Jo from Meg without harming Sam , but when Jo attempts to join him in capturing Meg , he refuses to allow her to come ; he tells Jo he will call her , but as he leaves , she mutters , " No , you won 't . " 
 In the fifth season episode " Good God , Y 'All ! " , Jo reappears with her mother Ellen in a small Colorado town called River Pass . They plan to help Rufus , a demon hunter and one of Bobby 's friends , kill the demons that have laid siege to the town . However , Jo and Ellen are separated in the chaos . Jo later finds and joins up with Rufus and other townspeople . Eventually , they attack Sam and Ellen , both of them appearing to be possessed by demons . Jo joins in with Rufus to torture the supposed " demon " out of a captured Sam with holy water and salt , but becomes doubtful when no demonic effects are present on Sam . Dean and Ellen arrive and , after a brief struggle , convince Jo and Rufus that War , one of the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse , is responsible for making all the townspeople turn against each other by thinking that both sides are demons . Jo and Ellen team up with the Winchesters again in " Abandon All Hope ... " , where they help the brothers reacquire the Colt — a mystical gun rumored to be capable of killing anything — in order to kill Lucifer . Upon tracking his location to an abandoned town , they are confronted by Meg , accompanied by a pack of hellhounds . The group of hunters flee , but Jo is injured when saving Dean from the hellhounds . Knowing that her wounds are fatal and that Lucifer must be stopped , Jo convinces the others to build a bomb and to use her as bait for a trap . Ellen stays behind and opens the front doors while the Winchesters escape onto the roof . After Jo dies in her arms , Ellen blows up the building , killing the hellhounds and herself in the process . 
 Jo is mentioned but not seen in the sixth season episode " My Heart Will Go On " , in which she is temporarily restored to life as a result of the angel Balthazar saving the Titanic from its destined sinking . She makes an on @-@ screen return in the seventh season episode " Defending Your Life " as a ghostly witness called by the Egyptian god Osiris when he is judging Dean 's guilt . Jo 's ghost instead testifies that Dean was not responsible for her fate . Osiris declares him guilty anyway and forces her to try to kill Dean , but she is able to take her leave in peace when Sam kills Osiris and thereby frees her from the god 's control . Supernatural executive producer Robert Singer confirmed that the apparition was Jo 's ghost and not an illusion created by Osiris . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 Series creator Eric Kripke initially described Jo as an " innocent girl who wanted to be a hunter " and who tends to look before she leaps ; she is also " enthusiastic " and very " girl @-@ next @-@ door " in her approach to hunting the supernatural . He later regretted writing Jo in this way , as he felt that it was the wrong characterization for a female character on Supernatural . However , Jo grows throughout the second season as she rebels against her mother by running away to be a hunter , which Kripke believed made her harder and tougher . Regarding her character 's capture by a vengeful spirit in " No Exit " , actress Alona Tal felt that Jo was a " badass " who handled the situation well . Tal commented , " She fought and risked her life and stayed there as bait . It took a lot of guts . " 
 The actress noted that Jo matures during her hiatus between the second and fifth season . Having found out the hard way that " banter doesn 't always work " , she becomes quieter and " not as mouthy " . The character " called the shots " in her final appearance , and was the " bigger person " by forcing everyone to accept the reality of the situation . After years of hunting together , the relationship between Jo and Ellen also develops ; Tal came to view them more as equals rather than daughter and mother . Although Jo 's feelings for Dean remain the same , Tal liked the fact that she does not easily give in to Dean 's advances in " Abandon All Hope ... " . She believed that Jo resists her urge to " go crazy [ with him ] " due to the dire circumstances , which " gave it a little more meaning " . When asked about the kiss that Dean gives to Jo when she is dying , Tal explained that she interpreted the kiss as Dean " really seeing [ Jo ] and thanking [ her ] and appreciating [ her ] . For him , at that particular moment , there was no other way to express it but with a kiss . " 
 With the character now a spirit in her seventh season appearance , Tal felt that Jo 's death brought her " clarity " and " a different level of <unk> " . Noting that the afterlife is a " completely different world " , the actress described Jo as " just relaxed and not angry " . She confirmed that Jo doesn 't hold Dean accountable for her death , pointing out that Jo had chosen to become a hunter because of her father , not because of Dean . However , series writer and co @-@ executive producer Adam Glass felt that Dean still has " some real guilt " over Jo 's death because the character feels that he " could have pushed [ her ] away from this life , not pulled [ her ] more into it . " 
 = = Development = = 
 Due to the father @-@ son dynamics of the hunting world depicted in the series ' first season with the Winchesters , the writers decided to explore a mother @-@ daughter relationship . This resulted in the introduction of the character Alex Harvelle and her mother Ellen , though the Alex character was eventually renamed Jo . Tal had been a fan of the show , and decided to audition for the role . Since the character was not fully explored during her first few appearances on the show , Tal did not know what her personality would be . Because of the way Jo is introduced — threatening Dean with a rifle — Tal was under the impression that the character was an experienced hunter . With this in mind , she decided to portray her as " somewhat confident and cool " by making use of her experience in the Israeli army , where she served for two years . Tal commented , " When I was in the army I was holding my gun and feeling all dangerous and badass . It 's an attitude , it 's a different kind of walk , and the way you hold yourself , the way you look at things . I tried to put that in there because she didn 't say much . " 
 The writers originally intended Jo to serve as a love interest for Dean Winchester , but this idea was dropped during Jo 's debut season because Kripke felt that she came across as more of a " girl @-@ next @-@ door " than the dangerous type of character Dean would be attracted to , like Sydney Bristow of Alias . Tal also noted the tension between Jo and Dean , which made the characters " snappy " towards one another , resulting in the appearance of a brother @-@ sister relationship . Kripke admits that , even before Jo 's debut , he had doubts about the way the character was conceived . Because of these factors , the character was eventually phased out of the second season altogether . Looking back from the seventh season , however , Tal opined that , " Jo and Dean would 've made a good couple " , pointing to the characters ' " mutual experiences " , particularly Jo 's knowledge of the supernatural and her experience in the hunting life , as one of the main reasons she believed that they were suitable for each other . She felt that their " obvious unsolved , unresolved " feelings for one another were " always brought up whenever Dean and Jo [ were ] in the same room . " 
 During the 2009 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , Kripke announced that Jo would return in the series ' fifth season . The opportunity to return surprised Tal due to the character 's negative fan reaction and the large time span since her previous appearance . She was later alerted about Jo 's demise in " Abandon All Hope ... " by director Phil Sgriccia . Though unhappy , Tal was " all for it " because she felt it benefited the show , and found it " grand " that Jo " went out in a blaze of glory " . Jo was one of many deceased characters the writers considered to have appear in the alternate reality of the sixth season episode " My Heart Will Go On " , but they ultimately settled on Ellen . Although executive producer Robert Singer stated that Jo would not be appearing in the sixth season , he noted that it was possible she could return in the next season . 
 Tal 's return for the seventh season was announced at the 2011 Comic @-@ Con. On the choice to bring Jo back for " Defending Your Life " , writer and co @-@ executive producer Adam Glass explained , " Knowing the history there , knowing the emotion that Dean would feel for her , we knew it 'd be great . Jo 's a favorite , too , so we wanted to see her back on the show . " Tal was happy to return to the show , saying , " I didn 't care that it took me over a season to come back . Just to be back at all was a blessing . " Feeling that she herself had grown as a person since her appearance in the fifth season , Tal tried to mirror that in her performance . She noted , however , " Obviously , [ Jo ] died . So there ’ s been some issues . " Singer called her work in the episode " terrific . " 
 On the possibility of another return to the series in the future , Tal said , " Whenever it works out and they do want me back , I ’ m always game , and I ’ m always excited to go back there . It ’ s a fun place to go back to . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception to Jo has been generally positive . Diana Steenbergen of IGN favored Jo from the beginning , deeming her " tough and direct , and also female , something the boys don 't have a lot of in their lives right now " . She also believed that Jo and Dean had a " natural chemistry " between them , which continues even with her reappearance in the fifth season . However , Steenbergen was confused by Jo 's anger at Sam and Dean over John Winchester 's involvement in her father 's death , feeling that the show 's producers may have added it to the story as an excuse for Jo 's removal from the series . While Tina Charles of TV Guide was at first unsure about the character , she wrote that by the episode " No Exit " , " Tal did step things up and kinda won me over " . She believed that while Jo did not make a good love interest for Dean , she was good in a " sisterly or friendly fellow @-@ <unk> way " , deeming her as " someone they can count on in a pinch " . Overall , Charles felt that Jo " fit into that world , whether she was a little overzealous or not " . 
 The character 's death saddened Charles , but she admitted it was a " very effective move " . She described Jo 's scenes with Dean in " Abandon All Hope ... " as " amazing " , and added , " I feel like I finally felt their connection and the kiss was pretty potent . " Commenting on the character 's dying farewells in the fifth season , Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune noted that Tal " brought [ her ] A @-@ game to ' Abandon All Hope … ' " , declaring that " [ Tal fits ] perfectly into the ' Supernatural ' world because [ she understands ] that on this show , restraint is everything . It 's not necessarily just about what the characters say or do , it 's about what they don 't say — what they can 't find the words for " . Steenbergen called Jo 's death " one of the saddest moments in the show 's history " , and expressed the desire to bring Jo back permanently . Regarding the character 's reappearance in " Defending Your Life " , Steenbergen described the scenes between Jo and Dean as " compelling " and " the highlights of the episode " . Likewise , Ryan deemed Jo 's final scene with Dean in " Defending Your Life " " the best part of the episode " , feeling that Jensen Ackles ( Dean 's actor ) and Tal " have always had nice chemistry together " . However , Ryan disliked that Dean felt he was responsible for Jo 's choices and ultimately her death , writing , " I 'm such a fan of Jo that to retroactively take away her agency and go along with the idea that Dean was her <unk> felt as though it would do a disservice to one of the show 's ( increasingly rare ) cool female characters . " 
 On the other hand , Sean Elliott of <unk> disliked the " Scrappy @-@ Doo qualities of the character " . He compared Jo to Dawn Summers of Buffy the Vampire Slayer , feeling that she " is always trying to help and always gets in the way " . Fan reaction to the character was generally negative as well . Ackles summed up the response as , " No , no , we just want this to be about the boys . " Though Kripke believed that Tal was a " terrific actress " who " did valiantly and beautifully with the part [ they ] gave her " , he felt that introducing her as a love interest was a mistake and came to believe that women should only be introduced into the series as antagonists . The failure with Jo prompted the series writers to introduce Ruby the following season in an attempt to " course @-@ correct " . 
 In 2012 , fans voted " tough and compromising " Jo the 53rd sexiest female character in fantasy and science fiction film and television in a poll conducted by SFX for the Top 200 Sexiest Characters In Sci @-@ Fi . 
 = Sam Cowan = 
 Samuel Cowan ( 10 May 1901 – 4 October 1964 ) was an English football player and manager . A relative latecomer to the sport , Cowan did not play football until he was 17 and was 22 by the time he turned professional . He made his league debut for Doncaster Rovers in 1923 , and signed for First Division Manchester City the following season . 
 Cowan played centre half for Manchester City for 11 seasons , captaining the team in the early to mid @-@ 1930s . He is the only player to have represented Manchester City in three FA Cup finals , as a runner @-@ up in 1926 and 1933 , and as a winner in 1934 . Internationally , he gained three England caps between 1926 and 1931 . In total he played 407 times for Manchester City , putting him 12th in terms of all @-@ time appearances . In 1935 , he transferred to Bradford City , and subsequently moved to Mossley as player @-@ manager . 
 In 1938 , Cowan joined Brighton & Hove Albion as a coach , and set up a physiotherapy business . He returned to Manchester City as manager in 1946 , winning the Second Division in his only season in charge . He continued to work in sports and physiotherapy until his death in 1964 . 
 = = Football career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Cowan was born on 10 May 1901 in Chesterfield , but moved further north in his early years and was raised in <unk> le Street near Doncaster . He did not play football as a child , only gaining an interest in the sport when he took part in a game at a local park aged 17 . He then started to play for local teams , including <unk> Juniors , <unk> and Denaby United and had an unsuccessful trial at Huddersfield Town . 
 In 1923 , Cowan gained his first professional contract following a successful trial at his local league club , Doncaster Rovers of the Third Division ( North ) . Despite playing as a defender , during his time at Doncaster he scored regularly , including a hat @-@ trick of headed goals against Halifax Town in March 1924 . His performances gained the attention of bigger clubs , and in December 1924 he joined Manchester City , who sought a successor to the likes of Mick Hamill and Max <unk> . 
 = = = Manchester City = = = 
 Cowan made his Manchester City debut in a 2 – 2 draw against Birmingham City on 20 December 1924 , and scored his first goal for the club two weeks later , against Nottingham Forest . He played in all but one of the remaining league matches that season , 21 in total . 
 Starting all but four of Manchester City 's matches in the 1925 – 26 season , Cowan was a key part of the team which reached the 1926 FA Cup Final , winning several ties by wide margins en route . However , in the final City were beaten 1 – 0 by Bolton Wanderers . Further disappointment followed in the league , when after a campaign characterised by erratic form , City were relegated on the final day of the season . By this time Cowan 's reputation as a competent centre @-@ back had grown , and he received an international call @-@ up . He made his England debut on 24 May 1926 playing an unfamiliar left @-@ half role in a 5 – 3 win against Belgium . By 1931 , he had earned three international caps , the others gained in matches against France and Austria . He also made appearances for the Football League team , including a trial match against England in 1931 . 
 In the 1926 – 27 season , Cowan made 27 appearances as his club sought an immediate return to the top division . The race for promotion went to the final match , with Manchester City and Portsmouth both in contention for the second of the two promotion places . Cowan played in a resounding City win , an 8 – 0 victory against Bradford City . The watching crowd believed the result to be sufficient for promotion , but Portsmouth 's match had been delayed by 15 minutes and was still in progress . A late Portsmouth goal meant the final scoreline in their match was a 5 – 1 win , enough to give Portsmouth second place on goal average by a margin of one two @-@ hundredth of a goal . The club won the Second Division championship the following season , gaining promotion to the top flight . The Second Division championship was Cowan 's first honour in professional football . 
 In the early 1930s , Cowan became Manchester City captain , succeeding Jimmy McMullan . During his captaincy the club reached two further FA Cup Finals . The first of these was in 1933 , against Everton . During the match Cowan was up against Everton captain Dixie Dean . Both players were renowned for their heading ability . Matt Busby claimed that Cowan could " head a ball as far as most of us could kick it " , but Dean prevailed in the aerial battle , scoring Everton 's second goal with a header . The Daily Mail observed that Dean 's presence gave Cowan a dilemma : " He was torn between a determination not to leave Dean and a desire to help his forwards . He broke down between the two . " Everton were 3 – 0 victors , but when Cowan received his runner 's up medal from the Duke of York , he remarked that he would come back next year to win . True to Cowan 's word , City returned to Wembley the following year . In the 1934 FA Cup Final , Cowan became the first and thus far only Manchester City player to represent the club in three FA Cup finals . He captained City to a 2 – 1 victory over Portsmouth . As team captain Cowan held primary responsibility for motivating his fellow players and match tactics . This was typical for a captain of his era , as managers of the period were chiefly administrators who had little input into coaching and tactics . 
 Cowan 's final season at Maine Road was 1934 – 35 , in which he was ever @-@ present . His final match for the club was a 5 – 0 defeat of Wolverhampton Wanderers on 4 May 1935 . In total he made 407 appearances for Manchester City , scoring 24 goals . As of 2008 he ranks 12th all @-@ time for Manchester City appearances . Bob Donnelly was signed to replace him in the 1935 close season , and Bradford City signed Cowan for a fee of £ 2 @,@ 000 in October 1935 . At the time the transfer fee was the second highest ever paid by the club . 
 = = = Bradford City = = = 
 Bradford City were struggling in the Second Division at the time of Cowan 's signing , having won just one of their first ten games of the 1935 – 36 season . Cowan made his debut for them on 19 October 1935 in a 2 – 2 draw with Swindon Town , but it was not until Cowan 's third game that Bradford won for the second time that season . Cowan missed just three of the club 's remaining fixtures that season , playing 29 times in the league and three in the FA Cup as City finished 12th . The following season , City again struggled . Cowan missed just one of the first 23 games , but after Christmas , he was restricted to just six ; and without Cowan , Bradford finished 21st and were relegated to the Third Division ( North ) . 
 = = = Managerial career = = = 
 In 1937 , Cowan was appointed player @-@ manager at Mossley . He led the club to the seventh place in the Cheshire League and to the Manchester Challenge Shield title . On the pitch , he played 39 matches and scored one goal . At the end of the season Cowan resigned to join Brighton & Hove Albion coaching staff . In October 1945 , a shortage of players resulted in Cowan taking to the field in a wartime match against Bournemouth . Aged 44 years and 156 days , he became the oldest ever Brighton player . While at Brighton , Cowan started a physiotherapy business based near the Goldstone Ground . 
 In November 1946 , Cowan became Manchester City manager , succeeding Wilf Wild , who moved to a purely administrative role . Cowan had been known for his motivational skills as a player , and was part of a new generation of managers who took responsibility for tactics and team selection , of which Cowan 's contemporary and former team mate Matt Busby became the most well @-@ known . Cowan was given a salary of £ 2 @,@ 000 , and came to an agreement whereby he spent part of the week with the Manchester City team and part looking after his business interests in Brighton . His first match as manager was a 3 – 0 win against Newport County , and the team then embarked upon a run of 19 matches without defeat . Despite achieving the Division Two title in his first season in charge , Cowan resigned in June 1947 as his commute from Brighton caused tension with club officials . 
 = = Post @-@ football = = 
 Cowan later worked as a physiotherapist for cricket club Sussex CCC and ice hockey team Brighton Tigers . As a trainer with the Tigers he was named in the British National League All Star team for three years running from 1956 to 1958 . He died on 4 October 1964 aged 63 , when he suffered a heart attack , while refereeing a football charity match in aid of Sussex wicket keeper Jim Parks . He left behind a widow and one son . In 2004 , he was elected to Manchester City 's Hall of Fame . A street near Manchester City 's former ground Maine Road , Sam Cowan Close , is named in his honour . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Player 
 FA Cup 
 Winner : 1934 
 Runner @-@ up : 1926 , 1933 
 Second Division 
 Winner : 1927 – 28 
 Manager 
 Manchester Challenge Shield 
 Winner : 1937 
 Second Division 
 Winner : 1946 – 47 
 = Chuck Versus the Wedding Planner = 
 " Chuck Versus the Wedding Planner " is the 21st episode of the fourth season of the American action @-@ comedy television series Chuck , and the 75th overall episode of the series . The episode was written by Rafe Judkins and Lauren LeFranc and directed by Anton Cropper . It originally aired on April 18 , 2011 . 
 In the episode , Chuck Bartowski ( Zachary Levi ) and Sarah Walker ( Yvonne Strahovski ) get conned out of their wedding money , and there is only one man they can turn to for help – Sarah 's conman father , Jack Burton ( Gary Cole ) . Meanwhile , Morgan Grimes ( Joshua Gomez ) and Alex McHugh ( Mekenna Melvin ) pressure John Casey ( Adam Baldwin ) to face Alex 's mother , Kathleen ( Clare Carey ) . 
 " Chuck Versus the Wedding Planner " received positive reviews from critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , it drew 4 @.@ 219 million viewers , with a 2 @.@ 5 / 4 share among all households and 1 @.@ 3 / 4 share among those aged 18 – 49 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1988 McCall , Idaho , Sarah Walker ( Alexa Blair ) assists her father Jack Burton ( Gary Cole ) with a number of confidence tricks . Sarah begins saving her earnings in a piggy bank to go on an adventure with her father . When Sarah 's grandmother ( Pamela Roylance ) forces Jack to leave Sarah , Sarah sneaks into his car . Jack returns Sarah to her bed after she has fallen asleep , taking the piggy bank with him . 
 In modern @-@ day Burbank , California , Sarah ( Yvonne Strahovski ) and Chuck Bartowski ( Zachary Levi ) pay their wedding planner , Daphne Peralta ( Lisa <unk> ) , only to learn that Daphne has " conned " them . Advised by Jack to use their government resources , Chuck pretends to " flash " on Daphne , linking her to a known terrorist and causing General Diane Beckman ( Bonita Friedericy ) to redirect government resources to finding Daphne . After Daphne is captured , Sarah and Chuck reveal the truth and are suspended . However , when reading the plans for the <unk> wedding , Chuck flashes on the names of Franz ( Thom Williams ) , Bruno ( Kevin <unk> ) , and Paulie Klüg ( George <unk> ) , Hungarian scientists in the possession of Iranian nuclear research on a portable device called the " Zephyr " , which one of the brothers is always carrying . All three brothers will be at their sister 's wedding reception in Los Angeles . Beckman , however , does not believe him and refuses to grant them government resources . 
 Chuck and Sarah turn to Jack to help them continue Daphne 's con and capture the Zephyr . They manage to lead the <unk> away from the reception and incapacitate them , only to find that none of them has the Zephyr . Jack realizes that the <unk> have been performing a shell game : the government has been pursuing them for the Zephyr when none of them ever had it ; their father ( Timothy V. Murphy ) had it all along . Meanwhile , the bride 's father realizes he is being conned and leads Morgan Grimes ( Joshua Gomez ) away at gunpoint . When Chuck and Sarah confront him , Klüg uses Morgan as a human shield , but John Casey ( Adam Baldwin ) takes aim at his head . However , Jack manages to talk Klüg down for the sake of the bride 's happiness . 
 Meanwhile , Morgan and Alex McHugh ( Mekenna Melvin ) lead Alex 's mother Kathleen ( Clare Carey ) to the Buy More so that Casey can reveal he is alive , but Casey asserts that Kathleen deserves better . However , Kathleen sees Casey and has an off @-@ screen conversation with Alex about him . Kathleen find her daughter disillusioned about Casey being a government hero . A confused Kathleen follows Casey and confronts him at the reception , telling him to tell Alex the " truth " , but Casey is urged by Chuck to continue with the con . Later , however , Kathleen witnesses Casey arrest Klüg , identifying himself as a colonel and an NSA agent . 
 Despite Chuck and Sarah 's efforts , Jack discovers that they are getting married . Chuck invites Jack to attend , but Jack refuses to make promises he cannot keep . Instead Jack leaves Sarah her old piggy bank , to which he has only added cash , never taken , more than covering the cost of the wedding . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Chuck Versus the Wedding Planner " was directed by Anton Cropper and written by Rafe Judkins and Lauren LeFranc . It originally aired in the United States on April 18 , 2011 , on NBC as the twenty @-@ first episode of Chuck 's fourth season and the seventy @-@ fifth episode overall . 
 " Chuck Versus the Wedding Planner " began filming on March 7 , 2011 . Series co @-@ creator Chris Fedak revealed at the Chicago Comic & Entertainment Expo ( <unk> ) that Gary Cole would return as Sarah 's father Jack Burton , and Zap2it confirmed in April 2011 that Cole would appear in " Chuck Versus the Wedding Planner " , after last appearing in the second season episode " Chuck Versus the DeLorean " . Lisa <unk> also guest starred as Daphne Peralta , the eponymous wedding planner . Mekenna Melvin reprised her recurring role of Casey 's daughter and Morgan 's girlfriend , Alex McHugh , and Clare Carey portrayed Alex 's mother Kathleen . 
 When Sarah travels to Miami , Florida to meet her father , aerial shots of the city are shown . The background that follows , however , has been described as " badly CGI 'd " . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 Jordan Bienstock of CNN noted several continuity errors in the episode . Among them is the fact that Jack is surprised that Sarah is a CIA agent , rather than running her own cons , when in fact it was made clear to him in his first appearance that she was " on the right side of the law " . Also , Kathleen refers to Casey by his real name , " Alex " , but the episode never acknowledges the fact that " Sarah Walker " is an alias . 
 In contrast , Alan Sepinwall and Eric Goldman noted , in their respective reviews for HitFix and IGN , allusions in " Chuck Versus the Wedding Planner " to past episodes . As in his first appearance , Jack refers to Chuck as " <unk> " and Casey as " Cop Face " . Chuck also makes his " famous " chicken pepperoni for Sarah , alluding to " Chuck Versus the Fake Name " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , " Chuck Versus the Wedding Planner " drew 4 @.@ 219 million viewers , with a 2 @.@ 5 / 4 share among all households and 1 @.@ 3 / 4 share among those aged 18 – 49 . 
 The episode received positive reviews from critics . Gary Cole 's return was highly praised , as well as the scene in which Sarah imitates the face Chuck makes when the Intersect has a " flash " . HitFix Senior Editor Alan Sepinwall wrote , " Cole 's return was as much fun as I hoped it would be - in some ways , even better than his first appearance in season two 's ' Chuck vs. the <unk> , ' where I liked Sarah and Jack 's interaction but thought the actual con job was a bit thin . ' Chuck vs. the Wedding Planner ' had its own flaw in the section where Sarah and Chuck are illegally using government resources to catch the con woman and wind up getting more government ' help ' than they bargained for ... But once Jack turned up in Burbank to help his daughter and her <unk> of a fiance be heroes and get back in the good graces of General Beckman , ' Wedding Planner ' was really very strong , both as a comedy piece ( loved Yvonne Strahovski 's accent as she impersonated Daphne ) and another story about Sarah 's colorful but ultimately sad past . " 
 Ryan McGee of The A.V. Club gave the episode a B on an A + to F scale , writing that the " episode didn ’ t really take advantage of Jack Burton 's return to the show . Instead , it pushed him off to the sidelines to make room for a storyline that had no earthly business in this episode . " Eric Goldman of IGN gave this episode a score of 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , calling it " a nice break from the Volkoff drama " . Melody Simpson of Buzz Focus wrote , " This story line has the potential to bring lots of drama but the way that it has been building up to this moment . " Stephen Lackey of Mania called the episode " fun stuff just lacking in drama where drama was required . " Brittany Frederick of Starpulse wrote that the episode reminded her " of all the reasons I fell in love with this show a year ago . It 's fun , and funny without being campy , but more importantly , it 's got heart . It 's an episode that made me think , ' This is why people fight for this show season after season . ' If it helps turn out more episodes like these , Gary Cole can drop by anytime he likes . I , for one , will be glad to see him . " 
