 On June 1 , 1997 , young grandson Malcolm set a fire in Shabazz 's apartment . Shabazz suffered burns over 80 percent of her body , and remained in intensive care for three weeks , at Jacobi Medical Center in the Bronx , New York . She underwent five skin @-@ replacement operations as doctors struggled to replace damaged skin and save her life . Shabazz died of her injuries on June 23 , 1997 . Malcolm Shabazz was sentenced to 18 months in juvenile detention for manslaughter and arson . 
 More than 2 @,@ 000 mourners attended a memorial service for Shabazz , at New York 's Riverside Church . Many prominent leaders were present , including Coretta Scott King and Myrlie Evers @-@ Williams , poet Maya Angelou , actor @-@ activists Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee , New York Governor George Pataki , and four New York City mayors — Abraham Beame , Ed Koch , David Dinkins , and Rudy Giuliani . U.S. Secretary of Labor Alexis Herman delivered a tribute from President Bill Clinton . In a statement released after Shabazz 's death , civil rights leader Jesse Jackson said , " She never stopped giving and she never became cynical . She leaves today the legacy of one who epitomized hope and healing . " 
 Shabazz 's funeral service was held at the Islamic Cultural Center in New York City . Her public viewing was at the Unity Funeral Home in Harlem , the same place where Malcolm X 's viewing had taken place 32 years earlier . Shabazz was buried next to her husband , El @-@ Hajj Malik El @-@ Shabazz ( Malcolm X ) , at Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale , New York . 
 = = = Memorials = = = 
 In late 1997 , the Community Healthcare Network renamed one of its Brooklyn , New York , clinics the Dr. Betty Shabazz Health Center , in honor of Shabazz . The Betty Shabazz International Charter School was founded in Chicago , Illinois , in 1998 and named in her honor . In 2005 , Columbia University announced the opening of the Malcolm X and Dr. Betty Shabazz Memorial and Educational Center . The memorial is located in the Audubon Ballroom , where Malcolm X was assassinated . In March 2012 , New York City co @-@ named Broadway at the corner of West 165th Street , the corner in front of the Audubon Ballroom , Betty Shabazz Way . 
 = = Portrayals in film = = 
 Shabazz was the subject of the 2013 television movie Betty and Coretta , in which she was played by Mary J. Blige . She was portrayed by Angela Bassett in the 1992 film Malcolm X. Bassett also played the part of Shabazz in the 1995 film Panther . Yolanda King , the daughter of Martin Luther King , Jr . , and Coretta Scott King , played Shabazz in the 1981 television movie Death of a Prophet , and Shabazz was portrayed by Victoria Dillard in the 2001 film Ali . 
 = Paul E. Patton = 
 Paul Edward Patton ( born May 26 , 1937 ) is an American politician . He was the 59th Governor of Kentucky , serving from 1995 to 2003 . Because of a 1992 amendment to the Kentucky Constitution , he was the first governor eligible to succeed himself in office since James Garrard in 1800 . Since 2013 , he has been the chancellor of the University of Pikeville in Pikeville , Kentucky after serving as its president from 2010 to 2013 . He also served as chairman of the Kentucky Council on Postsecondary Education from 2009 to 2011 . 
 After graduating from the University of Kentucky in 1959 , Patton became wealthy operating coal mines for 20 years . He sold most of his coal interests in the late 1970s and entered politics , serving briefly in the cabinet of Governor John Y. Brown , Jr. and chairing the state Democratic Party . In 1981 , he was elected judge / executive of Pike County . He made an unsuccessful bid for lieutenant governor in 1987 , but was elected in 1991 , serving concurrently as lieutenant governor and secretary of economic development under Governor Brereton Jones . 
 Four years later , Patton was elected Governor over Republican Larry Forgy . The major achievement of his first term was overhauling higher education , including making the state 's community colleges and technical schools independent of the University of Kentucky and organizing them into the Kentucky Community and Technical College System . Shortly after Patton turned back a weak challenge to his re @-@ election in 1999 , two Democratic state senators defected to the Republican Party , giving Republicans a majority in that legislative house for the first time ever . The economic prosperity that fueled Patton 's first term success faded into a recession in the early 2000s . Faced with a hostile legislature and a dire economic forecast , Patton was unable to enact much significant legislation in his second term , and his situation was exacerbated in 2002 when news of an extramarital affair and allegations of a sex @-@ for @-@ favors scandal broke . After initially denying the affair , Patton later admitted to it , but continued to deny using his office to benefit his mistress . Later in his term , Patton was attacked for pardoning four of his political advisers who were indicted for violating Kentucky 's campaign finance laws and for allegedly abusing his patronage powers . These successive scandals derailed any further political aspirations . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Patton was born in Fallsburg , Kentucky on May 26 , 1937 , in a retrofitted silo with no indoor plumbing , electricity , or telephone . He was the only son of the three children born to Ward and Irene Patton . The family moved often because Ward Patton , a teacher , was assigned to a different school every year . When he was hired by a railroad in Pike County , he and his wife agreed that she would remain in Fallsburg with the children until they finished school . Patton attended Fallsburg Elementary School , a four @-@ room schoolhouse in his hometown . He was active in the 4 @-@ H club , where he began to develop his public speaking ability . In 1951 , he enrolled at Louisa High School in Louisa , Kentucky . He was an honor student , a member of the drama club , a football and baseball player , and class president during his senior year . In 1955 , he graduated with the third @-@ highest grade point average in his class of 73 . 
 After high school , Patton matriculated to the University of Kentucky and unsuccessfully sought a seat in its Student Government Association in 1956 . Following his sophomore year , he married Carol Cooley , daughter of a Floyd County , Kentucky , coal mine operator . They had two children together – Nikki and Christopher . Patton borrowed money from his father @-@ in @-@ law to finish his education , and in 1959 earned a Bachelor of Science degree in mechanical engineering . He was later awarded an honorary Doctor of Public Service degree from the University of Louisville . 
 = = Coal industry career = = 
 After graduation , Patton worked as a day laborer for his father @-@ in @-@ law . In 1961 , he moved to <unk> and founded a coal company with his brother @-@ in @-@ law . In 1972 , he purchased <unk> Coal Company and became extremely wealthy during the coal boom that resulted from the 1973 oil crisis . He became a leader in the coal industry , serving on the board of directors of the Kentucky Coal Association , chairing the Board of the National Independent Coal Operators Association , and becoming a member of the Kentucky Deep Mine Safety Commission . He denounced the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969 as " right in its diagnosis of the problem , but wrong in prescription for the cure " . By 1976 , he had become president of the National Independent Coal Operators Association . He railed against a federal regulation that would prohibit strip mining on slopes of greater than 20 degrees , which would have effectively ended that method of mining in the Eastern Mountain Coal Fields , and lamented the economic disadvantage imposed on Kentucky coal miners by the state 's coal severance tax . 
 Patton was regarded as more moderate than most coal operators in his relationship to labor unions . Most of his mine workers were not unionized , and those who were generally belonged to the Southern Labor Union rather than the more confrontational United Mine Workers of America ( UMWA ) . Members of the UMWA local at Shelby Gap maintained that Patton was arrested for clipping a striking miner on a picket line with his pickup truck in the late 1970s . Local law enforcement officials claim no recollection of the incident , and there is no record of an arrest warrant against Patton or an actual arrest . 
 On October 18 , 1976 , Patton filed for divorce from Carol Cooley , saying only that their marriage was irretrievably broken . The divorce was final on February 25 , 1977 . Later that year , Patton married Judi Jane Conway of Pikeville , a secretary at his Kentucky Elkhorn mine . In 1973 , Conway had divorced her first husband , Bill Harvey Johnson , with whom she had two children . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Patton was introduced to politics by State Senator Kelsey Friend , who arranged for Patton to be a delegate to the 1972 Democratic National Convention . Friend also convinced Patton to help raise money for Walter " Dee " Huddleston 's congressional campaign . 
 As the coal boom began to wane , Patton sold most of his coal interests in 1978 . After a meeting with allies of his friend , First District Congressman Carroll Hubbard , in Madisonville on September 20 , 1978 , Patton considered running for governor in 1979 . However , he subsequently decided that he lacked the time to organize a campaign before the May primary election ; a letter leaked to the Paducah Sun showed that he believed he was losing Hubbard 's support . He joined Terry McBrayer 's campaign during the primary , and after McBrayer lost , he worked to elect John Y. Brown , Jr . , the Democratic nominee . Brown won the election , and Patton was appointed deputy secretary of transportation . He served only three months before resigning to protest Brown 's proposal for a coal severance tax . 
 In late 1981 , Brown asked Patton to become vice @-@ chair of the Kentucky Democratic Party . He would serve under Dale Sights of Henderson . Brown then informed Patton that there had been a change of plans : he had decided to appoint his father , former U.S. Representative John Y. Brown , Sr. to the chair , instead of Sights . Brown 's advisers convinced him that this would be politically damaging ; finally , Brown appointed Patton chair , with June Taylor , daughter of former governor Ruby Laffoon , as vice @-@ chair . The announcement was a surprise to most political observers , as Sights had been the odds @-@ on favorite for the chairmanship . Patton served as chairman until 1983 . During his tenure , he learned much about politics from Taylor and was introduced to Andrew " Skipper " Martin of Louisville , who would later become an important adviser and ally . 
 = = = Pike County judge / executive = = = 
 In 1981 , Patton ran for county judge / executive of Pike County , Kentucky . On the way to a victory in the Democratic primary , he outspent incumbent Wayne Rutherford $ 191 @,@ 252 to $ 49 @,@ 000 . In the general election , he garnered more than 75 percent of the vote against Republican challenger Jim Polley . 
 Within six months of his election , Patton instituted the state 's first mandatory , county @-@ wide garbage collection program , to combat illegal garbage dumping , which was rampant in the county . The program won Patton statewide acclaim . When Patton sought re @-@ election in 1985 , he again faced Rutherford in the Democratic primary . Rutherford campaigned against the garbage @-@ collection program , promising to repeal it if elected . This stance may have hurt him , because although some county residents resented the mandatory fee for garbage pick @-@ up , many more recognized the benefits , as illegal dump sites became less common . Patton won the primary again , and went on to re @-@ election . However , he won both races by much smaller margins than in 1981 ( 2 @,@ 524 votes in the primary and 3 @,@ 916 votes in the general election ) . 
 In his second term , Patton initiated an oil recycling program and established a work program for welfare mothers in day care centers . He oversaw construction of a new jail and a $ 5 million renovation to the county courthouse . He brought the county its first manufacturing company and stopped the practice of giving away gravel , drains , and bridge lumber from district warehouses to private citizens . Among his other priorities as judge / executive were the construction of rural roads and recreation facilities . 
 In 1987 , Patton ran for Lieutenant Governor of Kentucky . In a crowded primary , his 130 @,@ 713 votes placed him third behind Brereton Jones ( 189 @,@ 058 votes ) and Attorney General David L. Armstrong ( 147 @,@ 718 votes ) , but ahead of state senator David Boswell and Superintendent of Public Instruction Alice McDonald . In the most expensive primary in Kentucky history to that point , Patton spent more than $ 2 million of his personal fortune , but was outspent by Jones , who committed more than $ 3 million to the campaign . By comparison , Martha Layne Collins had spent $ 140 @,@ 000 to win the office in 1979 and Steve Beshear $ 250 @,@ 000 to win it in 1983 . 
 Following his defeat , Patton returned to Pike County . In 1989 he was re @-@ elected for a third term as judge / executive , receiving over 70 percent of the vote in a three @-@ way Democratic primary and subsequently winning the general election by nearly a three @-@ to @-@ one margin . He immediately began preparing for another run for lieutenant governor in 1991 . In the earlier campaign , the UMWA had been vociferously opposed to Patton because employees in his coal mines had been affiliated with the Southern Labor Union . Skipper Martin introduced him to Teamsters leaders , and Patton worked with them to unionize Pike County employees . He also worked with Kelsey Friend to pass the Kentucky Rural Economic Development Act , a measure giving financial incentives to companies that located in economically depressed rural counties . 
 = = = Lieutenant governor = = = 
 Patton sought the office of lieutenant governor again in 1991 . In a crowded seven @-@ candidate field in the Democratic primary , the front runner was Attorney General Fred Cowan of Louisville . Other candidates included Steve Collins , son of former governor Martha Layne Collins , and former Speaker of the Kentucky House of Representatives Bobby H. Richardson . Just days before the primary , it was reported that Cowan 's campaign had sought funds from a company that his office was investigating for criminal conduct . Patton beat Cowan by a margin of 146 @,@ 102 votes to 104 @,@ 337 . 
 In the general election , Patton faced Republican Eugene Goss . Goss criticized Patton for announcing that , if elected , he would seek the governor 's office at the expiration of his term . Goss insisted that he would not seek the governorship if elected , and maintained that using the lieutenant governor 's post as a stepping stone to the governor 's office was a betrayal of the office and its authority . Goss ran an unorthodox campaign , limiting individual contributions to his campaign to $ 300 and refusing to run television commercials . Patton went on to a lopsided victory in the general election , winning 514 @,@ 023 votes to Goss 's 250 @,@ 857 . 
 Upon his election as lieutenant governor , Patton resigned his office as Pike County judge @-@ executive . While presiding over the Senate in the 1991 legislative session , Patton voted against a mandatory seat belt law , breaking a 19 – 19 tie . He was the last Kentucky lieutenant governor to preside over the Kentucky Senate ; a 1992 amendment to the state constitution created a new position , President of the Kentucky Senate , and relieved the lieutenant governor of his duties in that body . 
 In November 1991 , Governor Brereton Jones appointed Patton as secretary of economic development , making Patton the first lieutenant governor to serve as an appointed cabinet secretary . In this capacity , he encouraged the use of tax incentives to bring new industry to the state . Bill Bishop , a journalist for the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader , criticized these incentives , saying that Patton too often used them to attract low @-@ wage jobs . In response , Patton wrote a series of essays ; while he never published them in the newspaper , he later compiled them into a book entitled Kentucky 's Approach to Economic Development . He also reorganized Kentucky economic development efforts , securing the adoption of four new development incentive programs and establishing the Kentucky Economic Development Partnership . 
 = = = Gubernatorial election in 1995 = = = 
 At the expiration of his term as lieutenant governor in 1995 , Patton announced his candidacy for governor . The 1995 gubernatorial election was novel in several ways , following a 1992 constitutional amendment . It was the first election in Kentucky history in which the governor and lieutenant governor were elected as a ticket . Another new provision stated that if no candidate received at least 40 percent of the vote in his or her party 's primary , a runoff election would occur between the top two candidates . Most significantly , for the first time in Kentucky history the winners of each race would be allowed to succeed themselves in office and serve another term . Also , as a result of campaign finance reform passed under Governor Jones , candidates would receive public campaign financing and would have their campaign spending capped , negating the advantage of wealthy candidates . 
 Patton chose Steve Henry , a surgeon and county commissioner from Louisville , as his running mate . His major opposition in the Democratic primary came from secretary of state Bob Babbage and President Pro Tempore of the Kentucky Senate John " Eck " Rose . Although sitting governor Brereton Jones did not officially endorse Patton , Rose referred to Jones as Patton 's " mentor " . Rose charged that , like Jones , Patton would not take a hard stand on the issues ; referring to a nickname given to Jones in the 1991 campaign , Rose remarked " If you have liked Jell @-@ O Jones , then you are going to be in a position to love Puddin ' Paul Patton . " Particularly odious to Rose was that Patton had publicly supported collective wage bargaining for public employees , but had declared that he would not fight for it in the upcoming 1996 legislative session . Though Babbage and Rose were political veterans and solid campaigners , Patton won 152 @,@ 203 votes in the primary , well over the 40 percent needed to avoid a runoff . Babbage ran second with 81 @,@ 352 votes and Rose was third with 71 @,@ 740 votes . Two other candidates split the remaining 33 @,@ 344 votes . 
 Patton entered the general election as a perceived underdog . The previous year , Republicans had taken over both the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives , and for the first time in decades a majority of Kentucky 's congressional delegation was Republican . State Democrats were also tainted by the Operation Boptrot investigation that sent many of their legislators , including House Speaker Don Blandford , to prison for political corruption . With Democrats in charge of state government for the previous 24 years , Patton feared that the " time for a change " argument would resonate with voters . 
 Patton 's opponent , Republican Larry Forgy , hurt his campaign by aligning himself with the Christian right , alienating moderates in both parties , particularly in Louisville . He also openly opposed the Kentucky Education Reform Act ( KERA ) , passed in 1990 during the administration of Wallace G. Wilkinson . Republican supporters of education reform deserted his campaign and helped form a bi @-@ partisan coalition supporting KERA . Traditional Democratic voting blocs such as organized labor and African @-@ Americans turned out in force for Patton . To further undermine Forgy , Patton reminded voters of the budget cuts by Congressional Republicans to programs affecting the elderly . These issues ultimately delivered a Patton victory of 500 @,@ 787 votes to 479 @,@ 227 . It was the closest Kentucky gubernatorial election in 32 years , and marked the first time an eastern Kentuckian had won the governorship since Bert T. Combs in 1959 . 
 = = = First term as governor ( 1995 – 1999 ) = = = 
 Though Patton had ambitions to enact education reform early in his administration , his financial adviser , James R. Ramsey , convinced him to propose a conservative budget in the first legislative session . The two developed a plan to modernize the state government , making it more efficient . State employees were leery of increased efficiency , believing it was a code word for cutting state jobs . Patton dispelled this notion by promising no involuntary layoffs . Patton also anticipated difficulty persuading legislators to invest an estimated $ 100 million in equipment and processes to realize improved efficiency . However , when economists projected a budget surplus for 1996 , Patton agreed to invest half of it in capital projects in exchange for using the other half for measures to improve government efficiency . Patton formed an Office for Technology and made improvements in the compatibility and interoperability of the state 's computer systems that were recommended by his son , Chris . Investments of $ 23 @.@ 3 million yielded a return of $ 300 million in state revenue . By the time Patton 's efficiency program was fully implemented , the state was realizing an annual return of 75 cents for every dollar initially invested . 
 In December 1996 , Patton called a special legislative session to consider the issue of worker 's compensation reform . Both Patton and the state 's legislators believed that the generous benefits provided under Kentucky state law created an unfavorable business climate in the state . The reform measures adopted in the special session included a substantial reduction in benefits , including those to coal miners who developed black lung disease . Patton 's support of this measure alienated labor leaders , especially in eastern Kentucky 's coal mining communities – which had previously been among his strongest supporters . As the law began to take effect , Patton himself agreed that it had gone too far , and his Secretary of Labor worked with representatives from organized labor to draft changes in the law . Those changes were eventually made in the 2002 legislative session . 
 = = = = Education reform = = = = 
 In the 1997 legislature , Patton began his mission of reforming the state 's system of higher education . Noting that the state 's community colleges , under the control of the University of Kentucky , and technical schools , under the control of the state government , were too often competing with each other in the same community , he proposed removing the community colleges from the university 's control . Part of the plan was upgrading the technical schools to colleges , allowing them to award associate 's degrees , not just diplomas and certificates . Control of the community and technical colleges would be invested in a new entity , the Kentucky Community and Technical College System . Patton believed that severing the community colleges from the University of Kentucky would allow the university to reallocate resources toward becoming a " Top 20 " research university in the nation . The plan also charged the University of Louisville with becoming a nationally @-@ recognized urban university . The state 's Council on Postsecondary Education ( CPE ) would help eliminate duplication of programs among the colleges and oversee the improvements in the state 's two major universities . In addition , the CPE was to oversee the formation of a " Commonwealth Virtual University " that would serve as a clearinghouse for all the distance learning opportunities offered by the colleges and universities of Kentucky . The new CPE president , Gordon K. Davies , appointed former University of Kentucky engineering faculty and then <unk> Corp. co @-@ founder Lee T. Todd to chair the new Distance Learning Task Force which created the Kentucky Virtual University ( now the Kentucky Virtual Campus ) and the Kentucky Virtual Library , and worked with the Kentucky Department of Education to create the Kentucky <unk> High School ( now the Kentucky Virtual Schools ) . Patton 's plan was outlined in the Kentucky Postsecondary Education Improvement Act of 1997 , nicknamed House Bill 1 . 
 While supported by the state 's smaller , regional universities , House Bill 1 immediately drew the ire of University of Kentucky president Charles T. Wethington , Jr . Before becoming university president , Wethington had administered the community @-@ college system . Most of the community colleges and the constituencies in their communities also opposed the plan . The university and the community colleges ran advertisements encouraging opposition to the plan ; Patton characterized these ads as " mean " . Patton was disappointed when Greg Stumbo , a leader in the Kentucky House of Representatives and former advocate of an independent community @-@ college system , announced his opposition the plan . Stumbo represented the community of Prestonsburg , an eastern Kentucky coal mining town , and Patton surmised that he was still angry about the worker 's compensation bill . Prestonsburg was also the home of Prestonsburg Community College ( now Big Sandy Community and Technical College ) . In the face of this opposition , Patton negotiated with individual legislators until he was convinced that he had a majority in both houses of the Kentucky General Assembly . He then pushed forward and was able to get the legislation passed . 
 In addition to this victory , Patton also secured passage of other higher education measures . In the 1998 legislative session , he proposed a $ 100 million bond issue to fund the Research Challenge Trust Fund , a fund that the state 's universities could tap to hire researchers for special projects . The program , later nicknamed " Bucks for Brains " , required the universities to match any resources leveraged from the fund dollar @-@ for @-@ dollar . The 1998 legislature also approved funding for the Kentucky Educational Excellence Scholarship ( <unk> ) program , which channeled money from the Kentucky Lottery into a special fund for scholarships . To qualify for a <unk> scholarship , students have to score at least a 2 @.@ 5 grade point average in high school , and attend a college or university in Kentucky . Awards are made on a sliding scale , with factors such as high school grades , scores on college entrance exams , and continued academic success in college affecting the amount of the award , which is renewable for up to eight college terms . 
 Patton 's education reforms were not confined to higher education . He also sought to make changes to the Kentucky Education Reform Act that would mollify its critics without gutting the law itself . One of the major complaints regarding KERA was the inability to compare the scores to those from other states to determine progress relative to the rest of the nation . Opponents of KERA in the Senate passed a bill to eliminate the testing until something better could be implemented . In the House , a more moderate measure was advanced , that added a component to the testing system that would allow students to be compared to national norms . Patton supported the House version of the bill , which ultimately emerged from the conference committee and was enacted into law . The administration 's strong support of KERA kept the legislation from being seriously challenged again during Patton 's term . One notable exception occurred in 2000 when legislators tried to repeal the anti @-@ nepotism provision regarding school hiring . The measure passed both houses of the legislature , but Patton vetoed it . 
 The passage of his higher education reforms led to Patton becoming the chairman of the Southern Regional Education Board from 1997 to 1998 . In 1999 he was chosen chairman of the Education Commission of the States . Other educational organizations then sought Patton 's leadership ; he chaired the National Education Goals Panel and was chosen by the U.S. Secretary of Education to lead a commission to study the high @-@ school senior year . 
 In the 1998 legislative session , the state enjoyed a $ 200 million budget surplus . Patton was able to distribute this surplus to legislative allies , giving him substantial leverage for his proposals . As one legislative leader opined , " Money buys a lot of silence . " Legislators were also reluctant to oppose the administration for fear that Patton would be re @-@ elected in 1999 . Consequently , Patton was able to gain approval of a very ambitious legislative agenda in 1998 , including tougher criminal laws , improved economic development , reform for Medicaid , and further reform of the higher @-@ education system . Patton also used some of the budget surplus to provide computers for public classrooms ; because of Patton 's commitment to education , Kentucky was the first state in the nation to have every public school classroom wired to the Internet . Once this was accomplished , Patton charged his education secretary , Ed Ford , with developing the Kentucky Virtual High School , a system of distance education that would allow students in smaller high schools in Kentucky to have access to courses in foreign languages and other subjects offered only at larger high schools . The virtual high school was brought online in January 2000 . 
 The last plank in Patton 's education platform was the improvement of adult education . This issue allowed him to work with a political foe , Republican senator David L. Williams , who had been pushing for additional resources for adult education since 1997 . In 1998 , Patton personally chaired a task force on adult education , and 18 months later , the task force 's recommendations were incorporated into a bill sponsored by Williams . The bill , which increased and equalized funding and tied continuing funds to successful performance by individual adult @-@ education programs , passed both houses of the General Assembly unanimously . By 2003 , the number of adults completing their GED rose by 17 percent , and the number of GED recipients who matriculated to college rose from 13 percent to 18 percent . 
 = = = = Criminal justice reform = = = = 
 Also on Patton 's agenda was a reformation of Kentucky 's juvenile justice system . Under Brereton Jones , because of its system of housing and treating juvenile offenders , Kentucky had been one of only two states unable to qualify for federal grants . Among the problems cited by the Department of Justice were abuse of juveniles by state employees , and failure to hold juvenile and adult offenders separately from each other . Governor Jones entered into a consent decree to ameliorate the situation , but his term expired before he could meaningfully address the terms of the decree . Patton went beyond the terms of the decree by implementing mandatory training for state employees who dealt with juvenile offenders , and by setting up a hotline for juveniles to report abuse anonymously . He shifted the responsibility for housing juveniles from local communities to the state , constructing nine new juvenile detention centers . In January 2001 , Attorney General Janet Reno proclaimed Kentucky 's juvenile justice system a model for the nation . 
 Patton did not stop with the juvenile justice system , however . He encouraged passage of a bill that required that violent offenders serve at least 85 percent of their sentences ( up from the 50 percent previously mandated ) , while requiring that judges consider home incarceration for first @-@ time , non @-@ violent offenders . The bill also allowed judges to sentence criminals to life without parole ; previously , life without parole for 25 years had been the harshest non @-@ capital sentence . The bill passed the legislature in 1999 . 
 = = = Gubernatorial election , 1999 = = = 
 Due to the constitutional amendment enacted under previous governor Brereton Jones , Patton became the first governor in more than 200 years eligible to succeed himself in office . James Garrard had served consecutive terms in 1796 and 1800 , but the Kentucky Constitution of 1799 barred any future governor from being elected to consecutive terms . In 1796 , Garrard was chosen as governor by electors , not by popular vote , and thus Patton was the first Kentucky governor to be popularly elected for consecutive terms . 
 Patton was unopposed in the Democratic primary . Republicans nominated Peppy Martin , who many considered a weak candidate . In fact , Patton 's old Republican foe , David Williams , announced he would vote for Patton over Martin . In the general election Patton garnered 352 @,@ 099 votes , 60 @.@ 6 percent of the total . Martin finished with 128 @,@ 788 votes , with 88 @,@ 930 votes going to third @-@ party candidate Gatewood Galbraith . When asked why the Republicans had chosen such a weak challenger , Patton opined " They mistakenly believed I could not be beaten . They made a mistake . " 
 = = = Second term as governor ( 1999 – 2003 ) = = = 
 After the gubernatorial election in 1999 , Louisville senator Dan <unk> announced he would change his party affiliation from Democrat to Republican , citing his conservative voting history , including opposition to the state lottery , KERA , and abortion . This switch , which Patton learned of too late to intervene , equalized the number of Democrats and Republicans in the Senate . Six weeks later , Paducah senator Bob Leeper announced he would also change his party affiliation . Patton traveled to Paducah and met with Leeper , but was unable to convince him to remain a Democrat . Leeper had a history of conflict with Democratic Senate President Larry Saunders , but he insisted his party switch , like <unk> 's , was based on political philosophy . Leeper 's switch gave Republicans a majority in the Senate for the first time in the state 's history . David Williams was elected President of the Senate , and held the Republican majority together effectively . Consequently , Patton faced a difficult task in maneuvering his agenda through a divided General Assembly . 
 The rift between Williams and Patton became permanent during negotiations over the state budget in 1999 . Patton proposed to Williams a 7 @-@ cent @-@ per @-@ gallon gasoline tax , with 1 cent of every 7 dedicated to counties with the most unpaved roads – usually heavily Republican counties ignored by past Democratic governors . Patton claimed Williams told him he had 10 votes in the Senate for the increase . But gas prices spiked before the measure came to a vote in the Senate , and Williams failed to deliver his votes after the House passed the tax . The administration and key Republican senators reached a compromise that saved Patton 's budget with tax changes that were mostly revenue @-@ neutral . Patton believed Williams had deliberately misled him , however , and the two never reconciled . 
 Another issue confronting both Patton and the legislature was how to spend federal funds from the Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement . Kentucky 's share of the settlement totaled $ 3 @.@ 5 billion over 25 years . Because tobacco was a major cash crop in Kentucky , Patton proposed that half of the settlement be used to diversify the state 's farmers ' crops . One @-@ fourth of the money would support health care and anti @-@ smoking efforts . The remaining one @-@ fourth would address early @-@ childhood care and education , a cause important to Patton 's daughter , Nicki , an early @-@ childhood educator . 
 In November 2000 , Kentucky voters approved a constitutional amendment providing a shorter legislative session in odd @-@ numbered years with longer sessions in even @-@ numbered years . Most of Patton 's proposals failed in the 2000 and 2001 legislative sessions . The economic boom that had provided ample funds for his programs during the first term slowed in 2001 , and by 2002 the state was $ 800 million short of meeting its budget . In 2002 , Republicans in the General Assembly called for an end to public campaign finance , as an economy measure . Calling it " welfare for politicians " , Republicans estimated that abolishing public campaign finance could save the state $ 30 million . Ultimately , the issue derailed the biennial budget during the regular legislative session . In April 2002 , Patton called a special legislative session to approve the budget , but legislators were still unable to agree . For the first time in the state 's history , the fiscal year began without a budget . This left Patton to run the state government for a year without a budget in place . 
 Besides the budget , another measure that failed to pass in the 2002 session was a bill to eliminate the death penalty for juveniles . The precedent for the juvenile death penalty had been set in the 1989 Supreme Court case of Stanford v. Kentucky , wherein the court ruled that Kevin Stanford could be executed for the 1981 rape , sodomy , and murder of a gas station attendant in Jefferson County , Kentucky , even though Stanford was only 17 at the time of the crime . In 2003 , Patton announced he would commute Stanford 's sentence . Patton did oversee the execution of two adult prisoners in 1997 and 1999 , making him the first Kentucky governor to do so since 1962 . 
 = = = = Tina Conner sex scandal = = = = 
 Already plagued by an uncooperative legislature , Patton 's situation was exacerbated in 2002 when it was revealed that , during his first term in office , he had engaged in an extramarital affair with a woman named Tina Conner . According to Connor , the operator of Birchtree Healthcare nursing home in Clinton , Kentucky , the relationship ended in 1999 , but Patton continued to call her until she completely broke off the affair in October 2001 . After initially denying the affair , Patton tearfully admitted to it during a televised press conference at the Kentucky History Center on September 20 , 2002 . The story made Patton the object of state and national ridicule , the subject of jokes by Jay Leno on The Tonight Show . The Louisville Courier @-@ Journal called for Patton 's resignation , stating that he was " too damaged as a moral authority to lead ... [ and ] too powerless as a politician to compel . " 
 Connor alleged that Patton arranged regulatory favors for the nursing home while the affair was ongoing . Two months after Connor said she ended the affair , Birchtree Healthcare was cited by state regulators for numerous violations of health and safety rules . By July 2002 , the state had pulled all Medicare and Medicaid payments from the facility , which soon went bankrupt . Connor further alleged that the state investigation of Birchtree was retaliation by Patton for her ending of the affair . In a separate incident , Conner claimed that Patton helped a construction company she owned obtain certification as a disadvantaged business , which gave the company special preference when bidding for state contracts . 
 The affair appeared to take a toll on Patton 's marriage ; his wife Judi was reported to be living in separate quarters in the governor 's mansion and was rarely seen in public with him . Key members of his cabinet also began to resign . Financial adviser James Ramsey left to become the president of the University of Louisville . Attorney General Jack Conway resigned to challenge incumbent congresswoman Anne Northup in the 2002 congressional elections . In January 2003 , Executive Cabinet Secretary <unk> Luallen also resigned . 
 Patton had risen to national prominence , successively chairing the Southern Governors Association , the Democratic Governors Association , and the National Governors Association ( NGA ) . He was serving as NGA chair at the time the Tina Conner scandal broke , and planned to resign his chairmanship in November 2002 . Nevertheless , the other governors rallied around him , convincing him to remain in the position . Together with his Republican vice @-@ chair , Idaho 's Dirk Kempthorne , Patton led the NGA effectively , securing federal funding to shore up state budgets and keeping the caucus from a partisan split in a vote over Medicaid . 
 Conner filed suit against Patton in September 2002 . By late 2003 , all but one of her charges against Patton had been dismissed ; the remaining charge alleged " outrageous " conduct . In March 2003 , the state 's Executive Branch Ethics Commission investigated Conner 's claims and accused Patton of four ethics violations , charging that he " used or attempted to use his official position " to provide favors for Conner . The favors included contacting the state transportation secretary with regard to Conner 's disadvantaged business application , recommending a promotion for an officer who allegedly helped Conner avoid paying a traffic ticket , appointing Conner to the board of directors for the Kentucky Lottery , and appointing Conner 's then @-@ husband to the Agricultural Development Board . Patton claimed that the favors he requested for Conner were the same kind of favors that he had requested for dozens of influential constituents . He also claimed he had not profited financially from any of the requested favors . He maintained that his attitude toward constituent services was " If you can do so legally and ethically , help them . " 
 = = = = Other scandals and loss of legislative influence = = = = 
 Because of the deteriorating national economic situation , Kentucky faced a severe budget shortfall in 2003 . Patton proposed an overhaul of the state tax system , whereby tax revenue would keep pace with the state 's eventual economic recovery . However , such reform would necessarily have meant tax increases , and with the 2003 gubernatorial election looming , legislators from both parties stuck strictly to a pledge not to raise taxes . Consequently , in the 2003 legislative session , members of the General Assembly crafted a budget that completely disregarded any input from Patton . The budget included repealing the campaign finance reform bill passed a decade earlier . Patton conceded " I have lost any ability to influence the legislature . " 
 During his final months in office , Patton drew criticism for abusing his patronage power . Critics charged that he had appointed several of his family and friends who were in non @-@ merit system jobs to merit system positions , increasing their chances of being retained when a new administration took over . These charges were particularly damaging because , earlier in the year , the General Assembly had ordered Patton to cut 800 non @-@ merit positions to help balance the budget . The Lexington Herald @-@ Leader opined that these charges were more serious than those of the Conner affair . Patton maintained that his friends had followed proper personnel protocol in applying for and securing merit positions . 
 In June 2003 , Patton issued pardons to four men who were under indictment for violating campaign finance laws during the 1995 gubernatorial race . The indictments stemmed from charges by then @-@ candidate Larry Forgy that Patton had skirted campaign finance laws by coordinating expenditures with the Teamsters and the state Democratic Party . A Franklin County grand jury returned the indictments in 1998 , but a circuit court judge dismissed them in 1999 on grounds that the campaign finance law was too vague . An appeals court reversed that decision the following year , and in 2003 , the Kentucky Supreme Court upheld the indictments by a vote of 5 – 1 . The Supreme Court of the United States refused to hear an appeal on June 13 , 2003 . Two days later , Patton issued pardons for all four men . State attorney general Ben Chandler lamented that the pardons would eliminate the possibility of determining whether Patton won the 1995 contest " honestly and openly " . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Patton had publicly stated that he was planning a run against Republican U.S. Senator Jim Bunning in 2004 , but the scandals that plagued him near the end of his administration derailed those plans . He retired to Pikeville , Kentucky , after the election of his successor , Republican Ernie Fletcher . He became a member of the First Presbyterian Church of Pikeville , the Big Sandy Regional Economic Development Board and chairman of the Pikeville / Pike County Industrial and Economic Authority . Tina Conner 's final claim against Patton – for " outrage " – was dismissed by a judge in May 2006 . In October 2006 , Conner filed a second lawsuit against Patton alleging misconduct by a public official and government oppression ; a Franklin County judge dismissed the suit , claiming it was an attempt by Conner to re @-@ litigate the claims from her first suit . 
 Governor Ernie Fletcher renamed a section of U.S. Route 119 in eastern Kentucky as the Paul E. Patton Highway at a ceremony on October 30 , 2008 . On February 1 , 2009 , Patton was chosen chairman of the Kentucky Council on Postsecondary Education ( CPE ) . On August 12 , 2009 , he was announced as the next president of Pikeville College ( now the University of Pikeville ) . In September 2009 , the Executive Branch Ethics Commission issued an advisory opinion that Patton could serve in both roles without a significant conflict of interest because the CPE wields very little oversight of Kentucky 's private colleges . Patton was advised to allow someone other than himself to be the official liaison between the University of Pikeville and the CPE and to recuse himself from CPE discussions on matters " that directly involve his private institution or that would affect his institution differently than any other similarly situated private postsecondary institution . " 
 = = = Tenure at University of Pikeville = = = 
 Patton was formally installed as president of the University of Pikeville on February 16 , 2010 . He also serves as a Distinguished Visiting Lecturer in Public Policy and Leadership . As president , Patton oversaw the construction of the Expo Center , a new facility to house the university 's indoor sports ; in 2011 , the Center 's basketball court was named Paul E. Patton Court . 
 In late 2011 , Patton announced that he and Speaker of the Kentucky House of Representatives Greg Stumbo would ask the General Assembly to consider adding the University of Pikeville as the ninth state @-@ supported university in the Kentucky university system . On December 30 , 2011 , he announced his resignation from the Council on Postsecondary Education to avoid any potential accusations of a conflict of interest regarding the proposal in the 2012 General Assembly . 
 In 2013 , Patton announced he would step down as president of the university and instead serve as chancellor . Because of his longstanding support of the university 's athletics programs , he was inducted into the university 's Athletics Hall of Fame in 2014 . In January 2015 , the university announced it would move its teacher training program out of the College of Arts and Sciences , creating the new Patton College of Education . The College was scheduled to open for the fall 2015 semester . 
 = Ice Hockey Hair = 
 Ice Hockey Hair is an EP by the Welsh alternative rock band Super Furry Animals , released in 1998 . The record contains four songs which the band felt did not fit in with either their previous album , 1997 's Radiator , or its follow @-@ up Guerrilla . The title track refers to an alternative name for the mullet hairstyle . The EP 's opening song , " Smokin ' " , was commissioned by British television station Channel 4 for a programme about sloth presented by Howard Marks . " Ice Hockey Hair " was later included on ' greatest hits ' compilation Songbook : The Singles , Vol . 1 , issued in 2004 , while " Smokin ' " appeared on 1998 's B @-@ side and rarities compilation Out Spaced . 
 The EP received mostly positive reviews , being awarded ' single of the week ' by the NME , and appearing at number two in the magazine 's Single of the Year list for 1998 . The record also appeared in the 1998 single of the year lists issued by both the Melody Maker and Select . Promotional music videos were issued for both " Ice Hockey Hair " and " Smokin ' " and are included on the DVD version of Songbook .... The former was directed by <unk> Palfrey while the latter was directed by Peter Gray . 
 = = Recording and themes = = 
 The first track on the EP , " Smokin ' " , was commissioned by British television station Channel 4 for a programme about sloth presented by Howard Marks as part of a series on the seven deadly sins . The band went into Grassroots , a community recording studio in Cardiff , in June 1997 and looped a sample of the Black Uhuru track " I Love King Selassie " , playing along and writing " Smokin ' " " completely spontaneously " . According to singer Gruff Rhys the song is " really light and up " as a result of being recorded in the summer . The track 's lyrics refer to smoking cannabis , with Rhys stating that it " seems ridiculous that you can 't do what you want with a plant that grows naturally " in reference to the drug 's illegal status in many countries . Rhys has claimed that he does not consider the track to be subversive , however — it is about the band 's own drug use and he doesn 't " expect everyone who buys the record to do the same . They 'd be quite sad if they did " . 
 Chief lyric writer Rhys has stated that , whereas he might " empty parts of [ his ] emotional state " into some songs , Ice Hockey Hair 's title track was written in the " instant pop music " tradition . The track was originally called " The Naff Song " as the band felt it " had so many naff , cheesy things about it " before being renamed " Ice Hockey Hair " following a conversation with a Swedish football player who said that having ' ice hockey hair ' , an alternative name for the mullet hairstyle , was a really naff thing to do in his home country . Rhys has described the song as a " Badfinger @-@ style power ballad " and claimed that it is about " someone who 's sunk so low they 're asking advice off a woman with ice hockey hair " . The track was recorded at <unk> Studios , London . 
 The band felt that " Ice Hockey Hair " and " Smokin ' " were " light relief " and needed to be released so that they could concentrate on their next album , Guerrilla , with Rhys stating that the " EP was a good chance to do something in isolation , because the tracks on it won 't fit in with the new album , and they didn 't fit in with the old one " . The EP is completed by " Let 's Quit Smoking " , a remix of " Smokin ' " , and " Mu @-@ Tron " , a largely instrumental track named after the Mu @-@ Tron guitar effects pedal and written by keyboardist Cian Ciaran . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Ice Hockey Hair was released on CD , 7 " and cassette on 25 May 1998 and reached number 12 on the UK Singles Chart . The CD version of the EP has four tracks while the 7 " and cassette feature only " Ice Hockey Hair " and " Smokin ' " . A 12 " vinyl release of Ice Hockey Hair was issued in June 1998 and includes all four songs from the CD version albeit in a different track order . The proverb " Decadence may not be seen as a wholly negative process neither should it be viewed as a terminal state . It 's a stage in the process of regeneration and renewal " was to have been featured on Ice Hockey Hair 's sleeve but the band eventually decided against the idea as they felt the phrase was too long . " Ice Hockey Hair " was included on the band 's ' greatest hits ' compilation Songbook : The Singles , Vol . 1 , issued in 2004 , while " Smokin ' " was included on 1998 's B @-@ side and rarities compilation Out Spaced . The Wildhearts recorded a cover of " Ice Hockey Hair " for their 2008 album Stop Us If You 've Heard This One Before , Vol 1 . 
 The Melody Maker called the Ice Hockey Hair EP " brilliant , predictably freakish weirdness " and described it as a cross between The Beach Boys and techno while guest reviewers Therapy ? claimed to like " Smokin ' " better than " Ice Hockey Hair " which they thought was " full @-@ on smoker music " . Vox stated that Ice Hockey Hair proved the band 's " placid casual grasp of the concept of genius " , describing the title track as a " gooey , melted mix of Queen , ELO , Pavement and [ ... ] Techno Animal " and " Smokin ' " , which they felt was the EP 's stand @-@ out song , as " deranged disco delirium " . The NME felt that the EP showed the Super Furry Animals had fulfilled their early promise and was the result of the band having " ideas like most people have cups of tea " , awarding Ice Hockey Hair ' single of the week ' in their 23 May 1998 issue . The magazine called " Smokin ' " " compact disco " and stated that " Mu @-@ Tron " was an " ugly name for a beautiful song " . " Ice Hockey Hair " was described as a combination of Queen , ELO , Wings , and " mad techno squalling " which sounds like " Elton John 's glitter @-@ coated grand piano " falling from the sky . AllMusic described the Ice Hockey Hair EP as " another fun , cool group of songs from a band that can seemingly do no wrong " which bridges the gap between the " spaced @-@ out rock " of 1997 's Radiator and the " pop / rock electronic experimentation " of 1999 's Guerrilla . The website did take issue with the short length of the record however , suggesting that the Super Furry Animals ' music works best " in large doses of pop / rock gem upon pop / rock gem " . 
 In their review of Songbook : The Singles , Vol . 1 , Drowned in Sound claimed that " Ice Hockey Hair " " could be the most perfect thing you 'll ever set ears upon " while the BBC viewed the " sublime " track as one of the record 's highlights . Also reviewing Songbook ... , Pitchfork Media called the song a " non @-@ album gem " , The Washington Post called it " gorgeous " and AllMusic referred to it as a masterpiece . Reviewing <unk> , the Melody Maker described the " <unk> funky " " Smokin ' " as brilliant and Select called it one of the " joyous pinnacles " of the album , suggesting that the track was inspired by P @-@ Funk . The NME however , called " Smokin ' " " sludgy " and suggested that it was <unk> 's " fairly naff nadir " . 
 Stylus Magazine named Ice Hockey Hair in a list of " Ten essential singles / EPs " released by Creation Records in a 2003 article about the label . " Ice Hockey Hair " was included in The Pitchfork 500 , a list of the greatest songs released from 1977 to 2006 , published by Pitchfork Media in 2008 . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 * denotes an unordered list 
 = = Music videos = = 
 = = = " Ice Hockey Hair " = = = 
 The promotional music video for " Ice Hockey Hair " was directed by <unk> Palfrey and appears on the DVD version of the band 's ' greatest hits ' album Songbook : The Singles , Vol . 1 . The video begins with silent footage of five characters , who appear in a small white rectangle in the centre of the screen against a black background . The text " I am like a film strip ... and like a child ... in a thousand lunar parks ... someone is always ... cranking the handle " appears as the video cuts between shots of each person . " Ice Hockey Hair " begins playing approximately 17 seconds into the video . Each character is again seen in a white rectangle in the centre of the screen followed by a shot of a pair of hands holding a strip of photos of that particular person during which red text is displayed showing the character 's name . A woman with short blonde hair and a red top , seen holding her head in her hands is introduced as " The wife " ; a bald man with blood on his head is " The husband " ; a woman in a white jacket with a blonde mullet hairstyle is " The mistress " ; a man with thick @-@ rimmed glasses , a white jacket , and red polo neck sweater is " The voyeur " ; and a man in a red and black tracksuit top with a large scar running from his left eye to right cheek is " The stalker " . The five characters are all seen singing along to the track individually , again framed in a white rectangle in the centre of the screen . " The wife " is twice shown ripping a photograph of her and " The husband " , while " The mistress " is seen sitting on the lap of " The husband " in two shots . After 1 minute and 6 seconds the Super Furry Animals are shown playing along to the track on a rotating dancefloor surrounded by photo booths and several dancers in dark clothes . During an instrumental break in the song , at 1 minute 38 seconds , two masked men are shown playing table tennis on another rotating dancefloor with two large fluorescent purple circles in the background . The five characters are then seen walking around the band and stepping into the photo booths that surround them . The text " Act 1 : The kiss " is shown , after which footage of the Super Furry Animals playing along to the track is intercut with shots of the characters . " The husband " and " The mistress " kiss while a strip of photos is seen being passed through a pair of hands and " The voyeur " is shown using a video camera . The characters move to different photo booths and the title " Act 2 : The stalking " is displayed . Shots of " The stalker " and " The wife " are then intercut with shots of the band . The characters again change booths and the title " Act 3 : The murder " is shown . After quick jump cuts between shots of the band , the masked men playing table tennis and the five characters , " The voyeur " is shown pointing his video camera at the motionless body of " The mistress " which is laid in a bathtub covered in film stock . More footage of the band follows before " The husband " is shown motionless of the floor , surrounded by a white tape outline . The video ends with more jump cuts between the band , the masked table tennis players and the five named characters . 
 = = = " Smokin ' " = = = 
 The music video for " Smokin ' " was directed by Peter Gray and also appears on the DVD version of Songbook : The Singles , Vol . 1 . The video begins with a shot of the Super Furry Animals ' ' SFA ' logo which appears on the cover of the Ice Hockey Hair EP . The logo fades out and the camera pans through a crowd of dark figures wearing berets towards a woman standing behind a long , black table . The woman is wearing a short sleeved black dress and has a blonde bob haircut . Her arms and face are illuminated in the otherwise dark room and she is shown walking backwards down the table , giving coloured cards to each of the figures wearing berets . The woman walks up and down the table observing the crowd as they each use the piece of card they were given to make an origami animal . As each person completes a model animal the woman gives them a new piece of coloured card . Approximately two minutes into the video the woman returns to a central position behind the table and looks down at one of the beret wearers . The camera cuts to show him screwing up a piece of green card into a ball which turns into an origami crane and flies away as he opens his hands . The rest of the figures in berets are shown from behind , bowing their heads before the camera cuts to a close up view of several origami animals on the table . These animals also begin to move , and interact with each other until a large red animal arrives . The camera cuts to a close @-@ up of the red animal 's head with smoke shown coming from its nose . The next shot shows the origami animals stationary on the table as the camera pans up to the beret wearers who are looking straight ahead while smoke moves across from the right . The woman walks up and down the table giving the beret wearers new pieces of card as they complete more and more origami animals . As the video draws to an end she rapidly piles up the origami animals into a heap in the middle of the table . When all the animals have been collected into the pile the beret wearers bow their heads and the woman puts her arms around the pile and smiles at the camera . In the final shot the woman places her hands on the table and stares at the camera as the video fades out to show the same Super Furry Animals ' ' SFA ' logo which appeared at the very beginning . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs by Super Furry Animals unless otherwise stated . 
 7 " ( CRE 288 ) , MC ( <unk> 288 ) 
 " Ice Hockey Hair " – 6 : 57 
 " Smokin ' " ( Super Furry Animals / Rose / Simpson ) – 5 : 05 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Band 
 Gruff Rhys – vocals 
 Huw Bunford – guitar , backing vocals 
 Guto Pryce – bass guitar 
 Cian Ciaran – keyboards , backing vocals 
 Dafydd Ieuan – drums , backing vocals 
 Artwork 
 Pete Fowler – illustration 
 Simon Corkin – design 
 = = Singles chart position = = 
 = 1st Parachute Brigade ( United Kingdom ) = 
 The 1st Parachute Brigade was an airborne forces brigade formed by the British Army during the Second World War . As its name indicates , the unit was the first parachute infantry brigade formation in the British Army . 
 Formed from three parachute battalions as well as support units and assigned to the 1st Airborne Division , the brigade first saw action in Operation Biting – a raid on a German radar site at Bruneval on the French coast . They were then deployed in the Torch landings in Algeria , and the following Tunisia Campaign , where it fought as an independent unit . In North Africa each of the brigade 's three parachute battalions took part in separate parachute assaults . The brigade then fought in the front line as normal infantry until the end of the campaign , during which they earned the nickname the " Red Devils " . Following the Axis surrender in North Africa , when 1st Airborne Division arrived in Tunisia the brigade once more came under its command . The brigade 's next mission was Operation Fustian , part of the Allied invasion of Sicily . This was also the British Army 's first brigade @-@ sized combat parachute jump . Because of casualties sustained in Sicily , the brigade was held in reserve for the division 's next action , Operation Slapstick , an amphibious landing at Taranto in Italy . 
 At the end of 1943 , the brigade returned to England , in preparation for the invasion of North @-@ West Europe . Not required during the Normandy landings , the brigade was next in action at the Battle of Arnhem , part of Operation Market Garden . Landing on the first day of the battle , the brigade objective was to seize the crossings over the River Rhine and hold them for forty @-@ eight hours until relieved by the advancing XXX Corps , coming 60 miles ( 97 km ) from the south . In the face of strong resistance elements , the brigade managed to secure the north end of the Arnhem road bridge . After holding out for four days , with their casualties growing and supplies exhausted they were forced to surrender . By this time the remainder of the brigade trying to fight through to the bridge had been almost destroyed and was no longer a viable fighting force . 
 Reformed after the battle , the brigade took part in operations in Denmark at the end of the war and then in 1946 joined the 6th Airborne Division on internal security duties in Palestine . Post @-@ war downsizing of the British Army reduced their airborne forces to a single brigade and led to the 1948 dissolution of 1st Parachute Brigade . 
 = = Formation history = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Impressed by the success of German airborne operations during the Battle of France , the British Prime Minister , Winston Churchill directed the War Office to investigate the possibility of creating a corps of 5 @,@ 000 parachute troops . On 22 June 1940 , No. 2 Commando was redeployed to parachute duties and on 21 November re @-@ designated the 11th Special Air Service Battalion ( later the 1st Parachute Battalion ) , with both a parachute and glider wing , the men of which took part in the first British airborne operation , Operation Colossus , on 10 February 1941 . The success of the raid prompted the War Office to expand the airborne forces , setting up the Airborne Forces Depot and Battle School in Derbyshire in April 1942 , and creating the Parachute Regiment as well as converting several infantry battalions into airborne battalions in August 1942 . This resulted in the formation of the 1st Airborne Division with the 1st Parachute Brigade and the 1st Airlanding Brigade . Its commander Major @-@ General Frederick Arthur Montague Boy Browning , expressed his opinion that the fledgling force must not be sacrificed in " penny packets " and urged the formation of further brigades . 
 All parachute forces had to undergo a twelve @-@ day parachute training course at No. 1 Parachute Training School , RAF Ringway . Initial parachute jumps were from a converted barrage balloon and finished with five jumps from an aircraft . Anyone failing to complete a descent was returned to his old unit . Those men who successfully completed the parachute course were presented with their maroon beret and parachute wings . 
 Airborne soldiers were expected to fight against superior numbers of the enemy armed with heavy weapons , including artillery and tanks . Training was as a result designed to encourage a spirit of self @-@ discipline , self @-@ reliance and aggressiveness . Emphasis was given to physical fitness , marksmanship and fieldcraft . A large part of the training regime consisted of assault courses and route marching while military exercises included capturing and holding airborne bridgeheads , road or rail bridges and coastal fortifications . At the end of most exercises , the battalions would march back to their barracks . An ability to cover long distances at speed was also expected : airborne platoons were required to cover a distance of 50 miles ( 80 km ) in twenty @-@ four hours , and battalions 32 miles ( 51 km ) . This ability was demonstrated in April 1945 . When the 3rd Parachute Brigade advanced 15 miles ( 24 km ) in twenty @-@ four hours , which included eighteen hours of close @-@ quarters fighting . In the same month the 5th Parachute Brigade marched 50 miles ( 80 km ) in seventy @-@ two hours , during which they also carried out two night time assaults . 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Brigadier Richard N. Gale , who would later command the 6th Airborne Division , took command of the 1st Parachute Brigade on its formation in September 1941 . A triangular brigade formation with three battalions , Gale decided that rather than dividing the 11th Special Air Service Battalion among the brigade 's battalions , he would keep the already trained unit together . On 15 September it was renamed the 1st Parachute Battalion , which , together with the newly raised 2nd and 3rd Parachute Battalions , now formed the 1st Parachute Brigade . These battalions were formed from volunteers aged between twenty @-@ two and thirty @-@ two years of age . Only men in infantry units were selected and only ten men from any one unit were allowed to leave . Early in 1942 the brigade was joined by the 4th Parachute Battalion , the 16th ( Parachute ) Field Ambulance , and the 1st ( Parachute ) Squadron , Royal Engineers ( RE ) . The 4th Parachute Battalion left the brigade in July to become the first battalion in the 2nd Parachute Brigade . 
 By 1944 the brigade had increased in size and now comprised the 1st , 2nd , 3rd Parachute battalions , the 16th ( Parachute ) Field Ambulance and the 1st ( Parachute ) Squadron Royal Engineers ( RE ) as well as the 3rd ( Airlanding ) Light Battery Royal Artillery ( RA ) with 75 mm howitzers , 1st ( Airlanding ) Anti @-@ Tank Battery RA with 6 pounder and 17 pounder guns along with a Royal Army Service Corps ( RASC ) detachment . 
 After the war the brigade comprised the 1st , 2nd , 17th Parachute Battalions and the 16th ( Parachute ) Field Ambulance . The 3rd Parachute Battalion had left to join the 3rd Parachute Brigade , replacing the 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion , who had returned to Canada at the cessation of hostilities . The 1st Airborne Division was disbanded in November 1945 , and the brigade assigned to the 6th Airborne Division in Palestine . In 1946 the 17th Parachute Battalion amalgamated with the 7th ( Light Infantry ) Parachute Battalion retaining the number of the senior unit . The brigade formation changed again in 1948 . Further amalgamations and the general reduction in the post war British Army resulted in the brigade being formed from the 1st Parachute Battalion , the amalgamated 2nd / 3rd Parachute Battalion and the amalgamated 8th / 9th Parachute Battalion . By July 1948 the 6th Airborne Division had been withdrawn to England and disbanded , leaving the 2nd Parachute Brigade as the only regular British Army parachute formation . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Bruneval = = = 
 The Bruneval raid or Operation Biting in February 1942 was one of the first missions planned by Combined Operations Headquarters that used all three of the British Armed Forces . An attacking force from ' C ' Company , 2nd Parachute Battalion would be parachuted into France by the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) and later evacuated by the Royal Navy . Their objective was a German Würzburg radar station on the coast of France , which British scientists wanted to examine . 
 On 27 February , in ideal tide and weather conditions , the raid was commanded by Major John D. Frost . A group of forty men would attack machine @-@ guns on the cliffs overlooking the evacuation beach and then advance to Bruneval village . Another fifty @-@ five men in an assault group would attack the radar station and forty men would set up a blocking position to prevent German reinforcements reaching the radar site . The parachute drop was mostly successful with half of the first group missing the drop zone ( DZ ) by 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) . After capturing the radar and other installations , the assault group dismantled the equipment then withdrew towards the beach . They were intercepted en route by the cliff machine guns which had not yet been cleared and suffered some casualties . When the delayed first group arrived , they managed to neutralize the enemy machine guns and by 02 : 15 the company had mustered on the beach to wait for the navy . Despite some initial problems caused by a lack of experience in combined operations , the troops were successfully evacuated with losses of three men killed and seven wounded . 
 The success of the Bruneval raid was reported in the British media for several weeks while Winston Churchill , who had taken a personal interest in the raid , assembled the War Cabinet on 3 March to hear from Major Frost and several other officers who had taken part . On 15 May 1942 a special supplement to the London Gazette carried the announcement of nineteen decorations for the mission , including a Military Cross for Frost . 
 = = = North Africa = = = 
 In November 1942 , the brigade now commanded by Brigadier Edwin Flavell , was detached from 1st Airborne Division , to take part in Operation Torch , the Allied landings in French North Africa . 
 On 11 November , the first major British parachute landing was made by the 3rd Parachute Battalion , which without its ' A ' Company , flew from England via Gibraltar in a fleet of American piloted Douglas Dakotas . Their objective , the airfield at Bone , turned out to be deserted and was secured with no opposition . No. 6 Commando and a flight of RAF Spitfires reinforced the battalion later the same day . The following day the rest of the brigade who had travelled by sea arrived at Algiers . During the next airborne mission on 16 November , the 1st Parachute Battalion secured an important road junction near Souk el Arba , 90 miles ( 140 km ) west of Tunis then the next day ambushed a German convoy and were involved in several small battles . The Commanding Officer ( CO ) Lieutenant Colonel James Hill was wounded attacking an Italian position and replaced by his second @-@ in @-@ command , Alastair Pearson . 
 On 29 November the 2nd Parachute Battalion , now commanded by John Frost , parachuted onto an airfield at Depienne , 30 miles ( 48 km ) south of Tunis . The airfield was deserted so Frost marched the battalion 10 miles ( 16 km ) to a second airfield at Oudna . Due to postponement of their advance , the First Army did not relieve the battalion as planned and instead it became trapped 50 miles ( 80 km ) behind the German lines , where Frost was informed by radio that they had been written off . After ambushing an advancing German formation , the battalion were attacked by a second German unit and surrounded . On 1 December the Germans attacked with infantry , armour and artillery , almost wiping out ' C ' Company and causing heavy casualties in the rest of the battalion . Frost ordered the battalion to disperse into company groups and head for the Allied lines . On 3 December , the surviving 180 men reached safety at <unk> al Bab . With no more opportunities for parachute operations , the brigade fought in the front line as normal infantry . In February they held the right flank of the Allied line at Bou Arada and on the night of 2 / 3 February , the 1st Battalion , along with a French Foreign Legion unit , captured the Jebel Mansour heights and were then subjected to constant shelling and infantry attacks . After three days without relief , their almost ammunition expended , and having suffered 200 casualties , they were forced to withdraw . This was followed by the brigade fighting two fierce engagements at Tamera and checking the German offensive of Operation <unk> . When the Allied advance began again after the winter rains , the brigade was assigned to the force tasked with capturing Bizerta on 17 March . The remaining Axis forces surrendered on 13 May 1943 bringing the Tunisian campaign to an end with a cost to the 1st Parachute Brigade of 1 @,@ 700 killed , wounded or missing . They had nevertheless proved themselves in combat and been nicknamed the Red Devils by the German forces they had fought against . 
 = = = Sicily = = = 
 Immediately before the Axis surrender in April 1943 , the 1st Airborne Division , now commanded by Major @-@ General George F. Hopkinson , arrived in North Africa , and the 1st Parachute Brigade once again came under their command for further operations in Sicily . The invasion of Sicily was to be carried out by General Bernard Montgomery 's Eighth Army landing in the east and Lieutenant General George S. Patton 's U.S. Seventh Army coming ashore in the west . These seaborne landings were to be supported by airborne assaults whereby the U.S. 82nd Airborne Division would support the Americans and the 1st Airborne Division the British . The British airborne assault was divided into brigade @-@ sized operations : Operation Ladbroke by the 1st Airlanding Brigade took place on the night of 9 / 10 July , and Operation Fustian by the 1st Parachute Brigade on the night of 13 / 14 July . A third operation to drop 2nd Parachute Brigade beside Augusta on the night of 10 / 11 July ( Operation Glutton ) was cancelled . 
 Now under the command of Brigadier Gerald Lathbury , 1st Parachute Brigade 's objective in Sicily was the Primosole bridge across the Simeto River , south of Catania , the only crossing point that gave the Eighth Army access to the Catania plain . Once they had captured the bridge , the brigade were to hold out until relieved by Major @-@ General Sidney C. Kirkman 's 50th ( Northumbrian ) Infantry Division , reinforced by the 4th Armoured Brigade advancing from the landing beaches . Paratroops of the brigade would land on four DZs and the gliders at two landing zones ( LZ ) . The 1st Parachute Battalion was divided into two groups that would land at DZs on both sides of the river and thereafter attack the bridge from both sides simultaneously – 3rd Parachute Battalion would land on their own DZ north of the bridge and secure the high ground , while the 2nd Parachute Battalion did the same in the south . 
 At 19 : 30 on 12 July 1943 the brigade took off from North Africa Consisting of 105 Dakotas , eight of them towing Waco gliders and 11 Albemarles towing Horsa gliders , the gliders amongst other things transported the twelve anti @-@ tank guns of the 1st ( Airlanding ) Anti @-@ Tank Battery . 
 The brigade 's first casualties occurred while they were still en route , when two Dakotas were shot down flying over an Allied convoy with another nine damaged and forced to turn back . When they reached the Sicilian coast , Axis anti @-@ aircraft fire shot down thirty @-@ seven and a further ten were damaged and forced to abort their mission . Of the surviving aircraft , only thirty @-@ nine managed to drop their paratroops within .5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) of the correct DZ . Only four gliders arrived intact and those not shot down en route were destroyed while attempting to land . Despite these setbacks , the 250 surviving men of the 1st Parachute Battalion captured the bridge intact . The battalion commander , 28 @-@ year old Lieutenant Colonel Pearson , ordered his men to dig in on the north side of the river . Their only support weapons were three anti @-@ tank guns , two 3 inch mortars and a Vickers machine gun . As they dug in , the men removed the demolition charges from the bridge such that even if they were forced off the bridge it could not be immediately destroyed . 
 Unknown to the brigade , units of the German 1st Parachute Division had parachuted onto Catania airfield to reinforce the Italians guarding the bridge and quickly moved to regain the crossing . The German paratroops attacked at dawn . The defenders at the bridge held out all day against infantry , armour and attacks by aircraft . South of the bridge , the 2nd Parachute Battalion also under attack , were able to call on naval gunfire support from the 6 inch guns of the British cruiser HMS Mauritius , which stopped an assault that was about to overrun their position . The men from the 1st and 3rd Battalions , although initially forced across the river , still held the southern bank until dark when they withdrew to the 2nd Battalion 's position . 
 To the south , the 50th ( Northumbrian ) Infantry Division , in the face of strong German resistance , had stopped for the night 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south of the 2nd Battalion . Gunfire was heard just south of the brigade position on the following morning whereupon Brigadier Lathbury sent out a patrol to investigate and they discovered it was from British guns . The leading elements of the 50th Division had finally made contact with the brigade . After two days fighting , the brigade 's 4th Armoured and the 9th Battalion , Durham Light Infantry recaptured the bridge . Operations Ladbroke and Fustian had cost the British 1st Airborne Division 454 dead , 240 wounded and 102 missing . 
 = = = England = = = 
 The brigade returned to England in late 1943 and trained for operations in North @-@ West Europe under the supervision of I Airborne Corps , commanded by Lieutenant @-@ General Frederick Browning . Although they were not scheduled to take part in the Normandy landings , Operation <unk> was a contingency plan drawn up whereby all the 1st Airborne Division would be parachuted in to support any of the five invasion beaches if delays were experienced . 
 In early September the brigade prepared for Operation Comet , during which the 1st Airborne Division 's three brigades were to land in the Netherlands and capture three river crossings . The first of these was the bridge over the River Waal at Nijmegen , the second the bridge over the River Maas at Grave and finally the bridge over the River Rhine at Arnhem . The objective of the British 1st Parachute Brigade would be the bridge at Arnhem . Planning for Comet was well advanced when on 10 September the mission was cancelled . Instead , a new operation was proposed with the same objectives as Comet but to be carried out by three divisions of the First Allied Airborne Army , the British 1st and U.S. 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions . 
 = = = Arnhem = = = 
 Landings by the 1st Allied Airborne Army 's three divisions began in the Netherlands on 17 September 1944 . Although the allocation of aircraft for each division was roughly similar , the 101st Airborne Division landing at Nijmegen would use only one lift . The 82nd Airborne Division at Grave required two lifts while the 1st Airborne Division at Arnhem would need three lifts . Whereas the two American divisions delivered at least three quarters of their infantry in their first lift , the 1st Airborne 's similar drop used only half its capacity for infantry and the remainder to deliver vehicles and artillery . 
 The 1st Airborne Division had the required airlift capacity to deliver all three parachute brigades with their glider @-@ borne anti @-@ tank weapons or two of the parachute brigades and the airlanding brigade on day one . Instead however , the vast majority of the division 's vehicles and heavy equipment , plus the 1st Parachute Brigade , most of the 1st Airlanding Brigade and divisional troops were to be on the first lift , with the rest to follow the next day . Following the first lift , the airlanding brigade would remain at the landing grounds to defend them for the following day 's lifts , while the parachute brigade set out alone to capture the bridges and ferry crossing on the River Rhine . 
 Planes carrying the brigade left England at around 09 : 45 and arrived over DZ ' X ' at 13 : 00 . After an uneventful landing the brigade , once organised , set off for Arnhem . The 2nd Parachute Battalion followed a southern route along the river Rhine , to the north 3rd Parachute Battalion took the <unk> @-@ Arnhem road through Oosterbeek , while the 1st Parachute Battalion initially remained in reserve at brigade headquarters . The 2nd Battalion , with ' A ' Company leading , came under sporadic fire from pockets of German troops . ' C ' Company were directed to capture the Arnhem railway bridge , but it was blown up just as they arrived . Pushing ahead , ' A ' Company came under fire from German armoured cars and discovered that the central span of the pontoon bridge was missing . Entering Arnhem as night fell , the leading battalion elements reached the main road bridge at 21 : 00 . Having secured the northern end of the bridge , attempts to capture the southern end were repulsed and the battalion started to fortify the houses and dig in . Following behind , other units of the brigade started to arrive , including a troop of guns from 1st ( Airlanding ) Anti @-@ Tank Battery , brigade headquarters without the brigadier , part of the 1st Airborne Reconnaissance Squadron , and detachments of Royal Engineers and Royal Army Service Corps men . In total about 500 men were now at the bridge . 
 A lucky break allowed 3rd Battalion to ambush the staff car carrying Generalmajor Friedrich Kussin , the German commandant of Arnhem , and kill him and his driver . Nevertheless , most of the battalion had been stopped by the Germans in Oosterbeek while ' C ' Company had entered Arnhem but were halted on the road leading to the bridge . At 15 : 30 the 1st Parachute Battalion were released from the reserve and directed along the Ede @-@ Arnhem road . Here they first encountered German armoured vehicles and a column of five tanks and fifteen half @-@ tracks , which were engaged by the battalion . They continued fighting their way forward , and by morning had reached the outskirts of Arnhem . By this time around a quarter of the battalion had been killed , wounded or were missing . Before this , at nightfall , Brigadier Lathbury had contacted Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Frost in command at the bridge and informed him the brigade would stay put during the night and attempt to reach him in the morning . 
 At dawn on the second day , the defenders on the bridge saw a small convoy of trucks approaching at some speed from the south , which at first they misidentified as the British XXX Corps . That they were enemy trucks did not become apparent until they were on the bridge whereupon the defenders opened fire and destroyed the convoy . Soon afterwards , German infantry and armour approached the bridge from the east . One tank reached the space under the bridge before it was destroyed by one of the 6 pounder anti @-@ tank guns . At 09 : 00 , thirty armoured cars , half @-@ tracks and trucks from the 9th SS Panzer Division attempted to rush the bridge from the south . The first five armoured cars , using the wrecks of the dawn convoy as cover and with the element of surprise , managed to cross unscathed . The rest of the force was engaged and twelve of their vehicles destroyed with the survivors returning to the southern bank . All day long , the force at the bridge came under fire from mortars and anti @-@ aircraft guns positioned south of the river and were subject to probing infantry and armour attacks . 
 On the outskirts of Arnhem , 1st Battalion , which had been joined by Headquarters Company , 3rd Battalion , unsuccessfully attempted to fight through to the bridge then moved south in an attempt to flank the German line . They eventually ended up beside the river , whereafter 3rd Battalion advanced 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) along the bank until daylight revealed their position to the Germans . Divisional commander Major @-@ General Roy Urquhart and Brigadier Lathbury accompanied 3rd Battalion until Lathbury was shot and wounded . Due to his injuries , they were unable to move him and he was left in the care of a Dutch family . The 1st and 3rd Battalions spent all day trying to force a way through to the bridge . By nightfall they had failed and the strength of both battalions was reduced to around 100 men . 
 Another attempt to reach the bridge began at 03 : 45 on the third day , 19 September when the 1st and 3rd Battalions were joined by the 11th Parachute Battalion and the 2nd Battalion , South Staffordshire Regiment . By dawn , under intense fire from the German defenders , the attack had faltered whereupon the 11th Parachute Battalion , until then held in reserve , was ordered to carry out a left flanking assault on the German line . This last attempt to reach the defenders at the bridge was subsequently stopped on the orders of General Urquhart when he realised the futility of the battle . By this time the 1st Parachute Battalion had been reduced to forty men and the 3rd Parachute Battalion to around the same number . 
 With no word from the division or brigade Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Frost assumed command of the brigade units at the bridge . With their casualties mounting and supplies of food and ammunition running low , a request for the force to surrender was rejected by Frost , who decided they would fight on . 
 By day four , 20 September , the brigade still holding out at the bridge had been split into two groups during the night by the Germans who had managed to infiltrate close enough to separate them into positions east and west of the bridge road . Any movement was subjected to machine @-@ gun and sniper fire and they were under almost constant mortar and artillery attack . Added to this were probes by tanks and self propelled guns , which approached the defenders ' buildings and opened fire at point blank range . The brigade , out of anti @-@ tank ammunition , could do nothing to stop them in the east , but the 6 pounders in the west still proved an effective deterrent . During the day , Lieutenant John Grayburn of the 2nd Battalion was killed and later posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross for his bravery during the fighting at the bridge . That morning , communications with 1st Airborne Division were established and Frost , on asking for reinforcements and supplies , was informed that the division was surrounded at Oosterbeek and the brigade was on their own . Frost was later wounded and command of the brigade assumed by Major Frederick Gough of the reconnaissance squadron . By midday the brigade position was untenable and the last defenders were withdrawn into what had been the Headquarters Company , 2nd Battalion 's position . By nightfall they were still holding out , and in the darkness some men tried unsuccessfully to break out . At dawn on day five , what was left of the brigade was forced to surrender . 
 = = = Post war = = = 
 By early May 1945 , the 1st Parachute Brigade had been brought up to strength , albeit mainly with inexperienced replacements and the survivors of the 4th Parachute Brigade , which had been disbanded . On 4 May , the brigade was detached from 1st Airborne Division and 1st Parachute Battalion transported to Denmark for occupation duties while the rest of the brigade remained in Britain as a reserve formation . Without the brigade , the 1st Airborne Division deployed to Norway , but on their return were disbanded on 15 November 1945 . The remaining airborne division , the 6th , went to serve in Palestine . On 8 April 1946 , the brigade , now under command of Brigadier Hugh Bellamy , arrived in Palestine where it deployed in an internal security role . They replaced the 6th Airlanding Brigade , which was reformed as a normal infantry formation . Disbandment of the last brigade was overseen by its final commander Brigadier James Hill . Except for the three battalions of the 2nd Parachute Brigade in England , the remainder of the British airborne forces were disbanded . Between March and May 1948 , the 6th Airborne Division was dismantled , with the men leaving for England to be demobbed . The 1st Parachute Battalion , along with divisional headquarters , were the last airborne units to leave Palestine , three days after the British mandate ended on 18 May . 
 After the brigade had been disbanded in June 1948 , its battalions were reformed , by renumbering those in the 2nd Parachute Brigade . The 5th ( Scottish ) Parachute Battalion became the 2nd Parachute Battalion , the 4th / 6th Parachute Battalion the 1st Parachute Battalion , and the 7th ( Light Infantry ) Parachute Battalion the 3rd Parachute Battalion . Finally , in July 1948 , the 2nd Parachute Brigade was renumbered the 16th Parachute Brigade Group , taking its one and six numbers from the two wartime divisions . 
 = Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' = 
 " Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " ( or " The Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " ) is a song first recorded by American jazz and rhythm and blues musician Tiny Bradshaw in 1951 . Originally performed in the style of a jump blues , Bradshaw borrowed lyrics from an earlier song and set them to an upbeat shuffle arrangement that inspired other musicians to perform and record it . Johnny Burnette and the Rock and Roll Trio made an important contribution in 1956 – they reworked it as a guitar riff @-@ driven song , which features an early use of intentionally distorted guitar in rock music . 
 In 1965 , the Yardbirds popularized the song as an early psychedelic blues rock song , due largely to Jeff Beck 's fuzz @-@ toned guitar work . Theirs soon became the most copied arrangement with recordings by a variety of musicians . After guitarist Jimmy Page joined the group , the Yardbirds recorded an updated version with new lyrics as " Stroll On " for the film Blowup in 1966 . With a highly charged rhythm section and a dual lead guitar attack by Beck and Page , it is seen as a forerunner to heavy metal . 
 When the Yardbirds broke up in 1968 , " Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " was adopted as a concert opener by Page 's new band , Led Zeppelin , during its early ( and again later ) touring years . The song also became an important part of Aerosmith 's early live repertoire and in 1974 , they recorded it for their second album . Their version is actually a two @-@ part song – the first has a slower , groove @-@ oriented arrangement , while the second uses that of the Yardbirds . Aerosmith turned it into a hard rock standard and a staple of classic rock radio ; it remains one of their most popular tunes . " Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " has been performed and recorded by numerous other artists . 
 = = Original song = = 
 Tiny Bradshaw and his band first recorded " The Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " in 1951 . They performed the song as a mid @-@ tempo jump blues , which uses a boogie @-@ woogie bass line and a shuffle rhythm . The introductory section features scat singing by Bradshaw answered by a chorus . The verses are delivered in a lively vocal style , followed by an instrumental break with a raucous , honking @-@ style tenor saxophone solo by Red <unk> and backed by drummer Philip Paul 's a heavy backbeat . Bradshaw 's lyrics use early jazz hipster references : 
 The lyrics are based on " Cow @-@ Cow Boogie " , a 1942 song about a singing cowboy . Bradshaw rewrote lines , such as " a ditty he learned in the city " and " get along , get hip little <unk> , and he trucked ' em on down the old fairway " , to meet his new scenario . Although the King Records single lists " Bradshaw @-@ Mann " as the songwriters , reissues and subsequent recordings of " The Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " credit Tiny Bradshaw , Lois Mann ( a pseudonym of King Records ' owner Syd Nathan ) , and Howard Kay . BMI , the performing rights organization , lists the songwriters / composers as " Myron C. Bradshaw , Sydney Nathan , and Howard Kay " . According to music historian Larry Birnbaum , " Mann 's name was plainly added to allow Syd Nathan to siphon off a share of the publishing royalties , as label owners routinely did in those days ; as for Kay , his identity remains a mystery " . 
 The recording session took place on October 6 , 1951 , in Cincinnati , Ohio . Besides Brashaw , <unk> , and Paul , the other participants were : Leslie Ayers and Lester Bass on trumpets ; Andrew Penn on trombone ; Ted " <unk> " Holbert on alto and baritone sax ; Rufus Gore on tenor saxes ; Jimmy Robinson on piano ; and Clarence Mack on bass . King Records issued the song on both ten @-@ inch 78 rpm and seven @-@ inch 45 rpm records in late 1951 . Billboard magazine reviewed the release and commented using jump parlance : " The singer comes thru [ sic ] with a great vocal on a rockin ' novelty , with some solid chorus and ork [ orchestra a.k.a. swing band ] backing . Tune builds all the way . Platter could catch a lot of change . " However , it did not appear on the charts of the nation 's most popular R & B songs , such as those compiled by Billboard . Although Bradshaw had five other records that reached the R & B top ten , " The Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " remains his best @-@ known recording and continues to be popular with Shag dancers ( a type of swing dance ) on the U.S. Eastern Seaboard . 
 = = Johnny Burnette rendition = = 
 In 1956 , Johnny Burnette and the Rock and Roll Trio reworked Bradshaw 's song using a rockabilly / early rock and roll arrangement . The Trio 's version features guitar lines in what many historians consider to be the first recorded example of intentionally distorted guitar in rock music , although blues guitarists , such as Willie Johnson and Pat Hare , had recorded with the same effect years earlier . 
 The Trio 's guitarist , Paul Burlison , explained that he noticed the sound after accidentally dropping his amplifier , which dislodged a power tube and later , " whenever I wanted to get that sound , I 'd just reach back and loosen that tube " . He utilized this effect with the song 's main instrumental feature , a three @-@ note minor key guitar line repeated throughout . Burlison recounted how he came up with the signature guitar riff : 
 [ I was ] in the dressing room with the loose tube . Johnny [ Burnett ] was playing an E chord and I was playing in a G position but I 'd take my fingers off and play in octaves [ using the thumb and middle or index finger ] . He wasn 't singing ' The Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' ' , it was another song , and I got to doing doom diddle doom <unk> doom <unk> ... [ Later ] I told Owen Bradley about it at the Barn , where we cut the stuff , and he said , ' let me hear it ' . So I started doing it and he said , ' Well , let 's do it ' . 
 The day after recording " The Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' , the trio recorded a version of Big Joe Turner 's " Honey Hush " , which features a more extensive use of the riff . Coral Records released both songs on a single in September 1956 . 
 Later , authors Vince Gordon and Peter <unk> argue that the guitar sound on " The Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " could be created with distortion commonly achievable with a highly @-@ overdriven early 1950s guitar amplifier . They point out that in the recording , the higher treble strings sound relatively clean , with the low E string having the most distortion ; with a tube malfunction , all strings would be distorted more or less to an equal degree . The authors add that this difference in sound could be achieved with the pole piece for the low E string raised higher than the rest , thereby allowing it to overload the amplifier more than the treble strings . They also argue that Nashville session guitarist Grady Martin provided the guitar parts for the Trio 's recording ; they base this on stylistic and technical qualities , since , at the time , Martin was a more accomplished player than Burlison , and these qualities are apparent in his work on other recordings . 
 = = The Yardbirds versions = = 
 English rock group the Yardbirds recorded " The Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " during their first American tour in 1965 . It is based on Johnny Burnette 's adaptation , but Beck biographer Annette Carson comments their " propulsive , power @-@ driven version , however , deviated radically from the original ... [ their ] recording plucked the old Rock & Roll Trio number from obscurity and turned it into a classic among classics " . The Yardbirds ' lead guitarist Jeff Beck , who is a fan of early rockabilly , said that he introduced the song to the group : " They just heard me play the riff , and they loved it and made up their version of it " . Giorgio Gomelsky , the group ' first producer , states that Sonny Boy Williamson II 's use of blues harp to imitate train sounds during his 1963 UK tour with the Yardbirds also inspired the band 's adaptation of the song . 
 The song opens with Beck using volume swells on an overdriven guitar to simulate a train whistle and the band launches into the song with rhythm guitarist Chris Dreja , bassist Paul Samwell @-@ Smith , and Beck following the riff from the Rock and Roll Trio 's song . Two combined takes of Keith Relf 's vocal , with some differences in the lyrics , come in after twelve bars . Following the vocal section , the rhythm changes to a shuffle and a 12 @-@ bar harmonica and guitar bridge sets the stage for Beck 's first solo . After returning to the original rhythm for another double @-@ tracked vocal section , a brief " rave up " -style section precedes Beck 's second solo . A rave up is used to describe a middle instrumental section of a song , when the beat shifts into double @-@ time and the instrumental improvisation gradually builds to a climax . It was part of the Yardbirds ' signature sound and " represent [ s ] some of the earliest psychedelic blues @-@ rock , <unk> Jimi Hendrix and Cream " , according to Birnbaum . Beck 's second guitar solo , which extends for two 12 @-@ bar sections , features an early use of a fuzz @-@ tone distortion effects pedal . Birnbaum describes his work as " incendiary " and " riveting , relatively complex solos " . The Yardbirds ' rendition became the new standard that subsequent musicians would follow . 
 The song was recorded by Sam Phillips at his Phillips Recording studio in Memphis , Tennessee , on September 12 , 1965 , with further recording by Roy Halee at Columbia Recording Studio in New York City on September 21 and 22 , 1965 . " The Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " was included on studio side of the Yardbirds ' second American album Having a Rave Up , which was issued on November 15 , 1965 . The song , along with another American studio recording , " I 'm a Man " , was not released in the UK until the mid @-@ 1970s , well after the group had disbanded . The song was a staple of the band 's concerts and they recorded several live versions with Beck , which appear on albums such as BBC Sessions and Glimpses 1963 – 1968 . 
 In June 1966 , bassist Samwell @-@ Smith left the Yardbirds to become a record producer . His initial replacement , well @-@ known studio guitarist Jimmy Page , soon switched to guitar with second guitarist Dreja taking over on bass . With both Beck and Page on board , the Yardbirds had one of the first dual lead guitar teams in popular rock . Movie director Michelangelo Antonioni saw the group 's September 23 , 1966 , performance at the Royal Albert Hall in London and , being impressed with their version of the song , requested that they perform " Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " for his upcoming film , Blowup . Less than two weeks later , the group entered the Sound Techniques studios in London , where they recorded on October 3 – 5 , 1966 . Unable to secure the movie performance rights from the song 's publisher , singer Keith Relf wrote new lyrics , renamed it " Stroll On " , and included credits to the five band members . The Yardbirds also introduced an updated arrangement to go with the new lyrics . Led Zeppelin biographer Keith Shadwick describes the new version as " brutal , menacing , and teetering on all @-@ out violence " , which foreshadows heavy @-@ metal . It opens with a new drum part by Jim McCarty and harmonized guitar feedback , before Beck 's train whistle simulation . Unlike their earlier song , Relf 's vocal is not double tracked nor does he play harmonica and the rhythm remains on the riff throughout the song . The guitar work , with both Beck and Page contributing lead @-@ guitar parts , has been called " revolutionary " , from the opening " wall of feedback " , the use of " jarringly dissonant chords " , and the " twining guitar duet " by Birnbaum . During October 12 – 14 , the Yardbirds were filmed lip syncing the song for Blowup . Their scene was staged on a set at Elstree Studios designed to resemble the Ricky @-@ Tick , a popular London club and , at Antonioni 's direction , Beck smashes his guitar , in the manner of the Who 's Pete Townshend . The song as performed in the film is edited ( doubled ) to increase its length for the story line . " Stroll On " was later included on the Blow @-@ Up soundtrack album in 1967 and appears on the Yardbirds compilation albums Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' / The Yardbirds Story and Ultimate ! . 
 After Jeff Beck 's departure in late 1966 , the Yardbirds continued to regularly perform the " The Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " . The original lyrics were used , but the " Stroll On " arrangement was followed with Jimmy Page playing all the guitar parts . Live performances with Page were later released on Live Yardbirds : Featuring Jimmy Page , Glimpses 1963 – 1968 , and Last Rave @-@ Up in L.A. 
 = = Led Zeppelin performances = = 
 Shortly after Keith Relf and Jim McCarty left the Yardbirds in mid @-@ 1968 , Jimmy Page searched for new musicians for a successor band . When the future members of Led Zeppelin rehearsed together for the first time in 1968 , the first song they played was " Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " . In When Giants Walked the Earth , biographer Mick Wall quotes Page : 
 [ W ] e did ' Train ' ... It was there immediately . It was so powerful that I don 't remember what we played after that . For me it was just like , ' Crikey ! ' I mean , I 'd had moments of elation with groups before , but nothing as intense as that . It was like a thunderbolt , a lightning flash – <unk> ! Everyone sort of went ' Wow ' . 
 The song was included in their early performances as " the New Yardbirds " and was featured as their opening number in Led Zeppelin 's 1968 and 1969 tours , and was included on several bootleg albums . In an interview , early MTV video host J.J. Jackson , who pointed out that he does not characterize Led Zeppelin 's music as heavy metal , described a bootleg recording from their first American tour , " if this were the only recording somebody ever heard of them , it doesn 't get much more ' heavy metal ' sounding than this , does it ? " They later revived it for their final tour " Over Europe " in 1980 . Though a studio version was never recorded by Led Zeppelin , as a solo artist Page recorded , during his <unk> sessions in 1988 , a version similar to the Led Zeppelin 1980 version . 
 = = Aerosmith version = = 
 In 1974 , Aerosmith brought " Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " into the hard @-@ rock mainstream . Steven Tyler , Joe Perry , and Tom Hamilton had performed the song prior to joining Aerosmith . Perry recalled , " ' Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' ' was the only song we had in common when we first got together . Steven 's band had played ' Train ' and Tom and I played it in our band ... It 's a blues song , if you follow its roots all the way back ... I always thought if I could just play one song , it would be that one because of what it does to me " . Perry 's band began performing the song regularly after he had been moved by the performance of " Stroll On " in Blowup ; Tyler recalled his band opened for the Yardbirds in 1966 : 
 I had seen the Yardbirds play somewhere the previous summer with both Jeff Beck and Jimmy Page in the band ... In Westport [ at their supporting gig on October 22 , 1966 ] we found out that Jeff had left the band and Jimmy was playing lead guitar by himself . I watched him from the edge of the stage and all I can say is that he knocked my tits off . They did ' Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' ' and it was just so heavy . They were just an un @-@ fuckin ' <unk> band . 
 The song was an early feature of Aerosmith 's concerts and a frequent show closer , including for their first gig in 1970 . They wanted to record a live version of the song , but producer Jack Douglas persuaded them to record a studio version , which actually consisted of two different versions of the song . The first part was slower , " more groove @-@ oriented " , while the second was a spirited rocker . To give the second part more of a live sound , Douglas overdubbed crowd noise from The Concert for Bangladesh , the 1971 benefit organized by George Harrison . Steve Hunter and Dick Wagner , who worked with Lou Reed and Alice Cooper , were brought in to record the guitar parts . According to Hunter , " We [ Wagner and I ] wanted to keep the solos equal so we 'd sit down ... and go through the material so it was totally even ... We didn 't want it to look like there was a rhythm guitar player and a lead guitar player , because that 's what we both did " . Hunter later elaborated : 
 Aerosmith was in Studio C of The Record Plant and I was doing work with Bob Ezrin in Studio A. I had a long wait between dubs and was waiting in the lobby . Jack Douglas popped his head out of Studio C and asked ' Hey , do you feel like playing ? ' I said sure , so I grabbed my guitar and went in ... I had two run thru ’ s [ sic ] , then Jack said ' great that 's it ! ' That turned out to be the opening solos on ' Train Kept A Rollin ' " . 
 In 1974 , " Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " was included on Aerosmith 's second album Get Your Wings . A 3 : 15 edited version of the song without the added audience noises was released as a single , but it did not appear on the record charts . The song continues to be a highlight of the group 's shows and the album version has become a staple of album @-@ oriented rock and classic rock radio . It has become so identified with Aerosmith , that when Jeff Beck ( whose 1965 and 1966 recordings with the Yardbirds inspired Tyler and Perry ) occasionally performs it , he often hears comments like " Hey , I like your angle on the Aerosmith tune " . 
 The song is featured on three Aerosmith live compilations : Live ! Bootleg ( 1978 ) , Classics Live ( 1986 ) , and Rockin ' the Joint ( 2005 ) . On the Rockin ' the Joint version , Perry and Brad Whitford can be heard doing a little bit of " The Star Spangled Banner " towards the end . Additionally , the band is known to play two different versions of the song , the regular version of the song , as well as a slowed @-@ down version often called " Slow Train " in the setlists . On at least two occasions , Tyler and Perry have performed the song with other artists ; in 1992 with Guns N ' Roses and in 1995 with Page and Plant . In 2002 , the whole band performed the song live with the Japanese hard rock duo B 'z . It also appears in the music video game Rock Band , and the master track appears in Guitar Hero : Aerosmith as the final encore in the game . In 2012 , Aerosmith performed the song with Johnny Depp , which is included as an extra track on the Music from Another Dimension ! DVD . 
 = = Recognition and legacy = = 
 The Johnny Burnette Rock and Roll Trio rendition of " Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " is included in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's exhibit of the " 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll " . Birnbaum notes the song 's lasting appeal and discusses renditions by Jeff Beck , Dread Zeppelin , <unk> Falco 's Panther Burns , Foghat , Guana Batz , Haymarket Square , Colin James and the Little Big Band , Riot , Métal Urbain , Motörhead , Nazz , Shakin ' Stevens and the Sunsets , Skid Row , Screaming Lord Sutch , Sugarloaf , The Tragically Hip , Twisted Sister , and the Up . He sums up the various influences and versions : 
 As it evolved from ragtime through jazz , boogie @-@ woogie , big @-@ band swing , small combo rhythm @-@ and @-@ blues , rockabilly , blues @-@ rock , acid rock , heavy metal , punk , thrash , psychobilly , and points beyond , ' Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' ' became increasingly wild and dissonant , as if each performer were trying to surpass the intensity of the previous one . Through all the transformations , the essence of Bradshaw 's original survives — a semblance of the melody , a smattering of the lyrics , and the immortal refrain ' The train kept a <unk> ' all night long ' , a cogent sexual metaphor for power and endurance . 
 = Yellow Submarine ( album ) = 
 Yellow Submarine is the tenth studio album by the English rock band the Beatles , released on 13 January 1969 in the United States and on 17 January 1969 in the United Kingdom . It was issued as the soundtrack to the animated film of the same name , which premiered in London in July 1968 . The album contains six songs by the Beatles , of which " Yellow Submarine " and " All You Need Is Love " had both been previously released . The remainder of the album was a re @-@ recording of the film 's orchestral soundtrack by the band 's producer , George Martin . 
 The project was regarded as a contractual obligation by the Beatles , who were asked to supply four new songs for the film . Some songs were written and recorded specifically for the soundtrack , while others were unreleased tracks from other projects . The album was issued two months after the band 's self @-@ titled double LP ( also known as the " White Album " ) and was therefore not viewed by the band as a significant release . Yellow Submarine has since been afforded a mixed reception from music critics , some of whom consider that it falls short of the high standard generally associated with the Beatles ' work . It reached the top 5 in the UK and the US , and has been reissued on compact disc several times . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 The album arose from contractual obligations for the Beatles to supply new songs to the soundtrack to United Artists ' animated film Yellow Submarine . Having recently completed their album Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band in April 1967 , the group showed minimal enthusiasm for the project . Along with the music for their Magical Mystery Tour TV film , the Yellow Submarine soundtrack was part of a period that author Ian MacDonald later described as the band 's " regime of continuous low @-@ intensity recording ... it had a workaday quality about it – an intrinsic lack of tension which was bound to colour the resulting material . " 
 = = = Soundtrack songs = = = 
 Only one side of the album contains songs performed by the Beatles ; of the six , four were previously unreleased . " Yellow Submarine " had been issued in August 1966 as a single , topping the UK chart for four weeks , and had also been released on the album Revolver . Following the Beatles ' performance of the song on the Our World international television broadcast , " All You Need Is Love " had also been issued as a single , in July 1967 . 
 Of the unreleased tracks , the first to be recorded was George Harrison 's " Only a Northern Song " , taped in February 1967 but rejected for inclusion on Sgt. Pepper . The group performed overdubs on this basic track in April , immediately after completing the stereo mixes for that album . Among the sounds added during what Beatles historian Mark Lewisohn describes as " a curious session " , were trumpet , glockenspiel and spoken voices . Harrison 's lyrics reflect his displeasure at being merely a contracted songwriter to the Beatles ' publishing company , Northern Songs . 
 " All Together Now " was recorded in a single session on 12 May 1967 , specifically for the film project . The title came from a phrase Paul McCartney had heard as a child , to encourage everyone to sing music hall songs . He later described the song as " a throwaway " . 
 The band recorded Harrison 's " It 's All Too Much " in late May 1967 at De Lane Lea Studios in central London . Inspired by its author 's experimentation with the drug LSD , and originally running to over eight minutes in length , the song reflects the Summer of Love philosophy of 1967 and makes extensive use of guitar feedback . As with the later recorded " All You Need Is Love " , the track includes musical and lyrical quotations from other works – in this case , a trumpet passage from Jeremiah Clarke 's " Prince of Denmark 's March " and a lyric from the <unk> ' 1966 hit " Sorrow " . 
 John Lennon 's " Hey Bulldog " was recorded on 11 February 1968 and evolved from an initial intent to shoot a promotional film for the single " Lady Madonna " . Like " All Together Now " , it was specifically recorded with the film soundtrack in mind . The track 's ending featured a jam session after the point where a fade @-@ out was intended in the final mix , which was kept in the finished version . Lennon later described the song as " a good @-@ sounding record that means nothing " . 
 = = = George Martin orchestrations = = = 
 Side two features a re @-@ recording of the symphonic film score composed by the Beatles ' producer , George Martin , specifically for the album . The recording took place with a 41 @-@ piece orchestra over two three @-@ hour sessions on 22 and 23 October 1968 in Abbey Road , and edited down to the length on the LP on 22 November . 
 In some of his arrangements , Martin referenced his past work with the Beatles ; for example , " Sea of Time " includes what MacDonald terms " an affectionate quotation " from the Indian @-@ styled " Within You Without You " , from Sgt. Pepper , and " Yellow Submarine in Pepperland " reprises the film 's title track . In " Sea of Monsters " , Martin adapted part of Bach 's Air on the G String , while in other selections he parodies works by Stravinsky . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film received its worldwide premiere in London in July 1968 , by which time the Beatles were busy working on their eponymous double album , The Beatles , commonly called " the White Album " . Ultimately , the Beatles were enthusiastic about the finished film , and did more to associate themselves with it after release . Having been delayed so that it would not clash with the release of The Beatles , and to allow for the re @-@ recording of Martin 's contributions , Yellow Submarine was issued by Apple Records on 13 January 1969 in the US and on 17 January in the UK . The album was issued in stereo only in the US , while the UK album was available in both stereo and mono , although the mono version is simply a fold @-@ down ( a combination of two stereo channels into one mono ) rather than a specific mix . Since " All You Need Is Love " had been rush @-@ released a single , it did not have an official stereo mix . Although the track was released on the US LP Magical Mystery Tour , an official stereo mix of the track was not made until 29 October 1968 for the album . In the US , 8 @-@ track tape versions featured " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " as an extra song on side two . 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 The artwork on the sleeve contains a drawing of the Beatles as featured on trailer posters , created by Heinz Edelman . The same basic design was used for the UK and US covers , though the UK jacket contains the words " Nothing is Real " ( taken from " Strawberry Fields Forever " ) just below the album 's title , while the US version did not . 
 On the back of the cover , the UK album contained a review of the White Album written for The Observer by Tony Palmer . The review was introduced by a few liner notes by Apple press officer Derek Taylor . The US cover contained a fictitious illustrated biography by Dan Davis of the Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , in which the ensemble 's battle with the Blue Meanies was compared to three other epic struggles in the history of the English @-@ speaking world : Beowulf 's struggle to save the Heorot mead hall , King John 's signing of the Magna Carta and Thomas Jefferson 's writing of the Declaration of Independence . 
 = = = Unreleased EP = = = 
 An EP containing the new songs had been considered for release in September 1968 , but any plan to issue the soundtrack music from Yellow Submarine was then postponed to allow for the White Album 's unveiling . Following the delayed release of the soundtrack album , however , Lewisohn writes that the Beatles were " mildly criticised " for having ceded a full LP side to Martin 's music and thereby failing to provide their customary " excellent value @-@ for @-@ money " . As a result , the band considered issuing Yellow Submarine as a five @-@ track mono EP , without the film score but including the then @-@ unreleased " Across the Universe " as a bonus track . This EP was mastered in March 1969 but never issued . The original running order for the EP was " Only a Northern Song " , " Hey Bulldog " and " Across the Universe " on side one , with " All Together Now " and " It 's All Too Much " on side two . 
 Lennon later dismissed Martin 's contributions as " all this terrible shit " and blamed Brian Epstein , the Beatles ' manager , for allowing Martin to participate in the project . According to author and music journalist Peter Doggett , neither the proposed EP format nor an expanded soundtrack album ( containing other previously issued Beatles songs that appear in the 1968 film ) was possible at the time , since " both options would have denied George Martin his contractual right to appear alongside The Beatles – and robbed him of potentially the largest royalty payment of his career . " 
 = = = Reissues = = = 
 The first compact disc release appeared in August 1987 . It is consistent with the English version of the LP . The running order is the same , with " Sea of Time " and " Sea of Holes " as separate tracks ; the " Nothing Is Real " subtitle remains intact , and the review of the White Album with Taylor 's introduction is included inside the CD insert . 
 The album appeared in a revised version on 13 September 1999 , coinciding with the remastered re @-@ release of the film . Titled Yellow Submarine Songtrack , it dispenses with the George Martin orchestrations , and includes the six Beatles songs from the original album , along with an additional nine songs , all completely remixed for this disc . 
 The original album was remastered and reissued , along with the rest of the Beatles ' catalogue , on 9 September 2009 . This release included both the UK and US sleeve notes . The mono mixes of the four songs that were intended for the unreleased EP ( along with " Across the Universe " ) were released for the first time on the Mono Masters collection as part of the box set The Beatles in Mono . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In contrast to the animated film , Yellow Submarine was not generally considered to be a significant release . Issued two months after The Beatles , it was one of the few Beatles releases that failed to top the charts in either the United Kingdom or the United States , peaking instead at number 3 and number 2 , respectively . In Canada , Yellow Submarine topped the RPM national albums chart for two weeks , ending the White Album 's 12 @-@ week run at number 1 . On America 's Billboard Top LPs chart , it was kept from the top by the same album . 
 Recalling the release in a special @-@ edition issue of Mojo magazine , Peter Doggett writes that " The papers got all trippy for Yellow Submarine " . Beat Instrumental bemoaned the paucity of new material by the band , but added : " be not of bad cheer . The George Martin score to the film is really very nice , and two tracks by George Harrison redeem the first side . Both [ songs ] are superb pieces , considerably more enthralling than the most draggy All Together Now , a rather wet track . " In a review for International Times , Barry Miles considered Martin 's score " superbly produced " and , of the songs , wrote only of " It 's All Too Much " , which he described as , variously , " Endless , mantric , a round , interwoven , trellised , tessellated , filigreed , <unk> , spiralling " and " Happy singalong music " . Writing in their book The Beatles : An Illustrated Record ( 1975 ) , NME critics Roy Carr and Tony Tyler bemoaned the commercial considerations that resulted in a full soundtrack album , saying that the four new songs " would have made a superb EP " . 
 More recently , AllMusic critic Richie Unterberger has written of Yellow Submarine : " The album would have been far better value if it had been released as a four @-@ song EP ... with the addition of a bonus track in " Across the Universe " ... No one would argue that there 's a huge amount more than meets the eye ( or ear ) there , but listening to the original album anew 40 years on , one is still struck by how mostly second @-@ rate , and recycled and rejected Beatles material still sounds so good . " Writing for Pitchfork Media , Mark Richardson opines that " the Yellow Submarine soundtrack is like the work of a supremely talented band that couldn 't really be bothered " and describes " Hey Bulldog " as " a tough and funky piano @-@ driven rocker , [ and ] by a good margin the best song here " . Richardson concludes : " But as an album it 's ultimately forgettable , which is something the Beatles so rarely were otherwise . " 
 PopMatters ' David Gassman views Martin 's selections as " kind of twee and inconsequential " and the four new songs on side one as " fascinating " , adding that " The material 's tossed @-@ off origins give it a character unlike any other Beatles album . " While noting that the soundtrack was superseded with the 1999 release of Yellow Submarine Songtrack , Gassman writes : " No matter how you get them , though , the otherwise unavailable songs on this album ought to be part of any thinking Beatles fan 's collection . " Alex Young of Consequence of Sound writes : " as a whole , Yellow Submarine is a delightful album , even if it 's still a less @-@ than @-@ acceptable inclusion in the Beatles canon " , though he criticised the inclusion of Martin 's score , which he felt should have been sold as a separate release . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Lennon @-@ McCartney , except " Only a Northern Song " and " It 's All Too Much " , by George Harrison . 
 All songs written and composed by George Martin , except " Yellow Submarine in Pepperland " , by Lennon @-@ McCartney . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The Beatles ( side one ) 
 John Lennon – lead and backing vocals , rhythm and lead guitars , piano , ukulele , banjo , harpsichord , handclaps 
 Paul McCartney – lead and backing vocals , bass and acoustic guitars , double bass , trumpet , handclaps , percussion 
 George Harrison – lead and backing vocals , lead and acoustic guitars , Hammond organ , percussion and handclaps , violin 
 Ringo Starr – drums , percussion and handclaps , backing vocals , lead vocals ( on track 1 ) 
 = = Certifications = = 
 BPI certification awarded only for sales since 1994 . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Srinivasa Ramanujan = 
 Srinivasa Ramanujan FRS ( pronunciation : / <unk> <unk> / ) ( 22 December 1887 – 26 April 1920 ) was an Indian mathematician and autodidact . Though he had almost no formal training in pure mathematics , he made extraordinary contributions to mathematical analysis , number theory , infinite series , and continued fractions . Ramanujan initially developed his own mathematical research in isolation ; it was quickly recognized by Indian mathematicians . When his skills became obvious and known to the wider mathematical community , centered in Europe at the time , he began a famous partnership with the English mathematician G. H. Hardy . The Cambridge professor realized that Ramanujan had rediscovered previously known theorems in addition to producing new ones . 
 During his short life , Ramanujan independently compiled nearly 3 @,@ 900 results ( mostly identities and equations ) . Nearly all his claims have now been proven correct , although some were already known . His original and highly unconventional results , such as the Ramanujan prime and the Ramanujan theta function , have inspired a vast amount of further research . The Ramanujan Journal , an international publication , was launched to publish work in all areas of mathematics influenced by his work . 
 Of notably deep religious conviction , Ramanujan credited his substantial mathematical capacities to divinity : ' " An equation for me has no meaning , " he once said , " unless it expresses a thought of God . " ' 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ramanujan was born on 22 December 1887 into a Tamil Brahmin family in Erode , Madras Presidency ( now Tamil Nadu ) , at the residence of his maternal grandparents . His father , K. Srinivasa Iyengar , worked as a clerk in a sari shop and hailed from Thanjavur district . His mother , <unk> , was a housewife and also sang at a local temple . They lived in <unk> Street in a traditional home in the town of Kumbakonam . The family home is now a museum . When Ramanujan was a year and a half old , his mother gave birth to a son , <unk> , who died less than three months later . In December 1889 , Ramanujan contracted smallpox , but unlike the thousands in the Thanjavur district who died of the disease that year , he recovered . He moved with his mother to her parents ' house in Kanchipuram , near Madras ( now Chennai ) . In 1891 and 1894 , his mother gave birth to two more children , but both died in infancy . 
 On 1 October 1892 , Ramanujan was enrolled at the local school . After his maternal grandfather lost his job as a court official in Kanchipuram , Ramanujan and his mother moved back to Kumbakonam and he was enrolled in the <unk> Primary School . When his paternal grandfather died , he was sent back to his maternal grandparents , then living in Madras . He did not like school in Madras , and tried to avoid attending . His family enlisted a local constable to make sure the boy attended school . Within six months , Ramanujan was back in Kumbakonam . 
 Since Ramanujan 's father was at work most of the day , his mother took care of the boy as a child . He had a close relationship with her . From her , he learned about tradition and puranas . He learned to sing religious songs , to attend pujas at the temple , and to maintain particular eating habits – all of which are part of Brahmin culture . At the <unk> Primary School , Ramanujan performed well . Just before turning 10 , in November 1897 , he passed his primary examinations in English , Tamil , geography and arithmetic with the best scores in the district . That year , Ramanujan entered Town Higher Secondary School , where he encountered formal mathematics for the first time . 
 By age 11 , he had exhausted the mathematical knowledge of two college students who were lodgers at his home . He was later lent a book by S. L. Loney on advanced trigonometry . He mastered this by the age of 13 while discovering sophisticated theorems on his own . By 14 , he was receiving merit certificates and academic awards that continued throughout his school career , and he assisted the school in the logistics of assigning its 1200 students ( each with differing needs ) to its 35 @-@ odd teachers . He completed mathematical exams in half the allotted time , and showed a familiarity with geometry and infinite series . Ramanujan was shown how to solve cubic equations in 1902 ; he developed his own method to solve the quartic . The following year , not knowing that the quintic could not be solved by radicals , he tried to do so . 
 In 1903 , when he was 16 , Ramanujan obtained from a friend a library copy of a A Synopsis of Elementary Results in Pure and Applied Mathematics , G. S. Carr 's collection of 5 @,@ 000 theorems . Ramanujan reportedly studied the contents of the book in detail . The book is generally acknowledged as a key element in awakening his genius . The next year , Ramanujan independently developed and investigated the Bernoulli numbers and calculated the Euler – Mascheroni constant up to 15 decimal places . His peers at the time commented that they " rarely understood him " and " stood in respectful awe " of him . 
 When he graduated from Town Higher Secondary School in 1904 , Ramanujan was awarded the K. Ranganatha Rao prize for mathematics by the school 's headmaster , Krishnaswami Iyer . Iyer introduced Ramanujan as an outstanding student who deserved scores higher than the maximum . He received a scholarship to study at Government Arts College , Kumbakonam , but was so intent on mathematics that he could not focus on any other subjects and failed most of them , losing his scholarship in the process . In August 1905 , Ramanujan ran away from home , heading towards Visakhapatnam , and stayed in Rajahmundry for about a month . He later enrolled at Pachaiyappa 's College in Madras . There he again excelled in mathematics but performed poorly in other subjects , such as physiology . Ramanujan failed his Fellow of Arts exam in December 1906 and again a year later . Without a degree , he left college and continued to pursue independent research in mathematics , living in extreme poverty and often on the brink of starvation . 
 = = Adulthood in India = = 
 On 14 July 1909 , Ramanujan married a ten @-@ year @-@ old girl , Srimathi Janaki ( <unk> ) ( 21 March 1899 – 13 April 1994 ) . It was not unusual for marriages to be arranged with young girls . Some sources claim Janaki was nine years old when they married . She came from <unk> , a village close to Marudur ( Karur district ) Railway Station . Ramanujan 's father did not participate in the marriage ceremony . 
 After the marriage , Ramanujan developed a <unk> testis . The condition could be treated with a routine surgical operation that would release the blocked fluid in the scrotal sac , but his family did not have the money for the operation . In January 1910 , a doctor volunteered to do the surgery for free . 
 After his successful surgery , Ramanujan searched for a job . He stayed at friends ' houses while he went door to door around Madras looking for a clerical position . To make money , he tutored students at Presidency College who were preparing for their F.A. exam . 
 In late 1910 , Ramanujan was sick again . He feared for his health , and told his friend R. <unk> Iyer to " hand these [ Ramanujan 's mathematical notebooks ] over to Professor <unk> Mudaliar [ the mathematics professor at Pachaiyappa 's College ] or to the British professor Edward B. Ross , of the Madras Christian College . " After Ramanujan recovered and retrieved his notebooks from Iyer , he took a train from Kumbakonam to Villupuram , a coastal city under French control . 
 = = = Attention towards mathematics = = = 
 Ramanujan met deputy collector V. Ramaswamy Aiyer , who had recently founded the Indian Mathematical Society . Wishing for a job at the revenue department where Aiyer worked , Ramanujan showed him his mathematics notebooks . As Aiyer later recalled : 
 I was struck by the extraordinary mathematical results contained in it [ the notebooks ] . I had no mind to smother his genius by an appointment in the lowest rungs of the revenue department . 
 Aiyer sent Ramanujan , with letters of introduction , to his mathematician friends in Madras . Some of them looked at his work and gave him letters of introduction to R. Ramachandra Rao , the district collector for Nellore and the secretary of the Indian Mathematical Society . Rao was impressed by Ramanujan 's research but doubted that it was his own work . Ramanujan mentioned a correspondence he had with Professor <unk> , a notable Bombay mathematician , in which <unk> expressed a lack of understanding of his work but concluded that he was not a phony . Ramanujan 's friend C. V. Rajagopalachari tried to quell Rao 's doubts about Ramanujan 's academic integrity . Rao agreed to give him another chance , and listened as Ramanujan discussed elliptic integrals , hypergeometric series , and his theory of divergent series , which Rao said ultimately converted him to a belief in Ramanujan 's brilliance . When Rao asked him what he wanted , Ramanujan replied that he needed work and financial support . Rao consented and sent him to Madras . He continued his research , with Rao 's financial aid taking care of his daily needs . With Aiyer 's help , Ramanujan had his work published in the Journal of the Indian Mathematical Society . 
 One of the first problems he posed in the journal was : 
 <formula> 
 He waited for a solution to be offered in three issues , over six months , but failed to receive any . At the end , Ramanujan supplied the solution to the problem himself . On page 105 of his first notebook , he formulated an equation that could be used to solve the infinitely nested radicals problem . 
 <formula> 
 Using this equation , the answer to the question posed in the Journal was simply 3 , obtained by setting x 
 = 2 , n = 
 1 , and a = 0 . Ramanujan wrote his first formal paper for the Journal on the properties of Bernoulli numbers . One property he discovered was that the denominators ( sequence <unk> in the OEIS ) of the fractions of Bernoulli numbers were always divisible by six . He also devised a method of calculating Bn based on previous Bernoulli numbers . One of these methods follows : 
 It will be observed that if n is even but not equal to zero , 
 ( i ) Bn is a fraction and the numerator of <formula> in its lowest terms is a prime number , 
 ( ii ) the denominator of Bn contains each of the factors 2 and 3 once and only once , 
 ( iii ) <formula> is an integer and <formula> consequently is an odd integer . 
 In his 17 @-@ page paper , " Some Properties of Bernoulli 's Numbers " , Ramanujan gave three proofs , two corollaries and three conjectures . Ramanujan 's writing initially had many flaws . As Journal editor M. T. Narayana Iyengar noted : 
 Mr. Ramanujan 's methods were so terse and novel and his presentation so lacking in clearness and precision , that the ordinary [ mathematical reader ] , unaccustomed to such intellectual gymnastics , could hardly follow him . 
 Ramanujan later wrote another paper and also continued to provide problems in the Journal . In early 1912 , he got a temporary job in the Madras Accountant General 's office , with a salary of 20 rupees per month . He lasted only a few weeks . Toward the end of that assignment , he applied for a position under the Chief Accountant of the Madras Port Trust . 
 In a letter dated 9 February 1912 , Ramanujan wrote : 
 Sir , 
 I understand there is a clerkship vacant in your office , and I beg to apply for the same . I have passed the Matriculation Examination and studied up to the F.A. but was prevented from pursuing my studies further owing to several untoward circumstances . I have , however , been devoting all my time to Mathematics and developing the subject . I can say I am quite confident I can do justice to my work if I am appointed to the post . I therefore beg to request that you will be good enough to confer the appointment on me . 
 Attached to his application was a recommendation from E. W. <unk> , a mathematics professor at the Presidency College , who wrote that Ramanujan was " a young man of quite exceptional capacity in Mathematics " . Three weeks after he had applied , on 1 March , Ramanujan learned that he had been accepted as a Class III , Grade IV accounting clerk , making 30 rupees per month . At his office , Ramanujan easily and quickly completed the work he was given , so he spent his spare time doing mathematical research . Ramanujan 's boss , Sir Francis Spring , and S. Narayana Iyer , a colleague who was also treasurer of the Indian Mathematical Society , encouraged Ramanujan in his mathematical pursuits . 
 = = = Contacting British mathematicians = = = 
 In the spring of 1913 , Narayana Iyer , Ramachandra Rao and E. W. <unk> tried to present Ramanujan 's work to British mathematicians . M. J. M. Hill of University College London commented that Ramanujan 's papers were riddled with holes . He said that although Ramanujan had " a taste for mathematics , and some ability , " he lacked the educational background and foundation needed to be accepted by mathematicians . Although Hill did not offer to take Ramanujan on as a student , he did give thorough and serious professional advice on his work . With the help of friends , Ramanujan drafted letters to leading mathematicians at Cambridge University . 
 The first two professors , H. F. Baker and E. W. Hobson , returned Ramanujan 's papers without comment . On 16 January 1913 , Ramanujan wrote to G. H. Hardy . Coming from an unknown mathematician , the nine pages of mathematics made Hardy initially view Ramanujan 's manuscripts as a possible fraud . Hardy recognised some of Ramanujan 's formulae but others " seemed scarcely possible to believe " . One of the theorems Hardy found amazing was on the bottom of page three ( valid for 0 < a < b + 1 / 2 ) : 
 <formula> 
 Hardy was also impressed by some of Ramanujan 's other work relating to infinite series : 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 The first result had already been determined by a mathematician named Bauer . The second was new to Hardy , and was derived from a class of functions called hypergeometric series , which had first been researched by Leonhard Euler and Carl Friedrich Gauss . Hardy found these results " much more intriguing " than Ramanujan 's work on integrals . After seeing Ramanujan 's theorems on continued fractions on the last page of the manuscripts , Hardy commented that " they [ theorems ] defeated me completely ; I had never seen anything in the least like them before " . He figured that Ramanujan 's theorems " must be true , because , if they were not true , no one would have the imagination to invent them " . Hardy asked a colleague , J. E. Littlewood , to take a look at the papers . Littlewood was amazed by Ramanujan 's genius . After discussing the papers with Littlewood , Hardy concluded that the letters were " certainly the most remarkable I have received " and said that Ramanujan was " a mathematician of the highest quality , a man of altogether exceptional originality and power " . One colleague , E. H. Neville , later remarked that " not one [ theorem ] could have been set in the most advanced mathematical examination in the world " . 
 On 8 February 1913 , Hardy wrote Ramanujan a letter expressing his interest in his work , adding that it was " essential that I should see proofs of some of your assertions " . Before his letter arrived in Madras during the third week of February , Hardy contacted the Indian Office to plan for Ramanujan 's trip to Cambridge . Secretary Arthur Davies of the Advisory Committee for Indian Students met with Ramanujan to discuss the overseas trip . In accordance with his Brahmin upbringing , Ramanujan refused to leave his country to " go to a foreign land " . Meanwhile , he sent Hardy a letter packed with theorems , writing , " I have found a friend in you who views my labour sympathetically . " 
 To supplement Hardy 's endorsement , Gilbert Walker , a former mathematical lecturer at Trinity College , Cambridge , looked at Ramanujan 's work and expressed amazement , urging the young man to spend time at Cambridge . As a result of Walker 's endorsement , B. <unk> Rao , a mathematics professor at an engineering college , invited Ramanujan 's colleague Narayana Iyer to a meeting of the Board of Studies in Mathematics to discuss " what we can do for S. Ramanujan " . The board agreed to grant Ramanujan a research scholarship of 75 rupees per month for the next two years at the University of Madras . While he was engaged as a research student , Ramanujan continued to submit papers to the Journal of the Indian Mathematical Society . In one instance , Narayana Iyer submitted some of Ramanujan 's theorems on summation of series to the journal , adding , " The following theorem is due to S. Ramanujan , the mathematics student of Madras University . " Later in November , British Professor Edward B. Ross of Madras Christian College , whom Ramanujan had met a few years before , stormed into his class one day with his eyes glowing , asking his students , " Does Ramanujan know Polish ? " The reason was that in one paper , Ramanujan had anticipated the work of a Polish mathematician whose paper had just arrived in the day 's mail . In his quarterly papers , Ramanujan drew up theorems to make definite integrals more easily solvable . Working off Giuliano <unk> 's 1821 integral theorem , Ramanujan formulated generalisations that could be made to evaluate formerly unyielding integrals . 
 Hardy 's correspondence with Ramanujan soured after Ramanujan refused to come to England . Hardy enlisted a colleague lecturing in Madras , E. H. Neville , to mentor and bring Ramanujan to England . Neville asked Ramanujan why he would not go to Cambridge . Ramanujan apparently had now accepted the proposal ; as Neville put it , " Ramanujan needed no converting and that his parents ' opposition had been withdrawn " . Apparently , Ramanujan 's mother had a vivid dream in which the family goddess , the deity of <unk> , commanded her " to stand no longer between her son and the fulfilment of his life 's purpose " . Ramanujan voyaged to England by ship , leaving his wife to stay with his parents in India . 
 = = Life in England = = 
 Ramanujan departed from Madras aboard the S.S. <unk> on 17 March 1914 . When he disembarked in London on 14 April , Neville was waiting for him with a car . Four days later , Neville took him to his house on Chesterton Road in Cambridge . Ramanujan immediately began his work with Littlewood and Hardy . After six weeks , Ramanujan moved out of Neville 's house and took up residence on Whewell 's Court , a five @-@ minute walk from Hardy 's room . Hardy and Littlewood began to look at Ramanujan 's notebooks . Hardy had already received 120 theorems from Ramanujan in the first two letters , but there were many more results and theorems in the notebooks . Hardy saw that some were wrong , others had already been discovered , and the rest were new breakthroughs . Ramanujan left a deep impression on Hardy and Littlewood . Littlewood commented , " I can believe that he 's at least a Jacobi " , while Hardy said he " can compare him only with [ Leonhard ] Euler or Jacobi . " 
 Ramanujan spent nearly five years in Cambridge collaborating with Hardy and Littlewood , and published part of his findings there . Hardy and Ramanujan had highly contrasting personalities . Their collaboration was a clash of different cultures , beliefs , and working styles . Hardy was an atheist and an apostle of proof and mathematical rigour , whereas Ramanujan was a deeply religious man who relied very strongly on his intuition . While in England , Hardy tried his best to fill the gaps in Ramanujan 's education without interrupting his inspiration . 
 Ramanujan was awarded a Bachelor of Science degree by research ( this degree was later renamed PhD ) in March 1916 for his work on highly composite numbers , the first part of which was published as a paper in the Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society . The paper was more than 50 pages and proved various properties of such numbers . Hardy remarked that it was one of the most unusual papers seen in mathematical research at that time and that Ramanujan showed extraordinary ingenuity in handling it . On 6 December 1917 , he was elected to the London Mathematical Society . In 1918 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society , the second Indian to be , following <unk> <unk> in 1841 . At age 31 Ramanujan was one of the youngest Fellows in the history of the Royal Society . He was elected " for his investigation in <unk> functions and the Theory of Numbers . " On 13 October 1918 , he was the first Indian to be elected a Fellow of Trinity College , Cambridge . 
 = = = Illness and death = = = 
 Throughout his life , Ramanujan was plagued by health problems . His health worsened in England . He was diagnosed with tuberculosis and a severe vitamin deficiency , and was confined to a sanatorium . In 1919 he returned to Kumbakonam , Madras Presidency , and soon thereafter , in 1920 , died at the age of 32 . His widow , S. Janaki Ammal , moved to Bombay ; in 1950 she returned to Chennai ( formerly Madras ) , where she lived until her death in 1994 at age 95 . 
 A 1994 analysis of Ramanujan 's medical records and symptoms by Dr. D. A. B. Young concluded that it was much more likely he had hepatic amoebiasis , an illness then widespread in Madras , rather than TB . He had two episodes of dysentery before he left India . When not properly treated , dysentery can lie dormant for years and lead to hepatic amoebiasis . <unk> was a treatable and often curable disease at the time . 
 = = = Personality and spiritual life = = = 
 Ramanujan has been described as a person of a somewhat shy and quiet disposition , a dignified man with pleasant manners . He lived a rather spartan life at Cambridge . Ramanujan 's first Indian biographers describe him as a rigorously orthodox Hindu . He credited his acumen to his family goddess , Mahalakshmi of <unk> . He looked to her for inspiration in his work and claimed to dream of blood drops that symbolised her male consort , Narasimha . Afterward he would receive visions of scrolls of complex mathematical content unfolding before his eyes . He often said , " An equation for me has no meaning unless it represents a thought of God . " 
 Hardy cites Ramanujan as remarking that all religions seemed equally true to him . Hardy further argued that Ramanujan 's religious belief had been romanticised by Westerners and overstated — in reference to his belief , not practice — by Indian biographers . At the same time , he remarked on Ramanujan 's strict vegetarianism . 
 = = Mathematical achievements = = 
 In mathematics , there is a distinction between having an insight and having a proof . Ramanujan proposed a plethora of formulae that could be investigated later in depth . G. H. Hardy said that Ramanujan 's discoveries are unusually rich and that there is often more to them than initially meets the eye . As a byproduct of his work , new directions of research were opened up . Examples of the most interesting of these formulae include the intriguing infinite series for π , one of which is given below : 
 <formula> 
 This result is based on the negative fundamental discriminant d 
 = − 4 × 58 = 
 − 232 with class number h ( d ) 
 = 2 ( note that 5 × 7 × 13 × 58 = 
 <unk> and that 9801 
 = 99 × 99 ; 396 = 
 4 × 99 ) and is related to the fact that 
 <formula> 
 This might be compared to <unk> numbers , which have class number 1 and yield similar formulae . 
 Ramanujan 's series for π converges extraordinarily rapidly ( exponentially ) and forms the basis of some of the fastest algorithms currently used to calculate π . <unk> the sum to the first term also gives the approximation 9801 √ 2 / <unk> for π , which is correct to six decimal places . See also the more general Ramanujan – Sato series . 
 One of Ramanujan 's remarkable capabilities was the rapid solution of problems . Once , a roommate of his , P. C. Mahalanobis , posed the following problem : 
 " Imagine that you are on a street with houses marked 1 through n . There is a house in between ( x ) such that the sum of the house numbers to the left of it equals the sum of the house numbers to its right . If n is between 50 and 500 , what are n and x ? " This is a bivariate problem with multiple solutions . Ramanujan thought about it and gave the answer with a twist : He gave a continued fraction . The unusual part was that it was the solution to the whole class of problems . Mahalanobis was astounded and asked how he did it . “ It is simple . The minute I heard the problem , I knew that the answer was a continued fraction . Which continued fraction , I asked myself . Then the answer came to my mind ” , Ramanujan replied . 
 His intuition also led him to derive some previously unknown identities , such as 
 <formula> 
 for all θ , where Γ ( z ) is the gamma function , and related to a special value of the Dedekind eta function . Expanding into series of powers and equating coefficients of θ0 , <unk> , and <unk> gives some deep identities for the hyperbolic secant . 
 In 1918 Hardy and Ramanujan studied the partition function P ( n ) extensively . They gave a non @-@ convergent asymptotic series that permits exact computation of the number of partitions of an integer . Hans Rademacher , in 1937 , was able to refine their formula to find an exact convergent series solution to this problem . Ramanujan and Hardy 's work in this area gave rise to a powerful new method for finding asymptotic formulae called the circle method . 
 In the last year of his life , Ramanujan discovered mock theta functions . For many years these functions were a mystery , but they are now known to be the holomorphic parts of harmonic weak Maass forms . 
 = = = The Ramanujan conjecture = = = 
 Although there are numerous statements that could have borne the name Ramanujan conjecture , there is one that was very influential on later work . In particular , the connection of this conjecture with conjectures of André Weil in algebraic geometry opened up new areas of research . That Ramanujan conjecture is an assertion on the size of the tau @-@ function , which has as generating function the discriminant modular form Δ ( q ) , a typical cusp form in the theory of modular forms . It was finally proven in 1973 , as a consequence of Pierre Deligne 's proof of the Weil conjectures . The reduction step involved is complicated . Deligne won a Fields Medal in 1978 for that work . 
 In his paper On certain arithmetical functions , Ramanujan defined the so @-@ called Delta @-@ function whose coefficients are called τ ( n ) ( the Ramanujan tau function ) . He proved many congruences for these numbers such as τ ( p ) ≡ 1 + <unk> mod 691 for primes p . This congruence ( and others like it that Ramanujan proved ) inspired Jean @-@ Pierre Serre ( 1954 Fields Medalist ) to conjecture that there is a theory of Galois representations which " explains " these congruences and more generally all modular forms . Delta ( z ) is the first example of a modular form to be studied in this way . Pierre Deligne ( in his Fields Medal winning work ) proved Serre 's conjecture . The proof of Fermat 's Last Theorem proceeds by first reinterpreting elliptic curves and modular forms in terms of these Galois representations . Without this theory there would be no proof of Fermat 's Last Theorem . 
 = = = Ramanujan 's notebooks = = = 
 While still in Madras , Ramanujan recorded the bulk of his results in four notebooks of loose @-@ leaf paper . They were mostly written up without any derivations . This is probably the origin of the misperception that Ramanujan was unable to prove his results and simply thought up the final result directly . Mathematician Bruce C. Berndt , in his review of these notebooks and Ramanujan 's work , says that Ramanujan most certainly was able to prove most of his results , but chose not to . 
 That may have been for several reasons . Since paper was very expensive , Ramanujan would do most of his work and perhaps his proofs on slate , and then transfer just the results to paper . Using a slate was common for mathematics students in the Madras Presidency at the time . He was also quite likely to have been influenced by the style of G. S. Carr 's book , which stated results without proofs . Finally , it is possible that Ramanujan considered his workings to be for his personal interest alone and therefore recorded only the results . 
 The first notebook has 351 pages with 16 somewhat organised chapters and some unorganised material . The second notebook has 256 pages in 21 chapters and 100 unorganised pages , with the third notebook containing 33 unorganised pages . The results in his notebooks inspired numerous papers by later mathematicians trying to prove what he had found . Hardy himself created papers exploring material from Ramanujan 's work , as did G. N. Watson , B. M. Wilson , and Bruce Berndt . A fourth notebook with 87 unorganised pages , the so @-@ called " lost notebook " , was rediscovered in 1976 by George Andrews . 
 Notebooks 1 , 2 and 3 were published as a two @-@ volume set in 1957 by the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research ( TIFR ) , Mumbai , India . This was a photocopy edition of the original manuscripts , in his own handwriting . 
 In December 2011 , as part of the celebrations of the 125th anniversary of Ramanujan 's birth , TIFR republished the notebooks in a coloured two @-@ volume collector 's edition . These were produced from scanned and microfilmed images of the original manuscripts by expert archivists of Raja Muthiah Research Library , Chennai . 
 = = Hardy – Ramanujan number 1729 = = 
 The number 1729 is known as the Hardy – Ramanujan number after a famous visit by Hardy to see Ramanujan at a hospital . In Hardy 's words : 
 I remember once going to see him when he was ill at Putney . I had ridden in taxi cab number 1729 and remarked that the number seemed to me rather a dull one , and that I hoped it was not an unfavorable omen . ' No ' , he replied , ' it is a very interesting number ; it is the smallest number expressible as the sum of two cubes in two different <unk> 
 Immediately before this anecdote , Hardy quoted Littlewood as saying , " Every positive integer was one of [ Ramanujan 's ] personal friends . " 
 The two different ways are 
 1729 
 = 13 + 123 = 
 93 + 103 . 
 Generalizations of this idea have created the notion of " taxicab numbers " . 
 = = Other mathematicians ' views of Ramanujan = = 
 Hardy said : " He combined a power of generalization , a feeling for form , and a capacity for rapid modification of his hypotheses , that were often really startling , and made him , in his own peculiar field , without a rival in his day . The limitations of his knowledge were as startling as its profundity . Here was a man who could work out modular equations and theorems ... to orders unheard of , whose mastery of continued fractions was ... beyond that of any mathematician in the world , who had found for himself the functional equation of the zeta function and the dominant terms of many of the most famous problems in the analytic theory of numbers ; and yet he had never heard of a doubly periodic function or of Cauchy 's theorem , and had indeed but the vaguest idea of what a function of a complex variable was ... " . When asked about the methods Ramanujan employed to arrive at his solutions , Hardy said that they were " arrived at by a process of mingled argument , intuition , and induction , of which he was entirely unable to give any coherent account . " He also stated that he had " never met his equal , and can compare him only with Euler or Jacobi . " 
 K. Srinivasa Rao has said , " As for his place in the world of Mathematics , we quote Bruce C. Berndt : ' Paul Erdős has passed on to us Hardy 's personal ratings of mathematicians . Suppose that we rate mathematicians on the basis of pure talent on a scale from 0 to 100 , Hardy gave himself a score of 25 , J.E. Littlewood 30 , David Hilbert 80 and Ramanujan 100 . ' " 
 During a lecture at IIT Madras in May 2011 , Berndt stated that over the last 40 years , as nearly all of Ramanujan 's theorems have been proven right , there had been greater appreciation of Ramanujan 's work and brilliance , and that Ramanujan 's work was now pervading many areas of modern mathematics and physics . 
 In his book Scientific Edge , the physicist Jayant <unk> spoke of " Srinivasa Ramanujan , discovered by the Cambridge mathematician Hardy , whose great mathematical findings were beginning to be appreciated from 1915 to 1919 . His achievements were to be fully understood much later , well after his untimely death in 1920 . For example , his work on the highly composite numbers ( numbers with a large number of factors ) started a whole new line of investigations in the theory of such numbers . " 
 During his lifelong mission in educating and propagating mathematics among the school children in India , Nigeria and elsewhere , P.K. Srinivasan has continually introduced Ramanujan 's mathematical works . 
 = = Posthumous recognition = = 
 Ramanujan 's home state of Tamil Nadu celebrates 22 December ( Ramanujan 's birthday ) as ' State IT Day ' . A stamp picturing Ramanujan was released by the Government of India in 1962 – the 75th anniversary of Ramanujan 's birth – commemorating his achievements in the field of number theory , and a new design was issued on 26 December 2011 , by the India Post . 
 Since Ramanujan 's centennial year , his birthday , 22 December , has been annually celebrated as Ramanujan Day by the Government Arts College , Kumbakonam where he studied and at the IIT Madras in Chennai . A prize for young mathematicians from developing countries has been created in Ramanujan 's name by the International Centre for Theoretical Physics ( <unk> ) in cooperation with the International Mathematical Union , which nominate members of the prize committee . The SASTRA University , based in the state of Tamil Nadu in South India , has instituted the SASTRA Ramanujan Prize of $ 10 @,@ 000 to be given annually to a mathematician not exceeding the age of 32 for outstanding contributions in an area of mathematics influenced by Ramanujan . Vasavi College of Engineering named its Department of Computer Science and Information Technology " Ramanujan Block " . 
 In 2011 , on the 125th anniversary of his birth , the Indian Government declared that 22 December will be celebrated every year as National Mathematics Day . Then Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh also declared that the year 2012 would be celebrated as the National Mathematics Year . 
 = = In media = = 
 The thriller novel The <unk> Trail by M N Krish weaves Ramanujan and his accidental discovery into its plot connecting religion , mathematics , finance and economics . 
 Ramanujan , an Indo @-@ British collaboration film , chronicling the life of Ramanujan , was released in 2014 by the independent film company Camphor Cinema . The cast and crew include director Gnana <unk> , cinematographer Sunny Joseph and editor B. Lenin . Popular Indian and English stars <unk> <unk> , Suhasini Maniratnam , Bhama , Kevin McGowan and Michael Lieber star in pivotal roles . 
 The Man Who Knew Infinity is a film based on the book The Man Who Knew Infinity : A Life of the Genius Ramanujan by Robert <unk> . In the film , Ramanujan is portrayed by British actor Dev Patel . 
 A play , First Class Man by Alter Ego Productions , was based on David Freeman 's First Class Man . The play is centred around Ramanujan and his complex and dysfunctional relationship with Hardy . On 16 October 2011 , it was announced that Roger Spottiswoode , best known for his James Bond film Tomorrow Never Dies , is working on the film version , starring actor Siddharth . Like the book and play it is also titled The First Class Man . 
 A Disappearing Number is a recent British stage production by the company <unk> that explores the relationship between Hardy and Ramanujan . 
 The novel The Indian Clerk by David Leavitt explores in fiction the events following Ramanujan 's letter to Hardy . 
 Google honoured him on his 125th birth anniversary by replacing its logo with a doodle on its home page . 
 Ramanujan was mentioned in the 1997 film Good Will Hunting , in a scene where professor Gerald Lambeau ( Stellan <unk> ) explains to Sean Maguire ( Robin Williams ) the genius of Will Hunting ( Matt Damon ) by comparing him to Ramanujan . 
 On 22 March 1988 , the PBS Series Nova aired a documentary about Ramanujan , " The Man Who Loved Numbers " ( Season 15 , Episode 19 ) . 
 = = Selected publications by Ramanujan = = 
 = = Selected publications about Ramanujan and his work = = 
 = = = Media links = = = 
 Biswas , <unk> ( 16 March 2006 ) . " Film to celebrate mathematics genius " . BBC . Retrieved 24 August 2006 . 
 Feature Film on Mathematics Genius Ramanujan by Dev Benegal and Stephen Fry 
 BBC radio programme about Ramanujan – episode 5 
 A biographical song about Ramanujan 's life 
 = = = Biographical links = = = 
 Srinivasa Ramanujan at the Mathematics Genealogy Project 
 O 'Connor , John J. ; Robertson , Edmund F. , " Srinivasa Ramanujan " , MacTutor History of Mathematics archive , University of St Andrews . 
 Weisstein , Eric W. , Ramanujan , Srinivasa ( 1887 – 1920 ) from <unk> . 
 Srinivasa <unk> Ramanujan 
 A short biography of Ramanujan 
 " Our Devoted Site for Great Mathematical Genius " 
 = = = Other links = = = 
 Who Was Ramanujan ? 
 A Study Group For Mathematics : Srinivasa Ramanujan Iyengar 
 The Ramanujan Journal – An international journal devoted to Ramanujan 
 International Math Union Prizes , including a Ramanujan Prize . 
 <unk> : Norwegian and Indian mathematical geniuses , <unk> – Essays and Surveys , Ramanujan 's growing influence , Ramanujan 's mentor 
 <unk> : The sponsor of Ramanujan 
 Bruce C. Berndt ; Robert A. Rankin ( 2000 ) . " The Books Studied by Ramanujan in India " . American Mathematical Monthly ( Mathematical Association of America ) 107 ( 7 ) : 595 – 601 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . JSTOR <unk> . MR <unk> . 
 " Ramanujan 's mock theta function puzzle solved " 
 Ramanujan 's papers and notebooks 
 Sample page from the second notebook 
 Ramanujan on Fried Eye 
 Clark , Alex . " 163 and Ramanujan Constant " . <unk> . Brady Haran . 
 = 1919 Polish coup d 'état attempt in Lithuania = 
 The Polish coup d 'état attempt in Lithuania refers to a failed attempt by Polish statesman Józef Piłsudski to overthrow the existing Lithuanian government of Prime Minister Mykolas Sleževičius , and install a pro @-@ Polish cabinet that would agree to a union with Poland . The Polish intelligence agency , the Polish Military Organization ( PMO ) was to carry out the coup d 'etat , planned to be implemented in August 1919 . The coup was designed to seem to be an initiative by local Lithuanians aiming to free their government of German influence . The PMO hoped to rely on the assistance of sympathetic Lithuanian activists . They were thwarted by the lack of cooperation and the unwillingness of sufficient number of Lithuanians to support the Polish cause . 
 After the Sejny Uprising , a Polish revolt against the Lithuanian authorities in one of the disputed border regions , Lithuanian intelligence intensified its investigation of the Polish minority and sympathizers in Lithuania , and uncovered the planned coup . The Lithuanians , not knowing the membership of the PMO , arrested numerous Polish activists and destabilized the PMO network enough to prevent the coup attempt . Later the full membership list was obtained and the PMO in Lithuania was dissolved . The coup further strained Polish – Lithuanian relations . 
 = = Background = = 
 Poland and Lithuania formed one state , the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , from the Union of Lublin in 1569 to the Third Partition in 1795 . Both Poland and Lithuania regained their independence in the aftermath of World War I , but both soon became engaged in territorial disputes over the Suwałki and Vilnius Regions . During the Polish – Soviet War , Poland launched an offensive against the Soviet Union and captured Vilnius ( Wilno ) during the Vilna offensive in April 1919 . Lithuanians described Vilnius as their historical capital and an integral part of the ethnographic Lithuania , while to the Poles , because of its large Polish population , it was a Polish city . Poland 's Chief of State Józef Piłsudski sought a union with Lithuania in hopes of reviving the old Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth ( see Międzymorze federation ) . The Lithuanians believed they would lose their sovereignty under the proposed federation and wanted their own national state . Although Polish – Lithuanian relations were not immediately hostile , they grew worse as each side refused to compromise . 
 As tensions rose , Lithuania asked the Allied Supreme Council to intervene , and it proposed two demarcation lines to prevent open hostilities , drawn in June and July 1919 ( the second one was known as the Foch Line ) . However , Poland ignored both lines and advanced deeper into the Lithuanian @-@ controlled territory . Faced with pressure from the Entente , Polish Chief of State Józef Piłsudski , who was significantly involved in planning of the coup , did not want open Polish – Lithuanian hostilities , which could led to much bloodshed and even greater tensions between Poland and Lithuania . Instead , since he thought there were enough Polish sympathizers in Lithuania to stage a coup d 'etat , he decided to plan one to topple the Lithuanian government . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The planning began mid @-@ July , 1919 . At the time Poland signed a ceasefire in the Polish – Ukrainian War ; Lithuania was invaded by the Bermontians from the north and the Saxon Volunteers were leaving the Lithuanian Army . Piłsudski was planning to use a network of the Polish Military Organization ( PMO ) , an underground organization he created during World War I for diversionary and intelligence operations @-@ like purposes . On July 31 , Piłsudski and Polish diplomat Leon Wasilewski arrived at Vilnius , then controlled by Poland . Piłsudski 's visit had no clear explanation . He later said that he arrived to negotiate with Lithuanians , led by Augustinas Voldemaras , while Lithuanian historian Vytautas Lesčius suggests he was holding talks with pro @-@ Polish estate owners from the Vilnius Region . On August 3 , Wasilewski arrived at Kaunas , the temporary capital of Lithuania , to negotiate with Prime Minister Mykolas Sleževičius . The Polish mission declared that Poland had no plans to annex Lithuania and proposed a plebiscite in the contested territories , allowing local inhabitants to determine their future . The Lithuanians replied that the disputed territories were an integral part of Lithuania and rejected the idea of a plebiscite . Negotiations broke down and Wasilewski left Kaunas on August 7 . The negotiations were then used to evaluate viability of the coup , the preparedness of the PMO , and the attitude of Lithuanian diplomats towards a union with Poland . 
 After the failure Wasilewski 's diplomatic mission , Polish newspapers increased their anti @-@ Lithuanian propaganda . They said that the Council of Lithuania was a pro @-@ German puppet , ignoring popular wishes for a union with Poland as such union would break German influence in the state . The Polish media further reported on growing anti @-@ government sentiment among the Lithuanians . This information was in line with the Polish plans to present the coup as an initiative by the local population to free Lithuania from German domination . While the plotters counted on military intervention by regular Polish troops , the Polish government maintained it had not inspired the coup . The official goal of the Polish plan was to " 1 ) create an independent Lithuania , powerful , truly democratic , connected voluntarily with Poland in a union , with as much internal autonomy as possible and 2 ) acceptance of the Polish minority in Lithuania as a partner in the Lithuanian government and recognition of the Polish language as equal to the Lithuanian language in Lithuania . " 
 The PMO recruited Lithuanian activists Stanisław Narutowicz , Juozas <unk> , Jurgis Aukštuolaitis , and <unk> <unk> . On August 20 – 22 , 1919 , Wasilewski and Tadeusz <unk> together with Narutowicz and Aukštuolaitis planned out the coup details . During the coup , scheduled for the night from August 28 to 29 , the rebels were to capture Kaunas and hold it until the arrival of the Polish regular units invited to protect the city . The Council of Lithuania and the Lithuanian government was to be deposed and replaced by a pro @-@ Polish cabinet . General <unk> Žukauskas was to be installed as a military dictator of the new Lithuanian government , with Aukštuolaitis as his second @-@ in @-@ command and Narutowicz as the head of the civilian government . General Žukauskas , then chief commander of the Lithuanian forces , was not aware of the coup , but was known for his generally friendly attitude towards Poland and was expected to support the aftermath . Other posts were reserved for Mykolas Biržiška , Jonas Vileišis , Steponas Kairys , Juozas <unk> and others , similarly unaware of the coup . Aukštuolaitis was given 800 @,@ 000 and promised another 300 @,@ 000 German marks to finance the coup . 
 = = Coup discovered = = 
 Eventually , the uprising was doomed by poor communication and the overeagerness of some of the PMO activists . Piłsudski failed to discourage local PMO activists from carrying out the Sejny Uprising in the Suwałki Region . The local PMO disregarded his recommendations and launched the uprising , which while locally successful , led to the failure of the nationwide coup . PMO members in Lithuania stated that the Sejny uprising had damaged their reputation , and many of its former supporters rejected calls by PMO recruiters . 
 The initial coup was postponed to September 1 , 1919 . However , some PMO units began their actions ( cutting telegraph wires , damaging railways , etc . ) as scheduled previously – on the night of August 27 to 28 . The Lithuanian intelligence intercepted and decoded the order to delay the coup . They had known before that Poles were plotting , but did not know who and when . The Lithuanian government was informed about the cut telegraph wires and intercepted order in the morning of August 28 . However , the government did not consider the threat real and did not take appropriate action . 
 A group of 18 Lithuanian Army officers , with tacit approval from Sleževičius , took the initiative . Afraid that PMO members infiltrated the military , they secretly decided to begin mass arrests of Polish supporters on the night from August 28 to 29 . Since they did not know who exactly was behind the conspiracy , the Lithuanians arrested more prominent Polish activists in Kaunas . Several dozen Poles were arrested the first night , including Aukštuolaitis and 23 Polish officers serving in the Lithuanian Army . By the second night the number of arrested Poles grew to 200 . Kaunas was declared under a state of siege . The Polish press noted mass arrests of Polish activists " to whom no charge can be ascribed other than being Poles " and concluded that this was proof of the systematic anti @-@ Polish policies of the German @-@ ridden Lithuanian government . 
 Because the Lithuanians did not have a list of PMO members , they did not arrest the main leaders . Also , provincial PMO branches remained intact . Therefore , on September 17 , 1919 , new orders were issued scheduling the second coup attempt for the end of September . This attempt was also discovered . A Lithuanian woman succeeded in convincing Petras <unk> , PMO deputy commander in Vilnius , to transfer the PMO document archive to the Lithuanians . On September 21 , the Lithuanians obtained a full list of PMO members and supporters and arrested them in the following days . The PMO branch in Lithuania ceased to function and was liquidated . 
 = = Aftermath and evaluation = = 
 The Lithuanians charged 117 persons during a military trial on December 11 – 24 , 1920 . Six leaders received life sentences . Other sentences ranged from 15 years to 8 months in prison . At least 15 individuals were acquitted . By 1928 there were no PMO members in Lithuanian prisons : some were exchanged for Lithuanian prisoners or released early . General Žukauskas was removed from his post as the commander of the Lithuanian Army and had to battle the perceived friendliness to Poland for much of his further career . The Polish government initially denied that there was any coup ; later it admitted that locals planned an uprising , but claimed it had no part in it . The coup further strained the Polish – Lithuanian relations , making Lithuanians even more uncompromising and afraid of Polish annexation . 
 The planned coup was criticized by historians as unrealistic for the following reasons . Piłsudski 's plan was based on false assumptions and faulty intelligence , which incorrectly indicated that the Sleževičius government was deeply unpopular , and that the general Lithuanian population was relatively friendly to Poland . No notable ethnic Lithuanian politicians declared support for the plan ; the plan relied on support from General Žukauskas , but his support was never confirmed ; Narutowicz , who was to head the civilian government , was a Pole ; the PMO was weak and incapable of taking control if the coup met any significant resistance ; and intervention of the Polish army would have led to bloodshed and undermined the idea of a voluntary union or alliance with Poland . The only group that supported the coup was the Polish minority in Lithuania , increasingly alienated by Lithuanian government policies . However , according to the Lithuanian census of 1923 , the minority constituted 3 @.@ 2 % of the population outside the Vilnius Region . On the ground , the uprising was doomed by poor communication and the overeagerness of some of the PMO activists . 
 = Todd Packer ( The Office ) = 
 " Todd Packer " is the eighteenth episode of the seventh season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's 144th episode overall . It originally aired on NBC on February 24 , 2011 . The episode was written by Amelie Gillette and directed by Randall Einhorn . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , traveling salesman Todd Packer ( David Koechner ) comes to Dunder Mifflin looking for a desk job in the office . However , the office is unsure if they want him to work there due to his previous behavior . Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) and Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) eventually team up and develop a scheme that rids the office of Packer . Meanwhile , after dealing with computer problems , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) confronts Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) about getting a new computer . 
 The episode was the first entry in the series to be written by Gillette , who had written for the online entertainment newspaper and website The A.V. Club . The episode received mixed reviews from critics ; while many did not enjoy the character of Todd Packer , others praised the temporary alliance between Jim and Dwight . " Todd Packer " was viewed by 6 @.@ 121 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 2 rating among adults between the age of 18 and 49 , making it the season 's lowest @-@ rated episode . Despite this , the episode was the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the week that it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Traveling salesman Todd Packer ( David Koechner ) comes to Dunder Mifflin looking for a desk job in the office . However , most of the office don 't want him to work there due to his previous behavior , and Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) in particular is horrified at the idea . Holly Flax ( Amy Ryan ) gives him a job as a salesman , forcing Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) to leave his desk and move to the annex . Todd repeatedly offends everybody with his jokes , especially Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) , although Kevin pretends to play along . Only Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) , Packer 's longtime friend , is not offended by Todd . Holly , who was at first excited to have Todd in the office per Michael 's recommendations , discovers how insensitive Todd is and asks Michael to get him under control . Michael and Todd have coffee in the lobby , where Todd says he wants to be a better person . Michael gets Todd to apologize , but everyone can tell that the apologies are insincere . Dwight and Jim scheme to get rid of Todd . They call him , pretending to be corporate offering him a job in Tallahassee , Florida , a job which Todd readily accepts . Michael overhears the call and goes to tell Todd that Dwight and Jim have tricked him . Before he has a chance , however , Todd insults Holly , and Michael decides to keep Dwight and Jim 's scheme a secret and allow Todd to take the " job " in Florida . As Michael and Holly witness Todd drive away from the view in his office , Michael admits that Packer is " an ass " before they embrace . 
 Meanwhile , when office administrator Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) gets a new computer for the receptionist 's desk to replace the older model , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) wants a new computer , too . Pam points out that if she were to get a new computer for one sales rep , she would have to get one for every sales rep . Unwilling to let it go , Andy pressures Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) into trading computers with him . Pam is angry when she finds out , and forces him to switch the computers back . When Andy continues to harass Pam about getting him a new computer , she tells him that the only way he can get a new computer is if his breaks . To accomplish this , he accepts all cookies , intentionally opens pop @-@ up ads , and places food in the disc drive . Pam then buys Andy a new computer , but they scratch it up to make it not look brand new . When they pretend to argue about it in front of the office , Pam claims that she found it in the warehouse . Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) confronts Pam later regarding finding the computer in the warehouse . As he knows everything that is in the warehouse and where it is stored , he leverages Pam into giving him more sick days . Pam gleefully tells the interviewers that she is now " full @-@ on corrupt " . 
 = = Production = = 
 This episode was written by Amelie Gillette , her first writing credit of the series . She was a writer for The A.V. Club before being hired for The Office . The episode was directed by longtime series director Randall Einhorn , and was his second credit for the season after " The Sting " . The cold open , which featured Jim and Dwight arguing about canned foods , was actually filmed for the previous season and is featured in the blooper reel on the sixth season DVD and Blu @-@ ray sets . 
 The Season Seven DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . The cut scenes include a sequence of Erin being excited after receiving her new computer , Michael expressing his desire for Holly and Packer to become friends , Packer telling Holly that Scranton is his hometown , Kevin hinting that he would like some of Dwight 's leftover pizza , Andy telling Pam about his high school " back seat " adventures , Michael and Holly arguing about Packer , and Jim trying to not let Dwight move back into his old desk . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Packer pretends to mistake Holly for actress Jennifer Aniston . Dwight angrily throws out Holly 's miniature zen gardens and remarks , " What do you grow in this , <unk> ? " Packer calls Kevin , Holly , and Dwight , the " three <unk> @-@ queers " , a homophobic slur referencing the 1844 novel The Three Musketeers . Dwight notes that , had Kevin grown up in Sumo culture , he would be considered a " promising up @-@ and @-@ comer " . Holly makes a list of humorous individuals , ranging from most humorous to less : " Bill Cosby , Steve Martin , ' Charlie Bit My Finger , ' Michael Scott [ … ] Todd Packer " . When asked if he would like chocolate milk , Packer notes that the only chocolate he likes is Vivica A. Fox . Jim mentions Justin Bieber , and Dwight says " Who is Justice Beaver ? " This leads Jim to say sardonically , " A crime @-@ fighting beaver " . Following the episode 's air date , the term " Justice Beaver " became popular a trend on Twitter , and led to a website in honor of the quote . When prank @-@ calling Packer , Dwight continuously makes references to the The Wizarding World of Harry Potter in Orlando , Florida . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Todd Packer " was viewed by an estimated 6 @.@ 121 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 2 rating / 9 % share . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 2 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked the lowest number of viewers for the series since the second season episode " Boys and Girls " , which was viewed by 5 @.@ 42 million viewers , as well as the lowest Nielsen rating for the series since the first season . Despite this , the episode became the highest @-@ rated NBC program for the original week it aired and also became the sixteenth most @-@ watched show for the week of broadcast among adults aged 18 – 49 . 
 Myles McNutt of The A.V. Club , Gillette 's former employer , awarded the episode a " B – " and noted that he did not like Todd Packer , nor the episode 's where his character is intentionally supposed to be vile . He did , however , enjoy the fact that Packer 's antics caused Jim and Dwight to unite in the face of a common enemy , a plot that McNutt said " had a scrappy feel to it " . McNutt also called Kevin being " slowly broken by Packer 's cruelty " an effective way to show how terrible Packer was to the morale of the office . He was , however , more critical about the fact that Holly seemed unaware that " Michael may not be the best judge of whether or not someone is funny " . At the end of his review , McNutt reminded readers that The A.V. Club specifically selected him as their new reviewer for the show because he did not know Gillette , thus avoiding a conflict of interest . 
 IGN writer Cindy White enjoyed the episode , but criticized the ending for being too similar to a scene in the series finale of the original version of The Office in which David Brent , after a successful blind date , tries to jump into a conversation with traveling salesman Chris Finch at a Christmas party . Finch makes a rude comment about his date which makes David stand up to him and tell him to " fuck off " . Despite this , she spoke highly of Jim and Dwight 's storyline , writing that " I wish their final ruse had been a bit more original , but it served the purpose of getting rid of Packer " . She ultimately gave the episode a 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 rating , denoting a " good " episode . 
 Matt Richenthal of TV Fanatic awarded the episode four out of five stars and praised it for its temporary teaming up of Jim and Dwight . Alan Sepinwall was critical of the episode ; although he enjoyed the continued exploration of Michael 's maturation , but felt that , because Packer was so infrequently seen on the show , he was stuck as " the American version of <unk> " from the original British series , and as such , did not fit into the show 's dynamics . Sepinwall was further critical of the main story , calling it " flat and uncomfortable " . However , he enjoyed the later part of Pam and Andy 's storyline , as well as Jim and Dwight teaming up to beat Packer . 
 = Work It Out ( Beyoncé song ) = 
 " Work It Out " is a song by American R & B singer Beyoncé . It was released on June 11 , 2002 , by Columbia Records as her debut single and the lead single from the soundtrack album of the film Austin Powers in Goldmember , in which Knowles stars as Foxxy Cleopatra . It was later included on the international editions of Knowles ' debut album , Dangerously in Love ( 2003 ) . Composed by Knowles , Pharrell Williams , and Chad Hugo , " Work It Out " is an R & B song which incorporates elements of 1960s and 1970s funk and post @-@ disco . 
 The song was generally well received by music critics , many of whom complimented its retro style and various influences . It has been credited as the beginning of Knowles ' career as a successful solo artist , after finding success as the lead singer of Destiny 's Child . " Work It Out " was nominated in the category of Best Original or Adapted Song at the 2003 Black Reel Awards . Commercially , the song failed to make an impact on the US Billboard Hot 100 but managed to find success on a few Billboard component charts , topping the Billboard 's Hot Dance Club Play chart . " Work It Out " also reached the top ten in Norway and the UK . 
 The song 's accompanying music video was shot and directed by Matthew Rolston . The video features Knowles playing Foxxy Cleopatra , and draws inspiration from several 1960 's and 1970s motifs . The video was nominated at the MTV Video Music Awards Japan in the category Best Video from a Film . " Work It Out " has been parodied and covered on several live television programs , including American Idol and America 's Best Dance Crew . Since its release , the song has been regularly included on several of Knowles ' tours and concerts . 
 = = Context and release = = 
 In the 2002 film Austin Powers in Goldmember , Knowles portrays Foxxy Cleopatra , the female protagonist alongside the film 's lead character , Austin Powers , portrayed by Canadian film actor and comedian Mike Myers . Cleopatra is a parody to the characters in blaxploitation films such as Foxy Brown and Cleopatra Jones , both of which are used in her name . Her clothing style is reminiscent of the disco era and her hair is in the afro style of the time . Taking inspiration from her portrayal , Knowles adopted in the song a persona similar to that of Cleopatra . Cleopatra and police officer Get Christie Love ! use the slang term " sugar " , which Knowles ad @-@ libs and incorporates into the song . Many similarities are seen as she performs under her Cleopatra persona in the music video of " Work It Out " . Due to the characters ' sassy nature , Knowles performs the song very confidently and assertively . Powers meets Cleopatra at the villain 's discothèque in 1975 , which attributes to Cleopatra 's disco @-@ type fashion and the heavily inspired disco @-@ era music video for " Work It Out " . 
 " Work It Out " was written by Knowles , Pharrell Williams and Chad Hugo , with The Neptunes helming its production . Critically , the song was credited with marking Knowles transition into the music scene as a solo artist , after fulfilling a career as the lead female vocalist of Destiny 's Child . Knowles premiered the song on May 23 , 2002 , via AOL . The song served as the first single from the soundtrack album , Austin Powers : Goldmember , with Britney Spears ' " Boys " following as the soundtrack 's second single . Additionally , it serves as the album 's opening track , and was released on June 11 , 2002 . " Work It Out " was also intended to serve as the lead single from Knowles ' debut album , Dangerously in Love . However , it was eventually replaced by " Crazy in Love " , while it was used as a bonus song on the album 's international versions . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Hal Leonard Corporation , " Work It Out " is a moderately paced R & B , soul , and funk song . Written in the key of G major , it has a moderately slow tempo of 84 beats per minute and incorporates elements of post @-@ disco . The song has been viewed as reminiscent of 1960s and 1970s funk and soul music , with Craig Seymour of Entertainment Weekly describing the tune as a " retro @-@ thumper " . Rob Fitzpatrick of New Musical Express commented that the song features " super @-@ heavy funk " , and is " an absolutely faultless attempt to re @-@ create on classics by The J.B. ' s and Lynn Anderson " , while Nick Duerden of Spin magazine described the song as a " stunning ' [ 19 ] 60s soul vamp . " Duerden and John Mulvey of New Musical Express recognized that The <unk> paid tribute to James Brown within the song . While making a reference to the fact that the song contains various elements of 1960s and 1970s musical styles , Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine stated that " Work It Out " positioned Knowles as " an MTV generation Tina Turner " . Spin echoed Cinquemani 's sentiments by describing Knowles as " gritty and sultry " , referencing Tina Turner . Knowles has additionally been described as " a ' Rock Steady ' -era Aretha Franklin " because of the way she " ambitiously grunts , wails , and moans " in " Work It Out " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Work It Out " garnered generally positive reviews from critics , most of whom complemented the 1960s and 1970s funk tone featured on the song . While reviewing the Austin Powers in Goldmember 's soundtrack album , Josh Tyrangiel , writing for Entertainment Weekly , gave the song a negative review stating that it was " all shimmy and innuendo " . However , while reviewing the single , Craig Seymour of the same publication awarded the song a grade of an A- , calling the track a " funky debut solo tune " and further stating that the song also proves that Knowles , best known " for riding poppy staccato beats , can get deep into a groove " . Mark Anthony Neal of PopMatters recognized the success of Destiny 's Child and credited it to Knowles , stating , " [ Beyoncé Knowles ] , first stepped out on the solo trip in support of her role as Foxxy Cleopatra in Austin Powers : Gold Member . ' Work It Out ' indicated to Neal that Knowles was ready to shed the ' but I 'm still not yet a woman ' vibe that 's earned Destiny 's Child multi @-@ platinum status . " 
 The song was considered a " good moment " on the film 's soundtrack album by Allmusic 's writer Stephen Thomas Erlewine . Erlewine called it " excellent " and favored it over the tracks of Survivor ( 2001 ) , Destiny 's Child 's previous album . Although considered a great transition for Knowles , Vibe disagreed , stating that the song debuted a tepid beginning for Knowles , who had high anticipations for a solo @-@ career . Contactmusic.com named the contributions by Knowles on the movie 's soundtrack as a highlight of the album . Rob Boss of Walmart called Knowles " alluring " while reviewing her performance on the soundtrack and comparing it to her performance in the movie itself . Dismissing Knowles ' acting by stating " she should stick to singing and leave the acting to the actors , " Boss called her performance on the song intense and stated that the opening track " Work It Out " was a reason enough to include Knowles in the film . Rob Fitzpatrick of New Musical Express gave the song a mixed to positive review , writing that it sounds not only like a perfect imitation or replication of classic funk , but also like a derivation of various other sources and motifs . John Mulvey , writing for the same magazine , considered " Work It Out " to be the best tune Knowles had recorded since " Say My Name " ( 2000 ) , and he further commented , " it 's Beyoncé yowling , testifying and wigging out in only slightly @-@ studied retro fashion that 's most striking . " 
 Spin magazine included the song on two separate lists of admiration . The first was a playlist of songs that " you need to know " , and " Work It Out " was placed at number five for songs to download . The other list included the song on a list of " must @-@ have Beyoncé Knowles songs " . In addition to being included on lists , Vibe magazine included the song on a " <unk> " list which named a number of songs that were on Vibe @-@ staff 's current playlists and stated the song was " her true destiny " . Yancey Strickler of Flak Magazine wrote that in " Work It Out " , Knowles sounds like Pam Grier " taking five from the revolution to let her afro down . Loose and funky ( apologies for the overused terminology there , but ' Work It Out ' practically defines it ) , the tune was Beyoncé declaring , ' I am woman , hear you drool . ' Self @-@ assured and immune to any of that tired old guff , she 's out @-@ of @-@ Huey @-@ Newton 's @-@ league untouchable . " Following the song 's 2002 release , it was included during many post @-@ 2003 award ceremonies . During the 2003 Black Reel Awards , the song was nominated in the category Best Original or Adapted Song . However , the song lost to Erykah Badu and Common 's " Love of My Life ( Ode to Hip @-@ Hop ) " from the film Brown Sugar . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Work It Out " failed to make the United States Billboard Hot 100 . Although it did not appear on the main US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , it peaked at number four on the US Bubbling Under R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . " Work It Out " became a club hit in the US , peaking at number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs , and enjoyed moderate commercial success in European territories . It debuted and peaked at number seven in the United Kingdom on July 27 , 2002 , charting for a total of 11 weeks . The song managed to peak inside the top 30 of multiple European charts , peaking at number three in Norway , number 12 in Ireland , number 14 in Denmark , number 23 in Sweden , and number 26 in the Netherlands . In Oceania , the single peaked at number 36 in New Zealand on September 8 , 2002 , while reaching number 23 for two consecutive weeks in late September 2002 in Australia . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for the song was directed by Matthew Rolston . Shot in New York in early June 2002 , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage of the shooting of the music video was released on June 7 , and the main video officially posted on MTV on June 17 . In the video , Jeremiah Alexis takes on the role of the bassist in the background and Knowles singing up @-@ front , with the overall feel inspired by 1970s glamor and the introduction of pop and funk . On the concept of the video , Knowles said , " I wanted it to look different from what we 've done . I wanted it to be raw . The look of it is like an old 1970 's show . " Rolston stated that the video was inspired by shows like Sonny & Cher and The Midnight Special with James Brown , which took place around the beginning of the disco era and the end of the hippy era . 
 The video begins with Knowles ( as Cleopatra ) sitting with Powers in a movie theater , a credit to the ending of Austin Powers in Goldmember . As the " movie " starts , Knowles is seen on stage performing with a band playing instruments to the song . After performing a simple choreography , Knowles begins her verse by singing into a microphone that has her name written on it with sparkles , with the scenery of the shot being a stage with a colorful background , and scenes from Goldmember pieced throughout the video . Knowles performs in a cube with disco @-@ scenery shown on the walls , ceiling , and projected onto Knowles , who plays with hula hoops while wearing " Virgo " bedazzled jeans throughout the video . As the video ends , Knowles is seen back on the beginning stage performing a dance @-@ routine with three backup dancers ; the video ending with the movie theater cheering for the video , while Cleopatra and Powers smile at each other . 
 Cynthia Fuchs of PopMatters reviewed the music video , stating : " The video offers up a standard @-@ seeming series of body parts — eye , navel , huge hair — but at the same time emphasizes Beyoncé 's frankly awesome power , recalling Aretha and especially Tina Turner as she <unk> up to the mic stand , her ferocious thighs revealed beneath a sequined miniskirt . In her first solo effort , Beyoncé declares herself a singular personality , a body , and a performer . Not to mention a sensation with a hula @-@ hoop . " Fuchs added to her comment about Knowles ' <unk> @-@ <unk> skills , referring to them as " sensational " and stated that it gave the video " a giddy , gorgeous turn " . Tamar Anitai of MTV News negatively reviewed Knowles ' choice in hair @-@ style as " two @-@ tone , too @-@ tight curls " . In 2003 , the music video was nominated at the MTV Video Music Awards Japan in the category Best Video from a Film . It eventually lost to Eminem 's " Lose Yourself " from the movie 8 Mile . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Knowles performed the song on multiple occasions , including the song as part of her set list on the Dangerously in Love Tour , where the performance of the song was recorded and distributed at the Wembley Arena in London , United Kingdom for the Beyoncé : Live at Wembley DVD / CD . The song was also performed live at the Wynn Theatre , in Las Vegas on August 2 , 2009 , at the I Am ... Yours concert , the performance was later recorded as well as distributed in a DVD / CD package entitled I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas on November 23 , 2009 . During the I Am ... Tour , the song was performed in a medley with " Crazy in Love " , " I Just Wanna Love U ( Give It 2 Me ) " , " Let Me Clear My Throat " , and " Pass the Peas " . 
 Knowles additionally performed the song on many televised appearances . The first televised performance of the song was on New Year 's Eve at Nikki Beach , St. Barth . Other televised performances included Rove , 2003 's Party in the Park , and Top of the Pops . Reviewing concert performances of the song , Mimi <unk> called Knowles possessed , stating : " <unk> her head around , jerking her body , twirling the microphone stand , she 's a new @-@ millennium version of Tina Turner . As human and humble as she is off stage , watching her perform is a quick reminder of why she 's a star . She 's magnetic . " 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 The Los Angeles based band Vitamin String Quartet , paid tribute to Knowles by doing their own version of " Work It Out " and adding it to their 2003 album , The String Quartet Tribute to Beyoncé . According to Tim Sendra of Allmusic , their version has more than four instruments on it as do most of the tracks , making it " more of a symphonic tribute to Beyoncé " . The song has been performed by many reality television shows , which later led to the group or person winning that current challenge . On the fifth season of American Idol , contestant Paris Ana 'is Bennett performed the song on March 28 , 2006 , in which the theme was to perform songs from the past six years . The song later allowed Bennett to pass through to the next round , with judge Randy Jackson stating it was the best of the night , Paula Abdul calling the performance " awesome " , and Cowell naming the performance " overly precocious " . 
 During the second week of the fourth season of America 's Best Dance Crew , the Massive Monkees were asked to perform the song with the challenge to " dance with hula hoops without accidentally dropping them " . The performance later allowed the group to move on to the next round , with judges Lil Mama stating that the group performed with a lot of " charisma " , however , JC Chasez negatively reviewed the performance as " elementary " . While searching for an all @-@ female band to accompany her on The Beyoncé Experience , Knowles had the candidates perform the single " Work It Out " as a test . An author called <unk> additionally referenced the song in a book of collected short @-@ stories titled " Choices " . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from Dangerously in Love liner notes . 
 Beyoncé Knowles – composer , vocals , writing , vocal production 
 The Neptunes ( Pharrell Williams and Chad Hugo ) – composer , writing , producer 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Earth Song = 
 " Earth Song " is the third single from Michael Jackson 's album HIStory : Past , Present and Future , Book I. It is the fifth song on the second disc of the album . It is a ballad that incorporates elements of blues , gospel and opera . Jackson had a long @-@ standing history of releasing socially conscious material such as " We Are the World " , " Man in the Mirror " and " Heal the World " . However , " Earth Song " was the first that overtly dealt with the environment and animal welfare . " Earth Song " was made for the Dangerous album but it failed to make the final cut . The song was written and composed by Jackson ; the task of production was split between Jackson , David Foster and Bill Bottrell . 
 " Earth Song " was accompanied by a lavish music video shot in four geographical regions . It centered on the destruction and rebirth of Earth and went on to receive a Grammy nomination in 1997 . The song was a top five hit in most European countries . It remains Jackson 's best @-@ selling single in the United Kingdom , and was the country 's number @-@ one Christmas single in 1995 . " Earth Song " was not released as a single in the United States . Jackson went on to receive recognition from various animal and environmental organizations . 
 In 2011 the song was paired @-@ up with the poem " Planet Earth " ( previously released on Michael Jackson 's This Is It , in 2009 ) and released as a song in the remix album Immortal . The song was the last song to be rehearsed by Jackson , shortly after midnight on June 25 , 2009 , making it the final song ever performed by Michael Jackson . 
 = = Background = = 
 Jackson already had a long @-@ standing history of writing charitable or socially conscious material . As a child , he had recorded the song " In Our Small Way " for his first album Got to Be There . As an adult , Jackson used his fame and wealth to promote various causes . In 1985 , he co @-@ wrote the charity single " We Are the World " with Lionel Richie , which was released worldwide to aid the poor in Africa and the US . The single became one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time , with nearly 20 million copies sold and millions of dollars donated to famine relief . It was also the first time Jackson was seen as a humanitarian . All of the profits from his single " Man in the Mirror " went to charity . Jackson founded the " Heal the World Foundation " in 1992 , inspired by his charity single of the same name . 
 Following the illness and death of Ryan White , Jackson helped draw public attention to HIV / AIDS , something that was still controversial at the time . He publicly pleaded with the Clinton Administration at Bill Clinton 's Inaugural Gala to give more money to HIV / AIDS charities and research . He would go on to perform the song " Gone Too Soon " for White and other victims of the illness . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Earth Song " was originally written and composed by Jackson in the Hotel Imperial in Vienna , Austria under the title " What About Us " . A demo , which featured Jackson singing the ending in falsetto , was to be released as part of a bonus disc for the remastered Dangerous album in 2001 but the release was cancelled ; the song along with other tracks were leaked on the internet . 
 Production of the song was a collaborative effort between Jackson , David Foster and Bill Bottrell . Andrae Crouch 's Choir and Jackson engage in a back and forth chant as the song reaches its climactic finale . Jackson 's intent was to create a song that was lyrically deep yet melodically simple , so the whole world , particularly non @-@ English @-@ speaking fans , could sing along . He conceptualized a song that had an emotional message . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 " Earth Song " is a ballad that incorporates elements of blues , gospel and opera . In the socially conscious track , Jackson issues a wakeup @-@ call about the dire situations that mankind has caused and is facing , ranging from war to devastation to animals and earth itself . The song reveals itself to be highly spiritual at the end where Jackson calls on people to remember the earth is their inheritance from God via their ancestor Abraham . " What about death again " reminds all to think about eternal death , asking people to check their heart for repentance , or to see if they really cared at all . Having disfellowshipped himself from Jehovah 's Witnesses , Jackson simplified his faith to focus on the Biblical Jesus Christ until his death . The song is written in the key of Ab melodic minor . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Earth Song " received mixed reviews from music critics . James Hunter of Rolling Stone stated , " The slow blues @-@ operatic ' Earth Song ' for all its noble sentiments , sounds primarily like a showpiece " . A San Jose Mercury News review called it " flat " and " whiny " , believing Jackson had already experimented with these concepts earlier in his career . 
 The Philadelphia Inquirer described the track as " a healing , rhythmic ballad that evokes religious imagery " . A review in The Sacramento Bee was favorable , describing Jackson 's vocal performance as " cool " . Michael Mehle of Rocky Mountain News described the finale as " anthemic " and a " powerful gospel opus " . A Ledger @-@ Enquirer review observed of " Earth Song " , " [ it ] enjoys the same kind of subtlety , building to a dramatic call @-@ and @-@ response finish with the Andrae Crouch Choir " . Contra Costa Times 's review called it " a bit sappy and overblown " but also acknowledged that it was " epic " and destined to be a " massive smash hit " . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 " Earth Song " remains Jackson 's best @-@ selling single in the United Kingdom , where it sold 1 @.@ 16 million copies as of November 2012 . It debuted at number one on the UK Singles Chart , where it remained for six weeks throughout December 1995 — beating the U2 / Brian Eno project Passengers in competition to win the Christmas number one spot — and into early @-@ 1996 . During its stay at number one , " Earth Song " kept the first single released by The Beatles in 25 years , " Free as a Bird " , off the number one position . In early December , bookmakers correctly predicted that Jackson would keep The Beatles off the top position and go on to attain the Christmas number @-@ one single . 
 The song also took the number one position in Spain , Italy , Sweden and Switzerland , peaking within the top five in almost every European state . In Germany , it was Jackson 's first single to reach No. 1 on the German Singles Chart and by staying on the pole position for 5 consecutive weeks , it 's also his most successful single there . 
 The song was only released to radio in the U.S. , appearing on the Hot Dance Music / Club Play chart . In 2006 , " Earth Song " reached number 55 on the European Hot 100 Singles chart , following the Visionary : The Video Singles campaign , whereby 20 of Jackson 's hit singles from the 1980s to the 1990s were reissued in several European countries . 
 = = = Environmental recognition = = = 
 Jackson received the Genesis Award : 1995 Doris Day Music Award , given each year for animal sensitivity . In 2008 , a writer for the Nigeria Exchange noted , " ' Earth Song ' drew the world 's attention to the degradation and bastardization of the earth as a fall out of various human activities " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Earth Song " , directed by fine art photographer Nick Brandt , was expensive and well @-@ received ; it gained a Le Film Fantastique : Best Video Award in 1996 , the 1995 Doris Day Music Award at the Genesis Awards and a Grammy nomination for Best Music Video , Short Form in 1997 . The production had an environmental theme , showing images of animal cruelty , deforestation , pollution , poverty and war . Jackson and the world 's people unite in a spiritual chant — " Earth Song " — which summons a force that heals the world . Using special effects , time is reversed so that life returns , war ends and the forests regrow . The video closes with a request for donations to Jackson 's Heal the World Foundation . The clip was shown infrequently in the United States . 
 The video was filmed in four geographic regions ( Americas , Europe and Africa ) . The first location was the Amazon Rainforest , where a large part was destroyed a week after the video 's completion . Natives of the region appeared in the video and were not actors . The second scene was a war zone in Karlovac , Croatia , with famous Croatian actor Slobodan Dimitrijević and the residents of the area . The third location was Tanzania , which incorporated scenes of illegal poaching and hunting into the video . No animals were harmed in the making of the " Earth Song " , as the footage came from documentary archives . The final location was in Warwick , New York , where a safe forest fire was simulated in a corn field . 
 The video was also included on the video albums : HIStory on Film , Volume II , Number Ones and Michael Jackson 's Vision . 
 = = Brit Awards = = 
 In 1996 , Jackson performed " Earth Song " at the Brit Awards in the United Kingdom ; he was there to collect a special " Artist of a Generation " award . Jackson sang while dangling off the edge of a high rise crane lift , which he had used the year before while performing it on the German TV show Wetten Dass . Below , a chorus of backing performers joined in and many of them began to physically embrace Jackson upon his descent . In response to the performance , Jarvis Cocker ran onto the stage without permission , lifted his shirt and pretended to break wind , before giving Jackson the insulting V @-@ sign . The Pulp frontman had been there with his band , who had been nominated for three Brit awards . Cocker was subsequently questioned by police over claims he had assaulted some of the child performers , but he was later released without charge . The singer explained that he found the performance offensive , claiming that Jackson had portrayed himself as Christ @-@ like and could do as he pleased because of his immense wealth and power . Jackson condemned Cocker 's behavior as " disgusting and cowardly " . The incident is referred to in the book Politics and Popular Culture by John Street , Professor of Politics at the University of East Anglia . He says : 
 " But to read popular culture as a straight @-@ forward – or at least typical – political text is to take a very narrow view of its meaning , and hence of its political message ( s ) . As we have noted , the text 's meaning will depend on how it is heard and read . Michael Jackson may have intended his ' Earth Song ' as an exercise in compassion ; others – like Jarvis Cocker – saw it quite differently . One reason these alternative readings emerge is because of the way the performance of popular culture engages more than a literal text , it employs gestures and symbols , tones of voice , looks and glances , all of which might tell a different story " . 
 = = 2010 Grammy Awards performance = = 
 The song , along with a 3 @-@ D short film that was to be featured in Jackson 's series of comeback concerts This Is It , was performed as a tribute to Jackson . Jennifer Hudson , Carrie Underwood , Smokey Robinson , Celine Dion and Usher all sang the song together , while the video played in the background . The film was shown in its original 3 @-@ D format during the broadcast . 
 Target provided free 3 @-@ D glasses to customers a week before the Grammy Awards . Paris and Prince Jackson , Jackson 's oldest children , appeared shortly after the performance to accept Jackson 's Lifetime Achievement Award , where they both gave a short speech . This was the first time the children had spoken publicly since the memorial service that was held for Jackson on July 7 , 2009 . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Written , composed and lead and background vocals by Michael Jackson 
 Produced by Michael Jackson and David Foster 
 Co @-@ Produced by Bill Bottrell 
 Choir performance by the Andrae Crouch Choir 
 Keyboards : David Paich 
 Bass guitar : Guy Pratt 
 Drums : Steve <unk> 
 Synthesizer programming : Steve Porcaro 
 Co @-@ performance by London Philharmonic Orchestra ( Orchestral Mix only ) 
 Orchestral arrangement by James Horner ( Orchestral Mix only ) 
 = Scandinavian Scotland = 
 Scandinavian Scotland refers to the period from the 8th to the 15th centuries during which Vikings and Norse settlers , mainly Norwegians and to a smaller extent other Scandinavians , and their descendents colonised parts of what is now the periphery of modern Scotland . Viking influence in the area commenced in the late 8th century , and hostility between the Scandinavian Earls of Orkney and the emerging thalassocracy of the Kingdom of the Isles , the rulers of Ireland , Dál Riata and Alba , and intervention by the crown of Norway were recurring themes . 
 Scandinavian @-@ held territories included the Northern Isles of Orkney and Shetland , the Hebrides , the islands of the Firth of Clyde and associated mainland territories including Caithness and Sutherland . The historical record from Scottish sources is weak , with the Irish annals and the later Norse sagas , of which the Orkneyinga Saga is the principal source of information , sometimes contradictory although modern archaeology is beginning to provide a broader picture of life during this period . 
 There are various competing theories that have addressed the early colonisation process although it is clear that the Northern Isles were the first to be conquered by Vikings and the last to be relinquished by the Norwegian crown . Thorfinn Sigurdsson 's rule in the 11th century included expansion well into north mainland Scotland and this may have been the zenith of Scandinavian influence . The obliteration of pre @-@ Norse names in the Hebrides and their replacement with Norse ones was almost total although the emergence of alliances with the native Gaelic speakers produced a powerful Norse @-@ Gael culture that had wide influence in Argyll , Galloway and beyond . 
 Scottish influence increased from the 13th century on . In 1231 an unbroken line of Norse earls of Orkney ended and the title was henceforward held by Scots nobles . An ill @-@ fated expedition by Haakon Haakonarson later in that century led to the relinquishing of the islands of the west to the Scottish Crown and in the mid @-@ 15th century Orkney and Shetland were also transferred to Scottish rule . The negative view of Viking activities held in popular imagination notwithstanding , Norse expansion may have been a factor in the emergence of the Gaelic kingdom of Alba , the forerunner of modern Scotland , and the trading , political , cultural and religious achievements of the later periods of Norse rule were significant . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The Northern Isles , known to the Norse as the Norðreyjar , are the closest parts of the United Kingdom to Norway and these islands experienced the first and most long @-@ lasting Norse influence of any part of Scotland . Shetland is some 300 kilometres ( 190 mi ) due west of Norway and in favourable conditions could be reached in 24 hours from Hordaland in a Viking longship . Orkney is 80 kilometres ( 50 mi ) further to the south west . 
 Some 16 kilometres ( 10 mi ) due south of Orkney is the Scottish mainland . The two most northerly provinces of mainland Scotland , Caithness and Sutherland , fell under Norse control at an early date . South of there the entire western seaboard of mainland Scotland from Wester Ross to Kintyre was also subject to significant Scandinavian influence . 
 The Suðreyjar , or " Southern Isles " include : 
 The Hebrides or Western Isles comprising : The Outer Hebrides , aka the " Long Island " to the west , separated from the northern Inner Hebrides by the waters of the Minch . These islands are some 180 kilometres ( 110 mi ) west of Orkney . 
 The Inner Hebrides including Skye , Islay , Jura , Mull and Iona . 
 The islands of the Firth of Clyde some 140 kilometres ( 87 mi ) to the south , the largest of which are Bute and Arran . 
 The Isle of Man , located in the Irish Sea equidistantly from modern England , Ireland , Scotland and Wales 
 The total distance from the southern tip of the Isle of Man to the Butt of Lewis , the northern extremity of the Outer Hebrides , is approximately 515 kilometres ( 320 mi ) . This entire region became dominated by Norse culture for much of the period under consideration . For example , it is likely that the Norse language became as dominant throughout the Inner Hebrides as it did on Lewis during the 10th and 11th centuries . 
 There was also significant direct Norse influence exerted in Galloway in south west Scotland and for much of the period , up until the 1266 Treaty of Perth , Norwegian and Danish foreign policy and the activities of independent or semi @-@ independent Norse rulers of the above parts of Scandinavian @-@ dominated Scotland had a powerful influence on the affairs of Scotland as a whole . 
 = = Colonisation process = = 
 Scholarly interpretations of the period " have led to widely divergent reconstructions of Viking Age Scotland " especially in the early period and Barrett ( 2008 ) has identified four competing theories , none of which he regards as proven . 
 The traditional explanation is the earldom hypothesis . This assumes a period of Norse expansion into the Northern Isles and the creation of an aristocratic dynasty that lasted well into the Medieval period , which exerted considerable influence in western Scotland and Mann into the 11th century . This version of events is essentially as told by the Norse sagas and is supported by some archaeological evidence although it has been criticised for exaggerating Orcadian influence in the <unk> . 
 The second of these theories is the genocide hypothesis , which asserts that the aboriginal populations of the Northern and Western Isles were eradicated and replaced wholesale with settlers of Scandinavian stock . The strength of this argument is the almost total replacement of pre @-@ existing place names by those of Norse origin throughout much of the region . Its weakness is that the place name evidence is from a relatively late date and the nature of this transition remains controversial . Genetic studies show that Shetlanders have almost identical proportions of Scandinavian matrilineal and patrilineal ancestry , suggesting that the islands were settled by both men and women in equal measure . 
 The pagan reaction hypothesis proposed by Bjorn <unk> suggests a long tradition of mobility amongst the various populations of the North Atlantic seaboard and that the expansion of Christian missions resulted in ethnic tensions that led to or exacerbated Viking expansion . There is some evidence of such mobility , such as Irish missionary activities in Iceland and The Faroes in the 8th century , but little that is conclusive . 
 The fourth suggestion is the Laithlind or Lochlann hypothesis . This word appears in various forms in the early Irish literature and is usually assumed to refer to Norway itself , although some have preferred to locate it in the Norse @-@ dominated parts of Scotland . Donnchadh Ó Corráin is a proponent of this view and claims that that a substantial part of Scotland — the Northern and Western Isles and large areas of the coastal mainland — were conquered by the Vikings in the first quarter of the 9th century and that a Viking kingdom was set up there earlier than the middle of the century . Essentially a variant of the earldom hypothesis , there is little archaeological evidence in its favour , although it is clear that extensive Viking incursions on the Irish coasts were supported by a presence of some kind in the Hebrides , even if the date the latter became prominent is far from certain . As Ó Corráin himself admits " when and how the Vikings conquered and occupied the Isles is unknown , perhaps unknowable " . 
 = = Early Viking incursions = = 
 Norse contacts with Scotland certainly predate the first written records in the 8th century , although their nature and frequency are unknown . Excavations at <unk> on the island of Unst in Shetland indicate that Scandinavian settlers had reached there , perhaps as early as the mid 7th century , consistent with dates produced for Viking levels at Old Scatness . 
 From 793 onwards repeated raids by Vikings on the British Isles are recorded . " All the islands of Britain " were devastated in 794 with Iona being sacked in 802 and 806 . ( These attacks on Christian settlements in the islands of the west were not new . In the 6th century Tiree was raided by Pictish forces , Tory Island was attacked in the early 7th century by a " marine fleet " and <unk> of Eigg and 52 companions were murdered by Picts on Eigg in 617 . ) Various named Viking leaders , who were probably based in Scotland , appear in the Irish annals : <unk> in 837 , <unk> in 845 and Hákon in 847 . The king of Fortriu Eógan mac Óengusa and the king of Dál Riata Áed mac Boanta were among the dead in a major defeat to the Vikings in 839 . Another early reference to the Norse presence in the Irish records is that there was a king of " Viking Scotland " whose heir , <unk> , brought an army to Ireland in 848 . <unk> Find was a reported leader of the Gallgáedil fighting in Ireland in 857 . 
 The Frankish Annales Bertiniani may record the conquest of the Inner Hebrides by Vikings in 847 . Amlaíb Conung , who died in 874 , is described as the " son of the king of Lochlainn " in the Fragmentary Annals of Ireland also suggesting an early date for an organised kingdom of Viking Scotland . In the same source Amlaíb is also recorded as having gone to the aid of his father Gofraidh who was under assault from Vikings in Lochlainn , circa 872 . Gofraidh died in 873 and may have been succeeded by his son Ímar who also died that year . A lament for Áed mac Cináeda , a Pictish king who died in 878 , suggests Kintyre may have been lost to his kingdom at that time . The Isle of Man may also have been taken by the Norse in 877 and was certainly held by them by 900 . 
 = = Norðreyjar = = 
 The Northern Isles were " Pictish in culture and speech " prior to the Norse incursions , and although it is recorded that Orkney was " destroyed " by King Bridei in 682 it is not likely that the Pictish kings exerted a significant degree of ongoing control over island affairs . According to the Orkneyinga Saga , about 872 Harald Fairhair became King of a united Norway and many of his opponents fled to the islands of Scotland . Harald pursued his enemies and incorporated the Northern Isles into his kingdom in 875 and then , perhaps a little over a decade later , the Hebrides as well . The following year the local Viking chieftains of the Hebrides rebelled . Harald then sent Ketill Flatnose to subdue them . Ketill achieved this quickly but then declared himself an independent " King of the Isles " , a title he retained for the rest of his life . Hunter ( 2000 ) states that Ketill was " in charge of an extensive island realm and , as a result , sufficiently prestigious to contemplate the making of agreements and alliances with other princelings " . According to the Landnámabók <unk> became ruler of a region already settled by Scandinavians . Some scholars believe that this entire story is apocryphal and based on the later voyages of Magnus Barelegs . For example , Woolf ( 2007 ) suggests that his appearance in the sagas " looks very much like a story created in later days to legitimise Norwegian claims to sovereignty in the region " and suggests an early 11th @-@ century creation of the earldom of Orkney , prior to which local warlords competed for influence with one another and local populations of farmers . 
 Nonetheless , the Norse tradition states that Rognvald Eysteinsson received Orkney and Shetland from Harald as an earldom as reparation for the death of his son in battle in Scotland , and then passed the earldom on to his brother Sigurd the Mighty . Sigurd 's line barely survived him and it was Torf @-@ Einarr , Rognvald 's son by a slave , who founded a dynasty that controlled the Northern Isles for centuries after his death . He was succeeded by his son Thorfinn Turf @-@ Einarsson and during this time the deposed Norwegian King Eric Bloodaxe often used Orkney as a raiding base before being killed in 954 . Thorfinn 's death and presumed burial at the broch of Hoxa , on South Ronaldsay , then led to a long period of dynastic strife . Whatever the historical details , it seems likely that Orkney and Shetland were being rapidly absorbed into Norse culture by this time . 
 The evidence of toponymy and language is unequivocal . Placenames in Orkney with a Celtic derivation are few in number and it is clear that Norn , a local version of Old Norse , was widely spoken by the inhabitants into historic times . Norn was also spoken in Shetland and evidence for Pictish elements in placenames is virtually non @-@ existent , the three island names of Fetlar , Unst and Yell excepted . 
 Jarlshof in Shetland contains the most extensive remains of a Viking site visible anywhere in Britain and it is believed that the Norse inhabited the site continuously from the 9th to the 14th centuries . Amongst the many important finds are drawings scratched on slate of dragon @-@ prowed ships and a bronze @-@ gilt harness mounting made in Ireland in the 8th or 9th centuries . Brough of Birsay in Orkney is another important archaeological site , which like Jarlshof has a continuity of settlement spanning the Pictish and Norse periods . There is a remarkable collection of 12th @-@ century runic inscriptions inside Maeshowe . 
 = = Caithness and Sutherland = = 
 In early Irish literature Shetland is referred to as <unk> Catt — " the Isles of Cats " , which may have been the pre @-@ Norse inhabitants ' name for these islands . The Cat tribe certainly occupied parts of the northern Scottish mainland and their name can be found in Caithness , and in the Gaelic name for Sutherland ( Cataibh , meaning " among the Cats " ) . There is limited evidence that Caithness may have had an intermediate phase of Gaelic @-@ speaking control between the Pictish era and the Norse takeover , but if it existed it is likely to have been short @-@ lived . 
 Sigurd Eysteinsson and Thorstein the Red moved on northern Scotland , conquering large areas variously described in the sagas as constituting all of Caithness and Sutherland and possibly including territory in Ross and even Moray during the last decade of the 9th century . The Orkneyinga Saga relates how the former defeated the Pict Máel Brigte Tusk but died from an unusual post @-@ battle injury . 
 Thorfinn Torf @-@ Einarsson married into the native aristocracy and his son , <unk> Thorfinnsson , is recorded as having sought the support of the King of Scots in the 10th century in pursuing his claim as Mormaer of Caithness . Njáls saga relates that Sigurd the Stout was the ruler of " Ross and Moray , Sutherland and the Dales " of Caithness and it is possible that in the late 10th century the Scots kings were in alliance with the Earl of Orkney against the Mormaer of Moray . 
 Thorfinn Sigurdsson expanded his father 's realm south beyond Sutherland and by the 11th century the Norwegian crown had come to accept that Caithness was held by the Earls of Orkney as a fiefdom from the Kings of Scotland although its Norse character was retained throughout the 13th century . Raghnall mac Gofraidh was granted Caithness after assisting the Scots king in a conflict with Harald Maddadson , an earl of Orkney in the early 13th century . This joint earldom ceased after 1375 and the Pentland Firth became the border between Scotland and Norway . 
 No Norse place names have been found on the northern Scottish mainland south of Beauly and so far no archaeological evidence of Norse activity has been found in the north @-@ west mainland . 
 = = Suðreyjar = = 
 Like the Northern Isles , the Outer Hebrides and the northern Inner Hebrides were predominantly Pictish in the early 9th century . By contrast , the southern Inner Hebrides formed part of the Gaelic kingdom of Dál Riata . 
 The obliteration of pre @-@ Norse names in the Outer Hebrides and in Coll , Tiree and Islay in the Inner Hebrides is almost total and there is little continuity of style between Pictish pottery in the north and that of the Viking period . The similarities that do exist suggests the later pots may have been made by Norse who had settled in Ireland , or Irish slaves . There are frequent references in early Icelandic history to slaves from Ireland and the Hebrides , but none from Orkney . Gaelic certainly continued to exist as a spoken language in the southern Hebrides throughout the settlement period , but place name evidence suggests it had a lowly status and Norse may have survived as a spoken language until the 16th century in the Outer Hebrides . 
 There is no evidence of any direct Norwegian rule in the area other than a few brief occupations although the written record is weak and no contemporary records of the Norse period from the Outer Hebrides exist . It is however known that Hebrides were taxed using the Ounceland system and evidence from Bornais suggests that settlers there may have been more prosperous than families of a similar status in the Northern Isles , possibly due to a more relaxed political regime . Latterly , the Hebrides sent eight representatives from Lewis and Harris and Skye and another eight from the southern Hebrides to the Tynwald parliament on Man . 
 Colonsay and Oronsay have produced important pagan Norse burial grounds . An 11th @-@ century cross slab decorated with Irish and Ringerike Viking art on Islay was found in 1838 . Rubha an Dùnain , today an uninhabited peninsula to the south of the Cuillin hills on Skye , contains the small Loch na h @-@ Airde , which is connected to the sea by a short artificial canal . This loch was an important site for maritime activity for many centuries , spanning the Viking and later periods of Scottish clan rule . There is a stone @-@ built quay and a system to maintain constant water levels . Boat timbers discovered there have been dated to the 12th century . Only three rune stones are known from the west coast of Scotland , on Christian memorials found on Barra , Inchmarnock and Iona . 
 In the Firth of Clyde , Norse burials have been found on Arran , although not Bute and place name evidence suggests a settlement pattern that was much less well @-@ developed than in the Hebrides . On the mainland coast there is cluster of Norse place names around Largs and an ornate silver brooch was found on a hillside near Hunterston that is of likely 7th @-@ century Irish origin but with a 10th @-@ century runic inscription . Five Hogback monuments found in Govan hint at Scandinavian enclaves inland . 
 The Isle of Man ( which was absorbed into Scotland from 1266 until the 14th century ) was dominated by the Norse @-@ Gaels from an early date and from 1079 onwards by the Crovan dynasty as attested by the Chronicles of Mann and evidenced by the numerous Manx Runestones and Norse place names . The modern @-@ day Diocese of Sodor and Man retains the centuries @-@ old name . 
 = = <unk> of the Gael = = 
 South of Sutherland there is considerable place name evidence of Norse settlement along the entire western coast , although unlike on the islands the settlement in the south seems to have been less prolonged and undertaken in tandem with pre @-@ existing settlement rather than replacing it entirely . The distinction between the Innse Gall ( islands of the foreigners ) and the <unk> <unk> ( coastland of the Gael ) is further suggestive of a distinction between island and mainland at an early date . In Wester Ross most of the Gaelic names that exist on the coastline today are of likely Medieval rather than pre @-@ Norse origin and a now @-@ lost charter refers to the mainland village of Glenelg opposite Skye as having been in the possession of the king of Man . As in Orkney and Shetland , Pictish seems to have been entirely replaced wherever the Norse encountered it . 
 In the 9th century the first references to the Gallgáedil ( i.e. " foreign Gaels " ) appear . This term was variously used in succeeding centuries to refer to individuals of mixed Scandinavian @-@ Celtic descent and / or culture who became dominant in west and south @-@ west Scotland , parts of northern England and the isles . This alliance between the two cultures , which also took place in Ireland , may have been instrumental in saving the Gaels of Dál Riata from the fate of the Picts in the north and west . Evidence for Norse settlement in mainland Argyll is limited although the Port an Eilean <unk> ship burial in Ardnamurchan is the first boat burial site to be discovered on the mainland of Britain . 
 = = South west Scotland = = 
 By the mid 10th century Amlaíb Cuarán controlled The Rhinns and the region gets the modern name of Galloway from the mixture of Viking and Gaelic Irish settlement that produced the Gall @-@ Gaidel . Magnus Barelegs is said to have " subdued the people of Galloway " in the 11th century and Whithorn seems to have been a centre of Hiberno @-@ Norse artisans who traded around the Irish Sea by the end of the first millennium . However , the place name , written and archaeological evidence of extensive Norse ( as opposed to Norse @-@ Gael ) settlement in the area is not convincing . 
 The ounceland system seems to have become widespread down the west coast including much of Argyll and this is just as true of most of the south west apart from land adjacent to the inner Solway Firth . In Dumfries and Galloway the place name evidence is complex and of mixed Gaelic , Norse and Danish influence , the last most likely stemming from contact with the extensive Danish holdings in northern England . One feature of the area is the number of names with a " kirk " prefix followed by a saint 's name such as Kirkoswald . Interpretation of this is not certain but it is also indicative of a mixed Gaelic / Norse population . 
 = = Eastern Scotland = = 
 There is no evidence of permanent Viking settlement on the east coast south of the Moray Firth , or of Norse burials , although raids and even invasions certainly occurred . Dunnottar was taken during the reign of Domnall mac Causantín and the Orkneyinga saga records an attack on the Isle of May , by Sweyn Asleifsson and <unk> <unk> : 
 They sailed south off Scotland until they came to <unk> . There was a monastery , the head of which was an abbot , by name , Baldwin . Swein and his men were detained there seven nights by stress of bad weather . They said they had been sent by Earl Rögnvald to the King of Scots . The monks suspected their tale , and thinking they were pirates , sent to the mainland for men . When Swein and his comrades became aware of this , they went hastily aboard their ship , after having plundered much treasure from the monastery . 
 Place name evidence of Scandinavian settlement is very limited on the east coast and in the south @-@ east Anglian was the predominant influence during this period of history . 
 = = Internal politics = = 
 The first phase of Norse expansion was that of war bands seeking plunder and the creation of new settlements . The second phase involved the integration of these settlers into organised political structures of which the most prominent in the early part were the Earls of Orkney in the north and the Uí Ímair in the south . 
 Even if the commencement of a formal earldom of Orkney is a matter of discussion ( see above ) there is little doubt that the institution experienced continuity thereafter . Until the mid to late 11th century the Earls of Orkney and Kings of the Western Isles were probably independent rulers . The imposition of direct Norwegian rule at the end of this century brought this to a close in the north and unusually , from c . 1100 onwards the Norse jarls of the Northern Isles owed allegiance both to Norway for Orkney and to the Scottish crown through their holdings as Earls of Caithness . In 1231 the line of Norse earls , unbroken since Rognvald Eysteinsson , ended with Jon Haraldsson 's murder in Thurso . The Earldom of Caithness was granted to Magnus , second son of the Earl of Angus , whom Haakon IV of Norway confirmed as Earl of Orkney in 1236 . In 1379 the earldom passed to the Sinclair family , who were also barons of Roslin near Edinburgh although Orkney and Shetland remained part of Norway for a century more . 
 The situation in the <unk> was more complex . Different kings may have ruled over very different areas and few of them can be seen as exerting any kind of close control over this " far @-@ flung sea kingdom " . The Uí Ímair were certainly a powerful force from the late 9th to the early 11th century with dynasts such as Amlaíb Cuarán and Gofraid mac Arailt claiming kingship of the Isles . Norse sources also list various rulers such as jarls Gilli , Sigurd the Stout , Håkon Eiriksson and Thorfinn the Mighty as rulers over the Hebrides who were vassals of the Kings of Norway or Denmark . The dates from the Irish and Norse sources do not significantly overlap , but it is not clear if these are records of competing empires , or reflect Uí Ímar influence in the south and direct Norse rule in the north , or both . Furthermore , two records in the Annals of Innisfallen may suggest that the Western Isles were not " organised into a kingdom or earldom " at this time but rather that they were " ruled by assemblies of freeholders who regularly elected lawmen to preside over their public affairs " . The Annals of the Four Masters entries for 962 and 974 hint at a similar arrangement . Crawford ( 1987 ) suggests that influence from the south rather than the north was " usually predominant " whilst admitting that the islands probably formed " groups of more or less independent communities " . 
 Godred Crovan became the ruler of Dublin and Mann from 1079 and from the early years of the 12th century the Crovan dynasty asserted themselves and ruled as " Kings of Mann and the Isles " for the next half century . The kingdom was than sundered due to the actions of Somerled whose sons inherited the southern Hebrides whilst the Manx rulers held on to the " north isles " for another century . The origins of both Godred Crovan and Somerled are obscure — the former may have been an Uí Ímair dynast from Islay , the latter married a Crovan heiress . 
 Thus it is clear that although there were competing factions in play , the Hebrides and islands of the Clyde were essentially under the control of rulers of Scandinavian origin from " at least the late tenth century " until the emergence of the kingdom of Scotland and its 13th century expansion into the west . 
 = = Relations with Pictland , Strathclyde and Alba = = 
 The early Viking threats may have speeded a long term process of gaelicisation of the Pictish kingdoms , which adopted Gaelic language and customs . There was a merger of the Gaelic and Pictish crowns , although historians continue to debate whether it was a Pictish takeover of Dál Riata , or the other way around . This culminated in the rise of Cínaed mac Ailpín in the 840s , who brought to power the House of Alpin who were leaders of a combined Gaelic @-@ Pictish kingdom for almost two centuries . 
 In 870 Dumbarton was besieged by Amlaíb Conung and Ímar , " the two kings of the Northmen " , who " returned to Dublin from Britain " the following year with numerous captives . Dumbarton was the capital of the Kingdom of Strathclyde and this was clearly a major assault which may have brought the whole of mainland Scotland under temporary Ui <unk> control . Three years earlier Vikings had seized Northumbria , forming the Kingdom of York and subsequently conquered much of England except for a reduced Kingdom of Wessex , leaving the new combined Pictish and Gaelic kingdom almost encircled . Amlaíb and his brother Auisle " ravaged the whole of Pictland and took their hostages " and later occupied this territory for a protracted period . The 875 Battle of Dollar was another major setback for the Picts / Scots . 
 In 902 the Norse suffered a serious reverse in Ireland losing control of Dublin and this seems to have intensified attacks on the emerging kingdom of Alba . A year later Dunkeld was attacked and Ímar , the " grandson of Ímar " was killed in battle with the forces of Constantine II in mainland Scotland . In the late tenth century the battle of " <unk> " was won by Alban forces over Vikings . Yet these events were setbacks for the Norse rather than a definitive moment . Of more significance were their defeats at the Battle of Brunanburh in 937 and at the Battle of Tara in 980 . 
 In 962 Ildulb mac Causantín , King of Scots , was killed ( according to the Chronicle of the Kings of Alba ) fighting the Norse near Cullen , at the Battle of <unk> but the line of the House of Alpin held firm and the threat posed by the Scandinavian presence to the emergent Kingdom of Scotland lessened . Perhaps to counter growing Irish influence in the Western Isles Magnus Barelegs re @-@ established direct Norwegian overlordship there by 1098 . He first took Orkney , the northern Scottish mainland and the Hebrides , where he " dyed his sword red in blood " in the Uists . In that year , Edgar of Scotland signed a treaty with Magnus which settled much of the boundary between the Scots and Norwegian claims in the islands . Edgar formally acknowledged the existing situation by giving up his claims to the Hebrides and Kintyre . 
 Following the intervention of Somerled and his death at the Battle of Renfrew the Kings of the Isles were weakened relative to the Scottish state , but more than 150 years later Norway intervened again , this time unsuccessfully . Following Haakon Haakonarson 's ill @-@ fated invasion and the stalemate of the Battle of Largs the Hebrides and Mann and all rights that the Norwegian crown " had of old therein " were yielded to the Kingdom of Scotland as a result of the 1266 Treaty of Perth . 
 In 1468 Orkney was pledged by Christian I , in his capacity as king of Norway , as security against the payment of the dowry of his daughter Margaret , betrothed to James III of Scotland . As the money was never paid , the connection with the crown of Scotland has become perpetual . 
 = = Religion , culture and economy = = 
 Although there is evidence of varying burial rites practised by Norse settlers in Scotland , such as grave goods found on Colonsay and Westray , there is little that enables a confirmation that the Norse gods were venerated prior to the reintroduction of Christianity . The Odin Stone has been used as evidence of Odinic beliefs and practices but the derivation may well be from " <unk> stone " . A few Scandinavian poetic references suggest that Orcadian audiences understood elements of the Norse pantheon , although this is hardly conclusive proof of active beliefs . Nonetheless , it is likely that pagan practices existed in early Scandinavian Scotland . 
 According to the sagas , the Northern Isles were Christianised by Olav Tryggvasson in 995 when he stopped at South Walls on his way from Ireland to Norway . The King summoned the jarl Sigurd the Stout and said " I order you and all your subjects to be baptised . If you refuse , I 'll have you killed on the spot and I swear I will ravage every island with fire and steel . " Unsurprisingly , Sigurd agreed and the islands became Christian at a stroke , receiving their own bishop , Henry of Lund ( also known as " the Fat " ) , who was appointed sometime prior to 1035 . The greatest source of Scottish influence after the appointment of the Scottish earls in the 13th century was probably through the church , although it is clear that Scots influence on the culture of Orkney and Shetland was fairly limited until the close of the 14th century or later . An influx of Scottish entrepreneurs helped to create a diverse and independent community that included farmers , fishermen and merchants that called themselves <unk> <unk> and who proved themselves increasingly able to defend their rights against their feudal overlords , be they Norwegian or Scots . This independence of mind may have been fostered by the influence of Norwegian government which was essentially communal and federal by contrast with Scotland . It was not until the mid 16th century that the Norse institutions were replaced by Scottish systems following large @-@ scale immigration from the south and the islanders were probably bi @-@ lingual until the 17th century . 
 Once again , the situation in the Hebrides is much less clear . There was a Bishop of Iona until the late 10th century and there is then a gap of more than a century , possibly filled by the Bishops of Orkney , before the appointment of the first Bishop of Mann in 1079 . The conversion of Scandinavian Scotland and the resultant end to slavery and integration of Viking society into mainstream European culture was a significant event . It took place at an early date , although the popular image of marauding berserkers and of the Norse as " enemies of social progress " remains despite considerable evidence that in their latter phase the Norse @-@ speaking populations were rather " enlightened practitioners of maritime commercial principles " . <unk> were open @-@ air governmental assemblies that met in the presence of the jarl and the meetings were open to virtually all free men . At these sessions decisions were made , laws passed and complaints adjudicated . Examples include Tingwall and Law Ting Holm in Shetland , Dingwall in Easter Ross , and Tynwald on the Isle of Man . 
 Women enjoyed a relatively high status during the Viking Age , possibly due to the high degree of mobility in society . There is little knowledge of their role in the Scandinavian colonies of Scotland although the indirect evidence of graves during the pagan and Christian periods suggests roles similar to those held elsewhere . Amongst the best known figures are Gormflaith ingen Murchada , Gunnhild <unk> , Aud the Deep @-@ Minded and Ingibjörg , the daughter of Earl Hakon Paulsson and wife of King Olaf Godredsson . 
 The Norse legacy of art and architecture is limited . The Christchurch at Brough of Birsay , now reduced , was the early seat of the Bishop 's of Orkney . St. Magnus Cathedral , Kirkwall is peerless as an example of Norse @-@ era construction in Scotland and St. Magnus Church , on Egilsay retains its round tower . The iconic Lewis chessmen are the best known treasure trove and numerous finds of grave goods including brooches and weaponry such as the Scar boat burial are well @-@ documented . 
 There is growing evidence of the importance of trade and commerce . Data from the Outer Hebrides suggests that pigs were a more important aspect of Viking farming than prior to that time , that red deer numbers may have been controlled rather than the species simply being subject to hunting , that herring fishing became an important commercial consideration and that trade with centres to the south such as Dublin and Bristol may have been important . Coins found at Bornais and Cille <unk> were produced in Norway , Westphalia , and England , although there were none from Scotland . Ivory from Greenland was also found there . 
 = = Present day influence = = 
 Norse and Viking colonisations and settlements have made an impression on peripheral Scotland , the evidence for which can be found in place names , language , genetics and other aspects of cultural heritage . 
 The Scandinavian influence in Scotland was probably at its height in the mid 11th century during the time of Thorfinn Sigurdsson , who attempted to create a single political and ecclesiastical domain stretching from Shetland to Man . The Suðreyjar have a total land area of approximately 8 @,@ 374 square kilometres ( 3 @,@ 233 sq mi ) . Caithness and Sutherland have a combined area of 7 @,@ 051 square kilometres ( 2 @,@ 722 sq mi ) and the permanent Scandinavian holdings in Scotland at that time must therefore have been at minimum between a fifth and a quarter of the land area of modern Scotland . 
 The Viking invasions may have inadvertently played a role in the creation of modern Scotland . Their destructive raids initially weakened Pictland , Strathclyde and Dal Riata , but these " harassed remnants " eventually became a united front and Norse aggression thus played a significant role in the creation of the kingdom of Alba , the nucleus from which the Scottish kingdom expanded as the Viking influence waned , just as in the south Wessex expanded to become the kingdom of England . 
 Some Scots take pride in their Scandinavian ancestry . For example , Clan MacLeod of Lewis claims its descent from Leod , who according to tradition was a younger son of Olaf the Black . Clan MacNeacail of Skye also claim Norse ancestry , and occasional references are made to the idea of Scotland joining " the Nordic circle of nations " in modern political debate . Yet , unlike the Danelaw in England , the Scandinavian occupation of Scotland has no single common name . This may be a reflection of the less well documented nature of the various invasions involved , but it also hints at a relative lack of popular understanding of the history . By comparison to the Roman occupations of Scotland the Norse kingdoms were much longer lived , more recent and had a significantly more dramatic influence on spoken language and by extension culture and lifestyles generally . They were however confined to areas that are relatively remote from the main centres of modern population . Furthermore , regardless of the actual impact of Scandinavian culture , the hereditary leaders of the Scots nation are generally descended from Pictish and Gaelic stock . The Vikings are thus often seen in a negative light and as a foreign invasion rather than as a key part of a multi @-@ cultural polity . 
 Nonetheless , in the Northern Isles the Scandinavian connection is still celebrated , one of the best @-@ known such events being the Lerwick fire @-@ festival Up Helly Aa . In particular , Shetland 's connection with Norway has proven to be enduring . When Norway became independent again in 1905 the Shetland authorities sent a letter to King Haakon VII in which they stated : " Today no ' foreign ' flag is more familiar or more welcome in our voes and havens than that of Norway , and Shetlanders continue to look upon Norway as their mother @-@ land , and recall with pride and affection the time when their forefathers were under the rule of the Kings of Norway . " At the 2013 Viking Congress held in Shetland the Scottish Government announced plans to strengthen Scotland ’ s historic links with Scandinavia . 
 = Dragon Quest ( video game ) = 
 Dragon Quest ( Japanese : ドラゴンクエスト , Hepburn : Doragon Kuesuto ) , also released as Dragon Warrior , is the first role @-@ playing video game ( RPG ) in the Dragon Quest media franchise . It was developed by Chunsoft for the Family Computer ( or Famicom for short ) and published by Enix in Japan in 1986 as Dragon Quest and by Nintendo in 1989 in North America for the Nintendo Entertainment System ( or NES ) as Dragon Warrior . Dragon Quest has been ported and remade for several video game platforms , including the MSX , PC @-@ 9801 , X68000 , Super Famicom , Game Boy Color , and mobile phones . In play , players control a hero character who is charged with saving the Kingdom of Alefgard and rescuing its princess from the evil Dragonlord . Dragon Warrior 's story became the second part in a trilogy . Several more anime and manga games , which revolved around this overarching plot were created . 
 Dragon Quest was created by Yuji Horii , who took inspiration from previous role @-@ playing games such as Wizardry , Ultima , and his own 1983 title The Portopia Serial Murder Case . Horii wanted to create an RPG which would appeal to a wide audience of people who were unfamiliar with the genre of video games in general . He tried to place a greater emphasis on storytelling and emotional involvement , as well as simplify the interface and expose the mostly Western computer genre to the Japanese console market . Manga artist and Dragon Ball creator Akira Toriyama produced the game 's artwork and Koichi Sugiyama composed its music . The North American version featured numerous changes , including battery @-@ backed RAM save games ( rather than using a password save system ) , modified character sprites and pseudo @-@ Elizabethan English style dialog . 
 Dragon Quest was commercially successful in Japan , with more than 2 million copies sold . Its release as Dragon Warrior in North America , and other Western countries , was less favorably received . Later , Western critics noted the game 's shortcomings but acknowledged its importance to the genre . Its original pseudo @-@ Elizabethan English script has been praised in many of these reviews . Fan @-@ made ROM hacks were released with substantial changes to the game . The game 's sound effects have also been orchestrated , and its music has been performed at numerous concerts . As a whole , Dragon Warrior has been credited with establishing the basic template for the Japanese console RPGs that followed . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Dragon Warrior is a role @-@ playing video game . Its gameplay mechanics have been described , years after its release , as simplistic and spartan . Players control a young hero who sets out to defeat a being known as the Dragonlord . Before starting the game , players are presented with a menu which allows them to begin a new quest ( a game ) , continue a previous quest , or change the speed in which messages appear on the screen . In the Japanese version , continuing a quest requires players to enter a password ; in the North American Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) English version , the quest is saved onto the game cartridge 's battery @-@ backup ( known in the game as an " Adventure Log " in the " Imperial Scrolls of Honor " ) . The English version also has options to delete or duplicate a saved quest . If players choose to start a new quest , they may give the hero any name they wish in either Japanese kana or English letters depending on the version . The hero 's name has an effect on his initial ability scores and their statistical growth over the course of the game . Each stat falls into one of two categories , one with faster growth than the other , and the game determines which path each stat uses with a formula based on the kana or letters in the character 's name . 
 Dragon Warrior presents players with a clear objective from the start and uses a series of smaller scenarios to increase the hero 's strength in order to achieve the objective . The game begins in King Lorik 's chamber in Tantegel Castle , where the hero receives information about the Dragonlord , whom he must defeat , and the stolen Balls of Light , which he must retrieve . After receiving some items and gold , the hero sets out on his quest . Much of Dragon Warrior is spent talking to townspeople and gathering information from them that leads to additional places , events , and secrets . Players are advised to take notes of these hints for future reference . Towns contain shops that sell improved weapons and armor ; general stores where the player may buy other goods ; inns that allow the hero to recover his health and magic , and shops that offer keys for purchase . Players may sell items at half price to shops that provide weapons , armor , or general goods . The hero 's status window is shown whenever he stops moving , displaying his current experience level ( LV ) and the amount of hit points ( HP ) , magic points ( MP ) , gold ( G ) , and experience points ( E ) . 
 To safely progress to the next areas in the game , players need to accumulate experience points and gold by defeating enemies outside of towns – in the overworld and in dungeons . Apart from the Dragonlord 's castle , there are no physical restrictions on where players can roam . Instead , monsters increase in difficulty as players venture further from Tantegel castle . As the hero 's level increases , players can explore further afield with less risk . Enemies appear in random encounters and the hero fights one opponent at a time . The encounter rate is lowest on fields and increases in forests and hills . Battles are turn @-@ based and fought from a first @-@ person perspective while the hero remains off @-@ screen . In combat , players must defeat the enemy by reducing its HP to zero . During combat , players have four commands : " fight " , " run " , " spell " , and " item " . The " fight " command causes the hero to attack the enemy with a weapon , or with his bare fists if no weapon is available , in an attempt to inflict damage . With the " run " command , the hero attempts to escape from a battle , which is recommended if his HP is low . The " spell " command casts magic that can , for example , heal the hero or damage the enemy . The " item " command uses herbs that replenish the hero 's HP . 
 During combat , the hero loses HP when he takes damage , and the display turns red when his HP is low . If his HP falls to zero , he dies and is taken back to King Lorik to be resurrected , and loses half his gold as punishment . If the hero succeeds in defeating an enemy , he gains experience points and gold ; if he gains enough experience points , his experience level increases , giving him greater strength , agility , speed , and the ability to use magic spells . Every time a spell is used , the hero 's MP decreases , with different spells costing different amounts of MP . Both HP and MP can be restored by resting at an inn . Additionally , a non @-@ player character can replenish the hero 's MP in Tantegel Castle . As the hero earns more gold , he can purchase better weapons , armor , and items . However , players have limited inventory space to hold items , so they must manage their item collection conservatively . The caves which the hero explores are dark and require the use of a torch or the " <unk> " spell to display a temporary field of vision around the character . In the English version , players can return to King Lorik at any point to save the quest . Because the Japanese version does not have a battery backup , players receive a password to return to a quest at a later time . 
 The control pad may be used to move the hero in any direction and to move the flashing cursor in menu displays . Additional buttons confirm and cancel commands . In the English version , players use menu commands to talk to people , check their status , search beneath their feet , use items , take treasure chests , open doors , and go up or down stairs . However , in some of the game 's later remakes , certain commands were assigned to buttons , navigating stairs became automatic , and the hero 's speed was increased . In the Japanese version , characters always face forward , so players must choose a command and then a direction in which to perform that action . In the North American version , the hero turns to face the direction he is moving , making direction selection unnecessary . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dragon Warrior 's plot is a simplistic medieval " rescue the princess , slay the <unk> , and get the orb of light " story . 
 = = = Backstory = = = 
 Dragon Warrior , its sequel , Dragon Quest II , and its prequel , Dragon Quest III , comprise a trilogy with a shared timeline . The story 's background begins when the kingdom of Alefgard was shrouded in permanent darkness . The brave warrior Erdrick ( known as " Loto " in the Game Boy Color ( GBC ) remake of the game ) defeated an evil creature and restored light to the land . In Erdrick 's possession was the Ball of Light , which he used to drive away enemies who threatened the kingdom . Erdrick handed the Ball of Light to King Lorik , and Alefgard remained peaceful for a long time . The Ball of Light kept winters short in Alefgard and helped maintain peace and prosperity for the region . 
 However , there is one man who shunned the Ball of Light 's radiance and secluded himself in a mountain cave . One day , while exploring the cave 's extensive network of tunnels , the man encountered a sleeping dragon who awoke upon his entrance . He feared the dragon would incinerate him with its fiery breath , but the dragon instead knelt before him and obeyed his commands . This man , who is later discovered to be a dragon , became known as the Dragonlord . One day , after his soul became corrupted by learning magic , the Dragonlord attacked Tantegel Castle and the nearby town of <unk> with his fleet of dragons and set the town on fire . Riding a large red dragon , the Dragonlord descended upon Tantegel Castle and stole the Ball of Light . Soon , monsters began to appear throughout the entire land , destroying everything in their paths . Much of the land became poisonous marshes , and at least one destroyed town ( <unk> , whose name is erroneously transposed with that of <unk> in the " Adventurer 's Handbook " walkthrough ) never recovered and remains in ruins even as of the time of gameplay . 
 The following day , Erdrick arrived at Tantegel Castle to speak with King Lorik and offered his help to defeat the Dragonlord . After searching the land for clues to the Dragonlord 's whereabouts , Erdrick found that the Dragonlord lived on an island that could be accessed only via a magical bridge that only a " Rainbow Drop " could generate . After venturing to the island , Erdrick was never heard from again . Many years later , during King Lorik XVI 's reign , the Dragonlord attacked the kingdom again and captured Princess Gwaelin . Many heroes tried to rescue the princess and recover the Ball of Light from the Dragonlord 's castle , called Charlock , but none succeeded . The prophet <unk> predicted that " One day , a descendant of the valiant Erdrick shall come forth to defeat the Dragonlord . " However , when the descendant ( the game 's hero ) arrives , many of the people of Alefgard have forgotten the story of Erdrick , and those few who do remember consider it a myth and do not believe in <unk> 's prophecy . King Lorik starts to mourn the decline of his kingdom . 
 = = = Main story = = = 
 The game begins when the player assumes the role of a stranger who arrives at Tantegel Castle . A castle guard tells him that a dragon has captured the princess and is holding her captive in a distant cave . Determined to rescue the princess and defeat the Dragonlord , he discovers an ancient tablet hidden inside a desert cave ; carved on the tablet is a message from Erdrick that outlines what the hero needs to do to follow in Erdrick 's footsteps and defeat the Dragonlord . The hero eventually rescues Princess Gwaelin , but realizes that in order to restore light to Alefgard , he must defeat the Dragonlord at Charlock Castle . After the hero collects a series of relics , he creates a bridge to reach Charlock and fights his way through the castle before finally confronting the Dragonlord . At this point the hero is given a dialogue choice – to side with the Dragonlord or to challenge him . If players choose the former , the game ends , the hero is put to sleep , and the game freezes ( and , in the battery @-@ operated North American NES version , deletes the player 's saved game and possibly one or both others on the cartridge ) ; however , in the GBC remake , the hero instead wakes up from a bad dream . If players choose to fight , a final battle between the hero and the Dragonlord commences . 
 Once the hero defeats the Dragonlord , he triumphantly returns to Tantegel Castle where King Lorik offers his kingdom as a reward . The hero turns down the offer and instead wishes to find his own kingdom . Accompanied by Princess Gwaelin , the hero then sets off in search of a new land ; this sets the stage for the events in Dragon Warrior II , which take place many years later and tells the story of three of the hero 's descendants . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 In Dragon Warrior the hero and the Dragonlord are the two main characters . Other major supporting characters are King Lorik ( King Lars in the GBC remake ) ; his daughter Princess Gwaelin ( Lady Lora ) , and two sages the hero meets during his journey . 
 The hero , who comes from a land beyond Alefgard , is a descendant of the legendary Erdrick . When the hero arrives , he does not appear to be a warrior – he arrives without weapons or armor – and is ignorant of the situation . The populace thinks his claim of the ability to defeat the Dragonlord are preposterous ; however , King Lorik sees this ability , which give him hope and he aids the hero on his quest . 
 The Dragonlord is a dragon who rules from Charlock Castle , which is visible from Tantegel Castle , the game 's starting point . His soul became evil by learning magic . Rumors say that , through a spy network , he knows everything that happens in Alefgard . He seeks " unlimited power and destruction " , which results in a rising tide of evil throughout Alefgard . The Dragonlord wants to enslave the world with his army of monsters that he controls with his will . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Yuji Horii and his team at Chunsoft began developing Dragon Quest in 1985 . It was released in Japan in 1986 for the Famicom , the MSX , and the PC @-@ 9801 . Dragon Quest has been released on multiple platforms since its initial release , including the X68000 in 1992 in Japan , and for mobile phones in 2004 with updated graphics similar to those of Dragon Quest VI . 
 = = = Historical backdrop = = = 
 When <unk> <unk> Service Center was founded in 1975 it published tabloid magazines that advertised real estate . In 1982 , after failing to establish a chain of stores , the company 's founder Yasuhiro Fukushima transformed it into a software company devoted to gaming and renamed it Enix . To find talent for the company , Fukushima held the " Enix Game Hobby Program Contest " . The competition was styled after manga competitions , was advertised in computer and manga magazines , and had a ¥ 1 million prize for the winners . The winners were <unk> Morita ( <unk> ) , Koichi Nakamura , and manga magazine Shōnen Jump editor Yuji Horii , who was the top winner . Horii designed a tennis game , Love Match Tennis , which became Enix 's first release . While he did not believe he would win , he was motivated by his editor , who enjoyed the games and published Horii 's articles on them . Later , when Enix began creating games for the NES , Fukushima held another contest . This time , Nakamura won with his " cartoonish and creative contest entry " Door Door , which became Enix 's first release for the NES . 
 Horii 's earliest inspiration for Dragon Quest is his own 1983 PC visual novel The Portopia Serial Murder Case – a murder mystery adventure game that bears similarities to games such as Mystery House , Zork , King 's Quest , and particularly Déjà Vu . Horii wanted to advance the game 's storyline by using dialogue . Portopia was originally released for Japan 's NEC PC @-@ 6001 and was later ported to the NES in 1985 . The port is Enix 's second release for the system and the first game which Horii and Nakamura worked on together . Horii redesigned the interface for the port to accommodate the console 's limited controls , and added areas to the game in which the detective battles monsters . While Portopia did not directly result in Dragon Quest 's creation , it was , according to 1UP.com , " a proving ground " for the RPG . The menu @-@ based command system of Portopia would later be used in Dragon Quest . 
 The original idea for Dragon Quest came during the development of Portopia . Horii and Nakamura came across the RPG Wizardry at a Macworld Conference & Expo . While it had some influence on Portopia 's dungeon crawl segments , Horii liked the game 's depth and visuals . He wanted to create a game similar to Wizardry , to expose the mainly Western @-@ exclusive RPG genre to Japan and to expand the genre past computer enthusiasts . Horii also cited Ultima as an inspiration for Dragon Quest 's gameplay , specifically the first @-@ person random battles in Wizardry and the overhead perspective of Ultima . While the RPG genre was predominantly Western and limited to PCs , Japanese gamers enjoyed home @-@ grown games such as the The Black Onyx and the Dragon Slayer series alongside Western RPG ports . However , while Horii and Nakamura enjoyed the dungeon crawling and statistical nature of Wizardry , they realized most people would not . This had not originally been a concern , but the success of Super Mario Bros. greatly increased the potential audience of any new Famicom / NES game . To create Dragon Quest , the gameplay needed to be simplified . According to Horii : " There was no keyboard , and the system was much simpler , using just a [ game ] controller . But I still thought that it would be really exciting for the player to play as their alter ego in the game . I personally was playing Wizardry and Ultima at the time , and I really enjoyed seeing my own self in the game . " 
 In order to create an RPG that would appeal to a wide audience unfamiliar with the genre , and video games in general , Horii wanted to create a new kind of RPG that did not rely on previous experience with the Dungeons & Dragons tabletop RPG , did not require hundreds of hours of rote fighting , and could appeal to any kind of gamer . To accomplish this he needed to simplify the system and have players associate themselves with the hero . Thus as the game progressed , the hero would become stronger , in contrast to games like Super Mario Bros. where the character Mario did not become progressively more powerful during the game . He wanted to build on Portopia and place a greater emphasis on storytelling and emotional involvement . He developed a coming @-@ of @-@ age tale that audiences could relate to and made use of RPG level @-@ building gameplay as a way to represent this . 
 = = = Japanese development = = = 
 Horii believed that the Famicom was the ideal platform for Dragon Quest , because unlike arcade games , players would not worry about spending money if they got a game over , and they could continue playing from where they left off . Whenever the player loses a battle , they would immediately be restored to a previous save point rather than the game ending and returned to the main menu , making the game more accessible . He also wanted to include multiple player characters but was forced to use only one due to memory constraints . Horii knew that RPGs had a steeper learning curve than other video games of the time , and to compensate for this he implemented quick level @-@ ups at the start of the game and gave players a clear final goal that is visible from the world map 's starting point : the Dragonlord 's castle . He also provided a series of smaller scenarios in order to build up the player 's strength to achieve the final objective . He created an open world which is not blocked physically in any way except by monsters that can easily kill unprepared players ; Gamasutra described this as one of the earliest examples of nonlinear gameplay . Horii used bridges to signify changes in difficulty and implemented a level progression with a high starting growth rate that decelerates over time , which contrasted to the random initial stats and constant growth rates of the early editions of Dungeons & Dragons . To make the game appeal to a larger audience , manga artist and creator of Dragon Ball , Akira Toriyama , was hired to produce the artwork . As with Dragon Ball , Toriyama 's artwork features characters " whose strength and cunning transcend generations " , but also includes humorous elements such as a chibi style . 
 Koichi Sugiyama , the game 's music composer , sought Enix out . Sugiyama sent a PC game 's feedback questionnaire to Enix . He was already a well @-@ known television composer , and , upon seeing Sugiyama 's feedback , Fukushima contacted him to confirm that " he was the Sugiyama from television . " Upon confirmation , Fukushima asked Sugiyama to compose a score for Dragon Quest . The game 's classical score was Sugiyama 's second video game composition after Wingman 2 . Sugiyama said it took him five minutes to compose the original opening theme , and noted the difficulty in adding a personal touch to the short jingles , but that his past experience with creating music for television commercials helped . According to Sugiyama , the composer has between three and five seconds to catch the audience 's attention through music . The theme and his other jingles for Dragon Quest have remained relatively intact in its sequels . 
 = = = North American localization = = = 
 Coverage of Dragon Quest 's North American localization first appeared in Nintendo Fun Club News 's winter 1988 issue – where the title changed to Dragon Warrior . The title was changed to avoid infringing on the trademark on wargame publisher Simulations Publications 's pen @-@ and @-@ paper RPG DragonQuest . The article about the game featured images from the game 's Japanese version , Erdrick 's original name ( " Roto " ) , the Dragonlord 's original name ( " Dragon King " ) , and the original name of the game 's starting location ( <unk> Castle ) . It briefly explained the backstory and basic gameplay elements , comparing the game to The Legend of Zelda . The game was later mentioned in Nintendo Power 's " Pak Watch " preview section in March 1989 , mentioning Dragon Quest III 's Japanese release in the magazine 's premiere July 1988 issue . It again mentioned the change of name from Dragon Quest to Dragon Warrior , its inspiration of two Japanese sequels , and that its release was still distant in time . 
 Dragon Warrior was released in North America by Nintendo of America under the direction of Satoru Iwata with help from Horii in August 1989 – months before the Japanese release of Dragon Quest IV . Because the game was released in North America nearly three years after the original release in Japan , the graphics were improved . Instead of lengthy passwords with kana characters , the North American version features a battery @-@ backed RAM <unk> . Akira Toriyama 's artwork in the instruction booklets was also changed to reflect more of a traditional tone as found in popular American based RPGs such as the Ultima series . The game 's character sprites were changed so that they face their direction of travel ; in the Japanese versions , the sprites are smaller and face only forwards , requiring players to choose a direction for actions from a menu . Spells were given self @-@ explanatory one @-@ word titles instead of the made @-@ up words of the Japanese version . Locations were renamed , and dialogue was rewritten from its <unk> style comparable to Dragon Ball to a style inspired by Elizabethan English , with sentences such as " Thy hit points have decreased by 1 . " Nintendo also removed salacious humor and religious connotations from the English @-@ language version . For example , in the Japanese version , in the town where the hero first buys keys , a woman offers to sell puff @-@ puff – a Japanese onomatopoeia for a girl rubbing her breasts in someone 's face , or juggling her own breasts . In the North American version , the same woman sells tomatoes . The term has been included in the game 's sequels as well as in Toriyama 's Dragon Ball series . 
 Katsuya Terada created some of the artwork for the early Dragon Warrior articles in Nintendo Power . Neither Terada nor those editing the artwork for the instruction booklet followed Toriyama 's work ; they instead used the settings and character poses to create alternate artwork in an American style . While the Japanese hero was drawn in a super deformed manga style , the English version 's appearance is based on " the West 's template of a medieval hero " . 
 In June 1989 , Electronic Gaming Monthly 's " <unk> " speculated that Dragon Warrior would be Nintendo 's " big release " in North America that Christmas . He based this on the series 's immense popularity in Japan especially after Dragon Quest III 's sales . Nintendo Power provided three feature articles on Dragon Warrior for issues between May and October 1989 and the November – December 1989 issue includes a strategy guide . The March – April 1990 issue of Nintendo Power has a map of the game world , with a poster of Super Contra on the other side , and also features a Dragon Warrior text adventure . 
 In late 1990 , Nintendo Power gave free copies of Dragon Warrior to subscribers , including a 64 @-@ page " Explorer 's Handbook " that has a full walkthrough of the game and additional backstory not mentioned in the original instruction booklet . Nintendo was reportedly interested in getting rid of unsold copies of the game , so it gave them away to subscribers . At the time , the game cost approximately US $ 50 at retail and the magazine 's subscription fee was only US $ 20 ( $ 95 and $ 38 respectively , adjusted for inflation ) . The giveaway attracted nearly 500 @,@ 000 new magazine subscribers , and many more renewed their subscription just to get the game . This ultimately led to the success of the series in the Western market . 
 = = = Re @-@ releases and remakes = = = 
 Enix remade Dragon Quest and Dragon Quest II for a one @-@ cartridge compilation known as Dragon Quest I + II for the Super Famicom on December 18 , 1993 . The remake sold over 1 @.@ 2 million copies in Japan . In 1998 , Enix released BS Dragon Quest for the Super Famicom Satellaview extension exclusively in Japan . The latter consisted of four one @-@ hour scenarios which players would download on a weekly schedule . Players were tasked with leveling their character , collecting medals and completing scenario @-@ specific conditions with special events designed to occur under specific conditions in real @-@ time . 
 Dragon Warrior and Dragon Warrior II were re @-@ released as part of a similar compilation for the GBC , titled Dragon Warrior I & II . It was developed by Tose and released by Enix on September 23 , 1999 in Japan and September 27 , 2000 , in North America . It uses an entirely new translation , discards the pseudo @-@ Elizabethan English style and uses names closer to those in the Japanese version . In this remake , " Dragonlord " is changed to " <unk> " , and " Erdrick " is changed to " Loto " . Several additional features were added . For example , players can quicksave their game anytime outside a battle ; the quicksave is deleted after it or a standard saved game is loaded . Players can store some of their gold for future use in a bank in case they die . The menu was streamlined and monsters yield more experience and gold to reduce the amount of time needed to increase levels and to make saving up for in @-@ game purchases faster . 
 In 2004 , the game , along with its sequel , were remade for mobile phones in Japan . This version is graphically based on the Super Famicom remake of Dragon Quest III . 
 Both the Famicom and Super Famicom versions of the game , together with Dragon Quest II and Dragon Quest III , were re @-@ released on the Dragon Quest 25th Anniversary Collection compilation for the Wii in Japan on September 15 , 2011 . The compilation includes original copies of the games ' strategy guides , original artwork and material on the games ' development . In October 2013 , Square Enix announced that they were re @-@ releasing Dragon Quest I – VIII for both Android and iOS . In November 2013 , the game was released for the iOS & Android mobile platforms in Japan . This release is based on the 2004 mobile remake of the game . The United States and Europe mobile versions were released on September 11 , 2014 . 
 = = Related media = = 
 Dragon Warrior has inspired related media in the form of a manga series , which has been adapted to anime , and a symphonic video game soundtrack . 
 = = = Anime and manga = = = 
 The manga series , Dragon Quest Retsuden : Roto no Monshō ( ドラゴンクエスト列伝 ロトの紋章 ? , Dragon Quest Saga : Emblem of Roto ) , was written by Chiaki Kawamata and Junji Koyanagi , with artwork by Kamui Fujiwara , and was published between 1991 and 1997 by Monthly Shōnen Gangan . Enix compiled the series into 21 volumes , which were later released on compact disc in 1994 . It was released on December 11 , 2009 for the PlayStation Store as part of the initial launch of Sony 's digital comic distribution . In 1996 , an anime movie based on the manga was released on videocassette . Square Enix started publishing a sequel series , Dragon Quest Retsuden : Roto no Monshō ~ Monshō o Tsugumono @-@ tachi e ~ ( ドラゴンクエスト列伝 ロトの紋章 ～ <unk> ～ ? , Dragon Quest Retsuden : Emblem of Roto – To the Children Who Inherit the Emblem ) , in 2005 . Jun Eishima wrote the first four volumes , and Takashi <unk> wrote the last five ; Yuji Horii supervised the manga , while Kamui Fujiwara contributed the artwork . 
 Dragon Quest Saga : Emblem of Roto takes place between Dragon Warrior III and Dragon Warrior . After monsters possessed Carmen 's king for seven years , the kingdom fell to the hordes of evil . The only survivors were Prince Arus and an army General 's daughter , Lunafrea . Meanwhile , in the Kingdom of Loran , a child is born and is named Jagan in accordance with the demon lord Imagine 's orders . Arus and Lunafrea set out to defeat the monsters and restore peace to the world . The sequel , To the Children Who Inherit the Emblem , takes place five years after the events in Dragon Quest Saga : Emblem of Roto . The world is again in chaos and a young boy , <unk> ( <unk> ) , sets out to gather companions to help him save the world from evil . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 Koichi Sugiyama composed and directed the music for Dragon Warrior . The soundtrack included eight tracks , which RPGFan said was " the foundation for Sugiyama 's career " . The pieces were arranged and incorporated into later Dragon Warrior games ' soundtracks . The music has been released in a variety of formats . The first is as a Drama CD , released by Enix on July 19 , 1991 , which incorporated a narrated story . Super Famicom Edition Symphonic Suite Dragon Quest I , published by Sony Records on January 12 , 1994 , followed ; the soundtrack featured orchestral versions of the tracks played by the London Philharmonic Orchestra and the original versions of the tunes . The game 's classical score was considered revolutionary for console game music . The soundtrack 's " eight melodies " approach set the template for most RPG soundtracks released since then , hundreds of which have been organized in a similar manner . 
 The orchestral albums for Dragon Warrior I and II were combined in Symphonic Suite Dragon Quest I • II , released by SME Visual Works on August 23 , 2000 , King Records reprinted it on October 7 , 2009 . The orchestral tracks were again released in the Symphonic Suite Dragon Quest I album , including orchestral versions of the game 's sound effects . Numerous live concerts have featured performances of the game 's music ; many performances were later released as albums such as Dragon Quest in Concert and Suite Dragon Quest I • II . 
 = = Reception and sales = = 
 = = = NES version = = = 
 Initial sales of the game were so low , Enix was going to lose money , but several Shonen Jump articles by Horii helped increase its sales substantially . People liked Toriyama 's artwork and Sugiyama 's music , which the book Power @-@ Up : How Japanese Video Games Gave the World an Extra Life said " was richer and more exciting than any game music had ever sounded " . The game was extremely popular in Japan and became the first in a series that in 2016 includes eleven games with several spin @-@ off series and stand @-@ alone titles . More than 2 million copies were sold of the Japanese version . The Dragon Quest I & II remake for the SNES yielded 1 @.@ 2 million copies sold in Japan . The 1989 " All Soft Catalog " issue of Famicom Tsūshin ( now Famitsu ) included Dragon Quest in its list of the best games of all time , receiving the Best RPG and Best Character Design awards , but losing to Dragon Quest III for the overall Grand Prize for best game of all time . 
 Several years after its Japanese release , the first English @-@ language version of Dragon Warrior garnered average reviews overall . Nintendo Power ranked it as third out of five upon its original release . It debuted at No. 7 on the magazine 's bimonthly " Top 30 " top NES games list in November 1989 . It climbed to No. 5 in January 1990 and remained there for 4 months ; it then dropped to No. 11 in May , No. 14 in July , and No. 16 in September 1990 before it dropped off the list . In the " Nintendo Power Awards 1989 " , the game was nominated for " Best Theme , Fun " and " Best Overall " ; it failed to win in either category . In response to Japanese youths ' arrests while waiting for Dragon Quest III 's release , Electronic Gaming Monthly 's <unk> said that the game was not " that special at all " , compared it to the NES version of Ultima III : Exodus and recommended that others play that game instead . While the English version has been seen as a commercial failure , according to Chris Kohler , the Nintendo Power subscription was a success and allowed Enix to bring the next three games over . He said Nintendo profited immensely from the Dragon Warrior subscription giveaway because " Nintendo Power was essentially a hundred @-@ page monthly ad for Nintendo products " , and it was now in thousands of households . 
 The game 's release has been regarded as important in the history of the console RPG . Kohler noted that Toriyama 's and Sugiyama 's contributions to the game " made Dragon Quest as visually and aurally exciting as the game play was unique and sophisticated . " GameSpot named it as one of the fifteen most influential titles in video game history . IGN listed it as the eighth best all @-@ time NES game . In 2005 , it listed it as the 92nd @-@ best all @-@ time video game , and in 2007 it listed the game as the 29th best . Nintendo Power rated Dragon Warrior as the 140th @-@ best game made for the Nintendo System in its Top 200 Games list in 2006 . IGN reviewed the game years later and gave it a 7 @.@ 8 out of 10 , and RPGamer 's Bill Johnson gave it a 4 out of 5 overall score . The NES ' localization received considerable praise for adding extra characters and depth to the story . The removal of the stylized dialogue in the GBC remake has similarly been lamented . 
 Seemingly primitive by today 's standards , Dragon Warrior features one @-@ on @-@ one combat , a limited item and equipment array , ten spells , five towns , and five dungeons . While noting its importance to the development of the RPG genre , Allgame reviewer Kyle Knight states that " taken on its own merits , it 's just not an enjoyable game to play . " 1UP.com explained why the series was not immensely popular at first in North America ; American console gamers were not used to the idea of RPGs , and they said that it would take a decade for the genre to be " flashy enough to distract from all of those words they made you read " . GameCritics ' Chi Kong Lui wrote that the game added realism to video games , and added , " If a player perished in Dragon Warrior , he or she had to suffer the dire consequences of losing progress and precious gold . That element of death evoked a sense of instinctive fear and tension for survival . " This , he said , allowed players to identify with the main character on a much larger scale . IGN writer Mark Nix compared the game 's seemingly archaic plot to more modern RPGs ; he said : " Noble blood means nothing when the society is capitalist , aristocratic , or militaristic . Damsels don 't need rescuing – they need a battle axe and some magic tutoring in the field . " While reviewing Dragon Quest VIII : Journey of the Cursed King , GameSpy staff wrote that , for many gamers , Dragon Warrior is their first exposure to the console RPG . Recalling their past , a staff member commented : 
 It opened my eyes to a fun new type of gameplay . Suddenly strategy ( or at least pressing the " A " button ) was more important than reflex , and the story was slightly ( slightly ! ) more complex than the ' rescue the princess ' stuff I 'd seen up ' till then . After all , Dragon Warrior was only half @-@ over when you rescued its princess . 
 Bill Johnson compared Dragon Warrior to modern RPGs and noted the game 's complete lack of replay value , which is due as much to the requirement that almost everything in the game must be done to beat it as to its difficulty . Johnson noted the game 's historical importance ; he said : " [ Playing Dragon Warrior is ] a tough road to walk , but reaching its end will instill a new appreciation of what today 's RPG 's are all about . " The 2009 book Vintage Games contrasted Dragon Warrior to the 1986 NES title The Legend of Zelda ; it said , while both titles share common RPG elements , Zelda features a fantasy setting and magic but no level or turn @-@ based combat system , and Dragon Warrior features both . Nintendo Power said the game 's historical significance is its greatest aspect , and noted that " playing Dragon Warrior these days can be a bit of a chore " . GamePro wrote that their favorite aspect of the game was the Elizabethan @-@ English dialogue , and that they were disappointed by its removal in the GBC remake . 
 = = = Remakes = = = 
 Famitsu gave the SNES compilation remake Dragon Quest I + II a rating of 35 out of 40 . The Satellaview remake was given a mixed , but overall positive review by <unk> . The touches such as the real @-@ time event and voicing were appreciated , but their implementation left much to be desired . However , the medal collection is a nice way to compete with friends and the reviewer enjoyed the game . Dragon Warrior 's English remake , as part of the dual GBC cartridge Dragon Warrior I & II , received better reviews than the original , garnering praise . IGN and Nintendo Power gave it an 8 out of 10 . IGN 's Marc Nix noted that while " it 's one of the only interesting RPGs on the Game Boy Color to actually make American shores " , players will feel frustrated ; those who played the original will lament the changes , while new players will feel that the game is too linear and simple . GameSpot gave it a 9 @.@ 6 out of 10 , citing the great improvements to sound quality and the appeal of playing both games in succession , and GameRankings reports an 83 @.@ 46 % overall score . It received RPGamer 's Game Boy Color Award of the Year for 2000 . Comparing it to its NES counterpart , RPGamer 's Derek Cavin awarded it 3 out of 5 , and wrote that the game is above average in all aspects , and particularly praised the visual elements . He criticized the game 's repetitiveness , and said that it is short enough that most players should finish the game before repetition becomes an issue . Combined , both the SNES and GBC remakes saw more than 1 @.@ 94 million copies sold worldwide . With the remakes ' good sales performances , Enix released Dragon Warrior III for the GBC in 2001 , which was based on a previously unreleased SNES update of Dragon Quest III ' English version . 
 = = = Related media = = = 
 Square Enix Music Online 's <unk> reviewed the game 's symphonic scores : Dragon Quest Suite ; Dragon Quest I Remix Symphonic Suite ( London Philharmonic Orchestra ) ; Dragon Quest I & II Symphonic Suite ( London Philharmonic Orchestra Remastered ) ; and Dragon Quest I Symphonic Suite ( Tokyo Metropolitan Symphony Orchestra ) . Comparing each of the suites , he gave all ratings ranging 7 through 9 out of 10 , and found the Tokyo Strings Ensemble recording superior to the aforementioned symphonic suites . While the music is somewhat flat , <unk> acknowledged this is due to the source material and praised Koichi Sugiyama 's and the orchestras ' efforts to compose an above @-@ average piece despite the limitation . Gamasutra 's Kurt Kalata also praised the symphonies ' melody , commenting that " the overworld theme ... is pretty simplistic and grating , but actually sounds pretty beautiful when played by a live orchestra " . 
 Dragon Quest Retsuden : Roto no Monshō – To the Children Who Inherit the Emblem sold well in Japan . For the week of August 26 to September 1 , 2008 , volume 7 was ranked 9th in Japan , selling 59 @,@ 540 copies . For the week of February 24 to March 2 , 2009 , volume 8 was ranked 19th in Japan , selling 76 @,@ 801 copies . For the week of October 26 to November 1 , 2009 , volume 9 was ranked 16th in Japan , selling 40 @,@ 492 copies for a total of 60 @,@ 467 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Dragon Warrior 's release has been noted as a notable turning point in video game history . The game has been listed as a genre builder for RPGs . Its popularity in Japan is synonymous with RPGs . While the game 's elements had been present in previous RPG titles , Dragon Warrior set the template for others ; almost all of its elements became the foundation for nearly every later game of the genre , from gameplay to narrative , replacing D & D as the model to follow . According to Shigeru Miyamoto , the success of Dragon Warrior changed the nature of video game development by making scenario writers far more important . 
 When Dragon Warrior was released , many of the development techniques used were intended to compensate for hardware limitations , but contemporary RPG developers continue to use these techniques despite technological advances that made them unnecessary . Dragon Warrior introduced the damsel @-@ in @-@ distress storyline that many RPGs follow , and a fresh plot twist to the " saving the princess " formula , where the game 's true objective is not revealed until the princess is rescued . The game also introduced an element of romance , where the player character is given a dialogue choice to respond to the princess 's question of whether he loves her ; romance has since become a commonplace feature the genre . The game 's 2D graphic style was used by most RPGs until the advent of 3D graphics . Dragon Warrior 's top @-@ down perspective has become " a dead giveaway to an RPG " . The game featured elements still found in most RPGs , such as the ability to obtain better equipment , major quests that intertwine with minor subquests , an incremental spell system , use of hit points and experience points , and a medieval theme . Reviewers said that , while Final Fantasy has been considered more important due to its popularity and attention in North America , Dragon Warrior laid the fundamentals on which Final Fantasy was based . Dragon Quest is also credited with affecting Dungeons & Dragons ' leveling system to even out its randomness by giving more bonuses early on and giving players maximum hit points on the first level . 
 In the Nintendo Power 's November 2010 issue , in celebration of the NES ' 25th anniversary in North America , Horii recalled the making of Dragon Warrior . <unk> was a fan of basic RPG mechanics , and wanted to simplify the interfaces ; he said that many other RPGs ' interfaces at the time " were so complicated that they intimidated new users " . He said that Dragon Warrior 's simplified gameplay made the game appealing to people and made the franchise <unk> he had been told that the NES lacked sufficient capacity for RPGs , which further motivated him to make one . 
 Dragon Quest became a national phenomenon in Japan , inspiring spinoff media and figurines . The video game industry has called it as Japan 's national game . Horii , who was linked through his Shonen Jump articles , increased in celebrity status , and become a household name in Japan , as well known in Japan as Steven Spielberg is in the US ; in contrast Miyamoto , creator of Super Mario Bros. and The Legend of Zelda , is not nearly as well @-@ known . In a Famitsu poll , the Japanese public voted Dragon Quest as the seventh favorite game for the NES . Several clones such as Glory of Heracles , Legend of the Ghost Lion and Mother were inspired by the Japanese version 's success . For Mother , Shigesato Itoi , a fan of Dragon Warrior , and Miyamoto , a detractor of RPGs , created an RPG that would subvert the Dragon Warrior RPG template by changing the setting and themes from the Middle Ages to the US . Dragon Warrior , along with other NES titles , has spawned many ROM hacks in recent years . One notable hack includes Super Mario Remix II , which features a new plot and revised character sprites to reflect the Mario series , while the gameplay and layout remain the same . Dragon Warrior became so popular in Japan that , if asked to draw ' slime ' , a Japanese person is likely to draw a shape similar to that of the game 's interpretation of slime . 
 Many aspects of pop culture still reference Dragon Warrior . The video game music band Descendants of Erdrick , based in Austin , Texas , is named after the game 's main character . On April Fools Day 2012 , Google added a Dragon Warrior @-@ inspired 8 @-@ bit option to Google Maps . 
 = The Holocaust in Lithuania = 
 The Holocaust in Nazi @-@ occupied Lithuania resulted in the near total destruction of Lithuanian Jews living in the Nazi @-@ controlled Lithuanian and Polish territories ( <unk> <unk> of Reichskommissariat Ostland ) . Out of approximately 208 @,@ 000 @-@ 210 @,@ 000 Jews , an estimated 190 @,@ 000 – 195 @,@ 000 were murdered before the end of World War II ( wider estimates are sometimes published ) , most between June and December 1941 . More than 95 % of Lithuania 's Jewish population was massacred over the three @-@ year German occupation — a more complete destruction than befell any other country affected by the Holocaust . Historians attribute this to the massive collaboration in the genocide by the Christian locals , though the reasons for this collaboration are still debated . The Holocaust resulted in the largest @-@ ever loss of life in so short a period of time in the history of Lithuania . 
 The events that took place in the western regions of the USSR occupied by Nazi Germany in the first weeks after the German invasion , including Lithuania , marked the sharp intensification of the Holocaust . 
 An important component to the Holocaust in Lithuania was that the occupying Nazi German administration fanned antisemitism by blaming the Soviet regime 's recent annexation of Lithuania , a year earlier , on the Jewish community . Another significant factor was the large extent to which the Nazis ' design drew upon the physical organization , preparation and execution of their orders by local Lithuanian auxiliaries of the Nazi occupation regime . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Soviet Union invaded and occupied and subsequently annexed Lithuania in 1940 . The German invasion of the Soviet Union , on 22 June 1941 , came after a year of Soviet occupation which had culminated in mass deportations across the Baltics only a week before the invasion . The Germans were welcomed as liberators and received support from Lithuania 's irregular militia against retreating Soviet forces . Many Lithuanians believed Germany would allow the re @-@ establishment of the country 's independence . In order to appease the Germans , some people expressed significant antisemitic sentiments . Nazi Germany , which had seized the Lithuanian territories in the first week of the offensive , used this situation to its advantage and indeed in the first days permitted a Lithuanian Provisional Government of the Lithuanian Activist Front to be established . For a brief period it appeared that the Germans were about to grant Lithuania significant autonomy , comparable with that given to Slovak Republic . However , after about a month , the more independently minded Lithuanian organizations were disbanded around August and September 1941 , as the Germans seized more control . 
 = = The destruction of Lithuanian Jewry = = 
 = = = Estimated number of victims = = = 
 Prior to the German invasion , the population of Jews was estimated to be about 210 @,@ 000 , although according to data from the Lithuanian statistics department , as of 1 January 1941 there were 208 @,@ 000 Jews . This estimate , based on the officially accounted for prewar emigration within the USSR ( approx . 8 @,@ 500 ) , the number of escapees from Kaunas and Vilnius <unk> , ( 1 @,@ 500 @-@ 2 @,@ 000 ) , as well as the number of the survivors in the concentration camps when they were liberated by the Red Army , ( 2 @,@ 000 @-@ 3 @,@ 000 ) , puts the number of Lithuanian Jews murdered in the Holocaust at 195 @,@ 000 to 196 @,@ 000 . It is difficult to estimate the exact number of casualties of the Holocaust and the latter number cannot be final or indisputable . The numbers given by historians differ significantly ranging from 165 @,@ 000 to 254 @,@ 000 , the higher number probably including non @-@ Lithuanian Jews among other Reich ( empirical ) dissenters labeled as Jewish killed in Lithuania . 
 = = = The Holocaust events = = = 
 Chronologically , the genocide in Lithuania can be divided into three phases : phase 1 ) summer to the end of 1941 ; phase 2 ) December 1941 – March 1943 ; phase 3 ) April 1943 – mid @-@ July 1944 . 
 The Lithuanian port city of Klaipėda ( Memel in German ) had historically been a member of the German Hanseatic League , and had belonged to Germany and East Prussia prior to 1918 . The city was semi @-@ autonomous during the period of Lithuanian independence , and under League of Nations supervision . Approximately 8 @,@ 000 Jews lived in Memel when it was absorbed into the Reich on March 15 , 1939 . Its Jewish residents were expelled , and most fled into Lithuania proper . In 1941 , German killing squads , the Einsatzgruppen , followed the advance of the German army units and immediately began organizing the murder of Jews . Most Lithuanian Jews perished in the first phase during the first months of the occupation and before the end of 1941 . The first recorded action of the Einsatzgruppen ( Einsatzgruppe A ) took place on June 22 , 1941 , in the border town of <unk> ( called <unk> in Yiddish and Garsden in German ) , which was one of the oldest Jewish settlements in the country and only eleven miles from German @-@ annexed Memel . Approximately 800 Jews were shot that day in what is known as the Garsden Massacre . Approximately 100 non @-@ Jewish Lithuanians were also executed , many for trying to aid their Jewish neighbors . About 80 @,@ 000 Jews were killed by October and about 175 @,@ 000 by the end of the year . The majority of Jews in Lithuania were not required to live in ghettos nor sent to the Nazi concentration camps which at that time were just in the preliminary stages of operation . Instead they were shot in pits near their places of residence with the most infamous mass murders taking place in the Ninth Fort near Kaunas and the <unk> Forest near Vilnius . By 1942 about 45 @,@ 000 Jews survived , largely those who had been sent to ghettos and camps . In the second phase , the Holocaust slowed , as Germans decided to use the Jews as forced labor to fuel the German war economy . In the third phase , the destruction of Jews was again given a high priority ; it was in that phase that the remaining ghettos and camps were liquidated . 
 Two factors contributed to the rapid destruction of Lithuanian Jewry . The first was the significant support for the " de @-@ <unk> " of Lithuania coming from the Lithuanian populace . The second was the German plan for early colonization of Lithuania – which shared a border with German East Prussia – in accordance with their Generalplan Ost ; hence the high priority given to the extermination of the relatively small Lithuanian Jewish community . 
 = = = Participation of local collaborators = = = 
 The Nazi German administration directed and supported the organized killing of Lithuanian Jews . Local Lithuanian auxiliaries of the Nazi occupation regime carried out logistics for the preparation and execution of the murders under Nazi direction . Nazi SS Brigadeführer Franz Walter Stahlecker arrived in Kaunas on 25 June 1941 and gave agitation speeches in the city to instigate the murder of Jews . Initially this was in the former State Security Department building , but officials there refused to take any action . Later , he gave speeches in the city . In a report of October 15 , Stahlecker wrote that they had succeeded in covering up their vanguard unit ( <unk> ) actions , and it was made to look like it was the initiative of the local population . Groups of partisans , civil units of nationalist @-@ rightist anti @-@ Soviet affiliation , initiated contact with the Germans as soon as they entered the Lithuanian territories . A rogue unit of insurgents headed by Algirdas <unk> and encouraged by Germans from the Sicherheitspolizei and Sicherheitsdienst , started anti @-@ Jewish pogroms in Kaunas ( Kovno ) on the night of 25 – 26 June 1941 . Over a thousand Jews perished over the next few days in what was the first pogrom in Nazi @-@ occupied Lithuania . Different sources give different figures , one being 1 @,@ 500 and another 3 @,@ 800 , with additional victims in other towns of the region . 
 On 24 June 1941 , the Lithuanian Security Police ( Lietuvos <unk> <unk> ) , subordinate to Nazi Germany 's Security Police and Nazi Germany 's Criminal Police , was created . It would be involved in various actions against the Jews and other enemies of the Nazi regime . Nazi commanders filed reports purporting the " zeal " of the Lithuanian police battalions surpassed their own . The most notorious Lithuanian unit participating in the Holocaust was the Lithuanian Sonderkommando Squad ( <unk> <unk> ) from the Vilnius ( Vilna , Wilno ) area which killed tens of thousands of Jews , Poles and others in the <unk> massacre . Another Lithuanian organization involved in the Holocaust was the Lithuanian Labor Guard . Many Lithuanian supporters of the Nazi policies came from the fascist Iron Wolf organization . Overall , the nationalistic Lithuanian administration was interested in the liquidation of the Jews as a perceived enemy and potential rivals of ethnic Lithuanians and thus not only did not oppose Nazi Holocaust policy but in effect adopted it as their own . 
 A combination of factors serves as an explanation for participation of some Lithuanians in genocide against Jews . Those factors include national traditions and values , including antisemitism , common throughout contemporary Central Europe , and a more Lithuanian @-@ specific desire for a " pure " Lithuanian nation @-@ state with which the Jewish population was believed to be incompatible . There were a number of additional factors , such as severe economic problems which led to the killing of Jews over personal property . Finally the Jews were seen as having supported the Soviet regime in Lithuania during 1940 – 1941 . During the period leading up to the German invasion , the Jews were blamed by some for virtually every misfortune that had befallen Lithuania . 
 The involvement of the local population and institutions , in relatively high numbers , in the destruction of Lithuanian Jewry became a defining factor of the Holocaust in Lithuania . 
 Not all of the Lithuanian populace supported the killings . Out of a population of close to 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( 80 % of it ethnic Lithuanians ) , a few thousands took an active part in the killings while many hundreds risked their lives sheltering the Jews . Israel has recognized 723 Lithuanians as Righteous Among the Nations for risking their lives to save Jews during the Holocaust . In addition , many members of the Polish minority in Lithuania also helped to shelter the Jews . Lithuanians and Poles who risked their lives saving Jews were persecuted and often executed by the Nazis . 
 = = Comprehension and remembrance = = 
 The genocide in Lithuania is seen by some historians as one of the earliest large @-@ scale implementations of the Final Solution , leading some scholars to express an opinion that the Holocaust began in Lithuania in the summer of 1941 . ^ Other scholars say the Holocaust started in September 1939 with the onset of the Second World War , or even earlier , on Kristallnacht in 1938 , or , according to the Jewish Virtual Library , when Hitler became Chancellor of Germany in 1933 . 
 The Soviet government , for political reasons , tried to minimize the unique suffering of the Jews . In Lithuania and throughout the Soviet Union , memorials did not mention Jews in particular ; instead they were built to commemorate the suffering of " local inhabitants " . People guilty of Nazi collaboration and crimes against Jews were not punished severely . 
 Since Lithuania regained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 , the debate over Lithuanian participation in the Holocaust has been fraught with difficulty . Modern Lithuanian nationalists stress anti @-@ Soviet resistance , but some Lithuanian partisans , seen in Lithuania as heroes in the struggle against Soviet occupation , were also Nazi collaborators who had cooperated in the murder of Lithuanian Jewry . The post @-@ Soviet Lithuanian government has on a number of occasions stated a commitment to commemorating the Holocaust , combating antisemitism , and bringing Nazi @-@ era war criminals to justice . The National Coalition Supporting Soviet Jewry have said " Lithuania has made slow but significant progress in the prosecution of suspected Lithuanian collaborators in the Nazi genocide " . Lithuania was the first of the newly independent post @-@ Soviet states to legislate for the protection and marking of Holocaust @-@ related sites . In 1995 , president of Lithuania Algirdas <unk> speaking before the Israeli Knesset , offered a public apology to the Jewish people for the Lithuanian participation in the Holocaust . On 20 September 2001 , to mark the 60th anniversary of the Holocaust in Lithuania , the Seimas ( Lithuanian parliament ) held a session during which Alfonsas Eidintas , the historian nominated as the Republic 's next ambassador to Israel , delivered an address accounting for the annihilation of Lithuania 's Jews . 
 There has been criticism that Lithuania is dragging its feet on the issue ; in 2001 Dr. Efraim <unk> , Director of the Simon Wiesenthal Center , criticized the Lithuanian government for its unwillingness to prosecute Lithuanians involved in the Holocaust . In 2002 the Simon Wiesenthal Center declared its dissatisfaction with the Lithuanian government ’ s efforts and launched a controversial " Operation Last Chance " offering monetary rewards for evidence that leads to the prosecution of war criminals ; this campaign has encountered much resistance in Lithuania and the other former Soviet bloc countries . More recently , in 2008 , the Simon <unk> Center which had initially ranked Lithuania high during on @-@ going trials to bring Lithuanian war criminals to justice , noted , in its annual report , no progress and the lack of any real punishment by Lithuanian justice organs for Holocaust perpetrators . 
 There has been limited debate on the place of the Holocaust in Lithuanian national memory ; historically Lithuanians have denied national participation in the Holocaust or labeled the Lithuanian participants in genocide as fringe extreme elements . The memories of that time and the discussion of those events in Jewish and Lithuanian historiographies are quite different , although Lithuanian historiography in the past two decades has improved , compared to the Soviet historiography , with the works of scholars such as Alfonsas Eidintas , <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> , among others , being positively reviewed by the Western and Jewish historians . The issue remains controversial to this day . According to Lithuanian historians , the contentious issues involve the role of the Lithuanian Activist Front , the Lithuanian Provisional Government and participation of Lithuanian civilians and volunteers in the Holocaust . 
 = Christopher Greenup = 
 Christopher Greenup ( c . 1750 – April 27 , 1818 ) was an American politician who served as a U.S. Representative and the third Governor of Kentucky . Little is known about his early life ; the first reliable records about him are documents recording his service in the Revolutionary War where he served as a lieutenant in the Continental Army and a colonel in the Virginia militia . 
 After his service in the war , Greenup helped settle the trans @-@ Appalachian regions of Virginia . He became involved in politics , and played an active role in three of the ten statehood conventions that secured the separation of Kentucky from Virginia in 1792 . He became one of the state 's first representatives , and served in the Kentucky General Assembly before being elected governor in a race where , due to his immense popularity , he ran unopposed . 
 Greenup 's term in office was marred by accusations that he had participated in the Burr Conspiracy to align Kentucky with Spain prior to the former 's separation from Virginia , but he vigorously and successfully rebutted these charges . Following his term as governor , he became less active in the political arena . He died on April 27 , 1818 . Greenup County , Kentucky and its county seat were both named in his honor . 
 = = Early life in Virginia = = 
 Christopher Greenup was most likely born in Fairfax County , Virginia around 1750 . [ a ] His parents were John and Elizabeth ( Witten ) Greenup . His early education was attained at the local schools of the area . He learned surveying and studied law under Colonel Charles Binns at Charles City County , Virginia . During the Revolutionary War , he first served as a lieutenant on the Continental Line and later attained the rank of colonel in the Virginia militia . 
