 = = Marketing and release = = 
 In March 2001 , the official website was set up , which revealed the film 's original October 26 , 2001 release and a redirect to the film 's distributor Constantin Films . The website was fully opened in July 2001 , and composed of images , plot info , character biographies and downloads . The film was planned to have an R @-@ rated classification , however was overruled by Anderson , claiming he wanted a PG @-@ 13 rating as it would best suit a younger audience . In January 2002 , the film was officially announced to contain an R rating . 
 In May 2001 , it was announced that Sony Pictures Entertainment would distribute the film in North America . It was suggested by Capcom executives that the film would not be released in 2001 , but rather in 2002 , which was later confirmed by Sony in August 2001 . The film was set for release on 5 April 2002 before being pushed forward to a 15 March release . 
 In December 2001 , Sony gave fans a chance to design the film 's poster with a prize of an undisclosed amount of cash , a free screening of the film , and with the final design being the film 's poster . On February 16 , 2002 , Nick Des Barres , a 23 @-@ year @-@ old aspiring actor and ex @-@ video game magazine designer , was announced as the winner of the competition . The film 's trailer and clips were released in late January and early February 2002 . 
 On June 29 , 2004 , over two years after the film 's release , a novelization by Keith R. A. DeCandido was published . DeCandido also wrote novelizations for the second film , which was published only two months later , and the third film in 2007 . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film opened in 2 @,@ 528 theaters and grossed $ 17 @,@ 707 @,@ 106 on its opening weekend ( March 15 – 17 , 2002 ) . The film grossed $ 40 @,@ 119 @,@ 709 domestically and $ 102 @,@ 441 @,@ 078 worldwide . 
 = = = Sequels = = = 
 After commercial success at the box office , a sequel , Resident Evil : Apocalypse ( 2004 ) was released . This was followed by Resident Evil : Extinction ( 2007 ) , Resident Evil : Afterlife ( 2010 ) , and Resident Evil : Retribution ( 2012 ) . Anderson did not direct the second or third films due to filming commitments with Alien vs. Predator ( 2004 ) and Death Race ( 2008 ) , 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 Resident Evil received a 33 % approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes , based on 123 reviews . Robert K. Elder from the Chicago Tribune stated : the film " updates the zombie genre with an anti @-@ corporate message while still scaring its audience and providing heart @-@ pounding action " , while Owen Gleiberman from Entertainment Weekly noted : the film is as " impersonal in its relentlessness as the video @-@ game series that inspired it . " 
 Both Resident Evil and the sequel appear on Roger Ebert 's most hated films list , published in 2005 . In his review , Ebert describes Resident Evil as a zombie movie set in the 21st century , where " large metallic objects make crashing noises just by being looked at " , and he criticizes the dialogue for being a series of commands and explanations with no " small talk " . 
 In 2014 , filmmaker James Cameron named Resident Evil his biggest guilty pleasure . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Relationship to the games = = 
 Various elements are borrowed from numerous video games including Resident Evil 2 and Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis , where Alice 's character awakes in Raccoon City Hospital with a viral outbreak occurring in the city . There are several references to characters and organizations such as the Umbrella Corporation , the Nemesis program , the underground train bearing the moniker " Alexi @-@ 5000 " a reference to Code : Veronica 's villain Alexia Ashford ( the train is from Resident Evil 2 , but in the game it reads " Galaxie @-@ 5000 " instead of " Alexi @-@ 5000 " ) and a police cruiser , from which Alice takes out a shotgun , has a " S.T.A.R.S. " logo on the hood . Jason Isaacs appears in the film as an uncredited masked surgeon ( which is a reference to William Birkin ) . The character of Dr. Isaacs ( played by Iain Glen ) in the film 's sequels is dedicated to or based on him . 
 Other references to the first game include Alice examining the mansion by going outside ; crows are visible for a moment . Crows are minor enemies that the player encounters throughout each game . Alice finds a picture of her wedding day with Spence , which is the same style as the photos in the first version of the Resident Evil game : in black and white with the foreground image noticeably spliced onto the background . On the newspaper at the end of the film , the words " Horror in Raccoon City ! More Victims Dead ! " are shown in the upper right corner . This is a reference to the same newspaper in the censored opening of the first Resident Evil game and the prologue chapter for the Resident Evil : The Umbrella Conspiracy novel . Near the beginning of the film , Alice examines a statue after the wind blows its cover off . This statue is similar in design to one in the mansion of the first game . 
 When returning to the Red Queen 's chamber , Kaplan points out that the four bodies of the group 's dead crew from the Glass <unk> Trap sequence are gone . This is a reference to the games , where the bodies of enemies disappear . When the survivors make their escape from the Hive with a countdown as they fight the final boss , this is a reference to the Resident Evil game which ends with a five @-@ minute countdown , during which the boss must be defeated . 
 A faux newspaper created by Screen Gems for Apocalypse , The Raccoon City Times , indicates hours after the initial outbreak when creatures began appearing in the Arklay Mountains feasting on victims . This is similar to the opening of the first video game . 
 Anderson has stated that the film 's camera angles and several shots allude to the video game 's camera angles , such as the fight between Alice and the security guard . These include a scene near the beginning where there is a close up of Alice 's eye . This is a direct reference to the title screen of the first game . In another scene , Alice awakes and hears a creepy sound , which is a reference to the plot of the first game . 
 = = Home media = = 
 Resident Evil was released on VHS and DVD on July 30 , 2002 in the United States , April 14 , 2003 in the United Kingdom and October 2002 in Australia . It was a special edition release , with a number of documentaries including five featurettes , one of which explained the making of Resident Evil , the film 's score composition , costume design , set design , zombie make up tests , and the music video for a remixed version of " My Plague " by Slipknot . 
 A Deluxe Edition was released on September 7 , 2004 , which included new special features such as an alternate ending with director Anderson 's video introduction , a clip compilation for Apocalypse , From Game to Screen featurette , a storyboarding Resident Evil featurette , and 6 other exclusive featurettes : The Creature , The Elevator , The Train , The Laser , Zombie Dogs and Zombies . 
 Screen Gems released Resident Evil : Resurrected Edition , a 2 @-@ disc package containing Resident Evil and Resident Evil : Apocalypse , on September 4 , 2007 . 
 On January 1 , 2008 , a Blu @-@ ray of the Resident Evil trilogy was released . 
 = William Garrow = 
 Sir William Garrow KC , PC , FRS ( 13 April 1760 – 24 September 1840 ) was a British barrister , politician and judge known for his indirect reform of the advocacy system , which helped usher in the adversarial court system used in most common law nations today . He introduced the phrase " presumed innocent until proven guilty " , insisting that defendants ' accusers and their evidence be thoroughly tested in court . Born to a priest and his wife in Monken Hadley , then in Middlesex , Garrow was educated at his father 's school in the village before being apprenticed to Thomas Southouse , an attorney in Cheapside , which preceded a pupillage with Mr. Crompton , a special pleader . A dedicated student of the law , Garrow frequently observed cases at the Old Bailey ; as a result Crompton recommended that he become a solicitor or barrister . Garrow joined Lincoln 's Inn in November 1778 , and was called to the Bar on 27 November 1783 . He quickly established himself as a criminal defence counsel , and in February 1793 was made a King 's Counsel by HM Government to prosecute cases involving treason and felonies . 
 He was elected to Parliament in 1805 for Gatton , a rotten borough , and became Solicitor General for England and Wales in 1812 and Attorney General for England and Wales a year later . Although not happy in Parliament , having been returned only for political purposes , Garrow acted as one of the principal Whig spokesmen trying to stop criminal law reform as campaigned for by Samuel Romilly and also attempted to pass legislation to condemn animal cruelty . In 1817 , he was made a Baron of the Exchequer and a Serjeant @-@ at @-@ Law , forcing his resignation from Parliament , and he spent the next 15 years as a judge . He was not particularly successful in the commercial cases the Exchequer specialised in , but when on Assize , used his criminal law knowledge from his years at the Bar to great effect . On his resignation in 1832 he was made a Privy Councillor , a sign of the respect HM Government had for him . He died on 24 September 1840 . 
 For much of the 19th and 20th centuries his work was forgotten by academics , and interest arose only in 1991 , with an article by John Beattie titled " Garrow for the Defence " in History Today . Garrow is best known for his criminal defence work , which , through the example he set with his aggressive defence of clients , helped establish the modern adversarial system in use in the United Kingdom , the United States , and other former British colonies . Garrow is also known for his impact on the rules of evidence , leading to the best evidence rule . His work was cited as recently as 1982 in the Supreme Court of Canada and 2006 in the Irish Court of Criminal Appeal . In 2009 , BBC One broadcast Garrow 's Law , a four @-@ part fictionalised drama of Garrow 's beginnings at the Old Bailey ; a second series aired in late 2010 . BBC One began broadcasting the third series in November 2011 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Garrow 's family originally came from Moray Scotland , where they were descended from the <unk> of <unk> , a Scottish royal line . Garrow 's father David was born at a farm called <unk> , Aberlour ( Speyside ) approximately 50 miles northwest of Aberdeen . David graduated from Aberdeen University with a Master of Arts degree on 1 April 1736 , and became a priest of the Church of England , creating a school in Monken Hadley . His younger brother William became a successful doctor , leaving most of his estate ( £ 30 @,@ 000 ) to Garrow . On 5 June 1748 David married Sarah Lowndes , with whom he had eleven children ; William , Edward , <unk> , Jane , John , Rose , William , Joseph , William , David and Anne . The first two Williams died as infants ; the third , born on 13 April 1760 , survived . 
 William Garrow was educated at his father 's school in Monken Hadley , The Priory , which emphasised preparing students for commercial careers such as in the East India Company . As such , it taught social graces , as well as English , Greek , Latin , French , geography , mathematics and dancing . Studying there Garrow " knew the English language well ; had a moderate acquaintance with the Latin and , as an accomplishment , added a considerable proficiency in French " . Garrow attended this school until he was 15 , at which point he was articled to Thomas Southouse born Faversham , Kent ? , an attorney in Cheapside . Garrow showed potential , being noted as " attentive and diligent in the performance of the technical and practical duties of the office " , and Southouse recommended that he become a solicitor or barrister ; as a result , when he was 17 , he became a pupil of a Mr. Crompton , a special pleader . As a pupil Garrow studied hard , fastidiously reading Sampson <unk> 's Doctrina <unk> , a manual on the Law of Pleading written in legal French . At the same time he viewed cases at the Old Bailey , forming a friendship with the clerk of arraignment there , William Shelton . 
 In the 18th century , speakers perfected the art of oratory through debating societies , one of the most noted of which met at <unk> 's Hall , London . Although initially shy ( during his first debate , the attendees had to force him from his seat and hold him up while he spoke ) , he swiftly developed a reputation as a speaker , and was referred to in the press as " Counsellor Garrow , the famous orator of <unk> 's Hall " . In November 1778 , Garrow became a member of Lincoln 's Inn , one of the four Inns of Court , and on 27 November 1783 at the age of 23 he was called to the Bar ; he later became a Bencher of Lincoln 's Inn in 1793 . 
 = = Career as a barrister = = 
 = = = Defence = = = 
 Garrow started as a criminal defence barrister at the Old Bailey , in a time where many defendants became increasingly reliant on barristers to prevent their conviction . His first case was actually as a prosecutor ; on 14 January 1784 , barely two months after he was called to the Bar , he prosecuted John Henry Aikles for obtaining a bill of exchange under false pretences . It was alleged that Aikles had promised to pay Samuel Edwards £ 100 and a small commission for a £ 100 bill of exchange , and when he took the bill , failed to hand over the money . Despite Aikles 's counsel claiming , according to Edward Foss , that " this was no felony " , and being represented by two of the most prestigious criminal barristers of the day , Garrow convinced both the judge and the jury that Aikles was guilty . Garrow later defended Aikles in September 1785 , securing his release due to ill @-@ health . 
 During his early years as a practising barrister , Garrow was particularly noted for his aggressive and confrontational style of cross @-@ examination . When James Wingrove was charged with theft and violence in the course of a highway robbery in 1784 , Garrow 's cross @-@ examination of William Grove ( who acted as a witness and the person charging Wingrove ) got him to admit that he was perjuring himself in an attempt to get a reward , and that Wingrove had not robbed the two injured parties . Garrow showed a dislike of most thief @-@ takers , of which Grove was one , although he did not treat the Bow Street Runners and other professionals with contempt . His dislike of such men was highlighted in his defence of three men in 1788 for theft ; they were charged with assaulting John Troughton , putting him in fear of his life , and stealing his hat . The issue was whether the assault put him in fear of his life , or whether he was exaggerating to claim a reward , which could not be claimed for simple theft . Garrow established that Troughton was uncertain about how he lost his hat , despite his attempts to claim that the defendants knocked it off him , and after four witnesses gave character evidence the defendants were found not guilty . 
 Garrow made much use of jury nullification to limit the punishment for his convicted clients , in a time when many crimes carried the death penalty ( the so @-@ called Bloody Code ) . In 1784 a pair of women were arrested for stealing fans worth 15 shillings , meaning a conviction would result in the death penalty ; Garrow convinced the jury to convict the women of stealing 4 shillings worth of fans , therefore changing the sentence to twelve months of hard labour . 
 = = = Prosecution = = = 
 Garrow soon developed a large practice , working criminal trials at the Old Bailey and outside London as both defence counsel and prosecutor . By 1799 , a book recorded that the number of cases he had at the Court of King 's Bench " is exceeded by none but Mr. [ Thomas ] Erskine 's " , and that " he has long monopolized the chief business on the home circuit ... No man is heard with more attention by the court , no man gains more upon a jury , or better pleases a common auditor " . In February 1793 he was appointed a King 's Counsel to help prosecute those accused of treason and sedition , less than ten years after his call to the Bar ; and his appointment was met with a mixed response from the media . The Briton described Garrow and the other five appointments as the best talent of the age , while the Morning Chronicle was bitter due to Garrow 's previous status as a friend of the Official Opposition , the Whigs , as opposed to the Tory government . 
 As the French Revolution and its perceived threat to the United Kingdom gained momentum , so did Garrow 's career ; he prosecuted in most of the state trials , and as he increased in experience was left to manage many of them himself , coming up against leading barristers such as Thomas Erskine , James <unk> and James Scarlett . In May 1794 the Government suspended habeas corpus , in 1795 outlawed all public meetings , in 1797 outlawed secret organisations and in 1799 outlawed all societies interested in reforming the way the United Kingdom was run . The Government planned a series of 800 arrests , with 300 execution warrants for high treason made out and signed , making a particular effort to prosecute Thomas Hardy and John Horne Tooke . Hardy was the first to be tried , with the prosecution arguing that he sought a revolution in England similar to that in France . With Garrow prosecuting and Erskine defending , the trial lasted eight days instead of the normal one , and the foreman of the jury was so tense that he delivered the verdict of " not guilty " in a whisper and then immediately fainted . Tooke was then prosecuted ; again , the jury found him not guilty , with the result that the other 800 trials were abandoned . 
 During the period when Garrow worked as a barrister , the sugar planters of the West Indies held large amounts of power in Parliament , allowing them to maintain a monopoly on the marketing of sugar in England that brought great profits . This industry was largely profitable due to the use of slave labour , to which Garrow had long been opposed ; when the sugar planters offered him a job managing all of their legal and political business , he replied that " if your committee would give me their whole incomes , and all their estates , I would not be seen as the advocate of practices which I abhor , and a system which I detest " . In 1806 Thomas Picton , the Governor of Trinidad , was charged with a single count of " causing torture to be unlawfully inflicted " on a young free mulatto girl ; he was brought before the Court of King 's Bench under Lord Ellenborough . The court records run to 367 pages , and Garrow was deeply involved as prosecuting counsel ; indeed , his opening speech on 24 February 1806 is considered by Braby to be one of his best . The case centred on whether or not Spanish law , which allowed torture , was still in effect at the time of the incident . The jury eventually decided that it was not , and Ellenborough found Picton guilty . Picton 's counsel requested a retrial , which was granted ; the jury in the second trial eventually decided that Picton was innocent . 
 Thanks to Garrow 's political connections , he was made first Solicitor General and then Attorney General for the Prince of Wales in 1806 and 1807 ; he was recommended by Erskine , who said in a letter to the Prince that " he knows more of the real justice and policy of everything connected with the criminal law than any man I am acquainted with " . In 1812 he prosecuted Leigh Hunt for seditious libel against the Prince Regent ; thanks to his work , Hunt was found guilty , reversing the judgment of an 1811 trial in which he had been acquitted . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Since 1789 , the press had been speculating that Garrow , a Whig , would enter Parliament ; however he was first elected in 1805 for Gatton . This was a rotten borough , with Garrow appointed to serve the interests of his patron . After his entry into politics Garrow at first paid little attention , not making his maiden speech until 22 April 1806 , when he opposed a charge for the impeachment of Marquess Wellesley . He spoke again on 18 June 1806 on a legal technicality , and after that did not intervene for another six years . Braby and other sources indicate that he did not enjoy his time in Parliament , and was rarely there unless required to conduct some business . 
 In June 1812 , he was appointed Solicitor General for England and Wales , receiving the customary knighthood , and , in May 1813 , he was appointed Attorney General . The Attorney General was the senior Crown prosecutor , during a time when the Prince Regent feared liberal changes to the criminal law and Parliamentary structure . Garrow , as " a mere creature of the Regent " , could be trusted to oppose this ; rather than the progressive , defensive work undertaken in his early career , this period was one of conservative aggression against the reformers . Garrow ran particularly foul of Sir Samuel Romilly , who was one of those looking to reform a penal code many claimed was not working . On 5 April 1813 , Romilly 's Bill on Attainder of Treason and Felony came before Parliament . Its intent was to remove corruption of the blood from cases involving treason and felony ; Garrow , then Solicitor General , declared that the Bill would remove one of the safeguards of the British Constitution . The Bill eventually failed , and corruption of the blood was not removed from English law until the Forfeiture Act 1870 . 
 Garrow also became involved in the repeal of the Corn Laws , voting for the measure , and sponsored legislation to control surgical practice in the United Kingdom ; the bill did not , however , pass into law . In the early 19th century animal cruelty was widespread ; Garrow was one of those who found it appalling , and sponsored a bill in 1816 to increase the penalties for riding horses until their severe injury or death . While defeated , his actions were vindicated by a bill of 1820 introduced by Thomas Erskine , which was given the Royal Assent and came into law . Garrow eventually resigned as Attorney General and as a member of parliament in 1817 , when he was appointed one of the Barons of the Exchequer . 
 = = Judicial career = = 
 Garrow 's first judicial appointment came in 1814 , when he was made Chief Justice of Chester . This was opposed by Sir Samuel Romilly , who argued that the positions of Chief Justice and Attorney General were incompatible , saying " to appoint a gentleman holding a lucrative office at the sole pleasure of the Crown to a high judicial situation , was extremely inconsistent with that independence of the judicial character which it was so important to preserve inviolate " . On 6 May 1817 , Garrow was made a Baron of the Exchequer and Serjeant @-@ at @-@ Law , succeeding Richard Richards , and resigning his seat in Parliament and his position as Attorney General . He was not a particularly distinguished judge in the Exchequer , mainly due to a lack of knowledge of the finer points of law . Practising on the Assize Circuits , however , was a different matter ; dealing with his more familiar criminal law rather than the commercial law of the Exchequer , Garrow performed far better . Braby indicates that he regularly amazed both barristers and defendants with his knowledge of the intricacies of crime . Garrow retired on 22 February 1832 , replaced by John Gurney , and was made a Privy Councillor on retirement as a measure of the Government 's respect for him . He died at home on 14 September 1840 , aged 80 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Garrow had an irregular relationship with Sarah Dore , who had previously borne a son , William Arthur Dore Hill , by Arthur Hill , Viscount Fairford in 1778 . Thomas Hague has suggested that Dore was an Irish noblewoman Garrow had seduced , but the only intent of his writings was to disparage Garrow , and there is no evidence to support his claim . Their first child , David William Garrow , was born on 15 April 1781 , and their second , Eliza Sophia Garrow , was born on 18 June 1784 . Garrow and Dore finally married on 17 March 1793 . Dore was noted as particularly elegant , and was actively involved in local matters in Ramsgate , where the family lived . Dore died on 30 June 1808 after a long illness , and was buried at the Church of St Margaret , <unk> . David William Garrow was educated at Christ Church , Oxford , earning the degree of Doctor of Divinity , and served as one of the Chaplains to the Prince of Wales . Eliza Sophia Garrow married Samuel Fothergill <unk> ; one of her children , also named William Garrow , served as the Consul @-@ General of Uruguay . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Garrow 's estate was valued at £ 22 @,@ 000 after his death near Ramsgate , Kent , including £ 12 @,@ 000 in the Bank of England , £ 5 @,@ 000 in three insurance policies and £ 5 @,@ 000 secured by mortgages – a total of £ 1 @,@ 791 @,@ 000 in 2016 terms . Garrow 's will was written in 1830 and contained only two demands ; to be buried in his birthplace , Hadley , with his uncle , his father 's younger brother William ( who had left Garrow the best part of his fortune ) , and to set up a trust . The trust contained his entire estate , with the trustees being Leonard Smith , a merchant , Edward Lowth <unk> of Paper Buildings , Inner Temple and William <unk> <unk> of Gray 's Inn . The money was divided between Joseph , Garrow 's nephew , who received £ 1 @,@ 000 , £ 200 to each of the children of Garrow 's sister , £ 2 @,@ 000 to the sister and £ 300 a year to the widow of Garrow 's son . Eliza , Garrow 's daughter , received £ 300 a year from the interest on the trust , with an additional provision of £ 200 for the joint use of Eliza and her husband . The estate was structured by a legal professional , and as such no death duties were paid . The second instruction was ignored : Garrow was buried in the churchyard of St Laurence , Ramsgate , his parish church . 
 Edward Foss described him as " one of the most successful advocates of his day " , something linked more to his " extraordinary talent " at cross @-@ examination than his knowledge of the law ; Garrow once told a witness before a case that " you know a particular fact and wish to conceal it – I 'll get it out of you ! " Lord Brougham , who regularly opposed him in court , wrote that " no description can give the reader an adequate idea of this eminent practitioner 's powers in thus dealing with a witness " . Lemmings notes Garrow as not only a formidable advocate but also the " first lawyer to establish a reputation as a defence barrister " . 
 Garrow was largely forgotten ; although Robert Louis Stevenson and his wife discovered his work a generation later when reading transcripts of Old Bailey cases , there was little academic work on him until the late 20th century . In 1991 , John Beattie published " Garrow for the Defence " in History Today , followed by " Scales of Justice : Defence Counsel and the English Criminal Law in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries " in Law and History Review . Allyson May , who did her doctoral study under Beattie , further extended the analysis of Garrow 's work with The Bar and the Old Bailey : 1750 – 1850 , published in 2003 . 
 Garrow 's work was cited in court as recently as 1982 , when the Supreme Court of Canada quoted a passage from The Trial of William Davidson and Richard Tidd for High Treason , where Garrow instructed the jury as to how to interpret testimony , in <unk> v The Queen in 1982 . In 2006 he was again quoted , when the Irish Court of Criminal Appeal used the same work in their review of the 1982 conviction of Brian Meehan for the murder of Veronica Guerin . 
 In 2009 , BBC One broadcast Garrow 's Law , a four @-@ part fictionalised drama of Garrow 's beginnings at the Old Bailey , starring Andrew Buchan as Garrow . A second series , again of four parts , was aired in late 2010 , and the third and final four @-@ part series was broadcast in November and December 2011 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = <unk> system = = = 
 It is indisputable that Garrow had a massive impact on the modern , adversarial court system used in several western nations and the rules of evidence , although he was barely aware of it . Prior to Garrow 's time , defendants in felony cases were not allowed to have defence counsel ; as a result , every defendant for arson , rape , robbery , murder and most forms of theft was forced to defend himself . The first step away from this was with the Trials Act 1696 , which allowed treason defendants the right to a counsel . Garrow 's practice was a further step forward ; with his aggressive and forthright style of cross @-@ examination , he promoted a more committed defence of clients , and indirectly reformed the process of advocacy in the 18th century . His area of advocacy ( he was counsel for the defence in 83 % of his cases ) and style is considered key by Beattie in establishing the " new school " of advocacy ; his aggressive style in defence set a new style for advocates to follow that assisted in counteracting a legal system biased against the defendant . While he was not the sole cause of this reform , his position at the head of the Bar meant that he served as a highly visible example for new barristers to take after . In some ways Garrow was far ahead of his time ; he coined the phrase " innocent until proven guilty " in 1791 , although the jury refused to accept this principle and it was not confirmed by the courts until much later . 
 = = = Evidence = = = 
 Garrow also had an impact on the rules of evidence , which were only just beginning to evolve when he started his career . His insistence that hearsay and copied documents could not be admitted in evidence led to the best evidence rule . He was crucial in insisting on the autonomy of lawyers when inducting evidence , in one case openly arguing with the trial judge to insist that the advocates have independence in submitting it . During this period , the use of partisan medical experts was particularly problematic . While medical experts were regularly called at the Old Bailey , the use of partisan experts was resisted , and at the beginning experts were given limited authority . While this increased towards the end of the 17th century , in line with the judges ' increasing desire for certainty and facts , Garrow is noted as an excellent example of the attitude lawyers took when cross @-@ examining such witnesses . When defending Robert Clark , accused of killing John <unk> by kicking him in the stomach , Garrow used a mixture of aggressive cross @-@ examination and medical knowledge to get the prosecution 's medical expert to admit that he could not prove how <unk> had died . Garrow and later advocates learned how to effectively " interrogate " such witnesses , strengthening their own arguments ( when it was their expert ) or demolishing those of others ( when it was an expert attached to the other side ) . 
 = Battle of Tippecanoe = 
 The Battle of Tippecanoe ( / <unk> / TIP @-@ ee @-@ kə @-@ NOO ) was fought on November 7 , 1811 , near present @-@ day Lafayette , Indiana between American forces led by Governor William Henry Harrison of the Indiana Territory and Native American warriors associated with the Shawnee leader Tecumseh . Tecumseh and his brother Tenskwatawa ( commonly known as " The Prophet " ) were leaders of a confederacy of Native Americans from various tribes that opposed US expansion into Native territory . As tensions and violence increased , Governor Harrison marched with an army of about 1 @,@ 000 men to disperse the confederacy 's headquarters at Prophetstown , near the confluence of the Tippecanoe and Wabash Rivers . 
 Tecumseh , not yet ready to oppose the United States by force , was away recruiting allies when Harrison 's army arrived . Tenskwatawa , a spiritual leader but not a military man , was in charge . Harrison camped near Prophetstown on November 6 and arranged to meet with Tenskwatawa the following day . Early the next morning , warriors from Prophetstown attacked Harrison 's army . Although the outnumbered attackers took Harrison 's army by surprise , Harrison and his men stood their ground for more than two hours . The Natives were ultimately repulsed when their ammunition ran low . After the battle , the Natives abandoned Prophetstown and Harrison 's men burned it to the ground , destroyed the food supplies stored up for the winter , and returned home . 
 Harrison , having accomplished his goal of destroying Prophetstown , proclaimed that he had won a decisive victory . He acquired the nickname " Tippecanoe " , which was popularized in the song " Tippecanoe and Tyler too " during the election of 1840 , when Harrison was elected president . The defeat was a setback for Tecumseh 's confederacy from which it never fully recovered . American public opinion blamed the violence on British interference — in terms of financial and munitions support for the Indians . This suspicion led to further deterioration of US relations with Britain and served as a catalyst of the War of 1812 , which began six months later . By the time the US declared war on the United Kingdom in June 1812 , Tecumseh 's confederacy was ready to launch its war against the United States in alliance with the British . In preparation , the Natives soon rebuilt Prophetstown , and frontier violence increased after the battle until Tecumseh was finally killed in 1813 during the Battle of the Thames . 
 = = Background = = 
 After being appointed governor of the newly formed Indiana Territory in 1800 , William Henry Harrison sought to secure title to Native American lands to open more land for settlers ; in particular , he hoped the Indiana Territory would attract enough settlers to qualify for statehood . Harrison negotiated numerous land cession treaties with American Indians , including the Treaty of Fort Wayne on September 30 , 1809 , in which Miami , Pottawatomie , Lenape , and other tribal leaders sold 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( approximately 12 @,@ 000 km ² ) to the United States . 
 Tenskwatawa , known as the Prophet , had been leading a religious movement among the northwestern tribes , calling for a return to the ancestral ways . His brother , Tecumseh , was outraged by the Treaty of Fort Wayne , and thereafter emerged as a prominent leader . Tecumseh revived an idea advocated in previous years by the Shawnee leader Blue Jacket and the Mohawk leader Joseph Brant , which stated that Native American land was owned in common by all tribes , and land could not be sold without agreement by all the tribes . Not yet ready to confront the United States directly , Tecumseh 's primary adversaries were initially the Native American leaders who had signed the treaty . He began by intimidating them and threatening to kill anyone and their followers who carried out the terms of the treaty . Tecumseh began to travel widely , urging warriors to abandon the accommodationist chiefs and to join the resistance at Prophetstown . Tecumseh insisted that the Fort Wayne treaty was illegitimate . In an 1810 meeting with Harrison , he demanded that Harrison nullify the treaty and warned that settlers should not attempt to settle the lands sold in the treaty . Harrison rejected his demands and insisted that the tribes could have individual relations with the United States . 
 In the meeting Tecumseh warned Harrison that he would seek an alliance with the British if hostilities broke out . Tensions between the United States and Britain had been high for several months as a result of British interference in U.S. commerce with France . As early as 1810 , British agents had sought to secure an alliance with Native Americans to assist in the defense of Canada should hostilities break out , but the Natives had been reluctant to accept their offer , fearing they had little to benefit from such an arrangement . 
 In August 1811 , Tecumseh again met with Harrison at Vincennes , where Tecumseh assured Harrison that the Shawnee brothers meant to remain at peace with the United States . Tecumseh then traveled to the south on a mission to recruit allies among the " Five Civilized Tribes " . Most of the southern nations rejected his appeals , but a faction of the Creeks , who came to be known as the Red Sticks , answered his call to arms , leading to the Creek War , which also became a part of the War of 1812 . 
 Harrison left the territory for business in Kentucky shortly after the meeting with Tecumseh , leaving secretary John Gibson as acting governor . Gibson , who had lived among the Miami tribe for many years , was quick to learn of Tecumseh 's plans for war and immediately called out the territory 's militia and sent emergency letters calling for the return of Harrison . By mid @-@ September , most of the militia regiments had formed . By then , Harrison had returned , accompanied by a small force of army regulars , and had taken command of the militia . Harrison had already been in communication with his superiors in Washington , D.C. , and he had been authorized to march against the confederacy in a show of force , hoping that they would accept peace . 
 Harrison gathered the scattered militia companies at Fort Knox near a settlement on Maria Creek , north of Vincennes ; There he was joined by the sixty @-@ man company called the Yellow Jackets , so named for their bright yellow coats , from Corydon , Indiana , as well as the Indiana Rangers . From there the entire force of about 1000 men set out northward towards Prophetstown . The force consisted of about 250 army regulars from the 4th US Infantry Regiment , 100 Kentucky volunteers , and near 600 Indiana militia including two companies of the Indiana Rangers . The army reached the site of modern Terre Haute , Indiana , on October 3 where they camped and built Fort Harrison while they waited for supplies to be delivered . A scouting party of Yellow Jackets was ambushed by Native Americans on October 10 causing several casualties and preventing the men from continuing to forage . Supplies quickly began to run low . By October 19 , rations were cut and remained so until October 28 when fresh supplies arrived via the Wabash River from Vincennes . With the army resupplied , Harrison resumed his advance to Prophetstown on October 29 . 
 = = Battle = = 
 As Harrison 's forces approached Prophetstown late on November 6 , they were met by one of Tenskwatawa 's followers waving a white flag . He carried a message from Tenskwatawa , requesting a ceasefire until the next day when the two sides could hold a peaceful meeting . Harrison agreed to a meeting , but was wary of Tenskwatawa 's overture , believing that the negotiations would be futile . Harrison moved his army to a nearby hill near the confluence of the Wabash and Tippecanoe Rivers . There he camped his men in battle array , and kept sentinels on duty during the night . 
 On the west side of the hill on which he encamped was a shallow creek ( Burnett Creek ) , and on the east side a very steep embankment . Because of the nature of the position , Harrison did not order any temporary works to be created around the position as was ordinarily done by encamped armies . The Yellow Jacket company , with Captain Spier Spencer in command , was posted on the southern end of the camp perimeter . The rest of the militia formed a rectangular formation along the edges of the bluff surrounding the camp . Colonel Davis Floyd commanded the militia units guarding the steep bluff on the eastern side of the formation . The regulars , commanded by Major Floyd , and the dragoons , commanded by Maj. Joseph Daveiss and former congressman Capt. Benjamin Parke , were kept behind the main line in reserve . 
 In an 1816 conversation with Lewis Cass , the Governor of Michigan , Tenskwatawa denied that he ordered his warriors to attack Harrison , and blamed the Winnebagos in his camp for launching the attack . Other accounts also point to the Winnebago as the responsible party for encouraging the attack and suggest that Tenskwatawa was unable to control his followers as panic set in . Tenskwatawa 's followers were worried by the nearby army and feared an imminent attack . They had begun to fortify the town , but the defenses were not yet completed . During the evening , Tenskwatawa consulted with the spirits and decided that sending a party to murder Harrison in his tent was the best way to avoid a battle . He assured the warriors that he would cast spells that would prevent them from being harmed and confuse Harrison 's army so they would not resist . The warriors then moved out and began to surround Harrison 's army looking for a way to sneak into the camp . Ben , an African @-@ American wagon driver traveling with Harrison 's army , had deserted to the Shawnee during the expedition . He agreed to lead a small group of warriors through the line to Harrison 's tent . During the late night hours , he was captured by the camp sentries , taken back to the camp and bound . He was later convicted of treason but pardoned by Harrison . 
 Although existing accounts are unclear about exactly how the battle began , Harrison 's sentinels encountered advancing warriors in the pre @-@ dawn hours of November 7 . Around 4 : 30 a.m. , the soldiers awoke to scattered gunshots and discovered themselves almost encircled by Tenskwatawa 's forces . Contact was first made on the northern end of the perimeter , but the movement was probably intended as a diversion . Shortly after the first shots , fierce fighting broke out on the opposite end of the perimeter as the warriors charged Harrison 's line on the southern corner . The attack took the army by surprise as the warriors shouted war calls and rushed the defenders . Spencer was among the first to be killed , being shot in each thigh . Governor Harrison later recorded his death in a dispatch to Washington saying , 
 " ... Spencer was wounded in the head . He exhorted his men to fight valiantly . He was shot through both thighs and fell ; still continuing to encourage them , he was raised up , and received [ another ] ball through his body , which put an immediate end to his existence . " 
 Lieutenants <unk> and Klaus , the other two Yellow Jacket commanding officers , were also soon wounded and killed . Without leadership , the Yellow Jackets began to fall back from the main line , retreating with the sentinels . The warriors followed the retreating unit and entered the camp . The soldiers regrouped under the command of future United States Senator , ensign John Tipton , and with the help of two reserve companies under the command of Captain Rodd , repulsed the warriors and sealed the breach in the line . 
 The second charge by the Native Americans targeted both the north and south ends of the camp , with the far southern end again being the hardest hit . Over half of Harrison 's casualties were suffered among the companies on the southern end , including Captain Spencer and five other men in his company , and seven other men in the adjoining company . With the regulars reinforcing that critical section of the line , and the surprise over , the men were able to hold their position as the attacks continued . On the northern end of the camp , Major Daveiss led the dragoons on a counter charge that punched through the Native Americans ' line before being repulsed . Most of Daveiss 's company retreated back to Harrison 's main line , but Daveiss himself was killed . Throughout the next hour Harrison 's troops fought off several more charges . When the warriors began to run low on ammunition and the sun rose , revealing the small size of Tenskwatawa 's army , the Indian forces finally began to slowly withdraw . A second charge by the dragoons forced the remaining Native Americans to flee . 
 The battle lasted about two hours and Harrison lost 62 men ( 37 killed in action and 25 mortally wounded ) ; about 126 were less seriously hurt . The Yellow Jackets suffered the highest casualties of the battle , with 30 % of their numbers killed or wounded . The number of Native American casualties is still the subject of debate , but it was certainly lower than that of the United States forces . Historians estimate that as many as 50 were killed and about 70 – 80 were wounded . 
 The warriors retreated to Prophetstown where , according to one chief 's account , the warriors confronted Tenskwatawa and accused him of deceit because of the many deaths , which his spells were supposed to have prevented . He blamed his wife for desecrating his magic medicine and offered to cast a new spell and insisted that warriors launch a second attack , but they refused . 
 Fearing Tecumseh 's imminent return with reinforcements , Harrison ordered his men to fortify the camp with works for the rest of the day . As the sentries moved back out , they discovered and scalped the bodies of 36 warriors . The following day , November 8 , he sent a small group of men to inspect the town and found it was deserted except for one elderly woman too sick to flee ; the rest of the defeated Natives had evacuated the village during the night . Harrison ordered his troops to spare the woman , but to burn down Prophetstown and destroy the Native Americans ' cooking implements , without which the confederacy would be hard pressed to survive the winter . Everything of value was confiscated , including 5 @,@ 000 bushels of corn and beans . Some of Harrison 's soldiers dug up bodies from the graveyard in Prophetstown to scalp . Harrison 's troops buried their own dead on the site of their camp . They built large fires over the mass grave in an attempt to conceal it from the Native Americans . However , after Harrison 's troops departed the area , the Native Americans returned to the grave site , digging up many of the corpses and scattering the bodies in retaliation . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The day after the battle the wounded were loaded onto wagons and carried back to Fort Harrison for medical care . Most of the militia was released from duty on November 9 and returned home , but many of the long @-@ time soldiers remained in the area a bit longer . In his initial report to Secretary William Eustis , Harrison informed him of a battle having occurred near the Tippecanoe River , giving the battle the river 's name , and added that he feared an imminent reprisal . The first dispatch did not make clear which side had won the conflict , and the secretary interpreted it as a defeat . The follow @-@ up dispatch made the United States victory clear , and the defeat of Tecumseh 's confederacy became more certain when no second attack materialized . Eustis replied with a lengthy note demanding to know why Harrison had not taken adequate precautions in fortifying his camp . Harrison responded that he considered the position strong enough to not require fortification . This dispute was the catalyst of a disagreement between Harrison and the Department of War that later caused him to resign from the army in 1814 . 
 At first , the newspapers carried little information about the battle , instead focusing on the highlights of the ongoing Napoleonic Wars . One Louisville newspaper even printed a copy of the original dispatch and called the battle a defeat for the United States . However , by December , most of the major papers in the United States began to carry stories about the battle . Public outrage quickly grew and many citizens blamed the British for inciting the tribes to violence and supplying them with firearms . Andrew Jackson was at the forefront of those calling for war , claiming that Tecumseh and his allies were " excited by secret British agents " . Other western governors called for action : Willie Blount of Tennessee called on the government to " purge the camps of Indians of every Englishmen to be found ... " Acting on popular sentiment , the War Hawks in Congress passed resolutions condemning the British for interfering in the United States ' domestic affairs . Tippecanoe fueled the worsening tension with the United Kingdom , culminating in a declaration of war only a few months later . 
 Until recently historians have accepted the story that Tecumseh was furious with Tenskwatawa for losing the battle , and that Tecumseh had threatened to kill his brother for allowing the attack to take place . According to this story , the Prophet lost prestige after the battle and no longer served as a leader of the confederacy . In their subsequent meetings with Harrison , several Native leaders claimed that the Prophet 's influence was destroyed ; in some accounts it was said he was being persecuted . Historians Alfred A. Cave and Robert Owens have argued that the Natives were probably trying to mislead Harrison in an attempt to calm the situation and that Tenskwatawa actually continued to play an important role in the confederacy . 
 Harrison , having accomplished his goal of dispersing the Natives of Prophetstown , proclaimed that he had won a decisive victory . But some of Harrison 's contemporaries , as well as some subsequent historians , raised doubts about whether the battle was as successful as Harrison claimed . " In none of the contemporary reports from Indian agents , traders , and public officials on the aftermath of Tippecanoe can we find confirmation of the claim that Harrison had won a decisive victory " , wrote historian Alfred Cave . The defeat was a setback for Tecumseh 's confederacy , but the Natives soon rebuilt Prophetstown , and frontier violence actually increased after the battle . Adam <unk> says the battle was a disaster for both sides , although it did make Tenskwatawa 's religious movement stronger . 
 On December 16 , 1811 , the first of the New Madrid earthquakes shook the South and the Midwest . Many Indians took the earthquake as a sign that Tenskwatawa 's predictions of doom were coming true , leading many to support Tecumseh , including many of his former detractors . Attacks against settlers increased in the aftermath . Numerous settlers and isolated outposts in the Indiana and Illinois Territories were targeted , leading to the deaths of many civilians . Prophetstown was partially rebuilt over the next year , though it was again destroyed by a second campaign in 1812 . Tecumseh continued to play a major role in military operations on the frontier , and by the time the U.S. declared war on Great Britain in the War of 1812 , Tecumseh 's confederacy was ready to launch its own war against the United States , this time with British allies . Tecumseh 's warriors made up nearly half of the British army that captured Detroit from the United States in the War of 1812 . It was not until Tecumseh 's death at the 1813 Battle of the Thames in Ontario that his confederation ceased to threaten the interests of the United States . 
 When William Henry Harrison ran for President of the United States during the election of 1840 , he used the slogan " Tippecanoe and Tyler Too " to remind people of his heroism during the battle . 
 = = Memorial = = 
 The participants in the battle received the Thanks of Congress . The resolution originally included William Henry Harrison by name , but his name was removed from the resolution before passage . Harrison considered this to be an insult , thinking Congress implied he was the one person in the campaign not worthy of accolades , and he expressed the opinion that it held him up to obloquy and disrespect . He was later awarded the Thanks of Congress and a Congressional Gold Medal in 1818 for victory at the Battle of the Thames . 
 William Henry Harrison returned to the battlefield in 1835 to give speeches during his first presidential campaign . Part of his speech called for the creation of a memorial to preserve the battle site . John Tipton later purchased the land to preserve it . The mission school on the hill was purchased by the Methodist Church to be used as a seminary . Tipton left the battlefield to the seminary in his will and they maintained it for many years and built a larger facility at the location in 1862 . The Battle and Harrison were memorialized by two Ohio towns being named Tippecanoe ; one changed its name to Tipp City in 1938 . 
 In 1908 , the Indiana General Assembly commissioned the creation of an 80 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) high obelisk memorial . By the 1920s the site had become primarily a Methodist youth retreat . On October 9 , 1960 , the Tippecanoe Battlefield was named a National Historic Landmark . In 1961 , a large commemoration of the 150th anniversary of the battle was held and attended by an estimated 10 @,@ 000 people . In the following years , the battle site became less trafficked and fell into disrepair . It was later taken over by the Tippecanoe County Historical Association which now maintains the battleground and the seminary building , which houses a museum about the battle . An amphitheater was added to the memorial in 1986 . From 1989 – 90 , the amphitheater was used for performances of The Battle of Tippecanoe Outdoor Drama . 
 = William S. Clark = 
 William Smith Clark ( July 31 , 1826 – March 9 , 1886 ) was a professor of chemistry , botany and zoology , a colonel during the American Civil War , and a leader in agricultural education . Raised and schooled in Easthampton , Massachusetts , Clark spent most of his adult life in Amherst , Massachusetts . He graduated from Amherst College in 1848 and obtained a doctorate in chemistry from Georgia Augusta University in Göttingen in 1852 . He then served as professor of chemistry at Amherst College from 1852 to 1867 . During the Civil War , he was granted leave from Amherst to serve with the 21st Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry , eventually achieving the rank of colonel and the command of that unit . 
 In 1867 , Clark became the third president of the Massachusetts Agricultural College ( MAC ) , now the University of Massachusetts Amherst . He was the first to appoint a faculty and admit a class of students . Although initially successful , MAC was criticized by politicians and newspaper editors who felt it was a waste of funding in a state that was growing increasingly industrial . Farmers of western Massachusetts were slow to support the college . Despite these obstacles , Clark 's success in organizing an innovative academic institution earned him international attention . 
 Japanese officials , striving to achieve rapid modernization of that country in the wake of the Meiji Restoration , were especially intrigued by Clark 's work . In 1876 , the Japanese government hired Clark as a foreign advisor to establish the Sapporo Agricultural College ( SAC ) , now Hokkaido University . During his eight months in Sapporo , Clark successfully organized SAC , had a significant impact on the scientific and economic development of the island of Hokkaido , and made a lasting imprint on Japanese culture . Clark 's visage overlooks Sapporo from several statues and his parting words to his Japanese students , " Boys , be ambitious ! " ( 「 <unk> 」 ) have become a nationally known motto in Japan . 
 After resigning the presidency of MAC in 1879 , Clark left academia to become the president of a mining company , Clark & Bothwell . The company , in operation from 1881 to 1882 , purchased several silver mines , mostly in Utah and California . Clark 's partner , John R. Bothwell , proved to be corrupt and the company quickly folded , destroying Clark 's reputation , his own finances and the fortunes of many of his friends and family . The subsequent scandal ruined Clark 's health . He died of heart disease at his home in Amherst in 1886 . 
 = = Education and early career = = 
 Born in Ashfield , Massachusetts , on July 31 , 1826 , William Smith Clark was the son of a country physician , Atherton Clark , and Harriet Smith Clark . In about 1834 , his family moved to Easthampton , Massachusetts . Clark was educated at Williston Seminary ( now the Williston Northampton School ) in Easthampton , and entered Amherst College in 1844 . He earned membership in the prestigious Phi Beta Kappa academic honor society and graduated in the class of 1848 . Clark then taught chemistry at Williston Seminary from 1848 to 1850 . In 1851 , he departed to study chemistry and botany at Georgia Augusta University in Germany , now known as the University of Göttingen , where he earned his Ph.D. in chemistry in 1852 . 
 Later that year , Clark returned to Amherst and accepted a professorship in analytical and applied chemistry at Amherst College . He held that position until 1867 . He also served as professor of zoology from 1852 to 1858 , and of botany from 1854 to 1858 . Shortly after his appointment , Clark began to promote agricultural education , a subject which had attracted his attention during his time in Göttingen . Beginning in 1853 , he headed a new Division of Science for the theoretical and practical study of agriculture . The program was not successful , however , and was discontinued in 1857 due to poor enrollment . It became clear to Clark that a new type of institution would be necessary if agricultural education were to be taught effectively . He was a member of the Massachusetts Board of Agriculture from 1859 to 1861 and was the president of the Hampshire Board of Agriculture from 1860 to 1861 , and later from 1871 to 1872 . He used his position in these organizations to seek support for an agricultural college in Massachusetts . 
 = = Family = = 
 A few months after returning home from Germany , on May 25 , 1853 , Clark married Harriet <unk> Richards Williston . Harriet Williston was the daughter of Clarissa and William Richards , American missionaries to the Kingdom of Hawaii . In 1838 , Harriet and her brother Lyman were sent from Hawaii to be taken in by industrialist Samuel Williston so that they could be schooled at Williston Seminary in Easthampton . William Richards died in 1847 in Hawaii . His wife , Clarissa , survived him , however she remained in Hawaii for some time after her husband 's death and it was agreed that Williston should adopt both Harriet and Lyman Richards . Clark 's adoptive father @-@ in @-@ law , Samuel Williston , would prove to be an important sponsor to his career . Williston was Amherst College 's primary benefactor , and a highly influential figure in western Massachusetts . 
 William and Harriet Clark had 11 children , only 7 of whom survived to adulthood . Their eldest child and daughter , Emily Williston Clark , married F.W. Stearns , the son of prominent trader and department store owner R.H. Stearns . One of their sons , Hubert Lyman Clark , became a prominent zoologist . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 Clark 's academic career was interrupted by the Civil War . An enthusiastic supporter of the Union cause in the war , Clark took part in student military drill instruction at Amherst College and successfully recruited a number of students . In August 1861 , he received a commission of major in the 21st Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry . He served with the 21st Massachusetts for nearly two years , eventually commanding that regiment as lieutenant colonel in 1862 , and colonel from 1862 to 1863 . 
 During its first months of service , the 21st Massachusetts was assigned garrison duty at the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis , Maryland . In January 1862 , the regiment was attached to the Coast Division commanded by Major General Ambrose Burnside and embarked with the division for operations in North Carolina . Clark was placed in command of the regiment in February 1862 and led it in the Battle of New Bern on March 14 , 1862 . In that action , Clark garnered a reputation for bravery when the regiment charged a Confederate battery and he straddled an enemy cannon , urging his regiment forward . The gun was the first artillery piece captured by the Union Army during that engagement . It was presented by General Burnside to Amherst College in honor of Lieutenant <unk> Stearns , son of the president of Amherst College and adjutant of the 21st Massachusetts , who was killed in the battle . The cannon was mounted inside Morgan Hall at Amherst College . 
 After the 21st Massachusetts was transferred to Northern Virginia in July 1862 , the regiment eventually became part of the Army of the Potomac and took part in several of the largest battles of the war including Second Bull Run , Antietam , and Fredericksburg . The regiment suffered its worst casualties during the Battle of Chantilly on September 1 , 1862 . In the confusion of the battle , fought in thick woods during a thunderstorm , Clark became separated from his regiment and wandered the Virginia countryside for four days before finding the army again . While he was missing , he was incorrectly listed as killed in action and an Amherst newspaper printed his obituary under the headline , " Another Hero Gone . " 
 Clark 's enthusiasm for the war waned considerably after the Battle of Fredericksburg during which the Union Army suffered severe casualties in repeated charges against a heavily fortified stone wall . In a January 1863 letter to a friend , Clark wrote that , although he still felt " the principles for which we fight are right and honorable , " he was " disheartened and dissatisfied " with the government and the army . By April 1863 , the numbers of the 21st Massachusetts had been so thinned by what Clark called the " cruel fate of war , " that the regiment had virtually ceased to exist and Clark 's command was only nominal . He therefore resigned his commission and returned to Massachusetts . 
 = = Massachusetts Agricultural College = = 
 The movement for an agricultural college in Massachusetts had begun as early as the 1830s , long before Clark became involved . The leaders of the movement included men such as Marshall Wilder , a prosperous Boston merchant and president of the Norfolk Agricultural Society , and Judge Henry Flagg French , who would become the first president of the Massachusetts Agricultural College . Their efforts met with little progress until the passage of the Morrill Land Grant Act in 1862 . Sponsored by U.S. Representative Justin Smith Morrill , the act allotted federal land in the West to each state . The proceeds from the sale of this land were to support the establishment of colleges " related to agriculture and the mechanic arts . " Massachusetts voted to take advantage of this federal program and established the Massachusetts Agricultural College in April 1863 . 
 Proponents of agricultural education , including Clark , felt that scientific advances were bypassing farmers as a class . Clark lamented that farmers in Massachusetts had little access to higher education and that , consequently , the profession was degenerating economically and intellectually . As Clark wrote , 
 In the good time coming , the refining , elevating , and strengthening influences of high intellectual and aesthetic culture will be considered as desirable in the agricultural profession as they are in medicine , law or theology ... If practical farmers are to remain ignorant of all the higher branches of learning , and to have only the mental discipline and culture of the country public schools , they can never occupy their proper position in society . 
 The farmer 's " proper position in society " was in particular jeopardy in New England , according to leaders of the agricultural education movement . Increasing industrialization caused the population of mill towns to grow exponentially in the mid @-@ 19th century at the expense of rural towns , many of which were left all but abandoned , especially in western Massachusetts . Adding to the crisis was the phenomenon of westward movement and the lure of cheap land in the Midwest . The agricultural education movement in Massachusetts , in reaction to this crisis , had highly moralistic tones . Clark criticized those who left New England , writing , " Will a wise man exchange the beautiful and diversified scenery of New England ... Will he forsake the school and churches and the social privileges of prosperous communities for the semi @-@ barbarous condition of newly and sparsely settled districts ? " Further , Clark warned that if the decay of rural Massachusetts continued , farming would soon be considered , " degrading in its nature , and designed ... only for those poor , stupid , ignorant , or unfortunate persons . " 
 Clark resigned his commission in the army one month after the MAC was voted into existence by the Massachusetts Legislature . When he returned to Amherst , he quickly sought involvement in the new institution and worked energetically to convince state authorities to locate the college in Amherst . Rival sites under consideration included Springfield , Lexington , and property owned by Harvard University in Roxbury . Elected to the Massachusetts Legislature in 1864 , Clark secured a bond for the Town of Amherst enabling it to contribute $ 50 @,@ 000 to the construction of the college buildings . This ultimately swayed the trustees to choose Amherst . 
 MAC went through two presidents in its first four years and by 1867 still did not have a faculty , nor students , nor finished buildings . Clark became president of the college in 1867 and immediately appointed a faculty and completed a plan for building construction . Clark 's decisive management enabled the college to admit its first class of 49 students . In addition to being president , he was professor of botany and horticulture . 
 Although initially regarded as a great success , the college saw poor enrollment over the course of the 1870s . Clark was particularly disappointed with the lack of support from the farming community , writing , " To one who understands fully the greatness of the work which has been done in Amherst … the utter indifference in regard to the college manifested by most of the 75 @,@ 000 farmers of Massachusetts is truly astounding . " 
 By the end of his presidency of MAC , Clark was falling under increasing criticism from the press and politicians in Boston . MAC , mounting an increasing debt , was declared a failure by some . Infuriated by what he called , " time @-@ serving politicians and unprincipled newspapers seeking only to float on the tide of public opinion , " Clark resigned in 1879 . 
 Clark was one of the commission of three , appointed by Massachusetts governor John Albion Andrew in 1863 , to consider the expediency of establishing a state military academy . He was a presidential elector in 1864 , and a representative to the Massachusetts House of Representatives in 1864 – 1865 and 1867 . He was a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences , and a member of other scientific societies . 
 = = Japan = = 
 In 1876 , Clark was invited by the government of Japan to establish the Sapporo Agricultural College , now Hokkaido University . Following the Meiji Restoration in 1867 , the new Imperial government of Japan set out upon a path of rapid modernization and recruited many European and American academics and military experts to help expedite the process . These men were referred to by the Japanese government as <unk> <unk> or " hired foreigners " . 
 Seeking a model agricultural college , Mori <unk> , the Japanese Minister to the United States , asked Horace Capron , Commissioner of the U.S. Department of Agriculture , for a recommendation . Capron recommended MAC . After visiting the college , Minister Mori later recommended Clark to the Japanese government as the ideal candidate to establish SAC . 
 Clark signed his contract with the Japanese government on March 3 , 1876 , in Washington , DC . Due to inconsistencies in translation , discrepancies exist to this day as to what Clark ’ s official title was . According to biographer John Maki , the Japanese and English versions of Clark ’ s contract differed on this point . The Japanese version named Clark , " head teacher ( namely , assistant director ) . " Because of this , in Japan , Clark has been referred to as " assistant director " or sometimes " vice @-@ president " of SAC . However , in the English version of the contract , " the word ‘ President ’ was inserted into the text and <unk> by Yoshida <unk> ( the Japanese Minister to the United States at the time ) . " Regardless of title , Clark enjoyed the complete support of the Japanese government in organizing SAC and he exerted principal authority over the college while he was in Japan . 
 Clark spent eight months in Sapporo from 1876 to 1877 . After enduring negative press in Massachusetts , he was pleased with the enthusiastic cooperation he received from the Japanese government . SAC was organized in just one month . Clark wrote to his wife , " I am actually rebuilding MAC ... on the other side of the earth . " In establishing SAC , Clark introduced the first American model farm and barn in Japan and the first college military unit in the country . He also introduced new crops and new techniques in agriculture , fishing , and animal husbandry . 
 Clark ’ s direct superior while working at SAC was the Governor of Hokkaido ( and future Prime Minister of Japan ) Kuroda Kiyotaka . The two men greatly respected one another and shared a bond in that they both had past military experience . Their positive relationship facilitated Clark ’ s many accomplishments while in Sapporo and accounted for the wide latitude Clark was given in implementing not just SAC programs , but also his influence on the colonial development of Hokkaido . 
 Hokkaido represented the Japanese frontier at that time and with so much work to be done in colonizing the island , Kuroda welcomed and frequently implemented Clark ’ s advice . Clark submitted recommendations to the governor on such diverse subjects as converting migratory fisherman into permanent colonists and establishing a textiles industry . In fact , Clark himself was taken aback by the apparent scope of his influence on colonial affairs , writing to his wife , “ Governor Kuroda consults me constantly and always follows my advice . ” He later wrote , “ I tremble to think how much confidence is reposed in me and what responsibilities I am daily assuming . ” 
 Clark not only had a significant impact on colonial development , but also had a powerful personal effect on the first students of SAC . The same rhetoric of ambition and personal elevation he had employed at MAC resonated more deeply with his Japanese students and , further , with a Japanese nation just emerging from a rigid feudal caste system . During classroom lectures , informal evening talks , and outings to collect botanical specimens , Clark discussed morality and urged his students to , " Be gentlemen . " 
 Although the Japanese government prohibited the teaching of the Bible in government schools , Clark managed , after considerable effort , to secure approval from Kuroda to make use of the Bible during ethics instruction . In doing so , Clark introduced Christian principles to the first entering class of the college . They , in turn , influenced the students in the second class who enrolled after Clark 's departure . In 1877 , 31 students of SAC converted to Christianity , signing a document drafted by Clark titled , " The Covenant of Believers in Jesus . " Some of them later played important roles in the fields of Christianity , education , and international relations during Japan 's continuing modernization in the early 20th century . Alumni such as Uchimura <unk> ( founder of the non @-@ church movement , a Japanese Christian society ) and <unk> <unk> ( Quaker , educator and diplomat ) , still known nationwide in Japan , were from the second entering class of the College . 
 During his stay in Hokkaido , Clark examined the local flora and introduced new species of plants and trees from Japan to the United States . He sent to Massachusetts a large assortment of seeds , many of which proved of special value to his own state , on account of the high latitude from which they were selected . In <unk> @-@ ku , Sapporo , he discovered a new lichen on the side of Mt . <unk> , at an elevation of 3 @,@ 200 feet ( 980 m ) , which was named <unk> clarkii , in his honor , by Edward Tuckerman . 
 On the day of Clark 's departure , April 16 , 1877 , students and faculty of SAC rode with him as far as the village of <unk> , then 13 miles ( 21 km ) outside of Sapporo . As recalled by one of the students , Masatake Oshima , after saying his farewells , Clark shouted , " Boys , be ambitious ! " Several differing versions of Clark 's parting words persist today including , " Boys , be ambitious , like this old man ! " and , " Boys , be ambitious for Christ ! " A painting of Clark 's departure , rendered in 1971 , hangs in the Prefectural Capitol building in Sapporo and includes a lengthier version of his parting words , " Boys , be ambitious ! Be ambitious not for money or for selfish aggrandizement , not for that evanescent thing which men call fame . Be ambitious for that attainment of all that a man ought to be . " 
 = = Later career = = 
 After his retirement from MAC , Clark became interested in a scientific floating college proposed by entrepreneur and real estate developer James O. Woodruff . This innovative concept attracted national attention and planning moved swiftly . Funds were procured and Clark was named President of the Faculty . Before the enterprise could get underway , Woodruff 's sudden death caused the abandonment of the scheme . 
 Following this setback , Clark decided to depart from academia and teamed up with John R. Bothwell in 1880 to form the Clark & Bothwell mining company . For Clark , mining was a logical extension of his background in chemistry and geology . Exactly how Clark became associated with Bothwell , a man of questionable character who had been cashiered from the U.S. Army for fraud , is unknown . As an academic , Clark was ill @-@ prepared for a financial career . This , coupled with Bothwell 's disreputable history , would result in a short life for the firm . 
 The firm of Clark & Bothwell opened for business on March 10 , 1881 with offices at the corner of Nassau and Wall Street in New York City . The first mine in which the company became invested was the Starr @-@ Grove silver mine , just south of present @-@ day Battle Mountain , Nevada . By the end of 1881 the company , with Clark as President , was involved in seven silver mines , predominantly in Utah and California . Although focused on the American West , the company had far @-@ reaching interests spreading from Mexico to Nova Scotia . The <unk> Mining Company of Tangier , Nova Scotia ( named by Clark after a Japanese word which , according to his translation , meant " all right " ) became a subsidiary of Clark & Bothwell in the summer of 1881 . The company was among the first involved in the Nova Scotia gold rush of that period . 
 In managing these mines , Clark took an active role as President . He traveled thousands of miles , recommending improvements to mills and machinery and overseeing the improvements . Meeting initial success , the company 's worth soon amounted to millions of dollars . The good fortune extended throughout the town of Amherst where , according to biographer John Maki , there was a " craze in mining stocks " as Clark 's friends , family , and former academic colleagues became heavily invested in the company . There were also substantial investors in New York , Boston , Philadelphia and other cities . 
 The first sign of serious trouble for the company came in March 1882 when the Starr @-@ Grove mine shut down due to lack of profit and increasing debt . The stock values of Clark & Bothwell 's various mines immediately plunged and were soon <unk> . The first of what was to be several lawsuits for investment money lost was brought in April 1882 . The most damaging development came when one of the subsidiaries , the Stormont Mining Company , sued Clark & Bothwell for funds withheld from Stormont . It soon became apparent that Bothwell , as Treasurer , had mismanaged affairs at the company 's New York office resulting in the firm 's collapse . By May 1882 , Bothwell was en route to San Francisco and was never heard from again . The scandal was national news and the resulting lawsuits played out in New York and New England newspapers . 
 Although Clark maintained that he had been " taken in " by Bothwell , his reputation in Amherst was nonetheless destroyed . The stresses of the scandal ruined Clark 's health , and for the last four years of his life , Clark was largely confined to his home in Amherst due to heart disease . He died in Amherst on March 9 , 1886 and is buried in Amherst 's West Cemetery . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although he is almost forgotten in his home state of Massachusetts , Clark remains a national figure in Japan . His influences on the agricultural and economic development of Hokkaido were significant , but it is primarily his cultural message that still resonates today . According to historian Fumiko Fujita , Clark 's phrase , " Boys , be ambitious ! " is " almost immortal in Japan . " The Japanese National Tourism Organization describes the slogan as " famous " and often quoted throughout the country . Historian John Maki wrote that many Japanese school textbooks " have carried brief accounts of [ Clark 's ] work and his slogan " , and that Clark 's name appears on " schools , buildings , shops , confections and countless tourist souvenirs . " 
 Clark 's missionary activities produced the Sapporo Independent Christian Church in 1882 , founded by students of SAC . It was one of the first cells of Christianity in Japan after the Meiji Restoration . Eventually , ten of the signers of Clark 's " Covenant in the Believers of Jesus , " raised funds to build the William S. Clark Memorial Church in Sapporo in 1922 . The church was demolished in 1962 , but rebuilt in another location and still houses the original " Covenant " as well as several Bibles Clark brought to Sapporo . 
 In the United States , Clark 's primary legacy is one of ongoing cooperation between the two colleges he founded , now the University of Massachusetts Amherst and the University of Hokkaido . Student and faculty exchanges were informal for many years until , according to journalist Daniel Fitzgibbons , the early 1960s when " the U.S. State Department contracted with the University to help strengthen the agricultural curriculum at Hokkaido . Through that program , 11 UMass faculty went to Sapporo and 52 Japanese faculty and students received advanced training in Amherst . " Both universities maintain exchange programs through various academic departments . 
 In 1969 , Professor John H. Foster of the Center for International Agricultural Studies designated the collaboration between the institutions as " the oldest technical assistance relationship between a U.S. university and a foreign university . " In recognition of this fact , and of Clark 's role in establishing the two colleges , the University of Massachusetts Amherst and the University of Hokkaido became sister universities in 1976 . On February 7 , 1990 , the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the prefecture of Hokkaido became sister states . 
 One of the first public works of art in honor of Clark 's legacy was a bust placed on the campus of the University of Hokkaido in 1926 commemorating the 50th anniversary of the establishment of SAC . The original bust was melted down during World War II , but reconstructed in 1947 . To mark the 100th anniversary of Clark 's arrival in Sapporo , the statue of Clark at <unk> observation hill was built in 1976 . Etched on the base of the statue are Clark 's famous words , " Boys , Be Ambitious . " The site is a popular tourist destination . Finally , on the campus of the University of Massachusetts Amherst , the William Smith Clark Memorial , a 0 @.@ 5 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 20 ha ) stone and sculptural garden , was dedicated on October 17 , 1991 . It is located on the former site of Clark 's house at the peak of Clark Hill . The memorial was designed by landscape architect Todd A. Richardson . 
 Buildings named after Clark include Clark Hall at the University of Massachusetts Amherst , originally constructed in 1905 to house the Department of Botany , and the Clark Memorial Student Center , built on the campus of the University of Hokkaido in 1960 , the first and largest western @-@ style collegiate student center in Japan . 
 = = Works = = 
 Contributions to Liebig 's Annalen : 
 “ Ueber <unk> @-@ <unk> ” ( 1851 ) 
 “ Analyse des <unk> aus dem <unk> <unk> ” ( 1851 ) 
 “ <unk> von <unk> ” ( 1852 ) 
 Papers contributed to the annual reports of the Massachusetts Board of Agriculture : 
 “ Report on Horses ” ( 1859 – 60 ) 
 “ Professional Education the Present Want of Agriculture ” ( 1868 ) 
 “ The Work and the Wants of the Agricultural College ” ( 1868 ) 
 “ The Cultivation of the Cereals ” ( 1868 ) 
 “ Nature 's Mode of Distributing Plants ” ( 1870 ) 
 “ The Relations of Botany to Agriculture ” ( 1872 ) 
 “ The Circulation of Sap in Plants ” ( 1873 ) 
 “ Observations on the Phenomena of Plant @-@ Life ” ( 1874 ) 
 “ Agriculture in Japan ” ( 1878 ) 
 In 1869 he translated Scheerer 's Blow @-@ pipe Manual for use at MAC . 
 = Battle of Ka @-@ san = 
 The Battle of Ka @-@ san was an engagement between United Nations ( UN ) and North Korean forces early in the Korean War from September 1 to September 15 , 1950 , in the vicinity of Ka @-@ san in South Korea . It was a part of the Battle of Pusan Perimeter , and was one of several large engagements fought simultaneously . The battle ended in a victory for the United Nations after large numbers of United States ( US ) and Republic of Korea ( ROK ) troops repelled a strong North Korean attack . 
 Attempting to capture Taegu as part of the Great Naktong Offensive , the North Korean People 's Army 's 1st and 13th Divisions advanced to the hill masses north of the city where they confronted the US Army 's 1st Cavalry Division and the ROK Army 's 1st Division . The North Koreans sought to occupy a number of hill masses , most prominently Hill 902 , known to South Koreans as Ka @-@ san , for the ancient fortress situated atop it . 
 In two weeks of fighting in and around the fortress , the North Koreans were able to gradually push back the UN forces from Ka @-@ san and Hills 755 and 314 to the south , but the UN forces held out strongly and the North Koreans were not able to quickly consolidate their gains . The UN forces defended the ground tenaciously , even assigning a battalion of engineers to fight on the front lines , eventually preventing the North Koreans from advancing long enough for a UN counterattack at Inchon which drove the North Koreans from the area . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Pusan Perimeter = = = 
 From the outbreak of the Korean War and the invasion of South Korea by the North , the North Korean People 's Army had enjoyed superiority in both manpower and equipment over both the Republic of Korea Army and the United Nations forces dispatched to South Korea to prevent it from collapsing . The North Korean ( NK ) strategy was to aggressively pursue UN and ROK forces on all avenues of approach south and to engage them aggressively , attacking from the front and initiating a double envelopment of both flanks of the unit , which allowed the North Koreans to surround and cut off the opposing force , which would then be forced to retreat in disarray , often leaving behind much of its equipment . From their initial June 25 offensive to fights in July and early August , the North Koreans used this strategy to effectively defeat any UN force and push it south . However , when the UN forces , under the Eighth United States Army , established the Pusan Perimeter in August , the UN troops held a continuous line along the peninsula which North Korean troops could not flank , and their advantages in numbers decreased daily as the superior UN logistical system brought in more troops and supplies to the UN army . 
 When the North Koreans approached the Pusan Perimeter on August 5 , they attempted the same frontal assault technique on the four main avenues of approach into the perimeter . Throughout August , the NK 6th Division , and later the NK 7th Division engaged the US 25th Infantry Division at the Battle of Masan , initially repelling a UN counteroffensive before countering with battles at Komam @-@ ni and Battle Mountain . These attacks stalled as UN forces , well equipped and with plenty of reserves , repeatedly repelled North Korean attacks . North of Masan , the NK 4th Division and the US 24th Infantry Division sparred in the Naktong Bulge area . In the First Battle of Naktong Bulge , the North Korean division was unable to hold its bridgehead across the river as large numbers of US reserve forces were brought in to repel it , and on August 19 , the NK 4th Division was forced back across the river with 50 percent casualties . In the Taegu region , five North Korean divisions were repulsed by three UN divisions in several attempts to attack the city during the Battle of Taegu . Particularly heavy fighting took place at the Battle of the Bowling Alley where the NK 13th Division was almost completely destroyed in the attack . On the east coast , three more North Korean divisions were repulsed by the South Koreans at P 'ohang @-@ dong during the Battle of P 'ohang @-@ dong . All along the front , the North Korean troops were reeling from these defeats , the first time in the war their strategies were not working . 
 = = = September push = = = 
 In planning its new offensive , the North Korean command decided any attempt to flank the UN force was impossible thanks to the support of the UN navy . Instead , they opted to use frontal attack to breach the perimeter and collapse it as the only hope of achieving success in the battle . Fed by intelligence from the Soviet Union the North Koreans were aware the UN forces were building up along the Pusan Perimeter and that it must conduct an offensive soon or it could not win the battle . A secondary objective was to surround Taegu and destroy the UN and ROK units in that city . As part of this mission , the North Korean units would first cut the supply lines to Taegu . 
 On August 20 , the North Korean commands distributed operations orders to their subordinate units . The North Koreans called for a simultaneous five @-@ prong attack against the UN lines . These attacks would overwhelm the UN defenders and allow the North Koreans to break through the lines in at least one place to force the UN forces back . Five battle groupings were ordered . The center attack called for the NK 3rd Division , NK 13th Division , and NK 1st Division break through the US 1st Cavalry Division and ROK 1st Division to Taegu . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Simultaneous with their attack at Ka @-@ san , UN and North Korean units were similarly deadlocked a short distance away in the Battle of Tabu @-@ dong . In that sector , NK Major Kim Song Jun of the NK 19th Regiment , NK 13th Division had defected to the UN troops on September 1 . He reported that a full @-@ scale North Korean attack was to begin at dusk that day . The NK 13th Division , he said , had just taken in 4 @,@ 000 replacements , 2 @,@ 000 of them without weapons , and was now back to a strength of approximately 9 @,@ 000 men . Upon receiving this intelligence , 1st Cavalry Division commander Major General Hobart R. Gay alerted all of his division 's front @-@ line units to be prepared for the attack . ROK 1st Division commander Major General Paik Sun Yup also braced his men for attack . 
 = = = North Korean attack = = = 
 Hard on the heels of Kim 's warning that the North Korean attack would strike the night of September 2 , the attack hit with full force in the " Bowling Alley " area north of Taegu . The attack caught the US 8th Cavalry Regiment unprepared at Sangju . The division was poorly deployed along the road to that town , lacking a reserve force to counterattack effectively . The North Koreans struck the 2nd Battalion , 8th Cavalry , the night of September 2 @-@ 3 on Hill 448 west of the Bowling Alley and 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of Tabu @-@ dong , and overran it . On the right , E Company , although not under attack , was cut off and had to withdraw . The commanding officer of the 3rd Battalion placed I Company in a blocking position just north of Tabu @-@ dong astride the road . There , two North Korean T @-@ 34 tanks and some North Korean infantry struck it at 02 : 00 on September 3 . In this action , I Company suffered many casualties but repelled the attack . The overrun 2nd Battalion withdrew through the 3rd Battalion which had assembled hastily in a defensive position south of Tabu @-@ dong . During the day , elements of the NK 1st Division forced the 8th Cavalry I & R Platoon and a detachment of South Korean police from the Walled City of Ka @-@ san on the crest of Hill 902 , 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) east of Tabu @-@ dong . On September 3 , therefore , the UN command , the Eighth United States Army lost both Tabu @-@ dong and Hill 902 , locally called Ka @-@ san , the dominant mountain @-@ top 10 miles ( 16 km ) north of Taegu . 
 The North Koreans now concentrated artillery north of Hill 902 and , although its fire was light and sporadic , it did cause minor damage in the 99th Field Artillery positions . This sudden surge of the North Koreans southward toward Taegu concerned the Eighth Army commander , Lieutenant General Walton Walker . The Army ordered an ROK battalion from the Taegu Replacement Training Center to a position in the rear of the 8th Cavalry , and the 1st Cavalry Division organized Task Force Allen , to be commanded by Assistant Division Commander Brigadier General Frank A. Allen , Jr . This task force comprised two provisional battalions formed of division headquarters and technical service troops , the division band , the replacement company , and other miscellaneous troops . It was to be used in combat as an emergency force should the North Koreans break through to the edge of Taegu . 
 = = = US counterattack on Ka @-@ san = = = 
 Eighth Army countered the North Korean advance down the Tabu @-@ dong road by ordering the 1st Cavalry Division to recapture and defend Hill 902 . This hill , 10 miles ( 16 km ) north of Taegu , gave observation all the way south through Eighth Army positions into the city , and , in North Korean hands , could be used for general intelligence purposes and to direct artillery and mortar fire . Hill 902 was too far distant from the Tabu @-@ dong road to dominate it ; otherwise it would have controlled this main communication route . The shortage of North Korean artillery and mortar ammunition reduced the advantages the peak held as an observation point for the North Koreans . 
 Despite being popularly known as the " walled city , " there was no walled city on the crest of Ka @-@ san in 1950 . Ka @-@ san , or Hill 902 , the 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) high mountain which differs from most high peaks in this part of Korea in having an oval @-@ shaped semi @-@ level area on its summit . This oval is a part of a 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) long ridge @-@ like crest , varying from 200 yards ( 180 m ) to 800 yards ( 730 m ) in width , which slopes down from the peak at 902 metres ( 2 @,@ 959 ft ) to approximately 755 metres ( 2 @,@ 477 ft ) at its southeastern end . On all sides of this ridge crest the mountain slopes drop precipitously . In ancient times , Koreans had built a 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) stone wall around the crest and had converted the summit into a fortress . Most of the summit in 1950 was covered with a dense growth of scrub brush and small pine trees . There were a few small terraced fields . Koreans knew Ka @-@ san as the " Sacred Mountain " . Near the northern end of the crest still stood the Buddhist <unk> Temple . 
 When the 1st Cavalry Division on August 29 assumed responsibility for the old ROK 1st Division sector north of Taegu it sent a patrol from the I & R Platoon to the top of Ka @-@ san . There the patrol found 156 South Korean National Police . There was some discussion between Gay and Walker about whether the 1st Cavalry Division or the ROK 1st Division should have the responsibility for the mountain . Gay maintained that his understrength division with a 35 miles ( 56 km ) front was already overextended and could not extend eastward beyond the hills immediately adjacent to the Tabu @-@ dong road . Uncertainty as to final responsibility for Ka @-@ san ended on the afternoon of September 3 after North Koreans had seized the mountain . 
 The Eighth Army telephoned Colonel Ernest V. Holmes , Chief of Staff of the 1st Cavalry Division , and told him that the 1st Cavalry Division had responsibility for the Walled City . Holmes replied he would send a company of engineers to Ka @-@ san . Holmes ordered Lieutenant Colonel William C. Holley , commanding officer of the 8th Engineer Combat Battalion , to report to Colonel Raymond D. Palmer , commanding the 8th Cavalry Regiment . That afternoon Palmer in his command post on the Tabu @-@ dong road outlined to Holley and the commanding officers of D Company , 8th Engineer Combat Battalion , and E Company , 8th Cavalry , his attack plan to regain control of Ka @-@ san . The Engineer company , commanded by First Lieutenant John T. Kennedy , was to lead the attack , E Company following . Once the force had gained the crest and E Company had established itself in defensive positions , the Engineer company was to come off the mountain . Many of the men in D Company were veteran infantrymen who had fought in World War II . 
 That evening , D Company loaded into trucks traveled north to the assembly area through a heavy rain . On the way they met two truckloads of South Korean police going south , some of them wounded . These were the police who , together with the detachment of the I & R Platoon , had been driven off Ka @-@ san that afternoon . After waiting in the rain awhile for orders , the Engineer company turned around and went back to camp . 
 = = = Engineer attack = = = 
 The next morning , September 4 , D Company received orders to move immediately as an infantry force to Ka @-@ san . The company carried no rations since E Company , 8th Cavalry , was to bring food and water later . The engineer troops arrived at their assembly area near the village of <unk> @-@ dong 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) east of the Tabu @-@ dong road , where Holley set up a communications command post . Sniper fire came in on the men as they moved up the trail to the base of Ka @-@ san 's steep slope . Word was given to the company that there were about 75 disorganized North Korean troops on Ka @-@ san . But actually , during the afternoon and evening of September 3 , the NK 2nd Battalion , 2nd Regiment , 1st Division , had occupied the summit of Ka @-@ san . 
 The engineer company started its attack up the mountain about noon of September 4 , following a trail up a southern spur . The 1st Platoon was in the lead , single file , followed by the 2nd and 3rd Platoons . Palmer considered the mission so important that he and his military intelligence officer , Captain Rene J. Guiraud , accompanied the engineers . Platoon Sergeant James N. Vandygriff , 2nd Platoon , D Company , in a brief conversation with Holley as he went ahead of the latter on his way up the trail , said he thought the attack was a " suicide mission " . 
 Less than 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) up the trail , D Company came under machine gun fire from its right flank , which inflicted several casualties . Kennedy rejected Vandygriff 's request to take a squad and knock out the gun , so the file got past the line of fire as best it could until M1918 Browning Automatic Rifle fire from the 3rd Platoon silenced the weapon . Farther up the trail another North Korean machine gun fired from the right along the trail and held up the advance until US artillery fire silenced it . The file of men left the trail @-@ like road , which dead @-@ ended , dropped over into a ravine on the left , and continued the climb . North Korean mortar fire killed two men and wounded eight or ten others in this phase of the ascent . At this time the 2nd Platoon leader collapsed from a kidney ailment and command passed to Vandygriff . Vandygriff led his platoon , now at the head of the company , on up the gully and at about 17 : 00 , came through a tunnel under a small ridge and the stone wall into the bowl @-@ shaped summit of Hill 755 , the southern arm of the Hill 902 crest . The 2nd and 3rd Platoons soon arrived , in that order . Near the top , Palmer received radio orders from Gay to come off the mountain ; Gay had not known that Palmer had accompanied the attack . 
 = = = Defense of Ka @-@ san = = = 
 Kennedy placed the 90 men of his company in position facing in an arc from west to northeast ; the 2nd Platoon took the left flank near the stone wall , the 1st Platoon took the center position on a wooded knoll , and the 3rd Platoon the right flank at the edge of a woods . Just as he reached the top , Second Lieutenant Thomas T. Jones , commanding the 3rd Platoon , saw and heard three North Korean mortars fire from 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) away on a grassy ridge to the east . He suggested to Kennedy that artillery fire be directed on these mortars , but Kennedy did not act on the suggestion . Kennedy established his command post inside the tunnel behind the 2nd Platoon position . The D Company position was entirely within the area enclosed by the stone wall , which was nearly intact except on the northeast near the 3rd Platoon position where it had crumbled and was covered with brush and trees . Jones pointed out to his platoon sergeant and squad leaders where he wanted them to take position at the edge of the woods facing the North Korean mortars he had seen on the grassy ridge beyond . He then remained a few minutes in conversation with Kennedy . A few minutes later Jones joined his 3rd Squad men at the edge of the woods . They told him that the platoon sergeant and the rest had continued on toward the narrow grassy ridge . One of the squad members called Jones to the edge of the woods and pointed out 12 well @-@ camouflaged North Korean soldiers , one of them carrying a machine gun , coming down the narrow ridge toward them from the mortar position . This group was a security force for the mortars and they dropped to the ground about one @-@ third of the way down the ridge . 
 Jones decided to bring back his other two squads to form a solid line and , expecting to be gone only a few minutes , he left his SCR @-@ 300 radio behind . Jones found one squad but the other had gone on farther and was not visible . While he studied the terrain and waited for a messenger he had sent to bring back that last squad , North Koreans attacked the main company position behind him . Judging by the noise he heard , Jones thought North Koreans had moved in force to the wooded bowl between him and the rest of the company . Jones never got back to his 3rd Squad . He and the rest of the platoon dropped down off the ridge into a gully on the left . 
 That night Jones and the eight men with him stayed in the ravine just under the crest . Without his radio he could not communicate with the rest of the company which he thought had been destroyed or driven off the hill . The next day when American fighter planes strafed the hilltop it confirmed his belief that no D Company men were there . Some of the men in the advanced squad made their way back to US lines , but North Koreans captured Jones and the eight men with him near the bottom of Ka @-@ san on September 10 as they were trying to make their way through the North Korean lines . This account of the 3rd Platoon explains why , except for the 3d Squad which rejoined D Company that evening , it was out of the action and off the crest almost as soon as it arrived on top , unknown to Kennedy and the rest of the company at the time . 
 = = = North Koreans hit Hill 755 = = = 
 About 30 minutes after D Company had reached Hill 755 , an estimated North Korean battalion launched an attack down the slope running south to Hill 755 from the crest of Hill 902 . The main attack hit Vandygriff 's 2nd Platoon just after Vandygriff had set up and loaded his two machine guns . These machine guns and the protection of the 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) wall on its left enabled D Company to turn back this attack , which left one dead and three wounded in the 2nd Platoon . That night , North Korean mortar and small arms fire harassed the company and there were several small probing North Korean attacks . Having no communication with the 3rd Platoon , Kennedy sent a patrol to its supposed position . The patrol reported back that it could find no one there but had found the platoon 's rocket launchers and two light machine guns . 
 At dawn on September 5 the North Koreans attacked . The engineers repulsed this attack but suffered some casualties . North Korean fire destroyed Vandygriff 's radio , forcing him to use runners to communicate with Kennedy 's command post . Ammunition was running low and three US C @-@ 47 Skytrain aircraft came over the area to make an airdrop . Kennedy put out orange identification panels , but the North Koreans put out similar panels . The planes circled , and finally dropped their bundles of ammunition and food on the North Korean positions . Immediately after the airdrops , two F @-@ 51 Mustang fighter planes came over and attacked D Company . The North Korean panels had misled both the cargo and fighter planes . The fighters dropped two napalm tanks within D Company 's perimeter , but none there were injured . The planes then strafed right through the 2nd Platoon position , but again caused no casualties . Soon after this aerial attack , North Korean troops attacked the positions , and PPSh @-@ 41 " burp gun " fire wounded Kennedy in the leg and ankle . 
 Sometime between 10 : 00 and 11 : 00 the advanced platoon of E Company , 8th Cavalry Regiment , arrived on top of Hill 755 and came into D Company 's perimeter . Some of the engineers fired on the E Company men before the latter identified themselves . The E Company platoon went into position on the right of Vandygriff , and Kennedy turned over command of the combined force to the E Company commander . Kennedy then assembled 12 wounded men and started down the mountain with them . The party was under small arms fire most of the way . A carrying party of Korean A @-@ frame porters led by an American officer had started up the mountain during the morning with supplies . North Korean fire , killing several of the porters , turned it back . 
 The day before , E Company had been delayed in following D Company to Hill 755 . Soon after the Engineer company had started up the trail on September 4 , E Company arrived at Holley 's command post at the base of the mountain . North Korean mortar fire was falling on the trail at the time and the company commander said he could not advance because of it . Holley radioed this information to Palmer who designated another company commander . This second officer was soon wounded in the leg and Holley then designated a third officer , who started up the mountain with E Company that evening about 20 : 00 . North Korean fire stopped the company 500 yards ( 460 m ) short of the crest before dawn . It was this same company that the NK 13th Division had cut off when it launched its attack the evening of September 2 and overran the 2nd Battalion north of Tabu @-@ dong . Tired and dispirited from this experience and their roundabout journey to rejoin the regiment , E Company men were suffering from lowered morale . 
 Shortly after the E Company platoon joined Vandygriff , the North Koreans attacked again . The E Company infantrymen had brought no mortars with them @-@ only small arms . In this situation , Vandygriff took a 3 @.@ 5 @-@ inch rocket launcher and fired into the North Korean attackers , causing them to break off the attack . By now Vandygriff 's troops were nearly out of ammunition . He then instructed his men to gather up all the weapons and ammunition from North Korean dead they could reach , and in this manner they obtained for emergency use about 30 to 40 rifles , 5 PPSh @-@ 41 guns , and some hand grenades . 
 In the course of gathering up these weapons , Vandygriff passed the dug @-@ in position of Private First Class Melvin L. Brown , a BAR man in the 3rd Squad . Brown was next to the wall on the extreme left of the platoon position at a point where the wall was only about 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) high . At the bottom of the wall around Brown 's position lay 15 to 20 North Korean dead . Earlier in the day , about 08 : 00 , Kennedy had visited Brown and had seen five North Korean dead that Brown had killed with BAR fire . Subsequently Brown exhausted his automatic rifle ammunition , then his few grenades , and finally he used his entrenching tool to knock the North Koreans in the head when they tried to climb over the wall . Brown had been slightly wounded in the shoulder early in the morning , but had bandaged it himself and refused to leave his position . 
 = = = Evacuation of Ka @-@ san = = = 
 At 13 : 30 Gay ordered the 8th Cavalry Regiment to withdraw its men off Ka @-@ san . Gay believed he had insufficient forces to secure and hold it and that the North Koreans had insufficient ammunition to exploit its possession as an observation point for directing artillery and mortar fire . However , Holley could not reach anyone in D Company , 8th Engineer Combat Battalion . 
 Rain started falling again and heavy fog closed in on the mountain top and severely reduced visibility there . Again the North Koreans attacked the 2nd Platoon and the adjacent E Company infantrymen . One of the engineers was shot through the neck and Vandygriff sent him to the company command post , only to have the man return to report that there was no longer a command post , that he could not find anyone and had seen only North Korean dead . Vandygriff now went to the noncommissioned officer who was in command of the E Company platoon and inform him . The two decided to withdraw . 
 As Vandygriff and his men began pulling back from the mountain , North Korean fire was falling in the platoon area from nearly all directions . The squad leaders started to break up the weapons that the platoon could not take out with them . At this time they discovered Brown was dead . Vandygriff told his troops not to remove the identification tags from the dead they would be leaving behind , as the tags would be the only means of identification later . Vandygriff put his platoon in a V formation and led them off the hill by the same trail they had ascended , picking up four wounded men on the way down . 
 At the base of the mountain , Holley and others in the afternoon saw E Company men come down from the top and , later , men from the engineer company . Each group thought it was the last of the survivors and told confused , conflicting stories . When all remaining members of D Company had been assembled , Holley found that the company had suffered 50 percent casualties ; 18 men were wounded and 30 were missing in action . 
 = = = NK consolidation = = = 
 Soldiers of the ROK 1st Division captured a North Korean near Ka @-@ san on September 4 who said that about 800 North Korean soldiers were on Ka @-@ san with three more battalions following them from the north . The engineer company had succeeded only in establishing a perimeter briefly within the North Korean @-@ held area . By evening of September 5 , Ka @-@ san was securely in North Korean hands with an estimated five battalions , totaling about 1 @,@ 500 soldiers , on the mountain and its forward slope . A North Korean <unk> carrying 82 @-@ mm. mortar shells and rice reportedly reached the top of Ka @-@ san during the day . The ROK 1st Division captured this <unk> a few days later south of Ka @-@ san . By September 10 , 400 @-@ 500 North Koreans were on the ridge of Ka @-@ San , as observed by a T @-@ 6 Mosquito spotter plane . 
 Now , with Ka @-@ san firmly in their possession , the NK 13th and 1st Divisions made ready to press on downhill into Taegu . On September 6 , the day after the American troops were driven off Ka @-@ san , a North Korean force established a roadblock 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) below Tabu @-@ dong and other units occupied Hill 570 , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) southwest of Ka @-@ san and overlooking the Taegu road from the east side . The next morning five tanks of the 16th Reconnaissance Company prepared to lead an attack against the roadblock . The North Korean troops were in a rice field west and on the hills east of the road . Gay personally observed the action . The tank attack speedily disposed of the North Koreans in the rice field , but the US infantry spent several hours clearing the hills on the east side of the road . 
 North Korean artillery during September 7 shelled batteries of the 9th and 99th Field Artillery Battalions , forcing displacement of two batteries during the day . US air strikes and artillery kept both Hills 902 and 570 under heavy attack . Even though the 1st Cavalry Division fell back nearly everywhere that day , Walker ordered it and the ROK II Corps to attack and seize Hill 902 and Ka @-@ san . He directed the ROK 1st Division and the US 1st Cavalry Division to select a boundary between them and to maintain physical contact during the attack . 
 On the morning of September 8 , Lieutenant Colonel Harold K. Johnson 's 3rd Battalion , 8th Cavalry , after a withdrawal during the night from its former position , tried to drive the North Koreans from Hill 570 . The three peaks of this mountain mass were under clouds , making it impossible to support the infantry attack with air strikes or artillery and mortar fire . Johnson placed all three of his companies in the assault against the three peaks ; two of them reached their objectives , one with little opposition , the other caught North Korean soldiers asleep on the ground . But North Korean counterattacks regained this second peak . The main North Korean force on Hill 570 was on the third and highest of the three peaks and held it firmly against the L Company attack . The I Company commander and the L Company executive officer were killed , as were several NCOs . An estimated 1 @,@ 000 North Korean soldiers were on Hill 570 , 8 miles ( 13 km ) north of Taegu , and on September 8 , Walker decided the continued pressure against the eastern flank of the 1st Cavalry Division sector was the most immediate threat to the UN Forces at Pusan Perimeter . 
 That same day , 8 September , the 1st Cavalry Division canceled a planned continuation of the attack against Hill 570 by the 3rd Battalion , US 7th Cavalry Regiment , when North Korean forces threatened Hills 314 and 660 , south and east of 570 . 
 = = = Taegu threatened = = = 
 In the midst of this drive on Taegu , an ammunition shortage became critical for the UN forces . The situation was such that United Nations Commander General of the Army Douglas MacArthur on September 9 sent messages urging that two ammunition ships then en route to Yokohama , Japan and Pusan carrying 172 @,@ 790 rounds of 105 @-@ mm. shells , with estimated arrival time September 11 , proceed at maximum speed consistent with the safety of the vessels . Eighth Army on September 10 reduced the ration of 105 @-@ mm. howitzer ammunition from 50 to 25 rounds per howitzer per day , except in cases of emergency . Carbine ammunition was also in critical short supply . The 17th Field Artillery Battalion , with the first 8 @-@ inch howitzers to arrive in Korea , could not engage in the battle for lack of ammunition . 
 The NK 1st Division now began moving in the zone of the ROK 1st Division around the right flank of the 1st Cavalry Division . Its 2nd Regiment , with 1 @,@ 200 men , advanced 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) eastward from the vicinity of Hill 902 to the towering 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) high mountain of P 'algong @-@ san . It reached the top of P 'algong @-@ san about daylight on September 10 , and a little later new replacements made a charge toward the ROK positions . The ROK repulsed the charge , killing or wounding about two @-@ thirds of the attacking force . 
 The US 1st Cavalry Division now had most of its combat units concentrated on its right flank north of Taegu . The 3rd Battalion , 7th Cavalry , attached to the 8th Cavalry Regiment , was behind that regiment on Hills 181 and 182 astride the Tabu @-@ dong road only 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) north of Taegu . The rest of the 7th Cavalry Regiment ( the 1st Battalion rejoined the regiment during the day ) was in the valley of the Kumho River to the right rear between the North Koreans and the Taegu Airfield , which was situated 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) northeast of the city . The US 5th Cavalry Regiment was disposed on the hills astride the Waegwan road 8 miles ( 13 km ) northwest of Taegu . On its left the entire 8th Engineer Combat Battalion was in line as infantry , with the mission of holding a bridge across the Kumho River near its juncture with the Naktong River east of Taegu . 
 The fighting north of Taegu on September 11 in the vicinity of Hills 660 and 314 was heavy and confused . For a time , the 1st Cavalry Division feared a breakthrough to the blocking position of the 3d Battalion , 7th Cavalry . The rifle companies of the division were now very low in strength . Johnson stated later that any company of the 3rd Battalion , 8th Cavalry , that had 100 men during this period was his assault company for the day . 
 = = = Hill 314 = = = 
 While the 3rd Battalion , 8th Cavalry , again vainly attacked Hill 570 on September 11 , North Korean soldiers seized the crest of Hill 314 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) southeast of it and that much closer to Taegu . Actually , the two hill masses are adjacent and their lower slopes within small arms range of each other . The North Koreans drove the 16th Reconnaissance Company from the hill and only the ROK 5th Training Battalion , previously hurried into the line from Taegu in a supporting position , prevented the North Koreans from gaining complete control of this terrain feature . This ROK battalion still held part of the reverse slope of Hill 314 when the 3rd Battalion , 8th Cavalry , hurried to the scene from its attacks on Hill 570 and tried to retake the position . The ROK battalion twice had attacked and reached the crest but could not hold it , and had dug in on the lower southern slopes . The 3rd Battalion , 7th Cavalry , command post had to fight off infiltrating North Koreans on September 12 as it issued its attack order and prepared to attack through the 8th Cavalry lines against Hill 314 . 
 This attack on the 12th was to be part of a larger American and ROK counterattack against the NK 13th and 1st Divisions in an effort to halt them north of Taegu . The 2nd Battalion , 7th Cavalry , relieved the ROK units on Hill 660 , east of Hill 314 , and had the mission of securing that hill . Farther east the ROK 1st Division had the mission of attacking from P 'algong @-@ san toward Ka @-@ san . The point nearest Taegu occupied by North Korean forces at this time was Hill 314 . The NK 13th Division valued its possession and had concentrated about 700 soldiers on it . The North Koreans intended to use Hill 314 in making the next advance on Taegu . From it , observation reached to Taegu and it commanded the lesser hills southward rimming the Taegu bowl . Hill 314 is actually the southern knob of a 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) hill mass which lies close to the east side of Hill 570 and is separated from that hill mass only by a deep gulch . The southern point rises to 314 metres ( 1 @,@ 030 ft ) and the ridge line climbs northward from it in a series of knobs . The ridge line is 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) in length , and all sides of the hill mass are very steep . 
 Lieutenant Colonel James H. Lynch 's 3rd Battalion , 7th Cavalry , on the eve of its attack against Hill 314 numbered 535 men , less its rear echelons . The battalion , which had been organized at Fort Benning , Georgia , from the US 30th Infantry Regiment of the US 3rd Infantry Division , had arrived in Korea at the end of August . The action of the 7th Cavalry at Hill 518 , begun nine days earlier , had been its first action , and attacking Hill 314 would be its second . The battalion attack plan this time differed radically from that employed against Hill 518 and was a direct development of that failure . The key aspect of the Hill 314 attack plan was to mass as many riflemen as possible on top of the narrow ridge line , by attacking with two companies abreast along the ridge , as opposed to Hill 518 , where the firepower of only a platoon , and at times of only a squad , could be brought to bear against the North Koreans . Because of the ammunition shortage there was no artillery preparation on Hill 314 , but there was an air strike before Lynch 's battalion , with L Company on the left and I Company on the right started its attack from the lower slopes at 11 : 00 on September 12 . 
 North Korean 120 @-@ mm. mortar fire was already falling on battalion as it moved out . For 500 yards ( 460 m ) it encountered only sporadic small arms and machine gun fire ; then North Korean rifle fire became intense and <unk> mortar fire came down on the troops , slowing the advance . On the left , men in L Company could see approximately 400 North Koreans preparing to counterattack . They radioed for an air strike but the designated planes were on the ground refueling . The troops were still able to repulse the counterattack with combined artillery , mortar , and small arms fire . The air strike came in at 14 : 00 , blanketing the top and the north slope of the ridge . By this time North Korean mortar fire had caused many casualties , and elements of L and I Companies became intermingled . But , in contrast to the action on Hill 518 , the men continued the attack largely of their own volition after many of the officers had become casualties . Many of the officers in the companies were wounded but refused evacuation and simply continued the attack . Fifteen minutes after the air strike , the 3rd Battalion resumed its attack toward the crest . As it neared it the North Koreans came out of their positions in a violent counterattack and engaged at close quarters . Some men gained the crest but North Korean mortar and machine gun fire drove them off . They reached it a second time but could not hold it . Another air strike hit the North Koreans . Then , a third time , the company commander led his men to the top . The men scrambled up a 60 @-@ degree slope for the last stretch to the top , where they closed with the North Koreans and overran their positions . The remaining men of the two US companies secured the hill and then reorganized jointly . There were fewer than 40 effectives left in L Company and about 40 in I Company ; the latter had lost all its officers . 
 Gay caused a special study to be made of this action because he considered it so outstanding . He found that the 3d Battalion suffered 229 battle casualties in the first two hours . Of these , 38 troops were killed and 167 wounded , the remainder were attached South Koreans . The battalion aid station reported treating 130 casualties . Other wounded were treated at the 8th Cavalry aid station . Many men with minor wounds did not ask for medical attention until the battle had ended , and there were only five cases of combat shock in contrast to the eighteen on Hill 518 . North Korean mortar fire caused 80 percent of the casualties . 
 The battalion held Hill 314 for the next six days and gathered up a large amount of North Korean equipment and ammunition . The North Korean soldiers on Hill 314 wore American uniforms , helmets , and combat boots . Many of them had M1 rifles and carbines . About 200 North Korean dead were on the hill . Of the other 500 estimated to have been there , most of them had been wounded or were missing . Several war crimes committed by the North Koreans came to light during the action on Hill 314 . On September 12 while the final action on the hill was taking place , troops discovered an American officer who had been bound , gasoline poured over him , and burned . Two days later members of the battalion found on the hill the bodies of four other American soldiers with their hands tied . The bodies bore evidence that the men had been bayoneted and shot while bound . 
 = = = Final moves = = = 
 After the capture of Hill 314 on September 12 , the situation north of Taegu improved . On September 14 the 2nd Battalion , 8th Cavalry , attacked and , supported by fire from Hill 314 , gained part of Hill 570 from the NK 19th Regiment , 13th Division . 
 Across the army boundary on the right , the ROK 1st Division continued its attack northwest and advanced to the edge of Ka @-@ san . The ROK 11th Regiment seized Hill 755 about dark on September 14 , and small elements of the ROK 15th Regiment reached the stone ramparts of the Ka @-@ san area at the same time . The ROK and North Korean troops fought during the night and on into the 15th at many points along the high mountain backbone that extends southeast from Ka @-@ san to Hills 755 and 783 and on to P 'algong @-@ san . Prisoners taken by the ROK 's estimated that there were about 800 North Koreans on this high ridge . The ROK 1st Division later estimated that approximately 3 @,@ 000 North Koreans were inside Ka @-@ san 's walled perimeter and about 1 @,@ 500 or 2 @,@ 000 outside it near the crest . At this time the bulk of the NK 1st Division was gradually withdrawing into Ka @-@ san and its vicinity . Indications were that the NK 13th Division also was withdrawing northward . Aerial observers on the afternoon of September 14 reported that an estimated 500 North Korean troops were moving north from Tabu @-@ dong . While these signs were hopeful , Walker continued to prepare for a final close @-@ in defense of Taegu . As part of this , fourteen battalions of South Korean police dug in around the city . 
 The fighting continued unabated north of Taegu on the 15th . The 2nd Battalion , 8th Cavalry , still fought to gain control of Hill 570 on the east side of the Tabu @-@ dong highway . On the other side , the 2nd Battalion , 8th Cavalry , attacked Hill 401 where a North Korean force had penetrated in a gap between the 8th and 5th Cavalry Regiments . The fighting on Hill 401 was particularly severe . Both sides had troops on the mountain when night fell . 
 = = = North Korean withdrawal = = = 
 The UN counterattack at Inchon collapsed the North Korean line and cut off all their main supply and reinforcement routes . On September 19 the UN discovered the North Koreans had abandoned much of the Pusan Perimeter during the night , and the UN units began advancing out of their defensive positions and occupying them . Most of the North Korean units began conducting delaying actions attempting to get as much of their army as possible into North Korea . The North Koreans withdrew from the Masan area first , the night of September 18 – 19 . After the forces there , the remainder of the North Korean armies withdrew rapidly to the North . The US units rapidly pursued them north , passing over the Naktong River positions , which were no longer of strategic importance . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The North Korean 13th and 1st Divisions were almost completely destroyed in the battles . The 1st Division had numbered 5 @,@ 000 men at the beginning of the offensive on September 1 . The 13th Division numbered 9 @,@ 000 . Only 2 @,@ 000 men from the 1st Division were able to retreat back into North Korea by October . The majority of the division 's troops had been killed , captured or deserted . The NK 13th Division , however , was completely annihilated . Only a few isolated pockets of its men were known to have made it back to North Korea . Most of the division 's officers , including its artillery commander , division surgeon , the chief of staff , and two of the three regimental commanders . When the NK 19th Regiment surrendered in Tanyang , it had only 167 men . No more than a few hundred of the original 9 @,@ 000 returned to North Korea . All of NK II Corps was in a similar state , and the North Korean army , exhausted at Pusan Perimeter and cut off after Inchon , was on the brink of defeat . 
 By this time , the US 1st Cavalry Division suffered 770 killed , 2 @,@ 613 wounded , 62 captured during its time at Pusan Perimeter . This included about 600 casualties , with around 200 killed in action it had already suffered during the Battle of Taegu the previous month . American forces were continually repulsed but able to prevent the North Koreans from breaking the Pusan Perimeter . The division had numbered 14 @,@ 703 on September 1 , but was in excellent position to attack despite its casualties . South Korean casualties at the battle were difficult to predict , but also thought to be heavy . The ROK 1st Division had numbered 10 @,@ 482 men September 1 . 
 = Jape ( band ) = 
 Jape is an Irish electronic – rock band from Dublin . Formed as a side project by Richie Egan whilst part of The Redneck Manifesto , they have released five albums to date ; <unk> ( 2003 ) , The Monkeys in the Zoo Have More Fun Than Me ( 2004 ) , Ritual ( 2008 ) , Ocean of Frequency ( 2011 ) , and This Chemical Sea ( 2015 ) . Jape 's wider discography includes the EP , Jape is Grape ( 2007 ) , as well as a number of singles , including " Floating " and " Phil Lynott " . The band have performed at festivals and events such as Glastonbury , Electric Picnic , Lovebox and Hard Working Class Heroes and provided support for The Flaming Lips at <unk> in Belfast in August 2008 . 
 The first and second albums received airplay on alternative national radio in Ireland . The Monkeys in the Zoo Have More Fun Than Me 's opening track , " Floating " , became a popular single on late night alternative music radio shows and attracted the attention of Brendan Benson during a visit to Dublin . Benson now covers the track whilst performing live with his band The Raconteurs , as do the Belgian bastard pop duo Soulwax during their DJ sets . 
 Jape 's third album , Ritual , was released in June 2008 , later winning the Choice Music Prize for Irish Album of the Year 2008 . The album features the singles " I Was a Man " , " Strike Me Down " and " Phil Lynott " , the latter of which was subject to an unsuccessful petition by fans to have it named Ireland 's Christmas number one single in December 2008 . 
 The album Ocean of Frequency was released in 2011 and won Jape their second Choice Music Prize in March 2012 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Richie Egan is the principal songwriter but refers to the overall band as Jape . This came about following his first few solo performances when he realised he did not wish people to consider him a singer @-@ songwriter but as part of a band . Egan has been part of many bands from a young age , and spent his youth experimenting with four @-@ track tape recorders and sounds . He was previously a member of the bands Black Belt Jones and Sir <unk> . After leaving Black Belt Jones he went on to become the bassist in the instrumental rock band The Redneck Manifesto of which he is still a member . He has occasionally toured as part of David Kitt ’ s live band , as well as in Conor J. O 'Brien 's band Villagers as a bass player and with his bandmates in The Redneck Manifesto . By 2003 Egan had developed Jape after spending a week at the family home of fellow Redneck , Niall Byrne , in Avoca , County Wicklow . 
 = = Style = = 
 Egan has said that he started listening to music during puberty . He was initially influenced by 1960s melodic pop such as Simon & Garfunkel , later listened to American hardcore punk such as the Dead Kennedys , Minor Threat , Black Flag but listens to many styles of music overall . The single " Strike Me Down " has been compared to MSTRKRFT and the French synthpop quartet Phoenix . Memories of a childhood show by heavy metal band Mastodon led him to write the song " Phil Lynott " . He also enjoys newer Irish acts such as Villagers . 
 = = Career = = 
 Jape 's debut album , <unk> , was released on the Volta Sounds label in 2003 . National broadcaster RTÉ suggested in its review that Jape was not a " convincing electronic producer " and that Egan did not have the voice of a singer @-@ songwriter , indicating its desire to see him remain with The Redneck Manifesto and refrain from any further activities under the pseudonym Jape . However , the album received airplay on national radio on shows such as Donal Dineen 's Here Comes the Night on Today FM . 
 Jape 's second album , The Monkeys in the Zoo Have More Fun Than Me was released by Trust Me I 'm A Thief Records in 2004 . It enjoyed much more success than its predecessor and contains the well @-@ known single " Floating " which was given much airplay on late night alternative radio shows . The lead single " Floating " was famously overheard being played in Whelan 's in Dublin by the musician Brendan Benson . Benson immediately requested a copy of the album and then praised Jape in The Guardian – however , the newspaper spelt it " <unk> " . He also rang Egan personally to inform him he would be covering " Floating " with his band The Raconteurs . However , Egan has stated that he did not give Benson personal permission to cover the song . He did witness the cover live at the Olympia Theatre and was later to describe it as " a great moment " . The single is also covered by Soulwax during their DJ sets . Jape participated in two nationwide tours with both David Kitt and The Redneck Manifesto to promote the album 's release . Kitt was co @-@ producer of " Floating " . The band went on to perform at prominent Irish festivals such as Electric Picnic and Hard Working Class Heroes . 
 A collection of remixes of the " Floating " single were released in June 2007 . A performance at the Lovebox festival in Dublin followed on 21 July that year . Jape recorded the EP Jape is Grape , due for release by V2 Records on 19 November 2007 . Despite V2 folding in October 2007 , the EP release went ahead and a nationwide tour of Ireland followed to promote what was the band 's major label debut . The band re @-@ signed to The Co @-@ Op. 
 Ritual , Jape 's first album in four years , was released under the Co @-@ op label on 4 June 2008 . It entered the Irish album charts at number fifteen , while the Irish Independent 's John Meagher named it his twentieth best Irish album of the 2000s . Ritual featured ten tracks , including " Streetwise " , " Graveyard " and " Strike Me Down " , all of which had previously been performed live . The album was preceded by the single " I Was a Man " , whilst a video for the song " Graveyard " , which was filmed in an actual graveyard in Dublin , was also released . There was a host of Irish and European dates and festival appearances to promote the album in June 2008 , including performances at the Róisín Dubh in Galway and Vicar Street and the Road Records music store in Dublin . Appearances alongside CSS , Battles and MGMT on the Park Stage and Dance Stage at Glastonbury in England on 28 – 29 June and an appearance at the Ola Festival in Spain followed . Jape then opened for The Flaming Lips at <unk> in Belfast on 11 August 2008 and performed a free show as part of Heineken Green Spheres in Cork alongside Donal Dineen on 19 November 2008 . Supporting Friendly Fires led to the English band remixing Jape 's " Strike Me Down " single . There was also an appearance at Electric Picnic 2008 to follow the appearance Electric Picnic 2006 . Tony Clayton @-@ Lea , writing in The Irish Times beforehand , said : " Suffice to say that if this whippet @-@ thin geezer isn 't one of the highlights of this year 's Picnic then that 's it — we give up " . In December 2008 , Jape fans were behind an unsuccessful petition to have the single " Phil Lynott " become the Christmas number one single in Ireland . 
 As of March 2009 , Jape had six songs written for a fourth album . An appearance at Electric Picnic 2009 occurred , however , a performance at <unk> in Slovakia did not occur , with Jape narrowly escaping a stage collapse which killed one person and injured more than 90 others . On 19 March 2010 Jape were announced as one of the first acts expected to perform at that year 's Indie @-@ pendence . 
 Jape released the album Ocean of Frequency in 2011 . Jape performed at the Eurosonic Festival in 2012 when Ireland was the " Spotlight Country " . Richie Egan has since left Ireland and moved to Sweden . 
 In January 2015 Jape returned with their fifth studio album This Chemical Sea . The record was proceeded by the single ' The Heart 's Desire ' and reached number 8 in Irish album charts . Following the album 's release Jape toured Europe , playing live shows across the continent . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = Extended plays = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = Choice Music Prize = = = 
 The nomination of Jape 's third album , Ritual , for Ireland 's Choice Music Prize was announced on 14 January 2009 . 
 Ritual 's victory was announced at a live ceremony held at Vicar Street , Dublin on 4 March 2009 . The prize included a cheque for € 10 @,@ 000 , jointly provided by the Irish Music Rights Organisation ( IMRO ) and the Irish Recorded Music Association ( IRMA ) , and a specially commissioned award . Frontman Richie Egan joked about a rival nominee by saying : " They all deserve the award -- sure my mother even told me that Mick Flannery ( nominated for his album White Lies ) was going to win , she said you 're good , Richie , but he 's gorgeous " . The award was decided by a secret ballot after the twelve judges , who included Today FM presenter Ian Dempsey , decided that the decision was proving difficult due to a closeness in voting . Jape was amongst six of the nominees who performed at the event , with a three @-@ song set featuring earlier in proceedings . 
 When Lisa Hannigan was nominated for the Mercury Prize , Ed Power , writing in the Irish Independent , wondered how close Jape had come to receiving a Mercury nomination — " Or , for that matter , how many of the judges had even heard of him " . 
 Ocean of Frequency was nominated for the Choice Music Prize in January 2012 and was announced as winner on 8 March 2012 , making Jape the first act to have won the award more than once . 
 = = = Meteor Music Awards = = = 
 Richie Egan received one nomination at the 2009 Meteor Awards for his band Jape . He lost to Mick Flannery in the Best Irish Male category at the awards ceremony held on 17 March 2009 . 
 = = = UK Music Video Awards = = = 
 " Floating " was nominated for Best Budget Video at the UK Music Video Awards in 2008 . Autamata , another Irish band , were also nominated for their video " Need You Sunshine " as were Example ’ s video for " Me and Mandy " , Lise <unk> 's video for " <unk> Curves " and These New Puritans 's video for " Elvis " . The awards ceremony took place on 14 October 2008 in the Odeon West End in Leicester Square , London . 
 = Sir Ewan Forbes , 11th Baronet = 
 Sir Ewan Forbes of Craigievar , 11th Baronet ( 6 September 1912 – 12 September 1991 ) was a Scottish nobleman , general practitioner and farmer . At birth , he was christened " Elizabeth Forbes @-@ Sempill " , and officially registered as the youngest daughter of John , Lord Sempill . After an uncomfortable upbringing , he began living as a man at the start of his medical career in 1945 . He formally re @-@ registered his birth as male in 1952 , adopting the name of " Ewan Forbes @-@ Sempill " , and was married a month later . 
 In 1965 , he stood to inherit his elder brother 's baronetcy , together with a large estate . This inheritance was challenged by his cousin , who argued that the re @-@ registration was invalid ; under this interpretation , Forbes would legally be considered a woman , and thus unable to inherit . The legal position was unclear , and it took three years before a ruling by the Court of Session was finally upheld by the Home Secretary , granting him the title . The case was held in great secrecy , with the effect that it was unable to be considered in other judgments on the legal recognition of gender variance , but has become more widely known since his death in 1991 . 
 = = Family background = = 
 The Forbeses were a well @-@ established Aberdeenshire family , holders of both a barony and a baronetcy . The baronetcy had been bestowed in 1630 , and was restricted to heirs male . In 1884 Sir William Forbes , the eighth baronet , inherited his cousin Maria 's title as Lord Sempill and took the surname of Forbes @-@ Sempill . On William 's death in 1905 , both titles passed to his eldest son , John . 
 John , the new Lord Sempill and Baronet , was a landowner and soldier who had served with the Lovat Scouts and then the Black Watch in the South African War . He would later command the 8th Battalion of the Black Watch during the First World War , in which he was wounded at the Battle of Loos . During the 1880s , he had met Gwendolyn <unk> at the fashionable German resort of Bad Homburg ; the couple were married on 22 June 1892 . The bride , from a Cornish background , had been brought up in Wales and was an accomplished harpist . 
 The couple had four children . The eldest , William , was born in 1893 , shortly after their marriage . William later became an engineer , aviator , and spy . There were then two daughters ; Gwendolyn ( also known as Gwyneth ) , who died of appendicitis before Ewan 's birth , and Margaret , who later became a decorated member of the Women 's Auxiliary Air Force in the Second World War and a Justice of the Peace , before dying in a car accident in 1966 . 
 Finally , in 1912 , a fourth child was born , christened Elizabeth Forbes @-@ Sempill , and known to the family as " Betty " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The issue of Ewan 's gender would later prove contentious ; the birth registration recorded a female child , but Forbes later commented that this was " a ghastly mistake " . Ewan was brought up as a girl alongside Margaret , but found childhood to be dominated by a growing gender insecurity . They spent a large amount of time playing with cousins Patrick and David , and in many contemporary photographs Forbes can be seen dressed in trousers and a male jacket , unconventional dress for a young woman of that era . In his book The Aul ' Days , written many years later , Forbes recalled a hatred of being " made to dress up " for social engagements , and of going to great lengths to avoid them . 
 Lord Sempill insisted on a " strict Scottish " upbringing for his children , which meant that they were taught to speak and write fluently in Doric as well as various European languages . Forbes refused to go away to a girls ' school , which meant being educated at home ; at fifteen , he pressed to be allowed to go overseas to attend a pre @-@ university course , and eventually settled on a co @-@ educational institution in Dresden . After coming out as a debutante in London in the late 1920s , Forbes studied in Dresden for a year , 1929 – 1930 , before travelling through central Europe , visiting Prague and Vienna . In the following academic year , he continued his studies in Paris , where he attended lectures at the Sorbonne and studied the harp under the principal harpist of the Paris Opéra . 
 As well as the harp , Forbes was an accomplished public reciter ; in the summer of 1930 , he won the Scots Verse recital contest at the Aberdeen Music Festival , and was paid by <unk> to make a series of recordings of the poems of Charles Murray . After returning from Paris , he led a troupe of Scottish country dancers – the " Dancers of Don " , that he had formed together with Isabella Mitchell . By this time , Forbes 's heart was set on studying medicine . However , his father refused to fund his studies , arguing that since there was more than enough work to be done managing the estate , there was no need for him to study further . Ewan resolved to fund his own studies , aiming to put aside £ 1 @,@ 000 to cover the costs . In 1933 , he studied under the psychologist Leonhard Seif in Munich , living with the British novelist Phyllis <unk> . Whilst there , he witnessed the German elections which brought the Nazi Party into power , and heard Adolf Hitler speak . 
 On the death of Lord Sempill in 1934 , both the barony and the baronetcy passed to William , the eldest child . Forbes inherited a farming estate at Brux , Aberdeenshire of about 1 @,@ 300 acres ( 5 @.@ 3 km2 ) , and took to the new lifestyle with gusto , adopting a broad Doric accent and taking to wearing a masculine kilt . 
 = = Medical career = = 
 In 1939 , Forbes was accepted as a medical student at the University of Aberdeen , graduating in 1944 and taking up the post of Junior Casualty Officer at the Aberdeen Royal Infirmary . After a swift progression to Senior Casualty Officer , he began to work as a general practitioner in Alford , Aberdeenshire in 1945 . In addition to the normal work of a rural doctor , he was called upon to act as a medical officer for a large number of German prisoners of war who were held in the area in 1946 , due to his command of the language . 
 The Alford area was one of the largest medical practices in the United Kingdom , and in the winter months Dr Forbes often had to travel through ten @-@ foot snowdrifts in a converted Universal Carrier . These conditions were not entirely unfamiliar ; a trip to see an uncle in St. Moritz at the age of thirteen had led to him taking up skiing and figure @-@ skating , and winning a number of bob sled races . He did not live in Alford , but remained at Brux , appointing a medical assistant to live in the town . The farm , left in the hands of a small resident staff , quickly ran into financial troubles . To raise a large amount of money quickly , Forbes sold the practice in Alford , and returned to the farm in 1952 , running it directly as a going concern from then on . 
 On moving to Alford , Forbes had begun to publicly present as a man . In 1952 , he formally became male by the simple process of requesting a warrant for birth re @-@ registration from the Sheriff of Aberdeen , registering himself as male , and changing his name to Ewan Forbes @-@ Sempill . He announced this with a notice in the Aberdeen Press and Journal of 12 September 1952 : " Dr E. Forbes @-@ Sempill henceforth wishes to be known as Dr Ewan Forbes @-@ Sempill " . His plans had been known in advance to many of his patients , who were reported as universally supportive . Forbes was equally candid with the press , describing the situation to one reporter as " ... a ghastly mistake . I was carelessly registered as a girl in the first place , but of course , that was forty years ago ... the doctors in those days were mistaken , too ... I have been sacrificed to prudery , and the horror which our parents had about sex " . 
 A month later , on 10 October , he married Isabella Mitchell , his housekeeper for the past five years , and formerly co @-@ founder of his dance troupe . The marriage took place at the kirk in Kildrummy , which he had recently joined . 
 = = Inheritance and lawsuit = = 
 The re @-@ registration passed without much public comment , and the issue of his gender would remain a private one until 1965 . That December , his elder brother died , leaving daughters but no sons , and thus posing a problem of inheritance . The barony could be inherited by heirs male or female , and so passed directly to Sempill 's eldest daughter Ann , but the baronetcy – along with the bulk of the land – would have to pass to the first male heir . The family had assumed that Ewan would inherit , as the younger brother . However , this was challenged by his cousin John Forbes @-@ Sempill , who argued that the 1952 re @-@ registration was invalid . This would mean that Forbes was still legally considered a woman , unable to inherit the title , and so it would pass to John Forbes @-@ Sempill . 
 At the time , gender re @-@ registration was permitted in a limited set of cases ; the leading case , decided in 1965 , had held that re @-@ registration of this form was only permitted when " the sex of a child was indeterminate at birth and it was later discovered ... that an error had been made " . The challenge was taken to the Court of Session , where the case was heard in great secrecy – no papers were publicly filed , and the judge sat in a solicitor 's office rather than in open court to hear the case . However , the records of the case have recently been made available via the National Archives of Scotland . They show that a total of twelve medical experts were called to give evidence , and their testimony was taken by the court to indicate that Forbes was a physical hermaphrodite , which would accord with the legal requirement of " indeterminate at birth " . However , the medical evidence was not conclusive ; Professor Martin Roth observed in evidence that he felt Forbes ' condition was closer to that of a transsexual , and Professor John Strong described the medical tests involved as " not wholly conclusive " . The judge ruled in favour of Forbes , though it has been suggested that the judge desired to ensure the estate and the title was inherited by the " right " candidate , and was flexible with his judgement to obtain this result . The ruling was appealed to the Lord Advocate , who referred the matter to the Home Secretary , James Callaghan . Callaghan finally ruled in December 1968 that Forbes was the rightful holder of the title , confirming the court 's decision . 
 The level of secrecy of the case , which was criticised by some contemporary observers , meant that it was not properly recorded or published , and the exact facts of the argument were not known for some time . As a result , whilst it sharply differs from later rulings such as Corbett v Corbett [ 1970 ] , it was not able to be considered as precedent in later judgments on the legal recognition of gender variance . 
 = = Later life = = 
 On taking up the baronetcy , Forbes dropped the " Sempill " from his surname ; this had been adopted by the family in the 1880s when they inherited the barony , and there was no reason to persist once the titles were separated . 
 With the inheritance case settled , he left the public eye and returned to the life of a rural landowner ; he placed Craigievar Castle in the hands of the National Trust for Scotland and continued to live in his house at Brux . Forbes was an elder of the local kirk at Kildrummy , and was appointed a Justice of the Peace for Aberdeenshire in 1969 . He published a book of reminiscences of his early years in 1984 , The Aul ' Days . 
 Forbes died , leaving no children , in 1991 and was succeeded in the baronetcy by his cousin John , the man who had originally mounted the legal challenge in the 1960s . His widow Isabella survived him , dying in 2002 . 
 = Friday the 13th ( franchise ) = 
 Friday the 13th is an American horror franchise that , as of 2016 , comprises twelve slasher films , a television show , novels , comic books , and tie ‑ in merchandise . The franchise mainly focuses on the fictional character Jason Voorhees , who drowned as a boy at Camp Crystal Lake due to the negligence of the camp staff . Decades later , the lake is rumored to be " cursed " and is the setting for a series of mass murders . Jason is featured in all of the films , as either the killer or the motivation for the killings . The original film was written by Victor Miller and was produced and directed by Sean S. Cunningham . However , he neither returned to write nor direct any of the sequels . The films have grossed over $ 465 million at the box @-@ office worldwide . 
 The first film was created to cash in on the success of Halloween ( 1978 ) , and its own success led Paramount Pictures to purchase the full licensing rights to Friday the 13th . Frank Mancuso , Jr . , who produced the films , also developed the television show Friday the 13th : The Series after Paramount released Jason Lives . The television series was not connected to the franchise by any character or setting , but was created based on the idea of " bad luck and curses " , which the film series symbolized . While the franchise was owned by Paramount , four films were adapted into novels , with Friday the 13th Part III adapted by two separate authors . When the franchise was sold to New Line Cinema , Cunningham returned as a producer to oversee two additional films , in addition to a crossover film with character Freddy Krueger from the Nightmare on Elm Street film series . Under New Line Cinema , 13 novellas and various comic book series featuring Jason were published . 
 Although the films were not popular with critics , Friday the 13th is considered one of the most successful media franchises in America — not only for the success of the films , but also because of the extensive merchandising and repeated references to the series in popular culture . The franchise 's popularity has generated a fanbase who have created their own Friday the 13th films , fashioned replica Jason Voorhees costumes , and tattooed their bodies with Friday the 13th artwork . Jason 's hockey mask has become one of the most recognizable images in popular culture . 
 = = Films = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 In the original Friday the 13th ( 1980 ) , Mrs. Pamela Voorhees ( Betsy Palmer ) stalks and murders the teenagers who are preparing Camp Crystal Lake for re ‑ opening . She is determined to ensure that the camp does not reopen after her son Jason ( Ari Lehman ) drowned in the lake because two staff members who were supposed to be watching him were having sex . The last counselor , Alice Hardy ( Adrienne King ) , fends off Mrs. Voorhees long enough to grab a machete and decapitate her . In Friday the 13th Part 2 ( 1981 ) , Jason ( Steve <unk> / Warrington Gillette ) is revealed to be alive and fully grown . After killing Alice Hardy , Jason returns to Crystal Lake to guard it from all intruders . Five years later , a group of teenagers arrive at Crystal Lake to set up a new camp , but Jason murders them . Ginny Field ( Amy Steel ) , the last counselor Jason attempts to kill , finds a cabin in the woods with a shrine built around the severed head of Mrs. Voorhees . Ginny fights back and slams a machete through Jason 's shoulder . Jason is left for dead as Ginny is taken away in an ambulance . During the events of Friday the 13th Part III ( 1982 ) , Jason ( Richard Brooker ) removes the machete from his shoulder and finds his way to Chris Higgins ' ( Dana Kimmell ) local homestead . Chris returns to her property with some friends , and Jason kills anyone who wanders into the barn where he is hiding . Taking a hockey mask from a victim to hide his face , Jason leaves the barn to kill the rest of the group . Chris seemingly kills Jason with an axe to his head , but the night 's events drive her into hysteria as the police take her away . 
 Friday the 13th : The Final Chapter ( 1984 ) continues where Part III leaves off , with Jason ( Ted White ) found by the police and taken to the local morgue after removing the axe . Upon arrival , Jason kills the coroner and a nurse before returning to Crystal Lake . A group of friends rent a house on Crystal Lake and fall victim to Jason 's rampage . After killing the teens , Jason seeks out Trish ( Kimberly Beck ) and Tommy Jarvis ( Corey Feldman ) , who live next door . While distracted by Trish , Jason is attacked and killed by Tommy . Friday the 13th : A New Beginning ( 1985 ) follows Tommy Jarvis ( John Shepherd ) , who was committed to a mental health institution after the events of The Final Chapter and grew up constantly afraid that Jason ( Tom Morga ) would return . Roy Burns ( Dick Wieand ) uses Jason 's persona to become a copycat killer at the halfway home to which Tommy has moved . Tommy , supervisor Pam ( Melanie Kinnaman ) , and a young boy named Reggie ( <unk> Ross ) manage to defeat Roy . They eventually learn that Roy had a son who was murdered by one of the patients at the institution , triggering Roy to take on Jason 's likeness and kill everyone there . Friday the 13th Part VI : Jason Lives ( 1986 ) begins with Tommy ( Thom Mathews ) visiting Jason 's grave after being released from another mental institution . Tommy inadvertently resurrects Jason ( C. J. Graham ) with a piece of the fence surrounding the cemetery acting as a lightning rod . Jason immediately heads back to Crystal Lake and kills the people working at the new summer camp . Tommy eventually chains Jason to a boulder that he tosses into the lake , where he leaves Jason to die . 
 Friday the 13th Part VII : The New Blood ( 1988 ) begins an indeterminate length of time after Jason Lives . Jason ( Kane Hodder ) is resurrected again , this time by the telekinetic Tina Shepard ( Lar Park Lincoln ) , who is trying to resurrect her father who drowned in the lake when Tina was a child . Jason once again begins killing those who occupy Crystal Lake and is returned to the bottom of the lake after a battle with Tina . Jason is resurrected again in Friday the 13th Part VIII : Jason Takes Manhattan ( 1989 ) by an underwater electrical cable . He follows a group of students on their senior class cruise to Manhattan , where he kills the ship 's crew and the majority of the students . Upon reaching Manhattan , Jason chases Rennie ( Jensen Daggett ) and Sean ( Scott Reeves ) , the two remaining students , into the sewers . Jason eventually melts away because the sewer is flooded with toxic waste . In Jason Goes to Hell : The Final Friday ( 1993 ) , Jason , through an unexplained resurrection , is hunted by the FBI at Crystal Lake . The FBI sets up a sting that successfully kills Jason . Through possession , Jason manages to survive by passing his black heart from one being to the next . It is revealed that he has a sister and a niece , and that he needs them to get his body back . Jason resurrects himself , but his niece , Jessica Kimble ( Kari Keegan ) , stabs him with a mystical dagger and he is dragged into Hell . 
 Jason X ( 2001 ) takes place in the future , when Jason has again been inexplicably resurrected . A scientist , Rowan Lafontaine ( Lexa Doig ) , decides that cryonic suspension is the only method of stopping him , but Jason breaks free and kills the army personnel guarding him before he can be again imprisoned . Rowan manages to lure Jason into the cryo ‑ chamber , but he ruptures the tank and freezes both himself and Rowan . Over 400 years later , a team of students studying Earth discover Jason 's body and take it into space . Upon being thawed by the team , he proceeds to murder everyone aboard the spacecraft . He is seemingly killed , but is then resurrected via nanotechnology as a cyborg version of himself . Finally , he is ejected into space and lands on the planet Earth 2 . The next Friday the 13th film , Freddy vs. Jason ( 2003 ) , was a crossover with A Nightmare on Elm Street . Set in the contemporary period , Freddy Krueger ( Robert Englund ) resurrects Jason ( Ken Kirzinger ) and sends him to Springwood hoping that he will create enough fear among the residents that Freddy will be strong enough to invade their dreams . Jason accomplishes this but refuses to stop killing . A battle ensues both in the dream @-@ world and at Crystal Lake . The outcome is left ambiguous , as Jason surfaces from the lake holding Freddy 's severed head , which winks and laughs . 
 In 2009 , a new Friday the 13th film which restarted the film series continuity was released . In this film , after witnessing his mother being beheaded at a young age , an adult Jason ( Derek Mears ) follows in her footsteps and kills anyone who comes to Crystal Lake . Jason subsequently kidnaps a young woman , Whitney Miller ( Amanda Righetti ) , who resembles his mother at a young age . Six weeks after her disappearance , her brother , Clay Miller ( Jared Padalecki ) , comes to look for her . The pair reunite and work together to seemingly kill Jason . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The original Friday the 13th was produced and directed by Sean S. Cunningham , who had previously worked with filmmaker Wes Craven on The Last House on the Left ( 1972 ) . Cunningham , inspired by the success of John Carpenter 's Halloween ( 1978 ) , wanted Friday the 13th to be shocking , visually stunning , and " [ make ] you jump out of your seat " . Distancing himself from The Last House on the Left , Cunningham wanted Friday the 13th to be more of a " roller coaster ride " . The first film was meant to be " a real scary movie " , and at the same time make audiences laugh . The concept for Friday the 13th began as nothing more than a title . A Long Night at Camp Blood was the working title Victor Miller used while he drafted a script , but Cunningham believed in his " Friday the 13th " moniker and rushed to place an advertisement in International Variety . Worrying that someone else owned the rights to the title and wanting to avoid potential lawsuits , Cunningham thought it would be best to find out immediately . Cunningham commissioned a New York advertising agency to develop his visual concept of the Friday the 13th logo , which consisted of big block letters bursting through a pane of glass . In the end , Cunningham believed there were " no problems " with the title , but distributor George Mansour contends that there was an issue : " There was a movie before ours called Friday the 13th : The Orphan . Moderately successful . But someone still threatened to sue . I don 't know whether Phil [ Scuderi ] paid them off , but it was finally resolved . " 
 Following the success of Friday the 13th in 1980 , Paramount Pictures began plans to make a sequel and immediately acquired the worldwide distribution rights . According to Paramount Pictures ' Chairman and CEO Frank Mancuso , Sr. , " We wanted it to be an event , where teenagers would flock to the theaters on that Friday night to see the latest episode . " Initial ideas for a sequel involved the Friday the 13th title being used for a series of discontinuous films , released once a year , and each would be a separate " scary movie " of its own right . Phil Scuderi — a co ‑ owner of Esquire Theaters with Steve Minasian and Bob Barsamian and a producer of the original film — insisted that the sequel must have Jason Voorhees , Pamela 's son , even though his appearance at the end of the original film was only meant to be a joke . Steve Miner , associate producer of the first film , believed in the idea , and he ultimately directed the first two sequels after Cunningham opted not to return to the director 's chair . 
 The studio continued to generate sequels over the years , based on the financial success they produced compared to their relatively low budgets . With every film repeating the same basic premise , the filmmakers came up with subtle adjustments so the audience would return . Changes involved the addition of a subtitle — as opposed to just a number attached to the end — like " The Final Chapter " and " Jason Takes Manhattan " , or filming the movie in 3 @-@ D , as Miner did for Friday the 13th Part III . The third film would also be the birthplace of one of the most recognizable images in popular culture , that of Jason 's hockey mask . Producer Frank Mancuso , Jr. eventually decided to kill Jason for good , after he experienced problems finding new films to produce that were more than just horror movies , because his name brought constant association to the Friday the 13th film series . 
 Jason would not stay buried for long , as the success of The Final Chapter ensured another Friday the 13th film . Mancuso , Sr. stated , " Quite simply , the public still wanted to see these films . So until they really stopped coming , why not continue to make more ? " A New Beginning shifted the focus of the story to the character of Tommy Jarvis and how he battles his inner demons , hallucinations , and " rages to kill " after his ordeal with Jason in The Final Chapter . This premise was not repeated , as the very next installment brought Jason back from the dead . Jason Lives attempted to create a " funnier , faster , and more action @-@ packed [ ... ] Friday " than had previously been done . The limited financial success of Jason Lives provided enough incentive to create another sequel , The New Blood . The idea proposed by screenwriter Daryl Haney stemmed from his realization that the films always ended with Jason battling the " final girl " . Haney decided that this final girl should have telekinetic powers , which led Producer Barbara Sachs to dub the film , Jason vs. Carrie . 
 Plans were made to take Jason away from Crystal Lake and place him in a larger environment for the eighth film . New York City was selected as the main setting , with Jason spending approximately a third of the movie on a boat before reaching New York . The film was then subtitled Jason Takes Manhattan . Ultimately , the character spent the majority of the time on the cruise ship , as budget restrictions forced scenes of New York to be trimmed or downgraded . Vancouver had to substitute for the majority of the New York scenes . 
 When Jason Takes Manhattan failed to perform successfully at the box office , Sean Cunningham decided that he wanted to reacquire the rights to Friday the 13th and start working with New Line Cinema on Freddy vs. Jason , as New Line owned the Nightmare on Elm Street franchise . The concept of a fight between Freddy and Jason was not new , since Paramount had approached New Line about filming a crossover years before the latter had gained the licensing rights to Friday the 13th . At that time , both companies wanted the license to the other 's character so that they could control the making of the film . Negotiations on the project were never finalized , which led Paramount to make The New Blood . After Jason Takes Manhattan was released in 1989 , the rights reverted to Scuderi , Minasian , and <unk> , who sold them to New Line . Before Cunningham could start working on Freddy vs. Jason , Wes Craven returned to New Line to make New Nightmare . This effectively put Freddy vs. Jason on hold , but allowed Cunningham the chance to bring Jason back into the spotlight with Jason Goes to Hell . The ninth installment " turned a healthy profit " , though it was only intended to open the door for a crossover with Freddy Krueger rather than to start a new series for New Line . Ultimately , the film series would go through another sequel before that would happen . Cunningham 's " frustration " with the delayed development of the Freddy vs. Jason project forced him to create another sequel in an effort to keep the franchise in the minds of audiences . Based on Jason Takes Manhattan 's concept of taking Jason away from Crystal Lake , the 10th film would put the titular character in space . The film suffered from the loss of its biggest supporter , President of Production Michael De Luca , when he resigned from his position . Lack of support forced the finished film to sit for two years before finally being released on April 26 , 2002 , and it would go on to become the lowest grossing film in the franchise at the domestic box office . It also held the distinction of having the largest budget of any of the previous films at that time . 
 After more than 15 years of off @-@ and @-@ on development , and approximately $ 6 million spent in 18 unused scripts from more than a dozen screenwriters , New Line finally produced a Freddy and Jason crossover for 2003 . One of the biggest hurdles for the film was developing a story that managed to bring the two horror icons together . Potential stories varied widely , from Freddy having molested and drowned Jason as a child , to a cult of Freddy worshipers called the " Fred Heads " . In January 2007 , Platinum Dunes producers Andrew Form and Brad Fuller outlined their intended goal to bring a Friday the 13th reboot to life . New Line approached Fuller and Form to create a reboot , but because Paramount still owned certain copyrights to the first film , the reboot would not be able to use anything from the original . Paramount , who wanted to be included in the development of a reboot , approached the producers and gave them license to use anything from the original films , including the title . With Paramount on board , Fuller and Form decided they wanted to use pieces from the early films . Fuller said , " I think there are moments we want to address , like how does the hockey mask happen . " Damian Shannon and Mark Swift , writers of Freddy vs. Jason , were brought on to pen the script for the new film , with Marcus Nispel , director of The Texas Chainsaw Massacre remake of 2003 , hired in November 2007 to direct . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 When Harry Manfredini began working on the musical score for the 1980 film , the decision was made to play the music only alongside the killer so as not to trick the audience into believing that the killer was around during moments that they were not supposed to be . Manfredini explains that the lack of music for certain scenes was deliberate : " There 's a scene where one of the girls [ ... ] is setting up the archery area [ ... ] One of the guys shoots an arrow into the target and just misses her . It 's a huge scare , but if you notice , there 's no music . That was a choice . " Manfredini also noted that when something was about to happen , the music would cut off so that the audience would relax a bit , which allowed the scare to become more effective . 
 Since Mrs. Voorhees , the killer in the original Friday the 13th , does not show up until the final reel of the film , Manfredini had the job of creating a score that would represent the killer in her absence . Manfredini was inspired by the 1975 film Jaws , where the shark is not seen for the majority of the film , but the motif created by John Williams cued the audience as to when the shark was present during scenes and unseen . While listening to a piece of Krzysztof Penderecki music , which contained a chorus with " striking pronunciations " , Manfredini was inspired to recreate a similar sound for Friday the 13th . He came up with the sound " ki ki ki , ma ma ma " , based on the line " Kill her mommy ! " , which Mrs. Voorhees recites repeatedly in the final reel . The " ki " comes from " kill " , and the " ma " from " mommy " . To achieve the unique sound he wanted for the film , Manfredini spoke the two words " harshly , distinctly , and rhythmically into a microphone " and ran them into an echo reverberation machine . Manfredini finished the original score after a few weeks and recorded it in a friend 's basement . Victor Miller and assistant editor Jay Keuper have commented on how memorable the music is , with Keuper describing it as " iconographic " . Manfredini makes note of the mispronunciation of the sounds : " Everybody thinks it 's cha , cha , cha . I 'm like , ' Cha , cha , cha ' ? What are you talking about ? " 
 When Manfredini returned for the first sequel , he had an easier time composing since he only needed to perfect what he had already created . Over the course of the sequels , Manfredini loosened the philosophy that the theme should be reserved just for the killer . Manfredini describes the style of the sequels as more of a " setting ' em up and knocking ' em down " approach , which meant that there were more " <unk> and red ‑ herrings " that required the killer 's theme music be played to try to trick the audience . Manfredini explains , " The original had the real myopic approach , and then we had to start thinking of the sequels as more conventional films . " For Part 3 , Manfredini only returned to score the first and last reels of the film because he was busy with a Broadway production . Jack <unk> pieced together portions of the score from the first two films to fill the remaining time for Part 3 , while Michael Zagar composed an opening and closing theme . Manfredini and Zagar met at the latter 's apartment , where Zagar rescored the original opening theme using a disco beat . Manfredini returned for The Final Chapter , and although there were similar elements to the score , everything was newly recorded for the fourth Friday the 13th . 
 When he began work on the score for A New Beginning , Manfredini created a theme just for the character of Tommy Jarvis . The idea was to suggest that there was " madness afoot " , which he believed helped to " ' point the finger ' at various characters [ ... ] to suggest that things were not as you might expect " . For Jason Lives , Tom McLoughlin instructed Manfredini to create a score that would not alert the audience about what was happening or about to happen , " but instead allow the audience to do it to themselves " . McLoughlin took this idea from John Carpenter 's 1978 film Halloween , which would always follow any shock in the film with Carpenter 's " <unk> ! " sound . McLoughlin wanted something more subtle , with a " Gothic " resonance . 
 Manfredini did not score The New Blood and Jason Takes Manhattan because of prior film engagements , but his scores from previous films were reused . While Manfredini was working on Sean Cunningham 's <unk> Six , Producer Iain Paterson hired Fred Mollin , who was scoring Friday the 13th : The Series , to finish composing the music to The New Blood . Manfredini 's original music only filled half the film . Mollin returned to fully score Jason Takes Manhattan , and worked with Steve <unk> to write an original song reminiscent of Robert Plant for the opening credits . Manfredini would score the next two entries in the series before being replaced on Freddy vs. Jason . The official reason for Manfredini 's replacement was because New Line wanted to take the series in a " new direction " , but Manfredini contends that the final cut of Freddy vs. Jason was " just the same thing " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Friday the 13th films generally received negative reception from professional critics , in contrast to other slasher films like Halloween . Critics disliked how the series favored high body counts over plot and character development and how each film was almost indistinguishable from the last . Nevertheless , the films were a financial success , prompting Paramount to release more sequels contingent on the box office appeal . When comparing Friday the 13th to the other top @-@ grossing American horror franchises — A Nightmare on Elm Street , Child 's Play , Halloween , the Hannibal Lecter series , Psycho , Saw , Scream , and The Texas Chainsaw Massacre — and adjusting for the 2011 inflation , Friday the 13th is the highest grossing horror franchise in the United States , with approximately $ 687 @.@ 1 million . A Nightmare on Elm Street follows with $ 592 @.@ 8 million , with the Hannibal Lecter film series closely behind with $ 588 @.@ 7 million . Then comes Halloween with $ 557 @.@ 5 million , Saw with $ 457 @.@ 4 million , Scream with $ 442 @.@ 9 million , Psycho with $ 376 @.@ 3 million , The Texas Chainsaw Massacre with $ 304 @.@ 6 million , and the Child 's Play film series rounding out the list with approximately $ 203 million . The financial success has extended to home release , with more than five million DVDs sold by 2005 . 
 = = Future = = 
 In an interview , producers Brad Fuller and Andrew Form expressed an interest in doing another Friday the 13th film , citing the enjoyment they had working on the 2009 reboot . On October 1 , 2009 , Warner Bros. announced that they planned to release the Friday the 13th sequel on August 13 , 2010 . Subsequently , Warner Bros. announced on December 10 , 2009 that the sequel had been pulled from the August 13 release slot and is now listed as " TBD " ( to be determined ) . Currently , Damian Shannon and Mark Swift are penning the sequel . On April 21 , 2010 , Fuller announced on his Twitter page that a sequel to the 2009 remake was no longer in the works , declaring it , " dead — not happening " . In a later interview , Fuller explained that the making of the 2009 remake was a joint effort by Paramount and New Line , who both own portions of the Friday the 13th franchise . With the economy down , both studios are limiting the films that they produce each year , opting for lower risks and higher rewards . As such , films like Friday the 13th Part 2 were put on hold , with the hope that when the economy bounced back , they would move forward with the next installment . Form explained that since neither studio wants to walk away from the production of a sequel and have it perform well without their involvement , thus making them look like " idiots " , the chance of having one studio being the primary producing house was rejected . Form and Fuller also mentioned that the Friday the 13th sequel may be a 3 ‑ D film , should it ever get the green light for production . 
 On February 1 , 2011 , it was reported that a script for a sequel had been completed . Brad Fuller states that he is ready when New Line Cinema is ready . On June 5 , 2013 , it was reported that Warner Bros. relinquished their film rights to the Friday the 13th series back to Paramount as part of a deal that allows Warner Bros. to co @-@ produce Interstellar . One week later , Derek Mears revealed that Paramount is working with Platinum Dunes to make a new installment " as fast as possible " . David Bruckner is set to direct the next installment of Friday the 13th . After altering the release date numerous times , Paramount has set the film for a Friday , May 13 , 2016 release date . In March 2015 , it was announced TV writer Nick <unk> will write the script . The TV series is produced by The CW and will be executive produced by original director Sean S. Cunningham . On October 20 , 2015 , The Wrap reports that the film is pushed back to January 13 , 2017 . Bruckner was reported to have left in late 2015 . On May 31 , 2016 , Fuller told Reel Word that the reboot will be an origin story for Jason and his mother will be in the film . 
 = = Television = = 
 On September 28 , 1987 , Paramount began airing Friday the 13th : The Series , a television series that focuses on two cousins ' attempts to recover cursed antiques that were sold from a shop they inherited from their uncle . The show starred John D. LeMay as Ryan <unk> and Louise Robey as Michelle Foster . It was created by Frank Mancuso , Jr. and Larry B. Williams originally under the title of The 13th Hour , and the series ran for 72 episodes . Mancuso , Jr. never intended to link the television show directly to the film series , but he utilized " the idea of Friday the 13th , which is that it symbolizes bad luck and curses " . The creators wanted to tie ‑ in Jason 's trademark hockey mask to the series , but the idea was discarded so that the show could have a chance to exist on its own . Mancuso , Jr. was afraid that mentioning any events from the films would take the audience away from " the new world that we were trying to create " . The decision to name the show Friday the 13th over the original title was made because Mancuso , Jr. believed a " Friday the 13th " moniker would better help to sell the show to networks . Filming took place in Toronto , Canada . Friday the 13th : The Series initially aired in first @-@ run syndication in a late @-@ night spot ; the success of the series as a late @-@ night show prompted some broadcasting stations to move it to primetime . Produced on a budget estimated below $ 500 @,@ 000 per episode , the first season placed second in the male 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic , just behind Paramount 's Star Trek : The Next Generation . In addition , the first season placed fifth in the female 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . 
 In September 2003 , during a panel session at the <unk> convention , Sean S. Cunningham spoke about the possibility of bringing Friday the 13th to television , with the series focusing on a group of teenagers living in the Crystal Lake area . On October 22 , 2005 , Cunningham discussed the potential series further . He explained that the idea was to call the series Crystal Lake Chronicles , and " set [ it ] in a town with all this Jason history " . The series would focus more on " coming @-@ of @-@ age issues " , in a similar style to Buffy the Vampire Slayer , Dawson 's Creek , and Smallville , with Jason as more of a recurring " background " character . 
 In April 2014 , it was announced that Emmett / Furla / Oasis Films and Crystal Lake Entertainment were planning to produce an hour @-@ long Friday the 13th television series . The series is intended to focus on a group of characters at Crystal Lake , who have to deal with the return of Jason Voorhees , as well as discover new information about him and his family . In March 2015 it was announced , the script of the pilot was written by Bill Basso and Jordu Schell . 
 On August 11 , 2015 , it was announced that the series is now being developed by The CW . Steve Mitchell and Craig Van Sickle have been hired to write the series , while Sean S. Cunningham , Basso , Schell , Randall Emmett , George Furla , and Mark Canton will be the series ' executive producers . The show will focus on characters from Crystal Lake who are forced to confront Jason Voorhees upon his return . The character will reportedly be re @-@ imagined and more grounded in reality . 
 = = Literature = = 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 Six of the 12 films have been adapted into novels — Friday the 13th 1 – 3 , Jason Lives , Jason X , and Freddy vs. Jason — with Friday the 13th Part 3 being adapted twice . The first novel was Michael Avallone 's 1982 adaptation of Friday the 13th Part 3 ; Avallone had previously adapted Beneath the Planet of the Apes and Shock Treatment . The author chose to use an alternate ending , one that was filmed for Part 3 but never used , as the conclusion for his adaptation . In the alternate ending , Chris , who is in a canoe , hears her boyfriend Rick 's voice and immediately runs back to the house . When she opens the door , Jason is standing there with a machete and decapitates her . The next book was not published until 1986 , when Simon Hawke adapted Jason Lives . Hawke would also adapt the first three films into novels , and his adaptation of the original Friday the 13th was published in 1987 , with novelizations of Part 2 and 3 both being published in 1988 . Hawke 's first adaptation , Jason Lives , introduced the character of Elias Voorhees , Jason 's father , who was supposed to appear in the film before being cut by the studio . The book explains how Elias has Jason 's body buried , instead of the planned cremation , after his death in The Final Chapter . 
 In 1994 , four young adult novels were released under the title of Friday the 13th . These stories focused on different people finding Jason 's mask and becoming possessed by his spirit , but the actual character did not appear in the novels . The novels were written by author Eric Morse and published in 1994 . The books are titled Mother 's Day , Jason 's Curse , The Carnival , and Road Trip . In 2003 and 2005 , Black Flame published novelizations of Freddy vs. Jason and Jason X. After the release of the Jason X novel , Black Flame began publishing two series of novels . One set was published under the Jason X title , while the second set used the Friday the 13th moniker . The Jason X series consisted of four sequels to the 2005 adaptation . The first to be published was Jason X : The Experiment , which saw the government attempting to exploit Jason 's indestructibility to create an army of " super soldiers " . The second novel , Planet of the Beast , follows the efforts of Dr. <unk> and his crew as they try to clone a comatose Jason and stay alive when Jason awakens . Death Moon revolves around Jason crash @-@ landing at Moon Camp Americana , and the final novel , To the Third Power , is about the discovery of a Jason clone underneath a prison . 
 The Friday the 13th series of novels are not connected to the Jason X series and do not continue any story set forth by the films . Instead , each novel developed the character of Jason in its own way . Friday the 13th : Church of the Divine Psychopath has Jason resurrected by a religious cult . In Friday the 13th : Hell Lake , a recently executed serial killer , Wayne Sanchez , persuades Jason to help him escape back to the real world . In Hate @-@ Kill @-@ Repeat , two religious serial killers attempt to find Jason at Crystal Lake , believing that the three of them share the same contempt for those that break the moral code . The Jason Strain places Jason on an island with a group of death row convicts — placed there by television executives running a reality game show — while a scientist attempts to create an age @-@ retarding " super drug " from Jason 's DNA . Instead , she creates a virus that reanimates the dead into zombies . The character of Pamela Voorhees returns from the grave in Carnival of Maniacs , and she searches for Jason , who is now part of a traveling sideshow and about to be auctioned off to the highest bidder . 
 = = = Comic books = = = 
 Since New Line Cinema 's acquisition of the franchise , several Friday the 13th comic books have been published by Topps Comics , Avatar Press , and DC Comics imprint WildStorm . The first comic book release for the franchise was the 1993 Topps Comics adaptation of Jason Goes to Hell , written by Andy Mangels . The three @-@ issue series was a condensed version of the film with a few added scenes . Topps Comics published another series in 1995 , with Nancy A. Collins writing a three @-@ issue , non ‑ canonical miniseries involving a crossover between Jason and The Texas Chainsaw Massacre 's Leatherface . The story involves Jason stowing away aboard a train and eventually meeting Leatherface . The two initially become friends , with Leatherface adopting Jason into the former 's family . After a series of misunderstandings , Jason and Leatherface turn on each other . 
 On May 13 , 2005 , New Line first exercised their rights to use the Friday the 13th moniker when they , along with Avatar comics , released a special issue of Friday the 13th . Written by Brian Pulido and illustrated by Mike Wolfer and Greg Waller , the story takes place after the events of Freddy vs. Jason , where siblings Miles and Laura Upland inherit Camp Crystal Lake . Knowing that Jason caused the recent destruction , Laura , unknown to her brother , sets out to kill Jason with a paramilitary group so that she and her brother can sell the property . The issue pre ‑ sold more than 17 @,@ 500 copies . Avatar released a three @-@ issue miniseries titled Friday the 13th : Bloodbath in September 2005 . The series was written by Brian Pulido , illustrated by Mike Wolfer and Andrew <unk> , and revolves around a group of teenagers who come to Camp Tomorrow , a camp that sits on Crystal Lake , for work and a " party @-@ filled weekend " . The teenagers begin to discover that they share common family backgrounds and soon awaken Jason , who proceeds to kill them . Brian Pulido returned for a third time in October 2005 to write another special issue for Avatar , titled Jason X. Picking up after the events of the Jason X film , Jason is now on Earth 2 where a <unk> , Kristen , attempts to subdue him in hopes that she can use his regenerative tissue to save her own life and the lives of those she loves . In February 2006 , Avatar published their final Friday the 13th comic , a two @-@ issue miniseries titled Friday the 13th : Jason vs. Jason X. The series was written and illustrated by Mike Wolfer . The story takes place after the events of the film Jason X , where a salvage team discovers the spaceship Grendel and awakens a regenerated Jason Voorhees . The " original " Jason and Über @-@ Jason , a version of Jason with mechanical limbs , are drawn into a battle to the death . In June 2006 , a one @-@ shot comic titled Friday the 13th : Fearbook was released , written by Mike Wolfer with art by Sebastian <unk> . In the comic , Jason is captured and experimented upon by the Trent Organization . Jason escapes and seeks out Violet , the survivor of Friday the 13th : Bloodbath , whom the Trent Organization is holding in their Crystal Lake headquarters . 
 In December 2006 , WildStorm began publishing its own series of comic books under the Friday the 13th title . The first set was a six @-@ issue miniseries that involves Jason 's return to Crystal Lake , a lone survivor 's tale of the murder of her friends by a monster , a new revelation about the evil surrounding Crystal Lake , and the truth of what Jason embodies . The miniseries pre ‑ sold approximately 60 @,@ 318 copies altogether , with each issue pre ‑ selling 15 @,@ 800 , 9 @,@ 600 , 8 @,@ 964 , 8 @,@ 637 , 8 @,@ 715 , and 8 @,@ 602 copies , respectively . The trade paperback of the series , released in September of 2007 , contained a foreword by musician Andrew <unk> .. On July 11 and August 15 , 2007 , WildStorm published a two @-@ part special titled Friday the 13th : Pamela 's Tale . The two @-@ issue comic book covers Pamela Voorhees ' journey to Camp Crystal Lake and the story of her pregnancy with Jason as she recounts it to hitchhiker Annie , a camp counselor who is killed in the original film . The miniseries pre ‑ sold a combined 16 @,@ 051 copies . 
 WildStorm released another comic book special , titled Friday the 13th : How I Spent My Summer Vacation , consisting of two issues that were released on September 12 and October 10 , 2007 . The comic book provides insight into the psychology of Jason Voorhees as he befriends a boy born with a skull deformity . The first issue of How I Spent My Summer Vacation pre ‑ sold approximately 7 @,@ 837 copies . WildStorm released a six @-@ issue sequel to Freddy vs. Jason , titled Freddy vs. Jason vs. Ash , starring the two aforementioned killers and Ash from the Evil Dead film series . The story focuses on Freddy using the Necronomicon , which is in the basement of the Voorhees home , to escape from Jason 's subconscious and " gain powers unlike anything he 's had before " . Freddy attempts to use Jason to retrieve the book , but Ash , who is working at the local S ‑ Mart in Crystal Lake , learns of the book 's existence and sets out to destroy it once and for all . The story , by Jeff Katz , was a sequel to the Freddy vs. Jason film in development before the former film had been theatrically released . After meeting with executives , the negotiations ended and the story was shelved . Following the success of Freddy vs. Jason , the idea of including Ash was brought up again , but New Line ultimately decided they would put the story in comic book form and bring in James <unk> to write and Jason Craig to do the artwork . On January 9 and February 13 , 2008 , WildStorm released another two @-@ issue miniseries , titled Friday the 13th : Bad Land , which was written and illustrated by Ron Marz and Mike Huddleston , respectively . The series explores the history of Crystal Lake before Pamela and Jason Voorhees arrived . Bad Land takes place in two time frames , the " present day " and 250 years before " present day " . It follows three hikers in the present and three fur trappers in the past , each of whom is snowed in by a blizzard at Crystal Lake . Each group experiences similar events , suggesting that there is a connection between the two groups . A one @-@ shot comic , titled Friday the 13th : <unk> and the Abused , written by Joshua Hale Fialkov with artwork by Andy B. , was released on April 30 , 2008 . The story involves a teenager named Maggie tricking her abusive boyfriend into travelling to Crystal Lake , where she plans to murder him , but she encounters Jason shortly after arriving at the camp . On June 24 , 2009 , the six @-@ issue sequel to Freddy vs. Jason vs. Ash , subtitled The Nightmare Warriors , began . Written by Jeff Katz and James <unk> , and illustrated by Jason Craig , the miniseries has Ash and survivors of both Freddy and Jason banding together to defeat the two after Freddy is released from the world of the <unk> by government operatives who had discovered the Necronomicon . 
 = = Documentaries = = 
 There have been two documentary books released chronicling the making of the Friday the 13th films . In February 2005 , FAB Press published their book containing interviews with the cast and crew of the Friday the 13th series of films . David Grove , a film journalist who has written for Fangoria , Cinefantastique , and various other British magazines detailing the creation of the Friday the 13th films , wrote the comprehensive book , Making Friday the 13th : The Legend of Camp Blood . Grove interviewed over 100 " key personnel involved in making the films " to collect " detailed production histories of each of the 11 films " , not including interviews with other film professionals like Wes Craven . Grove 's book also includes previously unseen production photos which were acquired from private collections . 
 Eight months after the release of Grove 's book , Titan Books , in association with Sparkplug Press , released a detailed history on the Friday the 13th series . Peter M. Bracke released Crystal Lake Memories : The Complete History of Friday the 13th on October 24 , 2005 . The book chronicles the creation of the series up to the release of Freddy vs. Jason . Bracke spent three years researching the series and collecting more than 200 interviews from the cast and crew of each of the films . Bracke 's extensive work for the book prompted Sean S. Cunningham to provide a foreword . Crystal Lake Memories also includes images , storyboards , concept art , and publicity material that had not been released to the public . A private party was held on October 22 , 2005 at Universal Studios CityWalk Hollywood for the book 's premiere . 
 A documentary film , titled His Name Was Jason : 30 Years of Friday the 13th , was released in February 2009 . This film was directed by Daniel Farrands , who had also written the film Halloween : The Curse of Michael Myers as well as a documentary on The Amityville Horror . The film was broadcast on the Starz television channel during the first week of February , and afterwards it was released on DVD on February 3 , 2009 . The documentary is hosted by special make ‑ up effects artist Tom Savini , who interviews the cast and crew members of each of the Friday the 13th films , asking them questions on the choices they made during filming . It also features interviews with journalists and other filmmakers who offer their opinion of the series . 
 In September 2013 , Farrands wrote and directed a second documentary film on the Friday franchise , this time directly inspired by Bracke 's book . Crystal Lake Memories : The Complete History of Friday the 13th discusses each of the twelve films , from the original to the 2009 remake , as well as the television series . It is narrated by Corey Feldman , and also features interviews with key individuals in the franchise 's history . Farrands has suggested that his work on the well @-@ received 2010 film , Never Sleep Again : The Elm Street Legacy , which documented the making of the Nightmare on Elm Street series , demonstrated the possibility for a documentary film that was more in depth and more comprehensive than his previous effort , His Name Was Jason . In making such a film , Farrands turned to Bracke 's book , which he had also worked on , and drew from its structure and content . Curious Goods : Behind the Scenes of Friday the 13th : The Series by Alyse Wax , a retrospective focusing on the 1987 television series , was released in October 2015 by BearManor Media . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 In addition to the films , television series , and various literature based on the Friday the 13th franchise , there are over 100 licensed products that have grossed more than $ 125 million in revenue . In May 1986 , Domark released a Friday the 13th game for the Amstrad CPC , Commodore 64 , and ZX Spectrum . The plot involved the player picking a " sanctuary " on a map , and then trying to persuade other teenagers to go hide there . Jason is " disguised as a friend " until he decides to attack the player . Three years later , LJN developed a game for the Nintendo Entertainment System . In the 2000s , <unk> developed their own Friday the 13th game , this time for mobile phones . In the game , the player takes the role of one of the staff members at Camp Crystal Lake . While the staff is preparing the camp for its first summer weekend , an " unknown stalker " begins murdering each of them . The player must discover the truth and escape the camp alive . There was also a Friday the 13th board game released in the United Kingdom , which contained " blood capsules that you crunch in your mouth to create home ‑ made special effects " . 
 Electronic Gaming Monthly announced in January 2015 that a new survival horror , multi @-@ platform game ( PC , Xbox One , and PS4 ) , described as " an asymmetrical , co @-@ operative and competitive multiplayer predator / prey horror experience " is in development , with a tentative release date of October 2015 . Sean S. Cunningham explained , " With a new television series on the horizon and plans announced for the thirteenth installment of the film franchise , we felt the timing was right to finally explore Jason , Camp Crystal Lake , and the rest of the Friday the 13th story in interactive form " . On October 13 , 2015 , it was announced that the game 's release date had been moved to autumn of 2016 . The company developing the game , Gun Media , had used Kickstarter to help fund the project , and has reached their goal by receiving $ 823 @,@ 704 with a $ <unk> goal . People giving large donations will be able to create their own killing methods which will be used in the game . Special effects creator Tom Savini is involved with the project . 
 Over the years , the characters of Friday the 13th have been marketed under various toy lines . In 1988 , Screamin ' Toys produced a model kit of Jason Voorhees . Six years later , Screamin ' Toys issued a second model kit based on Jason 's appearance in Jason Goes to Hell . Both kits are no longer in production . In 1998 , as part of McFarlane Toys ' Movie Maniacs 1 collection , a figure of Jason from Jason Goes to Hell was released . Jason was one of the three most popular figures sold from the Movie Maniacs 1 collection , and the other two were Freddy Krueger and Leatherface . The following year , 6 in ( 150 mm ) scale models of Jason and Freddy in a glass display case were released by MacFarlane Toys . In 2002 , as part of its Movie Maniacs 5 collection , McFarlane released a model of Über @-@ Jason from Jason X. McFarlane did not release another Friday the 13th collectable until November 2006 , when a 3 @-@ dimensional movie poster was released . Since 2002 , there has been a steady production of action figures , dolls , and statuettes , with more merchandise tying into the film Freddy vs. Jason . 
 Apart from video games and toys , the series has also seen the release of its films ' soundtracks . In 1982 , <unk> Records released a LP album of selected pieces of Harry Manfredini 's scores from the first three films . On September 27 , 2005 , <unk> Records released a limited edition CD of Fred Mollin 's scores . On January 13 , 2012 , La @-@ La Land Records released a limited edition 6 @-@ CD boxset containing Manfredini 's scores from the first six films . Beginning with Jason Goes to Hell , each film in the series has had their musical score and soundtrack released for sale . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In December 2006 , IGN ranked Friday the 13th seventh in the top 25 film franchises . Qualifications included : the franchise must have at least three films released before December 2006 ; the franchises must be either a commercial or artistic success ; and the franchise must have had some form of impact on popular culture . Three senior editors , the editor @-@ in @-@ chief , and IGN 's entertainment editorial manager judged the various film franchises . In commenting on Friday the 13th 's seventh @-@ place ranking , the general consensus among the reviewers was that even though the Halloween franchise started the slasher genre , Friday the 13th became one of " the most influential franchises of the 1980s " and that its commercial success through 11 films , novelizations , comic books , and other collectables is proof of its legacy . ABC Online 's Arts and Entertainment reporter , Gary Kemble , makes note of the popularity of the franchise throughout popular culture . Kemble points out that Jason 's mask , which was not adopted until the third film in the series , is one of the most widely recognizable images in popular culture . Talking with Brenna O 'Brien , co ‑ founder of the <unk> website , the pair discusses how the fan base of the franchise has become so impassioned with the series that they have created films , latex body suits to emulate Jason 's appearance , and tattoos of Jason and the Friday the 13th moniker on their body . 
 S. T. Karnick , editor of American Culture , wrote an article for the National Review detailing the impact Friday the 13th has had on the slasher genre and noting that the reasons critics have deplored the films are the same reasons why the franchise has had such a strong influence . Karnick explained that Friday the 13th did not try and recreate the same " clever " film that John Carpenter made in 1978 , but instead " [ codified ] the formula " of Halloween , and " [ boiled ] it down to its essentials " so that it could be copied by other filmmakers . In his assessment , Friday the 13th changed the horror genre by purposefully not providing back ‑ stories for characters so that when the audience witnessed a character 's death , they are " strangely unaffected " . Instead , Friday the 13th focuses on the history and motivations of the killer , who would exact revenge not on the people directly responsible , but on innocent people — a formula Karnick notes was replicated in A Nightmare on Elm Street , Child 's Play , Scream , I Know What You Did Last Summer , Saw , the Hannibal Lecter films , and the Halloween sequels . As Karnick sees it , " these films spoke directly to fears of increasing crime and social dislocation [ and ] provided audiences with ways to detach from these worries and conquer their fears of violence by laughing at it . " 
 In Karnick 's eyes , contemporary critics have failed to see how the film has affected audiences and subsequently branded the film series as " both irresponsible ( for numbing audiences to violence ) and puritanical ( for showing the murders of sexually active teens ) " . Quoting director John Carpenter , Karnick emphasized that " teens thus dispatched became victims not as punishment for sexual activity but simply because they were too preoccupied to notice the presence of a murderer " . Pointing to Roger Ebert as a prime example of how critics have misunderstood the films ( Ebert wrote that during a screening of Friday the 13th Part 2 , he noticed that the audience had no sympathy for the victims and cheered during death scenes ) , Karnick explains that Ebert 's remarks show how the film series forces " audiences to experience the very thing that motivates the murders : a lack of compassion " . In closing , Karnick suggested that these films were not puritanical , but proved that audiences " could be just as indifferent and callous as the characters in the films " . 
 = 2000 Malaysian Grand Prix = 
 The 2000 Malaysian Grand Prix ( formally the II Petronas Malaysian Grand Prix ) was a Formula One motor race held on 22 October 2000 at the Sepang International Circuit , in Sepang . It was the 17th and final race of the 2000 Formula One season , and the second Malaysian Grand Prix . The 56 @-@ lap race was won by Ferrari driver Michael Schumacher after starting from pole position . David Coulthard finished second for the McLaren team with Michael Schumacher 's teammate Rubens Barrichello third . 
 Mika Häkkinen , driving for McLaren , started from second position alongside Michael Schumacher . However , Häkkinen was forced to serve a ten @-@ second stop @-@ and @-@ go penalty because he was judged to have jumped the start . Häkkinen climbed back up to fourth place , his final finishing position . Coulthard , who started third , moved into the lead until the first round of pit stops . Michael Schumacher and teammate Barrichello traded the leading during their second stops with the former retaining the lead . Michael Schumacher held off a challenge from Coulthard in the closing stages of the Grand Prix to secure victory . 
 Michael Schumacher 's win was his ninth of the season , matching the record set by himself in 1995 , and Nigel Mansell in 1992 . Ferrari was confirmed as Constructors ' Champions as McLaren could not pass its points total in the final race . Coulthard 's second @-@ place finish helped to secure him third position in the World Drivers ' Championship . The Grand Prix was Pedro Diniz and Johnny Herbert 's final race ; the Englishman retired after 160 race starts . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by eleven teams , each of two drivers . The teams , also known as constructors , were McLaren , Ferrari , Jordan , Jaguar , Williams , Benetton , Prost , Sauber , Arrows , Minardi and BAR . Tyre supplier Bridgestone brought four different tyre types to the race : one dry compound , the Soft and three wet @-@ weather compounds , the Intermediate , Heavy Wet and the Soft wet tyres . 
 Heading into the final race of the season , Ferrari driver Michael Schumacher had already won the season 's Drivers ' Championship , having clinched the title at the previous race , the Japanese Grand Prix . Schumacher led the championship with 98 points ; McLaren driver Mika Häkkinen was second on 86 points . A maximum of 10 points were available for the remaining race , which meant Häkkinen could not catch Schumacher . Behind Michael Schumacher and Häkkinen in the Drivers ' Championship , David Coulthard was third on 67 points , ahead of Rubens Barrichello in fourth on 58 points . Barrichello was still able to clinch third place if he took victory in the race and Coulthard finished outside of the top six . Although the Drivers ' Championship was decided , the Constructors ' Championship was not . Ferrari were leading on 156 points , and McLaren were second on 143 points , with a maximum of 16 points available . 
 Prior to the event , protests over the imprisonment of Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim threatened to disrupt the race . The campaign group , known as Free Anwar , were reported in the media that they would use the Grand Prix in an attempt to bid for securing Ibrahim 's release . However , the director of the campaign Raja Petra <unk> subsequently announced the event would be left untouched . 
 The weekend marked Jaguar driver Johnny Herbert and Sauber 's Pedro Diniz final race . It was announced shortly beforehand that Herbert would move to the CART series and he confirmed that he rejected an offer to take up an testing position for the Williams team . Herbert said going into the weekend : " It 's going to be a bit emotional getting out of the car for the last time and out of Formula One . But I 'm really looking forward to the challenges that lie ahead of me . " Diniz 's future however was uncertain as he was rumored to be moving to Prost after undergoing extensive negotiations with the team . 
 Following the Japanese Grand Prix on 8 October , three teams conducted testing sessions around European race tracks between 10 – 13 October to prepare for the upcoming Grand Prix . Ferrari opted to spend the four days with test driver Luca Badoer where he tested new mechanical components on the F1 @-@ 2000 car at the Fiorano Circuit on a wet / dry track . He later moved to the Mugello Circuit where he tried out brake testing , car set @-@ ups , tyre evaluation , endurance runs for the car 's engines and continued trying out new car components . Benetton cancelled a test in Barcelona during the period and decided to run at the Silverstone Circuit one week later using new <unk> engines angled at 110 ° degrees . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Four practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — two on Friday , and two on Saturday . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted an hour . The third and final practice sessions were held on Saturday morning and lasted 45 minutes . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions were held in hot and dry weather conditions . Michael Schumacher set the fastest lap of the first practice session , a 1 : 40 @.@ 290 , seven @-@ tenths of a second quicker than teammate Barrichello . Coulthard was third quickest despite spending the majority of the session afflicted with an clutch problem . Häkkinen set the fourth fastest time , ahead of Eddie Irvine and Villeneuve . Giancarlo Fisichella , Herbert , Ricardo Zonta and Wurz completed the top ten fastest drivers in the session . In the second practice session , Häkkinen set the fastest time of the day , a 1 : 40 @.@ 262 ; Coulthard had a trouble free session and was third fastest . The Ferrari drivers remained quick — Michael Schumacher in second and Barrichello in fourth — although the latter started to experience flu symptoms . Jarno Trulli was fifth quickest , ahead of Ralf Schumacher . Zonta ran quicker during the session and was seventh fastest . The Benetton drivers Fisichella and Wurz , along with Jordan driver Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen rounded out the top ten . 
 The weather remained hot and dry for the Saturday morning practice sessions . Wurz was the fastest driver in the third practice session with a time of 1 : 38 @.@ 318 , three @-@ thousands of a second quicker than Häkkinen . Coulthard set the third fastest time . The two Ferraris ran slower than the previous session ; Michael Schumacher was fourth with Barrichello sixth . They were separated by Irvine . Zonta , Villeneuve and Ralf Schumacher followed in the top ten . An electronic engine sensor failure prevented Frentzen from setting a lap time . In the final practice session , Coulthard was the quickest driver , setting a time of 1 : 38 @.@ 109 despite going into the gravel traps in the session . Häkkinen finished with the fourth fastest time . Michael Schumacher and Wurz ended the session with the second and third fastest times respectively . Barrichello was fifth quickest , ahead of Jaguar drivers Herbert and Irvine . Button was seventh after having changed his car 's engine . Villeneuve and Trulli completed the top ten ahead of qualifying . 
 Saturday 's afternoon qualifying session lasted for an hour . Each driver was limited to twelve laps , with the grid order decided by the drivers ' fastest laps . During this session , the 107 % rule was in effect , which necessitated each driver set a time within 107 % of the quickest lap to qualify for the race . The session was held in dry and hot weather . The air temperature was 33 ° C ( 91 ° F ) and the track temperature 39 ° C ( 102 ° F ) . Michael Schumacher clinched his ninth pole position of the season , his second at the circuit , with a time of 1 : 37 @.@ 397 . He was joined on the front row of the grid by Häkkinen who recorded a lap time 0 @.@ 463 seconds slower than the pole sitter . Coulthard qualified third and suffered a worrying moment when a fire on his McLaren caused petrol to seep into his eye and admitted the incident could have escalated if not dealt with quickly . Barrichello , who was still suffering from flu , qualified fourth having been pushed from second position in the closing seconds of the session . Wurz qualified fifth , in his best qualifying performance of the season . Villeneuve secured the sixth fastest time despite having to walk to the pit lane when his BAR 's engine was turned off on his final run . Irvine made changes to his set @-@ up and secured seventh although he believed he could have been quicker as he backed off through turn 15 . Ralf Schumacher lost four tenths of a second on his fastest lap and managed eighth . Trulli and Frentzen rounded out the top ten qualifying positions for Jordan . Zonta missed qualifying in the top ten by two @-@ tenths of a second and lost time with a braking issue . Herbert , in his final Formula One race , qualified twelfth and struggled with understeer following an engine change . He was ahead of Fisichella , de la Rosa and Verstappen . Jenson Button qualified 16th and encountered traffic during the session which prevented him from setting a faster lap time . The Sauber , Prost and Minardi drivers qualified at the rear of the grid , covering positions 17 to 22 . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The drivers took to the track at 10 : 30 MST ( GMT + 8 ) for a 30 @-@ minute warm @-@ up session . It took place in warm and dry weather conditions . Zonta set the fastest time , a 1 : 40 @.@ 032 . Both McLaren drivers maintained their good pace from qualifying — Häkkinen was second , just off Zonta 's pace ; Coulthard had the fourth @-@ fastest time . They were separated by Michael Schumacher . 
 The race started at 15 : 00 local time . The conditions for the race were dry and cloudy with the air temperature 32 ° C ( 90 ° F ) and the track temperature 35 ° C ( 95 ° F ) . Häkkinen , who started alongside Michael Schumacher , jumped the start and moved into the lead . Coulthard managed to accelerate faster off the line and passed Michael Schumacher for second position heading into the first corner . Further down the field , de la Rosa , Heidfeld and Diniz , collided at the first corner and collected Prost driver Jean Alesi , who was spun around by <unk> de la Rosa , Diniz and Heidfeld all became the race 's first retirements whilst Alesi managed to continue . Both Minardi drivers were forced wide in avoidance . On the same lap , Ralf Schumacher was forced onto the grass while attempting to pass Irvine , with Trulli damaging his front wing after making contact with the Jaguar . Trulli made a pit stop for a new front wing , whilst Verstappen spun off . The resulting incidents caused the deployment of the safety car . 
 The safety car was withdrawn at the end of the second lap and the race got underway again with Häkkinen in the lead . The Finn allowed teammate Coulthard to move into the lead and was passed by both Ferrari drivers later on the same lap . At the competition of the third lap , Coulthard led from Michael Schumacher , Barrichello , Häkkinen , Wurz , Villeneuve , Irvine , Frentzen , Herbert , Button . Mika Salo , Fisichella , Ralf Schumacher , Marc Gené , Gastón Mazzacane , Verstappen , Alesi and Trulli . Coulthard began to immediately pull clear of Michael Schumacher as he began setting consecutive fastest laps . On lap four , Häkkinen was given a ten @-@ second stop @-@ and @-@ go penalty for jumping the start . Zonta moved into ninth position after overtaking Button and Herbert . Button lost a further position to Salo on the same lap . Meanwhile , Verstappen started to make up positions when he claimed sixteenth position from Gené . Häkkinen took his penalty on lap five , and re @-@ emerged in 18th . Frentzen went off the track and subsequently made a pit stop for repairs on the same lap . Verstappen overtook Ralf Schumacher to claim 14th position . 
 Coulthard set a new fastest lap of the race , a 1 : 40 @.@ 679 on lap seven and extended his lead from Michael Schumacher to 3 @.@ 6 seconds , who in turn was 2 @.@ 6 seconds ahead of teammate Barrichello . Wurz was a further 4 @.@ 2 seconds behind the second Ferrari driver but was gradually drawing ahead of Villeneuve in fifth . Verstappen continued to gain positions after passing Fisichella for eleventh . Frentzen became the event 's fourth retirement with electrical issues on lap seven . Trulli passed Mazzacane for 16th position one lap later . Salo took Herbert for eighth position on lap 9 , while Ralf Schumacher 's car began to develop mechanical issues . On the tenth lap , Coulthard ran off the track at turn six , with debris <unk> his left @-@ hand radiator . Further down the field , Gené lost 13th position to Alesi , as Trulli made a pit stop for further repairs to his car . By the start of lap twelve , Häkkinen had built a 5 @.@ 6 second gap over Michael Schumacher , with Verstappen taking Button for tenth position . Häkkinen moved into 14th place after passing Ralf Schumacher and Gené within the next two laps . 
 Salo and Alesi became the first drivers to make scheduled pit stops on lap 16 . Coulthard made a pit stop one lap later to remove the debris from his radiator and rejoined in sixth . Button became the race 's fifth retirement because of an engine failure on lap 19 . Michael Schumacher continued to set consecutive fastest laps , as he built an 8 @.@ 8 second gap to Barrichello by his first pit stop on lap 24 . Barrichello took over the lead for one lap before his pit stop on the following lap handing it back to Michael Schumacher . By the end of lap 26 , all of the leading drivers on two @-@ stop strategies had taken their pit stops . The race order was Michael Schumacher , Coulthard , Barrichello , Herbert , Verstappen , Villeneuve , Häkkinen , Wurz , Irvine , Zonta , Fisichella , Salo , Gené , Ralf Schumacher , Mazzacane , Alesi and Trulli . 
 Häkkinen passed Villeneuve on lap 28 although he went off the track in the process . Herbert made his only pit stop on the same lap although he stalled and rejoined in twelfth place . Gené , Mazzacane , Ralf Schumacher and Verstappen made pit stops between laps 28 and 29 . Villeneuve tried to retake fourth position from Häkkinen on the 30th lap but overshot the manoeuvre . Häkkinen made a pit stop on lap 35 , emerging behind Villeneuve and Irvine . Coulthard managed to close to within 2 seconds of Michael Schumacher when he made his second pit stop on lap 38 . Michael Schumacher made a pit stop on the following lap and remained in the lead . Barrichello became the leader for one lap and made his pit stop on lap 41 . This allowed Michael Schumacher to reclaim the first position . By the start of lap 45 , Coulthard had closed to within two seconds of Michael Schumacher . Ralf Schumacher was called into his garage by his team to retire on the 45th lap . Zonta pulled off the race track with an blown engine two laps later . 
 On the 49th lap , Herbert 's car suffered an suspension failure , losing both his rear wheels and struck the tyre barriers at turn 4 . Track marshals were required to extract Herbert from his car . <unk> was the final retirement of the Grand Prix and the season when his engine failed on lap 51 . Michael Schumacher managed to hold off Coulthard and crossed the finish line on lap 56 to secure his ninth victory of the season in a time of 1 ' 35 : 54 @.@ 235 , at an average speed of 120 @.@ 648 miles per hour ( 194 @.@ 164 km / h ) . Coulthard finished second in his McLaren , 0 @.@ 7 seconds behind Michael Schumacher , Barrichello was third in the other Ferrari , with Häkkinen in fourth , Villeneuve in fifth and Irvine rounding out the points @-@ scoring positions in sixth . Ferrari 's strong result gave them the 2000 Constructors ' Championship . Wurz , Salo , Fisichella , Verstappen and Alesi filled the next five positions , with Trulli and Mazzacane the last of the classified finishers . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three drivers appeared on the podium to collect their trophies and in the subsequent press conference . Michael Schumacher said that he and his team were delighted at clinching the victory and securing the Constructors ' Championship . He also added that he took victory with the use of team strategy after he realised Coulthard was quicker than him . Coulthard apologised to Michael Schumacher over the comments made by the McLaren driver about the German throughout the season . However , he also added he would not be retracting any comments made about his rival 's driving style but the way in which they were expressed . Barrichello described his race as " lonely " because of the lack of on track action he experienced . He also said that the hot temperatures he experienced worrying him mentally due to his illness . 
 McLaren team principal Ron Dennis congratulated Ferrari and Michael Schumacher for their achievement of clinching the Drivers ' and Constructors ' Championships . Michael Schumacher said he hoped that his success over the season would commence a new era of success with the Ferrari team . Similarly , their technical director Ross Brawn said he believed that the team could make further improvements in the following seasons : " We 've got to build from this success and I 'm sure we will do and get all the support from Italy and Ferrari that we will need to continue in this vein . " Ferrari held an event at the Mugello Circuit in front of 50 @,@ 000 people where they celebrated their success and thanked the team 's fanbase for their continued support . Häkkinen stated that had he not received his stop @-@ and @-@ go penalty , he believed he could have won the race . He added that his car was stationary before the starting procedure was initiated , and admitted that his car moved before the sequence was completed . 
 Despite his accident , Herbert suffered no physical injuries , except for a bruised left knee . He expressed disappointment in his late exit in his final Formula One race , saying that " I 'm pretty disappointed to have a good race ruined by a failure such as that . " Herbert left Formula One after 12 years with 161 race starts and 3 wins . Jaguar technical director Gary Anderson traced the suspension failure to a broken link on the rear right suspension rod . Herbert continued to participate in motor racing in 2001 driving in the 24 Hours of Le Mans and the American Le Mans Series . He later abandoned plans to drive in CART and became a test driver for the Arrows team in February 2001 . Diniz , meanwhile , could not find a race seat and became a shareholder in the Prost team to assist in helping the outfit become more competitive . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Bold text indicates the World Champions . 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Hate That I Love You = 
 " Hate That I Love You " is a song recorded by Barbadian singer Rihanna for her third studio album , Good Girl Gone Bad ( 2007 ) . It features vocals by American singer and songwriter Ne @-@ Yo , who co @-@ wrote the song with its producers StarGate . Def Jam Recordings released the song on August 21 , 2007 , as the third single from Good Girl Gone Bad . A Spanglish version featuring David Bisbal was made available on April 28 , 2008 . " Hate That I Love You " is a mid @-@ tempo R & B song about the power of love , with influences of folk music . " Hate That I Love You " received generally positive reviews from critics , many of whom compared it to previous works by Ne @-@ Yo . 
 The song achieved moderate success in comparison to other singles from the album , reaching the top twenty in thirteen countries . It reached number 15 on the UK Singles Chart , and number seven on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . " Hate That I Love You " was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) denoting shipments of over one million copies . The music video was directed by Anthony Mandler ; in it , Rihanna 's and Ne @-@ Yo 's characters meet their respective love interests . An edited Spanglish version of the video features scenes by Bisbal instead of Ne @-@ Yo . Rihanna performed the song at the 2007 American Music Awards , and on Operación Triunfo respectively . " Hate That I Love You " was performed on Rihanna 's four worldwide tours — Good Girl Gone Bad , Last Girl on Earth , Loud and the Diamonds World Tour . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 In early 2007 , Rihanna began to work with songwriters and producers on a follow @-@ up album to A Girl Like Me . She spent the week of the Grammy Awards writing with labelmate Ne @-@ Yo , who gave her vocal lessons . They wrote and sang " Hate That I Love You " , which was co @-@ written and produced by Norwegian duo StarGate . In an interview with MTV , the singer said that " when it first starts off , you think it 's a sexy song , but you have to listen to the lyrics . It 's a really deep song . " " Hate That I Love You " was recorded at the Battery Studios in New York City , Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles and Lethal Studios in Bridgetown . Phil Tan mixed it , and Ne @-@ Yo provided vocal production . Ne @-@ Yo told American magazine Vibe : 
 When people tell me that my song @-@ writing style seems like it could have come from the ' 60s , ' 70s , or early ' 80s , I take that as a compliment . Back in the day , people paid more attention to the poetics of the love song . Today [ in songs ] there is usually more sexual element than a romantic one . The best way to express an emotion like love is through storytelling . It makes it more ' I can relate to this character in this song , because I 've been through something similar . ' You hear that kind of storytelling in the song that I wrote for Rihanna called ' Hate That I Love You ' . 
 " Hate That I Love You " was released as the third single from Good Girl Gone Bad . Def Jam Recordings serviced it to contemporary hit , rhythmic and urban radio stations in the United States on August 21 , 2007 . A seven @-@ minute @-@ long K @-@ Klassic remix of the song was released digitally on October 22 , 2007 , in more than twenty countries . On October 29 , 2007 , a two @-@ track extended play ( EP ) , featuring the album version of " Hate That I Love You " and the K @-@ Klassic remix , was released on iTunes . In November 2007 , " Hate That I Love You " was released as a CD and Maxi single in Germany . The CD single includes the album version and " Hate That I Love You " the K @-@ Klassic remix , while the maxi single also includes the instrumental version and the music video . On November 16 , 2007 , a three @-@ track EP was released on iTunes , including the album version of " Hate That I Love You " , the K @-@ Klassic remix and its instrumental version . In late 2007 , a Spanglish version titled " Hate That I Love You ( <unk> Amarte ) " with vocals by singer David Bisbal leaked . It was released via iTunes in Argentina , Brazil and Spain . This version is included on David Bisbal 's live album <unk> Live . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Hate That I Love You " is a midtempo R & B song with folk influences that runs for 3 minutes and 39 seconds . According to the digital sheet music published by Sony / ATV Music Publishing at Musicnotes.com , it is written in the key of A @-@ flat major and Rihanna 's vocal range spans nearly an octave and a half from F3 to B ♭ 5 . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine wrote that " Hate That I Love You " maximizes Rihanna 's vocal range . The song uses piano , strummed guitars and 4 / 4 beats , combined with Rihanna and Ne @-@ Yo 's vocals , following the D ♭ 2 @-@ E ♭ 2 @-@ E ♭ 7 @-@ B ♭ 7 chord progression . 
 Critics compared " Hate That I Love You " to previous works by Ne @-@ Yo . Nick Levine from Digital Spy called the song a " second cousin " of Ne @-@ Yo 's singles " Sexy Love " and " Because of You " . Regarding the lyrics , Rihanna said , " When you 're in love with someone , even though they keep hurting you , you 're so naive and you love them so much that you put all the negative behind even though you keep getting hurt . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Hate That I Love You " received generally positive reviews from critics . <unk> Kraines from BBC Music called it a gorgeously simple modern duet . A reviewer from The New York Times called the duet breezy . Quentin B. Huff of PopMatters was unconvinced that " Hate That I Love You " is a full @-@ fledged ballad , but praised its catchy and smooth composition . Critics compared " Hate That I Love You " ' s composition to Beyoncé Knowles ' " Irreplaceable " ( B 'Day , 2006 ) . Jackie Hayden from Hot Press called " Hate that I Love You " " the prettier twin of ' Irreplaceable ' " . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine criticized the song , and called it a lazy carbon copy of " Irreplaceable " and " So Sick " ( In My Own Words , 2006 ) . Sarah McIntyre of RTÉ.ie concluded that the single " brings mournful acoustic guitar strumming , embarrassing harmonising and trite lyrics to a dreary whole . " 
 In a review of Good Girl Gone Bad , Norman Mayers from Prefix Magazine wrote that the songs which were written by Ne @-@ Yo " don 't necessarily gel with the more club @-@ oriented material on the album . " Digital Spy 's Nick Levine called the single a " folky , midtempo R 'n'B mush @-@ fest " , and said that , " The whole affair is smoother than Lulu 's forehead in the new Morrisons [ UK supermarket chain ] ad , but it 's almost criminal that Rihanna 's releasing this when ' Breakin ' Dishes ' and ' Don 't Stop The Music ' , a couple of flat @-@ out <unk> , are still stuck on her album . " The song received two nominations at the 50th Grammy Awards held at the Staples Center in Los Angeles , California , including for Best R & B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal and Best R & B Song . However , it lost to " <unk> " ( Funk This , 2007 ) by Chaka Khan featuring Mary J. Blige and " No One " ( As I Am , 2007 ) by Alicia Keys respectively . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Hate That I Love You " debuted at number 98 on the US Billboard Hot 100 for the issue dated September 15 , 2007 . After eight weeks on the chart , the song reached number nine and stayed on the position for five non @-@ consecutive weeks , before peaking at number seven on December 22 , 2007 , making it Rihanna 's fifth top @-@ ten single on this chart . The song stayed on the chart for total of 26 weeks , becoming Rihanna 's fourth longest @-@ running single on the US Billboard Hot 100 , behind " We Found Love " ( 36 weeks ) , " Don 't Stop the Music " ( 30 weeks ) and " Umbrella " ( 27 weeks ) . " Hate That I Love You " also peaked at number three on the US Pop Songs chart and became Rihanna 's fourth top @-@ five single there . It also peaked at number 20 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . The song was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on August 8 , 2008 , having sold more than one million downloads , but was less successful in Canada where it peaked at number 17 and stayed on the chart for 23 weeks . 
 The song debuted on the Australian Singles Chart at number 48 on November 25 , 2007 . After three weeks on the chart , it reached number 14 where it stayed for one week . It was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) denoting shipments of 35 @,@ 000 . Worldwide , the song 's highest chart peak was on the New Zealand Singles Chart , where it reached number six . " Hate That I Love You " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for selling more than 7 @,@ 500 digital copies . 
 " Hate That I Love You " debuted at number 57 on the UK Singles Chart on October 20 , 2007 , where it peaked at number 15 on November 24 , 2007 , after six weeks on the chart . More than 150 @,@ 000 copies of the song have been sold in the UK . " Hate That I Love You " reached number 13 in the Republic of Ireland . In mainland Europe , the song achieved moderate success , reaching the top @-@ thirty in ten countries . The single was most successful in Sweden , where it reached number 10 on the singles chart , and stayed at that position for two consecutive weeks . The song entered and peaked at number 16 on the French Singles Chart on January 12 , 2008 . It stayed at the peak position for two consecutive weeks , and spent 25 weeks on the chart . In Spain , the Spanglish version of " Hate That I Love You " charted on the Spanish Singles Chart . It entered the chart at number 39 on January 4 , 2009 . The following week it reached its peak of 37 , becoming Rihanna 's fourth top @-@ fifty single on that chart . It was certified triple platinum by the Productores de Música de España ( PROMUSICAE ) for selling more than 120 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Hate That I Love You " was directed by Anthony Mandler , who also directed the videos for Rihanna 's singles " Unfaithful " and " Shut Up and Drive " . Photographs of the production showing Rihanna wearing a cream bra and gray skirt were leaked on the same day . The video premiered on September 24 , 2007 , and was digitally released September 27 , 2008 on iTunes . 
 The video 's opening scene shows the sun rising and Rihanna waking up . Meanwhile , Ne @-@ Yo walks along a street , wearing a hat that obscures most of his face . Rihanna is in her room ; she is bored and wondering which clothes to wear , and she finds a gold necklace . As the song starts , Rihanna lies in bed and sings , while Ne @-@ Yo continues walking along the street , approaches the hotel and cautiously looks around before entering it . Meanwhile , Rihanna dresses , leaves the room and walks through the hallway of the hotel . Ne @-@ Yo goes in an elevator to the floor of Rihanna 's room . As Rihanna waits near the elevator , it opens . Ne @-@ Yo and Rihanna meet and smile at each other as Rihanna enters the elevator and Ne @-@ Yo exits . It is then revealed that Rihanna and Ne @-@ Yo are not singing about each other , but different people . As the video progresses , Rihanna is downstairs , chanting the lyrics of the song and Ne @-@ Yo is in a hallway . He knocks on a door , which his girlfriend opens , and he enters the room . Rihanna simultaneously climbs into her lover 's car and they smile at each other . The video ends with the previous scenes showing Rihanna leaving her hotel room . A reviewer from MTV UK commented , " After Shut Up And Drive the 19 year old is going even raunchier for this <unk> writhing around on a bed in her underwear and pearls . " 
 An edited version of the video was produced for the Spanglish version of the song , in which Ne @-@ Yo 's scenes are cut and replaced with scenes featuring David Bisbal . The Spanglish version of the video shows Bisbal watching the scenes of Rihanna on film being projected while he sings the song 's lyrics . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Rihanna occasionally performed " Hate That I Love You " at award ceremonies and concert tours . On November 18 , 2007 , Rihanna performed a medley consisting of " Umbrella " and " Hate That I Love You " at the 2007 American Music Awards , held at the Nokia Theater in Los Angeles , California . For the performance of " Hate That I Love You " , Ne @-@ Yo accompanied her on the stage . During the ceremony , Rihanna also won the award for Favorite Female Artist and the R & B / Soul Category . In late 2007 , Rihanna also embarked on her first worldwide concert tour , the Good Girl Gone Bad Tour ( 2007 – 09 ) . " Hate That I Love You " was the eleventh song on the set list for the tour . Her performance in Manchester was released in the UK through iTunes and is featured on the Good Girl Gone Bad Live DVD . In 2008 , Rihanna performed the Spanglish version of the song with David Bisbal , at the sixth series of the Spanish talent show , Operación Triunfo . 
 In 2010 , Rihanna embarked on her second worldwide tour , Last Girl on Earth Tour ( 2010 – 11 ) , and " Hate That I Love You " was included on the set list . Sarah Rodman from Boston Globe praised Rihanna 's performance of the song , and wrote that " Rihanna breezed through a bit of Eminem ’ s ' Love the Way You Lie ' and her own ' Hate That I Love You ' . " Rihanna performed the single at the 75th anniversary ceremony of Shakhtar Donetsk football team at the Donbass Arena in Ukraine on May 16 , 2011 . Rihanna also performed the song on her third worldwide concert tour , titled the Loud Tour ( 2011 ) , in which " Hate That I Love You " was the fourteenth track on the set list . Rihanna performed the song in a medley with her ballads " Unfaithful " and " California King Bed " , while wearing a long yellow gown . Rihanna also performed the song in the ballad section of her Diamonds World Tour . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at the Battery Studios in New York City , Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles and Lethal Studios in Bridgetown . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Good Girl Gone Bad , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = 2012 – 13 Hershey Bears season = 
 The 2012 – 13 Hershey Bears season was the franchise 's 75th season in the American Hockey League , starting on October 13 , 2012 , and ending on May 8 , 2013 , when they were eliminated during the first round of the Calder Cup playoffs . 
 Due to the 2012 – 13 National Hockey League lockout , Washington Capitals coach Adam Oates served as co @-@ coach of the Bears alongside head coach Mark French until November . Several Washington players also played with the Bears for a time , including defenseman Dmitri Orlov and goaltender Braden Holtby , who recorded four season shutouts . 
 The Bears experienced major offensive problems at the start of the season , resulting in the team 's worst 17 @-@ game start in eight years . But the team saw more success as the season progressed , including a seven @-@ game road winning streak from November 28 to January 11 , and a seven @-@ game point streak from January 26 to February 15 . The Bears participated in the 2013 AHL Outdoor Classic , but lost to the Wilkes @-@ Barre / Scranton Penguins . 
 Hershey was eliminated from the playoffs by the Providence Bruins despite winning the first two games in a best @-@ of @-@ five series , marking only the tenth time this had occurred in league history . Afterward , it was announced that French would not be retained for a fifth season as head coach . The 2012 – 13 season drew a club @-@ record home attendance average of 10 @,@ 046 , only the fifth time a club 's average had surpassed 10 @,@ 000 in recorded league history . 
 = = Off @-@ season = = 
 After several years of roster stability , the Hershey Bears lost several players during the off @-@ season , including Keith Aucoin , Chris Bourque , Andrew Carroll , Sean Collins , Cody Eakin , Kyle Greentree , Christian Hanson , D. J. King , Jacob <unk> , Graham Mink , Zach <unk> and Joel Rechlicz . The team obtained several new players through free agency , including Alex Berry , Matt Beaudoin , Matt <unk> , Jon DiSalvatore , Jon Kalinski , Steven Oleksy , Garrett Stafford , Ryan Stoa and Jeff Taffe . Rookies Stan Galiev and Cameron Schilling joined the team , Mattias Sjögren returned from the Swedish Elite League , and Hershey also obtained Zach Hamill in a trade that sent Bourque to the Boston Bruins organization . Bears coach Mark French said the new roster made the season feel like " a change in era " . 
 Like all American Hockey League teams , the Hershey Bears saw changes at the start of the season due to the National Hockey League lockout . Washington Capitals goaltender Braden Holtby and defenseman Dmitri Orlov joined the Bears roster due to the lockout , and Capitals head coach Adam Oates became co @-@ coach of the Hershey team along with French . Oates ' coaching staff also joined Oates and the team , including assistant coaches Calle Johansson and Tim Hunter , and video coach Brett Leonhardt . Bears goaltender Sergey Kostenko started the regular season on injured reserve due to off @-@ season shoulder surgery , and winger <unk> Paquette required surgery after breaking his right forearm during an October 6 exhibition game against the Wilkes @-@ Barre / Scranton Penguins . 
 = = Regular season = = 
 = = = October = = = 
 Hershey began its regular season with major offensive problems . They were outshot in 17 of their first 18 games , and were held to one or fewer goals in seven of those games . Their 6 – 10 – 1 – 0 start was the lowest total through 17 games since 2004 – 05 , which was the last season they failed to make the playoffs . After losing their season opener to the Syracuse Crunch , the Bears beat the Binghamton Senators on October 19 despite being outshot 44 to 21 . Hershey lost their first home game on October 20 , falling 8 – 7 to the Rochester Americans ; the 15 @-@ goal total marked the most combined goals from a Bears home opener , up from the previous record of 12 in 1987 . Hershey center Ryan Potulny exited the game with an undisclosed injury , and would not return until November 16 after a nine @-@ game absence . The team 's defense improved in subsequent games , allowing two goals or fewer in four of their next five matches . 
 Hershey lost 2 – 1 in overtime against Binghamton on October 21 . The game would have gone to a shootout , but under the first usage of the AHL 's new video replay system at Giant Center , a Senators goal that had been overturned with 6 @.@ 5 seconds left in overtime was restored . The Bears were held to a single goal in a second straight game in a 3 – 1 loss to Connecticut Whale on October 26 , but the next day saw their first home win and first shutout victory of the season . They defeated the Albany Devils 3 – 0 and Holtby , who had been sidelined since the previous week by an upper body injury , made 35 saves . Forward T.J. <unk> was recalled from the ECHL 's Reading Royals and made his Hershey debut in that game . The Bears finished the month with a 3 – 2 victory against the Penguins on October 28 , marking their first winning streak of the season . Orlov would miss the next four games due to an upper body injury , not returning until November 11 . 
 = = = November = = = 
 Hershey defeated the Springfield Falcons 3 – 2 in a shootout on November 2 , in which Boyd Kane and Matt Pope scored their first regulation goals of the season , and Galiev made the game @-@ winner in the seventh round of the shootout , his first professional shootout attempt . In a subsequent 3 – 2 loss against the Bridgeport Sound Tigers on November 5 , the Bears allowed a season @-@ high 11 power plays , four of which were five @-@ on @-@ three . Hershey had 50 total penalty minutes in the game , compared to 115 minutes total in their first eight games . Stoa suffered an upper body injury that left him scratched until January 5 . The Bears went 3 @-@ for @-@ 7 on the power play during a 3 – 1 victory against the Penguins on November 9 , ending a 0 @-@ for @-@ 18 power play stretch ; Holtby made 38 saves in the game . The Bears lost their next match 2 – 1 against the St. John 's IceCaps on November 10 . They were outshot 27 to 19 , making a total of 359 to 266 for the season and putting them 29th out of 30 in the league in shots . 
 Hershey 's offensive problems continued in a 3 – 1 loss against the Portland Pirates on November 11 , in which they struggled to get the puck out of their zone and through the neutral zone . Holtby , who made 31 saves , said afterward , " We just seemed to look dead the last couple games . " Kalinski suffered a hand injury and would not return until December 27 . The Bears fell to Syracuse again on November 16 . The 6 – 1 game , the most lopsided defeat of the season , was their third consecutive loss and third straight home game with only one goal . Hershey broke a three @-@ game losing streak on November 17 with a 4 – 1 against the Penguins , where Garrett Mitchell scored two goals , including Hershey 's first successful penalty shot since February 27 , 2010 . The team had surrendered two goals or fewer in eight of their past 14 games . But Hershey lost their next two games , including a 4 – 0 shutout loss to the Wilkes @-@ Barre / Scranton on November 21 . The Binghamton @-@ based Internet radio Power Play Post Show reported from an anonymous source that Penguins head coach John Hynes put a $ 200 bounty on Bears defenseman Oleksy for that game , a claim Hynes strongly denied . 
 After the November 21 game , Oates announced he and his assistant coaches would no longer coach the Bears , giving full control of the team back to French and assistant coach Troy Mann . Hershey 's offensive problems continued with a 3 – 1 loss against the Adirondack Phantoms , where they went 0 @-@ for @-@ 7 on the power play and saw their points percentage drop to .382 , the worst in the Eastern Conference . However , they won five of their next six games starting with a 4 – 2 victory over the Toronto Marlies on November 25 . The Bears ' subsequent 5 – 2 win against the Norfolk Admirals on November 28 marked the start of a seven @-@ game road winning streak that would not end until January 11 . It was also just the second time in 19 games that they outshot their opponent , with 35 shots to Norfolk 's 26 . <unk> made two of the goals . The Norfolk match was Kane 's 310th game with Hershey , placing him 39th in the teams ' all @-@ time games played list . The Bears won a third consecutive game against Bridgeport on November 30 , against leading in shots 32 to 24 . They won 5 – 2 , scoring four goals in the third period , a season high for goals in a single period . 
 = = = December = = = 
 The Bears opened the month with a 5 – 1 loss against Norfolk on December 1 , even though the Admirals allowed nine power plays . On December 4 , DiSalvatore and Potulny were formally named alternate captains , ending the practice of rotating alternates throughout the season . Orlov suffered an upper body injury during Hershey 's 2 – 1 victory against Norfolk on December 6 , and did not return to Hershey until March 9 . The Bears also won 5 – 4 against Wilkes @-@ Barre / Scranton after Kevin Marshall , who had been a healthy scratch the day before , made his first Hershey goal in overtime for the win . The Bears lost 3 – 2 against the Hamilton Bulldogs , with Potulny scoring both Hershey goals , including a power play goal that ended the team 's recent 0 @-@ for @-@ 19 power play record . 
 Hershey next won 2 – 1 against St. John 's on December 11 , in which Holtby the eighth goaltender in Hershey history to reach 70 victories . Taffe had two assists , tying him with Aucoin for second in the league for assists , and both Hershey goals came on the power play , marking the first time since November 9 they scored more than one power play goal in a game . Holtby had three shutout victories in the next five games , starting with a 4 – 0 win against St. John 's on December 12 . The Bears scored two power plays , marking the first time since the season 's three opening games that the Bears scored power plays in three consecutive matches . Paquette and Kostenko were reassigned to ECHL 's Reading Royals , and rookie winger Stanislav Galiev was recalled from Reading to the Bears . Holtby 's next 4 – 0 shutout victory against Norfolk on December 19 moved him to fifth place in career Hershey shutouts with 13 , and seventh place in regular season wins with 72 . 
 Hershey went 0 @-@ for @-@ 9 in the power play in their subsequent 1 – 0 loss to Springfield on December 22 , which ended a seven @-@ game point streak for Taffe . Holtby 's 2 – 0 shutout against Scranton on December 26 brought his record to 12 – 9 – 1 , tying him for third in the league for wins ; his four shutouts of the season tied him for second in the league . During a five @-@ game span he stopped 154 of 158 shots , a .975 save percentage . With their sixth straight road win on December 27 against Wilkes @-@ Barre / Scranton , Hershey saw a streak of 21 straight successful penalty kills end with a power play goal by the Penguins ' Paul Thompson . Hershey lost their next three games , during which they went 0 @-@ for @-@ 11 on the power play . Although his shutout streak ended , Holtby made 89 combined saves during the losing streak . He was named AHL Goaltender of the Month for December , during which he had a <unk> save percentage and allowed one goal or fewer in six of 10 starts . 
 = = = January = = = 
 With the end of the NHL lockout on January 6 , Holtby and Schilling left Hershey for the Washington Capitals , which cleared the way for goaltender Philipp Grubauer to rejoin the Bears from ECHL 's Reading Royals . The end of the lockout was believed to ultimately benefit Hershey because they retained more of their roster than most other AHL clubs . Tomáš <unk> scored two goals for Hershey in their 4 – 3 win against Bridgeport on January 8 , including the unassisted game @-@ winner with 25 @.@ 6 seconds left in overtime . Dany Sabourin made 35 saves , marking his third straight win as starting goaltender . Hershey 's seven @-@ game road winning streak ended with a 1 – 0 loss to the Penguins on January 11 , in which Taffe , Potulny and Evan Barlow all suffered lower body injuries . Despite their absences , the Bears beat Connecticut 4 – 3 the next day , where the line of Kalinski , Mitchell and Barry Almeida combined for two goals and six points . Hershey beat the Whale again on January 13 in a 5 – 0 shutout , scoring four goals in the first period including three power plays , which equaled 11 @.@ 1 percent of their 27 power plays of the season thus far . Tom Poti scored one of the power play goals ; it marked his first game since January 12 , 2011 for the Washington Capitals due to a fractured pelvis that threatened to end his career . 
 The Bears won their third consecutive game on January 16 with a shootout victory over the Worcester Sharks . Grubauer stopped four of five shootout attempts by the Sharks , while Mitchell and Potulny scored on the shootout for the win . But that game was followed by a season @-@ high four @-@ game losing streak , which included a 2 – 1 overtime loss to Wilkes @-@ Barre / Scranton at the AHL Outdoor Classic on January 20 . Before a crowd of 17 @,@ 311 at Hersheypark Stadium , Hershey kept the Penguins scoreless for two periods before they tied it in the third , then Paul Thompson scored a game @-@ winning breakaway goal 1 : 19 into overtime . Their fourth straight loss against Binghamton on January 26 briefly took the Bears out of playoff contention in the Eastern Conference . The Bears ranked 22nd in the league for scoring , averaging 2 @.@ 53 goals per game , and were last in league for shots on goal per game at 25 @.@ 21 . Their record was 0 @-@ for @-@ 15 when trailing in two periods , and 12 of their games so far had been one @-@ goal decisions . However , the January 26 loss also started a seven @-@ game point streak for the Bears , which included three wins and four overtime losses , three of which in a shootout . On January 31 , the Bears obtained winger Peter LeBlanc in a trade for Beaudoin to the Chicago Blackhawks , and also received Casey Wellman in a trade for Hamill to the Florida Panthers . 
 = = = February = = = 
 Hershey broke their four @-@ game losing streak with a 2 – 1 victory against the Manchester Monarchs on February 2 , making a season @-@ high 44 shots on goal . LeBlanc and Wellman combined for 10 shots in their Hershey debuts , and LeBlanc scored one of the two goals . Hershey lost the next day to the Penguins , falling 2 – 1 in overtime after allowing a power play goal with 10 @.@ 8 seconds left in overtime . In a 3 – 2 shootout win against the Lake Erie Monsters on February 5 , Sabourin made 35 saves and the Bears killed seven power plays . They also defeated Binghamton 4 – 3 on February 9 , scoring on two of eight power plays , better than their 1 @-@ for @-@ 11 power play record going into the game . Hershey lost 4 – 3 in a shootout against Norfolk on February 10 , despite scoring three goals in the third period . Potulny made two of the goals , including the last with 34 @.@ 4 seconds in regulation , marking his second multi @-@ goal game of the season . Stoa also scored his second two @-@ goal game of the season in the Bears ' subsequent 4 – 3 loss against Norfolk on February 10 , which marked the team 's third consecutive shootout loss . 
 Hershey 's seven @-@ game point streak ended on February 16 with a 2 – 1 loss against Toronto . It was also their eighth one @-@ goal game , tying them with the Houston Aeros for the season 's most one @-@ goal contests in the league . In a 4 – 1 win against Rochester the next day , Grubauer blocked 35 shots , marking his personal high in the American Hockey League and the third time this season he held an opponent to one goal in regulation . The Bears defeated Binghamton 5 – 4 in a shootout on February 22 , rallying from a two @-@ goal deficit in the third period and killing nine of the Senators ' 10 power plays . The victory was one of only two victories , both shootouts , in the past 18 games where Hershey trailed after two periods . Taffe scored two power play goals for his first two @-@ goal game for the Bears , and McNeill 's three assists move his career points total to 146 , making him eighth in all @-@ time scoring among Hershey defensemen . Grubauer earned his AHL shutout for the Bears with a 3 – 0 win February 23 against Adirondack , making a season high @-@ tying 40 saves . The game brought Hershey 's penalty kill record in 10 games to 42 @-@ for @-@ 46 , or 91 @.@ 3 percent , bringing their overall penalty kill to eighth best in the league . The Bears lost 6 – 4 in Albany on February 24 , which was also the third straight game Hershey scored two power play goals . They were scored by Stol and Potulny , who had each had five goals in their last six and seven games , respectively . Wellman also scored two goals in the game . 
 = = = March = = = 
 The Bears won their first three contests from March 1 to 3 . Although it marked their fourth three @-@ game winning streak of the season , it was their first time winning on three consecutive days , and first winning three in a row at home . The streak started with a 3 – 2 victory against the Penguins , scoring three goals in the first half of the first period . They were outshot 34 to 15 , which tied for Bears ' lowest total shots in a game . Grubauer was recalled to the Washington Capitals on March 7 to substitute for an ill Michal Neuvirth . He stopped 40 of 45 shots in 5 – 2 loss to the New York Islanders in his first NHL start on March 9 , and was returned to the Bears the next day after Neuvirth recovered . The Bears ' lost their next three straight games , including two back @-@ to @-@ back losses against Norfolk in which they were held to one goal . Those losses placed them in danger of losing playoff contention , tying them with Connecticut for seventh , with Albany and Manchester each one point behind . It was also the first time this season the Bears lost a game in regulation that it led after two periods . The team 's losing streak ended with a 1 – 0 victory against Bridgeport on March 17 , when Mitchell scored a game @-@ winning overtime goal . 
 Hershey faced a challenging schedule for the end of its regular season , with only three of the last 14 games scheduled for home . This marked the fewest in team history , with a previous low of five games in the final 14 of 2002 – 03 . The team also experienced significant roster changes in March , with Orlov , Oleksy and Schilling all being recalled to the Washington Capitals . Almeida and Kostenko were reassigned to the Reading Royals , Nicolas Deschamps joined the Bears roster , and Kevin Marshall was for defenseman Chay <unk> . Capitals winger Joey Crabb also cleared waivers and was assigned to Hershey on March 23 . The Bears ended a two @-@ game losing streak with a 4 – 1 victory over Worcester on March 24 , but lost 5 – 3 on March 29 to Albany , who had just lost six consecutive games . Grubauer was replaced by Sabourin after surrendering three shots on seven goals . Hershey defeated Providence 3 – 2 the next day , rallying with two goals in the final 12 minutes . It marked the first time this season the Bears had won a game after trailing for two periods . 
 = = = April = = = 
 April brought further roster changes for the Hershey Bears , with Joel Rechlicz rejoining the team in exchange for Matt <unk> , and Stafford being traded for winger Dane Byers . Forward Michael Latta was also traded to Hershey , meaning the team had added seven new players to the roster via trades since January 31 . The April trades were intended to add forward speed and depth to the team , but a late NHL trade deadline resulting from the lockout left only nine <unk> to meld the new players into the line @-@ up . After beating Syracuse 4 – 1 on April 5 , Hershey fell into a four @-@ game losing slump that briefly knocked them out of playoff contention . The first of those games , a 2 @-@ 1 loss against Syracuse at home , drew a season @-@ high attendance of 10 @,@ 943 . However , by April 12 , a loss against Providence knocked them into ninth place , and last place in the East Division . Another loss the next day to Manchester left them tied with the Monarchs for last place at 75 points , a full four points behind Connecticut and Norfolk to get back into the running for the playoffs . 
 The Bears ended their win drought with a 5 – 3 victory against Portland . After having gone one @-@ for @-@ 18 on the power play in the previous five games , Hershey scored a season @-@ high five power play goals against the Pirates , including a hat trick by Crabb . Taffe recorded five assists , the team 's season @-@ high points total for a single game . Another victory against Adirondack on April 19 placed <unk> back into playoff contention , tying them with Manchester , Norfolk and Connecticut at 79 points in the race for the final two spots . The Bears clinched the eighth and final seed by defeating Manchester 4 – 2 in their final regular season game on April 21 . Taffe finished the regular season the second @-@ highest scorer in the league with 18 goals , finishing behind the Rockford IceHogs ' Brandon <unk> at 22 goals . Taffe and <unk> tied for the league high in assists at 53 . Taffe was also named the team 's Most Valuable Player and made the AHL 's 2012 @-@ 13 second all @-@ star squad . The Bears finished the regular season with a home attendance total of 381 @,@ 764 and a club @-@ record average of 10 @,@ 046 . This marked only the fifth time an AHL club had averaged more than 10 @,@ 000 since records started being kept in 1962 , and the first time since the then @-@ Philadelphia Phantoms in 1999 – 2000 . Boyd Kane was named the club 's Man of the Year . 
 = = Calder Cup playoffs = = 
 The Bears faced the top @-@ seeded Providence Bruins in the best @-@ of @-@ five first round , marking the eighth consecutive year Hershey made the Calder Cup playoffs . It also marked the sixth AHL playoff meeting between the two teams , with Hershey winning four of the previous five , losing only in the 1949 finals . The Bruins led the league in wins ( 5 ) and points ( 105 ) for the 2012 – 13 regular season , and no team had beaten the AHL 's regular season points leader in the first round of the playoffs since the Cornwall Aces in 1996 . The Providence roster featured three former Hershey forwards : Chris Bourque , Christian Hanson and Graham Mink . Defenseman Patrick McNeill did not play for Hershey during the playoff series due to veteran roster limit issues . 
 Hershey won the first game 5 – 2 on April 26 , with Crabb opening scoring with a power play goal , and the Bears taking a 4 – 0 lead by the second period , resulting in Providence goaltender Niklas Svedberg being pulled from the game . The victory marked Hershey 's first game one win in a playoff series since defeating Manchester in the 2009 – 10 Eastern Conference finals . The Bears also won their second game 5 – 4 on April 28 , with Grubauer making 54 saves , eight short of matching the team 's playoff record . The Bruins allowed 64 shots , which were six short of Hershey 's highest in a playoff game . Hershey was losing 4 – 3 in the third , their first time trailing in the series , but Grubauer was pulled for an extra attacker and Crabb tied the game with 91 seconds in regulation , allowing DiSalvatore to score the game @-@ winner in overtime on a power play . Hershey 's 5 @-@ for @-@ 10 power play record ranked the highest in the Calder Cup playoffs at the time . 
 If the Bruins were swept , it would have marked the first time an overall top @-@ seed was swept from the opening round of the playoffs since the Cleveland Barons ousted the Buffalo Bisons in 1954 . But the Bruins fought off elimination with a 5 – 1 victory in game three on May 4 , where Bourque scored two goals and one assists against his former team . Despite scoring the first goal for the third straight game , Hershey failed to score on any of its six power plays , including a five @-@ on @-@ three that lasted a full two minutes . Providence also won a dramatic fourth game on May 5 . Trailing 4 – 3 in the third period , the Bruins stunned Hershey by scoring two goals in the final four minutes , including Carter Camper completing a hat trick with his game @-@ winner with 64 seconds left in the game . Hershey were eliminated from the playoffs after losing the fifth and final game by 3 – 2 . Crabb tied the game 2 – 2 in the third with his fifth goal of the series , but Bruins forward Jamie Tardif broke the tie at 9 : 20 of the period . The Bears finished the period with a six @-@ on @-@ four advantage but could not score . 
 This marked the third consecutive year Hershey was eliminated in the first round of the Calder Cup playoffs . They became the tenth team in AHL history to be eliminated after winning the first two games of a best @-@ of @-@ five series ; the last was the Lowell Lock Monsters , who lost to St. John 's Maple Leafs in 2002 . The road team won every game of the Bears and Bruins series . The only other time that had happened in AHL history was in 1995 , when the Fredericton Canadiens eliminated the St. John 's Maple Leafs . Hershey finished the season with a league @-@ worst average of 26 @.@ 42 shots on goal per game , and a total of 204 goals , the team 's lowest since 2003 – 04 . 
 = = Post season = = 
 On May 17 , Bears President Doug <unk> and Washington Capitals General Manager George McPhee announced they would not renew the contract of head coach Mark French . French spent four seasons with Hershey , making the playoffs every time and winning the Calder Cup in 2009 . He was the fifth winningest Hershey Bears coach at 180 wins , which was one win behind the fourth winningest , John Paddock . French subsequently became head coach of KHL Medveščak Zagreb for the Kontinental Hockey League . Several people were identified as possible candidates to succeed French , including Troy Mann , Paul Jerrard , Mike <unk> , Eric Veilleux and Larry Courville . After a search , it was announced on June 18 that Mike Haviland had been chosen for the position . <unk> said Haviland was chosen because it was believed he could improve Hershey 's home record and create a tougher , more aggressive , " in your face " team . Haviland had applied for the Washington Capitals head coach position the year prior , but Oates was selected instead . 
 After four years as Hershey 's assistant coach , Mann accepted a job as head coach of ECHL 's Bakersfield Condors on June 21 . Mann had <unk> for his position with the Bears and felt it went well , but said he faced a deadline to accept the Bakersfield job and could not turn it down . Ryan <unk> was signed as Mann 's replacement on July 5 . He had previously worked with Haviland , when <unk> was alternate captain on and Haviland was head coach of the ECHL 's Atlantic City Boardwalk Bullies in 2002 – 03 , the year the team won the Kelly Cup . 
 The post season saw several players depart the Hershey Bears line @-@ up . Immediately after Hershey was eliminated from the playoffs , the Washington Capitals recalled Joey Crabb and Tom Wilson for their Stanley Cup run ; Crabb later signed with NHL 's Florida Panthers . After 365 games with Hershey and playing as captain since 2001 , Boyd Kane left the Hershey Bears for Medveščak Zagreb in Croatia , reuniting with French . Sabourin left the Bears for the Graz 99ers of the Austrian Hockey League , and McNeill , who was limited to 47 games in the 2012 @-@ 13 season due to veteran roster limits , signed a one @-@ year two @-@ way contract with the Columbus Blue Jackets . Potulny signed with the KHL 's Avangard Omsk , Pope joined the Aalborg Pirates in Denmark , and Sjögren departed for the Linköpings Hockey Club in the Swedish Hockey League . 
 Byers , Rechlicz , Stoa , <unk> and <unk> were all re @-@ signed for the 2013 – 14 season , and Deschamps and LeBlanc received qualifying offers from the Washington Capitals . It was announced June 14 that Taffe re @-@ signed with the Bears . The Swedish Hockey League had announced one month earlier that Taffe had signed a contract with them , but Taffe said that announcement had been premature , and he wanted to keep his family in North America . In July , the Bears signed four free agents to one @-@ year contracts : defenseman Tyson Strachan , winger Matt Watkins , forward Derek Whitmore and goaltender David <unk> . For the 2013 – 14 season , Hershey signed defenseman David <unk> , Nate Schmidt , and <unk> <unk> , as well as goaltender Riley Gill , and forwards Josh Brittain , Dustin <unk> , Brandon Segal , and Jamie Johnson , a former linemate of Taffe 's with the Rochester Americans . 
 = = Standings = = 
 y – indicates team has clinched division and a playoff spot x – indicates team has clinched a playoff spot e – indicates team has been eliminated from playoff contention 
 = = = Divisional standings = = = 
 = = = Conference standings = = = 
 Divisions : AT – Atlantic , NE – Northeast , ET – East 
 = = Schedule and results = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = Player statistics = = 
 = = = Skaters = = = 
 Note : GP 
 = Games Played ; G = 
 Goals ; A 
 = Assists ; Pts = 
 Points ; + / − 
 = Plus / Minus ; PIM = 
 Penalty <unk> as of May 8 , 2013 
 † Denotes player spent time with another team before joining team . Stats reflect time with the team only . ‡ Left the team mid @-@ season * Rookie 
 = = = Goaltenders = = = 
 Note : GP 
 = Games played ; TOI = 
 Time on ice ; W 
 = Wins ; L = 
 Losses ; GA 
 = Goals against ; GAA = 
 Goals against average ; SV 
 = Saves ; SA = 
 Shots against ; SV % 
 = Save percentage ; SO = 
 Shutouts ; G 
 = Goals ; A = 
 Assists ; PIM = Penalty <unk> as of May 8 , 2013 
 ‡ Left the team mid @-@ season * Rookie 
 = = Milestones = = 
 = Beer in San Diego County , California = 
 San Diego County , California has been called " the Craft Beer Capital of America . " The county is home to more than 100 breweries , microbreweries , and brewpubs . Based on 2014 sales volume , four San Diego County breweries rank among the 50 largest craft brewers in the United States . San Diego County brewers pioneered the specialty beer style known as Double India Pale Ale ( Double IPA ) , sometimes called San Diego Pale Ale . Its beer culture is a draw for tourism , particularly during major festivals such as San Diego Beer Week and the San Diego International Beer Competition . San Diego County breweries like Stone Brewing Co . , AleSmith Brewing Company and Ballast Point Brewing Company are consistently rated among the top breweries in the world . 
 = = History = = 
 The San Diego Brewing Company opened in 1896 as the first commercial brewery in San Diego County ; Alonzo Horton , the father of modern San Diego , was one of the founders . At the time it was the largest manufacturing enterprise in the county . It was located on 32nd street in San Diego . It closed in 1920 because of Prohibition . It reopened in 1935 and continued in operation until 1942 , when it was displaced by the U.S. Navy 's 32nd Street Naval Station . A brewpub by the same name now operates in the Mission Valley neighborhood . 
 Mission Brewery , located in the Middletown neighborhood of San Diego , opened in 1913 and closed due to Prohibition . It was never reopened as a brewery , but the landmark five @-@ story brick building was repurposed several times , for kelp extraction until the 1980s and ultimately as an office building , still in operation . The building was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1989 . The name Mission Brewery was revived in 2007 by a brewery at 14th and L Streets in Downtown San Diego . 
 The Aztec Brewing Company was founded in Mexicali , Baja California , Mexico , in 1921 as <unk> Azteca SA . During Prohibition it helped to supply Americans with the beer they could not legally buy in the United States . The company moved to San Diego in 1933 , following the repeal of Prohibition , and became San Diego 's largest brewery . It was located on Main Street in Barrio Logan . It featured a large Rathskeller , or basement beer hall , decorated with murals , paintings , and woodcarvings by Jose Moya del Pino . By 1944 Aztec was the only brewery still operating in Southern California . The company was purchased by Altes Brewing Company in 1948 ; Altes was then bought by the National Brewing Company , which closed Aztec Brewing Company in 1953 . For the next 36 years there was no local commercially brewed beer in San Diego County . The name Aztec Brewing Company has been revived in a Vista brewery which opened in 2011 . 
 During Prohibition ( 1920 – 1933 ) , San Diegans could still drink beer by crossing the border into Mexico . In the formerly small town of Tijuana more than 180 cantinas were built to serve American visitors , and the city 's population grew tenfold between 1920 and 1930 . Several modern breweries were built in Mexicali to supply the demand . 
 Before Prohibition there had been seven breweries in San Diego . After repeal there were three : Aztec Brewing Company , San Diego Brewing Company , and Balboa Brewing Company . These were soon either purchased by the Big Three national brewing companies ( Anheuser @-@ Busch , Coors , and Miller ) or driven out of business by the aggressive marketing practices of the Big Three . From 1953 until the 1980s the local beer market was dominated by the large national brewers , with the alternative being imported beer from Mexico . But changes in national and state law in the late 1970s made home brewing legal , and in 1982 California allowed breweries to operate restaurants on their premises , which made brewpubs possible . 
 In 1989 the Karl Strauss Brewing Company opened a brewery and brewpub on Columbia Street in Downtown San Diego and expanded into distribution brewing in 1991 . This was the first commercial brewery in San Diego since 1953 , and for many San Diego consumers it was their first exposure to freshly brewed beer and to styles such as amber lager and pale ale . In the mid @-@ 1990s a second , more adventurous wave of craft breweries appeared , led by Pizza Port , Stone and <unk> . The local craft beer movement was inspired in part by homebrewing hobbyists , supported by the storefront Home Brew Mart , which opened in 1992 and later spun off the Ballast Point Brewing Company . 
 Beer festivals promoted the new styles and educated a new generation of beer drinkers . In 1997 local brewers Tomme Arthur and Tom Nickel organized the first such event , the Strong Ale Festival ( still an annual event ) , and in 1998 they added the Real Ale Festival ( discontinued after 2012 ) . Other festivals were added , and in 2009 the San Diego Brewers Guild launched an annual Beer Week . San Diego became so well established in the brewing world that the biennial World Beer Cup competition was held there in 2004 ; 11 medals ( out of more than 200 ) went to locals . San Diego hosted the event again in 2008 , taking 14 medals , and in 2012 , taking 16 medals . At the 2015 Great American Beer Festival , San Diego County brewers brought home a total of 20 medals ( 6 gold , 2 silver , and 11 bronze ) . 
 The Great American Beer Festival 's " Best Small Brewer " Award has gone to San Diego County brewers multiple times : 2004 ( Tomme Arthur for Pizza Port Solana Beach ) , 2007 ( Arthur for Port Brewing / Lost Abbey ) , 2008 ( <unk> ) , and 2011 ( <unk> <unk> , Pizza Port Ocean Beach ) . Pizza Port Carlsbad won the Best Large <unk> award in 2009 , 2010 , and 2011 . The World Beer Cup 's biennial " Best Small Brewer " award went to San Diego County Brewers in 2004 ( Tom Nickel for Oggi 's Pizza and Brewing ) , 2008 ( Arthur for Port Brewing / Lost Abbey ) , 2010 ( Ballast Point ) , and 2014 ( Coronado Brewing Company ) . 
 In 2013 – 14 the San Diego History Center featured a special exhibit on the history of beer in the county , titled " Bottled and <unk> : San Diego 's Craft Beer Culture . " 
 = = Beer styles = = 
 San Diego County brewers produce the full range of craft beers , but they are best known for strongly @-@ hopped , high @-@ alcohol beers such as India Pale Ale ( IPA ) , and particularly for an even stronger , <unk> style known as Double IPA . Double IPA beers are made with intensely aromatic , bitter hops , which result in a very bitter beer . A standard mass @-@ produced American beer scores less than 20 on the International Bitterness Units ( IBU ) scale ; an average IPA scores about 60 IBU ; and a double IPA commonly scores 100 IBU or higher . The style was pioneered by brewer Vinnie <unk> at the now @-@ defunct Blind Pig Brewery in Temecula in 1994 ; nowadays almost every brewery in San Diego County produces a double IPA . Double IPA has been called San Diego 's signature beer , and some people refer to Double IPA beers as San Diego Pale Ale . 
 = = Economic impact = = 
 As of April 2016 the county was home to 123 licensed breweries and brewpubs , with several dozen more in the planning stages . Brewing has been one of the fastest @-@ growing business sectors in San Diego , with seven new licenses issued in 2010 , fifteen in 2011 and eighteen in 2012 . In 2015 the county 's brewers generated $ 851 million in sales , a 17 % increase over 2014 . More than 4 @,@ 500 people worked in the brewing industry , a 20 % increase over 2014 . Beer @-@ related tourism is an important part of San Diego County 's visitor industry throughout the year ; the county is described as a " beer city destination " . Many breweries offer tours of their facilities and tasting rooms , and dozens of commercial tour operators market " beer tours " in San Diego County . 
 = = Annual events = = 
 San Diego Beer Week , launched in 2009 , is now a ten @-@ day county @-@ wide festival , held in early November and aimed at both local residents and tourists . It showcases the local beer scene and fosters knowledge about the area 's brewing heritage . The festival kicks off with the San Diego Brewers Guild Festival and continues with hundreds of large and small events hosted by breweries , nano @-@ breweries , pubs , and alehouses . In 2012 there were more than 500 events scheduled during Beer Week . 
 The San Diego International Beer Festival takes place during the San Diego County Fair every June . It includes seminars and classes , beer tasting , and beer judging . Participating breweries in 2013 came from 22 states and 16 countries . Other special beer events throughout the year include the San Diego Beer Festival in July , the San Diego Festival of Beer in September , and the Strong Ale Festival in December . 
 = = Notable breweries = = 
 One @-@ third of all the breweries in the county are located in the North County along the 60 @-@ mile ( 97 km ) stretch of California State Route 78 from Oceanside to Julian , so that the route is sometimes called the " Hops Highway . " 
 Stone Brewing Co. is the largest brewery in Southern California and the ninth largest craft brewery in the United States . Located in Escondido in San Diego 's North County , it is known for hoppy , high @-@ alcohol beers and an in @-@ your @-@ face attitude . ( The company 's best @-@ known brand , Arrogant Bastard Ale , uses the slogan " Hated by many . Loved by few . You 're not worthy . " ) Arrogant Bastard Ale is regarded as a " watershed beer " that " put San Diego on the craft brew map . " Stone Pale Ale is their flagship brew . The company produces eight beers year @-@ round , as well as special releases and collaborations . In addition to the brewery and tasting room it has two brewery restaurants , in Escondido and San Diego , and five " company stores " . In 2014 Stone announced plans to open brewery restaurants in Richmond , Virginia and in Berlin , Germany . 
 Karl Strauss Brewing Company was the first brewery in San Diego since 1953 and launched the current wave of breweries . It is now the third largest brewery in San Diego County . It operates a production brewery in San Diego 's Pacific Beach neighborhood as well as eight brewery restaurants in San Diego , Orange , Los Angeles and Riverside counties . The company 's flagship brew is Karl Strauss Amber Lager . Its best selling beer , Red Trolley Ale , won gold medals in its category at both the Great American Beer Festival ( 2011 and 2013 ) and the World Beer Cup ( 2010 and 2012 ) . 
 Ballast Point Brewing Company was opened in 1996 and is now the second largest brewery in the county . In 2010 the company was named the World Champion Small Brewery at the World Beer Cup . 
 The five brewpubs of Pizza Port , together with its spinoffs Port Brewing Company ( San Marcos ) and Lost Abbey ( San Marcos ) , have won dozens of medals in international competition . Pizza Port started brewing commercially in 1992 ; in 1994 it became the first @-@ ever San Diego brewery to win a medal at the Great American Beer Festival . In 2012 Pizza Port 's Ocean Beach location won three medals at the World Beer Cup including two golds , and the Carlsbad location won two ; Lost Abbey also won a gold and a bronze . The Great American Beer Festival named Pizza Port 's Carlsbad location the " best large brewpub " in 2009 , 2010 and 2011 . Port Brewing / Lost Abbey was named the " Small Brewing Company and Small Brewing Company Brewer of the Year " at the Great American Beer Festival in 2007 , and the Best Small Brewing Company at the World Beer Cup event in 2008 . The franchise took five medals at the 2013 Great American Beer Festival . 
 AleSmith Brewing Company , located in San Diego , was founded in 1995 . Many of their beers are strongly hopped and high in alcoholic content . Between 1998 and 2012 the company won eight medals in World Beer Cup competition , including four gold . It was the most popular brewery on <unk> 's surveys in 2004 and 2005 . In 2008 , AleSmith was awarded " Small Brewing Company and Small Brewing Company Brewer of the Year " at the Great American Beer Festival . 
 = Nigersaurus = 
 Nigersaurus is a genus of rebbachisaurid sauropod dinosaur that lived during the middle Cretaceous period , about 115 to 105 million years ago . It was discovered in the Elrhaz Formation in an area called <unk> , in the Republic of Niger . Fossils of this dinosaur were first described in 1976 , but it was only named Nigersaurus <unk> in 1999 , after further and more complete remains were found and described . The genus name means " Niger reptile " , and the specific name honours the French palaeontologist Philippe Taquet , who discovered the first remains . 
 Nigersaurus was 9 metres ( 30 feet ) long , which is small for a sauropod , and had a short neck . It weighed around four tonnes , comparable to a modern elephant . Its skeleton was highly pneumatised ( filled with air spaces connected to air sacs ) , but the limbs were robustly built . Its skull was very specialised for feeding , with large fenestrae and thin bones . It had a wide muzzle filled with more than 500 teeth , which were replaced at a rapid rate : around every 14 days . The jaws may have borne a keratinous sheath . Unlike other tetrapods , the tooth @-@ bearing bones of its jaws were rotated transversely relative to the rest of the skull , so that all of its teeth were located far to the front . 
 The closest relatives of Nigersaurus are grouped within the subfamily Nigersaurinae of the family Rebbachisauridae , which is part of the sauropod superfamily Diplodocoidea . Nigersaurus was probably a browser , and fed with its head close to the ground . The region of its brain that detected smell was underdeveloped , although its brain size was comparable to that of other dinosaurs . There has been debate on whether its head was habitually held downwards , or horizontally like other sauropods . It lived in a riparian habitat , and its diet probably consisted of soft plants , such as ferns , horsetails , and angiosperms . It is one of the most common fossil vertebrates found in the area , and shared its habitat with other dinosaurian <unk> , as well as large theropods and crocodylomorphs . 
 = = Description = = 
 Like all sauropods , Nigersaurus was a megafaunal quadruped with a small head , thick hind legs , and a prominent tail . Among that clade , Nigersaurus was fairly small , with a body length of only 9 m ( 30 ft ) and a femur reaching only 1 m ( 3 ft 3 in ) . It may have weighed around four tonnes , comparable to a modern elephant . It had a short neck for a sauropod , with thirteen cervical vertebrae . Nearly all <unk> had relatively short necks and a length of 10 m ( 33 ft ) or less . The only member of the family that reached the size of larger sauropods was <unk> . 
 The presacral vertebrae ( vertebrae before the sacrum ) were heavily pneumatised to the point where the column consisted of a series of hollow " shells " , each divided by a thin septum in the middle . It had little to no cancellous bone , making the centra thin bone plates filled with air spaces . The vertebral arches were so heavily pierced by extensions of the external air sacs that of their side walls little remained but 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 08 in ) thick intersecting laminae , the ridges between the pneumatic openings . The vertebrae of the tail , however , did have solid centra . The pelvic and pectoral girdle bones were very thin also , often only several millimetres thick . Like other sauropods , its limbs were robust , contrasting with the extremely lightweight construction of the rest of the skeleton . The limbs were not as specialised as the rest of the skeleton , and the front legs of Nigersaurus were about two @-@ thirds the length of the back legs , as in most diplodocoids . 
 = = = Skull = = = 
 The skull of Nigersaurus was delicate , with the four side fenestrae ( openings in the skull ) larger than in other sauropodomorphs . The total area of bone connecting the muzzle to the back of the skull was only 1 @.@ 0 cm2 ( 0 @.@ 16 sq in ) . These connecting struts of bones were usually less than 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 08 in ) thick . Despite this , the skull was resistant to the sustained shearing of the teeth . Another unique trait it had among sauropodomorphs was a closed supratemporal fenestra . The nasal openings , the bony nostrils , were elongated . Though the nasal bones are not completely known , it appears the front margin of the bony nostril was closer to the snout than in other diplodocoids . The snout was also proportionately shorter , and the tooth row was not at all <unk> , the snout tip not protruding relative to the remainder of the tooth series . The maxillary tooth row was in its entirety transversely rotated , its normal rear 90 ° everted towards the front . This was matched by an identical rotation of the dentary of the lower jaw . As a result , no other tetrapod had all of its teeth located as far to the front as Nigersaurus . 
 The slender teeth had slightly curved crowns , which were oval in cross @-@ section . The teeth in the lower jaw may have been 20 – 30 % smaller than those in the upper jaw , but few are known , and they are of uncertain maturity . Apart from this , the teeth were identical . Under each active tooth there was a column of nine replacement teeth within the jaw . With 68 columns in the upper jaws and 60 columns in the lower jaws , these so @-@ called dental batteries ( also present in hadrosaurs and ceratopsians ) comprised a total of more than 500 active and replacement teeth . Dental batteries erupted in unison , not each column individually . The enamel on the teeth of Nigersaurus was highly asymmetrical , ten times thicker on the outwards facing side than on the inner side . This condition is otherwise known only in advanced ornithischians . 
 Nigersaurus did not exhibit the same modifications seen in the jaws of other dinosaurs with dental batteries , or mammals with elaborate chewing functions . The lower jaw was S @-@ shaped and divided into the subcylindrical transverse ramus , which contained the teeth , and the back ramus , which was more lightweight and was the location for most of the muscle attachments . The jaws also contained several fenestrae , including three that are not present in other sauropods . The front ends of the jaws had grooves that indicate the presence of a keratinous sheath . Nigersaurus is the only known tetrapod animal to have had jaws wider than the skull and teeth that extended laterally across the front . The snout was even broader than those of the " duck @-@ billed " hadrosaurs . 
 = = History of discovery = = 
 Remains thought to belong to Nigersaurus were first discovered during a 1965 – 72 expedition to the Republic of Niger led by French paleontologist Philippe Taquet , and first mentioned in a paper published in 1976 . Although a common genus , the dinosaur had been poorly known until more material of other individuals was discovered during expeditions led by American palaeontologist Paul Sereno in 1997 and 2000 . The limited understanding of the genus was the result of poor preservation of its remains , which arises from the delicate and highly pneumatic construction of the skull and skeleton , in turn causing disarticulation of the fossils . Some of the skull fossils were so thin that a strong light beam was visible through them . Therefore , no intact skulls or articulated skeletons have been found , and these specimens represent the most complete known rebbachisaurid remains . 
 Nigersaurus was named and described in more detail by Sereno and colleagues only in 1999 , based on remains of newly found individuals . The same article also named <unk> , another sauropod from Niger . The genus name Nigersaurus ( " Niger reptile " ) is a reference to the country where it was discovered , and the specific name <unk> honours Taquet , who was the first to organise large @-@ scale palaeontological expeditions to Niger . The holotype specimen ( <unk> <unk> ) consists of a partial skull and neck . Limb material and a scapula found nearby were also referred to the same specimen . These fossils are housed at the National Museum of Niger . 
 Sereno and Jeffrey A. Wilson provided the first detailed description of the skull and feeding adaptations in 2005 . In 2007 , a more detailed description of the skeleton was published , based on a specimen discovered ten years earlier . The fossils , along with a reconstructed skeleton mount and a plastic model of the head and neck , were subsequently presented at the National Geographic Society in Washington . Nigersaurus was dubbed a " Mesozoic cow " in the press , and Sereno stressed that it was the most unusual dinosaur he had ever seen . He likened its physical appearance to Darth Vader and a vacuum cleaner , and compared its tooth shear with a conveyor belt and sharpened piano keys . 
 Teeth similar to those of Nigersaurus have been found on the Isle of Wight and in Brazil , but it is unknown whether they belonged to relatives of this taxon , or to titanosaurs , whose remains have been found in the vicinity . A lower jaw assigned to the titanosaur <unk> is likewise similar to that of Nigersaurus , but may have evolved convergently . 
 = = Classification = = 
 The remains of Nigersaurus were initially described in 1976 as belonging to a <unk> , but in 1999 Sereno 's team reclassified it as a rebbachisaurid diplodocoid . Rebbachisauridae is the basalmost family within the superfamily Diplodocoidea , which also contains the long @-@ necked diplodocids and the short @-@ necked dicraeosaurids . The subfamily Nigersaurinae , which includes Nigersaurus and closely related genera , was named by John A. Whitlock in 2011 . Below is a cladogram following an analysis by Federico Fanti and colleagues ( 2013 ) , which confirmed the placement of Nigersaurus as a basal <unk> rebbachisaurid . 
 The closely related genus <unk> from Spain was described in 2003 , and along with other animal groups that span the Cretaceous of Africa and Europe , this indicates that carbonate platforms connected these landmasses across the Tethys Sea . This was supported in 2013 by the description of the <unk> <unk> from Tunisia , which was more related to the European form than to Nigersaurus , despite being from Africa , then part of the supercontinent Gondwana . The discovery of these basal diplodocoids may indicate that short necks and small size were ancestral features of the group . <unk> of the rebbachisaurid skeleton evolved progressively , culminating in the <unk> . A 2015 cladistic study found <unk> itself to group with the <unk> , and the authors suggested that Nigersaurinae was therefore a junior synonym of <unk> . Nigersaurus was the basalmost member of this " Euro @-@ African " subclade . 
 = = Palaeobiology = = 
 Nigersaurus was suggested by Sereno and colleagues to be a ground @-@ level , non @-@ selective browser . The width of the muzzle and lateral orientation of the tooth row show that the sauropod could gather much food and crop it close to the ground , within one metre of the surface . This is further supported by facets on the labial ( externally facing ) side of the upper teeth , similar to Dicraeosaurus and Diplodocus , which are evidence that food or substrate wore the animal 's teeth as it fed . Nigersaurus also bears signs of low @-@ angle tooth @-@ to @-@ tooth wear on the inside of the maxillary crowns , which suggests that jaw movement was limited to precise up @-@ and @-@ down motions . Worn teeth from the lower jaw have not yet been discovered , but they are expected to show opposing tooth @-@ to @-@ tooth wear . The ability to raise their heads well above the ground does not necessarily mean they browsed on items there , and the short neck of Nigersaurus would have restricted the browsing range compared to other diplodocoids . 
 The adductor muscle of the jaw appears to have attached to the quadrate instead of the supratemporal fenestra . Both this and the other mastication muscles were likely weak , and Nigersaurus is estimated to have had one of the weakest bites of the sauropods . In addition , the small , nearly parallel nature of the tooth scratches and pits ( caused by grit , which would not be obtained as often by high @-@ browsers ) indicate that it ate relatively soft , herbaceous plants such as low @-@ growing ferns . Because of the lateral orientation of the teeth , it probably would not have been able to chew . Nigersaurus wore its tooth crowns down faster than other dinosaurian herbivores , and its tooth replacement rate was the highest of any known dinosaur . Each tooth was replaced once every 14 days ; the rate had previously been estimated lower . In contrast to Nigersaurus , sauropods with lower tooth replacement rates and broader tooth crowns are thought to have been canopy browsers . 
 Though it had large nostrils and a fleshy snout , Nigersaurus had an underdeveloped olfactory region of its brain and thus did not have an advanced sense of smell . Its brain @-@ to @-@ body @-@ mass ratio was average for a reptile , and smaller than those of ornithischians and non @-@ coelurosaurian theropods . The cerebrum comprised about 30 % of the brain volume , as in many other dinosaurs . 
 = = = Head posture = = = 
 On the basis of microtomography scans of skull elements of the holotype specimen , Sereno 's team created a " prototype " Nigersaurus skull they could examine . They also made an endocast of the brain and scanned the semicircular canals of its inner ear , which they found to be oriented horizontally . In their 2007 study , they stated that the structure of the occiput and cervical vertebrae would have limited the upward and downward movement of the neck and the rotation of the skull . Based on this biomechanical analysis , the team concluded that the head and muzzle were habitually oriented 67 ° downwards and close to ground level , as an adaptation for ground @-@ level browsing . This is unlike the way other sauropods have been restored , with their heads held more horizontally . 
 A 2009 study by Mike P. Taylor , Mathew Wedel , and Darren Naish agreed that Nigersaurus was able to feed with the downturned head and neck posture proposed by the 2007 study , but contested that this was the habitual posture of the animal . The study noted that the " neutral " head and neck posture of modern animals does not necessarily correspond to their habitual head posture . It further argued that the orientation of the semicircular canals varies significantly within modern species , and is therefore not reliable for determining head posture . This was supported by a 2013 study that suggested the methods used by Sereno 's team were imprecise , and that Nigersaurus habitually held its head like other sauropods . 
 = = Palaeoecology = = 
 Nigersaurus is known from the Elrhaz Formation of the <unk> Group in an area called <unk> , located in Niger . It is one of the most commonly found vertebrates in the formation . The Elrhaz Formation consists mainly of fluvial sandstones with low relief , much of which is obscured by sand dunes . The sediments are <unk> to medium @-@ grained , with almost no fine @-@ grained horizons . Nigersaurus lived in what is now Niger about 115 to 105 million years ago , during the Aptian and Albian ages of the mid @-@ Cretaceous . It likely lived in habitats dominated by inland floodplains ( a riparian zone ) . 
 After the iguanodontian <unk> , Nigersaurus was the most numerous <unk> . Other herbivores from the same formation include Ouranosaurus , <unk> , and an unnamed titanosaur . It also lived alongside the theropods <unk> , Suchomimus , and <unk> , and a yet @-@ unnamed noasaurid . <unk> like <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> also lived there . In addition , remains of a pterosaur , <unk> , fish , a <unk> shark , and freshwater bivalves have been found . Grass did not evolve until the late Cretaceous , making ferns , horsetails , and angiosperms ( which had evolved by the middle Cretaceous ) potential food for Nigersaurus . It is unlikely the dinosaur fed on conifers , cycads , or aquatic vegetation , due respectively to their height , hard and stiff structure , and lack of appropriate habitat . 
 = Simeon S. Willis = 
 Simeon Slavens Willis ( December 1 , 1879 – April 1 , 1965 ) was the 46th Governor of Kentucky , United States , serving from 1943 to 1947 . He was the only Republican elected governor of Kentucky between 1927 and 1967 . 
 Willis 's family came to Kentucky from Ohio about 1889 . After briefly working in the education and journalism fields , Willis read law with private tutors and was admitted to the bar in 1901 . He became interested in politics , but his early races for office were unsuccessful with the exception of his four @-@ year stint as city solicitor for Ashland , Kentucky . Finally in 1927 , newly elected governor Flem D. Sampson appointed Willis to the Kentucky Court of Appeals — then the court of last resort in the state . Willis went on to win a full four @-@ year term on the court in 1928 , and distinguished himself by revising Thornton on the Law of Oil and Gas , a six @-@ volume law reference . He was defeated for re @-@ election to his seat in 1932 and returned to his law practice . 
 After a decade out of politics , Willis was chosen without opposition as the Republican gubernatorial nominee in 1943 . Infighting among the state 's Democrats combined with Willis 's popular proposal to eliminate the state income tax carried him to a narrow victory over J. Lyter Donaldson . Willis was opposed by Democratic majorities in both houses of the Kentucky General Assembly . The end of World War II in 1945 brought sizable budget surpluses to the state , and disagreements over how to spend the excess funds spilled over into special legislative sessions . Willis was not able to realize his campaign promise of eliminating the state income tax because the legislature expanded the budget far beyond what he proposed . Nevertheless , he was able to forge a record of modest accomplishments , including constructing five tuberculosis hospitals across the state and significantly increasing funding for education . Following his term as governor , he served on various state boards and commissions , but failed in his only attempt to return to elective office — a 1952 campaign against Bert T. Combs to return to the Court of Appeals . Willis died on April 1 , 1965 , and is interred at Frankfort Cemetery in the capital city of Frankfort . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Simeon S. Willis was born in Lawrence County , Ohio , on December 1 , 1879 . He was the youngest of nine children born to John H. and Abigail ( Slavens ) Willis . During the Civil War , his grandfather William Willis was captain of Company C of the 5th West Virginia Infantry of the Union Army , and John H. Willis was a corporal in that company . Later , John Willis became a pioneer in the charcoal industry in Ohio . 
 Willis obtained his early education in the public schools of Lawrence County . About 1889 , his family moved to Springville ( now South Portsmouth ) in Greenup County , Kentucky . There , he attended the public schools , and took a teacher @-@ training course at a local private school . Before age 20 , he was selected principal of a three @-@ room grade school in Springville . 
 Willis also worked as a reporter for the Portsmouth Tribune and an editorial writer for the Greenup Gazette . He simultaneously read law with private tutors , including future congressman Joseph Bentley Bennett and William Corn , a professor at Ada University . He was admitted to the bar on November 11 , 1901 , and in January 1902 , he established a law practice in Ashland . Soon after , he joined Hager and Stewart , a prominent law firm in the area , where he remained for six years . Thereafter , he returned to his own practice . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Running as a Republican , Willis lost a bid to become city attorney of Ashland in 1905 . In 1916 , he ran for a seat on the Kentucky Court of Appeals , but lost in the primary to Flem D. Sampson , who went on to win the general election . He took a brief leave of politics and served as an appeals agent for the Selective Service System during World War I. In 1918 , he won the election for Ashland city solicitor and served in that position until 1922 . Beginning in 1922 , he served on the State Board of Bar Examiners , a position he held until 1928 . 
 Willis married Ida Lee Millis , a deputy county clerk , on April 14 , 1920 . The couple had one daughter , Sarah Leslie Willis , born on July 16 , 1922 . Ida Willis became the first executive director of the Kentucky Heritage Commission , and in 1979 , the Ida Lee Willis Memorial Foundation was created in her honor . 
 When Flem D. Sampson was elected governor in 1927 , he appointed Willis to fill his seat on the Kentucky Court of Appeals . In 1928 , Willis was elected to a full four @-@ year term representing the Court 's Seventh Appellate District . Holding a state @-@ level office increased his political stature , as did revising Thornton on the Law of Oil and Gas , a six @-@ volume law reference , during his time on the bench . His political image was not badly tarnished when he lost his seat on the court to Alex Ratliff during the Democratic surge that swept Franklin D. Roosevelt into the presidency in 1932 . Following this defeat , he returned to his private practice . 
 = = = Governor of Kentucky = = = 
 In 1943 , Willis was unopposed for the Republican gubernatorial nomination . The Democrats nominated J. Lyter Donaldson to oppose Willis in a contentious three @-@ way primary . Willis 's decade @-@ long absence from politics worked to his advantage , as he had few ties to the state 's established politicians and little in the way of a recent political track record that could be exploited by his opponent . Donaldson warned against changing the political party in power while World War II was still ongoing , but Willis countered that the soldiers must come home to a better state than the one they left , and that would not occur if the Democratic political machine were allowed to continue in power . He further proposed abolition of the state income tax , a proposal that was popular with voters , but was derided by the Democratic @-@ leaning Louisville Courier @-@ Journal as a " weird unreality " . 
 Willis won the general election by a vote of 279 @,@ 144 to 270 @,@ 525 . One factor influencing his victory was his ability to regain much of the black vote in urban centers such as Louisville , which had traditionally gone Republican but had in recent years swung Democratic . Further , factionalism in the Democratic party had hurt Donaldson . Though he enjoyed the support of sitting governor Keen Johnson , Donaldson garnered only lukewarm support from Johnson 's predecessor , Senator A. B. " Happy " Chandler . Willis was the only Republican elected governor of Kentucky in a 40 @-@ year period spanning from 1927 to 1967 . His victory in a traditionally Democratic state in an off @-@ year election brought him national attention , and he was considered as a candidate for vice @-@ president at the 1944 Republican National Convention . 
 Governor John W. Bricker of Ohio , who did become the Republican vice @-@ presidential nominee in 1944 , helped Willis in his race . Upon Willis ' victory , Bricker wired a friend to express jubilation , which turned out to have been unfounded : " Election showed definite trend in all areas against New Deal . I was not surprised at the outcome particularly in Kentucky because the thinking of the people of the Middle West is in line with results down there . It looks very much like a Republican victory next year . " 
 Willis faced the challenge of having Democratic majorities in both houses of the General Assembly and strong Democratic leadership in each . In the House , Democrats held a 56 – 44 majority , and Harry Lee Waterfield served as Speaker of the House . In the Senate , Democrats held a 23 – 15 majority , and the President Pro Tempore of the Senate was Earle C. Clements . Both Waterfield and Clements were preparing to make gubernatorial runs in 1947 . Willis did not make wholesale dismissals of Democrats in the state government , owing in part to shortages of experienced people during the war . This cost him some Republican support , and both his lieutenant governor and attorney general began to oppose him on many matters . However , his refusal to make wholesale dismissals may have been responsible the legislature not stripping the bulk of his gubernatorial powers as it had done to Flem D. Sampson , the last Republican governor . 
 During Willis 's term , state revenue increased because of to wartime inflation , increased federal money , and the relative prosperity of the state 's economy . The state budget was $ 31 million when Willis took office ; by the time he left office , it had expanded to $ 52 million . Much of these funds were devoted to education . Expenditures per pupil nearly doubled , as did teacher salaries . The school year was lengthened from seven to eight months . Counties were also allowed to double their school tax rate . He created a Commission on Negro Affairs , appointed the first African @-@ American to the state Board of Education , and increased state aid to pay out @-@ of @-@ state tuition to minorities who had been denied admission to professional programs in the state universities . 
 In the 1944 legislative session , the rival parties fought to a stalemate over the budget . The primary issue was deciding who would control the state 's sizable budget surplus — the legislature or the governor . In an effort to unify the two sides , Willis backed off his call for a repeal of the income tax ; another legislator proposed the repeal anyway , but it was defeated . Two months after the end of the session , Willis called a special session to reconcile the educational items in the budget . Once in session , legislators approved a full budget . The vote to accept the budget was deemed invalid , however , because approving a full budget was not part of Willis 's initial call for a special session . In response , Willis called a second special session , and the Assembly passed a full budget on June 16 , 1944 . 
 Willis renewed his call for an income tax repeal in the 1946 legislative session , but Democrats opposed the repeal and Republicans were split on the issue . The proposal failed by a vote of 36 – 60 . Accomplishments of the session included better mine safety laws and stronger concealed weapons laws , and increased funding for black education . The war 's end had brought additional revenue sources , and even with an expanded budget , the state experienced an $ 18 million surplus by the end of Willis 's term . 
 Other accomplishments of Willis 's administration included eliminating tolls on twelve of the state 's thirteen major bridges and expanding programs for dependent children and the elderly . Construction of five state tuberculosis hospitals — at London , Madisonville , Paris , Ashland , and Glasgow — was initiated and nearly 80 percent completed by the end of his term . Republicans were unable to capitalize on Willis 's accomplishments as governor , however . In the 1947 gubernatorial election , the party fragmented over their choice of gubernatorial nominee , and Democrat Earle C. Clements was elected governor . 
 = = = Later political career = = = 
 Following his term as governor , Willis returned to his private practice in Ashland . In 1952 , he failed in his bid to return to the Court of Appeals , having lost to future Governor Bert T. Combs . From 1956 to 1960 , he served as a member of the Kentucky Public Service Commission . In 1958 , he received a citation for outstanding service to the state bar . In 1961 , he was appointed to the review board authorized by the Veterans ' Bonus Act . Also in 1961 , he was appointed to the State Parole Board , a position he held until 1965 . 
 Willis died on April 2 , 1965 , and is buried at the Frankfort Cemetery in the state capital . The Simeon Willis Memorial Bridge over the Ohio River in Ashland is named in his honor . 
 = Server Sundaram = 
 Server Sundaram is a 1964 Indian Tamil @-@ language comedy @-@ drama film directed by Krishnan @-@ Panju and produced by A. V. Meiyappan . The film stars Nagesh as the title character . R. Muthuraman and K. R. Vijaya play the other lead roles while S. N. Lakshmi and Major Sundarrajan play supporting roles . The story focuses on the life of a hotel waiter and how he strives to reach greater heights after he becomes an actor to attain the love of his restaurateur 's daughter . 
 The film was adapted from a play of the same name written by K. Balachander , with the play also featuring Nagesh himself in the title role along with Major Sundarrajan and S. N. Lakshmi who reprised their roles in the film . Balachander also wrote the screenplay and dialogues for the film . Viswanathan – Ramamoorthy composed the film 's soundtrack and background music , while Kannadasan and Vaali wrote the lyrics for the soundtrack 's songs . 
 Released on 11 December 1964 , Server Sundaram earned positive critical feedback and went on to become a commercial success . At the 12th National Film Awards , it won the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Tamil under the Certificate of Merit category , and the Filmfare Award for Best Tamil Film . 
 Server Sundaram earned Nagesh and Balachander their breakthrough in Tamil cinema and led to many successful collaborations between the two . It became the first Tamil film to show numerous behind @-@ the @-@ scenes looks at various processes involved in film @-@ making such as the studio interiors and song recording . It was remade into Hindi as Main Sunder Hoon ( 1971 ) with Mehmood Ali and Kannada as Server <unk> ( 1993 ) with <unk> . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Sundaram ( Nagesh ) , a poor man , comes to Madras with aspirations of becoming a film actor . However , he ends up getting a job in a restaurant called Greenlands Hotel as a waiter . While catering for a group of people who go on an excursion to Mahabalipuram , he meets Radha ( K. R. Vijaya ) , the daughter of his restaurateur , Chakravarthy ( Major Sundarrajan ) . He misinterprets her friendly nature as love and falls in love with her . In the meantime , Sundaram happens to meet his friend Raghavan ( R. Muthuraman ) , an influential businessman , in the restaurant . During their subsequent meetings , Sundaram tells Raghavan about his ambition to become an actor as well as about his love for Radha , without mentioning her name . Raghavan genuinely believes that the girl reciprocates Sundaram 's feelings and motivates Sundaram to express his love . 
 When Raghavan is about to leave his house for a marriage proposal , Sundaram comes there and describes the girl he was talking about to Raghavan . Raghavan realises that Radha , whom he intends to marry , is the same girl Sundaram is in love with . Raghavan , believing that Radha loves Sundaram , decides to help Sundaram attain his love and get a chance to act in films , which he does successfully . Sundaram becomes a star after his debut film <unk> <unk> ( English : Innocent Husband ) becomes a success and believes that his stardom and popularity will help him in attaining his love . When Radha comes to Sundaram 's house to congratulate him , he introduces her to Raghavan , who is present at that time . As Sundaram goes to prepare snacks for the two , Radha asks Raghavan why he did not show up for the marriage proposal . Raghavan states that he thought Radha loved Sundaram . Shocked , Radha informs Raghavan that she likes Sundaram for his innocence , although she does not love him . Raghavan is pleasantly surprised , but to ensure that Sundaram 's film career does not suffer from discovering the truth , he asks Radha to keep it a secret . 
 Sundaram 's mother ( S. N. Lakshmi ) is pleased with her son 's popularity but misses his presence due to Sundaram 's busy acting career . She expresses to Sundaram her desire that she should die in his arms . When Raghavan believes that Sundaram will gradually forget Radha so that he and Radha can get married , he discovers that Sundaram 's love for Radha has grown stronger . Raghavan then informs Radha that she should marry Sundaram , as Raghavan does not want to backstab his friend . Radha instead decides to personally express her feelings to Sundaram . When Sundaram expresses his love to Radha , she tells him that she never imagined that he would assume her friendly affection towards him as love and that Raghavan is her fiancé . Sundaram , shattered on losing his love , is also happy on hearing that Raghavan would marry her and congratulates Raghavan . 
 While Sundaram is busy shooting for the climax scene of a film , his mother falls down the footsteps of her home and is badly wounded . Sundaram 's manager , Manickam ( S. Ramarao ) tries to convey the news to Sundaram , but is blocked by the studio authorities who inform him that the director has instructed them not to allow anyone into the studio . After finishing his shot , Sundaram hears of the news about his mother and rushes home to learn that she is dead . At last realising the happiness he enjoyed as a waiter , Sundaram dons his hotel uniform again . He explains to Raghavan that the waiter ’ s job is permanent , while the actor 's was only temporary . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Male actors 
 Nagesh as Sundaram , a hotel waiter @-@ turned actor 
 R. Muthuraman as Raghavan , Sundaram 's friend 
 S. Ramarao as Manickam 
 S. V. Ranga Rao ( Guest appearance ) 
 Major Sundarrajan as Chakravarthy , the hotel owner 
 T. M. Soundararajan ( Guest appearance in the song " Avalukenna " ) 
 Female actors 
 K. R. Vijaya as Radha , Chakravarthy 's daughter 
 S. N. Lakshmi as Sundaram 's mother 
 Manorama ( Guest appearance ) 
 = = Production = = 
 Server Sundaram was based on a 1960s comedy @-@ drama play of the same name that was written by K. Balachander , then a playwright . Balachander stated that he wrote the story of Server Sundaram for Nagesh after watching his performance in <unk> Oru Penn ( 1963 ) . Director duo Krishnan @-@ Panju had earlier made <unk> ( 1949 ) , which featured comedian N. S. Krishnan in the lead role , and wanted to make another film with a comedian as the protagonist . Hence they chose Nagesh for the job by informing him of their wish while travelling with the actor from Salem to Tiruppur . After returning from Tiruppur , Krishnan @-@ Panju and Nagesh met Balachander and the trio asked Balachander to write a stage play for Nagesh . Balachander agreed . Krishnan @-@ Panju also offered to produce a film adaptation of the play if it became a success . 
 The play had Nagesh himself in the title role , along with Major Sundarrajan and S. N. Lakshmi who reprised their roles in the film . Balachander recalled in 2009 that when he wrote Server Sundaram with Nagesh in mind , he suffered anxious moments : " I was convinced of the story , but there was a risk in promoting Nagesh , but I pulled it off " . 
 A. V. Meiyappan acquired the rights to the play and also shared Krishnan @-@ Panju 's wish to make a film based on it . Balachander was recruited as the film 's screenplay and dialogue writer . Krishnan @-@ Panju directed the film , although Balachander had shown a keen interest in directing it himself . Meiyappan accepted the inclusion of Nagesh in the film after watching the latter 's performance in the play . Nagesh , who in turn was impressed with S. N. Lakshmi 's performance in the play , asked Balachander to have Meiyappan include her in the film . K. R. Vijaya was cast as Sundaram 's love interest Radha , and R. Muthuraman was cast as his friend Raghavan . Singer T. M. Soundararajan made a guest appearance in the song " <unk> " , as did poet Vaali 's wife Ramani <unk> . 
 Server Sundaram was the first Tamil film to show numerous behind @-@ the @-@ scenes looks at the various processes involved in film @-@ making such as the studio interiors , song recording , horse riding scenes and rain scenes . It was also notable for not featuring an antagonist . In one sequence , S. V. Ranga Rao and Manorama are seen as actors performing a scene for a film , using the concept of film within a film . The bond between mother and son , which according to historian S. Theodore Baskaran was " a persistent theme in Tamil cinema " , was shown in the film . He also compared it to City Lights ( 1931 ) because in both films , a poor man " pin [ s ] for the attention of the woman he fancies " . Server Sundaram was also considered a biography of Nagesh 's own life . Nagesh was not convinced about having " <unk> " immediately after the film 's intermission . Krishnan @-@ Panju insisted and shot the song . Nagesh did not co @-@ operate much during the song 's filming . However , after seeing the positive feedback the song received , Nagesh admitted his mistake to Krishnan @-@ Panju . Panju edited the film under the pseudonym " Panjabi " , with R. Vittal as co @-@ editor . Server Sundaram was publicised with a still of Nagesh holding many cups and saucers , but the film initially had no such scene . After Meiyappan finished watching the final cut , upon his request it was added to the film . The final length of the film was 4 @,@ 535 m ( 14 @,@ 879 ft ) . 
 = = Music = = 
 The film 's soundtrack was composed by the duo Viswanathan – Ramamoorthy , with lyrics written by Kannadasan and Vaali . The soundtrack was released under the label of Saregama . 
 Philips , an autodidact guitarist , performed the guitar portions for " Avalukkenna " . The music troupe for the song consisted of Noel Grant ( drums ) , <unk> ( accordion ) , <unk> ( flute ) , Fobes ( violin ) , Henry Daniel and Joseph Krishna . Violinist T. Samuel Joseph , popularly known as Shyam , also took part in the recording of the song . Balan , a member of the troupe , claims that Viswanathan came up with the tune for " Avalukenna " in ten minutes , while Anand Venkateswaran of The Wire believes that Viswanathan set the song to tune in 15 minutes , and it took T. M. Soundararajan the rest of the day to record it . According to Gopal Krishnan , in his book , Chords & <unk> , " Avalukkenna " involved a " complicated arrangement of mambo and bossa nova . " <unk> was not convinced about whether " Avalukkenna " should be shot with Nagesh , feeling that the audience would not sit and watch a comedian singing . The producers took it as a challenge and came up with the idea of showing how a song is recorded and shot with " Avalukkenna " being played in the backdrop . Krishnan @-@ Panju liked the idea and made use of it . Soundararajan admitted his mistake after the film 's release and seeing the impact the song created . Live versions of " Avalukenna " have been performed by various Indian singers including Karthik , Haricharan , Shweta Mohan and Rahul Nambiar . The song " <unk> " from Kabali ( 2016 ) was described by India Today as being reminiscent of " Avalukkenna " . 
 The soundtrack received positive reviews , with " Avalukkenna " being particularly well received . Pradeep Madhavan of The Hindu states that " Avalukkenna " brought out Nagesh 's dancing potential onscreen . A reviewer from Radio Mirchi wrote that " Avalukkenna " provided a new concept to Tamil cinema in terms of lyrics , music and dance . Balachander commented on that song , " Songs like ' Avalukkenna .. [ ... ] Listen to them today , and they will seem so fresh and amazing . [ Viswanathan 's ] music is the kind that will challenge directors to come up with impressive visualisation . " Baradwaj Rangan , writing for The Hindu , said , " Listen to the lazy drawl with which certain words taper off in ‘ Avalukkenna , ’ an antidote to the rock ‘ n ’ roll bounce in the rest of the song . " <unk> <unk> <unk> " was later included in Old is Gold , an album compiling hit songs from films featuring Muthuraman , and was rated by The Times of India as one of the album 's " hot picks " . 
 Tracklist 
 = = Release = = 
 Server Sundaram was released on 11 December 1964 . The film became commercial success and completed a theatrical run of 100 days . It was also dubbed in Telugu under the same title . Server Sundaram was remade in Hindi as Main Sunder Hoon ( 1971 ) with Mehmood Ali , and in Kannada as Server <unk> ( 1993 ) with <unk> . 
 On 18 April 2010 , the film was screened at the South Indian Film Chamber Theatre for the Dignity Film Festival held in Chennai ; other films also screened included Madhumati ( 1958 ) , Kadhalikka Neramillai , Anbe Vaa ( 1966 ) and Thillana Mohanambal ( 1968 ) . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received critical acclaim , with positive comments directed mainly at Nagesh 's performance as Sundaram and Balachander 's screenplay and dialogues . S. Theodore Baskaran , Ashish Rajadhyaksha and Paul Willemen , and Baradwaj Rangan noted similarities between Nagesh and Charlie Chaplin . 
 Tamil magazine Ananda Vikatan , in its original review of the film dated 20 December 1964 , mentioned that the highlight of the film was Nagesh 's acting and the film gave the experience of conversing and enjoying with friends in a car journey without living much impact . Tamil Canadian journalist D. B. S. Jeyaraj stated that Nagesh " played the " server " ( waiter ) role to perfection " , that the film gave him " another dimension as an actor who could evoke tears from the audience through his emotional performance " and that Server Sundaram was one film in which he " provided stellar displays of his histrionic talents " . 
 On the scene where Nagesh auditions in front of the film producers introduced to him by Muthuraman , Baradwaj Rangan , writing for The New Indian Express , said , " Audiences that grew up with Nagesh will cotton on to the slyness of this apparently ungrateful gesture as the most identifiably Nagesh @-@ like among everything that 's transpired during these five minutes of Server Sundaram " , whilst also stating the actor 's comedy potential to be " his great arsenal " . In 2014 , at the fiftieth @-@ year celebrations of the film , Pradeep Madhavan of The Hindu called the film a " trendsetter " in Tamil cinema for showcasing scenes involved in filmmaking and believed that Nagesh " lived the role of Sundaram " . In its review of the film 's DVD , The Times of India gave a rating of 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 , calling it a " tour de force for Nagesh fans " and a " classic in every sense " . Film music historian <unk> stated , " Nagesh could effortlessly bring pathos into play as in [ ... ] Server Sundaram . This was possible because of his poignant real life experiences . " He also noted that despite Manorama 's role being a cameo , she held " her own in the presence of the talented Nagesh and S V Ranga Rao . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Server Sundaram attained cult status in Tamil cinema , and is believed by many critics to be Nagesh 's breakthrough role as an actor and Balachander 's first success in Tamil cinema . Actor Kamal Haasan compared his 2015 film <unk> Villain ( which also starred Balachander ) to Server Sundaram , finding it to be " both emotional and humorous " like the latter . The success of Server Sundaram led to many collaborations between Nagesh and Balachander , notable of which include <unk> ( 1965 ) , Major Chandrakanth ( 1966 ) , <unk> <unk> ( 1968 ) and Apoorva Raagangal ( 1975 ) . Film historian Mohan V. Raman noted , " By casting [ Nagesh ] in Server Sundaram , ... [ Balachander ] made the comedian a serious actor . " The film also became noted for introducing the anti @-@ hero to Tamil cinema as well as the style of delivering short and fast @-@ paced dialogues . A dialogue spoken by Nagesh 's character , " Long , long ago ... so long ago , nobody knows how long ago " became popular . Balachander mentions the dialogue in <unk> Villain as a build @-@ up to the film his character directs . Actor <unk> worked in several hotels and restaurants as a cleaner and server before making his debut as the lead actor with <unk> Kuthirai ( 2011 ) which won him the National Film Award for Best Supporting Actor ; Kumar <unk> of Daily News and Analysis compared this to the plot of Server Sundaram . Bharatiya Janata Party member L. Ganesan considered Server Sundaram to be an example " of good Tamil cinema globally . " Following Nagesh 's death in 2009 , Sify ranked Server Sundaram fourth in its list , " 10 Best Films of late Nagesh " , commenting , " A hotel waiter becomes a superstar and the transformation is shown brilliantly by the actor . " Sri Lankan historian Sachi Sri Kantha included Server Sundaram in his list compiling " the ten landmark Tamil movies , spanning all genres , which delighted the multitude of fans immensely " . 
 Director Radha Mohan expressed a desire to remake the film but decided against it : " If there is one film I want to remake , [ Server Sundaram ] will be the one , but I know I will not , because I believe classics should be left alone . " Director and choreographer Prabhu Deva ranked Server Sundaram among his favourite films . A restaurant named " Hotel Server Sundaram " is located in the <unk> area of Chennai . In December 2014 , G. Babu Jayakumar of The New Indian Express included the film in his list of Balachander 's noted films . Clips from Server Sundaram were screened along with clips from other films such as Iru <unk> ( 1969 ) , <unk> ( 1973 ) , Aval Oru Thodar Kathai ( 1974 ) , Avargal ( 1977 ) and <unk> ( 1991 ) at a function held in Balachander 's honour at Tiruchirappalli in January 2015 , a month after his death . Server Sundaram is also used as the title of an upcoming film starring Santhanam and Nagesh 's grandson <unk> , with its producer Selva having bought the title rights from AVM Productions . On why that title was chosen , Selva said , " Santhanam plays a chef in the film and we felt that Server Sundaram , in which Nagesh played the role of a server , would be apt for this film , too . It is amazing how well the title suited the concept of our film , which is why we went right ahead with our decision . " S. <unk> , writing for Daily News Sri Lanka , noted , " In [ Server ] Sundaram , [ Nagesh ] showed that after having gained the social status one shouldn 't forget one 's past . " 
 = Triceratops = 
 Triceratops is a genus of herbivorous ceratopsid dinosaur that first appeared during the late Maastrichtian stage of the late Cretaceous period , about 68 million years ago ( mya ) in what is now North America . It is one of the last known non @-@ avian dinosaur genera , and became extinct in the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event 66 million years ago . The term Triceratops , which literally means " three @-@ horned face " , is derived from the Greek <unk> ( tri- ) meaning " three " , κέρας ( kéras ) meaning " horn " , and <unk> ( ops ) meaning " face " . 
 Bearing a large bony frill and three horns on its large four @-@ legged body , and possessing similarities with the modern rhinoceros , Triceratops is one of the most recognizable of all dinosaurs and the best known ceratopsid . It shared the landscape with and was probably preyed upon by Tyrannosaurus , though it is less certain that the two did battle in the manner often depicted in traditional museum displays and popular images . 
 The exact placement of the Triceratops genus within the ceratopsid group has been debated by paleontologists . Two species , T. horridus and T. prorsus , are considered valid , although many other species have been named . Research published in 2010 suggested that the contemporaneous Torosaurus , a ceratopsid long regarded as a separate genus , represents Triceratops in its mature form . The view was immediately disputed and examination of more fossil evidence is expected to settle the debate . 
 Triceratops has been documented by numerous remains collected since the genus was first described in 1889 , including at least one complete individual skeleton . Paleontologist John Scannella observed : " It is hard to walk out into the Hell Creek Formation and not stumble upon a Triceratops weathering out of a hillside . " Forty @-@ seven complete or partial skulls were discovered in just that area from 2000 to 2010 . Specimens representing life stages from hatchling to adult have been found . 
 The functions of the frills and three distinctive facial horns on its head have long inspired debate . Traditionally , these have been viewed as defensive weapons against predators . More recent theories , noting the presence of blood vessels in the skull bones of ceratopsids , find it more probable that these features were primarily used in identification , courtship and dominance displays , much like the antlers and horns of modern reindeer , mountain goats , or rhinoceros beetles . The theory would find additional support if Torosaurus was found to be the mature form of Triceratops , as this would mean the frill also developed holes ( fenestrae ) as individuals reached maturity , rendering the structure more useful for display than defense . 
 = = Description = = 
 Individual Triceratops are estimated to have reached about 7 @.@ 9 to 9 @.@ 0 m ( 25 @.@ 9 – 29 @.@ 5 ft ) in length , 2 @.@ 9 to 3 @.@ 0 m ( 9 @.@ 5 to 9 @.@ 8 ft ) in height , and 6 @.@ 1 – 12 @.@ 0 tonnes ( 13 @,@ 000 – 26 @,@ 000 lb ) in weight . The most distinctive feature is their large skull , among the largest of all land animals . The largest known skull ( specimen MWC <unk> , formerly BYU <unk> ) is estimated to have been 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) in length when complete , and could reach almost a third of the length of the entire animal . It bore a single horn on the snout , above the nostrils , and a pair of horns approximately 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) long , with one above each eye . In 2010 , paleontologists revealed a fossil ( named " Yoshi 's <unk> , " MOR <unk> ) with 115 @-@ centimetre @-@ long ( 3 @.@ 77 ft ) horn cores , housed and displayed at the Museum of the Rockies in Montana . To the rear of the skull was a relatively short , bony frill , adorned with epoccipitals in some specimens . Most other ceratopsids had large fenestrae in their frills , while those of Triceratops were noticeably solid . T. horridus can be distinguished from T. prorsus by having a shallower snout . 
 Triceratops species possessed a sturdy build , with strong limbs , short hands with three hooves each , and short feet with four hooves each . Although certainly quadrupedal , the posture of these dinosaurs has long been the subject of some debate . Originally , it was believed that the front legs of the animal had to be sprawling at angles from the thorax in order to better bear the weight of the head . This stance can be seen in paintings by Charles Knight and Rudolph Zallinger . <unk> evidence in the form of trackways from horned dinosaurs and recent reconstructions of skeletons ( both physical and digital ) seem to show that Triceratops and other ceratopsids maintained an upright stance during normal locomotion , with the elbows flexed and slightly bowed out , in an intermediate state between fully upright and fully sprawling ( as in the modern rhinoceros ) . 
 The hands and forearms of Triceratops retained a fairly primitive structure compared to other quadrupedal dinosaurs such as thyreophorans and many sauropods . In those two groups , the forelimbs of quadrupedal species were usually rotated so that the hands faced forward with palms backward ( " pronated " ) as the animals walked . Triceratops , like other ceratopsians and the related quadrupedal ornithopods , walked with most of their fingers pointing out and away from the body , the primitive condition for dinosaurs also retained by bipedal forms like the theropods . In Triceratops , the weight of the body was carried by only the first three fingers of the hand , while digits 4 and 5 were vestigial and lacked claws or hooves . The phalangeal formula is 2 @-@ 3 @-@ 4 @-@ 3 @-@ 1 , meaning that the innermost finger of the forelimb has two bones , the next has three , etc . 
 = = Discovery and identification = = 
 The first named specimen now attributed to Triceratops is a pair of brow horns attached to a skull roof , found near Denver , Colorado in the spring of 1887 . This specimen was sent to Othniel Charles Marsh , who believed that the formation from which it came dated from the Pliocene , and that the bones belonged to a particularly large and unusual bison , which he named Bison alticornis . He realized that there were horned dinosaurs by the next year , which saw his publication of the genus Ceratops from fragmentary remains , but he still believed B. alticornis to be a Pliocene mammal . It took a third and much more complete skull to change his mind . The specimen , collected in 1888 by John Bell Hatcher from the Lance Formation of Wyoming , was initially described as another species of Ceratops . After reflection , Marsh changed his mind and gave it the generic name Triceratops , accepting his Bison alticornis as another species of Ceratops ( it would later be added to Triceratops ) . The sturdy nature of the animal 's skull has ensured that many examples have been preserved as fossils , allowing variations between species and individuals to be studied . Triceratops remains have subsequently been found in the American states of Montana and South Dakota ( in addition to Colorado and Wyoming ) , and in the provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta , Canada . 
 An earlier specimen , also recovered from the Lance Formation , was named Agathaumas sylvestris by Edward Drinker Cope in 1872 . Originally identified as a hadrosaur , this specimen consists only of post @-@ cranial remains and is only provisionally considered an example of Triceratops . 
 = = = Species = = = 
 Within the first decades after Triceratops was described , various skulls were collected , which varied to a lesser or greater degree from the original Triceratops , named T. horridus by Marsh ( from the Latin horridus ; " rough , rugose " , suggesting the roughened texture of those bones belonging to the type specimen , later identified as an aged individual ) . This variation is unsurprising , given that Triceratops skulls are large three @-@ dimensional objects , coming from individuals of different ages and both sexes , and which were subjected to different amounts and directions of pressure during fossilization . Discoverers would name these as separate species ( listed below ) , and came up with several phylogenetic schemes for how they were related to each other . 
 In the first attempt to understand the many species , Lull found two groups , although he did not say how he distinguished them : one composed of T. horridus , T. prorsus , and T. brevicornus ; the other of T. elatus and T. calicornis . Two species ( T. serratus and T. <unk> ) stood apart from these groups . By 1933 , and his revision of the landmark 1907 Hatcher @-@ Marsh @-@ Lull monograph of all known ceratopsians , he retained his two groups and two unaffiliated species , with a third lineage of T. obtusus and T. hatcheri that was characterized by a very small nasal horn . T. horridus @-@ T. prorsus @-@ T. brevicornus was now thought to be the most conservative lineage , with an increase in skull size and a decrease in nasal horn size , and T. elatus @-@ T. calicornis was defined by large brow horns and small nasal horn . C. M. Sternberg made one modification , adding T. <unk> and suggesting that it linked the second and third lineages closer together than they were to the T. horridus lineage . This pattern was followed until the major studies of the 1980s and 1990s . 
 With time , the idea that the differing skulls might be representative of individual variation within one ( or two ) species gained popularity . In 1986 , Ostrom and Wellnhofer published a paper in which they proposed that there was only one species , Triceratops horridus . Part of their rationale was that generally there are only one or two species of any large animal in a region ( modern examples being the elephant and the giraffe in modern Africa ) . To their findings , Lehman added the old Lull @-@ Sternberg lineages combined with maturity and sexual dimorphism , suggesting that the T. horridus @-@ T. prorsus @-@ T. brevicornus lineage was composed of females , the <unk> @-@ <unk> lineage was made up of males , and the T. obtusus @-@ T. hatcheri lineage was of pathologic old males . His reasoning was that males had taller , more erect horns and larger skulls , and females had smaller skulls with shorter , forward @-@ facing horns . 
 These findings were contested a few years later by Catherine Forster , who reanalyzed Triceratops material more comprehensively and concluded that the remains fell into two species , T. horridus and T. prorsus , although the distinctive skull of T. ( " Nedoceratops " ) hatcheri differed enough to warrant a separate genus . She found that T. horridus and several other species belonged together , and T. prorsus and T. brevicornus stood alone , and since there were many more specimens in the first group , she suggested that this meant the two groups were two species . It is still possible to interpret the differences as representing a single species with sexual dimorphism . 
 In 2009 , John Scannella and Denver Fowler supported the separation of T. prorsus and T. horridus , and noted that the two species are also separated stratigraphically within the Hell Creek Formation , indicating that they did not live together at the same time . 
 = = = = Valid species = = = = 
 T. horridus ( Marsh , 1889 ) ( originally Ceratops ) ( type species ) 
 T. prorsus ( Marsh , 1890 ) 
 = = = = Synonyms and doubtful species = = = = 
 The following species are considered nomina dubia ( " dubious names " ) , and are based on remains that are too poor or incomplete to be distinguished from pre @-@ existing Triceratops species . 
 T. albertensis ( C. M. Sternberg , 1949 ) 
 T. alticornis ( Marsh , 1887 [ originally Bison ] ) 
 T. brevicornus ( Hatcher , 1905 ) ( = T. prorsus ) 
 T. calicornis ( Marsh , 1898 ) ( = T. horridus ) 
 T. elatus ( Marsh , 1891 ) ( = T. horridus ) 
 T. <unk> ( Schlaikjer , 1935 ) 
 T. <unk> ( Marsh , 1889 ) ( = T. horridus ) 
 T. galeus ( Marsh , 1889 ) 
 T. hatcheri ( Lull , 1907 ) ( contentious ; see Nedoceratops below ) 
 T. ingens ( Lull , 1915 ) 
 T. maximus ( Brown , 1933 ) 
 T. <unk> ( Cope , 1874 ) ( nomen dubium ; originally Polyonax <unk> ) 
 T. obtusus ( Marsh , 1898 ) ( = T. horridus ) 
 T. serratus ( Marsh , 1890 ) ( = T. horridus ) 
 T. sulcatus ( Marsh , 1890 ) 
 T. sylvestris ( Cope , 1872 ) ( nomen dubium ; originally Agathaumas sylvestris ) 
 = = Classification = = 
 Triceratops is the best known genus of the Ceratopsidae , a family of large North American horned dinosaurs . The exact location of Triceratops among the ceratopsians has been debated over the years . Confusion stemmed mainly from the combination of short , solid frills ( similar to that of Centrosaurinae ) , and the long brow horns ( more akin to Ceratopsinae , also known as Chasmosaurinae ) . In the first overview of horned dinosaurs , R. S. Lull hypothesized two lineages , one of Monoclonius and Centrosaurus leading to Triceratops , the other with Ceratops and Torosaurus , making Triceratops a centrosaurine as the group is understood today . Later revisions supported this view , formally describing the first , short @-@ frilled group as Centrosaurinae ( including Triceratops ) , and the second , long @-@ frilled group as Chasmosaurinae . 
 In 1949 , C. M. Sternberg was the first to question this and favoured instead that Triceratops was more closely related to Arrhinoceratops and Chasmosaurus based on skull and horn features , making Triceratops a ceratopsine ( chasmosaurine of his usage ) genus . He was largely ignored , with John Ostrom , and later David Norman both placing Triceratops within Centrosaurinae . 
 Subsequent discoveries and analyses upheld Sternberg 's view on the position of Triceratops , with Lehman defining both subfamilies in 1990 and diagnosing Triceratops as ceratopsine ( chasmosaurine of his usage ) on the basis of several morphological features . In fact , it fits well into the ceratopsine subfamily , apart from its one feature of a shortened frill . Further research by Peter Dodson , including a 1990 cladistic analysis and a 1993 study using <unk> ( resistant @-@ fit theta @-@ rho analysis ) , a morphometric technique which systematically measures similarities in skull shape , reinforces Triceratops ' placement in the ceratopsine subfamily . 
 The below cladogram follows Longrich ( 2015 ) , who named a new species of Pentaceratops , and included nearly all species of chasmosaurine . 
 For many years after its discovery , the evolutionary origins of Triceratops remained largely obscure . In 1922 , the newly discovered Protoceratops was seen as its ancestor by Henry Fairfield Osborn , but many decades passed before additional findings came to light . Recent years have been fruitful for the discovery of several dinosaurs related to ancestors of Triceratops . Zuniceratops , the earliest known ceratopsian with brow horns , was described in the late 1990s , and Yinlong , the first known Jurassic ceratopsian , in 2005 . 
 These new finds have been vital in illustrating the origins of horned dinosaurs in general , suggesting an Asian origin in the Jurassic , and the appearance of truly horned ceratopsians by the beginning of the late Cretaceous in North America . As Triceratops is increasingly shown to be a member of the long @-@ frilled Ceratopsinae subfamily , a likely ancestor may have resembled Chasmosaurus , which thrived some 5 million years earlier . 
 In phylogenetic taxonomy , the genus Triceratops has been used as a reference point in the definition of Dinosauria ; dinosaurs have been designated as all descendants of the most recent common ancestor of Triceratops and Neornithes ( i.e. modern birds ) . Furthermore , the bird @-@ hipped dinosaurs , Ornithischia , have all been designated dinosaurs with a more recent common ancestor to Triceratops than modern birds . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 Although Triceratops are commonly portrayed as herding animals , there is currently little evidence that they lived in herds . While several other genera of horned dinosaurs are known from bonebeds preserving bones from two to hundreds or thousands of individuals , to date there is only one documented bonebed dominated by Triceratops bones : a site in southeastern Montana with the remains of three juveniles . It may be significant that only juveniles were present . Another , more recent find may reveal that Triceratops lived in small family groups . In 2012 , a group of three Triceratops in relatively complete condition , each of varying sizes from a full @-@ grown adult to a small juvenile , were found in Wyoming , near Newcastle . The remains are currently under excavation by paleontologist Peter Larson and a team from the Black Hills Institute . It is believed that the animals were traveling as a family unit , but it remains unknown if the group consists of a mated pair and their offspring , or two females and a juvenile they were caring for . The remains also show signs of predation or scavenging from Tyrannosaurus , particularly on the largest specimen , with the bones of the front limbs showing breakage and puncture wounds from Tyrannosaurus teeth . 
 For many years , Triceratops finds were known only from solitary individuals . These remains are very common ; for example , Bruce Erickson , a paleontologist of the Science Museum of Minnesota , has reported having seen 200 specimens of T. prorsus in the Hell Creek Formation of Montana . Similarly , Barnum Brown claimed to have seen over 500 skulls in the field . Because Triceratops teeth , horn fragments , frill fragments , and other skull fragments are such abundant fossils in the Lancian faunal stage of the late Maastrichtian ( late Cretaceous , 66 mya ) Period of western North America , it is regarded as among the dominant herbivores of the time , if not the most dominant herbivore . In 1986 , Robert Bakker estimated it as making up 5 / <unk> of the large dinosaur fauna at the end of the Cretaceous . Unlike most animals , skull fossils are far more common than postcranial bones for Triceratops , suggesting that the skull had an unusually high preservation potential . 
 Triceratops was one of the last ceratopsian genera to appear before the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event . The related Torosaurus , and the more distantly related diminutive Leptoceratops , were also present , though their remains have been rarely encountered . 
