 = = = Dentition and diet = = = 
 Triceratops were herbivorous , and because of their low head , their primary food was probably low growth , although they may have been able to knock down taller plants with their horns , beak , and bulk . The jaws were tipped with a deep , narrow beak , believed to have been better at grasping and plucking than biting . 
 Triceratops teeth were arranged in groups called batteries , of 36 to 40 tooth columns , in each side of each jaw with 3 to 5 stacked teeth per column , depending on the size of the animal . This gives a range of 432 to 800 teeth , of which only a fraction were in use at any given time ( tooth replacement was continuous and occurred throughout the life of the animal ) . They functioned by shearing in a vertical to near @-@ vertical orientation . The great size and numerous teeth of Triceratops suggests that they ate large volumes of fibrous plant material , with some suggesting palms and cycads , and others suggesting ferns , which then grew in prairies . 
 = = = Functions of the horns and frill = = = 
 There has been much speculation over the functions of Triceratops ' head adornments . The two main theories have revolved around use in combat , or display in courtship , with the latter thought now to be the most likely primary function . 
 Early on , Lull postulated that the frills may have served as anchor points for the jaw muscles to aid chewing by allowing increased size and thus power for the muscles . This has been put forward by other authors over the years , but later studies do not find evidence of large muscle attachments on the frill bones . 
 Triceratops were long thought to have possibly used their horns and frills in combat with predators such as Tyrannosaurus , the idea being discussed first by C. H. Sternberg in 1917 and 70 years later by Robert Bakker . There is evidence that Tyrannosaurus did have aggressive head @-@ on encounters with Triceratops , based on partially healed tyrannosaur tooth marks on a Triceratops brow horn and squamosal ; the bitten horn is also broken , with new bone growth after the break . Which animal was the aggressor is not known . Since the Triceratops wounds healed , it is most likely that the Triceratops survived the encounter and managed to overcome the Tyrannosaurus . Paleontologist Peter Dodson estimates that if Tyrannosaurus attacked a bull Triceratops , the Triceratops had the upper hand and would successfully defend itself by inflicting fatal wounds to the Tyrannosaurus using its sharp horns . Tyrannosaurus is also known to have fed on Triceratops . Evidence for this includes a heavily tooth @-@ scored Triceratops ilium and sacrum . 
 In addition to combat with predators using horns , Triceratops are classically shown engaging each other in combat with horns locked . While studies show that such activity would be feasible , if unlike that of present @-@ day horned animals , there is disagreement about whether they did so . Although pitting , holes , lesions , and other damage on Triceratops skulls ( and the skulls of other ceratopsids ) are often attributed to horn damage in combat , a 2006 study finds no evidence for horn thrust injuries causing these forms of damage ( for example , there is no evidence of infection or healing ) . Instead , non @-@ pathological bone resorption , or unknown bone diseases , are suggested as causes . A newer study compared incidence rates of skull lesions and periosteal reaction in Triceratops and Centrosaurus and showed that these were consistent with Triceratops using its horns in combat and the frill being adapted as a protective structure , while lower pathology rates in Centrosaurus may indicate visual rather than physical use of cranial ornamentation , or a form of combat focused on the body rather than the head . The frequency of injury was found to be 14 % in Triceratops . The researchers also concluded that the damage found on the specimens in the study was often too localized to be caused by bone disease . Histological examination reveals that the frill of Triceratops is composed of fibrolamellar bone which contains fibroblasts that play a critical role in wound healing , and are capable of rapidly depositing bone during remodeling . 
 One skull , assigned to Triceratops , was observed to have a hole in the jugal which appears to be a puncture wound that was sustained while this individual was still alive . This is supported by signs of healing that are present in the bone around the supposed wound . When examined closely , the hole in the bone has a diameter that is very similar to diameter of the distal end of a Triceratops horn . This , and other apparent healed wounds in the skulls of ceratopsians , has been cited as evidence of non @-@ fatal intraspecific competition in these dinosaurs . 
 The large frill also may have helped to increase body area to regulate body temperature . A similar theory has been proposed regarding the plates of Stegosaurus , although this use alone would not account for the bizarre and extravagant variation seen in different members of the Ceratopsidae . This observation is highly suggestive of what is now believed to be the primary function , display . 
 The theory of their use in sexual display was first proposed by <unk> in 1961 and has gained increasing acceptance since . Evidence that visual display was important , either in courtship or in other social behavior , can be seen in the fact that horned dinosaurs differ markedly in their adornments , making each species highly distinctive . Also , modern living creatures with such displays of horns and adornments use them in similar behavior . A 2006 study of the smallest Triceratops skull , ascertained to be a juvenile , shows the frill and horns developed at a very early age , predating sexual development and thus probably important for visual communication and species recognition in general . 
 = = = Growth and ontogeny = = = 
 In 2006 , the first extensive ontogenetic study of Triceratops was published in the journal Proceedings of the Royal Society . The study , by John R. Horner and Mark Goodwin , found that individuals of Triceratops could be divided into four general ontogenetic groups , babies , juveniles , subadults , and adults . With a total number of 28 skulls studied , the youngest was only 38 cm ( 15 in ) long . 10 of the 28 skulls could be placed in order in a growth series with one representing each age . Each of the four growth stages were found to have identifying features . Multiple ontogenetic trends were discovered , including the size reduce of the epoccipitals , development and reorientation of postorbital horns , and hollowing out of the horns . 
 = = = = = Torosaurus as growth stage of Triceratops = = = = = 
 Torosaurus is a ceratopsid genus first identified from a pair of skulls in 1891 , two years after the identification of Triceratops . The Torosaurus genus resembles Triceratops in geological age , distribution , anatomy and physical size and it has been recognised as a close relative . Its distinguishing features are an elongated skull and the presence of two fenestrae , or holes , in the frill . Paleontologists investigating dinosaur ontogeny ( growth and development of individuals over the life span ) in the Hell Creek Formation , Montana , US , have recently presented evidence that the two represent a single genus . 
 John Scannella , in a paper presented in Bristol , UK at the conference of the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology ( 25 September 2009 ) reclassified Torosaurus as especially mature Triceratops individuals , perhaps representing a single sex . Jack Horner , Scannella 's mentor at Bozeman Campus , Montana State University , noted that ceratopsian skulls consist of metaplastic bone . A characteristic of metaplastic bone is that it lengthens and shortens over time , extending and <unk> to form new shapes . Significant variety is seen even in those skulls already identified as Triceratops , Horner said , " where the horn orientation is backwards in juveniles and forward in adults " . Approximately 50 % of all subadult Triceratops skulls have two thin areas in the frill that correspond with the placement of " holes " in Torosaurus skulls , suggesting that holes developed to offset the weight that would otherwise have been added as maturing Triceratops individuals grew longer frills . A paper describing these findings in detail was published in July 2010 by Scannella and Horner . It formally argues that Torosaurus and the similar contemporary Nedoceratops are synonymous with Triceratops . 
 The assertion ignited debate . Andrew Farke had in 2006 stressed that , apart from the frill , no systematic differences could be found between Torosaurus and Triceratops . He nevertheless disputed Scannella 's conclusion by arguing in 2011 that the proposed morphological changes required to " age " a Triceratops into a Torosaurus would be without precedent among ceratopsids . Creatures would require the growth of epoccipitals , reversion of bone texture from adult to immature forms back to adult , and growth of frill holes at a later stage than usual . A study by Nicholas Longrich and Daniel Field analyzed 35 specimens of both Triceratops and Torosaurus . The authors concluded that Triceratops individuals too old to be considered immature forms are represented in the fossil record , as are Torosaurus individuals too young to be considered fully mature adults . The synonymy of Triceratops and Torosaurus cannot be supported , they said , without more convincing intermediate forms than Scannella and Horner initially produced . Scannella 's Triceratops specimen with a hole on its frill , they argued , could represent a diseased or malformed individual rather than a transitional stage between an immature Triceratops and mature Torosaurus form . 
 Given the abundance of fossils , particularly of Triceratops , additional field discoveries are expected to settle the debate in time . 
 = = = = = Other genera as growth stages of Triceratops = = = = = 
 Opinion has varied on the validity of a separate genus for Nedoceratops . John Scannella and Jack Horner regarded it as an intermediate growth stage between Triceratops and Torosaurus . Andrew Farke , in his 2011 redescription of the only known skull , concluded that it was an aged individual of its own valid taxon , Nedoceratops hatcheri . Nicholas Longrich and Daniel Fields also did not consider it a transition between Torosaurus and Triceratops , suggesting that the frill holes were pathological . 
 As described above , John Scannella had argued in 2010 that Nedoceratops should be considered a synonym of Triceratops . Andrew Farke ( 2011 ) maintained that it represents a valid distinct genus . Nick Longrich agreed with Scannella about Nedoceratops and made a further suggestion : that the recently described Ojoceratops was likewise a synonym . The fossils , he argued , are indistinguishable from the T. horridus specimens that were previously attributed to the defunct species T. serratus . 
 Longrich observed that another newly described genus , Tatankaceratops , displayed a strange mix of characteristics already found in adult and juvenile Triceratops . Rather than representing a distinct genus , Tatankaceratops could as easily represent a dwarf Triceratops or a Triceratops individual with a developmental disorder that caused it to stop growing prematurely . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 Triceratops lived during the Late Cretaceous of North America , its fossils have come from the Evanston Formation , Scollard Formation , Laramie Formation , Lance Formation , Denver Formation , and Hell Creek Formation . These fossil formations date back to the time of the Cretaceous @-@ Paleogene Extinction Event , and has been dated to 66 ± 0 @.@ 07 million years ago . Many animals and plants have been found in these formations , but mostly from the Lance Formation and Hell Creek Formation . 
 Theropods from these formations include genera of tyrannosaurids , ornithomimids , troodontids , avialans , caenagnathids , and dromaeosaurids . Acheroraptor and Dakotaraptor are dromaeosaurids from the Hell Creek Formation . <unk> dromaeosaurs are known from other fossil formations . Common teeth previously referred to Dromaeosaurus and Saurornitholestes later were considered to be Acheroraptor . The tyrannosaurids from the formation are Nanotyrannus and Tyrannosaurus , although the former might be a junior synonym of the latter . Among ornithomimids are the genera Struthiomimus as well as Ornithomimus , although an undescribed animal named " <unk> " could be from the formation . <unk> are only represented by Pectinodon and Paronychodon in the Hell Creek Formation ; with a possible species of Troodon from the Lance Formation . One species of coelurosaur is known from Hell Creek and similar formations by a single species , Richardoestesia . Only three oviraptorosaurs are from the Hell Creek Formation , <unk> , <unk> and a giant species of caenagnathid , very similar to <unk> , from South Dakota . However , only fossilized foot prints were discovered . The avialans known from the formation are Avisaurus , multiple species of <unk> , and several other species of <unk> , as well as several species of true birds including <unk> . 
 Ornithischians are abundant in the Scollard Lance , Laramie , Lance , Denver , and Hell Creek Formation . The main groups of ornithischians are ankylosaurians , ornithopods , ceratopsians , and pachycephalosaurians . Three ankylosaurians are known , Ankylosaurus , Denversaurus , and possibly a species of Edmontonia or an undescribed genus . Multiple genera of ceratopsians are known from the formation other than Triceratops , the leptoceratopsid Leptoceratops , and the chasmosaurine ceratopsids Torosaurus , Nedoceratops and Tatankaceratops . <unk> are common in the Hell Creek Formation , and are known from several species of the ornithopod Thescelosaurus , and the hadrosaurids Edmontosaurus , and a possible species of Parasaurolophus . Several pachycephalosaurians have been found in the Hell Creek Formation and in similar formations . Among them are the derived pachycephalosaurids Stygimoloch , Dracorex , Pachycephalosaurus , Sphaerotholus , and an undescribed specimen from North Dakota . The first two might be junior synonyms of Pachycephalosaurus . 
 Mammals are plentiful in the Hell Creek Formation . Groups represented include multituberculates , metatherians , and eutherians . The multituberculates represented include <unk> , the <unk> <unk> , Meniscoessus , Essonodon , <unk> , Cimolodon , and <unk> ; and the <unk> Mesodma , and <unk> . The <unk> Alphadon , <unk> , and Turgidodon , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , the <unk> <unk> , the <unk> <unk> , the <unk> <unk> , and the <unk> <unk> all represent metatherians of the Hell Creek Formation . A few eutherians are known , being represented by <unk> , <unk> , the <unk> <unk> and <unk> , the <unk> <unk> , and the possible <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Depiction in popular media = = 
 Triceratops ( the species are not identified ) is the official state fossil of South Dakota , and the official state dinosaur of Wyoming . The distinctive appearance of Triceratops has led to them being frequently depicted in films , computer games and documentaries , such as the 1993 film Jurassic Park and the 1999 BBC television documentary Walking with Dinosaurs . A recurring theme , especially in children 's dinosaur books , is a climactic showdown or battle between Triceratops and Tyrannosaurus . In 1942 , Charles R. Knight painted a mural incorporating a confrontation between the two dinosaurs in the Field Museum of Natural History for the National Geographic Society , establishing them as enemies in popular thought . Paleontologist Bob Bakker said of the imagined rivalry between Tyrannosaurus and Triceratops , " No matchup between predator and prey has ever been more dramatic . It 's somehow fitting that those two massive antagonists lived out their co @-@ evolutionary belligerence through the very last days of the very last epoch of the Age of Dinosaurs . " 
 = Three certainties = 
 The three certainties refer to a rule within English trusts law on the creation of express trusts that , to be valid , the trust instrument must show certainty of intention , subject matter and object . " Certainty of intention " means that it must be clear that the donor or testator wishes to create a trust ; this is not dependent on any particular language used , and a trust can be created without the word " trust " being used , or even the donor knowing he is creating a trust . Since the 1950s , the courts have been more willing to conclude that there was intention to create a trust , rather than hold that the trust is void . " Certainty of subject matter " means that it must be clear what property is part of the trust . Historically the property must have been segregated from non @-@ trust property ; more recently , the courts have drawn a line between tangible and intangible assets , holding that with intangible assets there is not always a need for segregation . " Certainty of objects " means that it must be clear who the beneficiaries , or objects , are . The test for determining this differs depending on the type of trust ; it can be that all beneficiaries must be individually identified , or that the trustees must be able to say with certainty , if a claimant comes before them , whether he is or is not a beneficiary . 
 There are four categories of uncertainty that can affect the validity of a trust : conceptual uncertainty , evidential uncertainty , ascertainability and administrative unworkability . " Conceptual uncertainty " is where the language is unclear , something which leads to the trust being declared invalid . " Evidential uncertainty " is where a question of fact , such as whether a claimant is a beneficiary , cannot be answered ; this does not always lead to invalidity . " Ascertainability " is where a beneficiary cannot be found , while " administrative unworkability " is where the nature of the trust is such that it cannot realistically carried out . Trustees and the courts have developed various ways of getting around uncertainties , including the appointment of experts to work out evidential uncertainty , and giving trustees the power to decide who is or is not a beneficiary . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The rule came out of the case of Knight v Knight . The testator , after giving away his personal and real property , added to the end of his will that " I trust to the justice of my successors , in continuing the estates in the male succession , according to the will of the founder of the family " . Langdale MR , hearing the case , held that this was not specific enough to create a valid trust ; furthermore , to be held as valid , trust instruments would have to have : 
 Certainty of intention : it must be clear that the testator intends to create a trust 
 Certainty of subject matter : it must be clear what property is part of the trust 
 Certainty of objects : it must be clear who the beneficiaries ( objects ) are . 
 Note : The ' Three certainties ' rule is not novel to Knight v Knight . It was first stated in Wright v Atkyns , by Lord Chancellor Eldon . 
 = = = Certainty of intention = = = 
 The first principle when deciding if there is certainty of intention is the nature of the language used ; the words , as said in Wright v Atkyns , " must be imperative " . Past this , there is no requirement that particular language be used . In Re <unk> , Megarry J held that " it is well settled that a trust can be created without using the word " trust " or " confidence " or the like ; the question is whether in substance a sufficient intention to create a trust has been manifested " . In Paul v Constance , it was held that the phrase " the money is as much yours as it is mine " was sufficient to translate to a trust . A trust will not be formed if it is clear that some other intention was there , such as the intention to make a pure gift , as in Jones v Lock . Historically , <unk> words such as " it is hoped " and " it is desired " were held to be valid . Since Lambe v Eames , the courts have instead taken the approach that the circumstances and the reading of the statement as a whole are the factors , and that no particular words will impose a trust on their own . 
 It is possible to create an express trust without being aware that one is doing so , so long as the court can determine from the person 's intention that a beneficial entitlement should be conferred which the law ( or equity ) will enforce . In the Constance case , Constance was described as a man of " unsophisticated character " who did not know he was creating a trust – nevertheless , the courts found that was what he had done . In Re <unk> , the company involved took actions to protect its customers by moving their funds into a separate bank account . Even though they had never indicated a desire to create a trust , their intention had been in line with the purpose of a trust , and thus it was considered valid . Many trusts are formed through wills , which create additional issues when determining intention . In Re Hamilton , Lindley LJ set out the standard rule that to " take the will you have to construe and see what it means , and if you come to the conclusion that no trust was intended you say so " ; essentially that judges should not simply assume that there is a trust . This literal approach was followed until the 1950s ; since then , the judiciary have been more willing to interpret trust documents in such a way as to make the trusts valid rather than void . According to Byrnes v Kendle , the question that needs to be answered in determining whether a certainty of intention exists is " What is the meaning of what the parties have said ? " and not " What did the parties mean to say ? " 
 = = = Certainty of subject matter = = = 
 It is a requirement that the subject matter be certain — that the property intended to be in the trust be separated from other property , showing clarity in what is intended to be trust property . If there is no clear separation , the trust will fail , as in Re <unk> Exchange Ltd . This point was illustrated by Re London Wine Co ( Shippers ) Ltd , where creditors of a bankrupt wine trading company argued that they should be able to claim the wine they had paid for . The problem was that these bottles were not individually identifiable , and Oliver J held that : 
 I appreciate the point taken that the subject matter is a part of a homogeneous mass so that specific identity is of as little as importance as it is , for instance , in the case of money . Nevertheless , as it seems to me , to create a trust it must be possible to ascertain with certainty not only what the interest of the beneficiary is to be but to what property it is to attach . 
 This is part of the " orthodox " or " strict " rule , along with Re <unk> . The exception to this rule is found in Hunter v Moss , which concerned 50 shares meant to be transferred to an employee out of a total holding of 950 . These shares were not individually identified , but Dillon LJ held that this was irrelevant because the shares were all of the same type and in the same company , and so it made no difference which particular shares were transferred . This was applied in Re Harvard Securities , where Neuberger J held that there was a difference between tangible property , such as wine , and intangible property , such as shares . Intangible property , by its very nature , does not require segregation . 
 = = = Certainty of objects = = = 
 There is a requirement that the beneficiaries of a trust , known as the objects , be certain . Within express trusts this is a particularly complex area , because the test used to determine certainty varies between fixed trusts , mere powers and discretionary trusts . Fixed trusts are trusts for a specific , named list of individuals , with Alastair Hudson giving the example of " £ 10 @,@ 000 to be held upon trust equally for the complete team of 11 Sunderland Football Club players who started the 1992 Cup Final at Wembley " . The test for fixed trusts is that the trustees must be able to give a complete list of the beneficiaries , as laid down in IRC v Broadway Cottages . If there are any potential beneficiaries who the trustees are not certain of , or the trustees cannot compile a complete list , the trust is void for uncertainty . 
 A more complex test is found with mere powers . These are where a person is granted the power ( the ability ) to exercise a trust @-@ like power , but without any obligation to do so , such as " the trustee may give £ 1 @,@ 000 to X " , or " the trustee can , at his discretion , give £ 1 @,@ 000 to X " as opposed to " the trustee shall give £ 1 @,@ 000 to X " . In Re Hay 's ST , Megarry VC said that : 
 A mere power is very different [ from an ordinary trust obligation ] . Normally the trustee is not bound to exercise it , and the court will not compel him to do so . That , however , does not mean that he can simply fold his hands and ignore it , for normally he must from time to time consider whether or not to exercise the power , and the court may direct him to do this . 
 The holder of a mere power is therefore free to do what he wants with the property he holds ; if he fails to consider his exercise of the power , the courts may force him to do so . The leading test for mere powers is the " any given postulant " test , laid down in Re Gulbenkian . This states that the trustees must be able to say with certainty , when a potential beneficiary comes before them , that he either is or is not a beneficiary . 
 Discretionary trusts are trusts which require that the trustees exercise their powers , in the same way as a fixed trust , but allow some discretion in how to do so , in a similar manner to mere powers . The leading test of certainty of objects here is also the " any given postulant test " , applied to discretionary trusts in McPhail v Doulton . The courts attempted to mitigate this test in Re Baden ’ s Deed Trusts ( no 2 ) ; however , all three judges of the Court of Appeal gave separate new tests and reasons . Stamp LJ had an approach based entirely on the facts , with no greater impact on certainty of objects . Sachs LJ took the approach that the burden of proof was on the claimants to prove they were beneficiaries , not on the trustees to prove the trust was valid . Megaw LJ , however , took the approach that a trust could be valid , even with uncertain beneficiaries , if there was a " core number " of beneficiaries who were certain . 
 = = Uncertainty = = 
 Where there is not sufficient clarity , the trust may be held void as uncertain . The applicable forms of uncertainty have been categorised as : 
 Conceptual uncertainty . 
 Evidential uncertainty . 
 Ascertainability . 
 Administrative unworkability . 
 Conceptual uncertainty is the " most fundamental in the validity of a trust or power " , and is where the language used in the trust is unclear . Examples include where familiar but overly vague terms are used , such as " good customers " or " useful employees " ; if the concept cannot be certain , the trust fails . Evidential uncertainty , on the other hand , is where there is a question of fact it is impossible to answer , such as when a claimant cannot prove he is a beneficiary . This does not necessarily invalidate the trust , as Jenkins LJ said in Re Coxen : 
 I must keep in mind the distinction between uncertainty as to the events prescribed by the testator ... in which the condition ... is to operate ( which is generally speaking fatal to the validity of such a condition ) and difficulty in ascertaining whether those events ... have happened or not , which is not necessarily fatal to such a validity . 
 The next type of uncertainty , ascertainability , is where it is impossible to find the beneficiaries , either because they have died , moved or changed names . This is not necessarily fatal ; the test for deciding if it is or not was laid out by Wynn @-@ Parry J as : " mere difficulty of ascertainment is not of itself fatal to the validity of the gift . As has been pointed out , it is a matter of degree , and it is only when one reaches , on the evidence , a conclusion that it is so vague or that the difficulty is so great that it must be treated as virtually incapable of resolution , that one is entitled , to my mind , to say that a gift of that nature is void for uncertainty " . If a beneficiary cannot be found despite strenuous steps to find one , the trustees can apply for a Benjamin Order , named after the case of Re Benjamin , which authorises them to distribute the property as if the beneficiary is dead . The final type of uncertainty is administrative unworkability — where the trust is , by its very nature , so impractical that the trustees cannot carry out their duties . Where this prevents the trustees carrying out their duties , the trust will be declared invalid , and not applied . 
 = = Resolving uncertainties = = 
 <unk> use three principal devices to resolve problems of potential uncertainty . These are : 
 To provide that an expert can give advice as to who is or is not a beneficiary ; 
 to give the trustees power to decide who is or is not a beneficiary ; 
 and to allow the trustees to grant property to almost anyone , hoping this will reduce the risk of uncertainty . 
 The first device has been approved by the courts : in Re Tuck 's Settlement Trusts , Lord Denning allowed the court and trustees to ask the Chief Rabbi about an issue within the ( Jewish ) testator 's will . The second device was condemned as ineffective by Jenkins LJ in Re Coxen , when he wrote : 
 If the testator had sufficiently defined the state of affairs in which the trustees were to form their opinion he would not have saved the condition from invalidity on the ground of uncertainty merely by making their opinion the criterion . 
 As such , simply giving the trustees this power was not enough to defeat uncertainties . If , however , the testator " had sufficiently defined " the way in which trustees should exercise their judgement , it would be valid . The final device is to give the trustees the power to give trust property to " anyone in the world " or to " anyone whom the trustees consider appropriate " . This has two problems ; firstly , the class could be too broad to be administratively workable , and second , the courts are unable to judge if the power has been exercised appropriately . However , in Re Hay 's ST , Megarry VC held that , exercised properly , this sort of agreement could be administratively workable , and would not be immediately void . 
 = Harold Barrowclough = 
 Major General Sir Harold Eric Barrowclough KCMG , CB , DSO & Bar , MC , ED , PC ( 23 June 1894 – 4 March 1972 ) was a New Zealand military leader , lawyer and Chief Justice from 1953 to 1966 . 
 Born in Masterton , Barrowclough commenced legal studies in 1913 and joined the Territorial Force the same year . In 1915 , partway through his law degree , he volunteered for service abroad with the New Zealand Expeditionary Force and fought on the Western Front . He finished the First World War in command of a battalion in the New Zealand Rifle Brigade . After the war he finished his law studies and became a successful lawyer . He also resumed duty in the Territorial Force , serving until 1931 when he moved to Auckland to join a law firm based there . 
 Following the outbreak of the Second World War Barrowclough volunteered for service with the Second New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( 2NZEF ) . He commanded an infantry brigade in the 2nd New Zealand Division during the campaign in Greece and Operation Crusader . In 1942 he was recommended for divisional command by his superior officer , Major General Bernard Freyberg , and was given the 3rd Division , which he led through the Solomon Islands campaign . When the division was disbanded in late 1944 , he was left without a command and was eventually discharged from the 2NZEF . He returned to the legal profession and in 1953 was appointed Chief Justice of New Zealand . He established a permanent Court of Appeal for New Zealand and also served on the Privy Council for a time . He retired in 1966 and died in Auckland in 1972 at the age of 77 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Harold Eric Barrowclough was born at Masterton , New Zealand , on 23 June 1894 , the son of a civil engineer , Alfred Barrowclough , and his wife . In later life , his father took up teaching . Educated at Palmerston North Boys ' High School , he performed well both academically and in sports . He was prefect and won a university scholarship in 1912 . The following year he began law studies at the University of Otago . He also joined the Territorial Force . 
 = = First World War = = 
 In the early stages of the First World War , Barrowclough volunteered for service in the New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( NZEF ) , enlisting as a private in January 1915 . He showed leadership potential and within four months had been commissioned as a second lieutenant . He departed for overseas service in October 1915 having been promoted to lieutenant and posted to the New Zealand Rifle Brigade . He saw brief service with the 2nd Battalion of the brigade during the Senussi Campaign in the Middle East . He was regarded as an outstanding officer and in early 1916 was promoted to captain . Three months later he was appointed commander of a company in the battalion . In September 1916 , while serving on the Western Front , he won a Military Cross for his actions during the Battle of the Somme when he led a party in an attack on a German strong point and linked up with the neighbouring British 47th Division . He was also awarded the Croix de Guerre for the same action . 
 Wounded in the back in June 1917 , he was invalided to England to convalesce . Upon recovery , he commanded reserve battalions at the NZEF bases in England . He returned to France in March 1918 as a temporary major and took up command of a company . In August 1918 , he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel and given command of 4th Battalion , New Zealand Rifle Brigade . A month later , during the Hundred Days Offensive , he was awarded a Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) for his leadership when dealing with a German counterattack near Havrincourt Wood . In what proved to be the New Zealand Division 's last action of the war , he led his battalion over the ramparts of Le Quesnoy , and was later mentioned in despatches . While the New Zealand Division was on occupation duty in Germany , he coordinated an education program for its soldiers until he returned to New Zealand and was discharged from the NZEF . 
 = = Interwar period = = 
 Resuming his legal studies at Otago , Barrowclough graduated with a law degree in 1921 and set up practice in Dunedin . He later lectured part @-@ time in law . He rejoined the Territorial Force and from 1924 to 1929 commanded the 1st Battalion , Otago Infantry Regiment . In 1930 , he was promoted to colonel and given command of the 3rd New Zealand Infantry Brigade . He resigned from the Territorial Force in 1931 when he accepted an offer of a partnership in the Auckland law firm Russell , McVeagh , Bagnall and Macky . He quickly developed a high profile in the Auckland law establishment . 
 By the mid @-@ 1930s , Barrowclough was disenchanted with the state of New Zealand 's military forces , which was in decline due to a lack of resources and the discontinuation of compulsory military training . In 1936 , he encouraged the reformation of the National Defence League of New Zealand ( NDL ) , a defence lobby group which aimed to encourage and revitalise New Zealand 's defence preparations for war . The country 's defence arrangements were in a poor state of affairs at the time but the NDL gained little traction with the Labour Government . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Prior to the outbreak of the Second World War , Barrowclough volunteered his services to the New Zealand Military Services , and this was duly taken up when the Second New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( 2NZEF ) , commanded by Major General Bernard Freyberg , was raised for service in the war . When the 2nd New Zealand Division was formed in 1940 , he was promoted to brigadier and appointed commander of its 6th Infantry Brigade . Embarking from New Zealand in May 1940 , he spent the next four months in England , commanding elements of the 2nd New Zealand Division which had been diverted there while en route to the Middle East , his own brigade continuing to Egypt as planned . He rejoined the brigade in October 1940 and led it during the campaign in Greece in April 1941 and later in Operation Crusader , the campaign to lift the Siege of Tobruk . He received several awards for his service during this period ; the Greek War Cross and a mention in despatches for his work in Greece , and a Bar to his DSO for his leadership during the Crusader offensive . 
 In response to a request from the New Zealand government , Barrowclough was nominated by Freyberg for command of the Pacific Section of 2NZEF , which was based in Fiji . With the entry of Imperial Japan into the war , this was an important command as Fiji was the last line of defence for mainland New Zealand . Barrowclough embarked for New Zealand in early 1942 but during his transit , the commanding officer of the Pacific Section became seriously ill and was invalided home to be immediately replaced by Major General Owen Mead . On Barrowclough 's arrival in New Zealand , he was disappointed to find that his expected command was no longer available . He was eventually posted as the commander of the Northern Division with the rank of major general . He was responsible for the defence of the upper North Island , and for the next few months oversaw the reorganisation and training of his new command . 
 = = = 3rd New Zealand Division = = = 
 Barrowclough 's opportunity for a return to duty overseas came following the death of Mead in an aircraft crash in July 1942 . At the time of Mead 's death , the Pacific Section was being recalled to New Zealand for reorganisation into a division for offensive operations in the South Pacific . In August , Barrowclough was named as commander of what was now known as the 3rd New Zealand Division . He immediately overhauled its structure and removed many officers who he considered too old for frontline duty , replacing them with personnel who had experience with the 2NZEF in Greece , Crete or North Africa . He also implemented training programs for his new command ; most of its personnel had been engaged in the construction of fortifications while in Fiji , which had left little opportunity for intensive tactical training and exercises . 
 In response to a request from Vice Admiral Robert L. Ghormley , the American commander of the South Pacific Area , the 3rd Division moved to New Caledonia on garrison duty while the American forces previously stationed there fought in the Battle of Guadalcanal . Conscious that his division was the only sizable non @-@ American unit in a theatre of operations having an overall American command structure , Barrowclough requested , and received , a charter that allowed him to seek instructions from the New Zealand Government if he felt the division was to be involved in operations that could result in significant casualties . 
 Although Barrowclough arrived in New Caledonia with his divisional headquarters in November 1942 , the main body of his command was not in place until January 1943 . Once on the island , his division began training in amphibious landings and jungle warfare to prepare it for forthcoming offensive operations while he set about dealing with the administrative and logistical problems of integrating the division into the American command structure . The 3rd Division was a division in name only , consisting of two infantry brigades – the 8th and 14th – instead of the three of a conventional infantry division , and he unsuccessfully agitated for expansion . New Zealand could not supply enough manpower to have two full infantry divisions in the field , and the government 's preference was to retain the 2nd Division , still in North Africa , at full strength . Barrowclough was unhappy at this decision and his relationship with Army headquarters in Wellington and its Chief of Staff , Lieutenant General Edward Puttick , became strained . The two brigade divisional structure also constrained how the 3rd Division could be employed in offensive operations , as it could not be used as a replacement for an American division due to its reduced number of personnel . Being the only unit in the South Pacific Area outside of the American supply chain also caused logistical problems as the division used British equipment . 
 In August 1943 , Barrowclough was advised that his division was to participate in the Solomon Islands campaign . It would eventually participate in three major amphibious operations . The first of these was in September 1943 , when the 14th Brigade conducted a series of landings around the coast of Vella Lavella during the Battle of Vella Lavella . It was a satisfactory performance by the New Zealanders and Barrowclough was congratulated by American commanders for the division 's work . This was followed by the Battle of the Treasury Islands , and then , in early 1944 , the Battle of the Green Islands . During this latter battle , Barrowclough commanded a force of nearly 16 @,@ 500 men , only a third of which were elements of his own division . The remainder were American forces . 
 Eventually , New Zealand 's increasing shortage of manpower resulted in the disbandment of the 3rd Division , which had been withdrawn to New Caledonia after the Battle of the Green Islands , in September 1944 . As well as providing reinforcements for the 2nd Division , at the time engaged in fighting in Italy , and allowing men to return to vital industries in New Zealand , it left a demoralised Barrowclough without a command . He had little options for redeployment . Attempts were made to find a suitable position for him with the 2nd Division in Italy or the British Army but to no avail . In late 1945 , he was discharged from the military . His service in the Pacific theatre of operations was rewarded with several decorations , which included the United States Legion of Merit and appointment as a Companion of the Order of the Bath . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After he left the military , Barrowclough returned to his legal career . His law firm had suffered during the war years through a lack of manpower and the rebuilding of his practice occupied much of his time . In 1953 , he moved to Wellington to take up an appointment as Chief Justice of New Zealand . The following year , he received an honorary doctorate in law from Otago . He also became a member of the Privy Council , was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George and was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II during her visit to New Zealand in 1954 . While Chief Justice , he established the permanent Court of Appeal for New Zealand . After his retirement in January 1966 Barrowclough returned to Auckland where he died on 4 March 1972 at the age of 77 . He was survived by three children . His wife , Mary , who he had married in 1921 , predeceased him in 1964 . 
 In his will Barrowclough left money to the University of Otago , to establish a scholarship for law students . In 2009 , Palmerston North Boys ' High School , Barrowclough 's former school , implemented leadership and achievement programs named in his honour . 
 = Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 = 
 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 is a 2010 British @-@ American fantasy film directed by David Yates and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures . It is the first of two cinematic parts based on the novel by J. K. Rowling . The film , which is the seventh instalment in the Harry Potter film series , was written by Steve Kloves and produced by David Heyman , David Barron , and Rowling . 
 The film stars Daniel Radcliffe as Harry Potter , alongside Rupert Grint and Emma Watson as Harry 's best friends Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger . It is the sequel to Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince and is followed by the concluding entry , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 . 
 The story follows Harry Potter on a quest to find and destroy Lord Voldemort 's secret to immortality – the Horcruxes . Principal photography began on 19 February 2009 ( 2009 @-@ 02 @-@ 19 ) and was completed on 12 June 2010 ( 2010 @-@ 06 @-@ 12 ) . Part 1 was released in 2D cinemas and IMAX formats worldwide on 19 November 2010 . 
 In the film 's worldwide opening weekend , Part 1 grossed $ 330 million , the third highest in the series , and the highest opening of 2010 , as well as the eighth @-@ highest of all @-@ time . With a worldwide gross of $ 960 million , Part 1 is the third @-@ highest grossing film of 2010 , behind Toy Story 3 and Alice in Wonderland , and the third highest grossing Harry Potter film in terms of worldwide totals behind Deathly Hallows – Part 2 and Philosopher 's Stone , and the 28th highest @-@ grossing film of all @-@ time . The film received two nominations at the 83rd Academy Awards : Best Visual Effects and Best Art Direction . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Minister of Magic , Rufus Scrimgeour , addresses the wizarding media , stating that the Ministry would remain strong even as Lord Voldemort gains strength . Harry , Ron and Hermione prepare for a journey to find and destroy Voldemort 's Horcruxes , with Harry watching the Dursleys depart and Hermione wiping her parents ' memories of her . 
 Severus Snape arrives at Malfoy Manor to inform Lord Voldemort and his Death Eaters of Harry 's impending departure from No. 4 Privet Drive . Voldemort commandeers Lucius Malfoy 's wand , as Voldemort 's own wand cannot be used to kill Harry , because the wands are " twins " . 
 Meanwhile , the Order of the Phoenix gather at Privet Drive and escort Harry to safety , using Polyjuice Potion to create six decoy <unk> out of everyone else . During their flight to the Weasley family home at the Burrow , all are ambushed by Death Eaters , who kill Mad @-@ Eye Moody and Harry 's owl , Hedwig , injure George Weasley , and knock out Hagrid which forces Harry to take over and drive his flying motorcycle while fighting Voldemort , destroying some power lines that causes a blackout to the city . At the Burrow , Harry has a vision of the wand @-@ maker Ollivander being tormented by Voldemort , who claims that Ollivander had lied to him by claiming that the only way Voldemort could kill Harry was by using another person 's wand . 
 Scrimgeour arrives at the Burrow with Albus Dumbledore 's Will and distributes three items to Ron , Hermione , and Harry . Ron receives Dumbledore 's <unk> , Hermione a copy of The Tales of Beedle the Bard , and Harry the first Golden Snitch that he ever caught in a Quidditch match . Scrimgeour reveals that Harry was also bequeathed the Sword of Godric Gryffindor , but the Minister states that the sword was not Dumbledore 's to pass on and , in any case , is missing . 
 Next , the Death Eaters assassinate Scrimgeour and replace him with their puppet Pius Thicknesse , who , under the influence of the <unk> curse , begins persecuting Muggle @-@ born witches and wizards . When Death Eaters disrupt the wedding of Bill Weasley and Fleur Delacour , Harry , Hermione , and Ron <unk> to London and find sanctuary at No. 12 Grimmauld Place . There they discover that the " R.A.B. " from the false Horcrux locket is Regulus Arcturus Black , the younger brother of Sirius Black . From Kreacher , the Blacks ' house @-@ elf , they learn that <unk> Fletcher stole the real locket . Kreacher and Dobby apprehend Fletcher , who reveals that the locket is in the possession of Dolores Umbridge . Under the disguise of Polyjuice Potion , the trio infiltrate the Ministry . In the courtroom , Umbridge is interrogating a Muggle @-@ born witch and threatens her , which enrages Harry , who says to her " You 're lying , Dolores . And one mustn 't tell lies . " He then stuns her and Hermione successfully retrieves the locket . The trio escape from the Dementors into the wilderness after accidentally revealing the location of No. 12 Grimmauld Place to <unk> , a Death Eater . 
 Unable to destroy the Horcrux , they take turns wearing it to dilute its malignant power . Harry sees a vision of Voldemort interrogating <unk> , a renowned wand @-@ maker , who claims that a teenage boy had once stolen the legendary Elder Wand from his shop . While Ron wears the locket , he is overcome by his negative feelings and after arguing with Harry , he leaves , upsetting Hermione . Harry and Hermione decide to go to Godric 's Hollow , where they visit Harry 's parents ' graves and the house where they were killed . Next they visit <unk> Bagshot , who they believe has the Sword of Gryffindor , which they deduce can destroy Horcruxes . They are surprised by Voldemort 's snake , Nagini , who had been possessing her corpse . Hermione accidentally breaks Harry 's wand as they escape into the Forest of Dean , where Hermione identifies the mysterious thief seen in Harry 's vision as Gellert Grindelwald . 
 When evening falls , Harry sees a Patronus in the form of a doe which leads him to a frozen pond . Gryffindor 's sword lies beneath the pond 's ice . Harry breaks the ice and jumps in to reach the sword . The locket around his neck attempts to strangle him , but Ron arrives to rescue Harry . Despite the soul inside the locket attacking both of them , Ron manages to destroy it with the Sword of Gryffindor . Hermione is angry with Ron at first but then reconciles with him . 
 The trio then visit Xenophilius Lovegood to learn about a symbol seen several times on their journey . He tells them that the symbol represents the Deathly Hallows : the Elder Wand , the Resurrection Stone and the Cloak of Invisibility . Lovegood betrays them to the Death Eaters in an effort to have his kidnapped daughter returned . Harry has a vision of Voldemort learning from Grindelwald that the Elder Wand lies with Dumbledore in his grave . 
 The trio escape into the wilderness once more , but Snatchers appear and chase them . They are captured and taken to Malfoy Manor . Bellatrix Lestrange imprisons Harry and Ron in a cellar in which they discover Luna , Ollivander , and Griphook the goblin . Bellatrix tortures Hermione for information on how they got the sword of Gryffindor . After Dobby <unk> in the cellar to save them , and incapacitates Peter Pettigrew , a short battle ensues ; Harry duels and disarms Draco Malfoy . Narcissa Malfoy 's wand is taken by Dobby who says " Dobby has no master . Dobby is a free elf . And Dobby has come to save Harry Potter and his friends . " Dobby is killed by Bellatrix right after he helps Harry and the other captives escape . Meanwhile , Voldemort breaks into Dumbledore 's tomb and takes the Elder Wand . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Daniel Radcliffe as Harry Potter 
 Rupert Grint as Ron Weasley , one of Harry 's best friends . 
 Emma Watson as Hermione Granger , one of Harry 's best friends . 
 Helena Bonham Carter as Bellatrix Lestrange , a Death Eater and Sirius Black 's cousin and murderer . 
 Robbie Coltrane as Rubeus Hagrid , Harry 's half @-@ giant friend , and gamekeeper at Hogwarts . 
 Warwick Davis as Griphook , a goblin and former employee at Gringotts Bank . Davis replaced Verne Troyer , who portrayed the character physically in the first film , though Davis had dubbed Griphook 's lines . 
 Tom Felton as Draco Malfoy , a Death Eater and son of Lucius and Narcissa Malfoy . 
 Ralph Fiennes as Lord Voldemort , an evil , power @-@ hungry wizard , and the leader of the Death Eaters . 
 Michael Gambon as Albus Dumbledore , former headmaster of Hogwarts killed by Severus Snape in the previous film . 
 Brendan Gleeson as Alastor ' Mad @-@ Eye ' Moody , a member of the Order of the Phoenix . 
 Richard Griffiths as Vernon Dursley , Harry 's Muggle uncle . 
 John Hurt as Garrick Ollivander , a <unk> abducted by the Death Eaters . 
 Rhys Ifans as Xenophilius Lovegood , the eccentric father of the trio 's friend Luna . 
 Jason Isaacs as Lucius Malfoy , Draco Malfoy 's father and a disgraced Death Eater . 
 Bill Nighy as Rufus Scrimgeour , the new Minister of Magic . 
 Alan Rickman as Severus Snape , a double agent to the Death Eaters and the new headmaster of Hogwarts . 
 Fiona Shaw as Petunia Dursley , Harry 's Muggle aunt . 
 Timothy Spall as Peter Pettigrew , the Death Eater who betrayed Harry 's parents to Voldemort . 
 Imelda Staunton as Dolores Umbridge , Senior Undersecretary to the Minister and Head of the Muggle @-@ born Registration Commission . 
 David Thewlis as Remus Lupin , a member of the Order of the Phoenix and a former teacher at Hogwarts . 
 Julie Walters as Molly Weasley , the Weasley matriarch and a mother figure to Harry . 
 = = Production = = 
 Part 1 was filmed back @-@ to @-@ back with Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 from 19 February 2009 to 12 June 2010 . Director David Yates , who shot the film alongside director of photography Eduardo Serra , described Part 1 as " quite real " ; a " road movie " that 's " almost like a vérité documentary " . 
 The idea of splitting the final book into two films came from " creative imperative " and it was suggested by the executive producer Lionel Wigram . David Heyman , initially , responded negatively , but Wigram asked , “ No , David . How are we going to do it ? ” . After rereading the book and discussing it with Steve Kloves , he agreed with the division . 
 The production filmed at Dartford Crossing for the dramatic chase where Hagrid and Harry are being ambushed by Death Eaters . 
 = = = Sets = = = 
 Stuart Craig , set designer for all of the previous Harry Potter films , returned for the final two parts . He said , " We made a very different kind of film , which was shot a great deal on location . We travelled quite far , we built sets , and they spend a lot of time in a forest , " he explained . " We built forest sets and integrated them into the real forests , so there were challenges there , as you might imagine . " Craig was ultimately nominated for an Academy Award for his work on Part 1 . 
 On the wedding tent for Bill and Fleur 's wedding in Part 1 , Craig commented on his aim to " rather than make it an extension of the house , which is rather eccentric , homemade , we decided to make it rather elegant . . . It 's lined with silk and beautiful , floating candelabra . So it 's a nice contrast with the house . " For the Ministry of Magic set , he noted , " This is an underground world ; this is a ministry , so we went to the real ministries , the Muggle ministries – Whitehall , in London – and decided that our magical ministry was kind of a parallel universe to these real ministries . " 
 Craig also commented on his design of Malfoy Manor , saying that it is " a very strong architectural set . The exterior is based on an Elizabethan house here in this country called Hardwick Hall and it has massive windows , and these windows are kind of blinded out . The shutters are drawn so they are like blind windows and they have a real kind of presence , an ominous presence , so that gave us the basis for a good exterior . There 's an extraordinary magical roof that 's added and surrounded by forest which isn 't there in reality , but again is one of the devices to make it more threatening and mysterious . " 
 = = = Costumes = = = 
 The costumes for Part 1 were designed by Jany Temime , who has been the costume designer on Harry Potter productions since Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban ( 2004 ) . Temime was involved in a controversy regarding her work on Fleur Delacour 's wedding dress . She was accused of copying the design from a similar dress from Alexander McQueen 's Fall 2008 collection . Temime spoke about the dress , saying that she " wanted it to be a witch wedding dress but not a Halloween dress . The dress is white but it needed to have something fantastic to it . So there is the phoenix [ motif ] , the bird , which is a symbol of love in a way because there is rebirth , love never dies , it is born again . " 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 After working on every film since Prisoner of Azkaban , Double Negative was asked to provide visual effects for the final instalments of the story , in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Parts 1 and 2 . Working closely with the film 's VFX Supervisor , Tim Burke , the team was led by VFX Supervisor , David Vickery and VFX Producer Charlotte <unk> . The main team also included 3D Supervisor , Rick Leary and 2D Supervisor , Sean <unk> . 
 Double Negative 's work for Part 1 included the corroding Warner Brothers logo and extensive environment extensions of the Burrows and its surrounds . Additional environment work was completed on Xenophilius Lovegood 's home , extending it in 3D and culminating in the Death Eaters ' attack . Double Negative also advanced the Death Eaters ' smoke effects , with the introduction of the ' flayed man ' stage in between their smokey , fluid , flying state and their live @-@ action presence upon landing . Other work included the Patronus charm that interrupts the wedding party to inform the guests that Voldemort has taken over the Ministry of Magic . 
 The visual effects company Framestore produced most of the creature CGI , as in previous films , as well as the animated Tale of the Three Brothers sequence , which was directed and designed by Ben <unk> . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Composer Nicholas Hooper , who scored Order of the Phoenix and Half @-@ Blood Prince , did not return for Deathly Hallows . Instead , Alexandre Desplat was hired to compose the score for Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows − Part 1 . The film also featured the song " O Children " by Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The first official picture from the first film was released on 1 December 2009 ( 2009 @-@ 12 @-@ 01 ) , showing Harry , Ron and Hermione in a London street . A clip was officially released on 8 December 2009 ( 2009 @-@ 12 @-@ 08 ) with the release of Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince on Blu @-@ ray and DVD . At the 2010 ShoWest convention , Alan F. Horn premiered unfinished footage from both films . The 2010 MTV Movie Awards premiered more footage from Deathly Hallows . Following this was the release of the official teaser poster , which shows the release date of both Part 1 and Part 2 and a destroyed Hogwarts castle . ABC Family broadcast interviews and additional scenes from both parts during their Harry Potter weekend , which began on 8 July 2010 . A two @-@ minute trailer for the film was released worldwide on 22 September 2010 . 
 On 29 September 2010 , three character posters for Part 1 of Harry , Ron , and Hermione were released by Yahoo ! Movies . The following day , a Part 1 cinema poster was released featuring the trio on the run in a forest . The theatrical poster has the tagline " Nowhere is safe " , and another version with no credits has the tagline " The end begins " . Various other character posters for Part 1 were released on 6 October 2010 , featuring Harry , Ron , Hermione , Lord Voldemort , Bellatrix Lestrange , Severus Snape and Fenrir <unk> . On 12 October , four new character posters were released . The posters are set to the theme of " Trust no one " and " The hunt begins " . 
 On 15 October 2010 , tickets began selling on Fandango for the US release of Part 1 , and on 19 October , a 50 @-@ second clip featuring never @-@ before @-@ seen footage was aired at the 2010 Scream Awards . On 16 October , the second TV spot was released on Cartoon Network during a premiere of Scooby @-@ Doo ! Curse of the Lake Monster . On 25 October 2010 , Yahoo ! Movies released an exclusive featurette of the film . On 30 October 2010 , Entertainment Weekly released two new featurettes titled " Horcruxes " and " The Story " , featuring a large amount of never @-@ before @-@ seen footage . On the same day , the Warner Bros. Harry Potter website was updated to reveal twelve miniature clips from the film . 
 On 3 November 2010 , the Los Angeles Times released an extended clip of Harry leaving the Burrow to find the Horcruxes , titled " No One Else Is Going to Die for Me " . On 4 November , a new clip was released from the Harry Potter Facebook page , titled " The Seven Potters " . Two more clips were released over the next two days , including a scene depicting a café attack and another taking place in Malfoy Manor . 
 = = = Theatrical release = = = 
 On 26 August 2010 , director David Yates , producers David Heyman and David Barron , and with Warner Bros. president Alan F. Horn attended a test screening for Deathly Hallows – Part 1 in Chicago . The unfinished film gained rave reviews from test screeners , some of whom labelled it " amazing and dark " and " the most perfect Harry Potter film " . Others expressed that the film faithfully adapted the novel , which led to an inheritance of the " book 's own problems " . 
 Warner Bros. Pictures was originally going to release Part 1 of Deathly Hallows in 2D and 3D formats . On 8 October 2010 , it was announced that plans for a 3D version of Part 1 had been scrapped . " Warner Bros. Pictures has made the decision to release Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 in 2D , in both conventional and IMAX cinemas [ because ] we will not have a completed 3D version of the film within our release date window . Despite everyone 's best efforts , we were unable to convert the film in its entirety and meet the highest standards of quality . " Part 1 of Deathly Hallows was released on Blu @-@ ray 3D as a Best Buy Exclusive . Part 2 was still released in 2D , 3D , and IMAX formats . 
 The world premiere for Deathly Hallows – Part 1 was held in Leicester Square in London on 11 November 2010 , with fans from across the world turning up – some of whom had camped for days in the square . This was followed by the Belgian premiere on 12 November and the US premiere in New York City on 15 November . 
 Just 48 hours prior to the official North American launch of Part 1 , the first 36 minutes of the film were leaked on the internet . Even before the leak , the film was already the fifth @-@ biggest generator of advance ticket sales in history , after selling out 1 @,@ 000 cinemas across the United States . Despite widely circulating rumours that the leaked footage was a marketing ploy to generate hype for the movie release date , no screener discs had been created by Warner Bros. , and executives called it " a serious breach of copyright violation and theft of Warner Bros. property " . 
 In Australia , the film had its premiere on 13 November at Warner Bros. Movie World , located on the Gold Coast , Queensland . Three hundred people attended the viewing , which was the second official showing in the world , behind the UK premiere . The film premiered in Kuwait 's release on 16 November . In Israel , Estonia , and New Zealand , the film was released on 18 November . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 was released on a single disc DVD and 3 @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray combo pack on 11 April 2011 in the UK and on 15 April 2011 in the US . On 28 January 2011 , it was announced by Emma Watson on the Harry Potter UK Facebook page that the page 's fans will get to vote for their preferred cover for the Part 1 Blu @-@ ray . The cover with the most votes will be the cover for the disc . Voting started that same day . The DVD and Blu @-@ ray include eight deleted scenes , with the Blu @-@ ray Combo Pack containing an opening scene from Part 2 featuring Harry and Ollivander discussing the Deathly Hallows . Deathly Hallows – Part 1 performed well in DVD sales , selling 7 @,@ 237 @,@ 437 DVD units and adding $ 86 @,@ 932 @,@ 256 to the gross revenue of the film , bringing the total to $ 1 @,@ 043 @,@ 331 @,@ 967 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 grossed $ 24 million in North America during its midnight showing , beating the record for the highest @-@ grossing midnight gross of the series , previously held by Half Blood Prince , which grossed $ 22 @.@ 2 million . The film also had the third highest midnight gross of all time , behind The Twilight Saga : Eclipse and The Twilight Saga : New Moon , which grossed $ 30 million and $ 26 @.@ 3 million , respectively . The film broke the record for the highest midnight gross in IMAX , with $ 1 @.@ 4 million in box office sales , surpassing Eclipse , which grossed $ 1 million . All of these records were later topped in 2011 by the film 's sequel , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 . 
 In North America , the film grossed $ 61 @.@ 7 million on its opening day , marking the sixth highest single day gross ever at the time . It became the highest opening day for a Harry Potter film in the series , a record previously held by Half @-@ Blood Prince with $ 58 @.@ 2 million , until it was broken by Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 with $ 92 @.@ 1 million . The film grossed a total of $ 125 million in its opening weekend , marking the largest opening for the franchise , previously held by Goblet of Fire and later topped by its sequel Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 . It also was the second biggest November opening ever at the time , behind The Twilight Saga : New Moon 's $ 142 @.@ 8 million , the ninth biggest weekend opening for a film of all time at the North American box office , and the second biggest opening weekend for a 2010 film in the United States and Canada behind Iron Man 2 's $ 128 @.@ 1 million . The film stayed at the top of the box office for two weeks , grossing $ 75 million over the five @-@ day Thanksgiving weekend , bringing its total to $ 219 @.@ 1 million . 
 In the UK , Ireland , and Malta , the film broke records for the highest Friday gross ( £ 5 @.@ 9 million ) , Saturday gross ( £ 6 @.@ 6 million ) , and Sunday gross ( £ 5 @.@ 7 million ) . Additionally , the film set the largest single day gross ( £ 6 @.@ 6 million ) and the largest opening three @-@ day gross ( £ 18 @,@ 319 @,@ 721 ) , a record previously held by Quantum of Solace , which grossed £ 15 @.@ 4 million . As of 13 February 2011 , Part 1 has grossed £ 52 @,@ 404 @,@ 464 ( $ 86 @,@ 020 @,@ 929 ) , becoming the second highest @-@ grossing 2010 release in the country , behind Toy Story 3 ( £ 73 @,@ 405 @,@ 113 ) . 
 Outside North America , the film grossed an estimated $ 205 million in its opening weekend , becoming the sixth highest of all time , the highest for a 2010 release , and the second highest for a Harry Potter movie , behind only Half @-@ Blood Prince . Globally , the film grossed 30 million in its opening weekend , ranking seventh on the all @-@ time chart . 
 It was the highest grossing 2010 film in Indonesia ( $ 6 @,@ 149 @,@ 448 ) , Singapore ( $ 4 @,@ 546 @,@ 240 ) , Thailand ( $ 4 @,@ 933 @,@ 136 ) , Belgium and Luxembourg ( $ 8 @,@ 944 @,@ 329 ) , France and the Maghreb region ( $ 51 @,@ 104 @,@ 397 ) , Germany ( $ 61 @,@ 430 @,@ 098 ) , the Netherlands ( $ 13 @,@ 790 @,@ 585 ) , Norway ( $ 7 @,@ 144 @,@ 020 ) , Sweden ( $ 11 @,@ 209 @,@ 387 ) , and Australia ( $ 41 @,@ 350 @,@ 865 ) . In total overseas earnings , it surpassed The Philosopher 's Stone ( $ 657 @.@ 2 million ) to become the highest grossing Harry Potter film overseas . 
 On 7 April 2011 , Part 1 ended its run with $ 295 @,@ 983 @,@ 305 in the United States and Canada , making it the fifth highest grossing film of 2010 in these regions , and $ 664 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 from other countries around the world , for a worldwide total of $ 960 @,@ 283 @,@ 305 , making it the third highest grossing film of 2010 worldwide behind Toy Story 3 and Alice in Wonderland , as well as the 31st highest grossing film of all time worldwide and the third highest grossing Harry Potter film in the series behind The Deathly Hallows – Part 2 and The Philosopher 's Stone . 
 Due to the success of the sequel in Germany , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 could return to No. 9 on the country 's Cinema Charts with 28 @,@ 000 viewers in July 2011 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Deathly Hallows Part 1 received generally positive reviews . Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film as score of 78 % based on 250 reviews , with an average score of 7 @.@ 1 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads , " It can 't help but feel like the prelude it is , but Deathly Hallows : Part I is a beautifully filmed , emotionally satisfying penultimate instalment for the Harry Potter series . " On Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 based on reviews from critics , the film has a score of 65 ( indicating " generally favourable reviews " ) based on 41 reviews . The film scored 87 / 100 from professional critics at the Broadcast Film Critics Association . 
 The UK 's Daily Telegraph also gave the film a positive review , remarking , " For the most part the action romps along , spurred by some impressive special effects , " adding , " It 's just slightly disappointing that , with the momentum having been established so effectively , we now have to wait until next year to enjoy the rest of the ride . " Roger Ebert awarded the first part three out of four stars , praising the cast and calling it " a handsome and sometimes harrowing film . . . completely unintelligible for anyone coming to the series for the first time " . Scott Bowles of USA Today called it , " <unk> and meditative , Hallows is arguably the best instalment of the planned eight @-@ film franchise , though audiences who haven 't kept up with previous chapters will be hopelessly lost " , while Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly likewise praised the film as " the most cinematically rewarding chapter yet . " In a review for the Orlando Sentinel , Roger Moore proclaimed Part I as " Alternately funny and touching , it 's the best film in the series , an Empire Strikes Back for these wizards and their wizarding world . And those effects ? They 're so special you don 't notice them . " Ramin <unk> of Newsweek gave a negative review , saying that " They 've taken one of the most enchanting series in contemporary fiction and sucked out all the magic . . . while Rowling 's stories are endlessly inventive , Potter onscreen just gives you a headache . " Lou Lumenick of the New York Post found the film to be " Beautifully shot but a soulless cash machine , " and that it " delivers no dramatic payoff , no resolution and not much fun . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 was nominated for Best Art Direction and Best Visual Effects at the 83rd Academy Awards . It is the second film in the Harry Potter film series to be nominated for a Visual Effects Oscar ( the previous one being Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban ) . The film was long @-@ listed for eight different categories including Best Cinematography , Production Design and Original Score at the 64th BAFTA awards , and ultimately was nominated for Best Special Visual Effects and Make @-@ up . 
 = Antigua and Barbuda at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 Antigua and Barbuda competed at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China , submitting a delegation that included athletes Daniel Bailey , Brendan Christian , James Grayman , and Sonia Williams in track and field events , and Kareem Valentine in swimming . Antigua and Barbuda 's appearance in Beijing marked its eighth appearance at the Summer Olympics since the nation 's debut at the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montréal , Canada . There were no medalists from Antigua and Barbuda in 2008 , although Bailey reached the quarterfinals and Christian the semifinals of their respective events . 
 = = Background = = 
 Antigua and Barbuda participated in eight Olympic Games between its debut at the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montréal and its 2008 appearance in Beijing , competing in every edition except for the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow . The 2008 Summer Olympic delegation was smaller than those of the 1980s and 1990s , when they were composed of thirteen or more athletes , but , with five participants , it was the same size that it had been at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens . As of the conclusion of the Beijing Games , no Antiguan or Barbudan athlete has won a medal , although Brendan Christian progressed to semifinals and Daniel Bailey to quarterfinals of their respective events in 2008 . At the 2008 games Kareem Valentine was the youngest athlete at fifteen years of age and Sonia Williams was the eldest at twenty @-@ nine . 
 The Foreign Ministry of Antigua and Barbuda supported the Chinese handling of the civil unrest in Tibet , an issue marred in controversy due to self @-@ immolations by Tibetans and numerous crackdowns on protesters , and expressed support for Chinese efforts to host the Olympics in Beijing despite the controversy . The flag @-@ bearer for the Games was James Grayman , an Antiguan athlete . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 = = = Men 's 100 meters = = = 
 Antigua Track Club athlete Daniel Everton " <unk> " Bailey competed in the men 's 100 m dash on behalf of Antigua and Barbuda and was that year 's only Antiguan to take part in the event . His participation in Beijing marked his second appearance in the Olympic games , following the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens . In Beijing he was assigned to Heat 1 during the first round on August 14 , competing against Usain Bolt of Jamaica and Vicente Lima of Brazil , among others . Bailey ran the event in 10 @.@ 24 seconds , coming in second place in a heat of eight people , placing behind heat leader Bolt by 0 @.@ 04 seconds and ahead of Lima by 0 @.@ 02 seconds . Overall , in the first round , Bailey tied Trinidad and Tobago 's Richard Thompson for tenth place out of eighty athletes . 
 Bailey advanced to the quarterfinals , which occurred later that day . Bailey was placed in Heat 5 against , among others , the United States ' Walter Dix and Jamaica 's Asafa Powell , completing the second round in 10 @.@ 23 seconds . He ranked fourth out of eight in the event , falling behind Derrick Atkins of the Bahamas ( 3rd place with a time of 10 @.@ 14 seconds ) and ahead of Ghana 's Aziz <unk> ( 5th place with a time of 10 @.@ 24 seconds ) . Overall , Bailey tied Japan 's Naoki <unk> for twentieth place out of forty remaining athletes and did not progress to semifinals . 
 = = = Men 's 200 meters = = = 
 Former University of Texas at Austin student Brendan Kyle Akeem Christian participated on behalf of Antigua and Barbuda in the 200 m dash at the Beijing Olympics . Christian , who broke the best American high school time in the 100 m and 200 m dashes , is the son of former Olympian Donald Christian , a cyclist for Antigua and Barbuda at the 1976 Summer Olympics . Brendan 's participation marked his second Olympic appearance , having competed in the 2004 Summer Olympics . In Beijing he raced in Heat 8 during the first round of the event on August 17 . He ranked second place out of eight athletes , falling behind heat leader Aaron Armstrong of Trinidad and Tobago by 0 @.@ 01 seconds and placing ahead of Canada 's Jared Connaughton by 0 @.@ 02 seconds . Overall , Christian tied Trinidad and Tobago 's Rondel <unk> and Japan 's Shinji <unk> for ninth place out of sixty @-@ six athletes . 
 The next day Christian participated in the quarterfinals and was placed in Heat 3 against athletes that included Churandy Martina of the Netherlands Antilles and Kristof <unk> of Belgium . Christian took first place in the race with a time of 20 @.@ 26 seconds , beating second @-@ place finalist Martina by 0 @.@ 18 seconds and ranking second overall out of thirty @-@ two athletes . Christian fell behind the overall quarterfinal leader Brian Dzingai of Zimbabwe by 0 @.@ 03 seconds and defeated the United States ' Walter Dix by 0 @.@ 01 seconds . Christian advanced to semifinals , which took place on the same day . 
 Christian competed in Heat 2 against Usain Bolt of Jamaica , Shawn Crawford of the United States , and Kim Collins of Saint Kitts and Nevis , among others , and ranked fifth out of eight after running a time of 20 @.@ 29 seconds . Collins ran 0 @.@ 04 seconds faster than Christian , while Mauritius ' Stephen Buckland ran 0 @.@ 11 seconds slower . Christian did not advance to the final round . 
 = = = Men 's high jump = = = 
 James Grayman competed in the Beijing Olympics as Antigua and Barbuda 's sole high jumper , where he participated in the second qualifying heat on August 17 against athletes that included Brazil 's Jesse Lima and the Czech Republic 's Tomas <unk> . Grayman cleared a 2 @.@ 20 meter height on his second attempt , placing behind tenth @-@ place heat finalist Dmytro Dem <unk> of the Ukraine , who made the height on his first try , and eleventh @-@ place heat finalist Linus <unk> of Sweden , who also made the height on his second attempt , but had fewer overall misses than Grayman . He finished ahead of the three thirteenth @-@ place heat finalists ( Italy 's Alessandro <unk> , Spain 's Javier Bermejo , and Botswana 's <unk> <unk> ) and the sixteenth @-@ place heat finalist ( Hup Wei Lee of Malaysia ) who achieved the same height , but did so in three tries . Overall , Grayman ranked 28th out of 40 competitors and did not advance to finals on August 19 . 
 = = = Women 's 100 meters = = = 
 Sonia Williams competed for Antigua and Barbuda in the women 's 100 m dash and was the only female member of the Antiguan national delegation in Beijing . Her participation these Games marked her second Olympic appearance , her first having been at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta . In Beijing Williams participated in the first round of the event on August 15 , when she was placed in Heat 5 against athletes that included Belgian Kim Gevaert and Belarusian Yuliya <unk> . She completed the race in 12 @.@ 04 seconds , finishing sixth out of eight athletes . Guam 's Cora <unk> , the seventh place finalist , ran 1 @.@ 35 seconds slower than Williams , while the fifth place finalist , <unk> Fukushima of Japan , ran 0 @.@ 3 seconds faster . Gevaert , who was the heat leader , earned a time that was 0 @.@ 71 seconds faster than Williams ' . Overall , Williams ranked 54th out of 85 athletes and did not progress to quarterfinals . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 Men 
 Track & road events 
 Field events 
 Women 
 Track & road events 
 = = Swimming = = 
 Fifteen @-@ year @-@ old Kareem " <unk> " Valentine Sandoval was the only person to compete in a swimming event from Antigua and Barbuda in 2008 . At the time he was in his third year in high school . He competed in the men 's 50 m freestyle , taking part in the August 14 preliminaries . His participation in the event marked the fifth time that he had swum in a pool , as he usually practiced in the ocean . During the course of his event Valentine was placed in Heat 2 of 12 against swimmers that included <unk> <unk> of Laos . Valentine swam the event in 31 @.@ 23 seconds , ranking fifth among six competitors . <unk> <unk> <unk> of the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( 6th ) finished nearly four seconds behind him with a time of 35 @.@ 19 seconds , while <unk> led the heat with a time of 29 @.@ 31 seconds . Overall , Valentine ranked 96th out of 97 swimmers in the event and did not advance to semifinals , which were held that same day . 
 Men 
 = Cadbury Castle , Somerset = 
 Cadbury Castle , formerly known as <unk> , is a Bronze and Iron Age hillfort in the civil parish of South Cadbury in the English county of Somerset . It is a scheduled monument and has been associated with King Arthur 's legendary court at " Camelot " . 
 The hillfort is formed by a 7 @.@ 28 hectares ( 18 @.@ 0 acres ) plateau surrounded by ramparts on the surrounding slopes of the limestone Cadbury Hill . The site has been excavated in the late 19th and early 20th century by James Bennett and Harold St George Gray . More recent examination of the site was conducted in the 1960s by Leslie Alcock and since 1992 by the South Cadbury Environs Project . These have revealed artifacts from human occupation and use from the Neolithic through the Bronze and Iron Ages . The site was reused by the Roman forces and again from c . 470 until some time after 580 . In the 11th century , it temporarily housed a Saxon mint . Evidence of various buildings at the site has been unearthed , including a " Great Hall " , round and rectangular house foundations , metalworking , and a possible sequence of small rectangular temples or shrines . 
 = = Background = = 
 Hillforts developed in the Late Bronze and Early Iron ages , around the start of the first millennium BC . The reason for their emergence in prehistoric Britain and their purpose has been a subject of debate . It has been argued that they could have been military sites constructed in response to invasion from continental Europe , sites built by invaders , or a military reaction to social tensions caused by an increasing population and consequent pressure on agriculture . The dominant view since the 1960s has been that the increasing use of iron led to social changes in Britain . Deposits of iron ore were located in different places from the tin and copper ore necessary to make bronze and , as a result , trading patterns shifted . The old elites lost their economic and social status and power passed into the hands of a new group of people . 
 Archaeologist Barry Cunliffe believes that population increase still played a role and has stated that " the forts provided defensive possibilities for the community at those times when the stress of an increasing population burst out into open warfare . But I would not see them as having been built because there was a state of war . They would be functional as defensive strongholds when there were tensions and undoubtedly some of them were attacked and destroyed , but this was not the only , or even the most significant , factor in their construction " . 
 = = Early occupation of the site = = 
 The earliest settlement on the site is represented by pits and post holes dated with Neolithic pottery and flints . These are the remains of a small agricultural settlement which was unenclosed . Bones recovered from the site have been radiocarbon dated to 3500 and 3300 BC . A bank under the later Iron Age defences is likely to be a <unk> or terrace derived from early ploughing of the hilltop . The site was also occupied in the Late Bronze Age , from which ovens have been identified . Radical revisions of the Bronze Age archaeology on the lower slopes resulted from discoveries during excavations and survey work by the South Cadbury Environs Project . Finds include the first Bronze Age shield from an excavation in northwest Europe , an example of the distinctive Yetholm @-@ type . Carbon dating implies that the shield was deposited in the 10th century BC , although metallurgical evidence suggests that it was manufactured two centuries earlier . A metal @-@ working building and associated enclosure were discovered 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) south east of the hillfort , roughly contemporary with the period of manufacture . 
 Human occupation continued throughout the Iron Age . A stone enclosure was constructed around 300 BC with timber <unk> , and ploughing ceased within the hilltop site . Excavations have shown the signs of four and six post rectangular buildings which were gradually replaced with roundhouses . Large ramparts and elaborate timber defences were constructed and refortified over the following centuries . Excavation revealed round and rectangular house foundations , metalworking , and a possible sequence of small rectangular temples or shrines , indicating permanent oppidum @-@ like occupation . Excavations were undertaken by local clergyman James Bennett in 1890 and Harold St George Gray in 1913 , followed by major work led by archaeologist Leslie Alcock from 1966 – 1970 . He identified a long sequence of occupation on the site and many of the finds are displayed in the Museum of Somerset in Taunton . The finds from the Late Bronze Age to the Early Iron Age , exploring the ramparts and southwestern gate structure , represent one of the deepest and most complex Iron Age stratigraphic sequences excavated in southern Britain . 
 = = Castle = = 
 During the first century BC additional lines of bank and ditch were constructed turning it into a multivallate hillfort which is now known as the castle . There is evidence that the fort was violently taken in around AD 43 and that the defences were further slighted later in the 1st century after the construction of a Roman army barracks on the hilltop . Excavations of the southwest gate in 1968 and 1969 revealed evidence for one or more severe violent episodes , associated with weaponry and destruction by fire . Whereas the excavator , Leslie Alcock , believed this to have been dated to around AD 70 , Richard Tabor argues for a date associated with the initial invasion , either AD 43 or 44 . Michael <unk> states that it was the site of vigorous resistance by the Durotriges and Dobunni to the second Augusta Legion under the command of Vespasian . 
 There was significant activity at the site during the late third and fourth centuries , which may have included the construction of a Romano @-@ British temple . 
 = = Post @-@ Roman occupation = = 
 Following the withdrawal of the Roman administration , the site is thought to have been in use from c . 470 until some time after 580 . Alcock revealed a substantial " Great Hall " 20 by 10 metres ( 66 ft × 33 ft ) and showed that the innermost Iron Age defences had been refortified , providing a defended site double the size of any other known fort of the period . Shards of pottery from the eastern Mediterranean were also found from this period , indicating wide trade links . It therefore seems probable that it was the chief <unk> ( " fort " ) of a major Brythonic ruler , his family , his teulu ( literally meaning " family " , but actually meaning " warband " ) , servants , and horses . 
 Between 1010 and 1020 , the hill was reoccupied for use as a temporary Saxon mint , standing in for that at Ilchester . Some small @-@ scale fortification of the site may also have occurred in the 13th century . 
 = = Description = = 
 Cadbury Castle is located 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) north east of Yeovil . It stands on the summit of Cadbury Hill , a limestone hill situated on the southern edge of the Somerset Levels , with flat lowland to the north . The summit is 153 m ( 500 ft ) above sea @-@ level on lias stone . 
 The hill is surrounded by terraced earthwork banks and ditches and a stand of trees . On the north west and south sides there are 4 ramparts , with two remaining on the east . The summit plateau covers 7 @.@ 28 hectares ( 18 @.@ 0 acres ) , and is surrounded by the inner bank which is 1 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 75 mi ) long . The hill fort is overlooked by <unk> , a rural plateau rich in archaeological remains . Due to scrub and tree growth the site has been added to the Heritage at Risk register . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 The suffix <unk> or sometimes byrig " ; byrig is the Anglo @-@ Saxon word meaning " fort " or " town " , which is frequently , but not exclusively , used to refer to hill @-@ forts . The first part of the name may come from the River Cam as with nearby villages the villages of West Camel and Queen Camel . Other scholars suggest a derivation from some figure named " <unk> " or " Cada " . It is one of three sites in Somerset to include the Cadbury name , the others being Cadbury Camp , near Tickenham and Cadbury Hill which is also known as Cadbury @-@ Congresbury to distinguish it from the other sites . 
 Local tradition , first written down by John Leland in 1542 , holds that Cadbury Castle was King Arthur 's Camelot . The site and the Great Hall are extensive , and the writer Geoffrey Ashe argued in an article in the journal Speculum that it was the base for the Arthur of history . His opinion has not been widely accepted by all students of the period . 
 Militarily , the location makes sense as a place where refugees and the southwestern Brythons of Dumnonia could have defended themselves against attacks from the east . If Arthur was indeed conceived at Tintagel , as tradition asserts , he may have been a prince of Dumnonia and used Cadbury as a stronghold on his eastern frontier . 
 = = South Cadbury Environs Project = = 
 The recent work on the archaeology of the site and the surrounding area has been carried out by the South Cadbury Environs Project . Since 1992 the project team , which included local volunteers South East Somerset Archaeological and Historical Society and the Yeovil Archaeology and Local History Society , have carried out geophysical surveys including <unk> and electrical resistivity tomography , <unk> sampling , test pits , deeper excavations and geographic information system ( GIS ) approaches . The project had input from academics and archaeologists from the universities of Bristol , Glasgow , Birmingham and Oxford , funded by the Leverhulme Trust and Arts and Humanities Research Council . The project studies the castle and surrounding area up to 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) away , using landscape sampling , 
 = I Stay in Love = 
 " I Stay in Love " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey from her eleventh studio album , E = MC ² ( 2008 ) . It was written and produced by Carey and Bryan @-@ Michael Cox , with additional songwriting from Adonis Shropshire and Kendrick Dean . It was released by Island Def Jam on October 28 , 2008 , as the fourth single from the album . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " I Stay in Love " was written and produced by Mariah Carey and Bryan @-@ Michael Cox , with additional songwriting from Adonis Shropshire and Kendrick Dean , for Carey 's eleventh studio album , E = MC ² ( 2008 ) . Carey produced the track for Maroon Entertainment and by Cox for <unk> Inc . Copyright is held by Rye Songs which is administered by Songs of Universal ( BMI ) / W.B.M. Music Corp. O / D / O itself and Songs in the key of B Flat / <unk> South / EMI Foray Music O / B / O itself and Phoenix Ave . Publishing / Christian Combs Publishing ( SESAC ) . The song was recorded by Brian Garten at Stone Groove Studios in New York , and mixed by Phil Tan for <unk> Productions , Inc . All instrumentation was performed by Cox , while Carey sung all the lead and background vocals . In an interview with Ed Lover for the radio station Power 105 in New York City , Carey revealed that the song was one of her favorites from the album and that she recorded her vocals within a day . Following the commercial underperformance of the album 's third single , " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " , " I Stay in Love " was released as the fourth single from E = MC ² . In the United States , it was serviced to mainstream , rhythmic and urban radio stations on October 28 , 2008 . A four @-@ track EP consisting of remixes by Jody den Broeder and Ralphi Rosario was released in the United States on December 16 , 2008 . 
 " I Stay in Love " is a " beat @-@ driven " and " piano @-@ laced " ballad , that is influenced by pop and R & B music genres . The song 's instrumentation is derived from a piano melody , and is backed by a strong computerized drum @-@ beat . It is composed in the key of D ♭ major , with Carey 's vocals spanning from the low note of D ♭ 3 to the high note of G ♭ 5 . The song moves at a slow tempo of 65 beats per minute in cut time , and it follows a chord progression of D ♭ – B ♭ m7 – G ♭ – A ♭ . The song features a " double voice " effect during its final chorus , where Carey 's normal singing tone throughout the rest of the song is combined with her raised pitch . She raises the pitch one octave , and layers it over her normal tone . Lyrically , the song finds Carey getting " her cry on with the connect @-@ the @-@ dots break @-@ up track . " She describes the old time she shared with her lover . She also admits that even though they did attempt to save their relationship , and that she knows that it is definitely over , she still " stays in love with him " . 
 On the United States ' Billboard Dance Club Songs chart , " I Stay in Love " became Carey 's fourteenth number @-@ one song on February 14 , 2009 . The track peaked at thirty @-@ seven on the Rhythmic chart , number eighty @-@ one on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , and number ninety @-@ five on the Pop 100 chart . The track reached number ninety @-@ five on the UK Singles Chart . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " I Stay in Love " garnered generally positive reviews from music critics . Many complimented the song 's piano @-@ driven melody , as well as Carey 's vocals , while some felt it was too similar to her previous single , " We Belong Together " ( 2005 ) . In his review of E = MC ² , Kevin O 'Hare of The Republican wrote that Carey " shines " on the song , while Fox News ' Roger Friedman described it as " a killer ballad . " People 's Chuck Arnold named it the best ballad on the album , calling it " pretty " . The Houston Chronicle 's writer Joey Guerra described the single as a " gently grooving ballad that Janet Jackson should be recording instead of wasting her time on tired sex clichés " , while commenting , " It 's doubtful , however , that Jackson could reach the notes Carey effortlessly hits at the end of the song " . Richard Cromelin from the Los Angeles Times highlighted Carey 's raw form of singing on the track , writing , " its unadorned , and her voice is almost leathery in the lower notes . It 's not flattering , but it rings true emotionally . " Nick Levine of Digital Spy called " I Stay in Love " a " fairly modern Mariah track " and that although he believed it was a " retread " of one of Carey 's previous singles " We Belong Together " ( 2005 ) , it is not an " unpleasant retread " . 
 Michael Slezak from Entertainment Weekly wrote that the song is " a slower , less addictive variation " of " We Belong Together " . Newsday critic , Glenn Gamboa , also called it a " We Belong Together @-@ sh ballad " . In separate reviews of the song , both David Balls and Nick Levine of Digital Spy also compared the song to Carey 's " We Belong Together " ; the former rated " I Stay in Love " three out of five stars , and wrote , " It may not be the most original of songs , but Carey 's emotion @-@ packed vocals make this a pleasant treat after some vacuous recent offerings . " Freedom De Luc from The Washington Post described the song as an " emotive ballad " , while Nekesa Mumbi Moody from Foster 's Daily Democrat noted " it could have been recorded in her early ' 90s heyday — except it 's not as saccharine as some of her early work " . However , Evan Sawdey of PopMatters described it as one of the album 's " worst songs " . 
 = = Music video play = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Directed by Carey 's husband Nick Cannon , the music video for " I Stay in Love " was filmed in Las Vegas , Nevada , using a story line that Cannon and Carey co @-@ wrote . Carey filmed the video on October 5 , at The Bank Nightclub of The Bellagio Hotel and Casino Resort , and in the Mojave Desert on October 6 , 2008 . In an interview with Ryan Seacrest , Cannon spoke about the video and said that there is a scene where Carey is in bed with a man ( played by Andrew <unk> ) , and that " Mariah plays the showgirl and there 's a guy who cheated and there 's flashbacks ...... " . The music video for " I Stay In Love " was featured on BET 's Access Granted for a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes look and a world premiere on October 27 , 2008 . The entire video was shown every hour on BET until October 28 , 2008 . " I Stay in Love " music video peaked at # 16 on Billboard 's Hot Videoclip Tracks chart . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video , black @-@ and @-@ white , begins with Carey parking her antique automobile in desert . She gets out , with customized black boots with an ' M ' on them , and as , she walks towards the camera , the vehicle explodes . As the music begins and the scene shifts to another where Carey applying her eye make @-@ up and earrings . As a form of product placement , her fragrance is shown on a dresser in her Boudoir . As Carey finishes getting ready , scenery of Las Vegas is shown , before shifting to Carey , now dressed as a Vegas performer . As she walks down a runway dressed in white garments ad feathers , she catches the attention of a man . He turns out to be Carey 's ex @-@ lover , who in turn came to the show to meet with one of Carey 's fellow dancers . As he caresses the female in the dressing room , Carey sees them , and walks by them , bumping into him purposely . Additional scenes are shown of Carey laying alone on the dark runway , apparently after the show has finished , as well as preparing herself for the show . During the second verse , the video then shows Carey driving down a highway in the desert , and as she drives , past memories of the pair are shown , holding each other intimately in a bed . She then pushes old gifts he had given her into the passengers seat , and pulls over the car , continuing the scene from the beginning of the video . After the car explodes , Carey tears off her necklace in despair , and begins to flail her arms in desperation . The video ends with Carey back at the show in Vegas during the finale , as glitter drops from the top of the stage . Carey , now back in the desert , looks for another ride , and gets into a black Cadillac Escalade driven by Nick Cannon . 
 = = = Reception and Luscious Pink commercial = = = 
 Nick Levine from Digital Spy complimented the video , commenting that it managed " to be both ridiculous and a little bit moving - quite an achievement . " Entertainment Weekly writer Michael Slezak described Carey 's boots as " hot " , and considered the cinematography of the music video " gorgeous " . He also complimented several aspects of the video , saying , " Mariah ’ s bod looks totally smokin ’ , even if her entire wardrobe should be donated to a charity benefiting teenage <unk> and / or truck @-@ stop hookers . Also : That Wentworth Miller 2 @.@ 0 ain ’ t hard on the eyes , either ( in reference to the man who played her love interest in " We Belong Together " ) . 
 The commercial for Carey 's Luscious Pink fragrance uses part of the " I Stay in Love " music video , with a clip of the song used as audio . The short clip shows Carey getting ready for the Vegas show , by applying her make @-@ up and lipstick , and also applying the fragrance on her neck and cleavage . The release published on Carey 's official website described the concept of the commercial as " a combination of Mariah 's two passions - music and fragrance . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Due to promotion for E = MC ² and the single , Carey was featured as a guest judge and musical act on the fifth series of the popular British talent competition , The X Factor . During that week , all the contestants would have to sing songs from Carey 's catalog . Prior to her arrival , one of the show 's judges Dannii Minogue said " Could it get any more nerve @-@ wracking for the contestants ? " , due to the general strenuous nature of Carey 's songs . Before any of the performances by the finalists , Carey performed " I Stay in Love " , accompanied by three background vocalists . She received a standing ovation from the audience and judges , and continued backstage for a taped session with the contestants . At the end of the program , she performed her classic " Hero " ( 1993 ) , and was eventually joined by the finalists for the finale of the song . " Hero " was re @-@ recorded by the 2008 UK X Factor finalists and released as a single , becoming the second best @-@ selling single of 2008 in the United Kingdom . According to reports , the episode gained a large increase in viewers due to Carey 's presence , and was able to surpass its long @-@ time rival program , Strictly Come Dancing , in the ratings . Carey also made an appearance at the American Music Awards of 2008 on November 23 , at the Nokia Theatre . Wearing a long black gown , she performed the song after receiving an honorary award for her achievements in music . Chris Harris from MTV News described it as a " riveting performance " . 
 = = Formats = = 
 Remix EP 
 " I Stay In Love " ( Jody den <unk> Radio Edit ) – 4 : 08 
 " I Stay In Love " ( Ralph Rosario Melodic Radio Edit ) – 3 : 50 
 " I Stay In Love " ( Jody Den Broeder House Mix ) – 8 : 29 
 " I Stay In Love " ( Ralph Rosario Big Vocal ) – 8 : 12 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Sweets and Sour Marge = 
 " Sweets and Sour Marge " is the eighth episode of The Simpsons ' thirteenth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 20 , 2002 . In the episode , Homer gathers several of Springfield 's citizens to participate in creating the biggest human pyramid in the world . It fails , but they instead learn that Springfield is the world 's fattest town , prompting Homer 's wife Marge to sue Garth Motherloving 's sugar company . 
 " Sweets and Sour Marge " was written by Carolyn Omine and directed by Mark Kirkland . It was dedicated to the memory of Ron Taylor . Omine conceived the episode after hearing about smokers who sued tobacco companies . While its plot is loosely based on Erin Brockovich , the episode also features references to Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory , What 's Eating Gilbert Grape and Butterfinger . It also features Ben Stiller as Garth Motherloving . In its original broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately 7 @.@ 5 million viewers , finishing in 34th place in the ratings the week it aired . Following its home video release , the episode received mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer buys a book on world records published by Duff at a library sale . After boring everyone with world record trivia , Homer decides to break a record himself . He gathers the whole town to build the world 's tallest human pyramid . After Jimbo and Kearney move their hands just before the record is claimed , the pyramid collapses into a giant sphere that rolls through town , taking in Agnes Skinner , Hans Moleman , and a suicidal man about to jump from a ledge onto the street . The entire town rolls to a truck weighing station and the Duff record book officials say that Springfield is the world 's fattest town ( to which Homer responds : " Take THAT , Milwaukee ! " ) 
 The townsfolk are happy to have made it in the record book , but Marge is worried that the whole town is overweight . She discovers that there is sugar in nearly everything Springfielders eat . After complaining to Garth Motherloving , head of the " Motherloving Sweets and Sugar Company " ( voiced by Ben Stiller ) , Marge decides to sue the sugar industry with the help of Gil and Professor Frink . Judge Snyder sides with her and bans all sugar products in Springfield , angering Homer and most of the town . 
 The whole town goes cold turkey and begins to suffer from intense sugar withdrawal . Homer joins a secret group led by Garth Motherloving to smuggle sugar from the island of San <unk> . After arriving back in Springfield , and evading a police boat , Homer brings the sugar to the docks . Marge pleads Homer to dump the cargo . There Homer is presented with two choices : to obey Marge and press the button Drop Cargo or bring the sugar to Garth Motherloving by pressing the button Obey Bad Guy . After contemplating , Homer drops the cargo and all the sugar falls to the Springfield docks ' water . All Springfielders , even those who seemed happier and healthier without sugar , jump into the harbor and drink the sugar water . Judge Snyder then declares the ban over and dives in with everyone else . Marge is upset and she thinks about giving up changing the world . However , Homer tells her that he loves her when she tries to make a world a better place . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Sweets and Sour Marge " was written by Carolyn Omine and directed by Mark Kirkland . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 20 , 2002 . The idea for the episode was pitched by Omine , who based it on a lawsuit at the time , wherein smokers sued tobacco companies for selling harmful wares . Omine found it " kinda weird " that the people did not take responsibility for their own health , and joked that , in the future , people might sue food companies for " making them fat " , which eventually became the episode 's plot . While making the episode , the Simpsons writers decided to compile a list of Springfield 's fat residents . According to Omine , the list " never ended " , and when the writers realized the amount of fat people there were in Springfield , they decided that the residents should try and " go for the world record " in the " fattest people " category . The writers then decided that the residents were trying to set the world record for largest human pyramid , and then accidentally set the record for fattest population . The episode features the first appearance of Cletus ' cousin Dia @-@ Betty . The character was animated by Kirkland 's assistant Matt Faughnan , who has since become a regular director for the series . Garth Motherloving , the head of the " Motherloving Sweets and Sugar Company " , was portrayed by American actor and comedian Ben Stiller . 
 At one point in the episode , the Springfield residents try to set the record for largest human pyramid , which fails when the pyramid collapses , causing the people to roll into a giant ball . According to director Kirkland , the scene , which the staff members refer to as the " people ball " , was very difficult to animate , and it " almost gave [ him ] a migraine " determining how to implement it in the episode . While trying to figure out how to animate the " people ball " , Kirkland spray @-@ painted a globe with white primer and assigned layout artist Paul Wee to draw the Springfield citizens on it with black ink . Normally , the Simpsons animators each draw ten scenes per week , but because he drew the " people ball " , Wee was excused from these duties . Since drawing the " people ball " by hand would have " murdered " the animators , they soon decided to photograph it for each frame of the scene . The photographs were taken in Kirkland 's garage and were then photocopied using a Xerox photocopier . Executive producer and current showrunner Al Jean stated that the technique for animating the " people ball " was " extremely interesting " , although it has never been used again in the series . The " master drawing " of the human pyramid , which Kirkland also stated was very complicated , took animator Matthew Schofield a couple of days to draw . The drawing then became a reference for the other animators to use when animating the scene . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Sweets and Sour Marge " ' s plot is loosely based on the 2000 drama film Erin Brockovich , which revolves around Erin Brockovich 's legal fight against the US West Coast energy corporation Pacific Gas and Electric Company . The Duff Book of World Records is a parody on the annually published reference book Guinness Book of World Records . Cereal mascot Count <unk> is a spoof on the General Mills cereal mascot Count <unk> ( who , in turn , parodies fictional character Count Dracula ) . After sugar becomes banned in Springfield , the town 's police force can be seen burning confiscated sugar products . However , when they throw an amount of Butterfinger candy bars in the fire , the bars start to glow and are left intact . Disappointed , police chief Clancy Wiggum explains " <unk> . Even fire doesn 't want them . " For a long time , The Simpsons characters starred in Butterfinger commercials , which helped the series get launched by earning revenue from the commercials . Around the time " Sweets and Sour Marge " was written , the series contract with Butterfinger was terminated , and the staff therefore decided to make fun of it . " If it had still been in existence , we wouldn 't have done it " , Jean said in the DVD commentary for the episode . Cletus ' cousin Dia @-@ Betty is loosely based on Darlene Cates ' character Bonnie Grape in the 1993 film What 's Eating Gilbert Grape . Before he agrees to hand the sugar cargo to Motherloving , Homer demands that he gets to see an Oompa Loompa , a character from the 1964 children 's book Charlie and the Chocolate Factory . The Oompa Loompa 's design is based on the version used in the 1971 film adaptation Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory , which Kirkland watched in order to " get [ the design ] right . " 
 = = Release = = 
 In its original American broadcast on January 20 , 2002 , " Sweets and Sour Marge " received a 7 @.@ 3 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 7 @.@ 5 million viewers . The episode finished in 34th place in the ratings for the week of January 14 @-@ 20 , 2002 . On August 24 , 2010 , " Sweets and Sour Marge " was released as part of The Simpsons : The Complete Thirteenth Season DVD and Blu @-@ ray set . Al Jean , Carolyn Omine , Matt Selman , Tom Gammill , Max Pross , Mark Kirkland and Matt Warburton participated in the audio commentary of the episode . 
 Following its home video release , " Sweets and Sour Marge " received mixed reviews from critics . Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide gave the episode a positive review , writing " What would Marge do on the show if she didn ’ t stage campaigns to tell others what to do ? Despite the risk of redundancy , ' Sweets ' actually works quite well . " He praised Stiller 's appearance in the episode , as well as the " exploration of the records book " . He concluded his review by considering it " one of Season 13 's stronger programs " . Nate Boss of Project @-@ Blu was favorable as well , calling the episode " A funny take on class @-@ action suits ( particularly those concerning other consumer products willingly purchased , like tobacco ) , as well as prohibition . " DVD Verdict 's Jennifer Malkowski gave the episode a B rating , and wrote that the " library 's ' Yes , we have pornography ! ' banner " was the episode 's " highlight " . Giving it a more mixed review , Ron Martin of 411Mania called the episode " uneven at best , mediocre at worst " . Andre Dellamorte of Collider described it as a " redress " of the season 8 episode " Homer vs. the Eighteenth Amendment " , in which Springfield is faced with prohibition . Giving the episode a negative review , IGN 's R.L. Shaffer wrote that " Sweet and Sour Marge " , along with " Homer the Moe " , " The Frying Game " , and " The Old Man and the Key " " represent some of the worst of The Simpsons " . 
 = Michael Sheen = 
 Michael Sheen , OBE ( born 5 February 1969 ) is a Welsh actor . After training at London 's Royal Academy of Dramatic Art ( RADA ) , he worked mainly in theatre throughout the 1990s and made notable stage appearances in Romeo and Juliet ( 1992 ) , Don 't Fool With Love ( 1993 ) , Peer Gynt ( 1994 ) , The Seagull ( 1995 ) , The Homecoming ( 1997 ) , and Henry V ( 1997 ) . His performances in Amadeus at the Old Vic and Look Back in Anger at the National Theatre were nominated for Olivier Awards in 1998 and 1999 , respectively . In 2003 , he was nominated for a third Olivier Award for his performance in Caligula at the Donmar Warehouse . 
 Sheen has become better known as a screen actor since the 2000s , in particular through his roles in various biopics . With writer Peter Morgan , he has starred in a trilogy of films as British politician Tony Blair : the television film The Deal in 2003 , followed by The Queen ( 2006 ) and The Special Relationship ( 2010 ) . For playing Blair , he was nominated for both a BAFTA Award and an Emmy . He was also nominated for a BAFTA as the troubled comic actor Kenneth Williams in BBC Four 's 2006 Fantabulosa ! , and was nominated for a fourth Olivier Award in 2006 for portraying the broadcaster David Frost in Frost / Nixon , a role he revisited in the 2008 film adaptation of the play . He also starred as the outspoken football manager Brian Clough in The Damned United ( 2009 ) . 
 Since 2009 and into the 2010s , Sheen has become known for a wider variety of roles . In 2009 , Sheen appeared in two fantasy films , Underworld : Rise of the Lycans and The Twilight Saga : New Moon , while in 2010 , he made a four @-@ episode guest appearance in the NBC comedy 30 Rock . He appeared in the science @-@ fiction film Tron : Legacy ( 2010 ) and Woody Allen 's romantic comedy Midnight in Paris ( 2011 ) . At Easter 2011 , Sheen directed and starred in National Theatre Wales 's The Passion , a 72 @-@ hour secular passion play staged in his hometown of Port Talbot . From late 2011 until early 2012 , Sheen played the title role in Hamlet at the Young Vic . In 2013 , he received a Golden Globe nomination for his role in Showtime 's television drama Masters of Sex . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sheen was born in Newport , Wales , the son of Irene ( née Thomas ) , a secretary , and Meyrick , a British Steel Corporation personnel manager . He has one younger sister , Joanne . When he was five , the family moved to Wallasey , but settled in his parents ' hometown of Port Talbot three years later . Director Sam Mendes has described Sheen as " a stage creature " and attributed that to the actor 's Welsh roots : " I 'm serious . He 's Welsh in the tradition of Anthony Hopkins and Richard Burton : fiery , mercurial , unpredictable . " A keen footballer , Sheen was scouted and offered a place on Arsenal F.C. ' s youth team at the age of 12 , but his family was unwilling to relocate to London . He later said he was " grateful " for his parents ' decision , as the chances of forging a professional football career were " so slim " . He stated that " it would have meant moving from Wales to London as a family " and that " it was just too big an upheaval " . He lost interest in playing football in his early teens . 
 Sheen was raised in a theatrical family — his parents were both involved in local amateur <unk> and musicals and , later in life , his father worked as a part @-@ time professional Jack Nicholson look @-@ alike . In his teenage years , Sheen was involved with the West Glamorgan Youth Theatre and , later , the National Youth Theatre of Wales . " It was a brilliant youth theatre " , Sheen has said , " and it taught me not only a lot about acting , but also about work ethic ; it was very disciplined . " He was influenced by the performances of Laurence Olivier and the writings of theatre critic Kenneth Tynan — " the combination of those two things kind of blew my head off . " Sheen was educated at <unk> Primary School , Glan Afan Comprehensive School and , finally , Neath Port Talbot College where he sat A @-@ levels in English , Drama and Sociology . He considered studying English at university but instead decided to attend drama school . He moved to London in 1988 to train as an actor at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art ( RADA ) , having spent the previous year working in a Welsh fast food restaurant called Burger Master to earn money . Sheen was granted the Laurence Olivier Bursary by The Society of London Theatre in his second year at RADA . He graduated in 1991 with a BA in Acting . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Classical stage roles ( 1991 – 2001 ) = = = 
 Sheen worked predominantly in theatre in the 1990s and has since remarked that he will always feel " slightly more at home " on stage . " It 's more of an actor 's medium . You are your own editor , nobody else is choosing what is being seen of you . " His first professional role , while still in his third and final year at RADA , was in When She Danced at the Globe Theatre in 1991 . He later described the role as " a big break . One day I was at RADA doing a movement class , the next I was at a read @-@ through with Vanessa Redgrave and Frances de la Tour . " Milton Shulman of the Evening Standard praised an " excellent " performance while The Observer wrote of " a notable West End debut " . In 1992 , Sheen 's performance in Romeo and Juliet at the Royal Exchange received a MEN Theatre Award nomination and led theatre critic Michael Coveney to declare him " the most exciting young actor of his generation ... a volatile , electrifying and technically fearless performer " . His 1993 turn as <unk> in Alfred de Musset 's Don 't Fool With Love at the Donmar Warehouse was nominated for the Ian Charleson <unk> and was described by The Independent as " quite thrilling " . Also in 1993 , Sheen appeared in the world premiere of Harold Pinter 's Moonlight at the Almeida Theatre and made his television debut in the 1993 BBC mini @-@ series <unk> . 
 Sheen played the title role in Peer Gynt in 1994 . The Yukio Ninagawa production was staged in Oslo , Tokyo and at the Barbican Centre , London . The Times praised Sheen 's " astonishing vitality " while The Independent found him " sensationally good " and noted that " the Norwegian press were grudgingly captivated by the mercurial Welsh <unk> " . In other 1994 work , Sheen appeared in Le Livre de Spencer at the Odéon @-@ Théâtre de l 'Europe , Paris and starred in the cross @-@ dressing farce Charley 's Aunt at the Royal Exchange . In 1995 , he appeared opposite Kate Beckinsale in a production of The Seagull at the Theatre Royal , Bath and , with the encouragement of Thelma Holt , directed and starred in The Dresser at the Theatre Royal , Plymouth . In addition , Sheen made his film debut that year , appearing opposite Kenneth Branagh in Othello . 1996 saw Sheen at the National Theatre for The Ends of the Earth , an original play by David Lan . A minor role in Mary Reilly marked the first of three film collaborations with director Stephen Frears . Sheen 's most significant appearance of 1997 was the title role in Henry V , staged by the Royal Shakespeare Company ( RSC ) at their Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon theatre , which earned him a second Ian Charleson Award nomination . The Times praised " a blisteringly intelligent performance " . Also in 1997 , he appeared in a revival of Harold Pinter 's The Homecoming at the National Theatre , directed by Roger Michell , and directed Badfinger , starring Rhys Ifans , at the Donmar Warehouse . The latter was staged by the Thin Language Theatre Company , which Sheen had co @-@ founded in 1991 , aiming to further Welsh theatre . He then appeared in the biographical film Wilde , playing Robbie Ross to Stephen Fry 's Oscar Wilde . In early 1998 Sheen formed a production company , The Foundry , with Helen McCrory and Robert Delamere to promote the work of emerging playwrights , and produced A Little World of Our Own at the Donmar Warehouse , which gave Colin Farrell his West End debut . 
 From 1998 to 1999 , Sheen starred as Mozart in a successful revival of Amadeus . The Peter Hall @-@ directed production was staged at the Old Vic , London and later transferred to the Music Box on Broadway . Ben Brantley , chief theatre critic for The New York Times , was particularly vocal in his praise . He noted that " Mr. Sheen elicits a real poetry from the role " and felt that , while watching him , " you start to appreciate the derivation of the term star . This actor is so luminous it 's scary ! " The Independent found him " quite stunning as Mozart . His fantastically physical performance convinces you of his character 's genius and the play catches fire whenever he 's on stage . " Sheen was nominated for a Laurence Olivier Award for Best Supporting Performance and an Outer Critics Circle Award for Outstanding Actor . In 1999 , Sheen explored the role of Jimmy Porter in the National Theatre 's production of Look Back in Anger . In 2003 , Sheen described the production as " the most enjoyable thing I 've ever done ... everything came together " . The Daily Mail declared him a " definitive Jimmy Porter ... simply exhilarating in his great jazz riffs of speeches , mercurial and irresistible . " " Sheen has cornered the market in explosive energy " , said The Independent , " but this thrilling performance is his finest yet . " The Financial Times noted : " As Jimmy Porter , a role of staggering difficulty in every way , Michael Sheen gives surely the best performance London has yet seen from him ... You hang on every word he utters ... This is a dazzlingly through @-@ the @-@ body performance . " He was nominated for a Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actor and an Evening Standard Award for Best Actor . 
 = = = The Deal , The Queen and Fantabulosa ( 2002 – 2006 ) = = = 
 At this point in his career , Sheen began to devote more time to film work . Heartlands , a little @-@ seen 2002 film about a naive man 's road trip in the Midlands , was his first leading film role . While The Guardian dismissed the " cloying bittersweet @-@ regional @-@ lottery @-@ <unk> " , it noted that " Sheen himself has a childlike , Frank Spencer @-@ ish charm " . " It was great to do something that was so different " , Sheen has said of the role . " I usually play very extreme characters but I couldn 't get away with doing all my usual silly tricks with Colin . " Also in 2002 , he had a minor role in the action @-@ adventure film The Four Feathers . In 2003 , Sheen appeared in Bright Young Things , the directorial debut of his Wilde co @-@ star , Stephen Fry . An adaptation of Evelyn Waugh 's novel , the film followed high society partygoers in decadent , pre @-@ war London . Sheen played a gay aristocrat in an ensemble cast which included James McAvoy , Emily Mortimer , David Tennant , Dan Aykroyd , Jim Broadbent and Peter O 'Toole . While the Los Angeles Times said he " shone " , The Guardian felt the role " drastically under @-@ uses his talents " . Sheen described his character as " possibly the <unk> man in cinema history " and relished a scene " where I do drugs with [ a then 95 @-@ year @-@ old ] Sir John Mills . " In other 2003 film work , Sheen portrayed the main antagonist , the werewolf leader Lucian , in Underworld and made a brief appearance in the sci @-@ fi film Timeline . 
 Sheen also returned to the stage in 2003 to play the title role in Caligula at the Donmar Warehouse , directed by Michael Grandage . It was the first of just three stage appearances during the 2000s ; his young daughter was now based in Los Angeles , California which made more frequent stage runs in Britain impractical . The Independent 's critic declared it " one of the most thrilling and searching performances I have ever witnessed " while The Daily Telegraph described him as an " outrageously charismatic actor " with " an astonishing physical presence " . The Times praised a " riveting performance " while The Guardian found him " highly impressive ... at one point he attacks his court poet with a single hair @-@ raising leap across a chair and table " . Sheen won an Evening Standard Award for Best Actor and a Critics ' Circle Theatre Award for Best Actor , and was again nominated for a Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actor . 
 Sheen 's breakthrough role was as British politician Tony Blair in 2003 's The Deal . The Channel 4 film explored the so @-@ called Granita pact made by Tony Blair and Gordon Brown prior to the 1994 Labour Party leadership election , and was the actor 's first collaboration with screenwriter Peter Morgan . Director Stephen Frears cast him because " he was in Mary Reilly and I knew he was brilliant . " Filmed while he was playing Caligula nightly on stage , Sheen has remarked , " It ’ s interesting that in searching for monsters to play , you often end up playing leaders . " The Daily Telegraph praised his " earnest , yet steely , portrayal " while The Guardian found him " excellent . This is intelligent and honest casting . " In 2004 , Sheen starred in ITV 's Dirty Filthy Love , a comic film about a man dealing with OCD and Tourette 's after a marital separation . Sheen spoke of " treading a fine line " because " a lot of the symptoms are intrinsically comical " . He was nominated for a BAFTA Award for Best Television Actor and a RTS Best Actor Award . Also in 2004 , Sheen played a pompous rock star in the romantic comedy Laws of Attraction and produced and starred in The Banker , which won a BAFTA Award for Best Short Film . In 2005 , Sheen starred in the National Theatre 's production of The UN Inspector , a David Farr adaptation of The Government Inspector . The Times wrote of " a scathingly brilliant and inventive performance " while Variety noted that the actor " adds comic finesse to his apparently ceaseless repertoire " . The Evening Standard , while conceding that the performance was " technically brilliant " , expressed bemusement as to why " one of the most mercurial and inspiring actors we have seems set on impersonating Rik Mayall throughout " . Also that year , he took part in the Old Vic 's 24 Hour Play , in which The Telegraph felt he " dazzled " . In 2005 film work , Sheen starred in Dead Long Enough , a small @-@ budget Welsh / Irish film , with his longtime friend , Jason Hughes . In addition , he had a supporting role in Ridley Scott 's Kingdom of Heaven , made a cameo appearance in The League of Gentlemen 's Apocalypse and starred in the short film The Open Doors . 
 Sheen came to international attention in 2006 for his portrayal of Tony Blair in The Queen . The film focused on the differing reactions of the British Royal Family and the newly appointed Prime Minister following the death of Diana , Princess of Wales in 1997 ; it was Sheen 's third collaboration with director Stephen Frears and his second with screenwriter Peter Morgan . He enjoyed reprising his role because Blair , at this point in his career , had " a weight to him that he didn ’ t have before " . When asked to discuss his personal opinion of Blair , Sheen admitted that the more time he spent working on the character , the " less opinion " he has of the politician : " Now when I watch him on TV or hear his voice , it 's sort of like a cross between a family member , a friend and seeing a really old embarrassing video of yourself . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone praised " a sensational performance , alert and nuanced " while Empire spoke of an " uncanny , insightful performance " . Sheen was nominated for a BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role . His second film appearance of 2006 was a supporting role in Blood Diamond as an unscrupulous diamond dealer . Also in 2006 , Sheen starred as the troubled English comic actor Kenneth Williams in BBC Four 's Fantabulosa ! In preparation for the role , he lost two and a half stone ( approx . 35 lbs ) , studied archival footage and read Williams ' published diaries . Sheen has said he is " fascinated by finding the private side of the public face " . The Times found his performance " mesmerising " while The Observer described it as " a characterisation for which the description tour @-@ de @-@ force is , frankly , pretty faint praise " . He won a RTS Award for Best Actor , and received his second BAFTA nomination of 2006 , for Best Television Actor . Sheen starred in two other BBC television productions in 2006 , playing H. G. Wells in HG Wells : War with the World and Nero in Ancient Rome : The Rise and Fall of an Empire . 
 = = = Frost / Nixon and The Damned United ( 2007 – 2009 ) = = = 
 From 2006 to 2007 , Sheen starred as the television broadcaster David Frost in Frost / Nixon at both the Donmar Warehouse and Gielgud Theatre in London and at the Jacobs Theatre on Broadway . The play , written by Peter Morgan , directed by Michael Grandage and co @-@ starring Frank Langella , was a critical and commercial success but Sheen initially accepted the role as a favour to his friends and " never thought it was going anywhere " . The Guardian said the actor " exactly captures Frost 's verbal tics and mannerisms while suggesting a nervousness behind the self @-@ assurance " . " He ’ s got the voice , the mannerisms , the blaze , " said the Financial Times , " but , more than that , Sheen — as viscerally exciting an actor as any in Britain today — shows us the hunger of Frost ’ s ambition .. and fox @-@ like instinct for the hunt and the kill . " Sheen was nominated for a Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actor and a Drama League Award for Distinguished Performance . Sheen next appeared in the 2007 film Music Within as a political activist with cerebral palsy . He spoke of having a " responsibility " to accurately portray the condition . Variety said his performance was " remarkable .. utterly convincing " , USA Today found him " outstanding " while the Los Angeles Times felt he was " reminiscent of Daniel Day @-@ Lewis in My Left Foot , bringing a vibrancy and wit to the role " . Also that year , Sheen starred in the short film Airlock , or How To Say Goodbye in Space with Derek Jacobi and was invited to join the actors ' branch of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts & Sciences . 
 Sheen reprised the role of David Frost in 2008 's Frost / Nixon , a film dramatisation of The Nixon Interviews of 1977 . Despite appearing in the original stage production in a part written for him by Peter Morgan , Sheen was surprised to have been cast in the film : " Peter said he 'd only be prepared to give the rights to someone who would cast me as Frost , which was very nice , but when the studios get their hands on something ... Right up until we started filming I was prepared to be disappointed " . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times asserted that Sheen embodied his character in a " compelling , intense " performance while The Wall Street Journal felt he was " a brilliant actor " who " grows his character from a bright @-@ eyed social butterfly to a gimlet @-@ eyed interrogator " . However , The New York Times felt " the likable , watchable Mr. Sheen has been pitted against a scene @-@ stealer " in Frank Langella 's Nixon . Frost himself later said it was " a wonderful performance " . Sheen was the recipient of the Variety Award at the British Independent Film Awards 2008 . 
 2009 saw Sheen portray another public figure ; he starred in The Damned United as the outspoken football manager Brian Clough . The Tom Hooper @-@ directed film focused on Clough 's disastrous 44 @-@ day tenure as manager of Leeds United and marked Sheen 's fifth collaboration with writer Peter Morgan . The actor has said Clough is the real @-@ life character he enjoyed playing most . The Guardian , writing in 2009 , declared it the " best performance of his big @-@ screen career " while The Times found him " magnificent " . USA Today praised " Sheen 's masterful performance " while the Los Angeles Times felt he played the role with " a cheeky , dark panache " and " skillful verve " . Entertainment Weekly asserted that , despite American audiences ' unfamiliarity with Clough , " what 's lost in translation is recovered easily enough in Michael Sheen 's astonishing performance " . Variety noted that his " typically scrupulous channeling of Clough gets the tics and mannerisms right , but also carves a moving portrait of a braggart suddenly out of his depth " . Also in 2009 , Sheen reprised his role as a werewolf in Underworld : Rise of the Lycans , a prequel to the original film . Of his decision to take part , Sheen has said : " My rule of thumb is that I want to do things I 'd like to go and see myself . " The New York Times felt he was " the movie ’ s greatest asset ... [ taking ] a lively break from his usual high @-@ crust duties to bring wit , actual acting and some unexpected musculature to the goth @-@ horror flick " . Variety said he hit " all the right notes in a star @-@ powered performance that will amuse , if not amaze , anyone who only knows the actor as Tony Blair or David Frost " while Richard Corliss of Time noted that he " tries bravely to keep a straight face " 
 Sheen had a supporting role in 2009 's The Twilight Saga : New Moon , the second film in the highly popular vampire series . He was paid a reported £ 5 million fee and director Chris Weitz has said he " aggressively " pursued the actor for the role . In its review , Rolling Stone said : " Late in the film , a real actor , Michael Sheen , shows up as the mind @-@ reading Aro , of the Italian Volturi vampires , and sparks things up . You can almost hear the young cast thinking , ' Is that acting ? It looks hard . ' So Sheen is quickly ushered out . " While The New York Times said he " preens with plausible menace " , USA Today felt he " plays the character with more high @-@ pitched giddiness than menace " . He was named Actor of the Year at GQ magazine 's annual Men of the Year ceremony . Sheen made two one @-@ off stage appearances in 2009 ; he performed a scene from Betrayal as part of a Harold Pinter tribute evening at the National Theatre and performed improvisational comedy as part of The Groundlings ' Crazy Joe Show in Los Angeles . 
 = = = Hamlet and Masters of Sex ( 2010 – present ) = = = 
 In 2010 , Sheen had a supporting role in the science fiction sequel Tron : Legacy . Referring to his David Bowie @-@ esque character , Sheen has said , " I was paid to show off basically " . The Wall Street Journal found little fun in the movie " except for a gleefully campy turn by Michael Sheen " while The New York Times said he " shows up to deliver the closest thing to a performance in the movie " . The Daily Telegraph felt his " lively hamming as a cane @-@ swishing nightclub owner merely underlines how impersonal — how inhuman — much else here is " . However , USA Today felt his " scenery @-@ chewing performance ... is meant as comic relief , but this movie thunders along so seriously that the attempt at humor feels jarring " . In other 2010 film work , Sheen provided the voices for characters in Tim Burton 's Alice in Wonderland and Disney 's Tinker Bell and the Great Fairy Rescue and appeared as a terrorist in Unthinkable . On television , Sheen 's performance in the third instalment of Peter Morgan 's Blair trilogy , The Special Relationship , was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor – Miniseries or Movie . The HBO film examined the " special relationship " between the US and the UK in the political era of Blair and Bill Clinton . It was the sixth collaboration between Sheen and Peter Morgan ; both parties have since said they will not work together again " for the foreseeable future " . Sheen also made a guest appearance in four episodes of NBC 's 30 Rock as Wesley Snipes , a love interest for Tina Fey 's Liz Lemon . Fey , the sitcom 's star and creator , has said that " he was so funny and delightful to work with " . In November 2010 , Sheen received the BAFTA Britannia Award for British Artist of the Year . 
 In 2011 , Sheen starred in and was creative director of National Theatre Wales 's The Passion , a 72 @-@ hour secular passion play staged in his hometown of Port Talbot , Wales . In addition to a professional cast , over one thousand local amateurs took part in the performance and as many more volunteers from local charity and community groups were involved in preparations in the months leading up to the play . The event was the subject of both a BBC documentary and The Gospel of Us , a film by director Dave McKean . Sheen has described it as " the most meaningful experience " of his career . The Observer declared it " one of the outstanding theatrical events not only of this year , but of the decade " . The Independent 's critic described it as " the most extraordinary piece of community @-@ specific theatre I 've ever beheld " . While the The Daily Telegraph bemoaned the large @-@ scale production 's logistical problems , " overall I found it touching , transformative and , in its own wayward way , a triumph . " The Guardian felt it was " so much more than just an epic piece of street theatre .. transforming and uplifting " . Sheen and co @-@ director Bill Mitchell were jointly honoured as Best Director at the Theatre Awards UK 2011 . In 2013 , Sheen was nominated for a Best Actor Welsh BAFTA for The Gospel of Us . 
 Sheen 's most notable film appearance of 2011 was a supporting role in Woody Allen 's Midnight in Paris . Allen noted that " Michael had to do the pseudo @-@ intellectual , the genuine intellectual , the pedant , and he came in and nailed it from the start " . Sheen enjoyed playing " someone who ’ s just absolutely got no sense that he ’ s overstepping the mark or that he ’ s being a bore . " The film opened the 2011 Cannes Film Festival and became Allen 's highest grossing film to date . Also in 2011 , Sheen starred in Beautiful Boy , an independent drama focusing on the aftermath of a school shooting , voiced the enigmatic and mysterious villain House in the Doctor Who episode " The Doctor 's Wife " written by his friend Neil Gaiman and made cameo appearances in The Twilight Saga : Breaking Dawn – Part 1 and Resistance . In 2012 film work , Sheen starred opposite Toni Collette in the independent comedy Jesus Henry Christ and reprised his role as the vampire Aro in the final instalment of The Twilight Saga . 
 Sheen played the title role in Hamlet at the Young Vic in late 2011 and early 2012 , a role he first explored in a 1999 BBC Radio 3 production . While there had been tentative plans over the years for both Peter Hall and Michael Grandage to direct Sheen in the play , he eventually asked Ian Rickson . Rickson 's production was set in the secure wing of a psychiatric hospital and featured original music by PJ Harvey . The Evening Standard declared Sheen 's performance " an audacious achievement " that " will live in the memory " while The Independent praised " a recklessly brilliant and bravura performance . " The Telegraph felt that Sheen " could be right up there among the great Hamlets " while The Times found him " unbearably moving " . The Guardian described him as " fascinating to watch ... intelligent , inventive and full of insights ... [ he ] delivers the " What a piece of work is man " passage with a beautiful consciousness of human potential . " The Observer declared him an actor " always worth crossing a principality to see and hear " whose " " To be , or not to be " is a marvel . " 
 In 2013 , Sheen appeared in a supporting role as the boyfriend of Tina Fey in the comedy Admission , with Stephanie Zacharek of The Village Voice describing the character as " a whiskery , elfin academic who chuckles to himself as he reads the Canterbury Tales prologue aloud in bed , in Middle English , no less . ( Sheen is scarily good at this . ) In 2014 , he starred in the fantasy children 's film Mariah Mundi and the Midas Box . R. Kurt <unk> of Slant Magazine said " the ever @-@ versatile Sheen brings an artful <unk> to his role " but Matt Pais of RedEye found him " insufficiently zany " in " a part that Robert Downey Jr. would nail but never accept . " His second film role of 2014 was a minor role in the political thriller Kill the Messenger . Also in 2014 , he starred in IFC 's six @-@ episode The Spoils of Babylon , a television parody of classic , sweeping miniseries , in which he played the husband of Kristen Wiig 's character . 
 In 2015 , Sheen starred opposite Carey Mulligan in the romantic drama Far from the Madding Crowd as prosperous bachelor William Boldwood . His performance was well received . Anthony Lane of The New Yorker remarked : " How you prevent such a fellow , crushed by his own decency , from sagging into a bearded Ashley Wilkes is no easy task , yet Sheen succeeds , and Boldwood ’ s brave smile grows dreadful to behold . " Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club found the character " pitiful , and sometimes downright painful to watch . He ’ s not Hardy ’ s Boldwood , but he ’ s a Boldwood . The only sad , genuine moment of the film belongs to him . " Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian remarked that Sheen 's face " is etched with agony and an awful kind of abject adoration , forever trying to find ways to forgive the loved one in advance for rejection . When Sheen ’ s Boldwood confides to Oak that he feels “ grief ” you really can feel his pain . " Stephanie Zacharek of The Village Voice also referred to the scene where Boldwood expressed his grief , commenting : " Sheen 's performance is fine @-@ grained , and the pure Englishness of his understatement is heartrending . " Also in 2015 , Sheen had well @-@ received comedic television performances in Comedy Bang ! Bang ! , The Spoils Before Dying and 7 Days in Hell . Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times said his television host in 7 Days in Hell was " played with damp lechery and cigarette @-@ ash mastery . " Liz Shannon Miller of Indiewire said he may have " stolen the show " while John DeFore of The Hollywood Reporter described him as the " scene @-@ stealer of the bunch . " 
 Since 2013 , Sheen stars in and produces Showtime 's Masters of Sex . He and Lizzy Caplan portray the 1960s human sexuality pioneers Masters and Johnson ; the series chronicles " their unusual lives , romance and pop culture trajectory , which saw them go from a Midwestern teaching hospital to the cover of Time magazine and Johnny Carson ’ s couch " . Willa Paskin of Slate said : " Sheen is not playing an anti @-@ hero , but someone much more difficult to like — an anti @-@ charismatic . His Masters is willfully repressed and aggressively passive : He is withholding and cold as a means of besting other people , of <unk> them . " David Sims of The Atlantic described Sheen 's portrayal of Masters as " an intensely honest and unsympathetic one " while Sonia Saraiya of The A.V. Club said Sheen played the role " so seamlessly it ’ s hard to remember that there ’ s a British actor there who has played flamboyant news personalities and prime ministers . " Sean T. Collins of The Observer described Masters as " a singularly unappealing figure " : " It ’ s not that Michael Sheen is bad in the role . On the contrary ! Sheen ’ s skill in playing Masters as an asshole who oscillates between headache @-@ inducing self @-@ repression and volcanic rage renders him unpleasant to spend more than two minutes with at a time . " Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter remarked : " Masters has never been very likable . In fact , it ’ s a testament to Sheen ’ s performance — and Caplan ’ s nuanced Johnson offsetting Masters — that anyone still cares what happens to Masters on a personal level . " He received a Golden Globe nomination for his performance in late 2013 . 
 In 2016 , Sheen has a role in the upcoming thriller Oppenheimer Strategies , and also provided voices for characters in the fantasy adventure Alice Through the Looking Glass and the upcoming science fiction romance Passengers . 
 = = Charity work = = 
 Sheen is an ambassador for <unk> Trust Wales , a charity which aims to provide a rehabilitation and therapy centre in the grounds of Swansea ’ s <unk> Hospital by 2015 , and is the Welsh ambassador of Into Film , a charity which offers after @-@ school film clubs to state primary and secondary schools in an effort to improve literacy levels . He is also an ambassador of the environmental charity Keep Wales Tidy . He is a patron of British charities including Scene & Heard , NSPCC 's Child 's Voice Appeal , Healing The Wounds , The Relationships Centre and <unk> . He has taken part in a number of charity football matches , most notably captaining the winning Soccer Aid 2010 team at Wembley Stadium , as well as appearing in the 2012 and 2014 matches . He is a patron of the British Independent Film Awards , an ambassador for the Dylan Thomas Prize and vice @-@ president of Port Talbot Town FC . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Sheen was in a relationship with English actress Kate Beckinsale from 1995 until 2003 . They met when cast in a touring production of The Seagull in early 1995 , and began living together shortly afterwards . Their daughter , Lily Mo Beckinsale @-@ Sheen , was born in 1999 in London , England . The actress has said she was " embarrassed " that Sheen never proposed , but felt as if she were married . Their relationship ended in January 2003 , soon after the couple moved to Los Angeles from London . Beckinsale had persuaded director Len Wiseman to cast Sheen in Underworld ; but while on set , she and Wiseman ( who was married ) fell in love , and subsequently married in 2004 . Sheen has said he continues to live in Los Angeles to be close to his daughter . He remains friends with Beckinsale . " We were very lucky in that we didn 't have an acrimonious split , " Beckinsale has said . " We are still very close and [ our daughter ] sees us around each other . " " He 's absolutely one of my most favourite people ever . " " I love him dearly — I would miss him dreadfully if he wasn 't in my life . " Sheen has said that Beckinsale " will always be one of the most important people in my life . I have real love for her . " 
 Sheen dated Canadian actress Rachel McAdams from mid @-@ 2010 to early 2013 . In early 2014 , he began dating American comedian Sarah Silverman . 
 = = Awards and recognition = = 
 = = = Theatre awards = = = 
 <unk> Theatre Award for Best Actor ( 1992 ) — nominated for Romeo and Juliet at the Royal Exchange , Manchester 
 Ian Charleson Award ( 1993 ) — nominated for Don 't Fool with Love at the Donmar Warehouse , London 
 Ian Charleson Award ( 1997 ) — nominated for Henry V at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre , Stratford Upon Avon 
 Laurence Olivier Award for Best Supporting Performance ( 1998 ) — nominated for Amadeus at the Old Vic , London 
 Outer Critics Circle Award for Outstanding Actor ( 1999 ) — nominated for Amadeus at the Music Box Theatre , Broadway 
 Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actor ( 1999 ) — nominated for Look Back in Anger at the National Theatre , London 
 Evening Standard Award for Best Actor ( 1999 ) — nominated for Look Back in Anger at the National Theatre , London 
 Evening Standard Award for Best Actor ( 2003 ) — win for Caligula at the Donmar Warehouse , London 
 Critics ' Circle Theatre Award for Best Actor ( 2003 ) — win for Caligula at the Donmar Warehouse , London 
 Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actor ( 2003 ) — nominated for Caligula at the Donmar Warehouse , London 
 Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actor ( 2006 ) — nominated for Frost / Nixon at the Donmar Warehouse , London 
 Drama League Award for Distinguished Performance ( 2007 ) — nominated for Frost / Nixon at the Bernard B. Jacobs Theatre , Broadway 
 Theatre Award UK for Best Director ( 2011 ) — win for The Passion , a site @-@ specific performance in Port Talbot , Wales 
 = = = Screen awards = = = 
 British Academy Television Award for Best Actor ( 2004 ) — nominated for Dirty Filthy Love 
 Royal Television Society Award for Best Actor ( 2004 ) — nominated for Dirty Filthy Love 
 British Academy Television Award for Best Actor ( 2006 ) — nominated for Fantabulosa ! 
 Royal Television Society Award for Best Actor ( 2006 ) — win for Fantabulosa ! 
 BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role ( 2006 ) — nominated for The Queen 
 Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actor ( 2006 ) — nominated for The Queen 
 Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actor ( 2006 ) — win for The Queen 
 New York Film Critics Online ( 2006 ) — win for The Queen 
 Kansas City Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actor ( 2006 ) — win for The Queen 
 Toronto Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actor ( 2006 ) — win for The Queen 
 St. Louis Gateway Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actor ( 2007 ) — nominated for The Music Within 
 Evening Standard British Film Award for Best Actor ( 2008 ) — nominated for Frost / Nixon 
 London Film Critics Circle Award for British Actor of the Year ( 2008 ) — nominated for Frost / Nixon 
 Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture ( 2008 ) — nominated for Frost / Nixon 
 Variety Award at the British Independent Film Awards 2008 — win 
 GQ Magazine 's Actor of the Year ( 2009 ) — win 
 Satellite Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture ( 2009 ) — nominated for The Damned United 
 Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor – Miniseries or a Movie ( 2010 ) — nominated for The Special Relationship 
 BAFTA Britannia Award for British Artist of the Year ( 2010 ) — win 
 Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture ( 2012 ) — nominated for Midnight in Paris 
 Welsh BAFTA Award for Best Actor ( 2013 ) - nominated for The Gospel of Us 
 = = = Other honours = = = 
 Sheen was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the 2009 New Year Honours list for his services to drama . He was awarded the freedom of the borough of Neath Port Talbot , Wales in 2008 for his services in the field of the dramatic arts . He is an Honorary Fellow of the University of Wales , Newport , the Royal Welsh College of Music & Drama Swansea University , Aberystwyth University and Swansea Metropolitan University , and has been awarded the James Joyce Award by University College Dublin . 
 = = List of performances = = 
 In addition to theatre , film and television credits , Sheen has also appeared in many radio productions , particularly in the early years of his career . Notable radio play appearances include Strangers on a Train ( 1994 ) opposite Bill Nighy , The Importance of Being Earnest ( 1995 ) opposite Judi Dench , Romeo and Juliet ( 1997 ) opposite Kate Beckinsale , Troy ( 1998 ) opposite Paul Scofield and The Pretenders ( 2004 ) opposite , again , Paul Scofield . He has narrated five novels for BBC Radio 4 and Naxos <unk> : Crime and Punishment ( 1994 ) , The Idiot ( 1995 ) , The Picture of Dorian Gray ( 1995 ) , A White Merc With Fins ( 1997 ) , Salmon Fishing in the Yemen ( 2011 ) and The Ocean at the End of the Lane ( 2013 ) . 
 = Development of Mother 3 = 
 The two @-@ part and nine @-@ year development of Mother 3 , a role @-@ playing video game , took place between 1994 and 2006 with a three year gap in @-@ between , and spanned four consoles and multiple delays . Following the commercial success of its predecessor , Mother 2 ( EarthBound outside Japan ) , Mother series creator Shigesato Itoi was given the previous game 's development team . Inspired by Super Mario 64 , the team set out to create a 3D game that ultimately exceeded the capabilities of the platform and changed their console focus from the Super Famicom to the Nintendo 64 and its 64DD magneto @-@ optical drive expansion peripheral , for which it was expected to be a 1998 launch title . Upon the commercial failure of the 64DD , it was converted to the cartridge @-@ only format . Itoi thought of the game 's concept during Mother 2 's development and built a 12 @-@ chapter story with player @-@ characters that rotated between chapters . Having been a producer during Mother 2 , Itoi served as a scriptwriter during Mother 3 's development . A North American version was announced as EarthBound 64 , but did not materialize when the 60 percent @-@ complete Japanese release was cancelled in August 2000 in <unk> leading up to Project Dolphin ( the code name of the GameCube ) . At the time , the game was estimated to need another two years of work . 
 After multiple years and failed petitions , Mother 3 was reannounced for the Game Boy Advance in 2003 within a Japanese television commercial for Mother 1 + 2 , a port of Mother and Mother 2 to the Advance . The game kept its original story and received a graphical overhaul in a pixelated style similar to Mother 2 . The game 's themes included human physiology , renewal , and <unk> on the morality spectrum . Its music was composed by Shogo Sakai , and retained the quirky style of series composers Keiichi Suzuki and Hirokazu Tanaka . Mother 3 was released on April 20 , 2006 in Japan , whereupon it became a bestseller . It has not been released outside Japan . 
 = = Nintendo 64 = = 
 Mother 3 was originally developed for the Super Famicom ( Super Nintendo Entertainment System ) beginning in 1994 . Shigeru Miyamoto , head of Nintendo Entertainment Analysis & Development and Mother 3 producer , said that Mother 3 was " a commercial decision " , since Mother 2 ( EarthBound outside Japan ) had sold well . By this point , Mother series creator Shigesato Itoi had worked on the series ' earlier games and Itoi Shigesato no Bass Tsuri No. 1 and was experienced at pitching video games , so Miyamoto provided a team willingly . The Mother 2 development team carried over to the new game 's development , though several people left and the team grew in size . They forewent the usual prototyping phase and went straight into development expecting to create something unprecedented . Itoi said he wanted to make the game like a Hollywood film . In September 1994 , he predicted that Mother 3 's development would end around 1996 with a release on Nintendo 's then @-@ upcoming console . The team was inspired by Super Mario 64 and felt that they too could creatively flourish by making a 3D world without restrictions . Their early technical specifications exceeded the capabilities and memory limits of the platform . About halfway through development , the team attempted to scale back its large scope and changed its development platform to the 64DD , a Nintendo 64 magneto @-@ optical drive expansion peripheral . At E3 in June 1997 , Miyamoto speculated that Mother 3 would be one of the four titles for the then @-@ expected 1998 launch of the Japan @-@ only peripheral , but the game was instead converted to a Nintendo 64 cartridge @-@ only format upon the commercial failure of the repeatedly delayed 64DD . 
 The EarthBound fan community anticipated a sequel , and a North American release of Mother 3 was announced as EarthBound 64 . Nintendo displayed a playable version of the game at their 1999 Space World trade show , where IGN described the development 's progress as " very far along " and half complete . In April 2000 , IGN estimated the game 's development as " safe to assume that the game is nearing its final stages of completion " . The game struggled to find a firm release date , and was expected to release in Japan before a North American version would be considered . At the time , the 64DD was only released in Japan . Nintendo chose not to show the game at the 2000 Electronic Entertainment Expo , though IGN expected to see a finished version of the game at Nintendo 's 2000 Space World . After a period of silence , Nintendo announced that the game would be a 256 megabit cartridge for the Nintendo 64 ( similar to Legend of Zelda : Ocarina of Time ) instead of a 64DD game . Mother producer Satoru Iwata cancelled the game altogether prior to the 2000 Space World , and Itoi announced the cancellation in late August 2000 . 
 Iwata clarified that the franchise was not abandoned but that the game would no longer be developed for the Nintendo 64 , and Miyamoto added that it was not due to project complications or development hell , but to resources needed for Project Dolphin ( the GameCube ) . Some of the artists had been on the project for over three years . They estimated the project to be about 60 percent complete at the time of cancellation — the basics were complete and only programming was left . About 30 percent of the final product was completed . Itoi felt that it would have taken an additional two years to finish properly , and Iwata said that the game might have been finished by 2000 had the scope been reduced two years earlier . Miyamoto was involved in other work and spent little time on @-@ site with the project , and Iwata too was distracted by bankruptcy concerns at HAL Labs and was off @-@ site in 1999 due to circumstances that required travel . Iwata was also hospitalized during production for stress @-@ related reasons . The team intended to have the game finished by the end of 1999 and knew they had to reconsider their priorities when they missed the milestone . They said that the Mother 3 supervisors had wanted to cancel the project since 1999 , but later changed sides and said that cancellation would be wasteful . They discussed bringing the game to their forthcoming GameCube , which Miyamoto felt would have solved some of the Nintendo 64 's hardware issues . Miyamoto and Iwata also discussed releasing the game on the Game Boy Advance , but realized that it would take " just as much time " with 40 to 50 staff members to make such a game . In retrospect , Iwata wondered out loud in an interview why the game needed to be in 3D when Itoi 's " greatest talent lies in words " and thought that the energy poured into making a 3D game might have been a poor choice . He said he felt " genuinely ashamed " , and acknowledged that they were both " caught up in the 3D obsession and felt obligated " at the time . At the time of its cancellation , Itoi predicted that Mother 3 would remain a story that only the game 's staff would know , but Miyamoto was still interested in bringing the game to fruition . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Itoi thought of the concept behind Mother 3 towards the end of Mother 2 's production . He called another person on the project to describe a " detective story where the city was the main character " . He thought of a hack , small @-@ time , womanizing private investigator who would become engrossed in a big murder case , and the story would unfold from a young female clerk at a flower shop who would slowly recall parts of a story consequential to the plot . Thus , the city would appear to grow . This idea of a " single place changing over time " was central to Mother 3 . He saw previous RPGs as " road movies " with little reason for the hero to backtrack to previous areas , and instead wanted the player to see the town gossip grow dynamically . Miyamoto and Itoi compared this type of progression to the story of Legend of Zelda : Majora 's Mask . The game was enough of a departure from the series that the development team questioned whether fans would consider it part of the series . 
 Itoi originally intended the game to have 12 chapters with varied game mechanics , e.g. , one with classic role @-@ playing game mechanics and another as just cutscenes . He conceptualized the process as designing 3D " puppets " that could then be easily moved around the " stage " . In actuality , each custom scene required special programming . The player @-@ character changed between each chapter — a concept they first attempted in their previous game — so as to see multiple characters grow . As development wore on , Itoi offered to compromise by replacing full chapters with sequences of still images and text . They cut the total chapters to seven or nine by the time it was canceled . Itoi described the story as " normal " for its first half , leading up to a " triple @-@ play twist " . One of the game 's themes was the reckless appearance and " uncomfortable beauty " of chimera — multiple creatures fused into one — which was the idea behind the metallic and wooden Mother 3 logo . Itoi has said of his role in the Mother series that he wanted to be more of a team member and scriptwriter and less of a manager in Mother 3 's development . He saw himself as simultaneously making the game he wanted to play and setting traps for the player , and as making a game Nintendo could not . 
 The game was set to continue several hundred years after Mother 2 . The player @-@ character , Flint , was a cowboy in the vein of Clint Eastwood with two boys , Lucca and Klaus ( later becoming Lucas and Claus ) , and a dog , Boney . The game was to include over 10 playable characters and span 10 years in its story based <unk> the Pig army , which attempts to use " primitive machinery ... to enslave mankind " . At the 1999 Space World , IGN sampled environments including a hovercraft in a desert canyon , a snake dungeon , a cutscene with a bullet train , a town with non @-@ player characters , and a mine cart scene , through themes including fantasy , the medieval , and science fiction . Physical contact with an enemy in the overworld triggered a turn @-@ based battle scene shown in the first @-@ person ( similar to EarthBound ) . The battles had psychedelic backgrounds and a circular menu that included a command to " get up " if the player was knocked down in a real @-@ time sequence . Attacks could be timed with the in @-@ game music for stronger effects . The developers also planned multiple routes for advancing through the game and unforeseen complications from minor actions , such as a monster finding food dropped in the forest . The game was set to include features such as synching the game 's time with the real time , but those features would not have worked without the 64DD . Mother 3 was set to run between 40 and 60 hours in length . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 In their review of the Space World 1999 demo , IGN found the mine cart scene — where Lucca and Klaus outrun a collapsing cave in a <unk> — to be its " most impressive " sequence . They added that it " might be one of the most impressive cutscenes on the N64 yet " . IGN felt that the controls were intuitive , the sound " well orchestrated and memorable " , the 3D game engine " strong " , and the battle system " confusing " . They wrote that the game would be highly original , but were not able to tell the degree to which the story or characters would interact . IGN compared the multi @-@ character aspect of the narrative to the Japan @-@ only Super Famicom RPG Live A Live . Famitsu readers ranked the game as one of their top ten most anticipated towards the end of 1999 . 
 = = Game Boy Advance = = 
 Three years later , in 2003 , a Japanese Mother 1 + 2 television commercial included a slide that announced a future release of Mother 3 . While working on the compilation that would port Mother and Mother 2 to the Game Boy Advance , Itoi predicted further pressure to release Mother 3 and decided , based on encouragement and the game 's fans , to release the game . Itoi had earlier assumed that restarting the project was impossible , and felt that his final effort to finish the game to be more like a " prayer " than like " vengeance " . Other than the graphical changes required for a release on the Advance , the game was to keep its original story . Brownie Brown staff assisted in the game 's development , and Itoi worked with them on individual pacing issues . 
 Itoi chose to use the pixelated style of Mother 2 for Mother 3 because he was uninterested in computer graphics trends . He felt that it was only coincidentally related to the resurgence of interest in <unk> . The series ' games were written in the hiragana alphabet instead of in kanji ( Chinese characters ) so as to remain accessible to young children . Itoi described the world as governed by " might equals right " and its power struggle as " macho " . The antagonist , Porky , was designed as a " symbol of humankind " . Itoi associated the game 's view of evil to the " fun and games " on the spectrum of " pranks " to " crimes " , and likened its tone to the lyrics of the song " Reunion " by Kazuko Matsuo , where the subject falls in love with someone the world finds evil . Itoi compared how the characters come to realize their psychic powers with menstruation , and added that human physiology was " one of his themes " . As such , players sweat when learning an ability , based on Itoi 's belief of how physical struggle facilitates growth . He also included characters like the Magypsies and Duster ( who has a bad leg ) to show the value of having friends with different qualities . Some environments were added to serve specific purposes . For example , <unk> Castle was meant to show the scale of time and <unk> Island was designed to reflect the player 's worst nightmares as similar to Mother 2 's " hallucinatory city " , <unk> . Another of his themes was the duality of the seriousness and lightheartedness of games , which is why he added a serious death scene to the first chapter . Other parts of the game referenced media such as Kiki 's Delivery Service . 
 Itoi wrote the game 's ending while overseas in Saipan before Mother 3 was cancelled . His Nintendo 64 version was darker , " dirtier " , and more upsetting , though the final version changed little in concept . The Nintendo 64 version was to be more vague and left to the player 's imagination through its sparse dialogue . Itoi attributed the change in tone to his own growth and the character composition of the new development team . He said that he had not been changed by fans . Itoi always planned for the two brothers to fight each other , though he did not write the ending until after production had already begun , a process he compared with Hayao Miyazaki 's . Itoi processed each line individually as he wrote the final scene , and later reflected on its moral content that bad people sometimes need even more help than the good people . He said that the one line that makes him most emotional is , " You must be tired . " Itoi felt that the ending 's renewal theme reflected his worldview of appreciating our time on Earth in light of the planet 's inevitable end . Much of the rest of the script was written after @-@ hours at a local hotel where they would continue their work . 
 The game was about 60 percent finished by July 2004 and was set for a late 2005 release in Japan . The game was released on April 20 , 2006 in Japan for the Game Boy Advance , whereupon it became a bestseller . A limited edition Deluxe Box Set was produced with a special edition Game Boy Micro and Franklin Badge pin . It did not receive a North American release on the basis that it would not sell well . Digital Trends wrote that the game 's emphasis on " magical transgender gurus " might have also affected the decision . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 All of the game 's music was composed by Shogo Sakai . Itoi saw Sakai as competing with Mother 2 composer Keiichi Suzuki for his fans . Itoi had to choose a composer from the development team who understood the series and could work full @-@ time on the project , including other development duties . Thus , he could not choose Suzuki , who was outside the project , or Hirokazu Tanaka , who had become the president of Creatures . Sakai also understood the game 's story intimately and named the Magypsies after musical terms . He worked to make the music feel similar to previous entries in the series . 
 There are 250 tracks in the game 's sound player . Itoi did not have a favorite of Sakai 's work . He noted that the final track , " Love Theme " , was added towards the end of the development cycle . While the ending was incomplete , Itoi planned to use the Pigmask theme , but they decided to add a new song to better reflect their intentions in December 2005 . The game 's soundtrack was released on compact disc on November 2 , 2006 . Kyle Miller of RPGFan wrote that the game retained the quirkiness of the previous soundtracks in the series despite the change in composers . He found the second half of the album , which included reinterpreted " classics " from the series , to be its strongest . 
 = Yukon Quest = 
 The Yukon Quest 1 @,@ 000 @-@ mile International Sled Dog Race , or simply Yukon Quest , is a sled dog race run every February between Fairbanks , Alaska , and Whitehorse , Yukon . Because of the harsh winter conditions , difficult trail , and the limited support that competitors are allowed , it is considered the " most difficult sled dog race in the world " , or even the " toughest race in the world " . 
 In the competition , first run in 1984 , a dog team leader ( called a musher ) and a team of 6 to 14 dogs race for 10 to 20 days . The course follows the route of the historic 1890s Klondike Gold Rush , mail delivery , and transportation routes between Fairbanks , Dawson City , and Whitehorse . Mushers pack up to 250 pounds ( 113 kg ) of equipment and provisions for themselves and their dogs to survive between checkpoints . They are permitted to leave dogs at checkpoints and dog drops , but not to replace them . <unk> may not be replaced ( without penalty ) and mushers cannot accept help from non @-@ racers except at Dawson City , the halfway mark . Ten checkpoints and four dog drops , some more than 200 miles ( 322 km ) apart , lie along the trail . Veterinarians are present at each to ensure the health and welfare of the dogs , give advice , and provide veterinary care for dropped dogs ; together with the race marshal or a race judge , they may remove a dog or team from the race for medical or other reasons . 
 The route runs on frozen rivers , over four mountain ranges , and through isolated northern villages . Racers cover 1 @,@ 016 miles ( 1 @,@ 635 km ) or more . Temperatures commonly drop as low as − 60 ° F ( − 51 ° C ) , and winds can reach 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) at higher elevations . Sonny Lindner won the inaugural race in 1984 from a field of 26 teams . The fastest run took place in 2010 , when Hans Gatt finished after 9 days and 26 minutes . The 2012 competition had the closest one @-@ two finish , as Hugh Neff beat Allen Moore by twenty @-@ six seconds . 
 In 2005 , Lance Mackey became the first Yukon Quest rookie to win the race , a feat that was repeated by 2011 's champion , Dallas Seavey . In 2007 , Mackey became the first to win both the Yukon Quest and the Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race , a feat he repeated the following year . The longest race time was in 1988 , when Ty <unk> took 20 days , 8 hours , and 29 minutes to finish . In 2000 , <unk> Zirkle became the first woman to win the race , in 10 days , 22 hours , and 57 minutes . Yukon Quest International , which runs the Yukon Quest sled dog race , also runs two shorter races : the Junior Quest and the Yukon Quest 300 ( previously the Yukon Quest 250 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The idea for the Yukon Quest originated in April 1983 during a bar @-@ room discussion among four Alaskans : LeRoy Shank , Roger Williams , Ron Rosser , and William " Willy " Lipps . The four proposed a thousand @-@ mile sled dog race from Fairbanks , Alaska to Whitehorse , Yukon , to celebrate the Klondike Gold Rush @-@ era mail and transportation routes between the two . They disdained the many checkpoints and stages of the Iditarod Sled Dog Race and envisioned an endurance race in which racers would rely on themselves and survival would be as important as speed . " We wanted more of a Bush experience , a race that would put a little woodsmanship into it " , Shank said at the race 's 25th anniversary . 
 This remained a vague plan until August 1983 , when the first public organizational meetings took place . Fundraising began , and the start date for the race was optimistically moved forward from February 1985 to February 25 , 1984 . The entry fee for the first race was $ 500 , and Murray Clayton of Haines , Alaska became the first person to enter when he paid his fee in October 1983 . In December 1983 , the race was officially named the Yukon Quest . Two more months of planning followed , and a crew of volunteers was organized to staff the checkpoints and place trail markers . On February 25 , 1984 , 26 racers left Fairbanks for Whitehorse . Each team was limited to a maximum of 12 dogs , and racers had to finish with no fewer than nine . They also had to haul 25 pounds ( 11 kg ) of food per dog ( 300 pounds ( 136 kg ) total ) to cover the long distances between checkpoints . 
 Numerous problems occurred in the first race . The leading mushers had to break trail because the snowmobile intended for the task broke down . Trail markers often were absent or misplaced , and no preparations had been made for racers in Dawson City until organizer Roger Williams flew there shortly after the race began . After Dawson City , mushers had their dogs and sleds trucked 60 miles ( 97 km ) to avoid a section of <unk> trail , then had to deal with open sections of the Yukon River near Whitehorse due to above @-@ average temperatures . The eventual winner of the inaugural race , Sonny Lindner , was greeted with little fanfare on his arrival . On the race 's 25th anniversary , he recalled , " I think it was 90 percent ( camping ) trip and maybe a little bit of racing . " 
 = = = First decade = = = 
 After the inaugural race , organizers improved the marking of the trail for the first contest held in the Whitehorse – Fairbanks direction . <unk> Bill Cotter said , " The trail was so nice that it was difficult to keep from going too fast . " The race grew in popularity over the next few years . In 1988 and again in 1989 , 47 mushers entered . In 1989 , 31 completed the race — the most that have ever finished it . In 1990 , Connie and Terri <unk> became the first ( and so far only ) mother and daughter to compete in the same Yukon Quest : Terri finished 21st , beating her mother ( 22nd ) by 26 minutes . The 1991 race saw eight teams withdraw in the first quarter because of an outbreak of a canine disease called the " Healy Virus " . Thirty @-@ five more dogs were sickened before the spread of the virus was halted by colder weather halfway through the race . In 1992 , unseasonable warmth caused problems in the first half of the race , and the second was affected by bitter cold . The head veterinarian of that race , Jeannie Olson , was replaced after she offered canine acupuncture to several mushers . Though not then forbidden by any rule , this violated equal @-@ treatment guidelines because she did not offer the treatment to every musher . At the end of that race , George Cook became the first musher since 1984 to finish short of Whitehorse when open water on the Yukon River prevented him from continuing . Because he did not quit , race officials gave him the Red Lantern Award . 
 Following the 1992 race , controversy erupted when the Alaska board of directors of Yukon Quest International informed the Yukon board that they were considering dropping the Yukon half of the Quest because Yukon officials did not meet fundraising goals . Alaska officials also believed it would be easier to manage an Alaska @-@ only race . A crisis was averted when the Yukon board of directors agreed to raise more money and the two sides formed a joint board of directors . The 1993 race was run as usual , but Jeff Mann had a more eventful race than most . When a moose attacked his dog team , he was forced to kill it with an axe , then butcher it according to Quest rules . Later , he was penalized 90 minutes for borrowing a reporter 's head lantern . Finally , after the conclusion of the race , he was fined half his winnings when his dogs tested positive for ibuprofen . 
 In the 1994 race , Alaskan Bruce Cosgrove was denied entry by Canadian customs officials in the pre @-@ race verification process , the only time a musher has been denied entry into either Canada or Alaska . Cosgrove started the race , but quit before the border . Following the race , controversy again erupted when Alaska Yukon Quest officials announced they would unilaterally eliminate Whitehorse from the Yukon Quest and run a cheaper Fairbanks @-@ to @-@ Dawson City race . Members of the Yukon Quest organization revolted against this and voted to evict the board members who had proposed it . 
 = = = Second decade = = = 
 The 1995 race featured 22 mushers , of whom 13 finished . Budget problems caused the first prize to drop by 25 % to $ 15 @,@ 000 , contributing to the low participation . This problem was fixed for the 1996 race , with a first @-@ place prize of $ 25 @,@ 000 . The 1997 race was won by Rick Mackey , brother of later Quest winner Lance Mackey ; the two are the only brother @-@ brother winning tandem in Quest history . Following the 1997 race , financial troubles again arose , this time on the Alaska side . Canadian organizers secured international sponsorship for the 1998 race , and when they refused to let this sponsorship money be used to pay debts accumulated in Alaska , members of the Alaska board threatened to host a separate competition . In the end , the Alaska board members were forced to resign , and a deal was worked out between the two sides . 
 The 1998 race was run on schedule and had 38 entrants . The 1999 race was won by Alaska Native Ramy Brooks , who defeated veterinarian Mark May by 10 minutes . In 2000 , <unk> Zirkle became the first woman to win the Yukon Quest after taking 10 days , 22 hours , and 57 minutes to trek the 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 609 km ) . Also in 2000 , Yukon Quest International added two races : the Quest 250 ( today the Quest 300 ) and the Junior Quest ( both described below ) . Competitors in each have gone on to participate in the Yukon Quest . The first of these graduated mushers competed in the 2001 race , won by Tim <unk> . 
 In 2002 , the Yukon Quest was won by Hans Gatt , an Austrian @-@ born resident of British Columbia and the first European to win . This was the first of three consecutive wins , making him the first three @-@ time winner . In 2003 , Gatt 's second win was truncated by a lack of snow near Whitehorse . Unseasonable warmth forced organizers to truck mushers and their dog teams to Braeburn before continuing what became a 921 miles ( 1 @,@ 482 km ) competition . The 2004 race saw 31 mushers start the race and 20 finish , a drop @-@ out rate of 35 % . During the first 24 years of the competition , there were 776 starters and 513 finishers . Though 90 more mushers attempted the race in the first 12 years than in the next dozen runnings , there is little difference in the percentage that did not finish ( 35 % in 1984 – 1995 ; 33 % in 1996 – 2007 ) . 
 = = = Third decade = = = 
 In 2005 , first @-@ time participant Lance Mackey broke Hans Gatt 's three @-@ win streak . Mackey finished in 11 days , 32 seconds . The victory was the first of four straight wins by Mackey , who holds the record for most consecutive wins and is also the only four @-@ time winner . During Mackey 's second win , a fierce storm atop Eagle Summit caused a whiteout that forced seven mushers and dog teams to be evacuated by helicopter . Partly because of the storm , only 11 finished the 2006 race — the fewest ever . The finishers also endured an unusual course : because snow was scarce near Whitehorse , they doubled back and finished in Dawson City after racing the 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 609 km ) . In 2007 , three dogs were killed in unrelated incidents , but Mackey tied Gatt 's record of three consecutive wins . One month later , Mackey became the first person to win both the Yukon Quest and the Iditarod in the same year . Mackey 's fourth win came during the 2008 race , the first Yukon Quest to end in Whitehorse since 2003 . 
 Because of the late 2000s recession , the 2009 Yukon Quest purse was reduced to $ 151 @,@ 000 from a planned total of $ 200 @,@ 000 . As a result , the first prize was reduced to $ 30 @,@ 000 from the planned $ 35 @,@ 000 . Partly because of this , Mackey withdrew before the race , making it easier for a newcomer to win . In the closest one – two finish , German Sebastian <unk> completed the race faster than anyone before , finishing that year 's 1 @,@ 016 @-@ mile ( 1 @,@ 635 km ) trip in 9 days , 23 hours , and 20 minutes . He was just four minutes ahead of Hugh Neff . 
 Following the 2009 race , officials decided to advance the competition 's start date by one week to better accommodate mushers also participating in the Iditarod . The 2010 race started in Fairbanks on February 6 , 2010 , and the early start date was kept for the 2011 competition . Hans Gatt won the 2010 race with the fastest finish in Yukon Quest history : 9 days and 26 minutes . That race was marked by good weather , and few mushers dropped out . In 2011 , conditions returned to normal , as violent storms blasted the trail and mushers during the second half of the race . Only 13 of the 25 competitors completed the race , tying the record for fewest finishers . In 2013 , poor trail conditions over American Summit forced the Dawson to Eagle section of the course to be rerouted over the Yukon River . 
 = = Route = = 
 The course of the race varies slightly from year to year because of ice conditions on the Yukon River , snowfall , and other factors . The length of the route has also fluctuated , ranging from 921 miles ( 1 @,@ 482 km ) in the weather @-@ shortened 2003 race to 1 @,@ 023 miles ( 1 @,@ 646 km ) in 1998 . In even @-@ numbered years , the race starts in Fairbanks and ends in Whitehorse . In odd @-@ numbered years , the start and finish lines switch . 
 The route follows the Yukon River for much of its course and travels over four mountains : King Solomon 's Dome , Eagle Summit , American Summit , and Rosebud Summit . Its length is equivalent to the distance between England and Africa , and the distance between some checkpoints is the breadth of Ireland . Racers endure ice , snow , and extreme cold . Wildlife is common on the trail , and participants sometimes face challenges from moose and wolves . Because of the harsh conditions , the Yukon Quest has been called the " most difficult sled dog race in the world " and the " toughest race in the world " . 
 = = = Pre @-@ race preparation = = = 
 Because of the extreme difficulty of the competition , several stages of preparation are needed . The first is the food drop , when mushers and race officials position caches of food and supplies at race checkpoints . This is necessary because mushers may only use their supplies along the route , reflecting the Gold Rush era , when dog trains would resupply at points along the trail . One week after the food drop , all dogs participating in the race undergo a preliminary veterinarian inspection to ensure they are healthy enough to race 1 @,@ 000 miles in subarctic conditions . The final stage of formal preparation is two days before the race , when mushers pick their starting order from a hat . 
 = = = Whitehorse to Braeburn = = = 
 The traditional starting line is in Whitehorse on First Avenue , near the former White Pass and Yukon Route train station , which today houses the Canadian offices of Yukon Quest International . Shortly after leaving the starting line , racers follow the frozen Yukon River north out of town . Crossing onto the <unk> River , mushers follow it north to the Klondike @-@ era Overland Trail . Racers take the trail to Braeburn Lodge , the first checkpoint . 
 This trail segment is about 100 miles ( 161 km ) long . The terrain consists of small hills and frequent frozen streams and lakes . When the race runs from Fairbanks to Whitehorse , the Braeburn checkpoint is the site of a mandatory eight @-@ hour stop to ensure the health of mushers ' dogs before the final stage . In odd years , mushers must take a four @-@ hour rest here or at Carmacks . The three minute start time difference is adjusted here . In even years , mushers must take an eight ( 8 ) hour rest here before continuing on for the last 100 miles ( 161 km ) of the race . 
 = = = Bareburn to Pelly Crossing = = = 
 In the first leg of this , mushers must travel from Bareburn to Carmacks which is 39 miles ( 63 km ) . In odd years , mushers have the option of taking their four @-@ hour rest here or at Bareburn . The three minute difference start time is also adjusted if the musher chooses to take their four @-@ hour rest here . 
 Coming out of Braeburn , competitors cross the Klondike Highway and proceed east for about 10 miles ( 16 km ) to Coghlan Lake . From there they turn north , then northwest , and travel along a chain of lakes that stretches for about 30 miles ( 48 km ) . They then enter a notorious stretch of heavily forested hills nicknamed " Pinball Alley " for the way the rough terrain bounces sleds into trees , rocks , and other obstacles . Trees are so scarred from repeated sled impacts that they have lost their bark on one side . In 1998 , racer Brenda Mackey was jolted around so much by the rough trail that her sled became wedged between two trees , forcing her to cut one down to continue . 
 After Pinball Alley , racers briefly mush along the Yukon River before climbing the riverbank to the Carmacks checkpoint . They then follow a road for about 15 miles ( 24 km ) and turn onto a firebreak trail . After departing the trail , they travel alongside and across the Yukon River to McCabe Creek , the first dog drop on the Whitehorse – Fairbanks route . Leaving McCabe Creek , the race trail parallels a driveway and the Klondike Highway for several miles before turning north to cross the Pelly Burn , an area scorched by a wildfire in 1995 . Because the fire destroyed much of the forest in the area , this portion of the trail has few obstacles and is considered fast . From the McCabe Creek site it is about 32 miles ( 51 km ) to Pelly Crossing . 
 = = = Pelly Crossing to Dawson City = = = 
 The stretch between Pelly Crossing and Dawson City is the greatest distance between checkpoints of any sled dog competition in the world . Between the two sites are 201 miles ( 323 km ) of open trail , marked only by a dog drop at Scroggie Creek , an abandoned gold @-@ mining site activated only during the Yukon Quest . 
 From Pelly Crossing , mushers travel west on the frozen Pelly River , or on a road that parallels the river if ice conditions are poor . At Stepping Stone , shortly before the Pelly and Yukon rivers meet , they can rest at a hospitality stop before turning north . From Stepping Stone to Scroggie Creek the trail consists of a mining road or " cat " road , named for the Caterpillar tracked mining vehicles that use it . Before organizers coordinated schedules with the mining equipment operators , racers often had to contend with heavy machinery blocking the trail or turning it into a muddy path . The Scroggie Creek dog drop is at the confluence of the Stewart River and Scroggie Creek . 
 After Scroggie Creek , the trail switches from a westerly direction to almost directly north . At this point , mushers enter the gold @-@ mining district surrounding Dawson City . From the Stewart River adjacent to Scroggie , the trail climbs , crossing the Yukon Territory 's Black Hills . Fifty miles ( 80 km ) from Dawson City and 55 miles ( 89 km ) from Scroggie Creek , it crosses the Indian River , and mushers begin the climb to King Solomon 's Dome , the highest point ( 4 @,@ 002 feet ( 1 @,@ 220 m ) ) on the trail . The trail ascends more gradually in the Whitehorse – Fairbanks route than in the opposite direction , where mushers have to endure several switchbacks . When mushers start in Whitehorse , they already have gained several thousand feet from the ascent into the Black Hills , including a climb over 3 @,@ 550 @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 082 m ) Eureka Dome . The main difficulties come during the descent from King Solomon 's Dome to Bonanza Creek , the epicenter of the Klondike Gold Rush . After reaching the creek , mushers thread through an area of mining waste and follow the Klondike River to Dawson City , the halfway point of the race . They are required to rest for 36 hours in Dawson City as a halfway @-@ rest . 
 = = = Dawson City to Eagle = = = 
 The distance from Dawson City to Eagle , the first checkpoint in Alaska for the Whitehorse – Fairbanks route , is 144 miles ( 232 km ) . Mushers must rest for four hours in Eagle . 
 Racers exit Dawson City on the Yukon River and follow it for about 50 miles ( 80 km ) to the Fortymile River hospitality stop . The river 's name comes from its distance from Fort Reliance , an abandoned trading post established in 1874 . From the hospitality stop , mushers travel southwest on the Fortymile River in what is one of the coldest portions of the race , because of cold air sinking to the bottom of the river valley . The trail on the river crosses the Alaska – Canada border , noticeable only because of the border vista , a strip of land cleared of all foliage . Shortly past the border , the river turns northwest , and mushers leave its frozen surface when it meets the Taylor Highway , a road closed to automobile traffic during the winter . As the trail follows the highway for 49 miles ( 79 km ) conditions are often hazardous , with high winds and drifting snow that can obscure trail markers . After climbing the 3 @,@ 420 @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 042 m ) American Summit , the trail gradually descends 20 miles ( 32 km ) to Eagle , on the banks of the Yukon River . 
 = = = Eagle to Central = = = 
 The route from Eagle to Central covers a distance of 233 miles ( 375 km ) . In winter , Eagle is buffeted by high winds and drifting snow funneled through the town by nearby Eagle Bluff , which stands 300 feet ( 91 m ) above the Yukon River . Because it is the first stop in the United States , competitors are greeted at Eagle by a United States Department of Homeland Security official who checks passports and entry documents . 
 After leaving Eagle , mushers travel northwest for 159 miles ( 256 km ) on the Yukon River , except for a few short portages . During this stretch , two hospitality stops are available . The first is 28 miles ( 45 km ) from Eagle at Trout Creek . The next is Biederman 's Cabin , the former home of Charlie Biederman , one of the last people to deliver mail by sled dog . ( The final sled dog mail route was canceled in 1963 , and Biederman 's sled hangs in the National Postal Museum . ) A dog drop site is located 18 miles ( 29 km ) from Biederman 's Cabin at Slaven 's Cabin , a historic site operated by the National Park Service . Some 60 miles ( 97 km ) past Slaven 's Cabin mushers arrive in Circle , so named because its founders believed it was on the Arctic Circle . ( Circle is actually about 50 miles ( 80 km ) south of that line . ) 
 From Circle , it is 74 miles ( 119 km ) to the checkpoint in Central . Mushers follow Birch Creek south until just before Circle Hot Springs . This area , along with the Fortymile stretch , is considered among the coldest on the trail , and mushers are advised to prepare for − 60 ° F ( − 51 ° C ) temperatures . Turning west , they travel through frozen swamps before reaching the Steese Roadhouse checkpoint in Central . In Central during even years , mushers have the option of taking their four @-@ hour rest here or at Mile 101 . If they choose to , the three minute start difference will be subtracted from their rest time . 
 = = = Central to Two Rivers = = = 
 From Central to the final ( or first , in the Fairbanks – Whitehorse direction ) checkpoint in Two Rivers is 114 miles ( 183 km ) . Despite the comparative closeness of the checkpoints and the location of a dog drop between them , this is considered the most difficult stretch of dog sled trail in the world . At this point , mushers must climb the two steepest and most difficult mountains on the trail : Eagle Summit and Rosebud Summit . 
 After leaving Central , mushers head west , paralleling the Steese Highway , which connects Central and Circle with Fairbanks . The trail travels through frozen swamps , mining areas , and firebreaks for about 20 miles ( 32 km ) . Mushers then encounter the Steese Highway for a second time before crossing several creeks to begin the ascent of Eagle Summit . They eventually climb above the tree line and are exposed to the wind as they continue upward . The weather atop Eagle Summit is harsh as this is a convergence zone between the Yukon Flats to the north and the low ground of the Tanana Valley to the south . A differential in the weather within the two valleys causes high winds and precipitation when there is moisture in the atmosphere . The final few hundred yards of the climb consists of a 30 @-@ degree slope often scoured to bare rock and tundra by the fierce wind . The crossing point itself is a symmetrical saddle , with two peaks of similar height separated by 100 yards ( 91 m ) . The south side of Eagle Summit is not as steep , and mushers generally have an easier time reaching the checkpoint at Mile 101 . When descending the steep northern slope of Eagle Summit on the Fairbanks – Whitehorse route , many mushers wrap their sled runners in chains to increase friction and slow the plunge . 
 The Mile 101 checkpoint is a cabin at mile marker 101 ( the distance from Fairbanks ) on the Steese Highway . At Mile 101 , mushers have the option of taking their four @-@ hour rest during even years . They can also take the rest at Central during even years . Again , the three minute start difference will be subtracted from the race if the musher desires to take their rest here . The cabin gives mushers the opportunity for a short rest between Eagle Summit and Rosebud Summit . The ascent of Rosebud Summit begins about 10 miles ( 16 km ) south of the dog drop . It consists of a gradual climb of 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) followed by a steep descent into the valley that contains the north fork of the Chena River . The descent also brings mushers back into forested terrain . The trail then parallels a road for about 27 miles ( 43 km ) before entering the final checkpoint at Twin Bears Campground near Two Rivers . 
 = = = Two Rivers to Fairbanks = = = 
 Two Rivers is the final checkpoint in the Whitehorse – Fairbanks route . Mushers are required to rest at least eight hours in Two Rivers in odd years to ensure the health of their dogs during the final leg of the race . The terrain in this stretch is among the easiest on the trail , with gently rolling hills and forest which gradually change into an urban landscape as racers approach Fairbanks . The greatest challenge for racers in the Two Rivers area is distinguishing the Yukon Quest trail from other sled dog trails , many of which have similar markings . Mushers have occasionally been deceived by these markings and taken wrong turns . 
 Beyond Two Rivers , the trail reaches the Chena River northwest of Fairbanks . This is the final stretch , and mushers use the river to enter Fairbanks and reach the finish line , which is on the river itself in the middle of downtown Fairbanks . Regardless of the timing of the finish , several thousand spectators typically gather to watch the first musher cross the finish line . 
 = = = Route changes = = = 
 The 1984 route was slightly different from today 's . It had just one non @-@ checkpoint dog drop , at the Mile 101 location , and bypassed American Summit , Pelly Junction , and Braeburn . Instead of running through Braeburn , mushers traveled across Lake Laberge for 60 miles ( 97 km ) between Whitehorse and Minto . The inaugural race also included a checkpoint at Chena Hot Springs Resort near Fairbanks . This site was moved to nearby Angel Creek after mushers complained that the hot springs melted nearby snow , causing their dogs to become wet — an extreme hazard in sub @-@ freezing temperatures . Two additional dog drops were added for the 1994 race : Biederman 's Cabin ( since replaced by Slaven 's Cabin ) and McCabe Creek . In 1995 , the Whitehorse end of the trail was moved away from Lake Laberge to near the <unk> River . Additional changes that year included the rerouting of the trail around the southern and eastern sides of King Solomon 's Dome south of Dawson City and the introduction of the Scroggie Creek dog drop site on the shore of the Stewart River . 
 In 1996 , the trail was rerouted through Pelly Crossing and a checkpoint was added there , and the Lake Laberge stretch was replaced by a route through Braeburn and along the Dawson @-@ Whitehorse Overland Trail . In 1997 , mushers were routed through the Chena River Lakes Flood Control Project and to the Alaska town of North Pole before continuing on to Fairbanks . The North Pole loop was removed before the 2009 race , and mushers were directed through Two Rivers instead . Starting in the 2010 race , the Mile 101 location was upgraded from a dog drop to a full @-@ fledged checkpoint . In the past several races , the Two Rivers checkpoint has changed locations annually : from a lodge to a campground , and then to a gravel pit in 2011 . 
 = = Weather = = 
 The Yukon Quest trail is in the subarctic climate range . In Fairbanks , the average February temperature is − 3 @.@ 8 ° F ( − 20 ° C ) , but − 40 ° F ( − 40 ° C ) is not uncommon , and temperatures have dropped to − 58 ° F ( − 50 ° C ) . An average of 7 @.@ 3 inches ( 185 mm ) of snow falls in February , with average snowpack depth of 22 inches ( 559 mm ) . 
 Outside the sheltered urban areas of Fairbanks , Whitehorse , and Dawson City , temperatures and snowfall are often more extreme . During the 2008 race , competitors started in − 40 ° F ( − 40 ° C ) temperatures in Fairbanks and then faced winds of 25 miles per hour ( 40 km / h ) on the trail , resulting in severe wind chills . At higher elevations , such as the crossings of Rosebud and Eagle summits , whiteout blizzards are common . In the 2006 race , 12 teams were struck by a massive storm that eventually caused the evacuation of seven teams by helicopter . In 2009 , mushers endured winds up to 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) , blowing snow , and subzero temperatures atop Eagle Summit , where conditions had been even worse in a storm during the 1988 race , when wind chill temperatures dropped below − 100 ° F ( − 73 ° C ) . 
 The extreme temperatures pose a serious health hazard . Frostbite is common , as is hypothermia . In the 1988 Yukon Quest , Jeff King suffered an entirely frozen hand because of nerve damage from an earlier injury which left him unable to feel the cold . King said his hand became " like something from a frozen corpse " . In 1989 , King and his team drove through a break in the Yukon River in − 38 ° F ( − 39 ° C ) temperatures . Frozen by the extreme cold , King managed to reach a cabin and thaw out . Other racers have suffered permanent damage from the cold : Lance Mackey suffered frostbitten feet during the 2008 Yukon Quest , and Hugh Neff lost the tips of several toes in the 2004 race . 
 = = Participants = = 
 Since the race 's inception in 1984 , 353 people from 11 countries have competed in the Yukon Quest , some many times . The race attracts from 21 ( in 1996 ) to 47 ( in 1988 and 1989 ) mushers each year . Of the 776 entries from 1984 to 2007 , 263 ( 34 % ) did not finish . The racers have come from various professions : taxicab drivers , swimming instructors , coal miners , tax assessors , lawyers , fur trappers , journalists , and a car salesman have all entered . 
 At the end of the competition , racers are given awards for feats performed on the trail . The foremost is the championship award , given to the winner . Accompanying this is the Golden Harness Award , given to the winner 's two lead sled dogs . The next award is the Veterinarians Choice Award , which is voted on by race veterinarians and given to the musher who took the best care of his or her dogs during the race . Other awards include the Challenge of the North Award — given to the musher who " exemplifies the spirit of the Yukon Quest " — and the Sportsmanship Award , given to the most sportsmanlike competitor , as chosen by a vote of the mushers . 
 The Rookie of the Year Award is given to the highest @-@ finishing first @-@ time competitor . The Dawson Award , consisting of four ounces of gold , is given to the first musher to reach Dawson City ( the midpoint ) who also finishes the competition . The final award is the Red Lantern , given to the last official finisher of the year 's race . Two awards have been discontinued : the Kiwanis Award , given to the first musher to cross the Alaska – Yukon border , and the Mayor 's Award , given to the Yukon Quest champion by the Mayor of Fairbanks . 
 The 2011 Yukon Quest champion is Alaskan Dallas Seavey , who finished the race in 10 days , 11 hours and 53 minutes . Seavey , who has run the Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race several times , won the Yukon Quest in his rookie year and therefore also was named rookie of the year . Haliburton , Ontario musher Hank <unk> won the 2011 Red Lantern Award by finishing the race in 13 days , 10 hours , and 54 minutes . For the first time in Yukon Quest history , more than one musher received the sportsmanship award . Following the 2011 race , Allen Moore , Brent Sass and Mike Ellis shared the honor . Ken Anderson , who reached Dawson City third , was the only one of the top three at that point to finish , and thus received the Dawson Award . <unk> musher Kelley Griffin received the Spirit of the North award , and the <unk> 's Choice award was given to Mike Ellis and his wife / handler Sue Ellis . 
 = = = Dogs = = = 
 Dogs in the Yukon Quest come in a variety of sizes and breeds , though the most common are Alaskan and Siberian Huskies weighing between 45 pounds ( 20 kg ) and 70 pounds ( 32 kg ) . The Alaskan Husky is not a recognized breed , but an amalgam of several different types bred for speed , stamina , and strength . Siberian Huskies are a breed recognized by the American Kennel Club and are characterized by thick coats , stiff ears , a fox @-@ like tail , and medium size . Siberian Huskies are typically larger and slower than their Alaskan counterparts , causing mushers to nickname the breed " <unk> " , but have more pulling power . The difference was seen during the 1998 Yukon Quest , when Bruce Lee 's team of Alaskan Huskies competed against André Nadeau 's team of Siberians . Lee 's team was faster than Nadeau 's over short stretches , but Lee had to rest more often . Nadeau had a head start out of the final checkpoint , but Lee was able to overtake and pass him . 
 = = Rules = = 
 The Yukon Quest encourages participants ' self @-@ sufficiency , and one of its objectives is " [ to ] encourage and facilitate knowledge and application of the widest variety of bush skills and practices that form the foundation of Arctic survival . " On the trail , racers may not accept outside assistance and are limited in the changes they may make to their teams and sled . There are 10 checkpoints and four additional locations where sick or injured dogs may be dropped from a team . Only four checkpoint stops are mandated : a 36 @-@ hour stop at Dawson City ; a four @-@ hour stop in Eagle , Alaska ; a two @-@ hour stop at the first checkpoint ; and an eight @-@ hour stop at the last . 
 As well as food , camping equipment , and dog @-@ care gear , mushers must carry an axe , a cold @-@ weather sleeping bag , a pair of snowshoes , veterinary records , Quest promotional material , a cooker , and eight <unk> per dog . Included in the required promotional material are numerous event covers intended to reflect the Quest 's ancestry as a mail route . One unusual rule requires mushers to immediately butcher any game animal killed during the race . This rule was applied in 1993 , when a musher was attacked by a moose and killed it to protect himself . 
 = = = Entry requirements = = = 
 Competitors must meet a series of written and unwritten requirements before entering . The first is that each musher must have a team of dogs . The race does not furnish any dogs , but participants have been known to lease or borrow dog teams rather than raise their own . In the 2009 Yukon Quest , for example , Newton Marshall from the Jamaica <unk> Team borrowed a dog team from Canadian Hans Gatt . Each competitor must have completed at least two sled dog races sanctioned by Yukon Quest International : one of 200 miles ( 320 km ) and one of 300 miles ( 480 km ) . Sanctioned races include the Copper Basin 300 and the <unk> 200 , Alaska races held before the Quest . 
 Those who have completed at least 500 miles ( 805 km ) of Quest @-@ sanctioned racing are eligible to send in an entry form . This requires entrants to certify that they are older than 18 , have not been censured by the Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race , and have never been convicted of animal abuse or neglect . They must pay $ 1 @,@ 500 or $ 2 @,@ 000 for late entries . 
 = = = Dog health = = = 
 Many of the Quest 's rules are intended to ensure the health of dogs in hazardous conditions . This process begins before the race , when all dogs must be examined by race veterinarians , who certify that the animals are suited and healthy enough to participate . Before the race , dog equipment also must be checked by race officials . <unk> harnesses are required , each musher must carry an appropriate amount of food , and additional food supplies must be in position at checkpoints . 
 Mushers must start the race with at most fourteen dogs and finish with no fewer than six . Dogs are visually examined by veterinarians stationed at every checkpoint , and mushers can be ejected and banned from the race for mistreating dogs . Dog whips and forced feeding are forbidden . Participating dogs may not receive injections during the race or be under the influence of performance @-@ enhancing substances such as steroids . The race marshal may remove any team from the race for violations of these rules or substandard dog care . 
 = = = Penalties = = = 
 The Yukon Quest 's rules allow race officials latitude on whether to assess a time penalty or monetary fine on mushers who violate one or more regulations . The most serious penalties can be assessed for mistreating dogs . Racers have been forcibly removed from the race for inadequate dog care ; the most recent instance of this took place in 2008 , when Donald <unk> was removed . More common are minor time and monetary penalties . For example , Dan <unk> was fined $ 500 of his eventual $ 9 @,@ 000 winnings for missing roll call at a mandatory meeting in 2007 . Fines of $ 500 also have been levied for not attending the finish banquet , littering , not wearing start and finish bibs , or losing veterinary records . These minor penalties can have an effect on the race . In 2009 , Hugh Neff , then in second place , was penalized two hours for <unk> on the Circle Hot Springs road . As a result , he finished four minutes behind Sebastian <unk> , the winner . 
 = = Junior Yukon Quest and Yukon Quest 300 = = 
 In addition to the main 1 @,@ 000 @-@ mile sled dog race , the Yukon Quest organization operates two shorter races : the Junior Yukon Quest and the Yukon Quest 300 . The two began in 2000 , though in its first three years the Quest 300 was only 250 miles and thus known as the Quest 250 . 
 = = = Junior Yukon Quest = = = 
 The Junior Yukon Quest , or Junior Quest , is a 135 @-@ mile ( 217 km ) race for mushers older than 14 but under 18 . Unlike the Yukon Quest , the Junior Quest does not change locations and always starts and ends in Fairbanks . It is billed as an opportunity for young racers to experience a mid @-@ distance sled dog race . They must plan a food drop , camp away from checkpoints , and carry much of the same equipment as mushers in the Yukon Quest and Yukon Quest 300 . 
 = = = Yukon Quest 300 = = = 
 The Yukon Quest 300 is a 300 @-@ mile ( 483 km ) race along the regular Yukon Quest trail . It alternates starting locations along with the main race and is intended for less @-@ experienced mushers training for longer races . The race is also a qualifier for the Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race and the following year 's Yukon Quest . Several mushers , including Fort Yukon Native Josh <unk> , have used the race as a trial before entering the longer races . 
 In 2009 , the race was capped at 25 entries . When the Quest 300 starts in Whitehorse , its course follows the main Yukon Quest trail until the Stepping Stone hospitality stop . From there , it turns southwest , ending in Minto Landing , Yukon . The Fairbanks route follows the main trail to Circle , then reverses course , ending in Central . 
 = = Further information = = 
 Berton , Pierre . The Klondike Quest : A Photographic Essay 1897 @-@ 1899 . North York , Ont . : Boston Mills , 2005 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 453 @-@ 5 . 
 Cook , Ann Mariah . Running North : A Yukon Adventure . Chapel Hill . N.C. : Algonquin Books , 1998 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 56512 @-@ 253 @-@ 6 . 
 Dick , Laurent . Yukon Quest Photo Journey . Anchorage , Alaska : Todd Communications , 2003 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 219 @-@ 9 . 
 Evans , Polly . Mad Dogs and an Englishwoman : Travels with Sled Dogs in Canada 's Frozen North . New York : Delta , 2009 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Phillips , Michelle . My Yukon Quest Story : 1000 Mile Sled Dog Journal . Tagish , Yukon : Michelle Phillips , 2003 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ 7 . 
 Proudfoot , Shannon ( March 26 , 2012 ) . " Yukon Quest is hell frozen over " . Sportsnet Magazine ( Toronto : Rogers Media ) . 
 Stuck , Hudson . Ten Thousand Miles with a Dog Sled : A Narrative of Winter Travel in Interior Alaska . 2nd ed . New York : Charles Scribner 's Sons , 1916 . ( Here [ 1 ] at Project Gutenberg . ) 
 = = = Fiction = = = 
 Browne , Belmore . The Quest of the Golden Valley : A Story of Adventure on the Yukon . New York : G.P. Putnam 's Sons , 1916 . 
 Henry , Sue . Murder on the Yukon Quest . New York : Avon , 2000 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 380 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 = = = Video = = = 
 Bristow , Becky . Dog Gone Addiction . Wild Soul Creations , 2007 . 67 minutes . 
 CBC North Television . The Lone Trail : The Dogs and Drivers of the Yukon Quest . CBC , 2004 . 60 minutes . 
 <unk> , Dan and <unk> , Sven . <unk> @-@ <unk> . <unk> Films , 2005 . 63 minutes . 
 Northern Light Media . Mark <unk> , dir . Appetite and Attitude : A conversation with Lance Mackey . 46 minutes . 
 = Bootham Crescent = 
 Bootham Crescent is an association football ground in York , North Yorkshire , England , and is the home of York City Football Club . With a capacity of 8 @,@ 256 , the ground is located near the centre of the city , just over a mile from York railway station . 
 York City leased land at Bootham Crescent from York Cricket Club as a replacement for their ground at Fulfordgate , which was on the outskirts of the city . The ground was constructed in four months , and officially opened on 31 August 1932 . During the Second World War , the Popular Stand was converted into an air @-@ raid shelter , and the ground suffered slight damage when a bomb landed on houses along the Shipton Street End . York purchased Bootham Crescent for £ 4 @,@ 075 in September 1948 . Floodlights were fitted at the ground in 1959 , and were replaced by ones twice as powerful in 1995 . A number of improvements were made in the early 1980s , with a gymnasium , offices and a lounge for officials built . 
 The David Longhurst Stand opened in 1991 after a roof was erected on the Shipton Street End . It was named after the former York player David Longhurst , who died during a match at the ground in 1990 . Bootham Crescent hosted football in the Football League from 1932 to 2004 , when York were relegated into the Conference National , and has done so again since York 's promotion back into the Football League in 2012 . The ground was renamed KitKat Crescent from 2005 to 2010 as part of a sponsorship deal with Nestlé . York are expected to move to a community stadium at Monks Cross in Huntington in early 2018 , and the Bootham Crescent site will be used for housing . 
 Bootham Crescent comprises four stands : the Main Stand , the Popular Stand , the David Longhurst Stand and the Grosvenor Road End . The ground has held a league representative match , neutral club matches , and schoolboy and youth international matches . Other than football , it has hosted a concert , a grand firework display , American football and rugby league matches and beer festivals . The record attendance of 28 @,@ 123 was set in March 1938 , for an FA Cup match against Huddersfield Town . The highest seasonal average attendance of 10 @,@ 412 was achieved in 1948 – 49 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction and early years = = = 
 York City F.C. played at Fulfordgate in Fulford , on the southern outskirts of York , from 1922 to 1932 . It was difficult for most supporters to reach , being a good distance from the railway station , and the tram service to Fulford only had a single track . Attendances declined in the club 's second and third seasons in the Football League , which the directors blamed on Fulfordgate 's location . One director , G. W. Halliday , became convinced that the only solution was to move to a new ground . York Cricket Club left Bootham Crescent , their home for around fifty years , for a new ground at Wigginton Road in January 1932 . Preliminary discussions and visits to Bootham Crescent took place , and the directors believed that renting the ground would be cheaper than repaying the debts on Fulfordgate . Further , Bootham Crescent was situated near the centre of the city , and the population living within a mile of the site was , at 30 @,@ 000 , ten times that within a similar radius of Fulfordgate . However , two former directors argued that attendances at many grounds had fallen during the Great Depression , and that the approaches and surrounds to Bootham Crescent were limited . 
 The directors were unanimous that a change should be made , and a special meeting of the shareholders was held on 26 April 1932 . The move to Bootham Crescent on a 21 @-@ year lease was approved by 115 votes to 37 . The site of York 's new home was of an irregular shape and was hemmed in from four sides , with a narrow track to the south , barracks to the west , a school and <unk> to the north and terraced houses to the east . Nonetheless , the grounds of the city 's football , cricket and rugby league teams were now within a few hundred yards of each other . The ground was renovated over the summer of 1932 ; the area was drained and then built to the design of local architects Ward & <unk> . The Popular Stand was erected on the west side using sections of the terrace cover at Fulfordgate , with the Main Stand built opposite . Terraces were banked up in the wedge @-@ shaped areas behind the goals . After four months of construction , Bootham Crescent was ready for the 1932 – 33 season , with an initial capacity of over 30 @,@ 000 . 
 The ground was officially opened on 31 August 1932 , when York played Stockport County in a Third Division North match . The club president , Sir John Hunt , marked the occasion by cutting a ribbon of the club 's colours of chocolate and cream . In attendance were the Lord Mayor of York , the Sheriff of York , the vice @-@ president of the Football League , the treasurer of the Football Association ( FA ) and the local Member of Parliament . York player Tom Mitchell scored the first goal at the ground in a 2 – 2 draw , played before 8 @,@ 106 supporters . In the first four seasons at Bootham Crescent , attendances were not higher , and were sometimes lower than at Fulfordgate . There were problems with the ground in its early years ; the quality of the pitch was questioned , and the Lincolnshire Echo remarked in April 1937 that the pitch was " almost a morass , with extensive pools of water in front of the goals " . There was an incident in March 1934 where the referee and linesmen were found unconscious in their dressing room , due to fumes from a faulty heater . 
 = = = Improvements and cup runs = = = 
 The ground first hosted a match against First Division opposition on 12 January 1935 when York played Derby County in an FA Cup third @-@ round match , which set a new club record attendance of 13 @,@ 612 . Attendance records were set at four successive stages of the 1937 – 38 FA Cup , culminating in the 28 @,@ 123 attendance for the sixth @-@ round match against Huddersfield Town on 5 March 1938 . By now the ground 's capacity was around 23 @,@ 000 , and seats were placed around the pitch to accommodate more fans . During the Second World War , the tunnel at the back of the Popular Stand was used as an air @-@ raid shelter for pupils and staff of Shipton Street School . The ground was slightly damaged after the air @-@ raid on York in April 1942 , when houses along the Shipton Street End were bombed . Considerable improvements were made in the immediate post @-@ war period . Deeper drainage and the concreting of the banking at the Grosvenor Road End were completed , and <unk> equipment was installed . 
 It was announced at the shareholders ' annual meeting in September 1948 that York had purchased Bootham Crescent for £ 4 @,@ 075 , with the club 's finances in a strong position at the time . Bigger crowds were recorded around the country in the post @-@ war period , and York achieved five @-@ figure average attendances in 1948 – 49 and 1955 – 56 . Over the late 1940s and early 1950s , concreting was completed on the terracing in the Popular Stand , due to the efforts of the supporters ' club , and the Shipton Street End . York reached the semi @-@ final of the 1954 – 55 FA Cup , and two matches from this run were played at Bootham Crescent : the first @-@ round match against Scarborough , which York won 3 – 2 , and the fifth @-@ round match against Tottenham Hotspur , which was won 3 – 1 before a crowd of 21 @,@ 000 . During the summer of 1955 the Main Stand was extended towards Shipton Street , funded by profits gained from the FA Cup run and a stand extension fund . 
 A concrete wall was built at the Grosvenor Road End for over £ 3 @,@ 000 in 1956 , as a safety precaution and as a support for additional banking and terracing . These improvements saw capacity extended to 23 @,@ 600 . Two FA Cup ties against First Division opposition were held at the ground in 1957 – 58 : Birmingham City were beaten 3 – 0 , followed by a 0 – 0 draw with Bolton Wanderers , which drew a capacity crowd of 23 @,@ 600 . Floodlights were installed at the ground in the summer of 1959 , costing £ 14 @,@ 500 , a substantial part of which was raised by a supporters ' club . They were officially switched on for a friendly against Newcastle United on 28 October 1959 , which Newcastle won 8 – 2 before a crowd of 9 @,@ 414 . 
 = = = Further improvements and a new stand = = = 
 York reached the quarter @-@ final of the 1961 – 62 League Cup , and in the earlier rounds beat Bristol City , Leicester City , Watford and Bournemouth at Bootham Crescent . The half @-@ time scoreboard at the Shipton Street End ceased to be used by 1965 , but remained as advertising boarding . On 5 May 1969 , referee Roy Harper collapsed and died on the pitch during a match against Halifax Town . Seats were installed in the Popular Stand for 1974 – 75 , York 's first season in the Second Division . This increased the ground 's seating capacity to 2 @,@ 762 , but meant the overall capacity was reduced to 16 @,@ 529 . The floodlights were updated and improved for £ 20 @,@ 000 , and were officially switched on by former Wolverhampton Wanderers player Derek Dougan for a friendly with Grimsby Town on 1 August 1980 . A gymnasium was built at the Grosvenor Road End for £ 50 @,@ 000 early in 1981 , and to help towards this York received £ 15 @,@ 000 from the Sports Council and £ 20 @,@ 000 from the Football League Improvement Trust . In the summer of 1983 new offices for the manager , secretary , matchday and lottery manager were built , along with a vice @-@ presidents ' lounge . The lounge was officially opened by Jack Dunnett , the chairman of the Football League , prior to a match against Wrexham in November 1983 . 
 By the early 1980s cracks had appeared in the wall built at the back of the Grosvenor Road End . The rear of the terracing was cordoned off , and the capacity of the ground reduced to under 13 @,@ 500 . The Grosvenor Road End was segregated and allocated to away supporters , and fencing was erected for the first time before the FA Cup match against Liverpool in February 1985 . All the fencing had been dismantled by the early 2000s . During the 1983 – 84 and 1984 – 85 seasons problems had arisen in handling big crowds , due to the ground having only two of four sides available for entry and exit , and the home supporters funnelling through the car park to the Shipton Street End . Extensive improvements were made in the summer of 1985 for approximately £ 100 @,@ 000 , and eight new turnstiles were installed at the Shipton Street End . Further , the dressing rooms were refurbished to incorporate new baths and showers , and a new referees ' changing room and physiotherapist 's treatment room were readied . Hospitality boxes were built into the Main Stand during 1986 – 87 , and video equipment was installed inside the ground . Crash barriers were strengthened , meaning ground safety requirements were met . These improvements meant that shortly before the Taylor Report was published , the ground 's capacity was 14 @,@ 109 , including 3 @,@ 059 seats . However , by September 1989 the capacity had been increased to 14 @,@ 628 . 
 The ground 's major drawback was the lack of covered standing accommodation at the Shipton Street End , but the cost of erecting a stand had been prohibitive . The Shipton Street Roof Appeal was launched in the spring of 1988 to raise money for a stand , and fundraising schemes were put into place . On 8 September 1990 York player David Longhurst collapsed and died from heart failure during a match against Lincoln City at Bootham Crescent . With the approval of his family , the David Longhurst Memorial Fund was launched , and all donations were added to the monies already raised for the roof appeal . The Football Trust contributed half of the £ 150 @,@ 000 cost of the stand , and it was constructed in the summer of 1991 . The David Longhurst Stand was officially opened on 14 October 1991 in a friendly match against Leeds United , which was watched by a crowd of 4 @,@ 374 . 
 = = = 1990s to present = = = 
 The Family Stand was opened in the Main Stand in 1992 , and manager John Ward ran the London Marathon to help raise funds for the project . Bootham Crescent first hosted a play @-@ off match when York beat Bury 1 – 0 on 19 May 1993 in the Third Division play @-@ off semi @-@ final ; the attendance of 9 @,@ 206 was the ground 's highest in seven years . During 1993 – 94 the Main Stand paddock was seated and covered , and the recent work to the stand cost £ 220 @,@ 000 . The ground 's capacity fell to 9 @,@ 459 , including seating for 3 @,@ 645 , after the renovations to the David Longhurst and Main Stands . In May 1995 a new drainage system was installed for £ 11 @,@ 000 , to improve the quality of the pitch during winter . New floodlights were installed in June 1995 at a cost of £ 122 @,@ 000 , and despite being shorter in height were twice as powerful as the original floodlights . A water tower was installed in the late 1990s , to further help the pitch quality . 
 In July 1999 York 's real property assets , including Bootham Crescent , were transferred to a holding company called Bootham Crescent Holdings ( BCH ) for £ 165 @,@ 000 . Chairman Douglas Craig put the ground and the club up for sale for £ 4 @.@ 5 million in December 2001 . It was announced that the ground would close by 30 June 2002 , and talks were held over a move to Huntington Stadium . In March 2002 the club was bought by John Batchelor ; he said York could continue at Bootham Crescent until a new stadium was built , when in fact the previous twenty @-@ five @-@ year lease was replaced with one that would expire in June 2003 . Batchelor spoke of building a new stadium at Clifton Moor , and Persimmon , who held ten percent of the shares in BCH , submitted planning applications for ninety @-@ three homes on the site of Bootham Crescent . In March 2003 York extended their lease of the ground to May 2004 , and under the ownership of the Supporters ' Trust proceeded with plans to move to Huntington Stadium . Planning problems arose with bringing the ground up to Football League standards , and the club preferred to stay at Bootham Crescent . York bought Bootham Crescent in February 2004 , after a £ 2 million loan from the Football Stadia Improvement Fund ( FSIF ) was secured . 
 York were relegated into the Conference National for 2004 – 05 , which brought an end to seventy @-@ two years of Football League football at Bootham Crescent . In January 2005 the ground was renamed KitKat Crescent , as part of a sponsorship deal under which Nestlé donated £ 100 @,@ 000 to the club . This money went towards covering the shortfall the club faced paying BCH directors , Persimmon and stamp duty when buying the ground . The ground was still commonly referred to as Bootham Crescent . The deal expired in January 2010 , when Nestlé ended all their sponsorship arrangements with the club . York returned to the Football League for 2012 – 13 , and their first League Two match at Bootham Crescent was a 3 – 1 defeat to Wycombe Wanderers on 18 August 2012 , before a 4 @,@ 591 crowd . The ground has not been subject to any major investment since the 1990s , and has faced problems with holes in the Main Stand roof , crumbling in the Grosvenor Road End , drainage problems and toilet conditions . 
 = = Future = = 
 The terms of the FSIF loan required the club to identify a site for a new stadium by 2007 , and have detailed planning permission by 2009 , to avoid financial penalties . Once plans for a new stadium were in place , the loan would turn into a grant to assist in funding the relocation . As part of the loan agreement , Persimmon have first refusal on purchasing Bootham Crescent once York leave , for ten percent lower than its market value . Persimmon still intend to build ninety @-@ three homes on the site , and the proceeds of the sale would go towards building the new stadium . In March 2008 York 's managing director Jason McGill cited " the annual cost of £ 60 @,@ 000 for the maintenance and upkeep of a 1932 stadium with few commercial and income @-@ generating opportunities " as the reason for the continued need to move to a new stadium . 
 Despite the club failing to formally identify a site by the end of 2007 , financial penalties were not incurred , as the FSIF were satisfied with the progress made . However , McGill said plans with the preferred site had ground to a halt by March 2008 . City of York Council announced its commitment to building a community stadium in May 2008 , which would be used by York and the city 's rugby league club , York City Knights . In July 2010 the council chose the option of building a 6 @,@ 000 all @-@ seater stadium at Monks Cross in Huntington , on the site of Huntington Stadium . In August 2014 Greenwich Leisure Ltd were named as the council 's preferred bidder to deliver an 8 @,@ 000 all @-@ seater stadium , a leisure complex and a community hub . Construction is expected to start in the summer of 2016 , for completion in early 2018 . 
 = = Structure and facilities = = 
 The ground can accommodate 8 @,@ 256 supporters , including seating for 3 @,@ 409 , and comprises four stands ; the Main Stand , the Popular Stand , the David Longhurst Stand and the Grosvenor Road End . 
 The Main Stand , which can seat 1 @,@ 757 spectators , is an all @-@ seated stand which runs around two @-@ thirds of the pitch . It contains the dressing rooms , club offices , ticket offices and hospitality suites , and contains a number of supporting pillars . The stand has open corners to either side , one of which is where the supporters ' club is located , and to the rear has windscreens to either side . At the front of it is the Family Stand , which offers adjusted rates for children and their carers . Opposite is the Popular Stand , a covered all @-@ seated stand , which contains a number of supporting pillars and holds a television gantry on its roof . It can seat 1 @,@ 652 spectators . 
 The northernmost stand of the ground is the David Longhurst Stand , which is a covered terrace for home supporters and has a row of supporting pillars across its front . The stand was originally known as the Shipton Street End , but was renamed following the death of David Longhurst , and has a capacity of 3 @,@ 062 . Opposite is the Grosvenor Road End , an open terrace reserved for away supporters , which holds a capacity of 1 @,@ 785 . As well as this , away fans are permitted to use 332 seats of the Popular Stand , in the section closest to the Grosvenor Road End . The toilet facilities for away supporters consist of open air urinals for men and <unk> for women . 
 The grass pitch measures 104 by 64 metres ( 114 by 70 yd ) . Head groundsman Bryan Foster was presented with a gold watch from the directors in March 1988 , in recognition of his long and outstanding service . His successor , Bryan Horner , was voted the Second Division groundsman of the year in 1999 . A club shop is situated just inside the car park , which also houses the commercial manager 's office . Adjoining this is the social club , known as the 1922 Bar since August 2015 , and the players ' bar . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The ground is located just over a mile from York railway station , which is approximately a twenty @-@ minute walk . The station lies on the East Coast Main Line between London King 's Cross railway station and Edinburgh Waverley railway station , and has direct services from Liverpool , Manchester , Birmingham and the South West . Many of the roads near the ground are for residential permit holders only , meaning car parking at the ground is notoriously difficult . The author Simon Inglis pointed out the irony of the club leaving Fulfordgate because of its location , when " it is harder than ever for fans to drive in to Bootham Crescent " . Parking on matchdays at nearby York Hospital has been available since January 2014 . A park and ride facility operates in the city , and a number of lines drop off within walking distance of the ground . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 Bootham Crescent hosted a war @-@ time representative match in which the Football League XI beat the Northern Command XI 9 – 2 on 17 October 1942 , before a 5 @,@ 500 crowd . It held a university representative match on 17 February 1976 , when a FA XI drew 2 – 2 with the Universities Athletic Union ; the FA XI included former England internationals and 1966 World Cup winners Bobby Charlton and Nobby Stiles . The ground hosted its first major neutral match on 7 February 1968 , when Middlesbrough beat Hull City 1 – 0 in an FA Cup third @-@ round second replay , in front of a crowd of 16 @,@ 524 . During 2012 – 13 Bootham Crescent held one fixture apiece for Harrogate Town and Gateshead , as the pitches at their grounds were unplayable . The ground hosted the 2013 FA Women 's Premier League Cup Final on 5 May 2013 , when Aston Villa beat Leeds United 5 – 4 on penalties after a 0 – 0 extra time draw . 
 The ground first held international football on 10 May 1952 , when England schools , captained by future York manager Wilf McGuinness , beat Ireland 5 – 0 before 16 @,@ 000 spectators . It has hosted a number of youth international matches , most notably the England under @-@ 18 's 4 – 0 win over Northern Ireland on 13 October 1996 , in which sixteen @-@ year @-@ old Michael Owen scored a hat @-@ trick for England . Bootham Crescent hosted three matches in the 2001 UEFA European Under @-@ 16 Championship , including France 's 2 – 0 win over Russia in the quarter @-@ final on 30 April 2001 , watched by 557 spectators . 
 The ground has also held non @-@ football events . It hosted a music concert in September 1979 and a grand fireworks display in October 1982 to celebrate the centenary of the Yorkshire Evening Press . Sporting events to have taken place include an American football match in the summer of 1988 , and a rugby league match between York RLFC and Leeds RLFC in the Challenge Cup before a crowd of 11 @,@ 347 on 29 January 1989 , which was won 28 – 9 by Leeds . York City Knights will temporarily play at Bootham Crescent in 2016 , ahead of the move to the Community Stadium . Beer festivals , organised by the York Minstermen supporters ' group , were held at the ground 's social club from 2008 to 2012 . 
 = = Records = = 
 The highest attendance record at the ground was 28 @,@ 123 for a match against Huddersfield Town in the FA Cup sixth @-@ round on 5 March 1938 . The highest attendance in the Football League is 21 @,@ 010 against Hull City in the Third Division North on 23 April 1949 . The attendance of 1 @,@ 167 against Northampton Town on 5 May 1981 is the lowest ever to see York in a Football League match . York were relegated into the Conference National in 2004 , and their highest home attendance in this division was 6 @,@ 660 for a game against Morecambe on 4 May 2007 . The lowest was 1 @,@ 567 for a match against Exeter City on 10 March 2008 . The lowest attendance at the ground for any first @-@ team fixture was 608 for a Conference League Cup third @-@ round match against Mansfield Town on 4 November 2008 . 
 The highest seasonal average attendance for York at Bootham Crescent was 10 @,@ 412 in 1948 – 49 . York 's lowest seasonal average was 2 @,@ 139 in 1977 – 78 , which came after two successive relegations from the Second Division . The most recent season in which the average attendance was more than 10 @,@ 000 was in 1955 – 56 . This season also saw York 's highest total seasonal attendance at the ground , which was 236 @,@ 685 . The lowest total seasonal attendance was 48 @,@ 357 for 1977 – 78 in the Fourth Division . 
 York 's biggest margin of victory at Bootham Crescent was by eight goals , achieved with a 9 – 1 win over Southport in the Third Division North on 2 February 1957 . Their biggest margin of defeat at the ground was by seven goals , when they were beaten 7 – 0 by Rochdale in a Third Division North match on 14 January 1939 . The most goals scored in a match was 12 on 16 November 1935 , when York defeated Mansfield Town 7 – 5 in the Third Division North . 
 = Hill 303 massacre = 
 The Hill 303 massacre ( Korean : 303 <unk> <unk> <unk> ) was a war crime that took place during the Korean War on August 17 , 1950 , on a hill above Waegwan , South Korea . Forty @-@ one captured United States Army prisoners of war were shot and killed by troops of the North Korean army during one of the smaller engagements of the Battle of Pusan Perimeter . 
 Operating near Taegu during the Battle of Taegu , elements of the U.S. Army 's 2nd Battalion , 5th Cavalry Regiment , 1st Cavalry Division were surrounded by North Korean troops crossing the Naktong River at Hill 303 . Most of the U.S. troops were able to escape but one platoon of mortar operators misidentified North Korean troops as South Korean army reinforcements and was captured . North Korean troops held the Americans on the hill and initially tried to move them across the river and out of the battle , but they were unable to do so because of heavy counterattack . American forces eventually broke the North Korean advance , routing the force . As the North Koreans began to retreat one of their officers ordered the prisoners to be shot so they would not slow the North Koreans down . 
 The massacre provoked a response from both sides in the conflict . U.S. commanders broadcast radio messages and dropped leaflets demanding the senior North Korean commanders be held responsible for the atrocity . The North Korean commanders , concerned about the way their soldiers were treating prisoners of war , laid out stricter guidelines for handling enemy captives . Memorials were later constructed on Hill 303 by troops at nearby Camp Carroll , to honor the victims of the massacre . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Korean War begins = = = 
 Following the invasion of the South Korea by North Korea , and the subsequent outbreak of the Korean War on June 25 , 1950 , the United Nations decided to enter the conflict on behalf of South Korea . The United States , a member of the U.N. , subsequently committed ground forces to the Korean Peninsula with the goal of fighting back the North Korean invasion and to prevent South Korea from collapsing . 
 The 24th Infantry Division was the first U.S. unit sent into Korea . The unit was to take the initial " shock " of North Korean advances , delaying much larger North Korean units to buy time to allow reinforcements to arrive . The division was consequently alone for several weeks as it attempted to delay the North Koreans , making time for the 1st Cavalry and the 7th and 25th Infantry Divisions , along with other Eighth United States Army supporting units , to move into position . Advance elements of the 24th Infantry , known as Task Force Smith , were badly defeated in the Battle of Osan on July 5 , the first encounter between American and North Korean forces . For the first month after this defeat , the 24th Infantry was repeatedly defeated and forced south by superior North Korean numbers and equipment . The regiments of the 24th Infantry were systematically pushed south in engagements around Chochiwon , Chonan , and Pyongtaek . The 24th made a final stand in the Battle of Taejon , where it was almost completely destroyed but delayed North Korean forces until July 20 . By that time , the Eighth Army 's force of combat troops were roughly equal to North Korean forces attacking the region , with new UN units arriving every day . 
 With Taejon captured , North Korean forces began surrounding the Pusan Perimeter in an attempt to envelop it . They advanced on UN positions with armor and superior numbers , repeatedly defeating U.S. and South Korean forces and forcing them further south . 
 = = = Pusan Perimeter at Taegu = = = 
 In the meantime , Eighth Army commander Gen. Walton Walker had established Taegu as the Eighth Army 's headquarters . Right at the center of the Pusan Perimeter , Taegu stood at the entrance to the Naktong River valley , an area where large numbers of North Korean forces could advance while supporting one another . The natural barriers provided by the Naktong River to the south and the mountainous terrain to the north converged around Taegu , which was also the major transportation hub and last major South Korean city aside from Pusan itself to remain in UN hands . From south to north , the city was defended by the U.S. 1st Cavalry Division and the ROK 1st Division and ROK 6th Division of ROK II Corps . 1st Cavalry Division , under the command of Maj. Gen. Hobart R. Gay , was spread out in a line along the Naktong River to the south , with its 5th Cavalry and 8th Cavalry regiments holding a 24 @-@ kilometre ( 15 mi ) line along the river and the 7th Cavalry in reserve along with artillery forces , ready to reinforce anywhere a crossing could be attempted . 
 Five North Korean divisions massed to oppose the UN at Taegu ; from south to north , the 10th , 3rd , 15th , 13th , and 1st Divisions occupied a line from Tuksong @-@ dong and around Waegwan to Kunwi . The North Korean army planned to use the natural corridor of the Naktong valley from Sangju to Taegu as its main axis of attack for the next push south . Elements of the NK 105th Armored Division were also supporting the attack . 
 Beginning August 5 , these divisions initiated numerous crossing attempts to assault the UN forces on the other side of the river in an attempt to capture Taegu and collapse the final UN defensive line . The U.S. forces were successful in repelling North Korean advances thanks to training and support , but forces in the South Korean sectors were not as successful . During this time , isolated reports and rumors of war crimes committed by both sides began to surface . 
 = = = Military geography = = = 
 Hill 303 forms an elongated oval 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) long on a northeast @-@ southwest axis with an extreme elevation of 994 feet ( 303 m ) . It is the first hill mass north of Waegwan and its southern slope comes down to the edge of the town . The hill grants observation of Waegwan , a network of roads running out of the town , the railroad and highway bridges across the river at that point , and long stretches of the river valley to the north and to the south . Its western slope terminates at the east bank of the Naktong River . From Waegwan a road runs north and south along the east bank of the Naktong , another northeast through the mountains toward Tabu @-@ dong , and still another southeast toward Taegu . Hill 303 was a critical terrain feature in control of the main Pusan @-@ Seoul railroad and highway crossing of the Naktong , as well as of Waegwan itself . 
 = = Massacre = = 
 The exact details of the massacre are sketchy , and based on the accounts of four U.S. soldiers who survived the event . Three captured North Korean soldiers were pointed out by the survivors as participants in the killings , and these three also gave conflicting accounts of what happened . 
 = = = North Korean advance = = = 
 The northernmost unit of the 1st Cavalry Division 's sector was G Company of the 5th Cavalry Regiment . It held Hill 303 , the furthest position on the Eighth Army 's extreme right flank . To the north lay the ROK 1st Division , the first unit in the line of the South Korean Army . 
 For several days UN intelligence sources had reported heavy North Korean concentrations across the Naktong , opposite the ROK 1st Division . Early in the morning on August 14 , a North Korean regiment crossed the Naktong 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) north of Waegwan into the ROK 1st Division sector through an underwater bridge . Shortly after midnight ROK forces on the high ground just north of the US @-@ ROK Army boundary were attacked by this force . After daylight an air strike partially destroyed the underwater bridge . The North Korean attack spread south and by 12 : 00 ( KST ) , North Korean small @-@ arms fire fell on G Company , 5th Cavalry Regiment , on Hill 303 . Instead of moving east into the mountains as other landings had , this force turned south and headed for Waegwan . 
 At 03 : 30 the morning on August 15 , G Company troops on Hill 303 spotted 50 North Korean infantry supported by two T @-@ 34 tanks moving south along the river road at the base of the hill . They also spotted another column moving to their rear , which quickly engaged F Company with small @-@ arms fire . In order to escape the enemy encirclement , F Company withdrew south , but G Company did not . By 08 : 30 the North Koreans had completely surrounded it and a supporting platoon of H Company mortarmen on Hill 303 . At this point the force on the hill was cut off from the rest of the American force . A relief column , composed of B Company , 5th Cavalry , and a platoon of U.S. tanks , tried to reach G Company but was unable to penetrate the North Korean force that was surrounding Hill 303 . 
 = = = U.S. forces captured = = = 
 According to survivor accounts , before dawn on August 15 the H Company mortar platoon became aware of enemy activity near Hill 303 . The platoon leader telephoned G Company , 5th Cavalry , which informed him a platoon of 60 South Korean troops would come to reinforce the mortar platoon . Later in the morning the platoon saw two North Korean T @-@ 34s followed by 200 or more enemy soldiers on the road below them . A little later a group of Koreans appeared on the slope . A patrol going to meet the climbing Koreans called out and received in reply a blast of automatic weapons fire . The mortar platoon leader , Lt. Jack Hudspeth , believed they were friendly . Some of the Americans realized that the advancing troops were North Koreans and were going to open up on them according to former Pvt. Fred Ryan and Pvt. Roy Manring , when they revisited the old mortar position in 1999 . However , Lt. Hudspeth ordered them not to fire and threatened them with a court martial if they did . The rest of the watching Americans were not convinced that the new arrivals were enemy soldiers until the red stars became visible on their caps . By that time they were extremely close to the American positions . The North Koreans came right up to the foxholes without either side firing a shot . The lieutenant in charge of the platoon ordered it to surrender without a fight , as it was far outnumbered and outgunned . The North Koreans quickly took all 31 of the mortarmen captive . One account , however , said 42 men were captured on the hill . 
 They were captured by the 4th Company , 2nd Battalion , 206th Mechanized Infantry Regiment of the NK 105th Armored Division . The North Koreans marched their prisoners down the hill after taking their weapons and valuables . In an orchard they tied the prisoners ' hands behind their backs , took some of their clothing and removed their shoes . They told the Americans they would be sent to the Seoul prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp if they behaved well . 
 = = = Imprisonment = = = 
 The original captors did not stay in continuous possession of the prisoners throughout the next two days . There is some evidence that elements of the NK 3rd Division guarded them after capture . During the first night of captivity the North Koreans gave the American prisoners water , fruit and cigarettes . Survivors claimed this was the only food and water the North Koreans gave them over the three days of their imprisonment . The Americans dug holes in the sand to get more water to drink . The North Koreans intended to move them across the Naktong that night , but American artillery fire on the Naktong River crossing sites prevented safe movement . During the night two of the Americans loosened their bindings , causing a brief commotion . North Korean soldiers threatened to shoot the Americans but , according to one survivor 's account , a North Korean officer shot one of his own men for threatening this . Two captured American officers — Lt. Hudspeth , the platoon leader of the Mortar Platoon , and Lt. Cecil Newman , who was a forward artillery observer , were seen conferring with each other about an escape plan according to Pvt. Fred Ryan . Both escaped during the night but were captured and executed . The North Koreans attempted to keep the Americans hidden during the day and move them at night , but attacks by American forces made this difficult . 
 The next day , August 16 , the prisoners were moved with their guards . One of the mortarmen , Cpl. Roy L. Day Jr . , spoke Japanese and was able to converse with some of the North Koreans . That afternoon he overheard a North Korean lieutenant say that they would kill the prisoners if other American forces advanced too close . Later that day other American forces began to assault Hill 303 to retake the position . B Company and several American tanks tried a second time to retake the hill , now estimated to contain a 700 @-@ man battalion . The 61st Field Artillery Battalion and elements of the 82nd Field Artillery Battalion fired on the hill during the day . That night , G Company succeeded in escaping from Hill 303 . Guards took away five of the American prisoners ; the others did not know what became of them . 
 Before dawn on August 17 , troops from both the 1st and 2nd Battalions of the 5th Cavalry Regiment , supported by A Company of the 70th Tank Battalion , attacked Hill 303 , but heavy North Korean mortar fire stopped them at the edge of Waegwan . During the morning , American artillery heavily bombarded the North Korean positions on the hill . Throughout the morning of August 17 the North Korean guards exchanged fire with U.S. troops attempting to rescue the prisoners . Around 12 : 00 the North Korean unit holding the Americans placed them in a gully on the hill with a light company of 50 guards . Several more American prisoners were added to the group during the day , bringing the number of prisoners on Hill 303 to 45 . However , one survivor estimated that the number of prisoners in total was 67 , and that the balance of the prisoners were executed on August 15 or 16 . 
 = = = Execution = = = 
 At 14 : 00 on August 17 , a UN air strike took place , attacking the hill with napalm , bombs , rockets and machine guns . At this time a North Korean officer said that American soldiers were closing in on them and they could not continue to hold the prisoners . The officer ordered the men shot , and the North Koreans then fired into the kneeling Americans as they rested in the gully . One of the North Koreans who was later captured said all or most of the 50 guards participated , but some of the survivors said only a group of 14 North Korean guards , directed by their non @-@ commissioned officers , fired into them with PPSh @-@ 41 " burp guns " . Before all the North Korean soldiers left the area , some returned to the ravine and shot survivors of the initial massacre . Only four or five of the men in this group survived , by hiding under the dead bodies of others . In all , 41 American prisoners were killed in the ravine . The bulk of these men — 26 in all — were from the mortar platoon but prisoners captured elsewhere were also among them . 
 The U.S. air strike and artillery bombardment pushed North Korean forces off the hill . After the strike , at 15 : 30 , the infantry attacked up the hill unopposed and secured it by 16 : 30 . The combined strength of E and F Companies atop the hill was about 60 men . The artillery and the air strike killed and wounded an estimated 500 enemy troops on Hill 303 , with survivors fleeing in complete disorder . Two of the massacre survivors making their way down the hill to meet the counterattacking force were fired upon before they could establish their identity , but not hit . American forces of the 5th Cavalry Regiment quickly discovered the bodies of the American prisoners with machine @-@ gun wounds , hands still bound behind their backs . 
 That night , near Waegwan , North Korean antitank fire hit and knocked out two tanks of the 70th Tank Battalion . The next day , August 18 , American troops found the bodies of six members of the tank crews showing indications that they had been captured and executed in the same manner as the men on Hill 303 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = U.S. response = = = 
 The incident on Hill 303 led UN commander , General Douglas MacArthur , to broadcast to the North Korean Army on August 20 , denouncing the atrocities . The U.S. Air Force dropped many leaflets over enemy territory , addressed to North Korean commanders . MacArthur warned that he would hold North Korea 's senior military leaders responsible for the event and any other war crimes . 
 Inertia on your part and on the part of your senior field commanders in the discharge of this grave and universally recognized command responsibility may only be construed as a <unk> and encouragement of such outrage , for which if not promptly corrected I shall hold you and your commanders criminally accountable under the rules and precedents of war . 
 — General of the Army Douglas MacArthur 's closing remark in his broadcast to the North Korean Army on the incident . 
 The incident at Hill 303 would be only one of the first of a series of atrocities the U.S. forces accused North Korean soldiers of committing . In late 1953 the United States Senate Committee on Government Operations , led by Joseph McCarthy , conducted an investigation of up to 1 @,@ 800 reported incidents of war crimes allegedly committed throughout the Korean War . The Hill 303 massacre was one of the first to be investigated . Survivors of the incident were called to testify before the committee , and the U.S. government concluded that the North Korean army violated the terms of the Geneva Convention , and condemned its actions . 
 = = = North Korean response = = = 
 Historians agree there is no evidence that the North Korean High Command sanctioned the shooting of prisoners during the early phase of the war . The Hill 303 massacre and similar atrocities are believed to have been conducted by " uncontrolled small units , by vindictive individuals , or because of unfavorable and increasingly desperate situations confronting the captors . " T. R. Fehrenbach , a military historian , wrote in his analysis of the event that North Korean troops committing these events were likely accustomed to torture and execution of prisoners due to decades of rule by oppressive armies of the Empire of Japan up until World War II . 
 On July 28 , 1950 , Gen. Lee Yong Ho , commander of the NK 3rd Division , had transmitted an order pertaining to the treatment of prisoners of war , signed by Kim Chaek , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , and Choi Yong @-@ kun , commander of the Advanced General Headquarters of the North Korean Army , which stated killing prisoners of war was " strictly prohibited . " He directed individual units ' Cultural Sections to inform the division 's troops of the rule . 
 Documents captured after the event showed that North Korean Army leaders were aware of — and concerned about — the conduct of some of their soldiers . An order issued by the Cultural Section of the NK 2nd Division dated August 16 said , in part , " Some of us are still slaughtering enemy troops that come to surrender . Therefore , the responsibility of teaching the soldiers to take prisoners of war and to treat them kindly rests on the Political Section of each unit . " 
 = = = Monument = = = 
 The story quickly gained media attention in the United States , and the survivors ' accounts received a great deal of coverage including prominent magazines such as Time and Life . In the years following the Korean War , the U.S. Army established a permanent garrison in Waegwan , Camp Carroll , which is located near the base of Hill 303 . The incident was largely forgotten until Lt. David <unk> read about the incident in the book " South to the Naktong , North to the Yalu " while stationed at Camp Carroll in 1985 , and after checking with various US Army and local sources he realized that the location of the massacre was unknown . He then obtained battle records through the National Archives to pinpoint the actual location of the POW massacre and then began a quest to find the whereabouts of the remaining survivors . The original memorial for the POWs was emplaced in 1990 in front of the garrison headquarters , although none of the American survivors were located by <unk> until 1991 . In 1999 Fred Ryan and Roy Manring , two of the three surviving POWs , were invited to attend a ceremony at the execution site . Both Ryan and Manring as well as James Rudd , the third surviving POW , had long been denied VA compensation claims for their severe injuries incurred during the execution because they had never been officially designated as Prisoners of War by the US Army . Later the base garrison at Camp Carroll raised funds to construct a much larger memorial at the actual massacre site on Hill 303 . South Korean military and civilians around Waegwan contributed to the funds for this memorial . The original memorial was placed on the hill on August 17 , 2003 . In 2009 soldiers of the U.S. 501st Sustainment Brigade began to gather funds for a second , larger monument on the hill . With the assistance of South Korean veterans , politicians and local citizens , the second monument was flown to the top of the hill by a U.S. Army CH @-@ 47 Chinook helicopter on May 26 , 2010 , in preparation for the 60th anniversary of the event . An annual memorial service is held on the hill to commemorate the deaths of the troops on Hill 303 . Troops garrisoned at Camp Carroll scale the hill and place flowers at the monument as a part of this service . 
 = The Ex @-@ Girlfriend = 
 " The Ex @-@ Girlfriend " is the first episode of the sitcom Seinfeld 's second season , and is the show 's sixth episode overall . The episode first broadcast on NBC in the United States on January 23 , 1991 , after being postponed for one week due to the start of the First Gulf War . During the course of the show , George Costanza ( Jason Alexander ) breaks up with his girlfriend Marlene ( Tracy Kolis ) . Later , he remembers that he left some books in her apartment and persuades his friend Jerry ( Jerry Seinfeld ) , the show 's protagonist , to retrieve them . Jerry starts dating Marlene , but once she begins to annoy him as much as she did George , he finds himself unable to break up with her because she has a " psycho @-@ sexual " hold on him . 
 Co @-@ written by the series ' co @-@ creators Larry David and Jerry Seinfeld , the episode was inspired by one of Larry David 's personal experiences . Directed by Tom Cherones , " The Ex @-@ Girlfriend " was the first episode of the show filmed at CBS Studio Center in Los Angeles , California , the previous season having been filmed at Desilu Cahuenga in Hollywood . The episode featured one new set , a chiropractor 's office ; the remaining had been used on the show earlier . The episode received a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 9 / 17 and was positively received by critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 George decides he wants to break up with his girlfriend Marlene , whose tendency to drag out conversations and phone messages irritates him to no end . After an emotional split , he realizes he has left some books in her apartment . Jerry tries to convince George that he does not need the books , as he has already read them , but George is nevertheless able to persuade Jerry to get them for him . To retrieve the books , Jerry decides to go on a date with Marlene , during which she tells him that she and Jerry can still be friends , despite her recent break @-@ up . Jerry and Marlene start dating ; but , after a while , Jerry finds her just as annoying as George did . He wants to break up with her , but is unable to because she has a " psycho @-@ sexual " hold on him . 
 Jerry is unable to decide whether or not to tell George he is dating Marlene , but Jerry 's ex @-@ girlfriend Elaine Benes ( Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus ) eventually convinces him that he should . After being informed , George informs Jerry he has no problem with him dating Marlene . The following night , Jerry asks Marlene to come to his apartment , but she tells him that it might be better not to date him anymore . Jerry asks her why , to which she replies that she did not think his stand @-@ up comedy act was funny , and that she could not date someone if she did not respect what they did . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode contained a number of references to pop culture . Elaine mentions that a man she knows used to nod at her whenever she saw him , but suddenly stopped , leading her to state , " [ ... ] he went from nods to nothing . " This prompts George to hum the Tony Bennett song " Rags to Riches " , replacing the chorus with " nods to nothing " . During a discussion with Elaine , Jerry mentions the 1958 film The Blob . Jerry also mentions the novel Moby Dick , jokingly stating that " when you read Moby Dick the second time , Ahab and the whale become good friends " . After George receives a bill from his chiropractor , he states " 75 bucks ? What , am I seeing Sinatra in there ? " Singer and actor Frank Sinatra , died the same day the last episode of Seinfeld was aired on NBC . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by series co @-@ creators Larry David and Jerry Seinfeld and directed by Tom Cherones . David based the story on a personal experience of his , when he gave a ride home to a woman who had recently dated a friend of his . He would frequently come up with the idea for an episode and make it into a teleplay with Seinfeld 's help ; in a 1991 interview with the Los Angeles Times , Seinfeld stated : " Most of the stories are from [ David 's ] life . He just has a tremendous wellspring of ideas . I mean , he just fills notebooks with ideas and I try to help him , but Larry is really the designer of the show . " David Sims of The A.V. Club commented , " Seinfeld started its second season , its first real season after a four @-@ episode test run , very strongly with " The Ex @-@ Girlfriend " , and it 's the first time we really see George as the character we know and love , that weird dark shadow of Larry David 's mind who behaves as no functioning human being honestly could . " 
 Among the actresses who auditioned for the part of Marlene were Amy <unk> , Jeri Ryan , who would go on to star in Star Trek : Voyager , and Heidi <unk> . <unk> was cast later as Susan Ross for Seinfeld 's fourth season . Tracy Kolis , who at the time was known for her appearance in the soap opera All My Children , was eventually cast for the part . She reappeared later in the season six episode " The Soup " , in which she portrayed a waitress named Kelly . Norman Brenner , who worked as Richards ' stand @-@ in on the show for all its nine seasons , appears as an extra during the second scene , walking by twice in different clothing . 
 The first table read of the episode took place on October 17 , 1990 . It was filmed in front of a studio audience six days later , on October 23 . Seinfeld 's stand @-@ up performances were filmed on October 29 , 1990 , along with the performances used in " The Pony Remark " and " The Busboy " . Filming of the episode took place on stage 19 of the CBS Studio Center in Studio City , Los Angeles , California . " The Ex @-@ Girlfriend " was the first episode to be filmed there , as the majority of season one was filmed in a studio called Desilu Cahuenga , in Hollywood , California , where The Dick Van Dyke Show had also been filmed . Tom <unk> designed the sets for the second season of the show , and was able to re @-@ use various sets from the first season , thanks to Castle Rock Entertainment 's decision to store them in a large storage facility . The chiropractor 's waiting room , in which George believes he was charged too much for a visit , was the only new set which appeared in the episode . 
 Although the scenes in Monk 's Cafe were filmed at the CBS Studio Center , the exterior of Tom 's Restaurant , a diner at Broadway and 112th Street in Manhattan was used as the exterior for the cafe . The second scene of the episode , which takes place on a street , was filmed on CBS Studio Center 's " New York Street " , a set that consists of four very small store fronts . During seasons one to five , " New York Street " was the only set the writers could use to replicate New York City . This scene , and additional scenes which take place in Jerry 's car , were filmed on October 22 from 5 : 00 to 8 : 30 p.m. One or two members of the crew shook the car to give the impression that it was moving , though it never actually was . Other crew members would move lights around the set to simulate street lights or headlights of other cars . Behind the car , two lights on a wheeled stand were placed to give the impression that there was a car behind it . This technique is called " poor man 's process " , because it is cheaper than other ways of achieving the effect . The show had previously experimented with this technique in the season one episode " The Stake Out " . 
 Some scenes in the episode were cut prior to broadcast . The opening scene in Jerry 's car , in which George discusses breaking up with Marlene , originally had George proposing that he would stage his own kidnapping while walking down the street with Marlene , and then hide out until she had given up on him . Although it was cut before the episode 's broadcast , this scene was included on the Seinfeld Volume 1 DVD set . Another scene which was cut featured Jerry 's neighbor Kramer ( Michael Richards ) entering Jerry 's apartment carrying a plate with cantaloupe on toothpicks . Originally , the scene in which Jerry tells George that he is dating Marlene took place in a library , with a librarian repeatedly <unk> George and Jerry and kicking them out of the library at the end of the scene . The location was changed to Monk 's Cafe because the dialogue had nothing to do with a library . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Ex @-@ Girlfriend " was first broadcast on NBC on January 23 , 1991 , after being postponed for one week due to the start of the First Gulf War . The episode gained a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 9 and an audience share of 17 , meaning that 10 @.@ 9 % of American households watched the episode and 17 % of all televisions in use at the time were tuned into it . Although Seinfeld would be considered a hit show by today 's standards , NBC was disappointed with its ratings , and , after three weeks , put the show on a two @-@ month break . 
 Critics reacted positively to the episode . Joseph P. Kahn , a critic for the Wilmington Morning Star , called the episode 's writing and acting " anything but hackneyed " and stated , " One safe prediction , Seinfeld will be here for a good long run this time around ( referring to how its first season only had five episodes ) . " Joyce Millman of Salon.com stated that she disliked Seinfeld 's pilot episode , but after seeing a scene from " The Ex @-@ Girlfriend " in which Jerry and Kramer discuss returning fruit , she was " awed by Seinfeld and co @-@ creator / writer Larry David 's brilliant grasp of , A ) working @-@ class Jewish craziness , and , B ) the absurd humor of the deeply mundane . " 
 In a review of the episode , Jon Burlingame of The Spokesman @-@ Review stated , " Seinfeld is an offbeat take on the standard sitcom concept . While rarely hilarious , it 's often smart and amusing . " In his review of the episode , Chicago Tribune critic Rick Kogan stated , " Hip without posing , it delivers its comedy in sharp and spectacular style " . 
 Mike Flaherty and Mary Kaye Schilling of Entertainment Weekly called " The Ex @-@ Girlfriend " " The series ' most multifaceted ( if not most engaging ) narrative so far " , and graded it with a B. David Sims gave the episode an A , writing , " George is really the most revolutionary character : he 's often repulsive and pathetic , but here these are traits we heartily enjoy and sympathize with and want more of ... The best thing about this episode is that Jerry almost immediately getting with George 's ex @-@ girlfriend creates no drama in the group , though it would on almost any other sitcom . " 
 A relatively negative review came from Chicago Sun @-@ Times critic Lon Grahnke , who criticized Seinfeld 's part in the episode : " [ .. ] this comedy series must ride on the shoulders of its star . And Seinfeld spends too much time shrugging " . He also noted Dreyfus was not granted screentime , as opposed to Richards , whose acting performances he described as " get [ ting ] tiresome " . Overall , Grahnke commented " At his best , Seinfeld draws a chuckle or two from his middle @-@ brow remarks on modern life and its perplexing contradictions . At his worst , the comedian shows the smugness of a detached star who can mechanically control the level of laughter that greets whatever quip he may utter . " 
 = HMS Lowestoffe ( 1761 ) = 
 HMS Lowestoffe was a 32 @-@ gun fifth @-@ rate frigate of the Royal Navy . Built during the latter part of the Seven Years ' War , she went on to see action in the American War of Independence and the French Revolutionary War , and served often in the Caribbean . Lowestoffe has become famous as the ship in which a young Horatio Nelson served shortly after passing his lieutenant 's examination . 
 Originally commissioned near the end of the Seven Years ' War , Lowestoffe patrolled in British waters until 1773 , when it underwent repairs . She was recommissioned in 1777 and served throughout the American War of Independence , including at the Battle of San Fernando de Omoa . After the bulk of the fighting ended , she returned home to Portsmouth in 1782 , and did not see battle for the next decade . She spent most of her later years in British and Mediterranean waters , winning particular glory for her part in an engagement with two French frigates in 1795 . Her final duties were back in the familiar waters of the West Indies , where she was wrecked in 1801 while escorting a convoy in the Caicos Islands . 
 = = Construction and commissioning = = 
 Sir Thomas Slade based his design for Lowestoffe on that of HMS Aurora , which was a former French vessel named <unk> . ( The Admiralty routinely " took the lines " , i.e. , drew up blueprints , of captured vessels , and these blueprints were available to designers such as Slade . ) 
 Lowestoffe was the only ship built to her design , though over a decade later the Navy would have two more frigates , HMS Orpheus and HMS Diamond , built to a modification of the design of Lowestoffe and <unk> . She was ordered on 15 February 1760 from Thomas West , Deptford Dockyard , with West contracted to launch her within 12 months , at a cost of £ <unk> per ton . Lowestoffe was laid down on 9 May 1760 , launched on 5 June 1761 and completed by 1 August 1761 . She officially received the name Lowestoffe on 28 October 1760 . She had cost a total of £ 7 @,@ 715 1s 10 ¾ d to build , coming in just slightly under the contracted price of £ <unk> . The Navy spent a further £ 4 @,@ 281 7s 8d on having her fitted out . 
 = = Career = = 
 Commissioned late in the Seven Years ' War , she saw little action under her first captain , Walter Stirling , and the Navy paid her off in 1762 . Lowestoffe was initially moored at Portsmouth . Then in early 1763 she was armed and stored , sailing on 26 July 1763 under the command of her new captain James Baker . 
 After spending some time cruising in the English Channel and stopping neutral merchants for inspections , Baker sailed Lowestoffe to Madeira and then on to the West Indies . She arrived at Carlisle Bay on 13 September , and then sailed on to Antigua . During her time at Carlisle Bay , Lowestoffe carried out patrols between Barbados and Antigua . 
 She was part of a squadron under Rear Admiral Tyrrell . Four vessels of the squadron , Princess Louisa , Lowestoffe , Virgin and Beaver , shared in the prize money arising from the seizure in January and February 1764 of several vessels engaged in illicit trade near Dominica . The seized vessels were the Sarah , Union , Mary Anne , Pastora , Elizabeth , Two Sisters , and June and Betsey . 
 Baker died on 31 March 1765 . His successor , Joseph Norwood , sailed Lowestoffe home to be paid off in August 1766 . Lowestoffe underwent a small repair at Sheerness between December 1766 and April 1767 , and after a period out of service was recommissioned again in June 1769 under Captain Robert <unk> . <unk> returned her to the West Indies in October that year , returning in May 1773 to Britain after four years at Jamaica . She was paid off in 1773 , and reduced to a 28 @-@ gun Sixth Rate . 
 = = = American War of Independence = = = 
 Lowestoffe now underwent a large repair . She was recommissioned under Captain William Locker in early 1777 and prepared for service in the Leeward Islands . Joining her for this voyage was a young Lieutenant Horatio Nelson , who had passed his examination on 9 April , and was joining the Lowestoffe as her second lieutenant . Also serving on the Lowestoffe at this time was Cuthbert Collingwood , who would go on to have an enduring friendship with Nelson , serving with him on a number of occasions , including at the Battle of Trafalgar . The ship sailed in early May , escorting a convoy to the West Indies , where they arrived in mid July . She was coppered at Jamaica and then went on a number of cruises , capturing an American sloop with a cargo of rice in August 1777 . 
 A second cruise saw the capture of an American privateer , and a notable incident for Nelson . Lowestoffe sent her boat and first lieutenant to take over the prize , but the seas were too rough to allow the American to be boarded , so the lieutenant returned . Nelson stepped forward and volunteered to make an attempt ; he succeeded . 
 On 25 March 1778 Lowestoffe captured the sloop Swan , Daniel Smith , Master . She was of 60 tons , had a crew of seven men , and was carrying a cargo of molasses . 
 By the time of Lowestoffe 's third cruise , Nelson had taken command of the ship 's tender , the schooner Little Lucy . Locker and the Lowestoffe spent the rest of 1778 and the early part of 1779 carrying out routine cruises and patrols , until Captain Christopher Parker replaced him in March 1779 . Locker , who had by now been ill for some time , had recommended Nelson to Sir Peter Parker , who found a space for Nelson aboard his flagship , the 50 @-@ gun HMS Bristol . Nelson joined her as third lieutenant on 1 July 1778 . 
 On 8 February 1779 , Lowestoffe captured the Vigilant , near the Bite ( or Bight ) of <unk> . The 70 ton sloop was sailing from Dominique to Philadelphia with a cargo of sugar , rum , molasses , coffee , cotton and salt . John English was her master and she had a crew of five men . 
 Lowestoffe became part of Captain John Luttrell 's squadron and carried out operations in the Bay of Honduras in October and November 1779 . On 17 October Lowestoffe , together with Pomona , Charon , and Porcupine participated in the successful British attack on the Fort of San <unk> de Omoa . During the attack Lowestoffe exchanged fire with the fort . While she was doing this she ran aground . Her immobility made her an easy target for the fort 's guns . Eventually boats were able to pull Lowestoffe off , but not before she had sustained extensive damage . She had contributed a landing party to the assault on the fort and in all lost three men killed and five wounded . As a result of the battle the British ships captured two Spanish prizes with a cargo of bullion worth in excess of $ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . Lowestoffe and Pomona also shared in the prize money for the St. Domingo and her cargo , which included 124 <unk> ( crates ) of indigo . 
 On 26 March 1780 Lowestoffe captured the small sloop Fortune , of 25 tons , off Cape Francois . Under the command of William Nevill , she had a crew of three and was sailing from North Carolina to Cape Francois with provisions . Also in early 1800 Lowestoffe captured the Danish brig Diana , which was sailing from St. Domingo to St. Thomas with a cargo of mahogany . Then on 15 June Lowestoffe , Phoenix and Pomona captured the brig Delaware , William Collins , Master . She was of 120 tons , armed with guns and had a crew of 53 men . She was sailing from Philadelphia to Port @-@ au @-@ Prince , with a cargo of flour and fish . More importantly , they also captured the French navy cutter Sans Pareil , of 16 guns and 100 men , as she was sailing from Martinique to Cap @-@ Français . She was the former British privateer Non Such . 
 Later Lowestoffe detained a Danish schooner sailing from <unk> to <unk> with a cargo of cattle . She also recaptured the British brig John , which a French privateer had taken , and herself took a Spanish brig sailing from La Guaira to Tenerife with a cargo of cocoa and spices . 
 On 26 September Lowestoffe and Pallas captured two small vessels . One was the sloop Fair Henrietta , of 70 tons , sailing from Philadelphia to Cape Francois with a load of lumber and bricks . The second was the brig St. Salvadore , with a crew of 13 men , sailing from New Orleans to Havana with a cargo of lumber . In late 1800 or early 1801 Lowestoffe captured a Spanish brig ( name unknown ) of 110 tons , laden with sugar and staves . 
 Between 2 and 4 October Lowestoffe survived a hurricane that badly damaged numerous British warships . The hurricane also caused Barbadoes , Scarborough and Victor to founder , i.e. , to be lost at sea with all hands . 
 Captain Christopher Parker transferred into Diamond on 1 November 1780 , Captain James Cornwallis briefly to replace him on Lowestoffe . Cornwallis requested and received a transfer to HMS Badger five weeks later . His successor was Captain Thomas Haynes . Under Haynes , Lowestoffe and Janus captured the sloop Dispatch , Giles <unk> , Master , on 18 January 1781 , off <unk> . She was 60 tons , and carried four guns and a crew of 14 men . She was on her way from Port @-@ au @-@ Prince to Philadelphia with a cargo of coffee and sugar . 
 Haynes left in May 1781 to take over the 64 @-@ gun third rate Ruby . Her next captain was George Stoney , with Captain Thomas Windsor replacing him on 31 January 1782 . Windsor sailed Lowestoffe home and paid her off at Portsmouth . She was laid up there for nine months , before being moved to the River Thames . 
 = = = The years of peace = = = 
 Robert Batson , of Limehouse carried out a great repair on Lowestoffe between July 1783 and March 1786 . She returned to service in the English Channel in October 1787 under Captain Edmund Dodd . She sailed to the Mediterranean in May 1788 , before returning to Britain where Captain Robert Stopford briefly took command in November 1790 . Lowestoffe was paid off later that year and was fitted out at Plymouth between July 1792 and January 1793 . Lowestoffe was then recommissioned in December 1792 under Captain William Wolseley . 
 = = = French Revolutionary War = = = 
 Wolseley sailed to the Mediterranean in May 1793 , joining Hood 's fleet then blockading Toulon . She joined a flying squadron under Commodore Robert Linzee to act against French forces in the Mediterranean . On 30 September 1793 , Commodore Robert Linzee took his squadron , including Lowestoffe , into the Gulf of San Fiorenzo to attack the redoubt of <unk> on Corsica . Lowestoffe fired two broadsides at a tower at Mortella Point that protected the deep entrance to the gulf . The fire caused the tower 's French defenders to abandon the tower and its three guns , allowing a landing party from Lowestoffe under the command of Lieutenants Francis Annesley and John Gibb to capture the tower . Linzee , however , delayed his assault on the city until he could bring his larger ships into action . These larger ships bombarded the town from 1 October , but sustained considerable damage from the garrison , which forced Linzee to withdraw . 
 Lowestoffe remained in the area , supporting British operations against the French garrisons on Corsica during 1794 . On 7 March 1794 Captain Charles Cunningham took over command from <unk> . A little over a month later , on 13 April Lowestoffe captured the Etoile du Nord . HMS Dido , Aimable and Imperieuse shared in the capture . Lowestoffe then was among the British warships that shared in the capture , on 24 May , of the French brigs Jacobin and <unk> . 
 Captain Benjamin Hallowell replaced Cunningham on 12 August . Hallowell commanded Lowestoffe during the Naval Battle of Genoa on 14 March 1795 , during which she received some damage from long range shots from the French fleet . Captain Robert Gambier Middleton replaced Hallowell in June 1795 . 
 = = = = Dido and Lowestoffe defeat Minerve and Artémise = = = = 
 Admiral Hotham then sent Lowestoffe , and the 28 @-@ gun Dido under Captain George Henry <unk> to reconnoitre the French fleet at Toulon . While off Minorca on 24 June 1795 the two frigates encountered two French frigates , the 42 @-@ gun Minerve and the 36 @-@ gun Artémise . The French were initially wary , but when they realised that they were larger and stronger than the British vessels , the French captains manoeuvred to attack . Minerve attempted to run down Dido but when Dido turned to avoid the impact Minerve 's bowsprit became entangled in Dido 's rigging , costing Dido her mizzenmast and colours . Lowestoffe came along the port side of the Frenchman to discharge a broadside that carried away Minerve 's foremast and topmasts , crippling her . Lowestoffe pursued the retreating Artémise , which eventually escaped . Lowestoffe returned to Minerve , firing on her until she struck . Lowestoffe had three men wounded , the Dido six killed and 15 wounded . Minerve lost about 10 percent of her crew of over 300 men . The British took Minerve into service as the 38 @-@ gun frigate HMS Minerve . The weight of Minerve 's broadside alone was greater than that of the two British frigates together , making the battle a notable victory ; the Royal Navy duly awarded the two captains a Naval Gold Medal each . In 1847 , Naval General Service Medals with clasps " Lowestoffe 24 June 1795 " or " Dido 24 June 1795 " were awarded to six surviving crew members . 
 = = Later service = = 
 Captain Robert Plampin relieved Middleton in December 1795 , going on to serve with a squadron under Thomas Troubridge . After a refit in Britain , Lowestoffe escorted convoys in the West Indies . 
 On 14 September 1796 she captured the <unk> . Lowestoffe was also among the vessels that in late 1799 captured the Spanish Letter of Marque Navarra ( alias Diligent ) . Diligent was of 150 tons and was armed with eight guns . She was sailing from <unk> to Veracruz with a cargo of wine , iron and writing paper . Lowestoffe also shared in the capture of the Spanish " <unk> " Ambrosia , which was sailing from Cadiz for Veracruz with a cargo of 26 @.@ 5 tons of quicksilver and 10 tons of writing paper . Lowestoffe alone captured the Spanish brig San Francisco , of 90 tons , sailing from <unk> to Havana with a cargo of sugar and logwood . 
 = = Loss = = 
 Lowestoffe sailed from Kingston , Jamaica on 22 July 1801 , and met a convoy five days later at Port Antonio . The escorts consisted of Lowestoffe , Acasta the sloop Bonetta , and the schooners <unk> and Sting . 
 While Lowestoffe was sailing through the Caicos passage late on 10 August , Pamplin realised that the strong currents known to run through the channel had reversed direction and Lowestoffe was running into shallow waters . He attempted to avoid grounding , but to no avail , and the Lowestoffe ran broadside onto Little Inagua ( “ <unk> ” ) Island . The crew threw stores and equipment overboard to lighten the ship , and boats came from other ships in the convoy to try to pull her off . The attempts to refloat her failed and her crew abandoned her by mid @-@ afternoon . The only casualties were five men who drowned when their boat capsized in the surf . The change in currents also caused the wreck of five merchantmen . In the late afternoon of 11 August Acasta left Bonetta and three of her own boats to help the wrecked vessels and then took command of the convoy . 
 The subsequent court @-@ martial at Port Royal on 3 September ruled that a sudden change in the current after dark had caused the loss . The board acknowledged that Pamplin had sailed in a judicious manner and exonerated Pamplin and his officers of blame both for the loss of Lowestoffe and the vessels in convoy . 
 In April 1803 the officers and crew of Lowestoffe and of Bonetta received payment for the salvage of the specie that Lowestoffe was carrying . 
 = HMS Harvester ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Harvester was an H @-@ class destroyer originally ordered by the Brazilian Navy with the name Jurua in the late 1930s , but bought by the Royal Navy after the beginning of World War II in September 1939 . Almost immediately after commissioning , in May 1940 , the ship began evacuating Allied troops from Dunkirk and other locations in France . Afterwards she was assigned to the Western Approaches Command for convoy escort duties . Harvester and another destroyer sank a German submarine in October . She was briefly assigned to Force H in May 1941 , but her anti @-@ aircraft armament was deemed too weak and she was transferred to the Newfoundland Escort Force in June 1941 for escort duties in the North Atlantic . The ship was returned to the Western Approaches Command in October 1941 and was converted to an escort destroyer in early 1942 . Harvester was torpedoed and sunk in March 1943 by a German submarine after having rammed and sunk another submarine the previous day while escorting Convoy HX 228 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Harvester displaced 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 370 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 883 long tons ( 1 @,@ 913 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 5 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Harvester carried a maximum of 470 long tons ( 480 t ) of fuel oil , giving her a range of 5 @,@ 530 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 240 km ; 6 @,@ 360 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 152 officers and men . 
 The vessel was designed for four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mk IX guns in single mounts , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear , but ' Y ' gun was removed to compensate for the additional depth charges added . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Harvester had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were originally fitted , but this was increased to three sets of rails and eight throwers while fitting @-@ out . The ship 's load of depth charges was also increased , from 20 to 110 . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 Harvester had her rear torpedo tubes replaced by a 12 @-@ pounder AA gun after the evacuation of Dunkirk in 1940 , but it is not known exactly when this modification was made . During her 1942 conversion to an escort destroyer , the ship 's short @-@ range AA armament had been augmented by two Oerlikon 20 mm guns on the wings of the ship 's bridge . The .50 @-@ calibre machine gun mounts were replaced by a pair of Oerlikons later . ' A ' gun was replaced by a Hedgehog anti @-@ submarine spigot mortar . The ship 's director @-@ control tower and rangefinder above the bridge were removed in exchange for a Type 271 target indication radar . A Type 286 short @-@ range surface search radar was probably also fitted mid @-@ way through the war . The ship also received a HF / DF radio direction finder mounted on a pole mainmast . 
 = = Service = = 
 Jurua was ordered by Brazil on 6 December 1937 from Vickers @-@ Armstrongs , Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness . The ship was laid down on 3 June 1938 and she was purchased by the British on 5 September 1939 and renamed HMS Handy . The ship was launched on 29 September 1939 and renamed Harvester in January 1940 as her original name was thought too liable to be confused with Hardy . Harvester was commissioned on 23 May and briefly worked up at Portland Harbour before she was assigned to the 9th Destroyer Flotilla . 
 The ship joined the Dunkirk evacuation on 29 May and returned 272 men to Dover during the day . However , the situation at Dunkirk soon became too dangerous to risk the larger and more modern destroyers , so Harvester made no attempt to evacuate any troops during daylight hours on 30 May . This decision was rescinded during the day on 30 May and the ship sailed for Dunkirk on the night of 30 / 31 May . En route she was narrowly missed by two torpedoes , but she rescued 1341 men in two trips on 31 May and an additional 576 on 1 June . Harvester was lightly damaged by strafing German aircraft that same day and required repairs that were made at Chatham . On 9 June the ship was ordered to Le Havre , France , to evacuate British troops , but none were to be found . She loaded 78 men at Saint @-@ Valery @-@ en @-@ Caux on 11 June . Later in the month she escorted ships evacuating refugees and troops from Saint @-@ Nazaire and St. Jean de Luz ( Operation Ariel ) . 
 From July to September , Harvester was assigned to convoy escort duties with the Western Approaches Command and she rescued 90 survivors from the armed merchant cruiser Dunvegan Castle in late August . The ship , together with five other destroyers of the 9th Flotilla , was assigned to Plymouth Command for anti @-@ invasion duties between 8 and 18 September before returning to her role as an escort vessel . On 30 October , with help from her sister Highlander , she sank the German submarine U @-@ 32 . Harvester rescued 19 survivors from the merchant vessel <unk> on 5 December and 131 survivors from the Armed Boarding Vessel Crispin on 3 February 1941 . She rescued four survivors from a Royal Air Force Armstrong Whitworth Whitley bomber four days later . 
 The ship was refitted at Barrow between 18 March and 18 April and then was assigned to Force H in Gibraltar where she escorted ships during Operations Tiger and Splice in May . Harvester was transferred to the Newfoundland Escort Force in June as her anti @-@ aircraft capability was believed by Admiral James Somerville to be too weak . She was assigned to the 14th Escort Group upon her arrival at St. John 's on 1 July . The ship was transferred back to the Western Approaches Command three months later and assigned to the 9th Escort Group . Harvester was converted to an escort destroyer during a lengthy refit at Dundee , Scotland , from 30 January 1942 to 16 April . She conducted sea trials of her Type 271 radar during May and then resumed her escort duties in the North Atlantic as flagship of Mid @-@ Ocean Escort Force Escort Group B @-@ 3 . 
 The ship was refitted at Liverpool between 12 December and 11 February 1943 . Whilst defending Convoy HX 228 on 3 March , Harvester forced U @-@ 444 to the surface and then rammed it . She was badly damaged by the ramming , but she rescued five survivors after the submarine sank . The next day , Harvester was torpedoed by U @-@ 432 and broke in half . Nine officers and 136 ratings were lost , but the French corvette Aconit rammed and sank U @-@ 432 herself and then rescued Harvester 's few survivors . 
 = 2003 Sri Lanka cyclone = 
 In May 2003 , a tropical cyclone officially called Very Severe Cyclonic Storm BOB 01 produced the worst flooding in Sri Lanka in 56 years . The first storm of the 2003 North Indian Ocean cyclone season , it developed over the Bay of Bengal on May 10 . Favorable environmental conditions allowed the system to intensify steadily while moving northwestward . The storm reached peak maximum sustained winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) on May 13 , making it a very severe cyclonic storm according to the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) , which is the official Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for the basin . The cyclone drifted north over the central Bay of Bengal , gradually weakening due to heightened wind shear . Turning eastward , the storm deteriorated to a deep depression on May 16 before it curved northeastward and re @-@ intensified into a cyclonic storm . It came ashore in western Myanmar and dissipated over land the following day . 
 In the wake of prolonged precipitation during the first half of May , the cyclone produced torrential rains across southwest Sri Lanka while stationary in the central Bay of Bengal . The storm drew extensive moisture that coalesced in the mountainous portion of the island . A station at Ratnapura recorded 366 @.@ 1 millimetres ( 14 @.@ 41 in ) of rainfall in 18 hours on May 17 , including 99 @.@ 8 mm ( 3 @.@ 93 in ) in one hour . In southwestern Sri Lanka , the rainfall caused flooding and landslides that destroyed 24 @,@ 750 homes and damaged 32 @,@ 426 others , displacing about 800 @,@ 000 people . Overall damage totaled about $ 135 million ( 2003 USD ) , and there were 260 deaths . The cyclone also produced some rainfall in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands of India and along the country 's eastern coast . The storm funneled moisture away from the mainland , which possibly contributed to a heat wave that killed 1 @,@ 900 people , and dropped heavy rainfall in Myanmar . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Around May 6 , the monsoon trough extended across the southern Bay of Bengal , producing a vast field of thunderstorm activity . A broad low @-@ pressure area formed by the next day and remained nearly stationary . Over the next few days , the convection varied in intensity until becoming more organized around the nascent surface low on May 10 . At 03 : 00 UTC on May 10 , the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) reported the formation of a depression about 535 km ( 330 mi ) west of Banda Aceh , Indonesia . Within nine hours , the depression further intensified into a deep depression . Around the same time , the system was classified as Tropical Cyclone 01B by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center . 
 With warm sea surface temperatures , a formidable anticyclone aloft , and low wind shear , the system continued to mature as it tracked northwestward . Early on May 11 , the deep depression strengthened into a cyclonic storm – marked by maximum sustained winds of at least 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) – and later in the day into a severe cyclonic storm . Simultaneously , the system was driven toward the north by a ridge of high pressure to the northeast . At the time , the cyclone was located about 700 km ( 430 mi ) east of Sri Lanka . The storm continued to intensify , becoming a very severe cyclonic storm on May 12 . That day , the JTWC upgraded Tropical Cyclone 01B to the equivalence of a minimal hurricane with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . In post @-@ season analysis , however , the agency revised the storm 's maximum winds to 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . At 06 : 00 UTC on May 13 , the IMD estimated that the storm attained peak winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . The intensity estimate was based on a satellite @-@ derived Dvorak number of 4 @.@ 5 , limited chiefly by the lack of an eye feature . 
 After peaking in intensity , the storm began weakening due to increasing easterly wind shear from the ridge to the north , displacing the center of circulation from the deepest convection . Early on May 14 , the IMD downgraded the storm to a severe cyclonic storm . Around this time , steering currents slackened , and the cyclone meandered northward over the central Bay of Bengal . By late on May 14 , convection had largely dissipated , with the exception of a small area near the center , and the system weakened to minimal cyclonic storm status . Thunderstorm activity continued to wax and wane as the storm turned to the southeastward , though persistent hostile conditions caused the storm to weaken further to a deep depression on May 16 . As the nearby ridge translated eastward , the depression was able to move more steadily to the east and later to the northeast , passing northwest of the Andaman Islands on May 18 . On the next day , the deep depression re @-@ intensified into a cyclonic storm , reaching a secondary peak with winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) . At about 10 : 00 UTC on May 19 , the storm made landfall close to Kyaukpyu , Ramree Island , in western Myanmar . The storm rapidly weakened into a depression and later degenerated into a low pressure area on May 20 , and was no longer discernible on satellite imagery by the next day . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Sri Lanka = = = 
 Due to the significant distance between Sri Lanka and the Bay of Bengal storm , no cyclone warnings were posted . The India @-@ based National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting anticipated the flood event three days in advance . However , the Sri Lankan government did not issue the first flood warnings until May 17 , the same day that the flooding began . Many residents learned about the impending floods through loudspeakers and word of mouth , although some were alerted by television or radio . About 8 @,@ 000 people evacuated on May 18 , utilizing schools and public buildings as emergency shelters . The precipitation occurred in the wake of an already rainy period ; a station near the Kalu River reported over 600 mm ( 24 in ) of rainfall in the first 15 days of May . 
 While the storm was nearly stationary in the central Bay of Bengal , the southwesterly flow drew abundant moisture over Sri Lanka to produce severe flooding . In the island 's mountainous southwestern portion , the winds across the island produced heavy rainfall rates through a process known as orographic lift , mostly occurring on May 17 – 18 . Throughout May 2003 , the highest rainfall in the country was 899 mm ( 35 @.@ 4 in ) at <unk> <unk> Estate . A station at Ratnapura recorded 718 mm ( 28 @.@ 3 in ) of precipitation in the month , of which 366 @.@ 1 mm ( 14 @.@ 41 in ) fell over an 18 ‑ hour period on May 17 ; at the same station , there was a peak hourly rainfall total of 99 @.@ 8 mm ( 3 @.@ 93 in ) . These were the heaviest rains on the island since 1947 . Rainfall was primarily concentrated in southwestern Sri Lanka , with a rain shadow farther inland that resulted in minimal precipitation in and <unk> . After the Kalu River overflowed , floodwaters reached 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) deep in Ratnapura City , submerging the first floors of most homes and persisting for about three days . Landslides created a temporary natural dam on the river that washed away a bridge when it broke . Along the Gin River , flood waters inundated the surrounding terrain up to 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) deep , covered roadways , and complicated evacuations . In Hambantota District , the inundation occurred after an ongoing drought , which amplified flood @-@ related damage . Although the flooding was severe in the southwestern portion of Sri Lanka , effects were minimal in the central and north @-@ central regions , and there was no severe flooding in the capital city of Colombo . 
 Since the previously wet conditions had saturated soils , the rains related to the cyclone caused severe flooding and landslides , mostly in Ratnapura and Nuwara Eliya districts . A landslide in <unk> killed 81 people , and at least 125 people died in Ratnapura . The floods increased river levels in Hambantota , Matara , Galle , and Kalutara districts , persisting until May 30 in Matara . Many roads were damaged , including the one that links Ratnapura to Colombo . About 100 schools were destroyed and another 200 were damaged , and some health facilities lost their equipment . Flooding from the cyclone destroyed 53 @,@ 300 hectares ( 132 @,@ 000 acres ) of tea crops , representing an estimated 20 – 30 % loss for the year in the low country . Farmers in the affected areas also lost some of their rice paddies to the high waters , although only about 3 % of the rice crop in the region was damaged , so no impact on the rice harvest was expected . Many areas lost electricity and telephone service , and there were disruptions to food and water supplies . 
 Throughout Sri Lanka , the floods destroyed at least 24 @,@ 750 homes and damaged 32 @,@ 426 others , displacing about 800 @,@ 000 people , many of whom lost everything they owned . Total damage was estimated at $ 135 million ( 2003 USD ) , primarily to homes and roads . Across the island , floods related to the cyclone killed 260 people . Most of the deaths were along the nation 's southern coast where the floods occurred , primarily along the Kalu River , and were mainly farmers . Levees helped drain floodwaters where systems were already in place . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 In its formative stages , the storm produced moderate rainfall in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands , totaling 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) at <unk> . Later , as the storm was approaching Myanmar , it dropped 89 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) of rainfall on Hut Bay . Several stations in Tamil Nadu reported light precipitation , including a total of 98 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) at Adirampattinam . Along the coast of Odisha , the fringes of the cyclonic storm dropped light rainfall , reaching 53 mm ( 2 @.@ 1 in ) at <unk> . As the storm made landfall in Myanmar , it produced heavy rainfall in Rakhine State , signalling an early start to the monsoon season . 
 The slow movement of the storm altered the atmospheric flow over southeastern India . According to the IMD , the cyclone " might have caused the severe heat wave conditions prevailing over the coastal Andhra Pradesh " from May into early June , killing up to 1 @,@ 400 people , and increasing air temperatures to 50 ° C ( 122 ° F ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the immediate aftermath of the flooding in Sri Lanka , the country 's air force , army , and navy , as well as police forces , operated search and rescue missions . The navy and air force collected residents stranded in trees and on roofs , and were later assisted by the Indian military . However , the lack of electricity and the damaged infrastructure hampered relief work . In the hardest hit area of Ratnapura , there was a shortage of doctors , prompting officials to request help from adjacent towns . There were increased reports of diarrhea , viral flu , and typhoid in the aftermath of the floods . Mobile health crews treated over 44 @,@ 000 residents , which helped reduce the spread of disease . Residents in one village went without food for three days , and in the storm 's aftermath , many were also without access to clean water . By May 19 , flooding had begun to recede in the worst affected areas , allowing workers to repair roads . The government released <unk> million ( LKR , $ 62 @,@ 500 USD ) for immediate relief , and also provided <unk> ( LKR , $ 156 USD ) toward funeral expenses for each death . From May 22 – 25 , the country 's legislature had reduced sessions so members could return to their districts . By the end of May 2003 , the government had allocated <unk> million ( LKR , $ 180 @,@ 000 USD ) for relief measures , including <unk> ( LKR $ 280 USD ) for each family to rebuild houses . The Sri Lankan government also set up a four @-@ person task force to manage flood relief . The local Red Cross chapter utilized emergency supplies to distribute 10 @,@ 000 food packages while also deploying trained volunteers to assist in the disaster areas . The Red Cross ultimately distributed about 26 @,@ 000 loaves of bread , 862 kg ( 1 @,@ 900 lb ) of sugar , and 1 @,@ 775 kg ( 3 @,@ 913 lb ) of rice , among other supplies . By May 20 , the Sri Lankan air force had distributed 35 tons of food , using eight helicopters to airdrop parcels . Red Cross workers cleaned hundreds of contaminated wells in the region , thereby restoring clean water access ; this task was finished by August . By May 16 , or nine days after the floods began , power was restored to about 95 % of areas , and roads were gradually rebuilt . Road access to most villages was restored by May 26 , with the exception of Matara . There , the ongoing floods prompted officials to close schools to reduce the spread of disease . After the floods largely subsided , the World Socialist Web Site criticized the Sri Lankan government for not having better disaster management in place , as well as noting that deforestation and gem mining contributed to the landslides . A Red Cross report in August 2003 noted the swift work to bring relief to the affected citizens , while also commenting that the floods displayed the country 's problems with disaster mitigation . 
 On May 19 , the Red Cross launched an appeal to the international community for assistance . A day prior , the Red Cross allocated <unk> to buy relief supplies , while the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs provided a $ 50 @,@ 000 grant . In the days after the floods , the government of India sent a ship with inflatable dinghies and medical supplies . A total of 18 countries or local Red Crosses sent <unk> million CHF worth of cash to Sri Lanka . Sweden sent <unk> ( 2003 SEK ) toward relief transport and distribution . The government of Japan sent ¥ 19 @.@ 8 million yen worth of tents , sheets , and other supplies to the country , The Iranian Red Cross sent $ 65 @,@ 625 ( USD ) worth of blankets and tents to Sri Lanka , which helped about 240 families . Australia 's government sent about $ 400 @,@ 000 ( AUD ) to UNICEF to help rebuild the damaged schools and other social services . The European Community Humanitarian Aid Office donated about € 800 @,@ 000 ( $ 944 @,@ 000 USD ) to the country . The World Food Programme distributed meals to about 10 @,@ 000 families , while the World Health Organization provided water purification tablets , typhoid vaccines , and health kits to about 100 @,@ 000 people . During a peace agreement amid the ongoing civil war , the Tamil Tigers in Sri Lanka sent trucks with clothing and food to the affected areas . In July 2004 , the Asian Development Bank provided $ 12 @.@ 5 million of the $ 17 @.@ 5 million needed to repair the damaged infrastructure , while the Sri Lankan government provided the remaining $ 5 million . 
