 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Ace Attorney Investigations takes place between the third and fourth games in the series , Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney − Trials and Tribulations and Apollo Justice : Ace Attorney . The story is split into five episodes , each focusing on a different crime , and tying together to form an overarching story revolving around an international smuggling ring . While previous Ace Attorney games feature defense attorneys Phoenix Wright and Apollo Justice as the lead characters , Ace Attorney Investigations features prosecutor Miles Edgeworth , who was Phoenix 's rival in previous games . Among the supporting characters are Kay Faraday , who claims to be the Yatagarasu , a legendary thief who works to expose illegal corporate dealings , and detective Dick Gumshoe , Edgeworth 's long @-@ time partner . Recurring rivals of Edgeworth 's are Shi @-@ Long Lang , an Interpol agent from the fictional country of Zheng Fa who bears a fierce hatred of prosecutors and the courts after his family 's reputation was tarnished by a corrupt prosecutor , and his assistant Shih @-@ na . Other characters include prosecutor Byrne Faraday , detective Tyrell Badd , and defense attorney Calisto Yew . Prosecutor Franziska von Karma , a character who first appeared in Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney − Justice for All , also appears in the game . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The backstory of the game is described in the fourth case , Turnabout Reminiscence . Ten years prior to the game 's present , the secretariat of the Cohdopian Embassy was accused of murdering Cece Yew , a witness to a smuggling ring 's connection to the embassy . Prosecutor Byrne Faraday and detective Tyrell Badd attempted to convict the secretariat , but he went free after key evidence was stolen . Feeling that the justice system was powerless to those who stand above the law , Faraday , Badd , and Yew 's sister Calisto , started stealing corporate files detailing illegal or unethical activities and exposed them to the media , under the name Yatagarasu . Three years later , another murder occurred at the embassy . During the trial , in which Faraday was the prosecutor , the suspect , Mack Rell , claimed that he had been told by Faraday to commit the murder , and said that Faraday was the Yatagarasu . A recess was held to replace Faraday with another prosecutor , Miles Edgeworth ; before court was reconvened , both Rell and Faraday were found dead . Edgeworth discovered that Calisto had murdered Faraday with help from Rell , then killed Rell and made it look like Faraday and Rell had killed each other . When confronted , Calisto says that she is Yatagarasu , not mentioning her two partners , and that she is part of the smuggling ring . Faraday 's daughter Kay is comforted over Faraday 's death by Edgeworth , Badd , and detective Gumshoe ; she believes her father to be the true Yatagarasu , and vows to catch the fake . 
 The game 's second case , Turnabout Airlines , takes place in the present , and has Edgeworth becoming involved with the smuggling ring during a trip aboard an airliner . An Interpol agent investigating the smuggling is murdered during the trip , and Edgeworth and a flight attendant become the main suspects . Another prosecutor , Franziska von Karma , works with Interpol to expose the smuggling ring ; she and Edgeworth discover the murderer to be another flight attendant , who is working with the smuggling ring . In the third case , The Kidnapped Turnabout , Edgeworth is called by Ernest Amano , whose son Lance has been kidnapped and is held at an amusement park . While attempting to exchange the ransom money , Edgeworth is also kidnapped , but is freed by Kay , who calls herself the true Yatagarasu . They release Lance , and find the dead body of Oliver Deacon , who Lance identifies as one of the kidnappers . As Edgeworth investigates the mystery , he meets Interpol agents Shi @-@ Long Lang and Shih @-@ na , who believe that Amano 's business group is involved with the smuggling ring ; the ring 's counterfeit money has ruined the economy of their home country Zheng Fa , so they seek to bring an end to the ring . Edgeworth learns that the kidnapping was a ploy by Lance to get money from his father , and that Lance had killed Deacon after the latter tried to back out of the plan . Evidence is found tying Amano to the smuggling ring , and Lang brings Amano in for questioning . 
 In the first case , Turnabout Visitor , Edgeworth finds a dead body in his office . He learns that the murderer was Jacques <unk> , a prosecutor who was working for the smuggling ring , and was trying to steal evidence from the murder ten years ago from Edgeworth 's office ; as a detective got too close , <unk> killed him . The fifth case , Turnabout Ablaze , takes place at the former Cohdopian embassy ; civil tension in <unk> forced the country to split into <unk> and <unk> , which share the same embassy building . The two countries planned to announce their reunification at the embassy when the fake Yatagarasu appeared , setting fire to the building and killing two people . The bodies are found at the embassies ' respective offices ; one of them is discovered to be the former secretariat of the Cohdopian embassy , who now was the secretariat for <unk> . Shih @-@ na is revealed to be Calisto in disguise ; she insists that she did not murder the secretariat , and is revealed to be an accessory to the crime . As she is taken away , she reveals that she is not Cece 's sister , that " Calisto " was just an alias she took while working for the smuggling ring , and that she became part of Yatagarasu on orders from the ring 's leader . Edgeworth reveals the ring 's leader to be <unk> 's and formerly <unk> 's ambassador Quercus Alba , who had committed murders and covered the tracks of the ring , and brought counterfeit money into Zheng Fa . Alba , Amano and others are convicted of their crimes , while Edgeworth and his companions recommit to their vows to defend the truth . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game was directed by Takeshi Yamazaki and produced by Motohide Eshiro , with character designs by Tatsuro Iwamoto , and music by Noriyuki Iwadare and Yasuko Yamada . Eshiro got the idea to make a new game featuring characters from the original Ace Attorney games while working on Trials and Tribulations . According to Eshiro , the game was made for portable play , and has an interface that uses the touch screen ; as this could not be replicated on other platforms such as Xbox Live , he said that the Nintendo DS was the platform that was best suited for it , and that no ports to other hardware were planned . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Eshiro said that they could have set the game in a courtroom similar to that of the main series and made a few additions , but that it would not have been very interesting ; instead they moved the game to crime scenes , and added several new gameplay elements . Yamazaki was the one who came up with the idea of making a game about deductive reasoning and crime scene investigation . Because of this theme , it made sense to them to include the Ace Attorney character Ema Skye in the game , as she is portrayed as wanting to be a forensic scientist . Yamazaki originally suggested that Ema should be the main character , but based on fan feedback , they decided to use the more popular character Miles Edgeworth instead . Figuring out how to move the game from the courtroom to the crime scene was a challenge for the development team . The team also thought that it was difficult to make the game feel new while also making sure it felt similar to the game series . Because of the new gameplay systems that all had to be created from scratch , Ace Attorney Investigations took longer to develop than previous Ace Attorney games had . 
 The concept of the story was that while each case is a standalone episode , they are also all interlinked , forming a larger mystery , with each episode revealing a piece of the puzzle . Because Edgeworth is portrayed as a genius prosecutor , whereas Phoenix Wright is a rookie attorney , the development team felt that they needed to come up with incidents that were larger in scale for Ace Attorney Investigations , to match Edgeworth 's skill level ; therefore , the opponents were made " more formidable " compared to the ones in previous games in the series . Eshiro saw the story as the most important part of the game , and said that , while time consuming , it was important to make sure that it works . This was accomplished through a lot of trial and error , and several rewrites and revisions : Yamazaki would come up with an idea , which was tested to see if players had a hard time understanding it . Based on feedback from the testers , Yamazaki would rewrite and reorder some parts , and add hints . When creating the game 's story , the development team took into account that some players might not have played any Ace Attorney games before . Because of this , they tried to make the game as accessible as possible , and make it playable without first having played any of the previous titles ; for instance , the first part of the game is a tutorial that introduces the game and the characters . They did however add in @-@ jokes for players who had played previous Ace Attorney games . Kay Faraday was the first new character that was created for the game , and was cited by Eshiro as one of his favorite characters . 
 The development team felt that with previous Ace Attorney games , players could identify with Phoenix Wright and Apollo Justice ; for Ace Attorney Investigations , they wanted players to be immersed in the game and feel like they are Edgeworth . He said that they think players will feel a connection with Edgeworth and understand his character . As examples of this , Eshiro cited the ability to directly control Edgeworth , and the possibility to see inside his head : the game 's logic system was created because the development team wanted to show how Edgeworth thinks . It represents what is happening inside his mind , which Eshiro describes as a " very cool , calm and collected way of thinking " . For the rebuttal phases in the game , Eshiro wanted to try out new things that could not be done in courtroom battles : during rebuttals , several characters come in and out during each scene at a rapid pace , providing the player with evidence , to create drama with tension . Ace Attorney Investigations has a larger focus on the environment than previous Ace Attorney titles had ; previous titles featured gameplay elements in which the player finds contradictions in suspects ' statements , whereas the goal of Ace Attorney Investigations is to find things at the crime scene that contradict the evidence the player has . The game 's third person perspective was specifically chosen to be different from the main series ' first person perspective , and to show the environment so that players can walk around inside it . The game system was designed specifically for Ace Attorney Investigations , with the aim of being different from the main series ; therefore , Eshiro felt that a lot of its features should stay within the Investigations series , and not be used in other Ace Attorney titles . 
 The development team put effort into trying to make Edgeworth look right ; Eshiro described Edgeworth 's running animation as " graceful , while exerting effort " , while Iwamoto was not entirely convinced and thought it looked like he is " walking really fast accidentally " . Eshiro and Yamazaki wanted to add a lot of features to the Little Thief system , but due to time constraints it ended up more simplistic than they had originally envisioned . Eshiro used his experience with producing action games such as Shadow of Rome and laying out scenes to get backgrounds to move smoothly without scrolling issues when Edgeworth moves . The programmers faced big technical challenges and had to make significant modifications to the game when implementing the graphics : in the game , two animated characters - whose graphics each are larger than those in previous Ace Attorney games - appear simultaneously and on top of smaller " mini @-@ avatar " graphics . Eshiro said that he thinks they pushed the graphic processing ability of the Nintendo DS system to its limits for this . Eshiro said that they would consider making DSiWare episodes if demand was high enough , but that they did not have any plans at the time . He said that there were many technical aspects to consider , such as memory limitations for DSiWare . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 The game was announced in Famitsu in April 2008 . A demo of the game was made available at Tokyo Game Show 2008 . It was also shown at San Diego Comic @-@ Con International 2009 , and appeared once more at Tokyo Game Show in 2009 . 
 The game was published by Capcom on May 28 , 2009 , in Japan , on February 16 , 2010 , in North America , on February 18 , 2010 , in Australia , and on February 19 , 2010 , in Europe . A limited edition version of the game was made available in Japan , containing a business card holder , promotional videos , a CD with five tracks from an Ace Attorney concert performed by the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra , a pamphlet from the concert , a game box , and a copy of the game itself . A bundle containing an Ace Attorney Investigations themed Nintendo DSi and a copy of the game was also made available in Japan . The soundtrack album Gyakuten Kenji Original Soundtrack was released on June 24 , 2009 , by Suleputer . 
 = = = Localization = = = 
 For the game 's localization , the main focus was to keep the dialogue natural and accessible to Western players , while also staying true to the Japanese version . The Japanese version had several instances of puns or cultural jokes , which would not have worked if they had been translated literally . There were also places in the script where the development team would have liked to insert jokes in the localization , but thought that it may be inappropriate to do so since the joke was not in the Japanese version . The team found difficulties in getting the Western version 's tone right , as they wanted to keep the localized text interesting , and at the same time avoid inconsistencies with the original version 's tone . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ace Attorney Investigations holds a score of 78 / 100 on the review aggregator Metacritic , indicating generally favorable reviews . The game sold 172 @,@ 000 units in the week of its release in Japan , and 42 @,@ 000 the following week ; by the end of 2009 , it was the 33rd best selling game of the year in Japan , with 303 @,@ 445 copies sold . On the other hand , Capcom USA 's vice president described Western sales as " poor at best " . The game won an Aggie Award for Best Character of 2010 , for Miles Edgeworth , and was awarded for Best Adventure Title of 2010 on Nintendo DS by Nintendo World Report . Following the game 's appearance at Tokyo Game Show in 2008 , it was awarded a Japan Game Award in the " future " category . 
 Austin Boosinger at Adventure Gamers said that the gameplay changes compared to the main series were mostly superficial , resulting in a game that is similar to but worse than the main series . Neal Ronaghan at Nintendo World Report did on the other hand feel that there had been enough changes for the game to feel fresh , and said that it was possibly the best entry in the Ace Attorney series . Hilary Goldstein at IGN said that the new gameplay elements were strong additions that add variety to the game , but felt that the series was running out of steam . Steven Hopper at GameZone said that the game was very similar to previous Ace Attorney games , on good and bad , and that the Ace Attorney series was starting to show its age . Laura Parker at GameSpot said that the game was a " successful twist " on the gameplay of the previous games in the series , and that it " lacked none of the magic " of them . 
 Boosinger called the game too easy and streamlined , and found the Logic system to be too simple . He did however feel that finding contradictions in testimonies was " fantastic as always " , while too reliant on trial and error . Ronaghan said that many solutions in the Rebuttal phases are " binary " - while it makes sense to present a piece of evidence at several points , the game accepts only one of them . He found the controls to be fine , but called the touch screen @-@ based walking controls " awkward and imprecise " . Goldstein similarly found problems with multiple pieces of evidence that all could point to the same contradiction , but where the game would only allow a specific one . At other times , she said that no reasonable solution could be found , forcing her to guess . John Walker at Eurogamer also complained about how reasonable solutions sometimes are not accepted . Hopper said that solving cases isn 't intuitive enough , and involves a lot of trial and error . While some puzzles made sense to him , others were frustrating . Parker called the gameplay exciting , and said that the game has depth and variety , but that it is too easy at times . 
 Boosinger said that while the game retains the comedy of the Ace Attorney series and has great character writing , he found the story to be dull , slow , and too long . Ronaghan called the dialogue funny , and said that the game was well @-@ paced , long , and enjoyable . Goldstein called the story interesting , but said that it at times plays out " like a bad soap opera " . Walker appreciated the choice to make Edgeworth the game 's lead character , and called Kay a fantastic addition . He found the translation of the game to be incredible , despite a number of spelling mistakes . Hopper appreciated that the game has a new protagonist and setting , and called the dialogue " cheesy but charming " . On the other hand , he said that there is a lot of superfluous text in the game , making the cases longer than they need to be . Parker said that it takes some time to get used to playing as Edgeworth , saying that he is not as immediately engaging as Phoenix and Apollo . She called the story deep and intricate , and slow but solid . Ronaghan called the art style and presentation wonderful , and said that each character " oozes with personality " , but that the animation , while better than that in previous titles , was limited to only a few frames at a time . Goldstein called the characters colorful , but found the locations to be uninteresting . Hopper called the game 's aesthetic " anime @-@ esque " and clean , and said that the static images were decent . Parker liked the game 's presentation , and called the environments " beautifully drawn " . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 A manga based on the game , written by Kenji Kuroda and drawn by Kazuo Maekawa , premiered in 2009 in Kodansha 's Weekly Young Magazine . Kodansha also released the manga in North America in four volumes between July 31 , 2012 , and January 29 , 2013 . The second and third volume ranked 7th and 8th , respectively , on The New York Times Manga Best Seller List for one week each in 2012 . In 2011 , an attraction based on the game was opened in the amusement park <unk> in Tokyo . A stage play based on game is planned to run in July 2016 in Tokyo . 
 A sequel to the game , Ace Attorney Investigations 2 , was released in Japan on February 3 , 2011 . There are currently no plans for Capcom to release it internationally , but a fan translation has been made and released on the internet . In July 2013 , Eshiro said that he and Yamazaki would like to make a third Investigations game , and that he intended to secure the needed Capcom personnel and plan everything out in the future , but that he could not make any promises . 
 = Royal Rumble ( 1994 ) = 
 Royal Rumble ( 1994 ) was the seventh annual Royal Rumble professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . It took place on January 22 , 1994 , at the Providence Civic Center in Providence , Rhode Island . The main event was the Royal Rumble match , a battle royal in which wrestlers enter the ring at regular intervals . Lex Luger and Bret Hart were named co @-@ winners after they simultaneously eliminated each other . 
 The undercard included a Casket match for the WWF Championship , in which Yokozuna successfully defended the title against The Undertaker . In addition , The Quebecers beat Bret and Owen Hart to retain the WWF Tag Team Championship and Razor Ramon successfully defended his Intercontinental Championship . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first televised match of the pay @-@ per @-@ view was supposed to be Ludvig Borga vs. Tatanka . The two were engaged in a feud that began prior to Survivor Series 1993 . Tatanka had been undefeated in the WWF since his debut in 1991 . Borga ended this streak on the October 30 , 1993 edition of WWF Superstars ( taped on September 28 , 1993 ) , when he hit Tatanka with a steel chair while the referee was distracted . As a results of storyline injuries from this attack and the beating he suffered afterward at the hands of Borga and Yokozuna , Tatanka was forced to miss the main event match at Survivor Series . Although Tatanka defeated Borga by disqualification on the December 20 , 1993 edition of Monday Night Raw , the bitterness between the two remained . 
 Borga suffered a legit ankle injury , however , and was replaced by Bam Bam Bigelow . Although the substitution took place shortly before the event , Bigelow and Tatanka also had a heated rivalry . In 1993 , Bigelow had cut Tatanka 's dyed red hair as an insult to his Lumbee heritage . The two faced each other as part of a six @-@ man match at SummerSlam 1993 , but the feud continued even after Tatanka 's team emerged victorious . 
 At Survivor Series 1993 , Owen Hart was eliminated during a elimination match when he crashed into his brother Bret Hart , who was walking along the ring apron , causing Owen to lose his focus and be pinned by Michaels . After the match , Owen interrupted his brothers ’ victory celebration to verbally attack Bret . He demanded a match with Bret to settle the dispute . Bret refused , and the brothers reunited over the Christmas holidays . They decided to focus their energy on taking the tag team title from the Quebecers . Their plan was temporarily put on hold when Marty Jannetty and the 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 Kid won the belts , but the Quebecers won a rematch the following week , guaranteeing that the Harts would get their title shot . 
 Razor Ramon and Irwin R. Schyster ( I.R.S. ) began feuding prior to SummerSlam 1993 because of an angle in which Money Inc . ( Ted DiBiase and I.R.S. ) teased Ramon about losing to the 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 Kid , a newcomer to the WWF . The rivalry heated up when I.R.S. stole Ramon 's gold chains while Shawn Michaels had Ramon distracted . Ramon and I.R.S. agreed to settle the feud at Royal Rumble 1994 with Ramon 's Intercontinental Championship on the line . 
 The rivalry between Yokozuna and The Undertaker began at Survivor Series 1993 . Yokozuna , who was pushed as an unstoppable monster , was unable to inflict any serious damage on The Undertaker when the two faced each other in an elimination match . Yokozuna slammed The Undertaker 's head into the steel steps leading up to the ring , but The Undertaker was unharmed . Later , Yokozuna used his finishing move , the Banzai Drop , on The Undertaker . When he tried to repeat the move , however , The Undertaker became the first wrestler to sit up after the move , surprising Yokozuna and his managers . The Undertaker was granted a title shot , but Jim Cornette , Yokozuna 's American spokesperson , included a clause in the contract that The Undertaker would not get a rematch if he lost . Paul Bearer , The Undertaker 's manager , included a clause stating that the confrontation would take place in a Casket match . In the following weeks , it was revealed that Yokozuna had a fear of caskets . The Undertaker used this knowledge to gain a psychological advantage going into the match . On one occasion , Paul Bearer brought the casket to the ring to intimidate Yokozuna . When Yokozuna approached the casket to face his fear , the Undertaker popped out to scare Yokozuna . 
 Lex Luger wanted to participate in the Royal Rumble match , as the winner was scheduled to get a title shot for the WWF Championship at WrestleMania X. The contract he had signed for his title shot at SummerSlam 1993 , however , stated that he would not receive a rematch if he failed to win the title . A compromise was reached , allowing Luger to compete . Yokozuna 's manager , Mr. Fuji , was allowed to bring in two wrestlers , Genichiro Tenryu and The Great Kabuki to hurt Luger 's chances of winning . 
 = = Event = = 
 In a dark match before the broadcast , the Brooklyn Brawler defeated Jim Powers . The Brawler used a swinging neckbreaker to get the victory . As the pay per view broadcast began , Vince McMahon announced that Ted DiBiase would be his commentary partner for the evening . 
 The first televised match was between Tatanka and Bam Bam Bigelow . Bigelow tried to attack Tatanka before the bell , but Tatanka moved . The two fought back and forth , and Bigelow gained momentum after Tatanka missed a crossbody from the top turnbuckle . Bigelow used his weight to keep the advantage , sitting on Tatanka and later using a bear hug to wear him down . After the two hit each other with simultaneous <unk> , Tatanka began a war dance . Bigelow kicked Tatanka in the back of the head to regain the advantage but missed a moonsault attempt from the top rope , allowing Tatanka to perform a crossbody from the corner and get the victory . 
 This match was followed by the Tag Team Championship match . The match started slowly , but both teams soon began brawling in the ring . The Harts focused on Pierre , but Jacques was eventually able to tag in to rescue him . After Pierre regained the advantage , Owen tagged in and took control of the match . He applied the Sharpshooter to Jacques , but Pierre broke the hold . Bret tagged in but fell out of the ring and kayfabe hurt his knee when the Quebecers ' manager pulled on the ropes . The Quebecers focused on Bret 's knee until Bret regained the advantage and attempted to apply the Sharpshooter . He was not able to stand , however , so the referee stopped the match and awarded the victory to the Quebecers . After the match , Owen yelled at Bret for not tagging out of the match . He then turned on Bret by kicking his injured leg and leaving him lying in the ring . 
 Next came the match between Irwin R. Schyster and Razor Ramon for the Intercontinental Championship , for which Jim Ross and Gorilla Monsoon took over the commentary roles . The match began with a brawl between the two , and Ramon got the early advantage . Schyster eventually threw Ramon over the top rope and attacked him on the floor . I.R.S. kept control of the match for quite a while , applying a reverse chinlock while using the ring ropes for additional leverage . After Ramon escaped the hold , he was able to perform a fallaway slam on Schyster . He then used an Irish Whip to throw Schyster into the corner , but the match turned around with a ref bump when referee Joey Marella was in the way and was kayfabe knocked unconscious . Shawn Michaels ran to the ring with his fake Intercontinental belt and hit Ramon with it , and Schyster helped revive Marella to count the pinfall . I.R.S. appeared to win the title , but referee Earl Hebner came to the ring and explained the situation to Marella . When Michaels ' belt was discovered in the ring , the match was restarted . Ramon simply grabbed Schyster , who was standing on the second turnbuckle celebrating , and performed the Razor 's Edge for the victory . 
 The next match was the Casket match ; the first wrestler to get his opponent in the casket and close the lid would win the match and the WWF championship . Yokozuna had great difficulty inflicting any serious damage on The Undertaker , but it was soon revealed that Mr. Fuji had arranged for several wrestlers to get involved on Yokozuna 's behalf . Crush , The Great Kabuki , Genichiro Tenryu and Bam Bam Bigelow interfered , but The Undertaker was able to fight back until Mr. Fuji stole The Undertaker 's urn from Paul Bearer . Yokozuna opened the urn , and smoke poured out . Meanwhile , Adam Bomb , Jeff Jarrett , The Headshrinkers ( Samu and Fatu ) and Diesel then came to the ring to help Yokozuna . Eventually , Yokozuna and his allies were able to shut The Undertaker in the casket to end the match . They locked the casket and pushed it down the aisle until smoke started coming out of the casket . The Undertaker appeared on the video screen at the end of the aisle , vowing to return . The casket was shown exploding on the screen , although the casket in the arena did not explode . After the explosion was shown , a person resembling The Undertaker was seen rising up to the ceiling of the Civic Center . This role is rumored to have been played by Marty Jannetty . 
 Before the Royal Rumble match began , commentator Vince McMahon announced that WWF President Jack Tunney had shortened the interval between entrances from the traditional two minutes to 90 seconds due to time constraints . Kamala was supposed to compete in the match , but he was replaced by Virgil . Ludvig Borga could not compete due to his ankle injury and was replaced by Kwang , a newcomer to the WWF . In addition , the 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 Kid was replaced by Sparky Plugg , who was also making his debut . Bastion Booger was scheduled to be the twenty @-@ fifth participant , but he did not appear for unknown reasons ; Vince McMahon stated that he did not appear because he did not " feel good " . 
 As the Royal Rumble match began , it was revealed that Scott Steiner was the first participant and his former rival Samu had drawn the number two position . Early in the match , Diesel tied a WWF record by throwing out seven consecutive wrestlers . He was ultimately eliminated by a group of wrestlers , while his partner Shawn Michaels kept aloof . Although Diesel wrestled as a heel at the time , his performance earned him applause from the crowd . 
 Several ongoing feuds came into play during the match . Crush and his former friend , Randy Savage fought each other until Crush eliminated Savage . Bam Bam Bigelow and Doink the Clown also faced each other during the match . Doink had annoyed Bigelow with a series of pranks in late 1993 , and the feud was supposed to be settled at Survivor Series 1993 , but the team of " Doinks " that Bigelow fought was just The Bushwhackers and Men on a Mission dressed up as clowns . When they met in the Royal Rumble , Bigelow quickly eliminated Doink . The Royal Rumble match also saw an old feud rekindled . Shawn Michaels and Marty Jannetty , former tag team partners as The Rockers , traded a series of punches when Jannetty entered the match and Michaels ultimately eliminated Jannetty from the match . 
 The match ended when Lex Luger and Bret Hart simultaneously eliminated each other . Two referees argued about who had landed first while several inconclusive camera angles were broadcast . Eventually , WWF President Jack Tunney came to the ring and had Finkel announce that both men would be considered winners . The situation regarding the title shot at WrestleMania X , which was to be given to the winner , remained unresolved until the following week on Monday Night Raw . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Ludvig Borga did not return to the WWF after his ankle healed , so there was no closure to his feud with Tatanka . The feud between Tatanka and Bam Bam Bigelow was also soon forgotten . In the summer of 1994 , both wrestlers joined Ted DiBiase 's Million Dollar Corporation . The two eventually formed a tag team and unsuccessfully challenged for the WWF Tag Team Championship . 
 The feud between Razor Ramon and I.R.S. ended shortly after the Royal Rumble . On the January 31 , 1994 edition of Monday Night Raw , the 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 Kid stole Ramon 's chains back from I.R.S. , bringing the feud to an end . Shawn Michaels ’ attack on Razor Ramon increased the hostility between the two . The debate over the true holder of the Intercontinental Championship was settled at WrestleMania X in a ladder match with both belts suspended above the ring . This ended the feud between Michaels and Ramon , although Ramon continued to feud with Michaels ’ friend Diesel . 
 Owen Hart demanded a match against Bret Hart , which Bret repeatedly refused . This situation was complicated because of Bret co @-@ winning the Royal Rumble . Jack Tunney decided that both Bret Hart and Lex Luger would get title shots at WrestleMania X , but that they would each wrestle two matches at the event . Lex Luger won a coin toss televised on Monday Night Raw and won the chance to face Yokozuna first . If he had lost the toss , he would have wrestled Crush before facing Yokozuna . Under the rules set forth by Tunney , Bret was required to wrestle Owen in the opening match at WrestleMania . Owen won the match , but Bret came out of WrestleMania with the WWF Championship after Yokozuna dropped the title to him . This led to an extended feud between the two that saw Jim Neidhart return to the WWF to side with Owen and Davey Boy Smith to make a comeback to take Bret 's side . 
 Several of the events during the Royal Rumble match led to feuds and pay @-@ per @-@ view matches later in 1994 . Diesel 's performance in the Royal Rumble match led to him becoming an up and comer in the WWF pecking order and he became the Intercontinental Champion shortly after WrestleMania X with assistance from Shawn Michaels . The duo later won the WWF Tag Team Championship the night before SummerSlam in August . At SummerSlam , however , Michaels cost Diesel the Intercontinental Championship by inadvertently kicking him when Razor Ramon ducked out of the way . Finally , at Survivor Series in November , the still @-@ simmering tension between the two friends boiled over when Michaels hit Diesel with another kick intended for Razor during their Survivor Series elimination match . Diesel became irate and chased after Michaels , who escaped in a car and declared their friendship and team over . 
 Meanwhile , Crush and Randy Savage faced each other in a Falls Count Anywhere match at WrestleMania X to settle their feud , and Doink and his midget sidekick Dink faced Bigelow and his kayfabe girlfriend Luna Vachon in a mixed tag match . 
 The Undertaker did not appear in the WWF for several months after his loss to Yokozuna . In reality , he was given time off to allow a back injury to heal . During his absence , the WWF promoted his return by showing video clips of people who claimed to have seen The Undertaker . Ted DiBiase claimed to have brought The Undertaker back to the WWF , but Paul Bearer informed him that DiBiase 's Undertaker was an impostor . Paul Bearer claimed to have located the true Undertaker , which led to a match at SummerSlam 1994 between DiBiase 's Undertaker ( portrayed by Brian Lee ) and Paul Bearer 's original Undertaker . After defeating the false Undertaker , Bearer 's Undertaker got revenge against Yokozuna by winning a Casket match at Survivor Series 1994 . To help prevent outside interference , Chuck Norris was brought in as a guest referee . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Royal Rumble entrances and eliminations = = = 
 A new entrant came out approximately every 90 seconds . 
 = Pennsylvania State Capitol = 
 The Pennsylvania State Capitol is the seat of government for the U.S. state of Pennsylvania and is in downtown Harrisburg . It was designed in 1902 in a Beaux @-@ Arts style with decorative Renaissance themes throughout . The capitol houses the legislative chambers for the Pennsylvania General Assembly , made up of the House of Representatives and the Senate , and the Harrisburg chambers for the Supreme and Superior Courts of Pennsylvania , as well as the offices of the Governor and the Lieutenant Governor . It is also the main building of the Pennsylvania State Capitol Complex . 
 The seat of government for the state was originally in Philadelphia , then was relocated to Lancaster in 1799 and finally to Harrisburg in 1812 . The current capitol , known as the Huston Capitol , is the third state capitol building to be built in Harrisburg . The first , the Hills Capitol , was destroyed in 1897 by a fire and the second , the Cobb Capitol , was left unfinished when funding was discontinued in 1899 . 
 Joseph Miller Huston designed the current capitol , dedicated in 1906 . After its completion , the capitol project was the subject of a graft scandal . The construction and subsequent furnishing cost three times more than the General Assembly had appropriated for the design and construction ; Huston and four others were convicted of graft for those excessive costs . 
 The Pennsylvania State Capitol is often referred to as a " palace of art " because of its many sculptures , murals and stained @-@ glass windows , most of which are Pennsylvania themed or were made by Pennsylvanians . The building was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1977 . Starting in 1982 , the restoration of the capitol has been ongoing . It was designated a National Historic Landmark in 2006 ; the boundaries of the designation were expanded to include the Capitol Complex in 2013 with the capitol a contributing property . 
 = = History = = 
 William Penn formed the first government of the then @-@ Province of Pennsylvania on October 28 , 1682 , in Chester , Pennsylvania . The government did not have a regular meeting place and often met in Quaker meeting houses or at private residences in Philadelphia . Pennsylvania 's first statehouse , now known as Independence Hall , was built in Philadelphia starting in 1732 and was completed in 1753 . With both the Pennsylvania General Assembly and the two predecessors of the United States Congress occupying Independence Hall from 1775 to 1783 , the state legislature considered proposals for moving the seat of the state government . John Harris , Jr. offered to give 4 acres ( 2 ha ) and 21 square perches ( 5 @,@ 717 ft2 ; 531 m2 ) of land near the banks of the Susquehanna River in central Pennsylvania to the state , provided that it be eventually used as the site of the capital . Harris also laid out a city in 1785 , near his plot of land , and named it in honor of his father . In 1799 , the legislature voted to relocate the capital to Lancaster instead of Harrisburg , because of Lancaster 's greater population . From 1799 to 1812 , the legislature resided in Lancaster at the Old City Hall . 
 = = = Hills Capitol = = = 
 The legislature voted in 1810 to relocate the capital again , and moved the seat of government to Harrisburg in October 1812 onto the land given by Harris . An additional 10 acres ( 4 ha ) was also purchased from United States Senator William Maclay . The legislature met in the old Dauphin County courthouse for the next decade until a new capitol was constructed . A competition was held to determine the design of the capitol starting in 1816 , which " was the first formal contest for [ designing ] an American statehouse " . The designs submitted , including one from William Strickland , were rejected as being too expensive . Another contest was started in January 1819 . Of the seventeen designs submitted , two were selected as semifinalists . One was from Harrisburg architect Stephen Hills and the other was from the designer of the Washington Monument , Robert Mills ; Hills ' design was selected . Hills had designed a " red @-@ brick , Federal @-@ style " capitol to " architecturally represent the function of democratic government . " Construction began on the Hills Capitol in 1819 and it was completed in 1822 . The capitol 's construction and subsequent furnishing was estimated to have cost $ 244 @,@ 500 . The Hills Capitol was visited by famous people , including the Marquis de Lafayette in 1825 and Albert Edward , Prince of Wales , ( later King Edward VII ) in 1860 . Abraham Lincoln visited the capitol in 1861 as president @-@ elect , and then his body lay in state there after his 1865 assassination . Pennsylvania 's collection of Civil War battle flags , which were accumulated in 1866 , was moved from the State Arsenal to the second floor of the capitol in 1872 . The flags were moved , again , in 1895 to the Executive , Library and Museum Building . On February 2 , 1897 , around noon , smoke was discovered coming from the Lieutenant Governor 's offices . By early evening , the Hills Capitol had been reduced to a " smoldering mass of debris " . 
 = = = Cobb Capitol = = = 
 After the destruction of the Hills Capitol , the now " homeless " legislature moved to a nearby Methodist Church . There were soon demands that the capital be relocated to Pittsburgh or Philadelphia ; the legislature quickly appropriated money to build a new capitol in Harrisburg . Governor Daniel H. Hastings opted for a pay @-@ as @-@ you @-@ go policy to allow the construction costs to be spread over multiple annual budgets . Governor Hastings also figured that $ 550 @,@ 000 was enough to build " a small legislative building " that could be added onto as needed over time . After building designs were submitted by various architects in another competition , Henry Ives Cobb was chosen in 1897 to design the new capitol . Construction of the Cobb Capitol began on May 2 , 1898 . The legislature met in the finished building , which they had deemed complete , even though it was an " unadorned , unfinished , several @-@ story brown brick structure that looked like a factory " , on January 3 , 1899 . Cobb himself described the building simply as " ugly " but believed that he would be able to finish it eventually , when more funding became available . 
 = = = Huston Capitol = = = 
 Governor William A. Stone appointed a new Capitol Building Commission in 1901 . The commission then held another design competition , for Pennsylvania architects only , which prevented Cobb , a Chicagoan , from submitting a design or finishing his capitol . The Building Commission also stipulated that parts of the unfinished , current capitol were to be used in the new capitol . The General Assembly had appropriated $ 4 million for the construction of the capitol . It did not limit the total amount to be used in furnishing the building . This caused problems after construction completion of the capitol . The American Institute of Architects was opposed to competition , citing that the terms of the competition were " calculated to only ' encourage favoritism and injustice ' and that they in no way obligated the Capitol [ Building ] Commission to select the best design or the best architect " . The Institute also advised that no Pennsylvania architects enter the competition ; Philadelphia architect Addison Hutton was subsequently expelled from the organization after submitting an entry . Joseph Miller Huston 's design was chosen from among nine entries in the competition in January 1902 . 
 The ground was broken for the Huston Capitol on November 2 , 1902 , but the cornerstone was not laid until May 5 , 1904 . Ownership of the capitol was handed over to the state government on August 15 , 1906 , and the Capitol Building Commission was dissolved . 
 Governor Samuel W. Pennypacker dedicated the new capitol on October 4 , 1906 . Former Governor Stone , who had become president of the Building Commission after leaving office , ceremoniously gave the key to the capitol to Governor Pennypacker . President Theodore Roosevelt , who had arrived earlier that morning by a special train to deliver a speech and tour the new capitol , declared it " the handsomest building I ever saw " . The Pennsylvania , Northern Central , Reading , and Cumberland Valley railroads each ran special trains to accommodate the crowds traveling to and from Harrisburg for the dedication . 
 Although the building was completed , the majority of the artwork in and around the capitol would not be completed for another two decades . The murals in the rotunda were not installed until 1908 and the sculptures outside the entrance to the capitol were dedicated on October 4 , 1911 . The collection of Civil War flags were removed from the Executive , Library and Museum Building . After a parade and a ceremony , they were installed in glass display cases in the capitol rotunda on June 14 , 1914 . The decoration of the capitol was completed on May 23 , 1927 , when the murals in the Supreme Court Chambers were unveiled . 
 = = = = Graft scandal = = = = 
 William H. Berry was elected in 1906 , shortly after the dedication , to the office of State Treasurer on a reform " fusion ticket " . Berry was the only Democrat elected to a statewide office from 1895 to 1934 . His successful campaign was deemed by Governor Pennypacker to be " one of those freaks of ill fortune " . Berry began investigating the costs of the capitol project and brought its $ 13 million <unk> to the attention of the public . Part of the reason for the discrepancy was Pennsylvania 's " over @-@ elaborate " and sometimes " unintelligible " method of " ordering and purchasing supplies , equipment [ and ] furnishings , commonly called the ' per @-@ foot rule ' " . Because the methods of measuring under the " per @-@ foot rule " were not rigorously enforced , furnishing could be , intentionally , overpriced by the supplier . For example , a flagpole installed on the capitol roof was priced at $ 850 ; Berry estimated the value of the pole to have been only $ 150 . Other expenses included $ 1 @,@ 619 for a $ 125 <unk> stand and $ 3 @,@ 257 for a $ 325 " mahogany case in the Senate barber shop " . 
 Pennypacker tried to demonstrate that costs associated with the capitol were reasonable in comparison with similar notable structures . He pointed out that the United States Capitol cost $ 18 million , but had " fifty @-@ five less [ rooms ] than the Capitol at Harrisburg . " Pennypacker also showed how the New York State Capitol had cost $ 24 million , and was still unfinished . After an investigation , a total of five people , including Huston , were convicted , on December 8 , 1908 , and sentenced to two years in prison for " conspiring with State officials to defraud the State in the erection and furnishing of the Capitol . " The Superintendent of Public Ground and Buildings James Shumaker and Auditor General William P. Snyder were also convicted . Among the convicted , John H. Sanderson and William L. <unk> died before going to prison . 
 = = = = Brunner plan = = = = 
 From 1912 to 1917 , the state acquired all of the 541 separate properties that comprise the Eighth Ward east of the capitol . The Eighth Ward was situated between the capitol and a set of railroad tracks , then owned by the Pennsylvania Railroad . Arnold Brunner was hired in 1916 to develop new accommodations for state government , which had already outgrown the capitol . He introduced his plan in 1920 , which called , first , for the demolition of the Eighth Ward . Brunner planned two office buildings behind the capitol , the North and South Office Buildings , and these were separated by a courtyard he named the People 's Court . The South Office Building was completed in 1921 . The leveling of the Eighth Ward was finished in 1925 . 
 Although Brunner died on February 14 , 1925 , elements of his plans were still completed , except for his People 's Court , which became a parking lot . Brunner planned a bridge to cross the railroad tracks and connect the capitol with the highest point in the city at 13th Street . Brunner had also originally planned to have another bridge span the Susquehanna River , on the west side of the capitol . After his death , parts of the bridge were redesigned and became the current State Street Bridge , which was completed in 1930 . The Education Building , or Forum Building , was completed in 1931 . 
 = = = = Restoration and preservation = = = = 
 The Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission erected two historical markers on August 11 , 1953 — one commemorating the Hills Capitol and another for the current capitol . The capitol was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on September 14 , 1977 . In 1982 , the Capitol Preservation Committee ( CPC ) was created " to supervise and coordinate the historic preservation of the State Capitol Building " . One of the CPC 's first projects was the preservation of the 390 Civil War flags and 22 flags from the Spanish – American War , which had been undisturbed since being placed in the rotunda in 1914 . Between 1985 and 1987 , scaffolding was erected in the rotunda and the murals removed for restoration . The statue atop the capitol dome was removed for restoration via helicopter in the summer of 1998 , being returned in September of the same year . It was decided to restore the Senate Chamber after it was flooded with 26 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 98 @,@ 000 L ; 22 @,@ 000 imp gal ) of water on February 14 , 1999 . The capitol was declared a National Historic Landmark on September 20 , 2006 , during its centennial . On February 27 , 2013 , the boundaries of the designation were revised to encompass the grounds and surrounding buildings . 
 = = Exterior = = 
 The capitol is 520 feet ( 160 m ) long and 272 feet ( 83 m ) tall . It is 254 feet ( 77 m ) wide at its center wing and its two side wings are 212 feet ( 65 m ) . The facade of the capitol is constructed out of granite from Hardwick , Vermont . The 94 @-@ foot -diameter ( 29 m ) dome is topped by the gilded brass statue of Commonwealth by Roland Hinton Perry . Standing 14 feet 6 inches ( 4 m ) tall atop a 4 @-@ foot -diameter ( 1 m ) ball , the statue is the personification of a commonwealth . The dome itself weighs 26 @,@ 000 short tons ( 24 @,@ 000 metric tons ) and was architecturally inspired by St. Peter 's Basilica in Vatican City . 
 Huston designed the large bronze doors at the capitol 's main entrance . They were modeled by sculptor Otto Jahnsen and were both cast in one piece using the lost wax method of casting by the Henry Bonnard Bronze Company . The doors are decorated with scenes from the history of Pennsylvania , such as the arrival of William Penn and his peace treaty with the Lenape . Busts of people who were important in the construction of the capitol , like Governor Pennypacker , Boies Penrose , and Matthew Quay , decorate the edges of the doors . The bust of Huston hides the doors ' keyhole . 
 The entrance is flanked by two sculptures , entitled Love and Labor : The Unbroken Law and The Burden of Life : The Broken Law . Both were sculpted out of Carrara marble from models created by George Grey Barnard in 1909 . 
 = = = Grounds = = = 
 The Pennsylvania Capitol Grounds , officially the Capitol Park , comprises 45 acres ( 18 ha ) and 26 @.@ 4 square perches ( 7 @,@ 187 ft2 ; 668 m2 ) . The grounds are bounded by North Street on the north , 7th Street on the east , Walnut Street on the south and 3rd Street on the west . Arnold Brunner designed the layout of the grounds , which originally totaled only 15 acres ( 6 ha ) from the land Harris and Maclay gave to the state . The remaining 29 acres ( 12 ha ) were added when the state bought the Eighth Ward . 
 A 64 @-@ foot -tall ( 20 m ) monument , dedicated to the citizens of Pennsylvania who died in the Mexican – American War , was built in 1858 . The monument was not placed onto the grounds until 1868 and was moved to the southeast corner of the grounds in 1893 , when the Executive , Library and Museum Building was built . In 1896 – 97 , a monument , dedicated to former governor John F. Hartranft , was sculpted by Frederick <unk> . The 26 @-@ foot -tall ( 8 m ) monument was unveiled on May 18 , 1899 , and was placed in front of the capitol . It was moved in 1927 to in front of the Executive , Library and Museum Building . Friends of Penrose in the General Assembly , who had died in 1921 , passed legislation for a memorial to Penrose . The 16 @-@ foot -tall ( 5 m ) monument was dedicated on September 23 , 1930 , and is located near the corner of North 3rd and Walnut Streets . 
 = = Interior = = 
 The Pennsylvania State Capitol houses the chambers for the Pennsylvania House of Representatives , the Pennsylvania Senate , and the Harrisburg chambers for the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania . The Capitol contains 475 rooms and has four floors , not including a mezzanine between the first and second floors , and a basement . The bronze entrance doors of the capitol lead into the rotunda on the first floor with the grand staircase in the center . The staircase in the rotunda is an imperial staircase , similar to the one in the Palais Garnier in Paris , France . The staircase leads to the mezzanine between the first and second floors , before dividing into two staircases leading to the second floor . Edwin Austin Abbey painted four allegorical medallions around the base of the capitol dome , detailing the " four forces of civilization " : Art , Justice , Science , and Religion . Four lunette murals were also painted by Abbey and " symbolize Pennsylvania 's spiritual and industrial contributions to modern civilization " . The lunettes are situated in the recesses of each arch in the rotunda . The rotunda is paved with tiles , hand @-@ crafted by Henry Chapman Mercer , from the Moravian Pottery and Tile Works . Mercer produced 1 @,@ 600 square feet ( 100 m2 ) of tile , which includes " 377 mosaics , representing 254 scenes , artifacts , animals , birds , fish , insects , industries and workers from Pennsylvania history " . The interiors of the rotunda and the dome are inscribed with a quote from William Penn made upon the foundation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania : 
 There may be room there for such a holy experiment . For the nations want a precedent . And my God will make it the seed of a nation . That an example may be set up to the nations . That we may do the thing that is truly wise and just . 
 = = = House Chamber = = = 
 The lower house of the bicameral General Assembly , the House of Representatives , has 203 members , elected for a term of 2 years , and presided over by the Speaker of the House . The House Chamber , or Hall of the House , is the largest of the three chambers at 90 feet ( 30 m ) wide and 120 feet ( 40 m ) long . It is located on the south side of the rotunda . 
 The House Chamber was designed with an Italian Renaissance theme . William B. Van Ingen created the fourteen circular , stained @-@ glass windows in the House Chamber , and Abbey painted its five murals . The largest of the murals is situated behind the Speaker 's rostrum . Named the Apotheosis of Pennsylvania , it depicts 28 famous Pennsylvanians . 
 = = = Senate Chamber = = = 
 The Senate is the upper house of the state legislature and has 50 members , elected to 4 @-@ year terms . The Senate is presided over by the President of the Senate , who is also the Lieutenant Governor . The 95 @-@ by @-@ 80 @-@ foot ( 29 by 24 m ) Senate Chamber , or Hall of the Senate , is the second @-@ largest chamber and was designed with a French Renaissance theme . It is located on the north side of the rotunda , opposite the House . Violet Oakley painted the murals in the Senate Chamber . Ingen also made 10 stained @-@ glass windows for the Senate Chamber . Both the House and Senate Chambers are on the second floor , each with an entrance on the third and fourth floors leading to a press gallery . 
 = = = Supreme Court Chamber = = = 
 The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania is the court of last resort in the Commonwealth . The Superior Court of Pennsylvania is one of two intermediate appellate courts in state . The Supreme Court Chamber , officially the Supreme and Superior Court Chamber , is used by both courts and was designed using ancient Greek and Roman themes . It is located on the fourth floor of the capitol , on the east side of the rotunda . The Supreme Court Chamber is the smallest of the three chambers at 42 by 72 feet ( 13 by 22 m ) . Oakley painted the 16 murals in the " Supreme Courtroom " to depict the history of law . A stained @-@ glass dome , designed by Pennsylvania native Alfred Godwin , is in the center of the ceiling . 
 = = Capitol Complex = = 
 The Pennsylvania State Capitol Complex includes the buildings owned by Commonwealth , which are controlled by the Pennsylvania Department of General Services , and are centered on the capitol in Harrisburg . The Capitol Complex became a National Historic Landmark in 2013 when the designation was revised to include not just the capitol , but the surrounding building as contributing property — except for the East Wing . 
 The oldest building in the complex is the Executive , Library and Museum Building . Situated next to the Hills Capitol and the Huston Capitol , it was built in 1894 . It was designated the Matthew J. Ryan Legislative Office Building on June 14 , 1999 , in recognition of former Speaker Matthew J. Ryan . The Ryan Office Building is the oldest building in the complex and was originally designed to house the State Library and State Museum of Pennsylvania , as well as the Governor 's Office and Reception Room . Today it houses the offices of the members of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives . 
 The seven @-@ story North and South Office Buildings are situated behind the capitol and overlook the East Wing . The South Office Building was renamed the K. Leroy <unk> Office Building on December 20 , 2002 , in recognition of former Speaker K. Leroy <unk> . The State Museum and State Archives buildings were constructed in 1964 . A 640 @-@ by @-@ 320 @-@ foot ( 200 by 100 m ) addition , called the East Wing , was dedicated on December 2 , 1987 . The East Wing replaced the decades @-@ old parking lot and fulfilled Brunner 's plan of a People 's Court . It was built partially underground , such that the tallest point on the East Wing barely reaches the first floor of the capitol . 
 = Go Big or Go Home = 
 " Go Big or Go Home " is the third season premiere of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 31st overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on January 20 , 2011 . In the episode , Leslie gets Ann to go on a date with state auditor Chris to persuade him to increase the parks department budget . Meanwhile , Andy continues harboring feelings for April , while a youth basketball game is ruined by Tom 's jealousy over Ron dating his ex @-@ wife Wendy . 
 The episode was written by Alan Yang and directed by Dean Holland . It was the first to feature Adam Scott , Rob Lowe , Jim O 'Heir and Retta as regular cast members rather than guest performers . Frequent guest stars Jama Williamson and Natalie Morales also reprised their roles . " Go Big or Go Home " marked the first original Parks and Recreation episode in eight months . It was filmed immediately after the second season concluded due to Amy Poehler 's pregnancy , but NBC ended up placing the show on hold to accommodate their new series , Outsourced . 
 The season premiere was the first Parks and Recreation episode to air in its new 9 : 30 p.m. Thursday time @-@ slot between the two popular shows The Office and 30 Rock . According to Nielsen Media Research , it was seen by 6 @.@ 19 million households . It was the series ' highest rating in the ages 18 to 49 demographic , and marked the highest overall viewership since the series premiere . The episode received highly positive reviews , with several commentators particularly praising the scene featuring " Swanson Pyramid of Greatness " , Ron Swanson 's guide to successful living . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After three months of closure due to the Pawnee budget crisis and government shutdown , Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) excitedly informs her fellow employees that the parks department has been reopened , although on a shoestring budget . State auditors Chris ( Rob Lowe ) and Ben ( Adam Scott ) announce they may only conduct existing park maintenance , but Leslie wants to offer better programs and services . Meanwhile , the always @-@ optimistic Chris continues trying to convince Ann ( Rashida Jones ) to go on a date with him . Ann finds him too intense , but Leslie convinces her to accept a date and try to persuade Chris to increase the parks budget . 
 Due to popular demand from citizens , Ben restarts the youth basketball league , although with only two teams . They are coached by Ron ( Nick Offerman ) , who is extremely strict and disciplined with his players , and Andy ( Chris Pratt ) , who is very laid back and lets his kids go out of control . Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) , who referees the game , becomes jealous when his ex @-@ wife Wendy ( Jama Williamson ) arrives to support Ron . Tom insists he is happy with his new girlfriend Lucy ( Natalie Morales ) and does not mind that Wendy is dating Ron . However , Tom repeatedly calls false fouls against Ron 's players until all of them are benched . When Ron and Wendy get angry , Tom ejects them from the games and declares it a forfeit , which concerns Lucy . 
 Ann finds she enjoys her date with Chris . When she asks why he is always so positive , he explains he was expected to die as a baby due to a blood disorder , so he now feels fortunate to be alive every day . Leslie crashes the date to help Ann persuade Chris to increase the parks budget , but to her surprise , Ben also arrives , having predicted Leslie 's plan . The four end up taking their date to a gay bar called The Bulge , where Chris tells Leslie he will consider increasing the parks budget . Leslie excitedly declares " mission accomplished " , accidentally giving away her scheme and prompting Chris to leave , hurt that Ann had an ulterior motive for the date . Later , however , Ann apologizes to Chris and asks for another date , to which he happily agrees . 
 Meanwhile , April ( Aubrey Plaza ) shows up to work after having disappeared three months earlier . Andy still has a crush on April , who previously liked Andy until she learned Ann had kissed him . Andy had been leaving messages to April ever since , but she did not return them because she was in Venezuela , where she met her new boyfriend , the handsome Eduardo ( Carlo Mendez ) . A discouraged Andy seeks advice from Leslie , who encourages him not to give up and to " go big or go home " . Inspired by her own advice , Leslie proposes restoring the parks department with a Harvest Festival , which was once a Pawnee tradition until eliminated by budget cuts . Leslie and the other parks employees agree that if it is not a success , the parks department will shut down . Impressed by their enthusiasm , Chris and Ben agree to the idea . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Go Big or Go Home " , the third season premiere , was written by Alan Yang and directed by Dean Holland . It was the first to feature Adam Scott , Rob Lowe , Jim O 'Heir and Retta as regular cast members rather than guest stars . Frequent guest performers Jama Williamson and Natalie Morales also reprised their roles . The episode was originally expected to debut in September 2010 and , due to Amy Poehler 's pregnancy , the Parks and Recreation producers decided to write and film the first six episodes of the season early so it could meet that air date . However , to accommodate their new comedy series Outsourced , NBC opted not to put Parks and Recreation on the fall schedule , and instead delayed the third season premiere to a mid @-@ season date of January 20 , 2011 . Due to the delay , " Go Big or Go Home " is set in the fall , when it was supposed to air , rather than the winter when it was actually broadcast . NBC chief executive officer Jeff Gaspin said this move was not a reflection on Parks and Recreation , and suggested the extended hiatus would not only have no negative effect on the show , but could actually build anticipation for its return . 
 " Go Big or Go Home " was the first original episode since " Freddy Spaghetti " in May 2010 , and executive producer Michael Schur said while he believed it was a strong episode , there were fears the hiatus would hurt the momentum of the series : " Of course , any time you 're not on the air , you run the risk of people forgetting about you ; that 's the sad thing about the mid @-@ season show . " The week of the third season premiere , Amy Poehler said of the hiatus , " It was an NBC decision and certainly we were confused . But I think , weirdly , there 's a momentum that comes from people waiting for us , which is nice . " Poehler also said the long hiatus made an ironic sort of sense for the script , since at the beginning the characters have " taken too much time off and we 've all gone a little crazy " . While Parks and Recreation previously aired on 8 : 30 p.m. EST on Thursdays , " Go Big or Go Home " marked the first episode in a new 9 : 30 p.m. Thursday time @-@ slot between the two popular shows The Office and 30 Rock . Poehler said of the time @-@ slot , " ' The Office ' is such an amazing show and to be behind it is an honor . " In anticipation of new viewers due to the Office lead @-@ in , " Go Big and Go Home " included an introductory sequence describing the previous events of the series . 
 " Go Big or Go Home " introduced the subplot of restoring the parks department budget through a harvest festival , which continued to be a major story arc throughout the first seven episodes of the season . It also marked a major development in the romantic subplot between Ann and Chris . Rashida Jones said of her character : " I think women over @-@ correct from their last boyfriends , and Chris is very much the opposite from Mark , " a reference to Mark Brendanawicz , a character eliminated the previous season . During one scene at Ann 's house , Leslie suggests outlandish and inappropriate ways for Ann to try to seduce Chris into increasing the parks department budget , including wearing a sleeveless tuxedo dress that suddenly bursts open . Amy Poehler said she and Jones improvised much of the scene . Poehler said of the scene , " I think it 's really funny how little game ( Leslie ) has with guys . She 's not a fool , it 's just not her expertise , so when she talks about how to be sexy or hot to get someone 's attention , it 's always really crazy . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 While coaching basketball , Ron Swanson shows his players what he calls the " Swanson Pyramid of Greatness " , a guide to living similar to the " Pyramid of Success " used by John Wooden . The pyramid includes several different categories , with honor at the top , and others below it such as America , <unk> , wood working , welfare avoidance and deer protein . A poster of this pyramid was included in promotional materials given to media in advance of the episode 's broadcast , and images of it were later placed on the official Parks and Recreation website . During the basketball game , Ron wears a red sweater and , at one point , angrily throws a chair into the court . These are references to the basketball coach Bobby Knight , for whom Ron had professed great admiration in the pilot episode . 
 During scenes at the gay bar , a stylized stencil poster of Leslie hangs on the wall . It is designed in a similar way to the Barack Obama " Hope " poster designed by artist Shepard Fairey , with the word " Knope " instead of " Hope " . This poster was previously featured in the second season premiere " Pawnee Zoo " , where Leslie is praised as a gay rights hero for marrying two male penguins at a ceremonial wedding at the zoo . During the parks department shutdown , Tom gets a part @-@ time job at Lady Foot Locker , a retail sportswear and footwear store . He wears the store uniform , which resembles a referee shirt , when he actually referees the youth basketball game later in the episode . Tom 's part @-@ time job is a reference to the second season episode " Woman of the Year " , where it is revealed Tom 's friend Jean @-@ Ralphio Saperstein also worked at a Lady Foot Locker . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Go Big or Go Home " was seen by an estimated 6 @.@ 19 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , with a 3 @.@ 2 rating / 8 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 . It marked the series ' highest rating in that demographic , and the highest overall viewership since the series premiere episode from April 2009 , which was seen by 6 @.@ 77 million household viewers . " Go Big or Go Home " lost about a quarter of the viewership of the episode of The Office ( " Ultimatum " ) , which was seen by 8 @.@ 3 million households , but New York magazine described this as a " respectable drop @-@ off " given the popularity of that series . Parks and Recreation received a higher rating in its time @-@ slot than the CBS crime drama series CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , which had more viewers at 14 @.@ 34 million households , but a lower 3 @.@ 1 rating / 8 share . Both shows were defeated by the Fox comedy @-@ drama series Bones , which received a 6 @.@ 5 rating / 10 share and was seen by 10 @.@ 55 million households . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Go Big or Go Home " received critical acclaim , with several critics particularly complimenting the " Swanson Pyramid of Greatness " joke . HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall said the episode was effective in appealing to both new and old viewers , developing various character subplots and establishing the harvest festival story arc . He also praised the performances of Chris and Ann , which he called a far better and more interesting pairing than Ann with Mark Brendanawicz . Linda Holmes of NPR suggested the season premiere was a good place for newcomers to the series to start watching . She said all the characters were funny and the two new cast members had been seamlessly integrated into the show . Time magazine writer James Poniewozik called the episode an " excellent start " to the season , and said the harvest festival subplot would help better focus the series by giving the characters a single goal . <unk> said it also " reminds us that the show is about something : the idea , maybe quaint @-@ seeming in this political climate , that civil servants can actually see themselves as servants and work in their community 's interest " . Damian Holbrook of TV Guide said " Go Big or Go Home " was an improvement on an already strong second season , claiming " the comedy seemed snappier , the relationships better grounded and the ensemble cast at their best . " 
 CNN writer Henry Hanks praised the season premiere and said he was " overjoyed " that the show had returned . He found particularly funny the scenes at the start of the episode which showed the part @-@ time jobs Tom , Donna and Jerry had during the parks department hiatus . Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club said " Go Big or Go Home " not only included many fun moments , but that the jokes felt " fresher and more rambunctious " than they had in the previous season , and that the shows seemed to have discovered " a newfound sense of purpose " . Gail Pennington of the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch said " Go Big and Go Home " , along with the five other first episodes of the season " couldn 't be funnier " . The Hollywood Reporter writer Tim Goodman felt the episode was a strong start to the season , and particularly praised Rob Lowe , whose character he said was " really beginning to jell " . Blogcritics writer Jerome Wetzel wrote , " I can 't express in words how good it is to have Parks and Recreation back on television . " Wetzel said the characters were so well defined that the show rivaled the ensemble cast of The Office , a comedy made by the same producers as Parks and Recreation . Zap2it writer Rick Porter wrote that Parks and Recreation " was one of the two or three funniest comedies on TV when it finished its second season , and it begins its third season having lost none of its mojo " . He particularly praised the performances of Nick Offerman and Rob Lowe . 
 Matt Fowler of IGN said the episode was a pleasant way to return to the series , and was glad the harvest festival would give the characters something specific to focus on . However , Fowler felt there was a lack of closure over Tom 's resentment in the episode of Ron dating Wendy . Joel Keller of TV Squad felt the new Chris and Ben characters served as a strong springboard into the third season , and that the premiere episode lived up to the anticipation caused by the show 's long hiatus . However , Keller said Tom 's continued pining for Wendy felt " a little protracted at this point " . New York magazine writer Steve Kandell praised the episode and said the parks department employees taking drastic steps to save their department reflected Parks efforts to seek out higher ratings . Kandell , however , felt introducing Chris ' tragic back story in the episode felt rushed . Eric Hochberger of TV Fanatic called the episode consistently funny , and said the new characters Ben and Chris were starting to hit their stride . However , Hochberger said Eduardo subplot felt like a contrived device to continue keeping April and Andy apart . Not all reviews were entirely positive . David Hinckley of New York Daily News called Parks and Recreation " a good show that could be a better show " , claiming it falls short of other NBC comedies like 30 Rock . Hinckley cited the basketball game with Andy , Ron and Tom as a scene that feels too much like a sketch comedy bit rather than a natural progression of the script . Nick Purdy of Paste said the addition of new cast members Chris and Ben may have diluted the rest of the cast 's talents , and that the episode felt as if it had " too many plates spinning " , leaving not enough screentime for strong characters like April Ludgate and Ron Swanson . 
 = Peasants ' revolt in Palestine = 
 The Peasants ' Revolt was a rebellion against Egyptian conscription and taxation policies in Palestine . It was a collective reaction to the gradual elimination of the unofficial rights and privileges previously enjoyed by the various societal groups in the region under Ottoman rule . While the local peasantry constituted the bulk of the rebel forces , urban notables and Bedouin tribes also formed an integral part of the revolt . 
 As part of Muhammad Ali 's modernization policies , Ibrahim Pasha , the Egyptian governor of the Levant , issued conscription orders for a fifth of all Muslim males of fighting age . Encouraged by rural sheikh Qasim al @-@ Ahmad , the urban notables of Nablus , Hebron and the Jerusalem @-@ Jaffa area did not carry out Ibrahim Pasha 's orders to conscript , disarm and tax the local peasantry . The religious notables of Safad followed suit . Qasim and other local leaders rallied their kinsmen and revolted against the authorities in May 1834 , taking control of several towns . While the core of the fighting was in the central mountain regions of Palestine ( Samaria and Judea ) , the revolt also spread to the Galilee , Gaza and parts of Transjordan . Jerusalem was briefly captured by the rebels and plundered . Faced with the superior firepower and organization of Ibrahim Pasha 's troops , the rebels were defeated in Jabal Nablus , Jerusalem and the coastal plain before their final defeat in Hebron , which was leveled . Afterward , Ibrahim Pasha 's troops pursued and captured Qasim in al @-@ Karak , which was also leveled . 
 Baruch Kimmerling and Joel S. Migdal argue that the revolt was a formative event for the Palestinian sense of nationhood in that it brought together disparate groups against a common enemy . Moreover , they asserted that these groups reemerged later to constitute the Palestinian people . The revolt represented a moment of political unity in Palestine . However , the ultimate intention of the notables and rebel leaders was to force out the Egyptian army and reinstate Ottoman rule as a means of restoring the Ottoman @-@ era standards that defined the relationship between the government and the governed . These standards were made up of the religious laws , administrative codes and local norms and traditions that were disrupted by Egyptian reforms . 
 = = Background = = 
 In consolidating his power , Muhammad Ali , the rebel governor of Ottoman Egypt , was modeling his rule on the bureaucratic organization characteristic of modern European states . Like earlier rulers of Egypt , Muhammad Ali desired to exercise control over greater Syria ( Bilad al @-@ Sham ) , both for its strategic value and for its natural resources . In addition to its abundant natural resources , Syria also had a prospering international trading community with well @-@ developed markets . In addition , in Ali 's strategy , Syria would serve as a captive market for goods being produced in Egypt . Moreover , the extension of Egyptian control over Syria was sought because it would serve as a buffer state between Egypt and the Ottoman sultan in Constantinople . Ali was attempting to become independent of the Ottoman Empire . 
 A new fleet and army was raised and built under Ali 's leadership , and on 31 October 1831 , his son Ibrahim Pasha launched an invasion of Syria , which initiated the First Egyptian – Ottoman War . For the sake of international appearances , the pretext for the expedition was a quarrel with Abdullah Pasha of Acre . Ali alleged that 6 @,@ 000 fellahin ( peasants or agricultural laborer ) had fled to Acre to escape the Egyptian draft , corvée , and taxes , and he demanded their return . Ibrahim Pasha advanced through Palestine , occupying Haifa in December 1831 , and then using the city as his primary military base . 
 = = = Events preceding the revolt = = = 
 Egyptian economic and political policies alienated four broad and influential factions in Palestine , namely the <unk> ( notables ) of Jerusalem , the bulk of the major clans in Jabal Nablus , the clans of the Jerusalem hinterland , and the Bedouin tribes in the areas of Hebron and Bethlehem . 
 In late 1832 , Qasim al @-@ Ahmad , leader of the Qasim clan and the chief of the nahiya ( subdistrict ) of Jamma 'in in Jabal Nablus was dismissed by Ibrahim Pasha from his additional post of mutassalim ( administrator ) of Jerusalem after having served a few months in that office . The official reasoning for Qasim 's dismissal was his " advanced age " . He was replaced by his son Muhammad al @-@ Qasim , who was consequently removed from the more powerful post of mutassalim of Nablus . Afterward , Sulayman ' Abd al @-@ Hadi of the Arraba @-@ based Abd al @-@ Hadi clan , a prominent ally of the Egyptians , was appointed to Muhammad 's former post in Nablus . The move was a power @-@ play by Ibrahim Pasha and the Abd al @-@ Hadi 's , who were quickly gaining prominence in the region ; their members had been appointed to head the Sidon Eyalet ( which included part of northern Palestine ) and a number of its districts . The move provoked the Qasim clan 's anger with the Abd al @-@ Hadi family and the Egyptian authorities . 
 The Abu Ghosh clan , based in the Jerusalem @-@ ara village of Qaryat al @-@ Inab , traditionally served as toll collectors for the Jerusalem @-@ Jaffa road , and were increasingly considered by Ibrahim Pasha to be extortionists . They were targeted by the authorities in 1833 . The clan 's leadership was arrested , including their head sheikh Ibrahim Abu Ghosh , and were temporarily sentenced to forced labor in Acre . Relations between the authorities and the Bedouin tribes of south @-@ central Palestine were also antagonistic . Traditionally , during Ottoman rule , the Bedouin were allowed to collect tribute payments from travelers and the inhabitants of the area in return for services to the state . Ibrahim Pasha saw the Bedouin as raiders who exceeded their privileges and abolished this practice . He also imposed additional conditions on the Bedouin , primarily the requirement of transporting grain for Egyptian troops in return for the right to graze livestock . In 1833 , the Dura @-@ based Amr tribe of the Hebron Hills , which was headed by Isa Amr and Abd al @-@ Rahman Amr , were subject to a military campaign by Ibrahim Pasha . The Abu Ghosh , the Ras Karkar @-@ based <unk> clan , and the Amr tribe were essentially at war with the Egyptians . 
 The imposition of new taxation categories that were a departure from both secular Ottoman law and the traditionally accepted Islamic law drew local Muslim anger at the authorities . However , the principal point of contention between the authorities and the notables of Jerusalem and Nablus was the conscription order by Ibrahim Pasha on 25 April 1834 . That day , Ibrahim Pasha convened with all of the clan leaders from both cities to demand the drafting of one out of every five Muslim men of fighting age . The order would begin with the conscription of 200 men from Jerusalem , a combined 3 @,@ 500 men from Sanjak al @-@ Quds and Sanjak Nablus , and 500 men from Hebron . By May 1834 , the only prominent ally of the Egyptians in Palestine was the Abd al @-@ Hadi clan . 
 According to a chronicled account , during the meeting , Ibrahim Pasha attempted to address the reluctance of the notables in sending their kinsmen and peasants to the army , asking that as Muslims at war with Christian nations , " is it not necessary for us to have a big standing army ? " The notables replied in the affirmative , but asserted that their men were already trained in the art of war and like the generations before them , they would " willingly shed blood " for the " fatherland " and " defend their country " from " the enemies of our religion " . Ibrahim Pasha countered that their fighters would need to be professionally trained , telling them " War is not the place for a herd of useless men " . 
 = = Revolt = = 
 = = = Beginning of revolt = = = 
 In retaliation for his dismissal and his son 's virtual demotion , Qasim al @-@ Ahmad organized the a 'ayan ( notables ) of Nablus , Hebron and Jerusalem against Ibrahim Pasha . On 19 May 1834 , the notables gathered and notified Egyptian officials that they were not able to conscript the Palestinian Arab peasantry into the army or collect taxes from them , claiming that the peasantry had taken up arms and fled to the mountains which were difficult to access . At the time of the notables ' stated failure to conscript local peasants , Ibrahim Pasha had been in need of new troops to replenish his army in preparation for further advances against the Ottomans . He considered the notables ' position to be treasonous and amounting to an insurrection . 
 Following the declaration of the notables , a meeting of local sheikhs ( chiefs ) from Jabal Nablus was hosted by Qasim in his clan 's throne village of Beit <unk> and was attended by Qasim 's sons Yusuf and Muhammad , Abdullah al @-@ Jarrar of Sanur , Isa al @-@ Barqawi of <unk> and Nasser al @-@ Mansur al @-@ Hajj Muhammad of Beit <unk> . The leaders expressed their frustrations at the close cooperation between the Abd al @-@ Hadi family and the Egyptian government and the meeting concluded with an agreement to oust the Egyptian army from Palestine . Under Qasim 's leadership the peasantry of Jabal Nablus moved to openly revolt against the authorities . At around the same time , the notables of Safad , the only sanjak ( district ) in Palestine that was part of the Eyalet of Sidon , declared their opposition to Ibrahim Pasha 's orders and sent a letter to Qasim affirming their refusal to comply with conscription orders , stating that " the son is the core of the heart , and naturally no one can leave his son without the sacrifice of life itself " . 
 The uprising spread to Jerusalem , Hebron and other mountainous areas in what is today known as the West Bank . Although Nablus was the core of the rebels ' strength , the first actual clash between the authorities and the rebels occurred in the vicinity of Hebron after a group of Egyptian soldiers were sent by the Egyptian governor of Hebron to enforce the draft orders . Local peasants from the nearby village of Sa 'ir and Bedouin fighters from the Bethlehem @-@ based Ta 'amirah tribe joined forces and killed some 25 soldiers during the fighting , defeating Ibrahim Pasha 's forces in the area . Prior to this clash , peasants and local Bedouin took up arms against the Egyptian army in al @-@ Salt , the Transjordanian center of the Nablus @-@ based Tuqan family . Following these confrontations , the Egyptian Army 's Nineteenth Regiment under Mustafa Bey came under rebel assault in the Jezreel Valley en route to the Galilee . About three @-@ quarters of the regiment 's roughly 1 @,@ 200 soldiers were killed or captured , and Mustafa Bey was wounded . With 300 of his soldiers , the latter escaped to Haifa and traveled across its bay to Acre , whose walls were surrounded by rebel forces . 
 = = = Rebel capture of Jerusalem = = = 
 While there are no known records of military planning , in early May the notables of Nablus , Jerusalem and Hebron coordinated an assault against Jerusalem . On 8 May armed peasants from Nablus , Jerusalem , Hebron and Gaza besieged the city and about 10 @,@ 000 fighters attempted to storm the walls . They were initially repulsed by the Egyptian garrison . An earthquake occurred in the city on 13 May and fighting ceased for several days . 
 On 19 May , some residents of Jerusalem 's <unk> neighborhood informed rebel leaders that they could use a sewer tunnel that ran from the Dung Gate to a mill in the Jewish Quarter , to clandestinely enter Jerusalem . The next day , 36 rebels ( peasants and <unk> ) under the leadership of Sheikh Subh <unk> , chief of the Bethlehem @-@ area <unk> tribe , entered the city via the tunnel and then opened the Dung Gate to allow thousands of rebels inside the walled city . The Egyptian commander of the city , Rashad Bey , subsequently withdrew his garrison into Jerusalem 's citadel to take up positions against the incoming rebels . 
 The rebels , who were joined by some of the city 's poorer Muslim residents , began to loot the homes of Egyptian officers . In response , some 500 Egyptian troops left the citadel to pursue the rebels , but began to loot homes in the city as well in revenge before Rashad Bey ordered them to cease . Fifty rebels , sixteen residents and five soldiers were killed in the confrontations of 20 May . On 21 May , the rebels attacked the city again and after a brief counterattack , Rashad Bey and his men returned to the citadel . Afterward , residents sympathetic to the revolt opened the Damascus Gate and 2 @,@ 000 peasant irregulars from Nablus entered the city to reinforce the rebels , whose numbers in Jerusalem then reached some 20 @,@ 000 . On that same day , but prior to the rebels ' entry , Rashad Bey 's troops had arrested Jerusalem 's leading notables , including the mufti ( leading Islamic scholar ) Tahir Effendi al @-@ Husayni , the leading <unk> ( locally honored descendants of the prophet Muhammad ) Umar Effendi al @-@ Husayni and Muhammad al @-@ Khalidi , and others . When the reinforcements from Nablus arrived , Egyptian troops withdrew further into the citadel , and Jerusalem was all but captured . 
 The rebels besieged and fired at the citadel and a wave of mass looting followed for the next three days . Virtually every Muslim , Jewish and Christian @-@ owned shop was raided and damaged . Because the Muslim shops were the last to be plundered , their owners were able to salvage most of their valuable merchandise . A Greek monk named Spyridon who resided in the city wrote that once the homes of Egyptian officers were looted , the rebels " began to loot the shops of the Jews , the Christians , the Franks , and then the Muslims . The grocers , the shoemakers and every other dealer suffered alike . Within two or three days there was not one shop intact in the market " . Protests by some citizens against the looting went unheeded as they were outnumbered by rebels . After the market areas were plundered , rebels began to loot the homes of Christians , which had been abandoned during the chaos , despite strict orders by rebel leaders and local sheikhs not to . The latter warned that such actions would provoke the protestations of Ottoman Sultan Mahmud II , who was at war with Muhammad Ali . On 23 May , all state @-@ owned supply warehouses and granaries were looted . 
 = = = Battles in Jerusalem and its environs = = = 
 On 24 May Ibrahim Pasha departed from Jaffa with 9 @,@ 000 soldiers and began his march toward recapturing Jerusalem . The next day , thousands of rebels left the city to harry Ibrahim Pasha 's forces on their route . A trip that would have normally taken five hours lasted two days as rebels attacked Egyptian troops , inflicting some 1 @,@ 500 casualties , including at least 500 fatalities . When Ibrahim Pasha reached Jerusalem , he did not enter the city immediately and instead stationed his forces at his headquarters in Mount Zion , which overlooked Jerusalem . On 28 May , he offered an amnesty to any rebel who surrendered , but none did . With 3 @,@ 000 soldiers he personally commanded a pursuit of rebels inside the city , resulting in the deaths of about 300 rebels and the capture of some 500 . Most were promptly released , but seventeen were jailed . 
 On 30 May Ibrahim Pasha re @-@ entered Jerusalem and the next day Egyptian troops attacked Beit Jala , a nearby Christian village . A reported 33 men and women were killed there because of their alleged involvement in the looting of Egyptian property . The purported revenge killings were halted by Ibrahim Pasha , but the residents ' livestock was seized . The next day , over 1 @,@ 000 rebels from the Ta 'amirah tribe entered the adjacent town of Bethlehem to protect their families and the Christian inhabitants from potentially experiencing the same fate as Beit Jala . They refrained from directly confronting Ibrahim Pasha , however . Bethlehem 's Muslim Quarter was destroyed by the Egyptian army and its inhabitants disarmed . This move was apparently a punishment for the killing of a favored loyalist of Ibrahim Pasha . Reverend William McClure Thomson wrote " this terrible vengeance failed to quell the turbulent spirit of the people . They are ever distinguished in the great feasts at Jerusalem by their fierce and lawless manners , and if any row occurs they are sure to have a hand in it . " The peasant rebels had frequently requested from the Christians of Bethlehem that they fight alongside them against Ibrahim Pasha 's troops . The Christians refused , citing their religious beliefs and political status , and sheltered in the town 's monasteries for safety . On 3 June , the rebels decided to attack the monasteries and looted the city . On 4 June rebels launched an attack on Ibrahim Pasha and about 4 @,@ 000 of his men at Solomon 's Pools near al @-@ Khader . 
 In Jerusalem meanwhile , Rashad Bey and his garrison ( numbering 1 @,@ 500 men ) were assaulted by rebel forces . Rashad Bey and 800 Egyptian soldiers were killed , while hundreds more were captured by rebels and taken to Hebron . Ibrahim Pasha had since returned to Mount Zion and the rebels attempted to lay siege against him and his troops . 
 = = = Spread of rebellion and truce negotiations = = = 
 By 8 June , Nablus was in full @-@ scale rebellion as were the coastal towns of Ramla , Lydda , Jaffa and Acre . At around the same time , rebels from the area of Atlit besieged Haifa and Galilee @-@ based rebels captured Safad and Tiberias in the eastern Galilee , while Bedouins participating in the revolt attacked the Egyptian garrison at al @-@ Karak in Transjordan . In the latter confrontation , 200 Egyptian soldiers were killed . In the rebel attack on Safad on 15 June , an unknown number of the city 's Jewish inhabitants were killed or raped over a period of 33 days . 
 When the notables of Jerusalem learned that Muhammad Ali was set to arrive in Palestine with reinforcements , they offered to mediate a truce between the Egyptians and the rebel leaders through the mufti Tahir Effendi al @-@ Husayni , who had since been released . The leader of the rebels in the Hebron Hills , Isa al @-@ Amr , informed al @-@ Husayni of three conditions for a truce to be reached : the pardoning of all rebels , the cancellation of conscription orders in return for the payment of 1 @,@ 000 <unk> per male , and the abolition of the new taxation category . The terms were rejected by Ibrahim Pasha , but he continued negotiations with al @-@ Husayni through Husayn Abd al @-@ Hadi , the governor of Sidon . 
 Qasim al @-@ Ahmad , head of the rebels in Jabal Nablus , then requested a pardon from Ibrahim Pasha so that he could negotiate an end to the fighting himself . Ibrahim agreed and with guarantees of safety by al @-@ Husayni and Abd al @-@ Hadi , Qasim met with Ibrahim in late June . The latter admonished Qasim for his betrayal of Muhammad Ali , to which Qasim responded with an apology and an explanation that his hand was forced . By the end of the meeting , the two reconciled and Ibrahim reappointed Qasim as mutassalim of both Nablus and Jerusalem . 
 However , some time after Ibrahim 's summit with Qasim , Muhammad Ali had several prominent Jerusalemite notables , including Tahir Effendi al @-@ Husayni , Umar Effendi al @-@ Husayni , Muhammad Ali al @-@ Husayni , Muhammad Ali al @-@ Khalidi , Sheikh Abdullah <unk> and Muhammad Abul Saud arrested and sentenced to exile in Egypt where they would be incarcerated . Many of the local village headmen in the Jaffa region were executed by Ali for supporting the revolt . Jaffa 's urban notables , who also backed the rebels in their earlier attempt to capture Jaffa 's fortress , escaped a similar fate by fleeing to the island of Cyprus . A number of major notables from other parts of Palestine were rounded up as well , including the religious leaders Sheikh Abdullah al @-@ <unk> of Nazareth and Sheikh Said al @-@ Sa 'di of az @-@ <unk> . Both were exiled to Egypt . Mas 'ud al @-@ Madi , the mutassalim of Jaffa , and his son Isa al @-@ Madi , the mutassalim of Safad , were arrested and executed by beheading for joining the revolt . The Madi family was the most powerful feudal household in the northern coastal region of Palestine at the time of their leaders ' executions . 
 = = = Defeat of the rebels in Jabal Nablus = = = 
 Qasim responded to the arrest of the Jerusalemite notables by cancelling his truce with Muhammad Ali and rallying the rebels of Jabal Nablus . He asserted that the truce negotiations had been a ruse to hold off the rebels until the arrival of reinforcements from Egypt . The rebels ' strategy in Jabal Nablus was to split their forces ( 30 @,@ 000 fighters ) into three divisions and fight Ibrahim Pasha 's troops on three fronts : Ras al @-@ Ayn , the approaches of the Galilee , and Nablus city . On 24 June Bedouin not directly affiliated to Qasim 's irregulars attacked Ibrahim Pasha 's camp in Palestine 's coastal plain . Four days of battle then followed between the rebels and Ibrahim Pasha 's men at Ras al @-@ Ayn , until the fortress in that village was captured by the Egyptians on 28 June . 
 On 30 June Muhammad Ali landed in Jaffa with 15 @,@ 000 troops from Egypt and on 2 July he convened with his son Ibrahim Pasha at Ramla , which was captured along with Lydda by Egyptian commander Salim Pasha who led Ali 's military convoy . In Ramla , the arrested Jerusalemite notables were assembled . Ali ordered the arrest of rebel leaders Qasim , his sons Yusuf and Muhammad , Abdullah Jarrar and Isa al @-@ Barqawi . He dispatched army commander Salim Pasha to Ali then instructed his ally Bashir Shihab II of Mount Lebanon to back Egyptian forces in the Sidon Eyalet . Meanwhile , Sulayman Abd al @-@ Hadi and Ibrahim Abu Ghosh requested the release of Jabr Abu Ghosh from prison . In return for the allegiance of the Abu Ghosh clan , Ali heeded their request , released Jabr and appointed him mutassalim of Jerusalem in place of Muhammad al @-@ Qasim , who had defected to the rebels at the start of the revolt . 
 Jabr immediately commenced an operation to disarm the people of the Jerusalem region , ordering the execution of anyone found with a weapon . Ali personally ordered the decapitations of the <unk> of Ramla and Lydda and of the headmen of rebellious villages near Jaffa . Acre was recaptured by the Egyptians and 2 @,@ 000 of its inhabitants were killed in the process . After receiving personal assurances from Husayn Abd al @-@ Hadi that he would enforce Ibrahim Pasha 's rule in Palestine , Ali departed for Egypt on 6 July . 
 Ibrahim Pasha continued his expedition against the rebels of Jabal Nablus , pursuing them at Zeita . Ninety rebels were slain while the rest fled to Deir al @-@ Ghusun , situated on a hilltop to the east of Zeita . At Deir al @-@ Ghusun , many of the inhabitants and rebels heeded a call by Husayn Abd al @-@ Hadi to flee once the Egyptian troops arrived . In response , Qasim had several of the defectors among his ranks killed . Ibrahim Pasha 's troops stormed the hill and the rebels ( mostly members of the Qasim , Jarrar , Jayyusi and Barqawi clans ) were routed , suffering 300 fatalities . Most of the surviving rebels , including Qasim and his son Yusuf , who were both wounded , fled . Captured rebels of fighting age were sent to Egypt for professional military training , while older rebels had their right hands cut off . 
 Following the rebels ' rout at Deir al @-@ Ghusun on 14 July , Ibrahim Pasha 's troops proceeded to Nablus unhindered , passing through Arraba , the loyalist stronghold of the Abd al @-@ Hadi family , and then through Sanur , the throne village of the Jarrar clan . When they entered Nablus on 15 July , no resistance was put up , and shortly afterward , the rest of Jabal Nablus submitted to Muhammad Ali 's troops . For the most part , due to the loyalty of the Abd al @-@ Hadi 's to Muhammad Ali , and the neutrality of the powerful Nimr clan , the inhabitants of the city of Nablus had not participated in the revolt . From Nablus , Ibrahim Pasha dispatched his troops north to occupy Jenin and Nazareth , before arriving in Jerusalem on 20 July with 30 @,@ 000 new conscripts . 
 = = = Rebel surrender in Galilee = = = 
 When Muhammad Ali was in Palestine , he requested military assistance from Emir Bashir Shihab II of Mount Lebanon , via an emissary , Emir Shihab 's son Amin . In late July , Emir Bashir led his forces toward Galilee , but before advancing further southward , he made a number of proclamations advising that the rebels of Safad surrender . The rebel leadership in Safad agreed to negotiate and sent Sheikh Salih al @-@ <unk> as an emissary to Bashir to arrange a meeting . Bashir invited the leaders of Safad to the village of Bint Jbeil where they agreed to surrender and submit to Egyptian authority . Afterward , Bashir arrived in Safad where he arranged for rebel leaders from nearby areas to surrender as well . 
 = = = Battle of Hebron = = = 
 Qasim and some of his men headed south to the Hebron Hills after their defeat in Jabal Nablus . They confronted Ibrahim Pasha 's troops at Solomon 's Pools , but were defeated after brief clashes . Afterward they fled to the city of Hebron . On 4 August Ibrahim Pasha 's troops besieged the city , leveling its fort by cannon fire . The fort was never restored . They then ransacked the city , and decisively defeated Qasim 's forces . According to historian Roger Heacock , the rebels and the townspeople " fought bravely and desperately , but they suffered severely from artillery fire . " 
 Mass killings and rapes by the Egyptian troops took place in Hebron . About 500 people were killed , and 750 men were taken as conscripts . Another 120 adolescents were taken by Egyptian officers " to do with as they wanted " , according to historian Baruch Kimmerling . According to Jewish historian Joseph Schwarz , most of the Muslim population managed to flee beforehand to the nearby hills . Some of the Jewish community stayed behind , and during the general pillage of the town , twelve of them were killed . The majority however , like most of the Jews of Safad and Tiberias , fled to Jerusalem . 
 = = = Execution of rebel leadership = = = 
 Qasim , his sons Yusuf and Muhammad , and Isa al @-@ Barqawi fled Hebron during the fighting and headed east across the Jordan River . They were sheltered in al @-@ Karak by a Bedouin clan affiliated with the Anizzah tribal confederation . Ibrahim Pasha 's troops pursued them and laid siege on al @-@ Karak for 17 days . After a hole was blasted into the town 's walls in late August , al @-@ Karak was destroyed and the orchards outside the town were uprooted as punitive measures against the residents for hosting Qasim . Fearing further retaliation from Ibrahim Pasha , the Anizzah clan 's chief , <unk> al @-@ Samir , handed over the rebel leaders to the Egyptians . 
 After his capture , Qasim , <unk> al @-@ <unk> , one of Qasim 's lieutenants , and al @-@ Barqawi were publicly executed in Damascus . Qasim 's sons Yusuf and Muhammad were executed in Acre . His two youngest sons Uthman and Ahmad were exiled to Cairo , Egypt . Ibrahim Pasha also had several other rebellious sheikhs ( chiefs ) executed in Damascus , including Isa al @-@ Amr of Dura , Ali Rabbah and Abd al @-@ Jabir Barghouti of Bani Zeid , Yusuf Salama of <unk> , Ismail ibn <unk> of Ras Karkar and Ismail Majali of al @-@ Karak . Several other sheikhs were jailed in Acre . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 The 1834 revolt and the immediate aftermath reduced the male population of Palestine by about one @-@ fifth . This decrease is attributed to the large numbers of peasants who were either deported to Egypt to work in manufacturing , drafted into Egypt 's military , or abandoned their villages and farms to join the Bedouin nomadic populations . Around 10 @,@ 000 peasants were deported to Egypt and the general population was disarmed . The conscription orders were extended beyond the Muslim population to the local Christians . Taxes were also extended from landed property to include livestock as well . As Ibrahim consolidated his hold over Palestine and disarmed the population , banditry by local tribesmen and civil strife was largely eliminated . 
 Abandoned or rebellious villages were destroyed by Ibrahim Pasha 's troops , which prevented their inhabitants from returning . Ibrahim 's army razed 16 villages before taking Nablus . He also forced the heads of the Nablus clans to leave for nearby villages . The absence of the traditional local leadership due to exile or execution left Palestine 's urban population to be financially exploited by both the government and its local opponents . The imprisoned headmen of villages were replaced by their sons , although Ibrahim Pasha demoted them as <unk> ( watchmen ) instead of the higher @-@ ranking title of mukhtar . Qasim 's son Mahmud replaced him and the popularity of his father among the peasantry compelled the rural chiefs of Jabal Nablus to request from the government that Mahmud replace Sulaiman Abd al @-@ Hadi as mutasallim of Nablus . 
 Ottoman rule was subsequently reinstated in 1840 after Acre was recaptured with the critical support of the British Navy , However , the locals who were drafted into Muhammad Ali 's army returned to their hometowns following the reassertion of Ottoman rule . Not long after the end of Egyptian rule , the intermittently recurring civil strife between the Qays and Yaman tribo @-@ political factions resumed in parts of central Palestine . Throughout the 1840s until the 1860s , the Ottomans launched their own modernization reforms , known as the Tanzimat , throughout the empire with varying degrees of success . Coinciding with these efforts , the international powers began a tug @-@ of @-@ war of influence in Palestine as they sought to extend their protection over the country 's religious minorities , a struggle carried out mainly through their consular representatives in Jerusalem . 
 = = Combatants and arms = = 
 = = = Rebels = = = 
 The peasants from the mountainous regions of Palestine and Bedouin ( nomadic ) warriors constituted the bulk of the rebels ' forces . Most adult males among the peasantry owned a rifle ( typically of the matchlock variety , ownership of which normally transferred from generation to generation ) or less frequently , a pistol . The latter were often used in urban environments where they were more effective . A wide array of melee weapons were also utilized , including scimitars ( generally used by Bedouin fighters ) , daggers , javelins , or different types of clubs ( generally used by peasant fighters ) . 
 The most active rebel forces hailed from Jabal Nablus . The principal rebel clans were the <unk> of Beit <unk> , the Jayyusi clan of Kur , the Jarrar clan of Sanur and the Barqawi clan of <unk> . Qasim al @-@ Ahmad led the forces of Jabal Nablus . In the greater Jerusalem region , the main rebel clans were Sam 'an of Ras Karkar , Barghouti of Bani Zeid and , until their defection to Ibrahim Pasha , Abu Ghosh of Qaryat al @-@ Inab . They were often supported by Qasim 's men . The Bedouin Ta 'amirah tribe from the Bethlehem region also played a major role in the fighting around Jerusalem . In the Hebron Hills , the rebels were led by the Amr clan of Dura while further southwest around Gaza , the Bedouin tribes of <unk> and <unk> fought against the Egyptians and their Bedouin allies . In the north , the rebel forces around Acre and Haifa were commanded by the Madi family , while the Hawwara irregulars of Aqil Agha , who had defected from Ibrahim Pasha 's service , and local sheikhs did most of the fighting in the heart of the Galilee , outside of Safad . In Safad itself , fighters were led by a council dominated by the city 's religious leadership . 
 The combat that peasant men had engaged in prior to the revolt was restricted to the vicinity in which they lived . During armed conflicts , they would often fight for a short amount of days before returning to cultivate their lands , which remained their main preoccupation . When their service was needed , they were commanded by a local chief who in turn was subordinate to a regional leader . Most armed conflict revolved around the chiefs ' bids for local influence and control or protection of villages from Bedouin plundering . There were also instances where peasant fighters would be assembled to back Ottoman authority in the face of local or external challengers , such as during the 1799 Napoleonic invasion , or against Ottoman authority when it interfered in the unofficial local autonomy that was enjoyed in the mountain regions . In most of the conflicts in which the peasant fighters participated , they fought alongside their kinsmen or neighbors . 
 = = = Egyptian Army and allies = = = 
 The Egyptian Army in Palestine was divided between infantry and cavalry regiments and consisted of thousands of professional soldiers , known as <unk> . During the revolt , this force was buttressed by over 15 @,@ 000 reinforcements who arrived with Muhammad Ali , bringing the number of Egyptian soldiers in Palestine to well over 20 @,@ 000 . While its army did most of the fighting , Egypt also commissioned or requested the participation of various irregulars . In the southern Gaza region , Egypt dispatched Bedouin from the tribes of <unk> Ali , al @-@ <unk> , al @-@ <unk> , and al @-@ <unk> to pursue rebels and raid their villages . In the northern Galilee region , towards the end of the revolt , the forces of Emir Bashir were mobilized upon Ibrahim Pasha 's request , but their mobilization sufficed in convincing the northern rebels to surrender . Thus , Bashir 's Lebanon @-@ based forces saw no combat . Local peasant fighters under Husayn Abd al @-@ Hadi also fought alongside the Egyptian army , particularly during the final battles for Jabal Nablus . 
 In contrast with the peasants ' arsenals , Egypt 's military possessed modern arms and artillery . The use of cannons on open battlefields in particular inflicted heavy losses on the rebels . Egypt 's army also possessed considerable organization in contrast to the lack of military coordination between rebel forces in different regions . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The revolt in Palestine was markedly different from the revolts that sprung up elsewhere in the Egyptian @-@ ruled Levant , such as the 1838 Druze revolt and those that occurred in the <unk> Mountains and Mount Lebanon . Unlike the other Levantine revolts , the participants were not an <unk> or socially homogeneous group , but rather an assortment of societal groups from different classes , subcultures , geographical areas and religions . This also significantly distinguished it from previous popular uprisings against Ottoman rule that had occurred in Jerusalem and its vicinity , namely the <unk> al @-@ Ashraf Revolt in 1703 – 1705 and the revolt of 1825 – 1826 , which failed to attract support from the people of Nablus , Hebron , Galilee and Gaza . 
 " Palestine " was a term that was used infrequently by its inhabitants at the time of the revolt , and its inhabitants identified themselves as Ottomans or by their religion . However , a " proto @-@ national sense " of Palestine ( Filastin ) had developed among the people of the Gaza , Jerusalem , Nablus , Lajjun and Safad districts ( administratively part of either the Sidon or Damascus Eyalet ) by at least the 17th century , according to historian Khaled M. Safi . The 17th century Ramla @-@ based intellectual , Khayr al @-@ Din al @-@ Ramli , used the term often in his <unk> ( religious edicts ) without specifying its boundaries , suggesting that the population of Palestine was aware of its geographic definition . Historians Baruch Kimmerling and Joel S. Migdal argue that the revolt was a formative event for the Palestinian sense of nationhood , in that it brought together disparate groups against a common enemy . These groups reemerged later to constitute the Palestinian people . Israeli scholar Shimon Shamir views the Egyptian period in Palestine as the " first application of the concept of the territorial state ... This was the inception of the modern history of Palestine . " 
 The revolt represented a moment of political unity in Palestine . However , the ultimate intention of the notables and rebel leaders was to force out the Egyptian army and reinstate Ottoman rule as a means of restoring the Ottoman @-@ era standards that defined the relationship between the government and the governed . These standards were made up of the religious laws , administrative codes and local norms and traditions that were disrupted by Egyptian reforms . The people of Palestine did not resist Ibrahim Pasha 's conquest of Palestine in 1831 as they were decreed to by the Sublime Porte and only acted against his authority three years later when he decisively interfered in their local affairs by way of conscription and further taxation . This constituted the prime motivation for the revolt , rather than loyalty to the Ottomans . The latter did not provide more benefits to the population than offered by Muhammad Ali 's rule , but unlike Ali , they largely left the peasants and the local elite to their own devices , not demanding much more than the traditional taxes and nominal acceptance of the sultanate 's authority . 
 = = = Palestinian historiography = = = 
 In general , 20th @-@ century historians from Palestine and the Arab world , and Palestinian and Arab nationalists , communists and leftists of all stripes , held a negative view of the Ottoman era , which they associated with backwardness , corruption and tyranny . According to historian Adel Manna , this uniformly negative perception of the Ottomans and the high regard for Muhammad Ali as a modernizer and a liberator of Arab lands from the Ottomans , which he sought to unite under his rule , influenced the later historiography of the 1834 revolt . Another factor that influenced the historians of the 20th century was the limited availability of primary sources from Palestine at the time of the revolt . Most primary Arabic accounts of the events were kept by Egypt 's bureaucracy at the time . Other accounts were from European travelers or consuls in the area , while there were no known written 19th @-@ century accounts by people living in Palestine 's towns and villages . 
 By the 20th century , the revolt was also largely absent in the Palestinian collective memory . According to Kimmerling , " the humiliating and traumatic events of 1834 were conveniently erased from the collective memory " . During the decades that followed the revolt , the elite classes in Palestine still wanted to maintain healthy relations with the Khedivate in Egypt and the urban population were not keen to glorify a revolt largely led by peasants . This differed from the attitude of the peasantry who continued to hold the revolt 's leader , Qasim al @-@ Ahmad , in high regard during the aftermath of the revolt . In the 20th century , the passing along of any oral testimonies from that time period were not sought after and recorded due to the prevailing nationalist atmosphere which largely focused on the anti @-@ Zionist and anti @-@ imperialist struggle in Palestine . Most contemporary Arab sources relied on Asad <unk> 's detailed 1938 study , The Royal Archives of Egypt and the Disturbances in Palestine , 1834 , which <unk> admittedly states was more or less based on the Egyptian perspective of the revolt . 
 Due to the aforementioned factors , the revolt was often considered to either be a manipulation of the commoners by a reactionary elite against modernization , a successful Ottoman bid to hamper Egypt 's efforts to liberate and unify its Arab lands , or was sidelined . The concept that the revolt 's diverse participants were acting based on their own interests and actual grievances rather than manipulation was largely ignored in Palestinian historiography until recent decades . 
 = Bravo November = 
 Bravo November is the original identification code painted on a British Royal Air Force Boeing Chinook HC4 military serial number ZA718 . It was one of the original 30 aircraft ordered by the RAF in 1978 and has been in service ever since . It has been upgraded several times in its history , now being designated as an HC4 airframe . It has seen action in every major operation involving the RAF in the helicopter 's 30 @-@ year service life . Since 1982 it has served in the Falkland Islands , Lebanon , Germany , Northern Ireland , Kurdistan , Iraq and Afghanistan . The aircraft has seen four of its pilots awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for actions whilst in command of Bravo November . 
 It first came to the attention of the general public for its survival of the Falklands Campaign . In April 1982 Bravo November was loaded , along with three other Chinooks , aboard the container ship MV Atlantic Conveyor bound for the Falkland Islands on Operation Corporate . Atlantic Conveyor was hit by an Exocet missile destroying the vessel along with its cargo . Bravo November was on an airborne task at the time and managed to land on HMS Hermes , gaining the nickname " The Survivor " . It was the only serviceable heavy lift helicopter available to British forces involved in the hostilities . The first of its four Distinguished Flying Crosses came for actions in the Falklands . Ever since , the name Bravo November became associated with this aircraft that has become " most famous " in the popular imagination . The aircraft is the subject of an exhibit at the RAF Museum . 
 = = Construction and callsign = = 
 Thirty Chinooks were ordered by the British Government in 1978 at a price of US $ 200 million . These helicopters were to become British variants of the United States Army 's Boeing CH @-@ 47 Chinook . ZA718 was one of the final <unk> the RAF received in February 1982 . The US army introduced an upgraded Chinook , the CH @-@ 47D in the 1980s with improvements including upgraded engines , composite rotor blades , a redesigned cockpit to reduce pilot workload , redundant and improved electrical systems , an advanced flight control system ( FCS ) and improved avionics . The RAF designation for this new standard of aircraft was the Chinook HC2 with ZA718 becoming the first RAF airframe to be converted in 1993 – 94 . Bravo November has been refitted and upgraded numerous times during its service in the British Armed Forces . There are few parts of the original aircraft that survive today though the " main fuselage , the manufacturer 's data plate in the cockpit and the RAF ’ s serial number ZA718 clearly emblazoned on the rear of the aircraft remain ever present . " 
 The aircraft has had a number of callsigns and designations throughout its career . It had the Boeing construction number of B @-@ 849 with the RAF airframe number of ZA718 which is still visible at the rear of the aircraft . The squadron code number of the aircraft has varied with the squadron in which it serves . The most famous code was Bravo November ( BN ) which it had during the Falklands War and has been associated with it ever since . 
 = = Career = = 
 Bravo November has had a distinguished career within the Royal Air Force serving in every conflict of the last 30 years and has seen four of its pilots awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for actions whilst at the controls of the aircraft . 
 = = = Falklands War = = = 
 In April 1982 Bravo November was loaded , along with three other Chinooks , aboard the container ship MV Atlantic Conveyor bound for the Falkland Islands . The Chinooks along with other helicopters and all the second @-@ line repair and maintenance support equipment and stores , were sent to the Falkland Islands to spearhead the British landings there . Prior to departing the UK , the 4 Chinooks had all rotor blades removed and placed inside them and the aircraft where then placed inside " banana bags " , <unk> jackets to protect them . Whilst en route to the Falklands the Chinooks were having their rotor blades refitted by the small party of 9 technicians of 18 Sqn RAF on board , the 1st time such a feat had been attempted at sea . On 25 May 1982 the second of two of the Chinooks had just undergone this refitting process when the Atlantic Conveyor was attacked and sunk by an Argentine Navy Dassault Super Étendard that had fired an Exocet sea @-@ skimming missile . One of these Chinooks , Bravo November , was airborne on a task at the time , picking up freight from HMS Glasgow . It thus avoided the ship 's destruction and later landed on the aircraft carrier HMS Hermes , gaining the nickname " The Survivor " . Owing to the rapid spread of fire and smoke aboard the Atlantic Conveyor after the Exocet strike , it was not possible to fly any of the helicopters that remained on the ship 's deck . 
 The strike on the Atlantic Conveyor had now rendered British forces with only one serviceable heavy lift helicopter , and there were no spares , service manuals , lubricants or tools for it . Even so , it was able to carry some 1 @,@ 500 troops , 95 casualties , 650 POWs and 550 tons of cargo . The first Distinguished Flying Cross was awarded for actions in the Falklands War . ZA718 was on a night mission when pilot Squadron Leader Dick Langworthy and his co @-@ pilot Flight Lieutenant Andy Lawless , descended after losing visibility in a thick snow shower , hitting the sea at around 100 knots ( 175 km / h ) due to a faulty altimeter . The impact threw up spray that flooded the engine intakes but Langworthy and his co @-@ pilot managed to get the helicopter back in the air . The fuselage was damaged , an antenna had been lost and the co @-@ pilot 's door had been removed . While the co @-@ pilot door was missing , the crew of Bravo November were unable to navigate or communicate with other forces . Bravo November returned to San Carlos for damage inspection . The impact had caused " little more than dents to the fuselage and damage to the radio systems . " Sqn Ldr Langworthy was awarded a DFC for his bravery at the controls of ZA718 during the campaign . 
 = = = Iraq War = = = 
 Twenty years after the Falklands conflict Bravo November saw service in Iraq , being the first British helicopter to land Royal Marines ashore . After departing from HMS Ark Royal , Bravo November landed the first Royal Marines on to the Al @-@ Faw peninsula to seize oil @-@ pumping facilities before Iraqi troops could destroy them . The second DFC for actions at the controls of Bravo November was awarded to Squadron Leader Steve Carr for his role in an operation in Iraq . Bravo November was tasked with delivering the Marines to the landing sites marked by US special forces before returning for more troops , guns and freight . The aircraft was being flown at an altitude of less than 100 ft with restricted visibility due to dust clouds thrown up by American armoured forces . 
 = = = Afghanistan conflict = = = 
 In June 2006 , whilst serving in the Afghanistan conflict , Flight Lieutenant Craig Wilson , Captain of ZA718 / BN from 1310 Flt in Helmand Province , received the third Distinguished Flying Cross for ' exceptional courage and outstanding airmanship ' while operating in Helmand Province . During the night of 11 June 2006 , Flt Lt Craig Wilson was tasked with picking up a casualty . The mission was successful despite the difficult and dangerous conditions that led Wilson to fly the aircraft at the low altitude of 150 ft . A few hours after this incident , the helicopter was called out again on operations , with Wilson landing the helicopter despite being low on fuel . After being on duty for over 22 hours , Wilson volunteered to take reinforcements to the front line , returning with two wounded soldiers . For his actions over the 24 ‑ hour period Flt Lt Wilson was awarded the DFC . 
 In 2010 , Bravo November was involved in another incident while on service in Afghanistan when pilot Flight Lieutenant Ian Fortune was hit by a ricochet from a bullet fired by Taliban fighters during an extraction of injured soldiers . Flt Lt Fortune landed the helicopter in a " hot zone " that was under heavy Taliban fire . After landing the aircraft was hit numerous times . One round ricocheted and hit Fortune 's helmet at the attaching point for the Night Vision Goggles ( NVG 's ) and smashed the visor . He stayed in control of the aircraft and continued to rescue his wounded colleagues and land his damaged helicopter . For his actions he was awarded the fourth Distinguished Flying Cross in the history of the aircraft . 
 Chinook ZA718 " Bravo November " continues to serve on active duty . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 At the RAF Museum in London there is a forward fuselage of a former United States Army Chinook painted to represent " Bravo November - the RAF 's Most Famous Chinook " . The exhibit was opened by retired Air Chief Marshal Sir Richard Johns on the 25th anniversary of the Falklands war . He said that " Bravo November is a hugely significant aeroplane to the RAF ... The RAF almost never singles out individual aircraft for tribute . But Bravo November is exceptional . " 
 The museum 's fine art collection also houses a painting by Joe <unk> , depicting two of the <unk> completed by ' Bravo November ' . The painting was presented to the Royal Air Force Museum by Sir Michael Jenkins , president of Boeing UK , on 9 December 2004 . 
 = Banksia cuneata = 
 Banksia cuneata , commonly known as Matchstick Banksia or Quairading Banksia , is an endangered species of flowering plant in the Proteaceae family . Endemic to southwest Western Australia , it belongs to Banksia subg . Isostylis , a sub @-@ genus of three closely related Banksia species with inflorescences or flower clusters that are dome @-@ shaped heads rather than characteristic Banksia flower spikes . A shrub or small tree up to 5 m ( 16 ft ) high , it has prickly foliage and pink and cream flowers . The common name Matchstick Banksia arises from the blooms in late bud , the individual buds of which resemble matchsticks . The species is pollinated by honeyeaters ( Meliphagidae ) . 
 Although B. cuneata was first collected before 1880 , it was not until 1981 that Australian botanist Alex George formally described and named the species . There are two genetically distinct population groups , but no recognised varieties . This Banksia is classified as endangered , surviving in fragments of remnant bushland in a region which has been 93 % cleared for agriculture . As Banksia cuneata is killed by fire and regenerates from seed , it is highly sensitive to bushfire frequency — fires recurring within four years could wipe out populations of plants not yet mature enough to set seed . Banksia cuneata is rarely cultivated , and its prickly foliage limits its utility in the cut flower industry . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banksia cuneata grows as a shrub or small tree up to 5 m ( 16 ft ) high , without a lignotuber . It has one or more main trunks with smooth grey bark , and many branches . Young stems are covered in coarse hairs , but these are lost as the stems age . The leaves are wedge @-@ shaped with serrated edges , having from one to five teeth along each side . They range from 1 to 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 5 in ) long and 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 20 to 0 @.@ 59 in ) wide , on a petiole of 2 to 3 mm . The upper surface is dull green ; as with the stems , both leaf surfaces are covered in coarse hairs when young , but these are soon lost . 
 Flowers occur in dome @-@ shaped heads from three to four cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) in diameter , growing at the ends of branches . They comprise 55 to 65 individual flowers , enclosed at the base by a whorl of short involucral bracts . As with most other Proteaceae , each flower consists of a perianth comprising four united tepals , and a single pistil , the style of which is initially enclosed within the limb of the perianth , but breaks free at anthesis . In B. cuneata , the perianth is about 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) long , with a limb of about 0 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 16 in ) . Prior to anthesis , the long thin perianth topped by a prominent limb resembles a matchstick , which explains one common name for this species . At first , the perianth is mostly cream , being pink only near its base ; it later becomes pink throughout . The style is initially cream , but turns red ; the pollen presenter is green . 
 Old flowers soon fall from the flower heads ( often called cones at this stage ) , revealing a woody base which may have up to five follicles embedded in it . These are a mottled grey colour , smooth , felted with short fine hairs , and measure from 1 to 1 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 to 0 @.@ 51 in ) high , 1 @.@ 7 to 2 @.@ 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 67 to 0 @.@ 83 in ) along the seam , and 0 @.@ 9 to 1 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 35 to 0 @.@ 47 in ) across the seam . Each follicle contains up to two seeds ; these are roughly triangular in shape , with a large papery wing . 
 Banksia cuneata is most easily distinguished from the other two species in B. subg . Isostylis by its brighter flowers and duller leaves . It further differs from B. ilicifolia in its smaller habit ; its smooth bark ; its smaller leaves , flowers and fruit ; and in its sequence of flower colour changes . The leaves , flowers and fruit of B. oligantha are smaller still , and its foliage is not as prickly as that of B. cuneata . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 = = = Discovery and naming = = = 
 The earliest known specimen collection of B. cuneata was made by Julia Wells some time before 1880 . What would later become the type specimen for the species was collected by Western Australian botanist and Banksia expert Alex George on 20 November 1971 , from <unk> Nature Reserve , about 8 km ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) east of Quairading , at 31 ° 59 ′ S 117 ° 30 ′ E. The species was finally published by George nearly a decade later , in his 1981 monograph " The genus Banksia L.f. ( Proteaceae ) " . The specific epithet is from the Latin cuneatus ( " wedge @-@ shaped " ) , in reference to the shape of the leaves . 
 The species has an uneventful nomenclatural history : it has no synonyms , and no subspecies or varieties have been published . It bears the common names of Matchstick Banksia or Quairading Banksia . 
 = = = Infrageneric placement = = = 
 George placed B. cuneata in subgenus Isostylis because of its dome @-@ shaped flower heads . A 1996 cladistic analysis of the genus by botanists Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges yielded no information about the circumscription of B. subg . Isostylis , nor of the relationships within it , so George 's placement of this species was retained in their arrangement . That arrangement was not accepted by George , and was largely discarded by him in his 1999 arrangement . The placement of B. cuneata there was unaffected , and can be summarised as follows : 
 Banksia 
 B. subg . Banksia ( 3 sections , 11 series , 73 species , 11 subspecies , 14 varieties ) 
 B. subg . Isostylis 
 B. ilicifolia 
 B. oligantha 
 B. cuneata 
 Since 1998 , American botanist Austin Mast and co @-@ authors have been publishing results of ongoing cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for the subtribe Banksiinae , which then comprised genera Banksia and Dryandra . Their analyses suggest a phylogeny that differs greatly from George 's taxonomic arrangement . Banksia cuneata resolves as the next closest relative , or " sister " , to a clade containing B. ilicifolia and B. oligantha , suggesting a monophyletic B. subg . Isostylis ; but the clade appears fairly derived ( that it , it evolved relatively recently ) , suggesting that B. subg . Isostylis may not merit subgeneric rank . 
 Early in 2007 , Mast and Thiele rearranged the genus Banksia by merging Dryandra into it , and published B. subg . Spathulatae for the taxa having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons ; thus B. subg . Banksia was redefined as encompassing taxa lacking spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. cuneata is placed in B. subg . Banksia . 
 = = = Phylogeny = = = 
 Relationships between B. cuneata and the other members of B. subg . Isostylis still remain unclear . Though Mast 's studies found B. cuneata to be the most basal of the three species , a 2004 study of genetic divergence within the subgenus yielded both other possibilities : some analyses suggested B. ilicifolia as basal , while others suggested B. oligantha . Further complicating the situation is the southernmost population of B. cuneata , which has both genetic and phenetic affinities with B. oligantha located to the southeast . The origin of this population is unknown . It might have arisen through hybridisation , or it may be a transitional or even ancestral form . Finally , biogeographical factors suggest that B. ilicifolia would be the most basal of the three species : it occurs in the High Rainfall Zone where relictual species are most common , whereas the others are restricted to the Transitional Rainfall Zone , where more recently evolved species are most common . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 An endangered species , B. cuneata occurs only over a 90 km ( 56 mi ) range around <unk> and Quairading , in Western Australia . It favours deep yellow sand at elevations between 230 and 300 m ( 750 and 980 ft ) , in woodland habitat . It often grows in association with Banksia prionotes and <unk> angustifolium . 
 Reports on the number of populations and individuals vary widely . A survey in 1982 reported 450 plants in five populations , with the largest population comprising 300 plants . In 1988 , however , only four populations comprising 300 plants were found ; surprisingly , only fifty plants could be found in the location where a population of 300 had previously been reported ; yet there were no dead plants , and no evidence of disturbance . Since then the number of populations reported have ranged from 6 to 11 , and reports of the total number of plants have ranged from 340 to 580 . 
 = = Life cycle and ecology = = 
 Pollinated primarily by honeyeaters , the inflorescences appear from September to December . Prominent flowers , a red or pink colour , a straight style and a tubular perianth are features thought to promote pollination by birds . The structure of B. cuneata 's flower , with the style end functioning as a pollen presenter , suggests that autogamous self @-@ fertilisation must be common . This is countered , however , by protandry : pollen is released well before the pistil becomes receptive ; usually by the time the pistil becomes receptive most of the pollen has either been transferred , or has lost its viability . This strategy is effective against individual flowers fertilising themselves , but does nothing to prevent <unk> : fertilisation of flowers by different flowers on the same plant . Because of the way flowers are clustered together in heads , this must be quite common , although whether it results in successful fruit set is another matter : isozyme studies have observed " intense selection against homozygotes " , a fairly common <unk> strategy in plants that set lots of seed . 
 Assessments of the mating system of this species have found that outcrossing rates vary between populations . Populations in relatively intact bushland have high outcrossing rates , but those in more disturbed environments are both more inbred on average , and more variable . This has been attributed to a range of causes . Firstly , the higher density of disturbed populations leads to greater rates of mating between neighbouring plants , resulting in more genetic structure and thus more effective selfing . Secondly , disturbed populations usually lack an understorey , and so cannot support a resident population of honeyeaters ; instead , they rely upon occasional visitors for pollination . The greatly reduced pollination rates means fewer outcrossing fertilisations on average , leading to less selection against inbred fertilisations ; and the sporadic presence of pollinators leads to outcrossing variability . 
 No seed is set when pollinators are excluded , indicating that seed set must be pollinator @-@ limited . About 96 % of fertilized follicles mature , and about 82 % of seeds mature . These are very high numbers for Banksia , indicating that there are no problems with nutrient supply . This species produces an unusually high number of old flowerheads , or cones , per plant — typically more than 500 . However , there are an unusually low number of follicles per cone — often only one . Thus the number of follicles per plant ends up roughly average for a Banksia species . 
 Banksia cuneata lacks a lignotuber , so plants are killed by bushfire . However , this species is strongly serotinous : seed is released only following a fire . Thus plants accumulate an aerial seed bank in fire intervals , which is released all at once after a fire , ensuring population regeneration . The mechanism is a resin that seals the follicles shut , preventing dehiscence ; the heat of a bushfire melts the resin , and the follicles open . Intense fires cause the immediate release of the seed and seed separator , but after cooler fires the seed separator often remains in place , blocking the follicle exit and preventing seed release . The wings on the seed separator are hygroscopic ; they draw together when moistened , then reflex out again as they dry . Thus they lever themselves , and the seeds , out of the follicle over the course of one or more wet @-@ dry cycles , ensuring that seed is released only after rain has fallen . The juvenile period for B. cuneata is around four years . Populations are very vulnerable to fire during this period , as fire will wipe out the entire population and there will be no seed from which it might recover . A model @-@ based investigation found that the optimal fire interval for maximising population size over the medium term is around 15 years . More frequent fires reduce population size by killing adults before they have reached their full fecundity . Less frequent fires reduce population size because there are fewer opportunities for seed dispersal and germination . However , the optimal fire interval for minimising the risk of extinct in the long term is probably much longer . 
 B. cuneata is very unusual in apparently suffering no seed loss due to <unk> . In nearly all other species , burrowing insect larvae eat a large proportion of seeds , and birds cause further losses in breaking open cones in search of larvae to eat . The seed @-@ eating insects are mostly species @-@ specific , and it appears that no insect species has adapted to B. cuneata . Possible reasons for this are the very low seed counts , and the rarity of the species , both of which offer little incentive for adaptation to the species . There is also no evidence of <unk> feeding on seed after it has fallen . As a result , this species has the highest rate of seed viability recorded for a Banksia species : in one study , 74 % of all seed produced in the previous 12 years was viable . This was largely accounted for by seed under 9 years old , about 90 % of which is viable . After the ninth year , viability is lost rapidly as the follicles decay and senescence sets in . Seed production itself starts very slowly . On average , plants aged between 5 and 12 years have about 18 seeds stored in their canopy . Storage increases exponentially , however , and 25 @-@ year @-@ old plants often have tens of thousands of seeds . Seed production probably never plateaus . In fact , by the time a plant is twenty years old it has accumulated such a great weight of cones that major branches begin to break away ; and by the age of thirty , plants have broken branches more often than not . As plants age , branch breakage increasingly leads to plant death , and it is unlikely that any plants live to more than 45 years . 
 The high seed maturation and viability rates are offset , however , by an extremely low seedling survival rate . This is almost solely due to moisture stress . In one study , an estimated 17 @,@ 100 viable seeds were released following an experimental fire . Fewer than 5 % of them germinated , and only eleven plants survived the first summer drought . The last plants to die were in depressions , in shaded areas or amongst leaf litter ; and the eleven survivors were all on road shoulders , where they benefited from road runoff and a 3 cm ( 1 in ) thick mulch of <unk> laterite . The inevitable conclusion is that seedling survival is primarily determined by water availability . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Banksia cuneata was declared critically endangered after a 1982 survey found only five populations comprising about 450 plants . The largest population , consisting of around 300 plants , was on a conservation reserve , but all others were on road verges , and contained only 50 – 70 plants each . However , since then more plants have been located , and populations have been found to be gradually increasing in response to a number of conservation measures including fencing and baiting of rabbits . In recognition of its slight recovery , it is now considered endangered but no longer critically so . 
 In April 1987 , Western Australia 's Department of Environment and Conservation burnt part of one population in an experimental regeneration fire . The mature plants were killed , and the seedlings that volunteered did not survive the summer drought . A Matchstick Banksia Recovery Team was established in 1995 , and over time they succeeded in establishing a large number of seedlings . A large adult population was destroyed by bushfire in 1996 , causing further concern , but this was followed by the recruitment of large numbers of seedlings . 
 Threats to B. cuneata include land clearing , which leads to direct plant loss and population fragmentation , grazing pressure , competition from exotic weeds , changes to the fire regime , and encroaching salinity . The Banksia Atlas survey found one population to be on the side of a road ; the plants were aging with no new seedlings noted , and the site was weed @-@ infested . A large part of the surviving populations are on private land , and depend on good relationships with local landowners . Many have obliged by fencing off areas and restricting entry of rabbits . There has been some attempt by CALM to translocate populations away from hazardous areas ; these have met with some success , helped with watering in the first year . 
 = = = Land clearing = = = 
 Even before the extensive clearing of the Wheatbelt in the 1930s , B. cuneata must have had a highly fragmented distribution , since the deep yellow sand favoured by the species occurs only in patches , and makes up only 10 to 15 % of the area . Around 93 % of the land has now been cleared of native vegetation , with the remaining 7 % occurring in remnants of various sizes . Thus land clearing must have further fragmented an already fragmented population , as well as greatly reduced the number of individual plants . 
 = = = Protection of genetic diversity = = = 
 Levels of genetic diversity within individual populations of B. cuneata are unusually high for a rare and endangered species , but the populations fall into two genetically distinct groups . These are separated not by geographical distance but by the Salt River , an ephemeral saline river system that provides a habitat unsuitable for both B. cuneata and the birds that pollinate it . It thus functions as a barrier to the exchange of genetic material , allowing populations on different sides of the river to diverge through genetic drift . The implication for conservation is that effort should be invested on both sides of the river in order to conserve as much genetic diversity as possible . It was suggested that one large population from each population group would probably be adequate . More recently , however , a model @-@ based risk analysis found that the population size required to reduce extinction risk to acceptable levels is more than ten times the current population size . This leads to the conclusion that all populations , and all available habitat , should be protected . 
 = = = Disease = = = 
 Phytophthora cinnamomi dieback has not been identified as a threat to this species , but testing has found it to be highly susceptible ; in one study it exhibited the highest susceptibility of 49 Banksia species studied , with 80 % of plants dead within 96 days of inoculation with the disease , and 100 % dead within a year . 
 = = = Climate change = = = 
 The survival of this species is tied closely to rainfall because of the susceptibility of seedlings to drought . It is thus especially vulnerable to the effects of climate change . This was recognised as early as 1992 , when it was noted that winter rainfall in the Quairading region had been falling by about 4 % per decade , and that a continuation of this trend may reduce the species ' distribution . Recently , a more thorough assessment of the potential impact of climate change on this species found that severe change is likely to lead to extinction , and mild change to a reduction of its range by 80 % by 2080 . However , there may not be any range reduction at all under mid @-@ severity climate change , depending on how effectively this species can migrate into newly habitable areas . 
 = = Uses and cultural references = = 
 Propagation is by seed , although these are hard to obtain . Seeds do not require any treatment before sowing , and take around 23 days to germinate . Cuttings yield unpredictable results . The plant itself prefers a deep , sandy , well @-@ drained soil with a pH of 6 @.@ 0 – 7 @.@ 0 . It requires full sun , but some protection from the wind is recommended , as this is a fast @-@ growing plant with spindly branches that are easily damaged by wind . A more compact form can be obtained by pruning the top quarter each year . This species has little appeal to the cut flower industry because of its prickly foliage , and its tendency to drip nectar . 
 Ironically , given its conservation status , Kingsley Dixon of Kings Park and Botanic Garden suggested that it may have weed potential : the species was trialled as a cut flower crop on land north of Moore River , and seedlings were noted afterwards . 
 Banksia cuneata has been adopted as the floral emblem of the Shire of Quairading , and has been incorporated into the shire logo . There is a park named <unk> Park in the town of Quairading . 
 = Inchdrewer Castle = 
 Inchdrewer Castle is a 16th @-@ century tower house in the parish of Banff , Aberdeenshire , in the northeast of Scotland . Situated on a slight rise 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) southwest of Banff , it looks across to Banff Bay . Originally owned by the Currour family , it was purchased by the Ogilvies of Dunlugas in 1557 and became their main family seat . The Ogilvies were staunch Royalists , which resulted in the castle coming under attack from the Covenanters in 1640 . George Ogilvy , 3rd Lord Banff was murdered in 1713 and his body hidden inside the castle , which was then set on fire . The castle came under siege again in 1746 , during the Jacobite rebellion . At the start of the 19th century , following the death of the 8th Lord Banff , the property was inherited by the Abercromby of Birkenbog family , who leased it to a tenant . It became uninhabited after 1836 and the structure deteriorated . 
 Over the following century the neglect continued until some basic external renovation work was undertaken between 1965 and 1971 , making the structure wind and water tight , although it remained unoccupied . The castle was again abandoned and left unmaintained . The condition of the building further declined , becoming derelict . It was in a ruinous state when marketed for sale in April 2013 after the death of Count Robin Mirrlees , who had owned it for about fifty years . At the end of that year it was purchased by the former model Olga Roh , who said she intended to restore it . Modern day reports suggest that the spirit of the 3rd Lord Banff and that of a white dog haunt the castle , which is classified as a category A listed building . 
 = = Early history = = 
 The castle 's exact construction date is unknown , but it was some time in the early to mid 16th century , during the reign of either James IV or James V. Various spellings are used : Inch <unk> ( or <unk> as one word ) ; <unk> ; <unk> ; or <unk> . Originally owned by the <unk> ( Currour ) family , in 1557 it was purchased by Walter Ogilvy of Dunlugas ( 1509 – 58 ) , and became the main family seat . James Currour was a notary in Banff and is linked with several of Dunlugas ' contracts and witnessing leases . 
 During the late 16th century the Dunlugas Ogilvies undertook re @-@ <unk> and extension work , including the addition of courtyard buildings and a distinctive circular tower that incorporated the hall into its first storey . An act recording the lands in favour of George Ogilvy was ratified by King Charles I in late June 1633 . George was the son of Walter Ogilvy , and an ardent Royalist and supporter of the king against the Covenanters . Inchdrewer Castle was left in ruins after being attacked by Covenanter forces led by General Robert Monro in 1640 ; another of the family properties , a town house , was also devastated . George Ogilvy was appointed a peer in 1642 , becoming the first Lord Banff . 
 George Ogilvy , 3rd Lord Banff , inherited the property when his father , the 2nd Lord Banff , died on 10 September 1668 . He was murdered in 1713 and the castle destroyed by fire ; his body had been concealed inside . Restoration work was once more undertaken . 
 The castle came under attack by troops led by the Duke of Cumberland in 1746 in the course of the Jacobite rebellion . Yet more restoration work was carried out during the later part of the century . 
 When William Ogilvy , 8th Lord Banff , died on 4 June 1803 , the estate was inherited by his sister Jean ( sometimes named Jane ) , who had married George Abercromby ( Abercrombie ) of Birkenbog . Her son , Sir Robert Abercromby succeeded her . Sir Robert was appointed member of Parliament for the Banff constituency in 1812 but four years later claimed financial difficulties prevented him seeking re @-@ election . In 1820 he asked George IV to allow the Banff peerage , which had become dormant or extinct when the 8th Lord Banff died , to continue by declaring his mother Baroness Banff , or granting him the title of Lord Banff , but the request was denied . 
 The main residence of the Abercromby 's was at Forglen House , Turriff . The castle was in a sufficient state of repair to be leased to tenants until 1836 . MacGibbon and Ross refer to the castle as being in the ownership of Sir R. J. Abercromby of Birkenbog when writing about it in their architectural book published in 1887 . The ground @-@ floor plan given in the book shows two parts of the building as being " ruinous " . 
 The castle was abandoned at the beginning of the 20th century , and it soon became dilapidated . 
 = = Later history = = 
 The castle was purchased by Count Robin Mirrlees in 1962 or 1963 . Renovation work was possibly undertaken in 1965 by architect Oliver Hill , although his undated drawings may not have been fully implemented . After visiting the property in 1966 , Nigel Tranter , author and historian , reported that work had begun on the structure but described it as a " ruinous shell of a house " . Some structural restoration work was undertaken and the castle was slightly repaired , sufficient to have made it " wind and watertight " by 1971 . But it was then abandoned again , and further deterioration occurred ; it had been uninhabitable since 1836 , and <unk> never lived in it . Internally , only basic work was undertaken . Local residents believed the only time the interior was used during this period was when a ceremony was held to site a plaque commemorating the completion of external work in 1971 . 
 Historic Scotland designated Inchdrewer Castle a category A listed building in February 1972 . The poor condition of the property was highlighted in a report expressing concern by the Scottish Civic Trust in 1999 . Inspections by Aberdeenshire Council officials described it as " showing signs of a lack of maintenance " in February 2008 , with all its windows broken . Further decline was noted in October 2010 , and the castle was said to be " on the cusp of ruination " . Further deterioration was noted when the castle was visited in December 2012 . 
 <unk> died on 23 June 2012 and disinherited his son by leaving the property to his teenage grandson . Together with the title of " Baron of Inchdrewer " the castle ruins were put up for sale in April 2013 , and purchased in November 2013 for about £ 400 @,@ 000 by Olga Roh , former Valentino and Versace model and owner of <unk> . Roh had never been to Scotland and had not seen the castle before she bought it , but said she planned to restore it so it could be used for fashion shoots , as a film location , or as a residence . Other suggestions were use as a holiday destination for friends or a boutique hotel . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Starting as a basic L @-@ shaped tower built from tooled ashlar dressed rubble , the castle was extended in a southerly direction by the addition of a circular tower during the first alterations in the late 16th century . A staircase was inside the new tower and further structures were added to the south and north sides of the courtyard at this stage of the development . Replacement entrances were installed and the original first @-@ floor doorway was closed off . Access on the west side was gained through a narrow round @-@ headed entrance and a wider main doorway was incorporated in the south elevation . 
 Some of the architectural features incorporated throughout the castle included : corbelled battlemented <unk> on the towers ; turrets set above first or second storey level ; a large elongated aperture provided light in the first floor hall ; and shot holes in the southwest tower . The fenestrations on the wing added in the late 18th century differed from those used in earlier parts of the structure , being larger and more regular in appearance . 
 The restorations completed in 1971 made the structure wind and water tight , added extra windows and installed fresh glazing , but as it was then abandoned again , weather elements exacerbated by vandalism led to further structural deterioration . The castle was in a ruinous condition in 2013 and unfit for habitation . 
 = = Superstition and haunting = = 
 Twenty @-@ first century newspaper stories report that the ghost of the murdered George Ogilvy , 3rd Lord Banff , haunts the castle . Nigel Tranter visited Inchdrewer again in the 1970s and a large white dog , which he speculated may have been a Samoyed , bounded out of the castle as he approached it with a local builder . Unable to explain how the dog could have been confined in the castle for seven days , he was later sent a copy of the magazine Vogue , in which it was stated that the castle was " haunted by a lady in the shape of a white dog " . 
 = 1977 Oman cyclone = 
 The 1977 Oman cyclone was the deadliest tropical cyclone on record to strike Oman . The storm formed off the west coast of India in the Arabian Sea , and curved westward to reach peak winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . The storm struck Masirah Island and later southern Oman on June 13 , before dissipating the next day over Saudi Arabia . Producing wind gusts to 230 km / h ( 140 mph ) , the storm was the strongest cyclone on record to hit the Arabian Peninsula until Cyclone Gonu hit in 2007 . About 95 % of <unk> Island was damaged by the strong winds , including much of the military base . The cyclone dropped 430 @.@ 6 mm ( 16 @.@ 95 in ) of rainfall over a 24 period on <unk> , which was the highest daily total in the country as of 2003 . Overall , the storm killed at least 105 people and left 50 @,@ 000 homeless . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On June 6 , a monsoon depression formed in the Arabian Sea about 500 km ( 315 mi ) south @-@ southwest of Goa , India . It initially paralleled the Indian coastline , becoming a tropical storm on June 9 with a minimum barometric pressure of 986 mbar ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) . That day , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began tracking the system . The storm moved northward , followed by a northwest turn on June 10 . It curved toward the west , and the JTWC reported the cyclone as reaching peak 1 – minute sustained winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) on June 11 . In addition , the India Meteorological Department estimated the system became a severe cyclonic storm , which has sustained winds of at least 118 km / h ( 73 mph ) . On June 12 , the storm attained a minimum pressure of 975 mbar ( 28 @.@ 8 inHg ) while continuing westward . 
 On June 13 , the eye of the cyclone passed over Masirah Island for a 40 minute period , producing peak sustained winds of 167 km / h ( 104 mph ) and a minimum pressure of 956 mbar ( 28 @.@ 2 inHg ) . The JTWC issued the final advisory at 0800 UTC that day . The Oman Department of Meteorology reported the storm as being much stronger than the JTWC , with sustained winds of 165 mph ( 105 km / h ) and gusts to 230 km / h ( 140 mph ) . The cyclone was the strongest on record to make landfall on the Arabian Peninsula , until Cyclone Gonu surpassed it in 2007 . Shortly after striking Masirah , the storm moved ashore mainland Oman , causing rapid weakening to tropical depression status . The system dissipated on June 14 after crossing into southeastern Saudi Arabia . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Along the southwest coast of India , the storm produced high swells of up to 7 m ( 23 ft ) in conjunction with the monsoon . The waves affected several drilling rigs operated by the Oil and Natural Gas Corporation , forcing work to shut down . The tanker Texaco Plymouth experienced significant structural damage from the storm , losing two lifeboats . The freighter <unk> Island in the central Arabian Sea experienced 139 km / h ( 86 mph ) winds before sinking , which took the lives of 23 of its crew . 
 The military base in Masirah was first warned about the cyclone on June 11 . The next day , officials there raised a Category 3 warning , which was soon upgraded to Category 2 . Aircraft were stored in hangars , and workers inspected the roofs of buildings before riding out the storm in a shelter . Hurricane @-@ force winds struck during the morning hours of June 13 , with sustained winds peaking at 167 km / h ( 104 mph ) and gusts to 200 km / h ( 124 mph ) . After a lull during the eye 's passage , winds then increased out of the southwest towards 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . The strong winds caused buildings to collapse and roof beams to be blown through the air . Every building at the base sustained damage , and virtually all homes in the nearby village were leveled . The radio relay station on the island was also damaged . Overall , the storm wrecked about 95 % of the buildings in Masirah , leaving 2 @,@ 000 people homeless there . Rain totals were significant , with a total of 482 @.@ 3 mm ( 18 @.@ 99 in ) falling 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) northeast of Salalah . A station on Masirah Island reported 430 @.@ 6 mm ( 16 @.@ 95 in ) in 24 hours , more than six times the average annual precipitation there . The total was the highest daily rainfall in the period from 1977 to 2003 nationwide . Floods washed away thousands of animals as well as lime and palm @-@ tree plantations , downing thousands of trees across the region . The rains flooded the main highway from Muscat to Salalah , and also accumulated in the typically dry Dhofar region . There , most drains were unable to withstand the unusual flooding . 
 The cyclone was considered the worst disaster in Oman during the 20th century , and remains the deadliest cyclone as of 2010 . Overall , the cyclone caused 105 deaths , and over 5 @,@ 000 injuries , and left about 50 @,@ 000 people homeless . The death toll is disputed , as another report indicated 110 deaths in Oman . After the storm , neighboring Saudi Arabia sent assistance to Oman , as did other nations in the Persian Gulf . The cyclone struck before the nation created a coordinated disaster network in 1988 ; as a result , the relief work was spread among various agencies . 
 = Auxois = 
 The Auxois is a horse breed from eastern France . It is a large breed , with some individuals weighing over 910 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 010 lb ) , bred for horse meat , agricultural work and leisure pursuits . Overall , members of the breed are solid and muscular in appearance . They are usually bay or bay roan in color , although some other colors are accepted by the breed registry , and are known for their power and docility . 
 The Auxois is a direct descendant of the Bourguignon of the Middle Ages . In the 19th century , blood was added from other French draft breeds before the creation of a stud book in 1912 . After the creation of the stud book , only purebred Auxois or Ardennais and Trait du Nord crosses could be registered . World War I interrupted efforts to set the breed standard , but testing resumed in 1920 , and between then and World War II the Auxois was the pride of regional farmers . The breed reached its peak in the 1930s , but by the 1960s began to decline with the advent of mechanization . 
 By the 1970s , the Auxois had almost become extinct , and the French government began pushing the breeding of all native draft horses for meat production , as opposed to agricultural usage . However , the meat of the Auxois was not considered high quality , and this , combined with a lower @-@ than @-@ expected market for meat , led to a continued decline in French draft horse populations . In the 1990s , the French government reversed its position on breeding for meat , and began promoting draft breeds for leisure pursuits . The Auxois continues to be rare , having the eighth @-@ smallest population numbers of the nine native French draft breeds . An annual breed show is held in Semur @-@ en @-@ Auxois , and the Auxois is frequently seen at the Paris International Agricultural Show . 
 = = Breed characteristics = = 
 The Auxois is a horse of great size , larger than the Ardennais and almost as large as the Trait du Nord . It is massively muscular in build , built for heavy pulling . The average height is 15 @.@ 3 to 16 @.@ 3 hands ( 63 to 67 inches , 160 to 170 cm ) , with an ideal height of 16 @.@ 1 hands ( 65 inches , 165 cm ) to 16 @.@ 3 3 ⁄ 4 hands ( 67 @.@ 75 inches , 172 cm ) for stallions and 16 to 16 @.@ 3 hands ( 64 to 67 inches , 163 to 170 cm ) for mares . They weigh from 700 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 500 lb ) to more than 910 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 010 lb ) , depending on whether an individual horse is bred for meat , agricultural work or leisure pursuits . 
 The head is relatively short , with a wide forehead . The neck is also relatively short and muscular , the shoulders long and sloping and the chest wide and deep . The body is solid , with a broad , short back and loins . The hindquarters are well @-@ muscled . The legs are robust , although they can appear small in relation to the mass of the body . They usually have less feathering on the legs than other French draft horse breeds . Horses registered with the studbook may be branded on the left side of the neck with the letters " TX " . This brand is generally applied during breed competitions , and only after the age of two . 
 Auxois horses are usually bay or bay roan in color , although they can also be chestnut or red roan , similar to the <unk> gray and seal brown ( the latter called black pangaré by the breed registry , although these horses are genetically brown , not black with pangaré markings ) are also accepted for registration ; all other colors are excluded . The Auxois is known for its power and docility , having a calm and gentle temperament . Like the Ardennais , it is an easy keeper , able to survive outdoors in all seasons , even in the harsh climatic conditions sometimes seen in Morvan and <unk> . 
 The majority of Auxois are still bred for meat production , and in 2001 , 50 % of the horses bred were intended for slaughter . However , the power and gaits of the breed make them valued for competitive and leisure driving , as well as equestrian tourism . The smaller horses of the breed are used for milk production . The Auxois is used for celebrations , such as weddings , and historical reenactments . It is also used for logging , and in recent years , has been increasingly used in agriculture , being found in vineyards , gardens and farms . The use of them for the maintenance of rural roads is also in planning . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of the Auxois is closely tied to its homeland , for which it is named . The rich pastures of the Auxois area , including the French Gold Coast , parts of Yonne , the Saône @-@ et @-@ Loire and northern <unk> , are conducive to the breeding of large draft horses . The recognition of the Auxois dates back to the early 20th century , making it relatively new compared to other French draft breeds . 
 The Auxois is a direct descendant of the Bourguignon of the Middle Ages , a small , robust , tough horse used for riding and driving . A now @-@ discredited theory once held that the Auxois was a descendant of the even older <unk> horse , the bones of which were found in the area where the breed was developed . Originally the Morvan horse also existed in the same area , but was absorbed into the Auxois after extensive crossbreeding . During the 1840s , Percheron blood was introduced to the breed , followed by Boulonnais blood in the 1860s and Ardennais and possibly Nivernais blood in the late 19th century . Care was not taken to fix a specific breed type , though , and so the physical characteristics were variable . 
 Breeders introduced foreign stallions before creating a stud book for the breed . The breed took its name from the " rich valley of Auxois " , where the crossbreeding and selection for the new breed took place . The local mares created from 19th century breeding were crossed with Ardennais and Trait du Nord stallions , sought after for their large size and power , which made them valuable for agricultural work . The birthplace of the breed is around the Cluny Stud , and it was originally considered to be a sub @-@ type of the Ardennais breed . 
 The first attempts to create a breed registry in 1903 and 1904 failed . In 1912 , another attempt was made , this time successful , and a stud book was created in Dijon in 1913 . With the creation of the stud book , only purebred Auxois or Ardennais and Trait du Nord crosses could be registered . However , by 1917 , the physical characteristics of the breed were still not fixed , and leaders of the equine community were critical , and doubtful of whether the Auxois was a breed in its own right or still merely a subtype of the Ardennais . They were also unsure whether it was a good idea to accept the recognition of another regional breed , of which France had many . 
 = = = World War I and World War II = = = 
 World War I interrupted the efforts to secure a breed standard , with stud book selection not resuming until 1920 . Within a few years , the ideal height was set around 15 @.@ 3 hands ( 63 inches , 160 cm ) , and its breeding spread throughout Auxois and neighboring regions . 
 Between World War I and World War II , the Auxois was the pride of regional farmers . Before the advent of <unk> , it was the preferred pulling animal , even for slow work , winning out over the local Charolais cattle breed used as oxen . The Auxois was bred solely for agricultural work , and used exclusively for this purpose . The strongest horses were used for multi @-@ horse hitches in the fields and for logging . The Auxois competed in popularity with the Nivernais horse , and it was not uncommon for farmers in the region to have both the black @-@ coated Nivernais and the red @-@ coated Ardennais and Auxois to satisfy the color preferences of all potential buyers . 
 In the early 1930s the Auxois reached the peak of its physical development . It was described , like the Ardennais and the Trait du Nord , as a born <unk> , with a neck naturally held so low that the nose almost touched the ground . It was developed entirely for traction , and its conformation allowed it to move huge weights over short distances . At the same time , it became more popular than the Nivernais , and was considered a southern representation of the Ardennais breed . Merchants visiting Burgandy horse fairs appreciated the breed , and deemed its bay coloration better able to hide dirt than that of the light gray Percheron or black Nivernais . The peak populations and usage of the Auxois and other French draft horses was short due to the advent of mechanization in the 1960s . 
 = = = Post @-@ war to 1990s = = = 
 During World War II , fuel stocks were used by the armies , and were unavailable to farmers . This allowed horses to remain a key aspect of agriculture and transportation until the end of the war . After the war , farmers rapidly mechanized their operations . The Auxois and other draft breeds were quickly abandoned in favor of machines , and population numbers began to fall in the early 1950s and collapsed completely in the 1960s . By the 1970s , the Auxois had almost disappeared , although many villages in the breed 's homeland retained a small number of mares for traditional competitions . 
 In the early 1970s , Henry Blanc was appointed as the new director of the French National Stud , and began the conversion of French draft breeds into animals bred for slaughter into horse meat . The stud encouraged farmers who could no longer find buyers for their animals to fatten them for resale to the slaughter markets . Breeding for the production of meat helped to safeguard the Auxois breed by keeping its gene pool intact , but also transformed the previously powerful breed into one bred solely for weight — the main consideration in pricing at slaughter . In 1976 , an official French decree changed the name of the category in which the Auxois fit from " draft horses " to " heavy horses " and encouraged farmers to select the heaviest breeding stallions possible , to increase the average weight of the breed . The National Stud approved this change , and between the 1950s and the 1980s , the average weight of the Auxois increased from 650 to 800 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 430 to 1 @,@ 760 lb ) to 800 to 1 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 800 to 2 @,@ 200 lb ) or more . 
 The conversion to meat was unfavorable for the Auxois , however . The Percheron was preferred for the quality of the meat and the Ardennais and closely related Auxois were considered to have some of the lowest quality meat . In addition , the promised market for horse meat did not materialize , and French slaughterhouses were overwhelmed by imports of cheap horses from the Americas and Eastern Europe . Because of this lack of profitability , the population of most French breeds , including the Auxois , continued to decline until 1994 . The collapse in prices then forced the National Stud to redirect its draft horse @-@ related activities . 
 In the early 1990s , recreational riding enjoyed a revival in France , while the consumption of horse meat dropped . In 1991 , the Agricultural College in Semur @-@ en @-@ Auxois began the production of horse milk using Auxois mares in Bierre @-@ lès @-@ Semur . In 1994 , the French Official Journal published a decree restoring the name of " draft horse " from the almost 20 @-@ year use of " heavy horse " . In 1996 , another decree prohibited the docking of tails of all French horses . French farmers moved towards the production of animals for recreation or agricultural uses , and the National Stud began supporting this aim . In July 1998 , a promotional center for the Auxois opened in Bierre @-@ les @-@ Semur , through regional and departmental grants and using the National Stud to promote the breed . It focuses mainly on the training of young horses for riding and driving , and showcases various performances , as well as providing shoeing services and birthing assistance . In 1999 , a study was undertaken of Auxois breeders , which showed opposition to changes in the breed . The author recommended expanding the breed standard to open new markets and save the Auxois from extinction . 
 = = = Present = = = 
 As it has been since the creation of the Auxois stud book , only purebred horses and Ardennes and Trait du Nord crosses are allowed to be registered . This is to ensure selection for the desired breed characteristics , which are now a lighter and more active horse than was seen during the time of breeding for horse meat . Horses bred through artificial insemination and embryo transfer are allowed to be registered ; those potentially bred through cloning are not . The Syndicat du Cheval de Trait Auxois ( Auxois Draft Horse Association ) is the national registry , managing the stud book , breed standard and promotion of the breed . An annual breed competition is held in September in Semur @-@ en @-@ Auxois . The Burgandy region continues to celebrate the breed , and there is a museum dedicated to it in Bierre @-@ les @-@ Semur . The Auxois is also regularly seen at the International Agriculture Show in Paris . 
 The population of Auxois is very low , and it is one of the rarest of the nine French draft horse breeds . In 2001 , it had the eighth @-@ smallest population of the nine breeds , making the threats of inbreeding and extinction very real . In 2006 , 250 active breeding mares and 32 stallions were reported , with 125 breeders ( the term breeder applying to any person owning at least one active breeding mare ) . The Auxois represented 1 percent of total French draft horse registrations in 2007 . Burgundy is by far the main breeding area , with a few horses in the Rhône @-@ Alpes and Auvergne regions . There are no known registered Auxois living outside France and it is almost unknown outside of its home region , even within the rest of France . Of the nine French draft horse breeds , the Auxois is the only one that is not exported . Between 1992 and 2011 , between 80 and 146 foals were born each year , with numbers ranging from 105 to 128 between 2007 and 2011 . 
 = The Equation = 
 " The Equation " is the eighth episode of the first season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . The episode follows the Fringe team 's investigation into the kidnapping of a young musical prodigy ( Charlie Tahan ) who has become obsessed with finishing one piece of music . Dr. Walter Bishop ( John Noble ) returns to St. Claire 's Hospital in an effort to find the boy 's whereabouts . 
 The episode was written by supervising producer J. R. Orci and co @-@ executive producer David H. Goodman , and was directed by Gwyneth Horder @-@ Payton . Actress Gillian Jacobs guest starred as the boy 's kidnapper . The episode featured her character in a " pretty violent and quite messy " fight with Olivia Dunham ( Anna Torv ) , Torv 's first for the series . The two actresses spent several weeks practicing the fight 's choreography . 
 " The Equation " first aired in the United States on November 18 , 2008 , garnering an estimated 9 @.@ 175 million viewers . The episode was the Fox network 's fifth ranked show for the week , and helped Fox win the night among adults aged 18 to 49 . Critical reception to " The Equation " ranged from mixed to positive , with most reviewers praising the asylum storyline . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While helping fix a woman 's car engine on the side of a Middletown , Connecticut road , Andrew <unk> ( Adam Grupper ) sees a sequence of red and green flashing lights and is hypnotized into a suggestive state . Upon ' waking up ' , he does not have any memory of what happened while hypnotized , but sees that the woman and his son Ben ( Charlie Tahan ) , a young musical prodigy , are missing . Phillip Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) reveals that similar cases have ended with the victims being returned , but left insane from the trauma of the incident . All the victims were academics and accomplished in their respective fields . 
 When interviewing Andrew , Olivia Dunham ( Anna Torv ) learns that nine months previously , Ben survived a car accident with a new , extraordinary ability to play the piano , despite never taking lessons . Dr. Walter Bishop ( John Noble ) recalls memories of red and green lights but is unable to remember more . While trying to dredge up the old memories , Walter recounts a previous unsuccessful mind control experiment he had worked on for an advertising agency , who wished to compel customers to buy their products using flashing lights . He deduces that someone succeeded in producing the lights using wavelengths , and these caused Andrew to sustain a " hypnagogic trance " that allowed his son to be abducted . He successfully tests an experiment on Peter Bishop ( Joshua Jackson ) . 
 Andrew 's sketch leads to the identification of the kidnapper as Joanne Ostler ( Gillian Jacobs ) , a MIT neurologist who was previously believed deceased . Joanne tricks Ben into helping her complete an unfinished equation by using the image of his mother , who died in the car accident . Meanwhile , Walter suddenly remembers that he heard about the lights from former mathematician Dashiell Kim ( Randall Duk Kim ) , an old bunkmate at St. Claire 's Hospital who disappeared under similar circumstances . To discover the child 's whereabouts , Olivia encourages Walter to return to St. Claire 's . The visit does not go well , and Walter is held by hospital administrator Dr. Bruce Sumner ( William Sadler ) , who remains unconvinced of Walter 's sanity . 
 Peter figures out Joanne 's assumed name using a FBI database , while Walter manages to convince Kim into giving up a vague description of Joanne 's whereabouts by telling him there is a little boy who needs their help . Kim says he was kept in " a dungeon in a red castle . " Olivia and Peter use the information to find the boy once they arrange for Walter 's release . However , Joanne escapes with the completed formula , which she gives to Mitchell Loeb ( Chance Kelly ) . Loeb kills her , but not before using the equation to allow him to pass through solid matter . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Equation " was written by supervising producer J. R. Orci and co @-@ executive producer David H. Goodman . Both would go on to separately write other first season episodes , including Orci 's " The Transformation " and Goodman 's " Safe " , which resolved the fate of the eponymous equation . " The Equation " was directed by filmmaker Gwyneth Horder @-@ Payton , her first and only credit for the series to date . 
 The episode featured guest actress Gillian Jacobs as the kidnapper Joanne Ostler . Jacobs explained her character 's motivations , " I 'm a very mysterious figure , and at the beginning of the episode you see that I have taken this boy , have kidnapped him . I have taken him to this room and have him hooked him up to these EKG machines . I 'm trying to get him to finish writing this piano piece which I need to help solve an equation ... It 's very important to me . " 
 Horder @-@ Payton considered the confrontation between Olivia and Joanne to be the former 's " first big fight scene . " She added , " It 's been well choreographed and they 've been practicing for several weeks . " According to Torv , she and Jacobs broke the moves down " really simply " and then " put them together into really small little bits . " The director called it a " pretty violent and quite messy " fight , to which first assistant director Colin MacLellan added , " It 's a pretty phenomenal brawl actually to have two women kick the crap out of each other . " 
 The first season DVD includes several scenes that were omitted from the final cut of the episode . The first centers on Walter waking up in the middle of the night , explaining to a disgruntled Peter that he 's attempting to " shift my circadian rhythm to the nocturnal cycle . " The other scene shows Olivia and Peter playing poker , which leads her to realize an important part of the episode 's case . 
 = = Themes and analysis = = 
 Flashing multicolored lights , specifically red and green , are a consistent theme of the first season , with Into the Looking Glass : Exploring the Worlds of Fringe author Sarah Clarke Stuart calling them " noteworthy recurring images . " They can also be seen in the computer graphics of the Observer 's binoculars , as well as during the second and third seasons as a way to distinguish the two universes . 
 The character of Walter goes through much development during the first season . Stuart believed that he changes the most out of the main cast , and his return to St. Claire 's reflects this progression . Actor John Noble explained his character 's evolution in a November 2008 interview , " We see Walter from a different angle , very vulnerable . He goes back to the asylum again , and we see the very , very fearful man return for a while . Although he does have some wonderful moments earlier in the episode , when he goes back inside he turns into this incredibly fearful , stuttering fellow that we saw when we first met him . It 's a very interesting journey we see Walter go through . " 
 In the episode , Walter sees himself several times while staying in the mental institution . Many reviewers expressed curiosity about this " Visitor " or " Second Walter " . After looking through " Walter 's Lab Notes , " released by Fox after each episode , Ramsey Isler of IGN speculated that Walter suffered from a multiple personality disorder , while AOL TV 's Jane Boursaw thought it was either an hallucination or his alternate universe counterpart . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The Equation " first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on November 18 , 2008 . It was watched by an estimated 9 @.@ 18 million viewers , earning a 4 @.@ 1 / 10 ratings share among adults aged 18 to 49 , meaning that it was seen by 4 @.@ 4 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 11 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of broadcast . The episode also received a 5 @.@ 6 / 8 ratings share among all households . Fringe and its lead @-@ in show , House M.D. , helped Fox win the night in the adult demographic , as it was Fringe 's highest rating since the season 's second episode . It was Fox 's fifth ranked show for the week . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews from television critics . Fearnet columnist Alyse Wax called it a " pretty good episode " , and believed it to be " far more enjoyable than last week 's " , as it lacked that episode 's " conspiracy nonsense " and John Scott storyline . However , Wax continued that " The Equation " " seemed rather pedestrian " because " nothing too freaky " happened , and wished that Walter and Peter had been used more . Jane Boursaw of AOL TV considered Walter 's return to the asylum " heartbreaking " . 
 IGN 's Travis Fickett rated " The Equation " 7 @.@ 5 / 10 , and called it a " solid episode " despite a few perceived plotholes . He liked Walter and Peter 's actions in the asylum , and concluded " At this point , whether a solid single episode is enough to keep you watching Fringe likely has to do with your overall patience with the series and whatever its ultimate goals might be . " Erin Dougherty of Cinema Blend called it the best episode since " The Same Old Story " since it contained " suspense and drama and a minimal amount of conspiracy theories " , making her feel " seriously giddy " . While still calling it " entertaining " , she disliked Walter seeing himself in the asylum , believing it " was really strange and didn ’ t go with the flow of the story " . 
 The A.V. Club writer Noel Murray graded the episode with a B + , explaining that he believed it to be mainly an original story ; what kept him from promoting it to the " elusive ' A ' level – something no Fringe episode has yet done for me " was the ending , which was " like something out of dozens of mediocre cop shows " . Despite this , Murray found it and the asylum storyline to be " compelling " . Conversely , UGO Networks was critical of the episode , writing " Fringe continues to wobble in story quality . Last night 's episode was a perfectly good way to waste an hour , but far off the track of last week 's episodes . The episode featured some plot conveniences that were a bit hard to swallow " . 
 = Sociology = 
 Sociology is the study of social behavior or society , including its origins , development , organization , networks , and institutions . It is a social science that uses various methods of empirical investigation and critical analysis to develop a body of knowledge about social order , disorder , and change . Many sociologists aim to conduct research that may be applied directly to social policy and welfare , while others focus primarily on refining the theoretical understanding of social processes . Subject matter ranges from the micro level of individual agency and interaction to the macro level of systems and the social structure . 
 The traditional focuses of sociology include social stratification , social class , social mobility , religion , secularization , law , sexuality and deviance . As all spheres of human activity are affected by the interplay between social structure and individual agency , sociology has gradually expanded its focus to further subjects , such as health , medical , military and penal institutions , the Internet , education , and the role of social activity in the development of scientific knowledge . 
 The range of social scientific methods has also expanded . Social researchers draw upon a variety of qualitative and quantitative techniques . The linguistic and cultural turns of the mid @-@ twentieth century led to increasingly interpretative , hermeneutic , and philosophic approaches towards the analysis of society . Conversely , the end of the 1990s and the beginning of 2000s have seen the rise of new analytically , mathematically and computationally rigorous techniques , such as agent @-@ based modelling and social network analysis . 
 Social research informs politicians and policy makers , educators , planners , lawmakers , administrators , developers , business magnates , managers , social workers , non @-@ governmental organizations , non @-@ profit organizations , and people interested in resolving social issues in general . There is often a great deal of crossover between social research , market research , and other statistical fields . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Sociology should not be confused with various general social studies courses , which bear little relation to sociological theory or social science research methodology . The US National Science Foundation classifies sociology as a STEM Field . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Sociological reasoning pre @-@ dates the foundation of the discipline . Social analysis has origins in the common stock of Western knowledge and philosophy , and has been carried out from as far back as the time of ancient Greek philosopher Plato , if not before . The origin of the survey , i.e. , the collection of information from a sample of individuals , can be traced back to at least the Domesday Book in 1086 , while ancient philosophers such as Confucius wrote on the importance of social roles . There is evidence of early sociology in medieval Islam . Some consider Ibn Khaldun , a 14th @-@ century Arab Islamic scholar from North Africa ( Tunisia ) , to have been the first sociologist and father of sociology ( see Branches of the early Islamic philosophy ) ; his Muqaddimah was perhaps the first work to advance social @-@ scientific reasoning on social cohesion and social conflict . 
 The word sociology ( or " sociologie " ) is derived from both Latin and Greek origins . The Latin word : <unk> , " companion " ; the suffix <unk> , " the study of " from Greek -λογία from λόγος , <unk> , " word " , " knowledge " . It was first coined in 1780 by the French essayist Emmanuel @-@ Joseph Sieyès ( 1748 – 1836 ) in an unpublished manuscript . Sociology was later defined independently by the French philosopher of science , Auguste Comte ( 1798 – 1857 ) , in 1838 . Comte used this term to describe a new way of looking at society . Comte had earlier used the term " social physics " , but that had subsequently been appropriated by others , most notably the Belgian statistician Adolphe <unk> . Comte endeavoured to unify history , psychology and economics through the scientific understanding of the social realm . Writing shortly after the malaise of the French Revolution , he proposed that social ills could be remedied through sociological positivism , an epistemological approach outlined in The Course in Positive Philosophy ( 1830 – 1842 ) and A General View of Positivism ( 1848 ) . Comte believed a positivist stage would mark the final era , after conjectural theological and metaphysical phases , in the progression of human understanding . In observing the circular dependence of theory and observation in science , and having classified the sciences , Comte may be regarded as the first philosopher of science in the modern sense of the term . 
 Comte gave a powerful impetus to the development of sociology , an impetus which bore fruit in the later decades of the nineteenth century . To say this is certainly not to claim that French sociologists such as Durkheim were devoted disciples of the high priest of positivism . But by insisting on the <unk> of each of his basic sciences to the particular science of sciences which it presupposed in the hierarchy and by emphasizing the nature of sociology as the scientific study of social phenomena Comte put sociology on the map . To be sure , [ its ] beginnings can be traced back well beyond Montesquieu , for example , and to Condorcet , not to speak of Saint @-@ Simon , Comte 's immediate predecessor . But Comte 's clear recognition of sociology as a particular science , with a character of its own , justified Durkheim in regarding him as the father or founder of this science , in spite of the fact that Durkheim did not accept the idea of the three states and criticized Comte 's approach to sociology . 
 Both Auguste Comte and Karl Marx ( 1818 – 1883 ) set out to develop scientifically justified systems in the wake of European industrialization and secularization , informed by various key movements in the philosophies of history and science . Marx rejected Comtean positivism but in attempting to develop a science of society nevertheless came to be recognized as a founder of sociology as the word gained wider meaning . For Isaiah Berlin , Marx may be regarded as the " true father " of modern sociology , " in so far as anyone can claim the title . " 
 To have given clear and unified answers in familiar empirical terms to those theoretical questions which most occupied men 's minds at the time , and to have deduced from them clear practical directives without creating obviously artificial links between the two , was the principle achievement of Marx 's theory . The sociological treatment of historical and moral problems , which Comte and after him , Spencer and Taine , had discussed and mapped , became a precise and concrete study only when the attack of militant Marxism made its conclusions a burning issue , and so made the search for evidence more zealous and the attention to method more intense . 
 Herbert Spencer ( 27 April 1820 – 8 December 1903 ) was one of the most popular and influential 19th @-@ century sociologists . It is estimated that he sold one million books in his lifetime , far more than any other sociologist at the time . So strong was his influence that many other 19th century thinkers , including Émile Durkheim , defined their ideas in relation to his . Durkheim 's Division of Labour in Society is to a large extent an extended debate with Spencer from whose sociology , many commentators now agree , Durkheim borrowed extensively . Also a notable biologist , Spencer coined the term " survival of the fittest " . While Marxian ideas defined one strand of sociology , Spencer was a critic of socialism as well as strong advocate for a laissez @-@ faire style of government . His ideas were highly observed by conservative political circles , especially in the United States and England . 
 = = = Foundations of the academic discipline = = = 
 The first formal Department of Sociology in the world was established by Albion Small - at the invitation of William Rainey Harper - at the University of Chicago in 1892 , and the American Journal of Sociology was founded shortly thereafter in 1895 by Small as well . However , the institutionalization of sociology as an academic discipline was chiefly led by Émile Durkheim ( 1858 – 1917 ) , who developed positivism as a foundation to practical social research . While Durkheim rejected much of the detail of Comte 's philosophy , he retained and refined its method , maintaining that the social sciences are a logical continuation of the natural ones into the realm of human activity , and insisting that they may retain the same objectivity , rationalism , and approach to causality . Durkheim set up the first European department of sociology at the University of Bordeaux in 1895 , publishing his Rules of the Sociological Method ( 1895 ) . For Durkheim , sociology could be described as the " science of institutions , their genesis and their functioning " . 
 Durkheim 's monograph , Suicide ( 1897 ) is considered a seminal work in statistical analysis by contemporary sociologists . Suicide is a case study of variations in suicide rates among Catholic and Protestant populations , and served to distinguish sociological analysis from psychology or philosophy . It also marked a major contribution to the theoretical concept of structural functionalism . By carefully examining suicide statistics in different police districts , he attempted to demonstrate that Catholic communities have a lower suicide rate than that of Protestants , something he attributed to social ( as opposed to individual or psychological ) causes . He developed the notion of objective sui generis " social facts " to delineate a unique empirical object for the science of sociology to study . Through such studies he posited that sociology would be able to determine whether any given society is ' healthy ' or ' pathological ' , and seek social reform to negate organic breakdown or " social anomie " . 
 Sociology quickly evolved as an academic response to the perceived challenges of modernity , such as industrialization , urbanization , secularization , and the process of " rationalization " . The field predominated in continental Europe , with British anthropology and statistics generally following on a separate trajectory . By the turn of the 20th century , however , many theorists were active in the Anglo @-@ Saxon world . Few early sociologists were confined strictly to the subject , interacting also with economics , jurisprudence , psychology and philosophy , with theories being appropriated in a variety of different fields . Since its inception , sociological epistemology , methods , and frames of inquiry , have significantly expanded and diverged . 
 Durkheim , Marx , and the German theorist Max Weber ( 1864 – 1920 ) are typically cited as the three principal architects of sociology . Herbert Spencer , William Graham Sumner , Lester F. Ward , W. E. B. Du Bois , Vilfredo Pareto , Alexis de Tocqueville , Werner Sombart , Thorstein Veblen , Ferdinand Tönnies , Georg Simmel and Karl Mannheim are often included on academic curricula as founding theorists . Curricula also may include Charlotte Perkins Gilman , Marianne Weber and Friedrich Engels as founders of the feminist tradition in sociology . Each key figure is associated with a particular theoretical perspective and orientation . 
 Marx and Engels associated the emergence of modern society above all with the development of capitalism ; for Durkheim it was connected in particular with industrialization and the new social division of labor which this brought about ; for Weber it had to do with the emergence of a distinctive way of thinking , the rational calculation which he associated with the Protestant Ethic ( more or less what Marx and Engels speak of in terms of those ' icy waves of egotistical calculation ' ) . Together the works of these great classical sociologists suggest what Giddens has recently described as ' a multidimensional view of institutions of modernity ' and which emphasises not only capitalism and industrialism as key institutions of modernity , but also ' surveillance ' ( meaning ' control of information and social supervision ' ) and ' military power ' ( control of the means of violence in the context of the industrialisation of war ) . 
 = = = Positivism and anti @-@ positivism = = = 
 = = = = Positivism = = = = 
 The overarching methodological principle of positivism is to conduct sociology in broadly the same manner as natural science . An emphasis on empiricism and the scientific method is sought to provide a tested foundation for sociological research based on the assumption that the only authentic knowledge is scientific knowledge , and that such knowledge can only arrive by positive affirmation through scientific methodology . 
 Our main goal is to extend scientific rationalism to human conduct .... What has been called our positivism is but a consequence of this rationalism . 
 The term has long since ceased to carry this meaning ; there are no fewer than twelve distinct <unk> that are referred to as positivism . Many of these approaches do not self @-@ identify as " positivist " , some because they themselves arose in opposition to older forms of positivism , and some because the label has over time become a term of abuse by being mistakenly linked with a theoretical empiricism . The extent of antipositivist criticism has also diverged , with many rejecting the scientific method and others only seeking to amend it to reflect 20th century developments in the philosophy of science . However , positivism ( broadly understood as a scientific approach to the study of society ) remains dominant in contemporary sociology , especially in the United States . 
 Loïc <unk> distinguishes three major strains of positivism : <unk> , Logical , and Instrumental . None of these are the same as that set forth by Comte , who was unique in advocating such a rigid ( and perhaps optimistic ) version . While Émile Durkheim rejected much of the detail of Comte 's philosophy , he retained and refined its method . Durkheim maintained that the social sciences are a logical continuation of the natural ones into the realm of human activity , and insisted that they should retain the same objectivity , rationalism , and approach to causality . He developed the notion of objective sui generis " social facts " to delineate a unique empirical object for the science of sociology to study . 
 The variety of positivism that remains dominant today is termed instrumental positivism . This approach eschews epistemological and metaphysical concerns ( such as the nature of social facts ) in favor of methodological clarity , replicability , reliability and validity . This positivism is more or less synonymous with quantitative research , and so only resembles older positivism in practice . Since it carries no explicit philosophical commitment , its practitioners may not belong to any particular school of thought . Modern sociology of this type is often credited to Paul Lazarsfeld , who pioneered large @-@ scale survey studies and developed statistical techniques for analysing them . This approach lends itself to what Robert K. Merton called middle @-@ range theory : abstract statements that generalize from segregated hypotheses and empirical regularities rather than starting with an abstract idea of a social whole . 
 = = = = Anti @-@ positivism = = = = 
 Reactions against social empiricism began when German philosopher Hegel voiced opposition to both empiricism , which he rejected as uncritical , and determinism , which he viewed as overly mechanistic . Karl Marx 's methodology borrowed from Hegelian <unk> but also a rejection of positivism in favour of critical analysis , seeking to supplement the empirical acquisition of " facts " with the elimination of illusions . He maintained that appearances need to be critiqued rather than simply documented . Early <unk> such as Wilhelm Dilthey pioneered the distinction between natural and social science ( ' <unk> ' ) . Various neo @-@ Kantian philosophers , <unk> and human scientists further theorised how the analysis of the social world differs to that of the natural world due to the irreducibly complex aspects of human society , culture , and being . 
 At the turn of the 20th century the first generation of German sociologists formally introduced methodological anti @-@ positivism , proposing that research should concentrate on human cultural norms , values , symbols , and social processes viewed from a resolutely subjective perspective . Max Weber argued that sociology may be loosely described as a science as it is able to identify causal relationships of human " social action " — especially among " ideal types " , or hypothetical simplifications of complex social phenomena . As a non @-@ positivist , however , Weber sought relationships that are not as " historical , invariant , or <unk> " as those pursued by natural scientists . Fellow German sociologist , Ferdinand Tönnies , theorised on two crucial abstract concepts with his work on " Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft " ( lit. community and society ) . Tönnies marked a sharp line between the realm of concepts and the reality of social action : the first must be treated axiomatically and in a deductive way ( " pure sociology " ) , whereas the second empirically and inductively ( " applied sociology " ) . 
 [ Sociology is ] ... the science whose object is to interpret the meaning of social action and thereby give a causal explanation of the way in which the action proceeds and the effects which it produces . By ' action ' in this definition is meant the human behaviour when and to the extent that the agent or agents see it as subjectively meaningful ... the meaning to which we refer may be either ( a ) the meaning actually intended either by an individual agent on a particular historical occasion or by a number of agents on an approximate average in a given set of cases , or ( b ) the meaning attributed to the agent or agents , as types , in a pure type constructed in the abstract . In neither case is the ' meaning ' to be thought of as somehow objectively ' correct ' or ' true ' by some metaphysical criterion . This is the difference between the empirical sciences of action , such as sociology and history , and any kind of prior discipline , such as jurisprudence , logic , ethics , or aesthetics whose aim is to extract from their subject @-@ matter ' correct ' or ' valid ' meaning . 
 Both Weber and Georg Simmel pioneered the " Verstehen " ( or ' interpretative ' ) method in social science ; a systematic process by which an outside observer attempts to relate to a particular cultural group , or indigenous people , on their own terms and from their own point of view . Through the work of Simmel , in particular , sociology acquired a possible character beyond positivist data @-@ collection or grand , deterministic systems of structural law . Relatively isolated from the sociological academy throughout his lifetime , Simmel presented idiosyncratic analyses of modernity more reminiscent of the phenomenological and existential writers than of Comte or Durkheim , paying particular concern to the forms of , and possibilities for , social individuality . His sociology engaged in a neo @-@ Kantian inquiry into the limits of perception , asking ' What is society ? ' in a direct allusion to Kant 's question ' What is nature ? ' 
 The deepest problems of modern life flow from the attempt of the individual to maintain the independence and individuality of his existence against the sovereign powers of society , against the weight of the historical heritage and the external culture and technique of life . The antagonism represents the most modern form of the conflict which primitive man must carry on with nature for his own bodily existence . The eighteenth century may have called for liberation from all the ties which grew up historically in politics , in religion , in morality and in economics in order to permit the original natural virtue of man , which is equal in everyone , to develop without inhibition ; the nineteenth century may have sought to promote , in addition to man 's freedom , his individuality ( which is connected with the division of labor ) and his achievements which make him unique and indispensable but which at the same time make him so much the more dependent on the complementary activity of others ; <unk> may have seen the relentless struggle of the individual as the prerequisite for his full development , while socialism found the same thing in the suppression of all competition – but in each of these the same fundamental motive was at work , namely the resistance of the individual to being leveled , swallowed up in the social @-@ technological mechanism . 
 = = = Other developments = = = 
 The first college course entitled " Sociology " was taught in the United States at Yale in 1875 by William Graham Sumner . In 1883 Lester F. Ward , the first president of the American Sociological Association , published Dynamic Sociology — Or Applied social science as based upon <unk> sociology and the less complex sciences and attacked the laissez @-@ faire sociology of Herbert Spencer and Sumner . Ward 's 1200 page book was used as core material in many early American sociology courses . In 1890 , the oldest continuing American course in the modern tradition began at the University of Kansas , lectured by Frank W. Blackmar . The Department of Sociology at the University of Chicago was established in 1892 by Albion Small , who also published the first sociology textbook : An introduction to the study of society 1894 . George Herbert Mead and Charles Cooley , who had met at the University of Michigan in 1891 ( along with John Dewey ) , would move to Chicago in 1894 . Their influence gave rise to social psychology and the symbolic interactionism of the modern Chicago School . The American Journal of Sociology was founded in 1895 , followed by the American Sociological Association ( ASA ) in 1905 . The sociological " canon of classics " with Durkheim and Max Weber at the top owes in part to Talcott Parsons , who is largely credited with introducing both to American audiences . Parsons consolidated the sociological tradition and set the agenda for American sociology at the point of its fastest disciplinary growth . Sociology in the United States was less historically influenced by Marxism than its European counterpart , and to this day broadly remains more statistical in its approach . 
 The first sociology department to be established in the United Kingdom was at the London School of Economics and Political Science ( home of the British Journal of Sociology ) in 1904 . Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse and Edvard <unk> became the lecturers in the discipline at the University of London in 1907 . Harriet Martineau , an English translator of Comte , has been cited as the first female sociologist . In 1909 the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Soziologie ( German Sociological Association ) was founded by Ferdinand Tönnies and Max Weber , among others . Weber established the first department in Germany at the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich in 1919 , having presented an influential new antipositivist sociology . In 1920 , Florian Znaniecki set up the first department in Poland . The Institute for Social Research at the University of Frankfurt ( later to become the Frankfurt School of critical theory ) was founded in 1923 . International co @-@ operation in sociology began in 1893 , when René Worms founded the Institut International de <unk> , an institution later eclipsed by the much larger International Sociological Association ( ISA ) , founded in 1949 . 
 = = Theoretical traditions = = 
 = = = Classical theory = = = 
 The contemporary discipline of sociology is theoretically multi @-@ paradigmatic as a result of the contentions of classical social theory . In Randall Collins ' well @-@ cited survey of sociological theory he retroactively labels various theorists as belonging to four theoretical traditions : Functionalism , Conflict , Symbolic Interactionism , and Utilitarianism . Modern sociological theory descends predominately from functionalist ( Durkheim ) and conflict @-@ centered ( Marx and Weber ) accounts of social structure , as well as the symbolic <unk> tradition consisting of micro @-@ scale structural ( Simmel ) and pragmatist ( Mead , Cooley ) theories of social interaction . Utilitarianism , also known as Rational Choice or Social Exchange , although often associated with economics , is an established tradition within sociological theory . Lastly , as argued by <unk> Connell , a tradition that is often forgotten is that of Social Darwinism , which brings the logic of Darwinian biological evolution and applies it to people and societies . This tradition often aligns with classical functionalism . It was the dominant theoretical stance in American sociology from around 1881 to 1915 and is associated with several founders of sociology , primarily Herbert Spencer , Lester F. Ward and William Graham Sumner . Contemporary sociological theory retains traces of each of these traditions and they are by no means mutually exclusive . 
 = = = = Functionalism = = = = 
 A broad historical paradigm in both sociology and anthropology , functionalism addresses the social structure , referred to as social organisation in among the classical theorists , as a whole and in terms of the necessary function of its constituent elements . A common analogy ( popularised by Herbert Spencer ) is to regard norms and institutions as ' organs ' that work toward the proper @-@ functioning of the entire ' body ' of society . The perspective was implicit in the original sociological positivism of Comte , but was theorised in full by Durkheim , again with respect to observable , structural laws . Functionalism also has an anthropological basis in the work of theorists such as Marcel Mauss , Bronisław Malinowski and Radcliffe @-@ Brown . It is in Radcliffe @-@ Brown 's specific usage that the prefix ' structural ' emerged . Classical functionalist theory is generally united by its tendency towards biological analogy and notions of social evolutionism , in that the basic form of society would increase in complexity and those forms of social organisation that promoted solidarity would eventually overcome social disorganisation . As Giddens states : " Functionalist thought , from Comte onwards , has looked particularly towards biology as the science providing the closest and most compatible model for social science . Biology has been taken to provide a guide to conceptualising the structure and the function of social systems and to analysing processes of evolution via mechanisms of adaptation ... functionalism strongly emphasises the pre @-@ eminence of the social world over its individual parts ( i.e. its constituent actors , human subjects ) . " 
 = = = = Conflict theory = = = = 
 Functionalist theories emphasise " cohesive systems " and are often contrasted with " conflict theories " , which critique the overarching socio @-@ political system or emphasise the inequality between particular groups . The following quotes from Durkheim and Marx epitomise the political , as well as theoretical , disparities , between functionalist and conflict thought respectively : 
 To aim for a civilisation beyond that made possible by the nexus of the surrounding environment will result in <unk> sickness into the very society we live in . Collective activity cannot be encouraged beyond the point set by the condition of the social organism without undermining health . 
 The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles . Freeman and slave , patrician and plebeian , lord and serf , guild @-@ master and journeyman , in a word , oppressor and oppressed , stood in constant opposition to one another , carried on an uninterrupted , now hidden , now open fight , a fight that each time ended , either in a revolutionary re @-@ constitution of society at large , or in the common ruin of the contending classes . 
 = = = = Symbolic Interactionism = = = = 
 Symbolic interaction ; often associated with Interactionism , <unk> sociology , <unk> , <unk> , is a sociological tradition that places emphasis on subjective meanings and the empirical unfolding of social processes , generally accessed through micro @-@ analysis . This tradition emerged in the Chicago School of the 1920s and 1930s , which prior to World War II " had been the center of sociological research and graduate study " . The approach focuses on creating a framework for building a theory that sees society as the product of the everyday interactions of individuals . Society is nothing more than the shared reality that people construct as they interact with one another . This approach sees people interacting in countless settings using symbolic communications to accomplish the tasks at hand . Therefore , society is a complex , ever @-@ changing mosaic of subjective meanings . Some critics of this approach argue that it only looks at what is happening in a particular social situation , and disregards the effects that culture , race or gender ( i.e. social @-@ historical structures ) may have in that situation . Some important sociologists associated with this approach include Max Weber , George Herbert Mead , Erving Goffman , George <unk> and Peter Blau . It is also in this tradition that the radical @-@ empirical approach of <unk> emerges from the work of Harold Garfinkel . 
 = = = = Utilitarianism = = = = 
 Utilitarianism is often referred to as exchange theory or rational choice theory in the context of sociology . This tradition tends to privilege the agency of individual rational actors and assumes that within interactions individuals always seek to maximise their own self @-@ interest . As argued by Josh Whitford , rational actors are assumed to have four basic elements , the individual has ( 1 ) " a knowledge of alternatives , " ( 2 ) " a knowledge of , or beliefs about the consequences of the various alternatives , " ( 3 ) " an ordering of preferences over outcomes , " ( 4 ) " A decision rule , to select among the possible alternatives " Exchange theory is specifically attributed to the work of George C. <unk> , Peter Blau and Richard Emerson . Organisational sociologists James G. March and Herbert A. Simon noted that an individual 's rationality is bounded by the context or organisational setting . The utilitarian perspective in sociology was , most notably , revitalised in the late 20th century by the work of former ASA president James Coleman . 
 = = = 20th @-@ century social theory = = = 
 Following the decline of theories of sociocultural evolution , in the United States , the interactionism of the Chicago School dominated American sociology . As Anselm Strauss describes , " We didn 't think symbolic interaction was a perspective in sociology ; we thought it was sociology . " After World War II , mainstream sociology shifted to the survey @-@ research of Paul Lazarsfeld at Columbia University and the general theorising of <unk> Sorokin , followed by Talcott Parsons at Harvard University . Ultimately , " the failure of the Chicago , Columbia , and Wisconsin [ sociology ] departments to produce a significant number of graduate students interested in and committed to general theory in the years 1936 – 45 was to the advantage of the Harvard department . " As Parsons began to dominate general theory , his work predominately referenced European sociology — almost entirely omitting citations of both the American tradition of sociocultural @-@ evolution as well as pragmatism . In addition to Parsons ' revision of the sociological canon ( which included Marshall , Pareto , Weber and Durkheim ) , the lack of theoretical challenges from other departments nurtured the rise of the <unk> structural @-@ functionalist movement , which reached its crescendo in the 1950s , but by the 1960s was in rapid decline . 
 By the 1980s , most <unk> in Europe had broadly been replaced by conflict @-@ oriented approaches and to many in the discipline , functionalism was considered " as dead as a dodo . " " According to Giddens , the orthodox consensus terminated in the late 1960s and 1970s as the middle ground shared by otherwise competing perspectives gave way and was replaced by a baffling variety of competing perspectives . This third ' generation ' of social theory includes <unk> inspired approaches , critical theory , <unk> , symbolic interactionism , structuralism , post @-@ structuralism , and theories written in the tradition of hermeneutics and ordinary language philosophy . " 
 = = = = Pax Wisconsana = = = = 
 While some conflict approaches also gained popularity in the United States , the mainstream of the discipline instead shifted to a variety of empirically oriented middle @-@ range theories with no single overarching , or " grand " , theoretical orientation . John Levi Martin refers to this " golden age of methodological unity and theoretical calm " as the Pax Wisconsana , as it reflected the composition of the sociology department at the University of Wisconsin – Madison : numerous scholars working on separate projects with little contention . Omar <unk> describes the Pax Wisconsana as : " a Midwestern flavored , <unk> resolution of the theory / method wars in which [ sociologists ] all agreed on at least two working hypotheses : ( 1 ) " grand theory " is a waste of time ; ( 2 ) [ and ] good theory has to be good to think with or goes in the trash bin . " Despite the aversion to grand theory in the later half of the 20th century , several new traditions have emerged that propose various syntheses : structuralism , post @-@ structuralism , cultural sociology and systems theory . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The structuralist movement originated primarily from the work of Durkheim as interpreted by two European anthropologists . Anthony Giddens ' theory of structuration draws on the linguistic theory of Ferdinand de Saussure and the French anthropologist Claude Lévi @-@ Strauss . In this context , ' structure ' refers not to ' social structure ' but to the semiotic understanding of human culture as a system of signs . One may delineate four central tenets of structuralism : First , structure is what determines the structure of a whole . Second , structuralists believe that every system has a structure . Third , structuralists are interested in ' structural ' laws that deal with coexistence rather than changes . Finally , structures are the ' real things ' beneath the surface or the appearance of meaning . 
 The second tradition of structuralist thought , contemporaneous with Giddens , emerges from the American school of social network analysis , spearheaded by the Harvard Department of Social Relations led by Harrison White and his students in the 1970s and 1980s . This tradition of structuralist thought argues that , rather than semiotics , social structure is networks of patterned social relations . And , rather than Levi @-@ Strauss , this school of thought draws on the notions of structure as theorised by Levi @-@ Strauss ' contemporary anthropologist , Radcliffe @-@ Brown . Some refer to this as " network structuralism , " and equate it to " British structuralism " as opposed to the " French structuralism " of Levi @-@ Strauss . 
 = = = = Post @-@ structuralism = = = = 
 Post @-@ structuralist thought has tended to reject ' humanist ' assumptions in the conduct of social theory . Michel Foucault provides a potent critique in his Archaeology of the Human Sciences , though Habermas and Rorty have both argued that Foucault merely replaces one such system of thought with another . The dialogue between these intellectuals highlights a trend in recent years for certain schools of sociology and philosophy to intersect . The anti @-@ humanist position has been associated with " postmodernism , " a term used in specific contexts to describe an era or phenomena , but occasionally construed as a method . 
 = = Central theoretical problems = = 
 Overall , there is a strong consensus regarding the central problems of sociological theory , which are largely inherited from the classical theoretical traditions . This consensus is : how to link , transcend or cope with the following " big three " dichotomies : subjectivity and objectivity , structure and agency , and synchrony and diachrony . The first deals with knowledge , the second with action , and the last with time . Lastly , sociological theory often grapples with the problem of integrating or transcending the divide between micro , meso and macro @-@ scale social phenomena , which is a subset of all three central problems . 
 = = = Subjectivity and objectivity = = = 
 The problem of subjectivity and objectivity can be divided into a concern over the general possibilities of social actions , and , on the other hand the specific problem of social scientific knowledge . In the former , the subjective is often equated ( though not necessarily ) with the individual , and the individual 's intentions and interpretations of the objective . The objective is often considered any public or external action or outcome , on up to society writ large . A primary question for social theorists , is how knowledge reproduces along the chain of subjective @-@ objective @-@ subjective , that is to say : how is <unk> achieved ? While , historically , qualitative methods have attempted to tease out subjective interpretations , quantitative survey methods also attempt to capture individual <unk> . Also , some qualitative methods take a radical approach to objective description in situ . 
 The latter concern with scientific knowledge results from the fact that a sociologist is part of the very object they seek to explain . Bourdieu puts this problem rather succinct : 
 How can the sociologist effect in practice this radical doubting which is indispensable for bracketing all the presuppositions inherent in the fact that she is a social being , that she is therefore socialised and led to feel " like a fish in water " within that social world whose structures she has internalised ? How can she prevent the social world itself from carrying out the construction of the object , in a sense , through her , through these <unk> @-@ conscious operations or operations unaware of themselves of which she is the apparent subject 
 = = = Structure and agency = = = 
 Structure and agency , sometimes referred to as determinism versus voluntarism , form an enduring ontological debate in social theory : " Do social structures determine an individual 's behaviour or does human agency ? " In this context ' agency ' refers to the capacity of individuals to act independently and make free choices , whereas ' structure ' relates to factors that limit or affect the choices and actions of individuals ( such as social class , religion , gender , ethnicity , and so on ) . Discussions over the primacy of either structure and agency relate to the core of sociological epistemology ( " What is the social world made of ? " , " What is a cause in the social world , and what is an effect ? " ) . A perennial question within this debate is that of " social reproduction " : how are structures ( specifically , structures producing inequality ) reproduced through the choices of individuals ? 
 = = = Synchrony and <unk> = = = 
 Synchrony and diachrony , or statics and dynamics , within social theory are terms that refer to a distinction emerging out of the work of Levi @-@ Strauss who inherited it from the linguistics of Ferdinand de Saussure . The former slices moments of time for analysis , thus it is an analysis of static social reality . <unk> , on the other hand , attempts to analyse dynamic sequences . Following Saussure , synchrony would refer to social phenomena as a static concept like a language , while diachrony would refer to unfolding processes like actual speech . In Anthony Giddens ' introduction to Central Problems in Social Theory , he states that , " in order to show the interdependence of action and structure ... we must grasp the time space relations inherent in the constitution of all social interaction . " And like structure and agency , time is integral to discussion of social reproduction . In terms of sociology , historical sociology is often better positioned to analyse social life as diachronic , while survey research takes a snapshot of social life and is thus better equipped to understand social life as synchronised . Some argue that the synchrony of social structure is a methodological perspective rather than an ontological claim . Nonetheless , the problem for theory is how to integrate the two manners of recording and thinking about social data . 
 = = Research methodology = = 
 Sociological research methods may be divided into two broad categories : 
 Quantitative designs approach social phenomena through quantifiable evidence , and often rely on statistical analysis of many cases ( or across intentionally designed treatments in an experiment ) to create valid and reliable general claims 
 Qualitative designs emphasise understanding of social phenomena through direct observation , communication with participants , or analysis of texts , and may stress contextual and subjective accuracy over generality 
 Sociologists are divided into camps of support for particular research techniques . These disputes relate to the epistemological debates at the historical core of social theory . While very different in many aspects , both qualitative and quantitative approaches involve a systematic interaction between theory and data . Quantitative methodologies hold the dominant position in sociology , especially in the United States . In the discipline 's two most cited journals , quantitative articles have historically outnumbered qualitative ones by a factor of two . ( Most articles published in the largest British journal , on the other hand , are qualitative . ) Most textbooks on the methodology of social research are written from the quantitative perspective , and the very term " methodology " is often used synonymously with " statistics . " Practically all sociology PhD programs in the United States require training in statistical methods . The work produced by quantitative researchers is also deemed more ' trustworthy ' and ' unbiased ' by the greater public , though this judgment continues to be challenged by <unk> . 
 The choice of method often depends largely on what the researcher intends to investigate . For example , a researcher concerned with drawing a statistical generalisation across an entire population may administer a survey questionnaire to a representative sample population . By contrast , a researcher who seeks full contextual understanding of an individual 's social actions may choose ethnographic participant observation or open @-@ ended interviews . Studies will commonly combine , or ' triangulate ' , quantitative and qualitative methods as part of a ' multi @-@ strategy ' design . For instance , a quantitative study may be performed to gain statistical patterns or a target sample , and then combined with a qualitative interview to determine the play of agency . 
 = = = Sampling = = = 
 Quantitative methods are often used to ask questions about a population that is very large , making a census or a complete enumeration of all the members in that population infeasible . A ' sample ' then forms a manageable subset of a population . In quantitative research , statistics are used to draw inferences from this sample regarding the population as a whole . The process of selecting a sample is referred to as ' sampling ' . While it is usually best to sample randomly , concern with differences between specific subpopulations sometimes calls for stratified sampling . Conversely , the impossibility of random sampling sometimes necessitates <unk> sampling , such as convenience sampling or snowball sampling . 
 = = = Methods = = = 
 The following list of research methods is neither exclusive nor exhaustive : 
 Archival research or the Historical method : draws upon the secondary data located in historical archives and records , such as biographies , memoirs , journals , and so on . 
 Content analysis : The content of interviews and other texts is systematically analysed . Often data is ' coded ' as a part of the ' grounded theory ' approach using qualitative data analysis ( <unk> ) software , such as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> Miner . 
 Experimental research : The researcher isolates a single social process and reproduces it in a laboratory ( for example , by creating a situation where unconscious sexist judgements are possible ) , seeking to determine whether or not certain social variables can cause , or depend upon , other variables ( for instance , seeing if people 's feelings about traditional gender roles can be manipulated by the activation of contrasting gender stereotypes ) . Participants are randomly assigned to different groups that either serve as controls — acting as reference points because they are tested with regard to the dependent variable , albeit without having been exposed to any independent variables of interest — or receive one or more treatments . <unk> allows the researcher to be sure that any resulting differences between groups are the result of the treatment . 
 Longitudinal study : An extensive examination of a specific person or group over a long period of time . 
 Observation : Using data from the senses , the researcher records information about social phenomenon or behaviour . Observation techniques may or may not feature participation . In participant observation , the researcher goes into the field ( such as a community or a place of work ) , and participates in the activities of the field for a prolonged period of time in order to acquire a deep understanding of it . Data acquired through these techniques may be analysed either quantitatively or qualitatively . In the observation research , a sociologist might study global warming in some part of the that is less populated . 
 Survey research : The researcher gathers data using interviews , questionnaires , or similar feedback from a set of people sampled from a particular population of interest . Survey items from an interview or questionnaire may be open @-@ ended or closed @-@ ended . Data from surveys is usually analysed statistically on a computer . 
 = = = Computational sociology = = = 
 Sociologists increasingly draw upon computationally intensive methods to analyse and model social phenomena . Using computer simulations , artificial intelligence , text mining , complex statistical methods , and new analytic approaches like social network analysis and social sequence analysis , computational sociology develops and tests theories of complex social processes through bottom @-@ up modeling of social interactions . 
 Although the subject matter and methodologies in social science differ from those in natural science or computer science , several of the approaches used in contemporary social simulation originated from fields such as physics and artificial intelligence . By the same token , some of the approaches that originated in computational sociology have been imported into the natural sciences , such as measures of network centrality from the fields of social network analysis and network science . In relevant literature , computational sociology is often related to the study of social complexity . Social complexity concepts such as complex systems , non @-@ linear interconnection among macro and micro process , and emergence , have entered the vocabulary of computational sociology . A practical and well @-@ known example is the construction of a computational model in the form of an " artificial society " , by which researchers can analyse the structure of a social system . 
 = = Scope and topics = = 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 Sociologists ' approach to culture can be divided into a " sociology of culture " and " cultural sociology " — the terms are similar , though not entirely interchangeable . The sociology of culture is an older term , and considers some topics and objects as more @-@ or @-@ less " cultural " than others . Conversely , cultural sociology sees all social phenomena as inherently cultural . Sociology of culture often attempts to explain certain cultural phenomena as a product of social processes , while cultural sociology sees culture as a potential explanation of social phenomena . 
 For Simmel , culture referred to " the cultivation of individuals through the agency of external forms which have been objectified in the course of history " . While early theorists such as Durkheim and Mauss were influential in cultural anthropology , sociologists of culture are generally distinguished by their concern for modern ( rather than primitive or ancient ) society . Cultural sociology often involves the hermeneutic analysis of words , artifacts and symbols , or ethnographic interviews . However , some sociologists employ historical @-@ comparative or quantitative techniques in the analysis of culture , Weber and Bourdieu for instance . The subfield is sometimes allied with critical theory in the vein of Theodor W. Adorno , Walter Benjamin , and other members of the Frankfurt School . Loosely distinct from the sociology of culture is the field of cultural studies . Birmingham School theorists such as Richard Hoggart and Stuart Hall questioned the division between " producers " and " consumers " evident in earlier theory , emphasising the reciprocity in the production of texts . Cultural Studies aims to examine its subject matter in terms of cultural practices and their relation to power . For example , a study of a subculture ( such as white working class youth in London ) would consider the social practices of the group as they relate to the dominant class . The " cultural turn " of the 1960s ultimately placed culture much higher on the sociological agenda . 
 = = = = Art , music and literature = = = = 
 Sociology of literature , film , and art is a subset of the sociology of culture . This field studies the social production of artistic objects and its social implications . A notable example is Pierre Bourdieu 's 1992 Les Règles de L 'Art : <unk> et Structure du Champ <unk> , translated by Susan Emanuel as Rules of Art : Genesis and Structure of the Literary Field ( 1996 ) . None of the founding fathers of sociology produced a detailed study of art , but they did develop ideas that were subsequently applied to literature by others . Marx 's theory of ideology was directed at literature by Pierre <unk> , Terry Eagleton and Fredric Jameson . Weber 's theory of modernity as cultural rationalisation , which he applied to music , was later applied to all the arts , literature included , by Frankfurt School writers such as Adorno and Jürgen Habermas . Durkheim 's view of sociology as the study of externally defined social facts was redirected towards literature by Robert <unk> . Bourdieu 's own work is clearly indebted to Marx , Weber and Durkheim . 
 = = = <unk> , deviance , law and punishment = = = 
 Criminologists analyse the nature , causes , and control of criminal activity , drawing upon methods across sociology , psychology , and the behavioural sciences . The sociology of deviance focuses on actions or behaviours that violate norms , including both formally enacted rules ( e.g. , crime ) and informal violations of cultural norms . It is the remit of sociologists to study why these norms exist ; how they change over time ; and how they are enforced . The concept of social disorganisation is when the broader social systems leads to violations of norms . For instance , Robert K. Merton produced a typology of deviance , which includes both individual and system level causal explanations of deviance . 
 = = = = Sociology of law = = = = 
 The study of law played a significant role in the formation of classical sociology . Durkheim famously described law as the " visible symbol " of social solidarity . The sociology of law refers to both a sub @-@ discipline of sociology and an approach within the field of legal studies . Sociology of law is a diverse field of study that examines the interaction of law with other aspects of society , such as the development of legal institutions and the effect of laws on social change and vice versa . For example , an influential recent work in the field relies on statistical analyses to argue that the increase in incarceration in the US over the last 30 years is due to changes in law and policing and not to an increase in crime ; and that this increase significantly contributes to maintaining racial stratification . 
 = = = Communications and information technologies = = = 
 The sociology of communications and information technologies includes " the social aspects of computing , the Internet , new media , computer networks , and other communication and information technologies " . 
 = = = = Internet and digital media = = = = 
 The Internet is of interest to sociologists in various ways ; most practically as a tool for research and as a discussion platform . The sociology of the Internet in the broad sense regards the analysis of online communities ( e.g. newsgroups , social networking sites ) and virtual worlds , thus there is often overlap with community sociology . Online communities may be studied statistically through network analysis or interpreted qualitatively through virtual ethnography . Moreover , organisational change is catalysed through new media , thereby influencing social change at @-@ large , perhaps forming the framework for a transformation from an industrial to an informational society . One notable text is Manuel <unk> ' The Internet Galaxy — the title of which forms an inter @-@ textual reference to Marshall McLuhan 's The Gutenberg Galaxy . Closely related to the sociology of the Internet , is digital sociology , which expands the scope of study to address not only the internet but also the impact of the other digital media and devices that have emerged since the first decade of the twenty @-@ first century . 
 = = = = Media = = = = 
 As with cultural studies , media study is a distinct discipline that owes to the convergence of sociology and other social sciences and humanities , in particular , literary criticism and critical theory . Though the production process or the critique of aesthetic forms is not in the remit of sociologists , analyses of socialising factors , such as ideological effects and audience reception , stem from sociological theory and method . Thus the ' sociology of the media ' is not a subdiscipline per se , but the media is a common and often @-@ indispensable topic . 
 = = = Economic sociology = = = 
 The term " economic sociology " was first used by William Stanley Jevons in 1879 , later to be coined in the works of Durkheim , Weber and Simmel between 1890 and 1920 . Economic sociology arose as a new approach to the analysis of economic phenomena , emphasising class relations and modernity as a philosophical concept . The relationship between capitalism and modernity is a salient issue , perhaps best demonstrated in Weber 's The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism ( 1905 ) and Simmel 's The Philosophy of Money ( 1900 ) . The contemporary period of economic sociology , also known as new economic sociology , was consolidated by the 1985 work of Mark <unk> titled " Economic Action and Social Structure : The Problem of <unk> " . This work elaborated the concept of embeddedness , which states that economic relations between individuals or firms take place within existing social relations ( and are thus structured by these relations as well as the greater social structures of which those relations are a part ) . Social network analysis has been the primary methodology for studying this phenomenon . <unk> 's theory of the strength of weak ties and Ronald Burt 's concept of structural holes are two best known theoretical contributions of this field . 
 = = = = Work , employment , and industry = = = = 
 The sociology of work , or industrial sociology , examines " the direction and implications of trends in technological change , globalisation , labour markets , work organisation , managerial practices and employment relations to the extent to which these trends are intimately related to changing patterns of inequality in modern societies and to the changing experiences of individuals and families the ways in which workers challenge , resist and make their own contributions to the patterning of work and shaping of work institutions . " 
 = = = Education = = = 
 The sociology of education is the study of how educational institutions determine social structures , experiences , and other outcomes . It is particularly concerned with the schooling systems of modern industrial societies . A classic 1966 study in this field by James Coleman , known as the " Coleman Report " , analysed the performance of over 150 @,@ 000 students and found that student background and socioeconomic status are much more important in determining educational outcomes than are measured differences in school resources ( i.e. per pupil spending ) . The controversy over " school effects " ignited by that study has continued to this day . The study also found that socially disadvantaged black students profited from schooling in racially mixed classrooms , and thus served as a catalyst for desegregation busing in American public schools . 
 = = = Environment = = = 
 Environmental sociology is the study of human interactions with the natural environment , typically emphasising human dimensions of environmental problems , social impacts of those problems , and efforts to resolve them . As with other sub @-@ fields of sociology , scholarship in environmental sociology may be at one or multiple levels of analysis , from global ( e.g. world @-@ systems ) to local , societal to individual . Attention is paid also to the processes by which environmental problems become defined and known to humans . As argued by notable environmental sociologist John Bellamy Foster , the predecessor to modern environmental sociology is Marx 's analysis of the metabolic rift , which influenced contemporary thought on sustainability . Environmental sociology is often interdisciplinary and overlaps with the sociology of risk , rural sociology and the sociology of disaster . 
 = = = = Human ecology = = = = 
 Human ecology deals with interdisciplinary study of the relationship between humans and their natural , social , and built environments . In addition to Environmental sociology , this field overlaps with architectural sociology , urban sociology , and to some extent visual sociology . In turn , visual sociology — which is concerned with all visual dimensions of social life — overlaps with media studies in that it utilises photography , film and other technologies of media . 
 = = = Family , gender , and sexuality = = = 
 Family , gender and sexuality form a broad area of inquiry studied in many sub @-@ fields of sociology . A family is a group of people who are related by kinship ties : - Relations of blood / marriage / civil partnership or adoption . The family unit is one of the most important social institutions found in some form in nearly all known societies . It is the basic unit of social organisation and plays a <unk> in socializing children into the culture of their society . The sociology of the family examines the family , as an institution and unit of socialisation , with special concern for the comparatively modern historical emergence of the nuclear family and its distinct gender roles . The notion of " childhood " is also significant . As one of the more basic institutions to which one may apply sociological perspectives , the sociology of the family is a common component on introductory academic curricula . Feminist sociology , on the other hand , is a normative sub @-@ field that observes and critiques the cultural categories of gender and sexuality , particularly with respect to power and inequality . The primary concern of feminist theory is the patriarchy and the systematic oppression of women apparent in many societies , both at the level of small @-@ scale interaction and in terms of the broader social structure . Feminist sociology also analyses how gender interlocks with race and class to produce and perpetuate social inequalities . " How to account for the differences in definitions of femininity and masculinity and in sex role across different societies and historical periods " is also a concern . Social psychology of gender , on the other hand , uses experimental methods to uncover the <unk> of gender stratification . For example , one recent study has shown that resume evaluators penalise women for motherhood while giving a boost to men for fatherhood . 
 = = = Health , illness , and the body = = = 
 The sociology of health and illness focuses on the social effects of , and public attitudes toward , illnesses , diseases , mental health and disabilities . This sub @-@ field also overlaps with gerontology and the study of the ageing process . Medical sociology , by contrast , focuses on the inner @-@ workings of medical organisations and clinical institutions . In Britain , sociology was introduced into the medical curriculum following the Goodenough Report ( 1944 ) . 
 The sociology of the body and embodiment takes a broad perspective on the idea of " the body " and includes " a wide range of embodied dynamics including human and non @-@ human bodies , morphology , human reproduction , anatomy , body fluids , biotechnology , genetics . This often intersects with health and illness , but also theories of bodies as political , social , cultural , economic and ideological productions . The ISA maintains a Research Committee devoted to " The Body in the Social Sciences " . 
 = = = = Death , dying , bereavement = = = = 
 A subfield of the sociology of health and illness that overlaps with cultural sociology is the study of death , dying and bereavement , sometimes referred to broadly as the sociology of death . This topic is <unk> by the work of Douglas Davies and Michael C. <unk> . 
 = = = Knowledge and science = = = 
 The sociology of knowledge is the study of the relationship between human thought and the social context within which it arises , and of the effects prevailing ideas have on societies . The term first came into widespread use in the 1920s , when a number of German @-@ speaking theorists , most notably Max Scheler , and Karl Mannheim , wrote extensively on it . With the dominance of functionalism through the middle years of the 20th century , the sociology of knowledge tended to remain on the periphery of mainstream sociological thought . It was largely reinvented and applied much more closely to everyday life in the 1960s , particularly by Peter L. Berger and Thomas <unk> in The Social Construction of Reality ( 1966 ) and is still central for methods dealing with qualitative understanding of human society ( compare socially constructed reality ) . The " archaeological " and " genealogical " studies of Michel Foucault are of considerable contemporary influence . 
 The sociology of science involves the study of science as a social activity , especially dealing " with the social conditions and effects of science , and with the social structures and processes of scientific activity . " Important theorists in the sociology of science include Robert K. Merton and Bruno Latour . These branches of sociology have contributed to the formation of science and technology studies . Both the ASA and the BSA have sections devoted to the subfield of Science , Knowledge and Technology . The ISA maintains a Research Committee on Science and Technology 
 = = = Leisure = = = 
 Sociology of leisure is the study of how humans organise their free time . Leisure includes a broad array of activities , such as sport , tourism , and the playing of games . The sociology of leisure is closely tied to the sociology of work , as each explores a different side of the work @-@ leisure relationship . More recent studies in the field move away from the work @-@ leisure relationship and focus on the relation between leisure and culture . This area of sociology began with Thorstein Veblen 's Theory of the Leisure Class . 
 = = = Peace , war , and conflict = = = 
 This subfield of sociology studies , broadly , the dynamics of war , conflict resolution , peace movements , war refugees , conflict resolution and military institutions . As a subset of this subfield , military sociology aims toward the systematic study of the military as a social group rather than as an organisation . It is a highly specialised sub @-@ field which examines issues related to service personnel as a distinct group with coerced collective action based on shared interests linked to survival in vocation and combat , with purposes and values that are more defined and narrow than within civil society . Military sociology also concerns civilian @-@ military relations and interactions between other groups or governmental agencies . Topics include the dominant assumptions held by those in the military , changes in military members ' willingness to fight , military unionisation , military professionalism , the increased utilisation of women , the military industrial @-@ academic complex , the military 's dependence on research , and the institutional and organisational structure of military . 
 = = = Political sociology = = = 
 Historically political sociology concerned the relations between political organisation and society . A typical research question in this area might be : " Why do so few American citizens choose to vote ? " In this respect questions of political opinion formation brought about some of the pioneering uses of statistical survey research by Paul Lazarsfeld . A major subfield of political sociology developed in relation to such questions , which draws on comparative history to analyse socio @-@ political trends . The field developed from the work of Max Weber and <unk> Ostrogorsky . 
 Contemporary political sociology includes these areas of research , but it has been opened up to wider questions of power and politics . Today political sociologists are as likely to be concerned with how identities are formed that contribute to structural domination by one group over another ; the politics of who knows how and with what authority ; and questions of how power is contested in social interactions in such a way as to bring about widespread cultural and social change . Such questions are more likely to be studied qualitatively . The study of social movements and their effects has been especially important in relation to these wider definitions of politics and power . 
 Political sociology has also moved beyond methodological nationalism and analysed the role of non @-@ governmental organisations , the diffusion of the nation @-@ state throughout the Earth as a social construct , and the role of stateless entities in the modern world society . Contemporary political sociologists also study inter @-@ state interactions and human rights . 
 = = = Population and demography = = = 
 Demographers or sociologists of population study the size , composition and change over time of a given population . Demographers study how these characteristics impact , or are impacted by , various social , economic or political systems . The study of population is also closely related to human ecology and environmental sociology , which studies a populations relationship with the surrounding environment and often overlaps with urban or rural sociology . Researchers in this field may study the movement of populations : transportation , migrations , diaspora , etc . , which falls into the subfield known as <unk> studies and is closely related to human geography . Demographers may also study spread of disease within a given population or epidemiology . 
 = = = Public sociology = = = 
 Public sociology refers to an approach to the discipline which seeks to transcend the academy in order to engage with wider audiences . It is perhaps best understood as a style of sociology rather than a particular method , theory , or set of political values . This approach is primarily associated with Michael <unk> who contrasted it with professional sociology , a form of academic sociology that is concerned primarily with addressing other professional sociologists . Public sociology is also part of the broader field of science communication or science journalism . In a distinct but similar vein , applied sociology , also known as clinical sociology , policy sociology or sociological practice , applies knowledge derived from sociological research to solve societal problems . 
 = = = Race and ethnic relations = = = 
 The sociology of race and of ethnic relations is the area of the discipline that studies the social , political , and economic relations between races and ethnicities at all levels of society . This area encompasses the study of racism , residential segregation , and other complex social processes between different racial and ethnic groups . This research frequently interacts with other areas of sociology such as stratification and social psychology , as well as with postcolonial theory . At the level of political policy , ethnic relations are discussed in terms of either <unk> or multiculturalism . Anti @-@ racism forms another style of policy , particularly popular in the 1960s and 70s . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The sociology of religion concerns the practices , historical backgrounds , developments , universal themes and roles of religion in society . There is particular emphasis on the recurring role of religion in all societies and throughout recorded history . The sociology of religion is distinguished from the philosophy of religion in that sociologists do not set out to assess the validity of religious truth @-@ claims , instead assuming what Peter L. Berger has described as a position of " methodological atheism " . It may be said that the modern formal discipline of sociology began with the analysis of religion in Durkheim 's 1897 study of suicide rates among Roman Catholic and Protestant populations . Max Weber published four major texts on religion in a context of economic sociology and social stratification : The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism ( 1905 ) , The Religion of China : Confucianism and Taoism ( 1915 ) , The Religion of India : The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism ( 1915 ) , and Ancient Judaism ( 1920 ) . Contemporary debates often center on topics such as secularisation , civil religion , the intersection of religion and economics and the role of religion in a context of globalisation and multiculturalism . 
 = = = Social change and development = = = 
 The sociology of change and development attempts to understand how societies develop and how they can be changed . Within this field , sociologists often use <unk> methods or historical @-@ comparative methods . In contemporary studies of social change , there is overlaps with international development or community development . However , most of the founders of sociology had theories of social change based on their study of history . For instance , Marx contended that the material circumstances of society ultimately caused the ideal or cultural aspects of society , while Weber argued that it was in fact the cultural mores of Protestantism that ushered in a transformation of material circumstances . In contrast to both , Durkheim argued that societies moved from simple to complex through a process of sociocultural evolution . Sociologists in this field also study processes of globalisation and imperialism . Most notably , Immanuel Wallerstein extends Marx 's theoretical frame to include large spans of time and the entire globe in what is known as world systems theory . Development sociology is also heavily influenced by post @-@ colonialism . In recent years , <unk> Connell issued a critique of the bias in sociological research toward countries in the Global North . She argues that this bias blinds sociologists to the lived experiences of the Global South , specifically , so @-@ called , " Northern Theory " lacks an adequate theory of imperialism and colonialism . 
 = = = Social networks = = = 
 A social network is a social structure composed of individuals ( or organisations ) called " nodes " , which are tied ( connected ) by one or more specific types of interdependency , such as friendship , kinship , financial exchange , dislike , sexual relationships , or relationships of beliefs , knowledge or prestige . Social networks operate on many levels , from families up to the level of nations , and play a critical role in determining the way problems are solved , organisations are run , and the degree to which individuals succeed in achieving their goals . An underlying theoretical assumption of social network analysis is that groups are not necessarily the building blocks of society : the approach is open to studying less @-@ bounded social systems , from non @-@ local communities to networks of exchange . Drawing theoretically from relational sociology , social network analysis avoids treating individuals ( persons , organisations , states ) as discrete units of analysis , it focuses instead on how the structure of ties affects and constitutes individuals and their relationships . In contrast to analyses that assume that socialisation into norms determines behaviour , network analysis looks to see the extent to which the structure and composition of ties affect norms . On the other hand , recent research by Omar <unk> also demonstrates that network ties are shaped and created by previously existing cultural tastes . Social network theory is usually defined in formal mathematics and may include integration of geographical data into <unk> . 
 = = = Social psychology = = = 
 Sociological social psychology focuses on micro @-@ scale social actions . This area may be described as adhering to " sociological <unk> " , examining whole societies through the study of individual thoughts and emotions as well as behaviour of small groups . Of special concern to psychological sociologists is how to explain a variety of demographic , social , and cultural facts in terms of human social interaction . Some of the major topics in this field are social inequality , group dynamics , prejudice , aggression , social perception , group behaviour , social change , non @-@ verbal behaviour , socialisation , conformity , leadership , and social identity . Social psychology may be taught with psychological emphasis . In sociology , researchers in this field are the most prominent users of the experimental method ( however , unlike their psychological counterparts , they also frequently employ other methodologies ) . Social psychology looks at social influences , as well as social perception and social interaction . 
 = = = Stratification , poverty and inequality = = = 
 Social stratification is the hierarchical arrangement of individuals into social classes , castes , and divisions within a society . Modern Western societies stratification traditionally relates to cultural and economic classes arranged in three main layers : upper class , middle class , and lower class , but each class may be further subdivided into smaller classes ( e.g. occupational ) . Social stratification is interpreted in radically different ways within sociology . Proponents of structural functionalism suggest that , since the stratification of classes and castes is evident in all societies , hierarchy must be beneficial in stabilising their existence . Conflict theorists , by contrast , critique the inaccessibility of resources and lack of social mobility in stratified societies . 
 Karl Marx distinguished social classes by their connection to the means of production in the capitalist system : the bourgeoisie own the means , but this effectively includes the proletariat itself as the workers can only sell their own labour power ( forming the material base of the cultural superstructure ) . Max Weber critiqued Marxist economic determinism , arguing that social stratification is not based purely on economic inequalities , but on other status and power differentials ( e.g. patriarchy ) . According to Weber , stratification may occur among at least three complex variables : ( 1 ) Property ( class ) : A person 's economic position in a society , based on birth and individual achievement . Weber differs from Marx in that he does not see this as the supreme factor in stratification . Weber noted how managers of corporations or industries control firms they do not own ; Marx would have placed such a person in the proletariat . ( 2 ) Prestige ( status ) : A person 's prestige , or popularity in a society . This could be determined by the kind of job this person does or <unk> and ( 3 ) Power ( political party ) : A person 's ability to get their way despite the resistance of others . For example , individuals in state jobs , such as an employee of the Federal Bureau of Investigation , or a member of the United States Congress , may hold little property or status but they still hold immense power Pierre Bourdieu provides a modern example in the concepts of cultural and symbolic capital . Theorists such as Ralf <unk> have noted the tendency toward an enlarged middle @-@ class in modern Western societies , particularly in relation to the necessity of an educated work force in technological or service @-@ based economies . Perspectives concerning globalisation , such as dependency theory , suggest this effect owes to the shift of workers to the developing countries . 
 = = = Urban and rural sociology = = = 
 Urban sociology involves the analysis of social life and human interaction in metropolitan areas . It is a discipline seeking to provide advice for planning and policy making . After the industrial revolution , works such as Georg Simmel 's The Metropolis and Mental Life ( 1903 ) focused on urbanisation and the effect it had on alienation and anonymity . In the 1920s and 1930s The Chicago School produced a major body of theory on the nature of the city , important to both urban sociology and criminology , utilising symbolic interactionism as a method of field research . Contemporary research is commonly placed in a context of globalisation , for instance , in Saskia Sassen 's study of the " Global city " . Rural sociology , by contrast , is the analysis of non @-@ metropolitan areas . As agriculture and wilderness tend to be a more prominent social fact in rural regions , rural sociologists often overlap with environmental sociologists . 
 = = = = Community sociology = = = = 
 Often grouped with urban and rural sociology is that of community sociology or the sociology of community . Taking various communities — including online communities — as the unit of analysis , community sociologists study the origin and effects of different associations of people . For instance , German sociologist Ferdinand Tönnies distinguished between two types of human association : Gemeinschaft ( usually translated as " community " ) and Gesellschaft ( " society " or " association " ) . In his 1887 work , Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft , Tönnies argued that Gemeinschaft is perceived to be a tighter and more cohesive social entity , due to the presence of a " unity of will " . The ' development ' or ' health ' of a community is also a central concern of community sociologists also engage in development sociology , exemplified by the literature surrounding the concept of social capital . 
 = = = Violence = = = 
 The late political theorist Hannah Arendt wrote widely on the connection between power and violence , in particular her book On Violence . 
 = = Sociology and the other academic disciplines = = 
 Sociology overlaps with a variety of disciplines that study society , in particular anthropology , political science , economics , social work and social philosophy . Many comparatively new fields such as communication studies , cultural studies , demography and literary theory , draw upon methods that originated in sociology . The terms " social science " and " social research " have both gained a degree of autonomy since their origination in classical sociology . The distinct field of social psychology emerged from the many intersections of sociological and psychological interests , and is further distinguished in terms of sociological or psychological emphasis . 
 Sociology and applied sociology are connected to the professional and academic discipline of social work . Both disciplines study social interactions , community and the effect of various systems ( i.e. family , school , community , laws , political sphere ) on the individual . However , social work is generally more focused on practical strategies to alleviate social dysfunctions ; sociology in general provides a thorough examination of the root causes of these problems . For example , a sociologist might study why a community is plagued with poverty . The applied sociologist would be more focused on practical strategies on what needs to be done to alleviate this burden . The social worker would be focused on action ; implementing theses strategies " directly " or " indirectly " by means of mental health therapy , counseling , advocacy , community organisation or community mobilisation . 
 Social anthropology is the branch of anthropology that studies how contemporary living human beings behave in social groups . Practitioners of social anthropology , like sociologists , investigate various facets of social organisation . Traditionally , social anthropologists analysed non @-@ industrial and non @-@ Western societies , whereas sociologists focused on industrialised societies in the Western world . In recent years , however , social anthropology has expanded its focus to modern Western societies , meaning that the two disciplines increasingly converge . 
 Sociobiology is the study of how social behaviour and organisation have been influenced by evolution and other biological process . The field blends sociology with a number of other sciences , such as anthropology , biology , and zoology . Sociobiology has generated controversy within the sociological academy for allegedly giving too much attention to gene expression over socialisation and environmental factors in general ( see ' nature versus nurture ' ) . Entomologist E. O. Wilson is credited as having originally developed and described Sociobiology . Besides Sociobiology the bio @-@ communication theory investigates interactions between non @-@ human organisms such as animal communication , plant communication , fungal communication and communication in micro @-@ organisms on the basis of rule @-@ governed sign @-@ use . In this respect any coordination of behaviour between at least two organisms is sign @-@ mediated that underlies combinatorial ( syntactic ) , context @-@ dependent ( pragmatic ) and content @-@ relevant ( semantic ) rules . 
 Irving Louis Horowitz , in his The Decomposition of Sociology ( 1994 ) , has argued that the discipline , while arriving from a " distinguished lineage and tradition " , is in decline due to deeply ideological theory and a lack of relevance to policy making : " The decomposition of sociology began when this great tradition became subject to ideological thinking , and an inferior tradition surfaced in the wake of totalitarian triumphs . " Furthermore : " A problem yet unmentioned is that sociology 's malaise has left all the social sciences vulnerable to pure positivism — to an empiricism lacking any theoretical basis . Talented individuals who might , in an earlier time , have gone into sociology are seeking intellectual stimulation in business , law , the natural sciences , and even creative writing ; this drains sociology of much needed potential . " Horowitz cites the lack of a ' core discipline ' as exacerbating the problem . Randall Collins , the Dorothy Swaine Thomas Professor in Sociology at the University of Pennsylvania and a member of the Advisory Editors Council of the Social Evolution & History journal , has voiced similar sentiments : " we have lost all coherence as a discipline , we are breaking up into a conglomerate of specialities , each going on its own way and with none too high regard for each other . " 
 In 2007 , The Times Higher Education Guide published a list of ' The most cited authors of books in the Humanities ' ( including philosophy and psychology ) . Seven of the top ten are listed as sociologists : Michel Foucault ( 1 ) , Pierre Bourdieu ( 2 ) , Anthony Giddens ( 5 ) , Erving Goffman ( 6 ) , Jürgen Habermas ( 7 ) , Max Weber ( 8 ) , and Bruno Latour ( 10 ) . 
 = = Journals = = 
 The most highly ranked general journals which publish original research in the field of sociology are the American Journal of Sociology and the American Sociological Review . The Annual Review of Sociology , which publishes original review essays , is also highly ranked . Many other generalist and specialised journals exist . 
 = Age of Empires III : The Asian Dynasties = 
 Age of Empires III : The Asian Dynasties is the second expansion pack for the real @-@ time strategy video game Age of Empires III developed through a collaboration between Ensemble Studios and Big Huge Games , and published by Microsoft Game Studios . The Mac version was ported over , developed and published by <unk> 's MacSoft Games . The game is the second expansion pack following The WarChiefs . The game introduces three new civilizations ; China , Japan , and India . It also introduced minor people , campaigns , maps , and game modes . 
 Age of Empires III : The Asian Dynasties for PC was released in North America on October 23 , 2007 . The Mac version was released on August 5 , 2008 . The game was generally received well by critics , mostly praising graphics , and sometimes criticizing predictable aspects of the game . It earned a 79 % score on GameRankings and an 81 % on Metacritic . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gameplay of Age of Empires III : The Asian Dynasties followed a similar format to the original game , Age of Empires III . Rather than introduce new methods of gameplay , most changes were focused on introducing new content to the game . 
 Export is a special resource , only available to the three Asian civilizations , and is used to hire foreign troops and research technologies from the consulate , where the player can choose a foreign ally or , for the Japanese , isolationism . Export is generated automatically when the villagers are gathering , but its gather rate is much slower than other resources , making it challenging to afford a large foreign army . Export Rate / Experience points are also generated by other means ( like sacred cows for Indians ) and are specific to each clan . 
 = = = Civilizations = = = 
 Three new civilizations are added in Age of Empires III : The Asian Dynasties . Each Asian civilization has monks , instead of explorers as in previous games . These monks have the ability of ' Stun ' instead of ' Sharpshooter Attack ' ( as for European powers ) or ' Nature Friendship ' ( as in the War Chiefs ) . 
 There are six new native civilizations available for hire in The Asian Dynasties . They are the Sufis , the Shaolin , the Zen , the <unk> , the Bhakti , and the Jesuits . 
 India — This civilization has no villager cards at the Home City , but they receive one villager with almost every shipment . All villagers that are not shipped from the Home City cost wood instead of food . Villagers are also not allowed to harvest livestock for food , but instead can build a structure called a Sacred Field which generates experience points whenever livestock are tasked to it . Sepoys ( Musketeers ) , Gurkha ( Skirmishers ) and Rajputs ( much like <unk> ) are the primary infantry units , and India has several types of camel and elephant cavalry . Both of India 's Brahmin monks ride atop elephants and can heal other units from the start of the game . Their Home City is Delhi and their leader is Akbar the Great . 
 China — The Chinese get only one explorer ( a Shaolin monk ) along with a weak disciple at the start of the game . Chinese monks and disciples have the ability to occasionally land critical hits , doing extra damage . The Chinese monk is the only Asian hero who can train military units ( disciples ) during the Discovery Age and has the largest number of attack points compared to any other monk or explorer . The Chinese monk also has the unique ability to convert enemy units defeated by him into disciples , although the chances are low . The Chinese have a higher population limit than all the other civilizations ; up to 220 population points , rather than the usual 200 . However , to reach this cap , several upgrades must be made . Additionally , their military units are trained in blocks , much like the Russians , except that each block is made up by several types of troops , meaning when the player creates a " block " they receive a technically combat @-@ ready force . The Chinese build villages rather than houses or shrines . Villages can garrison villagers and livestock given to them tasked to fatten more quickly . These villages also supply 20 population . Their Home City is Beijing and their leader is the Kangxi Emperor . 
 Japan — This civilization has the Daimyo and Shogun units . Japanese villagers cannot gather food via herding or hunting , but can build shrines near huntable and <unk> animals to gain a slow trickle of food , wood , or coin ( or experience once a certain shipment is sent from the Home City ) . The shrines also act as houses , supporting 10 population units . They have the unique ability to ship most cards twice . Their starting explorers are two Ikko @-@ Ikki archer monks that can be improved with extra attributes ( via shipment cards or upgrades at the Monastery ) . The monks start off with an ability called " Divine Strike " which can be used to finish off guardians or enemy units with less health . They also begin with a move that temporarily stuns treasure guardians . Japanese monks also have the ability to build shrines , which allows villagers to focus on gathering resources and building other structures . Their Home City is Edo and their leader Tokugawa Ieyasu . 
 = = = Campaigns = = = 
 There are three new campaigns , one for each new civilization . Furthermore , these campaigns return to the historical , civilization @-@ based single @-@ player campaigns , which are different from the past campaigns in the Age of Empires III series . Each campaign consists of five new scenarios . They are the first campaigns in the Age of Empires III series to not revolve around the fictional Black family . 
 Japanese campaign — The Japanese campaign focuses on the unification of Japan , the beginning of which was also a scenario in Age of Empires II : The Conquerors , the establishment of the Tokugawa Shogunate , which players control , and a young general named Sakuma Kichiro , the " adopted son " of Tokugawa Ieyasu . The campaign begins when Kichiro meets up with Daimyo Torii Mototada , who also narrates this campaign , at the siege of Osaka ( transported from 1598 to 1615 ) to capture the 5 @-@ year @-@ old heir of Hideyoshi . Kichiro and Mototada ally with the local villagers and storm the castle . Next , they move to the north @-@ east of Honshu to destroy any villages that might support Tokugawa 's enemy Uesugi <unk> and defeat Uesugi 's army . After the victory , in which they suffer heavy losses , Mototada learns that Tokugawa 's main enemy , Ishida <unk> is threatening Mototada 's estate at Fushimi , forcing Mototada to return there . Meanwhile , Kichiro marches his exhausted army west again to take control of the <unk> Road trade route . In the aftermath of the battle there , Kichiro learns from a defeated samurai that it was Tokugawa who destroyed his home when he was a baby and murdered his parents . Kichiro , true to the samurai code , remains loyal to Tokugawa and joins Mototada at Fushimi . Here , Mototada confirms the defeated samurai 's story . During the ensuing battle , Kichiro escorts the non @-@ combatants to safety , but is forced to leave Mototada to fight alone . As the enemy breaches the final defenses , Mototada commits seppuku , detailing in his last statement the importance of loyalty . Kichiro joins Tokugawa at Sekigahara . After the Battle of Sekigahara ends in victory for Tokugawa , Kichiro finally changes his mind and abandons his loyalty to his master and rides away through the war @-@ torn battlefield , forsaking his honor and shaming his family name for generations to come , which Mototada had foreseen . 
 Chinese campaign — The Chinese campaign focuses loosely on the 1421 hypothesis and is about a Chinese treasure ship discovering the New World before Christopher Columbus . The story mainly focuses on Jian Huang , a Ming captain who has long dreamed of seeing the outside world , and his partner and new friend , Lao Chen , a large , powerful , and crude sailor , who are given orders to help expand the Ming Empire . In the beginning , the treasure fleet is attacked by <unk> pirates while still under construction . On orders of the spoiled and selfish Admiral Jinhai , nephew of the unnamed emperor , Huang and Chen save the fleet and eliminate the pirates . The fleet then embarks westward and is next seen to land in a port on the coast of India . There many of the crew , including Huang and Chen , are attacked by soldiers of the Indian Zamorin and flee with part of the fleet to a nearby island where they set up a new base and mount a rescue mission to save Jinhai and the remaining crew who have been captured by the Zamorin 's troops and ( as they discover ) some Chinese defectors . The fleet continues west at Jinhai 's insistence , although many ships turn back , and eventually are cast ashore in the Yucatán by a storm . Chen and Huang go to rescue crews of the other ships from hostile Aztec soldiers . When they return , they find that Jinhai has disappeared . Huang suspects that he was captured along with many of the fleet 's crewmembers and mounts a rescue mission . Huang and Chen cut through the jungle and rescue many of their comrades , but Jinhai is not among them . Huang 's small army of sailors then enters a nearby Aztec city , where they learn that Jinhai has set himself up as an emperor or perhaps a god among the Aztecs and that it was Jinhai who plotted with the Zamorin in India . Huang and Chen escape an ambush by Jinhai 's soldiers and flee back to the coast through a series of caves , rescuing more of their crew along the way . Once back at the coast they set up a base and counterattack , defeating and killing Jinhai . After the battle , Huang , Chen , and the surviving crew members scour the beaches for all evidence of their presence and then sail home to China , hoping that no one will ever know they were there . 
 Indian campaign — The Indian campaign is about the Indian Rebellion of 1857 and deals with a situation very similar to <unk> Black 's situation in " The <unk> " campaign : " Shadow " . The protagonist is Lieutenant Nanib Sahir ( a portmanteau name of Nana Sahib ) , a member of the Sepoy regiments who served the British East India Company , who slowly becomes disillusioned by its cruel ways and abuse of Indian citizens . The campaign begins with Nanib and his superior , Colonel George Edwardson , regaining British control of the saltpetre trade in the Punjab . Nanib and Edwardson then march south to Calcutta and defeat the roving bands of arsonists there . At the close of the battle , Nanib convinces a group of arsonists to lay down their weapons and leave , but Edwardson 's men ambush and massacre them , leaving Nanib visibly shaken . The conflict of Nanib 's loyalty comes to a head when he and his men are ordered by the Colonel Edwardson to use new Enfield Rifles despite the cartridges ' greasing with beef tallow and pork fat , which is a taboo to the sepoys ' Hindu and Muslim beliefs . Nanib uses one of the rifles to fire a near miss at Edwardson ( loosely based on a similar incident involving Mangal Pandey ) , killing one of his soldiers . Nanib and fellow sepoy Pravar Patel then lead their regiment of sepoy in an attack on the local Company fort by assaulting weapon caches to cause fires and explosions under its foundations . After their victory , Nanib and Pravar quickly rally the local citizens and sepoys , raising enormous forces . Although Nanib denies leadership of the revolt , he and Pravar decide to rescue Bahadur Shah II from British captivity when the Shah declares himself supreme ruler of India . They sneak into Delhi in the dead of night and destroy weapon caches to cause elephant stampedes , which destroy various city gates . Along the way , they find more rebels who help them battle through Delhi , freeing the Shah and escaping into the night . Nanib subsequently leads his forces in an assault on a Company fort commanded by Colonel Edwardson . Nanib destroys or captures the saltpetre sites and plantations supplying Edwardson 's forces inside the fort and fends off three counterattacks . Finally , he assaults the fort and captures its outer defenses , including the fixed guns , mortally wounding Edwardson in the process before destroying the fort 's command post . When the heat of battle fades , Nanib approaches a dying Edwardson , who threatens and curses the Indians , saying that the Company is a much larger and more powerful force than all of India . Nanib replies by explaining that no military force can kill the Indians ' passion for their country . After Edwardson breathes his last breath , Nanib and Pravar leave to begin a long and costly war against the Company , and three rebel sepoys are seen lowering the Company 's flag from the nearby <unk> . 
 = = = Wonders = = = 
 In Age of Empires III : The Asian Dynasties , the three new civilizations must build a Wonder to advance from age to age , instead of advancing from the Town Center . Unlike previous Age of Empires games , the player does not achieve victory by building a wonder . Players can choose from a selection of wonders , each having benefits unique to their civilization . Once built , this wonder provides an initial bonus of units or resources , while continuing to provide a benefit to the player 's civilization . This initial bonus becomes larger , depending on which age is being advanced to . Since the wonder is a building , players can assign different numbers of villagers to build it , which affects the speed of advancement . Wonders that are destroyed cannot be rebuilt . 
 = = Development = = 
 In developing Age of Empires III : The Asian Dynasties , Ensemble Studios worked with Big Huge Games for the first time . This partnership came about as a result of Ensemble Studios being busy with other projects including Halo Wars , and Big Huge Games ' real @-@ time strategy team with spare time on their hands . Several Big Huge Games employees , including Brian Reynolds , had declared they were fans of the Age of Empires series , and thus they asked Ensemble Studios if the two could work together on the upcoming expansion . The two studios did large amounts of communication through the internet , and Reynolds says the entire process worked well . Ensemble Studios took the role of the " customer " in their relationship with Big Huge Games , and thus the game was designed to satisfy Ensemble 's needs . Ensemble designers Greg Street and Sandy Petersen were also heavily involved in brainstorming and developing the game . 
 A demo version of Age of Empires III : The Asian Dynasties was released on October 4 , 2007 . The demo featured the Japanese civilization , the Honshū random map , and the Supremacy game mode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Age of Empires III : The Asian Dynasties was received positively by reviewers , with an average score of approximately 80 % . This was similar to the reception of Age of Empires III . 
 IGN praised the graphics in Age of Empires III : The Asian Dynasties , noting the graphics engine used in the game was strong enough to support the game ; able to " render high @-@ level battlefield action and ground @-@ level cinematics easily " . GameSpot agreed , approving of the added " visual pizzazz " in the form of Wonders , buildings , and units . The greatest praise came from GameSpy though ; reviewer Tom Chick described the " gorgeous pagodas , arches , minarets and colors " as " a rare and generous package of new visuals " . IGN called the game 's voice acting " great " , also praising the " <unk> " sounds of the characters . GameSpot disagreed , complaining that the audio was overly similar to past games in the series . 
 The gameplay generally received praise from reviewers , with some caveats . While IGN 's Steve Butts " loved " the game 's new units and operations , he complained of a predictability in the missions , asking for more surprises . GameSpot 's Jason Ocampo agreed , noting that the " campaigns feature familiar plot twists " , while praising the " new twists " on the Age of Empires series @-@ style gameplay . GameSpy noted that some of the changes were well overdue . However , the gameplay was given a big ticket , with the hypothetical question posed ; " Ever play an expansion or sequel and then realize you can never go back to its predecessor because you 've been spoiled by the new ? " 
 = Montpelier railway station = 
 Montpelier railway station is on the Severn Beach Line and serves the district of Montpelier in Bristol , England . It is 2 @.@ 85 miles ( 4 @.@ 59 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads . Its three letter station code is <unk> . The station has a single platform , serving trains in both directions . As of 2015 it is managed by Great Western Railway , which is the third franchise to be responsible for the station since privatisation in 1997 . They provide all train services at the station , mainly a train every forty minutes in each direction between Bristol Temple Meads and Avonmouth . 
 The station was opened on 1 October 1874 as Montpellier ( two ' L 's ) by the Great Western and Midland Railways as part of the Clifton Extension Railway , designed to connect the port of Avonmouth to the national rail network . In February 1888 the station 's name changed to Montpelier ( one ' L ' ) . The station two platforms , with the main structures on the southern platform and smaller waiting rooms on the northern platform . In 1903 the station employed 19 staff . The station building was destroyed by bombing during the Second World War , and replaced with the current building . 
 The Severn Beach Line declined over the latter half of the twentieth century , with passenger numbers falling significantly . Goods services at Montpelier ended in 1965 , and all staff were withdrawn in 1967 . The line was largely reduced to single track in 1970 , with the northern platform abandoned and all trains using the remaining platform . The station building is no longer in railway use . Services had decreased to ten per day each direction by 2005 , but have since increased to twenty @-@ four trains per day . 
 = = Description = = 
 Montpelier railway station is located in the Bristol ward of Ashley , north of the city centre , serving the districts of Montpelier , Cotham , Ashley Down and St Andrews . The surrounding area is mostly residential , with shops on the nearby A38 Cheltenham Road . The station can be accessed step @-@ free from Station Road to the south , or by a footbridge and steps from Cromwell Road to the north . The station is on the Severn Beach Line from Bristol Temple Meads to Severn Beach , 2 miles 68 chains ( 4 @.@ 6 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads , and 10 miles 55 chains ( 17 @.@ 2 km ) from Severn Beach . It is the third station from Temple Meads , and first station of the branch part of the line ( the first two stations , Lawrence Hill and Stapleton Road , are on the main line Cross Country Route ) . The station is on a roughly east @-@ west alignment , curving to the north , with a single 144 @-@ yard ( 132 m ) -long curved platform to the south of the track , serving trains in both directions . Directly to the east of the station is the 268 @-@ yard ( 245 m ) -long Montpelier Tunnel , and to the west is The Arches bridge over the A38 . The station 's northern platform was abandoned in 1970 and is overgrown . 
 Facilities at the station are minimal – there are a few chairs and timetable information is provided . There are help points on the platform , giving next train information and allowing passengers to contact staff . There is no ticket office , nor any self @-@ service ticket machines . The station building is used as a workshop and showroom for a company selling fireplaces , and is bricked up on the platform side . It is however colourfully decorated with a mural , painted as a collaborative effort between the Severnside Community Rail Partnership and Fairfield High School . The Severnside CRP also tend the station 's garden in conjunction with the nearby Colston 's Girls ' School . There is no car park or taxi rank , but there are bus stops on Cromwell Road , and more on the busy A38 Cheltenham Road roughly 400 yards ( 370 m ) away . Cycle storage is available on the platform . 
 The line through Montpelier has a 30 miles per hour ( 48 km / h ) speed limit for diesel multiple units , and 15 miles per hour ( 24 km / h ) for other trains . The line , which is not electrified , has loading gauge <unk> , and carries less than 5 million train tonnes per year . In the 2013 / 14 financial year , approximately 120 @,@ 000 passengers used Montpelier station , making it the <unk> busiest station in the country and the fifth busiest within the Bristol unitary authority area . This was an increase of almost 100 % from the 2002 – 03 financial year , and reflected a general rise in usage of the Severn Beach Line . 
 = = Services = = 
 Services at Montpelier are all operated by Great Western Railway , mainly using diesel Class 150 Sprinter units , occasionally supplemented by Class 153 Super Sprinter and Class 158 Express Sprinter units . Monday to Friday there are 25 trains per day in each direction : three trains every two hours run from Bristol Temple Meads to Avonmouth , with one extended to St Andrews Road and Severn Beach , giving a service at Montpelier of one train in each direction every 40 minutes . Most services start at Bristol , but one evening service to Avonmouth begins at Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . On Saturdays there is a similar level of service , at 24 trains per day , but more trains continue to Severn Beach . Sunday sees a roughly hourly service to and from Bristol , ten trains per day , with only two services extending to Severn Beach , except during the May – September timetable period when all services are extended . The first and last Sunday trains towards Bristol are extended to Taunton via Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , and there are similar workings in the other direction . 
 There an interval of about ten minutes between services to Avonmouth and those to Bristol , due to the line 's main passing point , Clifton Down , being the next but one station . Most trains call at all stations but some services omit Lawrence Hill . The typical journey time to Bristol Temple Meads is roughly 13 minutes , and about 17 minutes to Avonmouth . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Joint railway era = = = 
 Montpelier railway station was opened on 1 October 1874 when the Clifton Extension Railway began operations . The line , a joint venture between the Midland and Great Western Railways , was built to connect the Bristol Port Railway and Pier to the national network . It ran from Sneyd Park Junction in the Avon Gorge via Clifton Down station to Ashley Hill Junction , east of Montpelier , from which the Great Western and Midland lines diverged – the Great Western heading south , joining the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway towards Bristol Temple Meads , the Midland heading east towards Mangotsfield . The line was built at 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard gauge , and was initially managed by the Clifton Extension Railway Joint Committee . 
 The station was built by Messrs Baker & Son of Canon 's Marsh , Bristol . There were two platforms , with the southern platform used by trains towards Clifton Down and the northern one by trains the other direction . The platforms were 405 feet ( 123 m ) long and spacious , but open to the elements with little in the way of cover . An iron footbridge linked the two platforms , as well as carrying a pedestrian right of way between Cromwell Road to the north and Station Road to the south . The original station buildings were built from pennant stone , a common material in the Bristol area , and partly obtained from the digging of a cutting near Clifton Down . The station master had lodgings above the waiting rooms on the southern platform , which had separate ticket windows for Midland and Great Western services . The buildings on the northern platform were principally waiting rooms . A goods yard was provided on the south side of Station Road , mainly used for coal traffic , and accessible from the west via a bridge over the road . A signal box with 16 levers was located at the west end of the southern platform , controlling the yard and crossover points on the main line . There was some debate about whether the station should be called " Montpelier " or " Montpellier " , but the joint railway committee overseeing the line ruled in favour of the former in 1888 . In 1895 a petition was submitted to the joint railway committee , asking for better cover for the platforms , improved waiting rooms and a new booking office on the northern platform . The committee agreed to extend the canopy on the northern platform , and to improve the waiting rooms , but refused to build a new booking office . The work was completed in 1896 . Further building work took place during the First World War , when the southern platform was extended . 
 The initial Monday to Saturday service provided at Montpelier by the Midland Railway was 13 trains per day between Clifton Down , Fishponds and Mangotsfield , where passengers could change for services to Bath , Birmingham and other Midland destinations . The Great Western provided ten services per day between Clifton Down and Bristol Temple Meads , the city 's major station , where passengers could change for trains to London , Exeter and Wales , among others . The Great Western also provided occasional through services to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . On Sundays , there was no Midland service , but seven Great Western trains . The Clifton Down Tunnel , the final link to the Bristol Port Railway and Pier , was opened in 1877 , initially allowing freight trains to reach Avonmouth Docks . It was not until 1885 that it was cleared for passenger use , which allowed services to Avonmouth via Sea Mills and Shirehampton . There was a trial Midland service between Bristol St Philip 's and Avonmouth in September 1885 , but this was ended after a month . In 1886 , the daily Great Western service at Montpelier consisted of six trains to Avonmouth , 24 to Clifton Down and 32 to Temple Meads . The Midland provided 12 services from Clifton Down to Fishponds , and 11 back . In the first 20 years of the Montpelier 's use , the station handled large numbers of parcels , and was popular for day trips to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . The station 's management passed to the Great Western & Midland Railways Joint Committee on 1 November 1894 . 
 The station was initially well @-@ staffed : in 1903 there were 19 staff , although this had fallen to 15 by 1935 . Before the First World War , it was not unusual for extra porters to be sent to Montpelier to handle large quantities of goods – the station was used by many commercial travellers who had large hampers full of clothes and samples , and the loading on Monday morning had the potential to cause delays . In 1910 , Montpelier saw 17 Great Western services from Avonmouth to Temple Meads and 15 the other way , a further 20 trains each day operating between Clifton and Temple Meads , and 13 Midland trains each way between Clifton and Fishponds or Mangotsfield . Midland services were suspended from 1 January 1917 to 15 May 1919 due to the War . The Hotwells section of the Bristol Port Railway and Pier closed in 1922 , so to compensate an additional six trains were provided to Avonmouth , with four back . 
 In 1923 , grouping resulted in the Midland Railway being absorbed into the London , Midland and Scottish Railway ( LMS ) , and the line continued in a joint arrangement between the Great Western and the LMS . From 1924 , many trains to Avonmouth were extended to Severn Beach , a growing seaside resort , and some on to Pilning , then back to Temple Meads via Patchway . The post of station master was withdrawn on 29 March 1926 , with responsibility passing to staff at Clifton Down . Redland had suffered a similar loss in 1909 . The main station building on the southern platform was bombed in the Bristol Blitz during the Second World War , and was replaced after the war by the current building . The war also saw the end of services to Fishponds and Mangotsfield , the last operating on 31 March 1941 . By 1947 , just before the start of the British Rail era , there were 33 services each direction between Avonmouth and Temple Meads , and 18 on Sundays . Some trains made circular trips to and from Temple Meads via Clifton Down and Henbury or Pilning . 
 = = = British Rail and privatisation = = = 
 When the railways were nationalised in 1948 , services at Montpelier came under the control of the Western Region of British Railways . Staff levels were reduced further , down to two booking clerks , four porters , a checker and a weighbridge operator by 1950 . Service levels had decreased slightly by 1955 to 28 towards Avonmouth and 29 towards Bristol , but the services were at regular intervals . Passenger numbers however dropped sharply in 1961 as the result of a fare increase , and so in 1962 a new reduced timetable was enacted , which lost more passengers . A year later in 1963 , the Beeching report suggested the complete withdrawal of services along the line , but ultimately only those beyond Severn Beach or via Henbury were withdrawn . The goods yard at Montpelier closed on 18 November 1965 , with the signal box following on 10 May 1967 . Staff were completely withdrawn on 17 July 1967 with tickets issued by the train guard . The general reduction in passenger traffic , as well as the transfer of Avonmouth goods traffic to the Henbury Loop Line , allowed the removal of the northern track from 19 October 1970 , with all services using the southern platform . The former goods yard is now a small industrial estate . By 1974 , service had reduced to 19 trains per day in each direction , with no Sunday services beyond Avonmouth . 
 British Rail was split into business @-@ led sectors in the 1980s , at which time operations at Montpelier passed to Regional Railways . At this time , all trains ran to Severn Beach , but the service pattern was irregular . This changed in 1995 when an hourly timetable was introduced for peak times , but northbound services were terminated at Avonmouth . 
 When the railway was privatised in 1997 , local services were franchised to Wales and West , which was succeeded by Wessex Trains , an arm of National Express , in 2001 . Following action by Friends of Severn Beach Railway ( FOSBR ) and a string of protests , services had increased to 10 per day in each direction by 2005 , with Bristol City Council providing a subsidy to Wessex Trains . The Wessex franchise was amalgamated with the Great Western franchise into the Greater Western franchise from 2006 , and responsibility passed to First Great Western , a subsidiary company of FirstGroup , rebranded as Great Western Railway in 2015 . A minimum service requirement was written into the franchise agreement , ensuring an hourly service along the line , and this has since been increased to three trains every two hours ( 24 trains per day ) . Sunday services to Severn Beach were restored in 2010 . 
 In 2004 , the Severnside Community Rail Partnership was formed , covering the Severn Beach Line and a network of routes radiating from Bristol . By 2008 , they had created a support group for the station , were helping with station upkeep , and had improved the provision of timetabling information through the use of simplified departure timetable posters . In 2007 , they repainted the mural on the old station building , but it was defaced by vandals the same year . First Great Western offered a £ 500 reward for identifying the persons responsible , and stated they planned to install CCTV cameras . Students from Fairfield High School repainted the mural with help from professional graffiti artist Richard Minchin . Artist Wei Ong repainted the mural in 2015 . Customer help points with next train information screens were installed during 2008 / 09 , paid for by money from the Department for Transport 's " Access for All " fund and local councils . The help points were stolen in early 2010 , but have since been replaced . 
 = = Future = = 
 First Great Western declined a contractual option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise ( of which services at Montpelier are a part ) beyond 2013 , citing a desire for a longer @-@ term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line . The franchise was put out to tender , but the process was halted and later scrapped due to the fallout from the collapse of the InterCity West Coast franchise competition . A two @-@ year franchise extension until September 2015 was agreed in October 2013 , and subsequently extended until March 2019 . 
 With the coming upgrade to the Great Western Main Line , the main line from London to Bristol is due to be electrified by 2016 . However , the electrification will not extend beyond the main lines , so Montpelier will continue to be served by diesel trains , with the current " Sprinter " units expected to be replaced by Class 165 and 166 " Turbo " units . Stephen Williams , MP for Bristol West , questioned whether electrification could continue to Montpelier and the rest of the Severn Beach Line . Then @-@ Secretary of State for Transport Philip Hammond replied that it would have to be looked at in the future . The group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways supports the electrification of the entire Severn Beach Line . 
 Improved services at Montpelier are called for as part of the Greater Bristol Metro scheme , a rail transport plan which aims to enhance transport capacity in the Bristol area . There is an aspiration for half @-@ hourly services , with trains towards Bristol terminating alternately at Portishead and Bath Spa , however due to the large sections of the Severn Beach Line which are single @-@ track and to the congested main line from Temple Meads , such frequency is not currently feasible . The scheme was given the go @-@ ahead in July 2012 as part of the City Deal , whereby local councils would be given greater control over money by the government . There are also calls for the reopening of the Henbury Loop Line , which could allow a direct service from Montpelier to Bristol Parkway via Avonmouth . Plans for a loop were rejected by the West of England Joint Transport Board , however Bristol City Councillors voted to send the decision back to the board for further discussion . 
 = The Boat Races 2016 = 
 The 2016 Boat Races ( also known as The Cancer Research UK Boat Races for the purposes of sponsorship ) took place on 27 March 2016 . Held annually , The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the universities of Oxford and Cambridge along a 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) tidal stretch of the River Thames in south @-@ west London . For the first time in the history of the event , the men 's , women 's and both reserves ' races were all held on the Tideway on the same day . 
 In the men 's reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie were beaten by Oxford 's Isis while in the women 's reserve race , Cambridge 's Blondie defeated Oxford 's Osiris . In the women 's race , Oxford won easily as Cambridge nearly sank in rough conditions , while the men 's race was won by Cambridge by three lengths , taking the overall record in the event to 82 – 79 in their favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course , between Putney and Mortlake on the River Thames in south @-@ west London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as champions , having won the 2015 race by a margin of six lengths , but Cambridge led overall with 81 victories to Oxford 's 79 ( excluding the 1877 race , officially a dead heat though claimed as a victory by the Oxford crew ) . 
 It was the first time in the history of The Boat Race that all four senior races – the men 's , women 's , men 's reserves ' and women 's reserves ' – were held on the same day and on the same course along the Tideway . Prior to 2015 , the women 's race which first took place in 1927 , was usually held at the Henley Boat Races along the 2 @,@ 000 @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 200 yd ) course . However , on at least two occasions in the interwar period , the women competed on the Thames between Chiswick and Kew . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 2015 race by six and a half lengths , with Cambridge leading 41 – 29 overall . For the fourth year , the men 's race was sponsored by BNY Mellon while the women 's race saw BNY Mellon 's subsidiary Newton Investment Management as sponsors . In January 2016 , it was announced that the sponsors would be donating the title sponsorship to Cancer Research UK and that this year 's event was to be retitled " The Cancer Research UK Boat Races " . There is no monetary award for winning the race , as the journalist Roger Alton notes : " It 's the last great amateur event : seven months of pain for no prize money " . 
 On Sunday 27 March , the women 's race started at 3 : 10 p.m. British Summer Time , the women 's reserve race at 3 : 25 pm , the men 's reserves ' race fifteen minutes later and the men 's race a further half @-@ hour after that at 4 : 10 pm . The men 's race was umpired for the fifth time by Simon Harris , who had overseen the inaugural Tideway running of the Women 's Boat Race in 2015 . He rowed for Cambridge in the 1982 and 1983 races and was most recently umpire for the men 's race in 2010 . Rob Clegg , umpire for the 2011 race and three @-@ time Oxford Blue , took charge of the women 's race . The men 's and women 's reserves races were umpired by Sarah Winckless and Judith Packer respectively , the former becoming the first female official of one of the men 's races in history . 
 Although around 250 @,@ 000 spectators were expected to line the banks of the river , engineering works and poor weather reduced the attendance . The event was broadcast live in the United Kingdom on the BBC . Numerous broadcasters worldwide also showed the main races , including <unk> across Africa , EBU across Europe , SKY México across Central America , TSN in Canada and Fox Sports in Australia . It was also streamed live on BBC Online . 
 = = Coaches = = 
 The Cambridge men 's crew coaching team was led by their Chief Coach Steve Trapmore . Appointed to the post in 2010 , Trapmore was a gold medal @-@ winning member of the men 's eight at the 2000 Summer Olympics . He was assisted by Ed Green , the former head coach at University College Cork and development coach at Molesey Boat Club . Donald Legget , who rowed for the Light Blues in the 1963 and 1964 races acted as a supporting coach , along with coxing coach Henry <unk> ( who steered Cambridge in the 2013 race ) and the medical officer Simon Owens . Sean Bowden was Chief Coach for Oxford , having been responsible for the senior men 's crew since 1997 , winning 11 from 16 races . He was a former Great Britain Olympic coach and coached the Light Blues in the 1993 and 1994 Boat Races . His assistant coach was Andy <unk> who has coached the senior boat since 2006 . 
 OUWBC 's head coach was Christine Wilson who had been appointed in 2012 . She was advised by former Dark Blue Neil <unk> , winning cox in the 1991 race . Cambridge 's women were coached by former Goldie coach Rob Baker who was assisted by Paddy Ryan and Nick Acock , along with guest coach Jonathan Conder . 
 = = Trials = = 
 = = = Women 's = = = 
 The women 's trials took place on The Championship Course on 10 December 2015 . Umpired by Rob Clegg , the Oxford boats , Scylla and Charybdis took part in a " phenomenal race " . After an even start , Scylla held a one @-@ length lead by Craven Cottage , extending it to two lengths by Hammersmith Bridge . As conditions worsened past Chiswick Eyot , Charybdis , stroked by OUWBC president Maddy Badcott , began to close the gap and took the lead around the second of the Surrey bends , to win the encounter by three lengths . 
 CUWBC 's trial was conducted between Twickenham and Tideway in rough water and windy conditions . The race was also umpired by Rob Clegg with both boats getting away together . Twickenham took an early lead , and following a steering error in which Tideway struck a buoy before Hammersmith Bridge , Twickenham were two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths ahead by Chiswick Eyot and pulled away to win by four lengths . 
 = = = Men 's = = = 
 The men 's trials were conducted three days after the women 's , on 13 December , also along The Championship course . The Dark Blues , rowing in Business and Pleasure , were umpired by Simon Harris . Pleasure drew away to hold half a length 's lead by the top of Putney Embankment , extending it to three @-@ quarters of a length as the crews passed Harrods Furniture Depository . Although Business made a push to close the gap , Pleasure held their lead below Barnes Bridge but began to tire . Business started to reduce the deficit but too late , as Pleasure passed the finishing post half @-@ a @-@ length ahead . 
 Cambridge 's trial boats were named Fuerte and Listo ( strong and clever in Spanish ) with the club 's president Henry Hoffstot occupying the latter 's number seven seat . Fuerte made the better start but by Barn Elms , the crews were level . With the umpire having to warn both crews for encroachment at Fulham , Fuerte 's Luke Juckett caught a crab , allowing Listo to take a small lead . Fuerte regained the advantage under Hammersmith Bridge and were a length ahead by Chiswick Eyot . Taking advantage of a clear water advantage , Fuerte moved across in front of Listo , and rowed on to win by four lengths . 
 = = Build @-@ up = = 
 Cambridge were considered the favourites to win for the first time since the 2012 race . Oxford 's women were favourites to retain their title for the fifth consecutive year . 
 = = = Women 's = = = 
 CUWBC competed against Oxford Brookes University Boat Club along the Tideway on 31 January in a two @-@ segment race . In inclement weather , Cambridge started from the Surrey side of the river for the first segment , and were quickly behind . By Craven Cottage , Oxford Brookes were one third of a length ahead , but CUWBC drew level by Harrods Furniture Depository , and led under Hammersmith Bridge by a length to take victory . Oxford Brookes took Surrey for the second piece , starting at Chiswick Eyot . A close start saw the umpire John Garrett warning the crews for encroaching into each others ' water , ultimately culminating in a clash under Barnes Bridge as Cambridge were pulling away . A " boat @-@ stopping crab " put pay to any chance of Oxford Brookes recovering the deficit and CUWBC won the second segment by three lengths . 
 CUWBC took on Molesey Boat Club on 22 February in a race from the Chiswick Steps to the Start post . A good start from the Light Blues saw them almost a length ahead by Chiswick Eyot , and move into a clear water advantage by St Paul 's School . A further length 's advantage was taken by Hammersmith Bridge which was soon extended to two by Harrods and three by the Mile Post . Despite encountering a strong headwind , CUWBC continued to pull away from Molesey and passed the Start line six lengths clear . Six days later , OUWBC competed against Molesey in a three @-@ piece set on the Championship Course . Aggressive steering from the Dark Blues earned them several warnings from the umpire during the first race , and although it was initially close , OUWBC pulled away to hold a length 's lead by the Mile Post before passing under Hammersmith Bridge two lengths ahead . The second segment from the Mile Post to Chiswick Eyot saw further clashes between the crews , but Oxford dominated , leading by three lengths at St Paul 's boathouses and winning by four lengths . In the third race , Molesey took an early lead but OUWBC recovered before the crews shot Barnes Bridge , finishing the piece two lengths ahead . 
 = = = Men 's = = = 
 The Light Blues faced Oxford Brookes on the Tideway on 30 January , in a two @-@ piece race . Cambridge selected Surrey and were a length down by the Town Buoy . At the first bend in the river by Craven Cottage , Oxford Brookes held lead of nearly two lengths , but CUBC began to reduce the deficit . By Hammersmith Bridge , the crews were nearly level and despite warnings from the umpire , Cambridge held their aggressive line to pass the finish line at Chiswick Eyot two lengths ahead . The second race saw the crews rowing back from Chiswick Eyot to the Finish Post . Although Oxford Brookes took a narrow lead , the Light Blues were ahead by Chiswick Pier and took clear water advantage to win by more than three lengths . Goldie had lost both races against an alternate Oxford Brookes crew earlier . 
 On 22 February , it was OUBC 's turn to race against Oxford Brookes , in two segments over the Championship Course . After an even start to the first contest , the Dark Blues held a slight advantage heading into the first bend . Oxford Brookes recovered , and were two @-@ thirds of a length ahead as the crews passed below Hammersmith Bridge . OUBC took advantage of a caught blade to move back into contention but the race was ended prematurely as a sailing boat intervened on the course . The Dark Blues took an early lead in the second race , but despite being a length up , failed to take a clear water advantage . Oxford Brookes drew back and by Barnes Bridge held a small lead , one which they capitalised on in the rough water to finally pass the Finish Post two lengths clear of OUBC . 
 Umpired by Matthew Pinsent , Oxford raced against Leander on 12 March from Putney Bridge to Chiswick Eyot . Although Leander made the better start , the Dark Blues remained in touch , finishing two seats down . CUBC faced a German under @-@ 23 crew in a two @-@ segment race on 15 March , with the Light Blues winning both . 
 On 24 March , CUBC announced their boat name Kevin after Kevin Whyman , cox of the successful 1996 and 1997 crews who was killed in a solo aircraft display crash at <unk> North in August 2015 . OUBC announced their boat name Daniel after their former coach Daniel Topolski , who died in February 2015 . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The official weigh @-@ in for the crews took place at the Methodist Central Hall Westminster on 1 March 2016 . 
 = = = Women = = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 74 @.@ 8 kilograms ( 165 lb ) , 4 @.@ 3 kilograms ( 9 @.@ 5 lb ) per rower more than their opponents . Both women 's boat club presidents were British . Oxford 's 2015 number seven Maddy Badcott was the president of OUWBC for the 2016 race . Her counterpart , Hannah Roberts , rowed in Blondie in 2014 and 2015 . The CUWBC crew featured three returning Blues in Daphne <unk> , Ashton Brown and cox Rosemary <unk> . Oxford also saw three participants with Boat Race experience return in former Boat Club president Anastasia Chitty , Maddy Badcott and Lauren Kedar . Cambridge 's number two , Fiona Macklin , was following her grandfather David Macklin who had represented the Light Blues in the 1951 race which required a re @-@ row after Oxford sank . 
 = = = Men = = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 88 @.@ 25 kilograms ( 195 lb ) , 1 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 3 @.@ 3 lb ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford 's number four , Joshua <unk> , was the heaviest man in the race , weighing 96 @.@ 4 kilograms ( 213 lb ) . It was the first time in the history of the race that both boat club presidents were American . Cambridge 's Henry Hoffstot hailed from New York while Oxford 's Morgan <unk> was born in Baltimore . The Dark Blue crew contained a single rower with Boat Race experience in Jamie Cook , a member of the victorious 2015 crew . Four members of the 2015 crew returned for the Light Blues , including cox Ian Middleton and president Henry Hoffstot who were earning their third Blues . 
 = = Races = = 
 = = = Reserves = = = 
 In the women 's reserves race , Cambridge 's Blondie defeated Oxford 's Osiris . Oxford 's Isis beat Goldie in the men 's reserves race . 
 = = = Women 's = = = 
 The women 's race was the 71st contest between OUWBC and CUWBC , and started at 3 : 10 p.m. on 27 March 2016 . The overall record in the event before the race stood at 41 – 29 in Cambridge 's favour . Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey side of the river . Cambridge made the better start and held a slight lead , but after passing the Mile Post level , OUWBC made a push to hold a half @-@ length lead after five minutes , and were almost clear by Harrods Furniture Depository . Cambridge were forced to take evasive action as the crews passed below Hammersmith Bridge two seconds down , but kept in touch despite multiple warnings from the umpire . The Light Blues made for the shelter of the shore as the conditions worsened and both boats took on water , while Oxford remained in the rough water , losing some of their advantage . Oxford were eight seconds ahead by Chiswick Steps and continued to pull away . Oxford tucked into the Middlesex bank while Cambridge remained in the more traditional racing line , taking on substantial water . At Barnes Bridge , Cambridge began to sink and received advice to pull to the side . The Cambridge cox indicated that she wanted to continue to complete the course and was allowed to do so . Oxford passed the finishing post in 21 minutes 49 seconds , 24 lengths ahead of the Light Blues , taking the overall record to 41 – 30 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = = = Men 's = = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey side of the river . The men 's race was the 162nd contest between OUBC and CUBC , and was held at 4 : 10 p.m on 27 March 2016 . Prior to the race , the overall record in the event stood at 81 – 79 in Cambridge 's favour , with one dead heat . Oxford were late for the start and were awarded a " false start " , meaning that one more false start from the Dark Blues would result in disqualification . Cambridge edged ahead from the start and were a canopy 's length ahead after a minute . After warnings to both crews from the umpire , Cambridge moved away from the Dark Blues and were half a length ahead by the Mile Post and almost clear as the crews passed the Harrods Furniture Depository . Oxford pushed on under Hammersmith Bridge to remain in contention , one second behind . Cambridge moved just clear as the crews hit rough water in Chiswick Reach just below Chiswick Eyot . By the time they passed Chiswick Steps , the Light Blues were over a length clear and five seconds ahead of Oxford . Both crews moved towards the Middlesex side of the river to reduce their exposure to the rough conditions and as they passed under Barnes Bridge , the Light Blues held a nine @-@ second lead . Oxford pushed on to keep in touch , but Cambridge passed the finishing post in 18 minutes 41 seconds , two and a half lengths ahead of Oxford . It was the Light Blues ' first victory in four years , ending a run of six wins from eight races for Oxford , and took the overall record in the event to 82 – 79 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Cambridge 's women 's coach Rob Baker said " Our cox did exceptionally well and nearly got us back into the race . Then we sunk . " Speaking of Oxford 's cox Morgan Baynham @-@ Williams , OUWBC president Badcott noted " we 're so lucky to have Morgan – she smashed it today . " Badcott went on to describe the conditions as " probably the worst I have experienced on the Tideway " . OUBC 's coach Sean Bowden said the conditions were " the worst I have ever seen " while Matthew Pinsent referred to them as " absolutely biblical " . Hoffstot said he was " humbled " by the victory , his first in three attempts , while his opposite number <unk> acknowledged that Cambridge had " managed the conditions better . " 
 Olympic medallists Helen Glover and Heather Stanning were amongst the presentation committee . 
 = The Battle For Midway = 
 The Battle For Midway is a turn @-@ based strategy video game developed and published by Personal Software Services . It was first released in the United Kingdom and France for the MSX in 1984 , and was re @-@ released for the Amstrad CPC , Commodore 64 and ZX Spectrum in 1985 . It is the second instalment of the Strategic Wargames series . The game is set during the Battle of Midway in the Pacific Ocean theatre of World War II and revolves around the United States Navy attacking a large Imperial Japanese fleet stationed at Midway Atoll , in retaliation for the attack on Pearl Harbour . 
 In the game , the player assumes control of American forces and must eliminate all Japanese forces around the atoll by air or naval combat . The Battle For Midway received largely negative reviews upon release . It was criticised for its incompatibility with black and white television sets , as the game was only accessible in a limited range of colours . The easy difficulty of the gameplay was also criticised . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is a turn @-@ based strategy and focuses on naval battles during the Battle of Midway , which is initiated in response to the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbour . The player commands three American task forces ; two United States Navy forces and one United States Air Force unit , which are stationed on Midway Atoll . The objective of the game is to defeat three attacking Imperial Japanese naval forces . Each American task force has an aircraft carrier , whereas the Japanese have four . The player begins the game with two American search aircraft used to locate and track the attacking Japanese forces . 
