 When the main attacking Japanese force has been located , the player must send all available air units to engage them in combat . Air combat takes place over real time , and may take up to a minute of travel time once launched from an aircraft carrier . Aircraft will run out of fuel over time and will crash if not refuelled at a carrier . The game contains elements of arcade gameplay , which will automatically enable once the player comes into contact with the enemy . The arcade sequences involves the player utilising an anti @-@ air machine gun in order to shoot down Japanese aircraft . The game ends once all four Japanese aircraft carriers have been destroyed . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Personal Software Services was founded in Coventry , England , by Gary Mays and Richard Cockayne in 1981 . The company was known for creating games that featured historic war battles and conflicts , such as Theatre Europe , Bismark and Falklands ' 82 . The company had a partnership with French video game developer ERE Informatique , and published localised versions of their products to the United Kingdom . In 1986 , Cockayne took a decision to alter their products for release on 16 @-@ bit machines , as he found that smaller 8 @-@ bit computers , such as the ZX Spectrum , lacked the processing power for larger strategy games . The decision was falsely interpreted as " pulling out " from the Spectrum market by video game journalist Phillipa Irving . Following years of successful sales throughout the mid 1980s , Personal Software Services experienced financial difficulties , in what Cockayne admitted in a retrospective interview that " he took his eye off the ball " . The company was acquired by Mirrorsoft in February 1987 , and was later dispossessed by the company due to strains of debt . 
 Upon release , The Battle For Midway was packaged with an exclusive ring @-@ binder and a manual detailing the nature of the Battle of Midway . It was later re @-@ released as part of a Strategic Wargames compilation cassette known as Conflicts 2 , published by Personal Software Services . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received negative reviews upon release . Angus Ryall of Crash criticised the game 's incompatibility with black and white television sets , stating that , despite a growing British economy , Ryall expected the developers to have designed games for " the lowest common denominator " . Gwyn Hughes of Your Sinclair criticised the tactical elements of the game as too light , stating that the success of the player depends on dexterity , and not " brainpower " . Clare Edgely of Sinclair User praised the game 's historical accuracy , however she felt that its late release in comparison to other wargames made The Battle For Midway feel " ordinary " . A reviewer of Your Computer stated that the game was a " flawed " attempt to recreate the famous Battle of Midway , despite admitting that it contained " some nice touches " . A reviewer of Australian Commodore Review praised the game 's wide range of features such as the save and load functions . However , they criticised menu designs and " insufficiently integrated " arcade sequences , calling them both " poor " . 
 Two reviewers of Your Spectrum criticised the combat sequences ' reliance on the speed of pressing keys instead of the use of strategy . One reviewer considered the game to be sophisticated , however the other reviewer viewed the game 's slow pace and graphics negatively . Despite the criticism , Ryall praised the real time element of the game and accessibility , saying that The Battle For Midway is up to " current standards " . A reviewer of Amstrad Action praised the game 's " accurate " reproduction of events and different levels of speed , however criticised the easy predictability of Japanese forces . A reviewer of Amtix stated that the game suffered from " average " graphics and " poor " sound , and also questioned the inclusion of the arcade sequences . A reviewer of Your 64 recommended The Battle for Midway for beginners to the genre , despite stating that it was " not a simple game " . A reviewer of Commodore Horizons called it an " enthralling " game . 
 = Pod ( sculpture ) = 
 Pod is the name of a 2002 modern sculpture by American artist Pete Beeman , currently installed at Southwest 10th Avenue and West Burnside Street in downtown Portland , Oregon . The 30 @-@ foot sculpture , intended to represent the " infrastructure , energy , and vibrancy of Portland " , is supported by its static tripod base with a 15 @-@ foot diameter . It is constructed from stainless steel , galvanized steel , bronze , titanium , lead and other materials . Pod was fabricated by Beeman and David Bermudez , and engineered by Beeman and Peterson Structural Engineers . It is considered interactive and kinetic , with a central , vertical pendulum that swings back and forth when pushed . The sculpture cost as much as $ 50 @,@ 000 and was funded by the Portland Streetcar Project . Pod is part of the City of Portland and Multnomah County Public Art Collection courtesy of the Regional Arts & Culture Council . 
 = = Description and history = = 
 Pod was designed by native Portland resident Pete Beeman as a public art project for the Portland Streetcar . According to Beeman and the Regional Arts & Culture Council , the modern sculpture is designed to represent the " infrastructure , energy , and vibrancy of Portland " . Of the work 's design , Beeman said : 
 " I was thinking about how Portland is designed and planned and built , and how the planning and infrastructure of Portland is really important in what makes Portland great . I was thinking of the static tripod as the infrastructure . The moving part was the vibrancy and life . " " The most interesting part of the sculpture will be watching people try to move it . " 
 Pod is constructed from stainless steel , galvanized steel , bronze , titanium , lead , plastic and rubber . The 30 @-@ foot sculpture is supported by its static tripod base with a 14- to 15 @-@ foot diameter . Each of the three " legs " , cut to size by BBC Steel , stand 14 @-@ feet tall and are grounded by two cubic yards of cement . The central pendulum structure consists of 73 titanium rods ; each of these connects to a " star fruit " -shaped bronze bulb at the base of the pendulum . Pod was fabricated by Beeman and David Bermudez , and engineered by Beeman and Peterson Structural Engineers . The work is considered interactive and kinetic ; the central , vertical pendulum swings back and forth when pushed . The upper and lower parts of the pendulum " swing and flex in different rhythms , affecting each other " until returning to a resting position . Pod cost $ 40 @,@ 000 – $ 50 @,@ 000 and was funded by the Portland Streetcar Project . 
 The sculpture was installed at a triangular traffic island at a " busy " street intersection ( Southwest 10th Avenue and West Burnside Street ) in downtown Portland in November 2002 . In 2003 , Pod was included in a walking tour by the Americans for the Arts Public Art Conference . It was cleaned and underwent maintenance for approximately two weeks in August 2010 . Dual Pendulum ( 2000 ) , Beeman 's kinetic prototype of Pod , was installed at Oregon State University for Da Vinci Days in 2007 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2002 , D.K. Row of The Oregonian called Pod a " complex , funny piece " , comparing it to a " mechanical spider with an unlikely spine sticking in the air " . Row said the sculpture evoked the curves of sculptor Richard Serra and design style of architect Frank Gehry . Michael Powell , owner of Powell 's City of Books ( located across the street from Pod ) , called the sculpture " wonderful " . Pod has been compared to a scrotum and has even been referred to as " Satan 's Testicle " and " The <unk> " . 
 = Thelema = 
 Thelema ( / <unk> / ) is a religion based on a philosophical law of the same name , adopted as a central tenet by some religious organizations . The law of Thelema is " Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law . Love is the law , love under will . " The law of Thelema was developed in the early 1900s by Aleister Crowley , an English writer and ceremonial magician . He believed himself to be the prophet of a new age , the Æon of Horus , based upon a spiritual experience that he and his wife , Rose Edith , had in Egypt in 1904 . By his account , a possibly non @-@ corporeal or " <unk> " being that called itself Aiwass contacted him and dictated a text known as The Book of the Law or Liber AL vel Legis , which outlined the principles of Thelema . An adherent of Thelema is a Thelemite . 
 The Thelemic pantheon includes a number of deities , primarily a trio adapted from ancient Egyptian religion , who are the three speakers of The Book of the Law : Nuit , Hadit and Ra @-@ Hoor @-@ Khuit . Crowley described these deities as a " literary convenience " . The religion is founded upon the idea that the 20th century marked the beginning of the Aeon of Horus , in which a new ethical code would be followed ; " Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law " . This statement indicates that adherents , who are known as Thelemites , should seek out and follow their own true path in life , known as their True Will . The philosophy also emphasizes the ritual practice of Magick . 
 The word <unk> is the English transliteration of the Koine Greek noun θέλημα ( pronounced [ <unk> ] ) " will " , from the verb <unk> " to will , wish , want or purpose . " As Crowley developed the religion , he wrote widely on the topic , as well as producing more ' inspired ' writing that he collectively termed The Holy Books of Thelema . He also included ideas from occultism , yoga and both Eastern and Western mysticism , especially the Qabalah . 
 = = Historical precedents = = 
 The word θέλημα ( <unk> ) is rare in classical Greek , where it " signifies the appetitive will : desire , sometimes even sexual " , but it is frequent in the Septuagint . Early Christian writings occasionally use the word to refer to the human will , and even the will of God 's opponent , the Devil , but it usually refers to the will of God . One well @-@ known example is in the " Lord 's Prayer " ( Matthew 6 : 10 ) , “ Thy kingdom come . Thy will ( <unk> ) be done , On earth as it is in heaven . ” It is used later in the same gospel ( 26 : 42 ) , " He went away again a second time and prayed , saying , " My Father , if this cannot pass away unless I drink it , Thy will be done . " In his 5th @-@ century Sermon on 1 John 4 : 4 @-@ 12 , Augustine of Hippo gave a similar instruction : " Love , and what thou wilt , do . " ( <unk> et quod vis fac ) . 
 In the Renaissance , a character named " <unk> " represents will or desire in the Hypnerotomachia Poliphili of the Dominican monk Francesco Colonna . The protagonist <unk> has two allegorical guides , <unk> ( reason ) and <unk> ( will or desire ) . When forced to choose , he chooses fulfillment of his sexual will over logic . Colonna 's work was a great influence on the Franciscan monk François Rabelais , who in the 16th century , used Thélème , the French form of the word , as the name of a fictional abbey in his novels , Gargantua and Pantagruel . The only rule of this Abbey was " <unk> <unk> que <unk> " ( " Fais ce que tu <unk> " , or , " Do what thou wilt " ) . In the mid @-@ 18th century , Sir Francis Dashwood inscribed the adage on a doorway of his abbey at Medmenham , where it served as the motto of the Hellfire Club . Rabelais ' Abbey of Thelema has been referred to by later writers Sir Walter Besant and James Rice , in their novel The Monks of Thelema ( 1878 ) , and C. R. Ashbee in his utopian romance The Building of Thelema ( 1910 ) . 
 = = = François Rabelais = = = 
 François Rabelais was a Franciscan and later a Benedictine monk of the 16th century . Eventually he left the monastery to study medicine , and moved to the French city of Lyon in 1532 . There he wrote Gargantua and Pantagruel , a connected series of books . They tell the story of two giants — a father ( Gargantua ) and his son ( Pantagruel ) and their adventures — written in an amusing , extravagant , and satirical vein . 
 Most critics today agree that Rabelais wrote from a Christian humanist perspective . The Crowley biographer Lawrence Sutin notes this when contrasting the French author 's beliefs with the Thelema of Aleister Crowley . In the previously mentioned story of Thélème , which critics analyze as referring in part to the suffering of loyal Christian reformists or " evangelicals " within the French Church , the reference to the Greek word θέλημα " declares that the will of God rules in this abbey " . Sutin writes that Rabelais was no precursor of Thelema , with his beliefs containing elements of Stoicism and Christian kindness . 
 In his first book ( ch . 52 @-@ 57 ) , Rabelais writes of this Abbey of Thélème , built by the giant Gargantua . It is a classical utopia presented in order to critique and assess the state of the society of Rabelais ' day , as opposed to a modern utopian text that seeks to create the scenario in practice . It is a utopia where people 's desires are more fulfilled . Satirical , it also epitomises the ideals considered in Rabelais ' fiction . The inhabitants of the abbey were governed only by their own free will and pleasure , the only rule being " Do What Thou Wilt " . Rabelais believed that men who are free , well born and bred have honour , which intrinsically leads to virtuous actions . When constrained , their noble natures turn instead to remove their servitude , because men desire what they are denied . 
 Some modern Thelemites consider Crowley 's work to build upon Rabelais ' summary of the instinctively honourable nature of the Thelemite . Rabelais has been variously credited with the creation of the philosophy of Thelema , as one of the earliest people to refer to it , or with being " the first Thelemite " . However , the current National Grand Master General of the U.S. Ordo Templi Orientis Grand Lodge has stated : 
 Saint Rabelais never intended his satirical , fictional device to serve as a practical blueprint for a real human society ... Our Thelema is that of The Book of the Law and the writings of Aleister Crowley 
 Aleister Crowley wrote in The Antecedents of Thelema , ( 1926 ) , an incomplete work not published in his day , that Rabelais not only set forth the law of Thelema in a way similar to how Crowley understood it , but predicted and described in code Crowley 's life and the holy text that he claimed to have received , The Book of the Law . Crowley said the work he had received was deeper , showing in more detail the technique people should practice , and revealing scientific mysteries . He said that Rabelais confines himself to portraying an ideal , rather than addressing questions of political economy and similar subjects , which must be solved in order to realize the Law . 
 Rabelais is included among the Saints of Ecclesia Gnostica <unk> . 
 = = = Francis Dashwood and the Hellfire Club = = = 
 Sir Francis Dashwood adopted some of the ideas of Rabelais and invoked the same rule in French , when he founded a group called the Monks of Medmenham ( better known as the Hellfire Club ) . An abbey was established at Medmenham , in a property which incorporated the ruins of a Cistercian abbey founded in 1201 . The group were known as the Franciscans , not after Saint Francis of Assisi , but after its founder , Francis Dashwood , 11th Baron le Despencer . John Wilkes , George Dodington and other politicians were members . There is little direct evidence of what Dashwood 's Hellfire Club practiced or believed . The one direct testimonial comes from John Wilkes , a member who never got into the chapter @-@ room of the inner circle . He describes the group as hedonists who met to " celebrate woman in wine " , and added ideas from the ancients just to make the experience more decadent . 
 In the opinion of Lt. Col. Towers , the group derived more from Rabelais than the inscription over the door . He believes that they used caves as a Dionysian oracular temple , based upon Dashwood ’ s reading of the relevant chapters of Rabelais . Sir Nathaniel Wraxall in his Historical Memoires ( 1815 ) accused the Monks of performing Satanic rituals , but these claims have been dismissed as hearsay . Gerald Gardner and others such as Mike Howard say the Monks worshipped " the Goddess " . Daniel Willens argued that the group likely practiced Freemasonry , but also suggests Dashwood may have held secret Roman Catholic sacraments . He asks if Wilkes would have recognized a genuine Catholic Mass , even if he saw it himself and even if the underground version followed its public model precisely . 
 = = Aleister Crowley = = 
 Aleister Crowley ( 1875 – 1947 ) was an English occultist and writer . In 1904 , Crowley claimed to have received The Book of the Law from an entity named Aiwass , which was to serve as the foundation of the religious and philosophical system he called Thelema . 
 = = = The Book of the Law = = = 
 Crowley 's system of Thelema begins with The Book of the Law , which bears the official name Liber AL vel Legis . It was written in Cairo , Egypt during his honeymoon with his new wife Rose Crowley ( née Kelly ) . This small book contains three chapters , each of which he claimed to have written in exactly one hour , beginning at noon , on April 8 , April 9 , and April 10 , 1904 . Crowley claims that he took dictation from an entity named Aiwass , whom he later identified as his own Holy Guardian Angel . Disciple , author , and onetime Crowley secretary Israel Regardie prefers to attribute this voice to the subconscious , but opinions among Thelemites differ widely . Crowley claimed that " no forger could have prepared so complex a set of numerical and literal puzzles " and that study of the text would dispel all doubts about the method of how the book was obtained . 
 Besides the reference to Rabelais , an analysis by Dave Evans shows similarities to The Beloved of Hathor and Shrine of the Golden Hawk , a play by Florence Farr . Evans says this may result from the fact that " both Farr and Crowley were thoroughly steeped in Golden Dawn imagery and teachings " , and that Crowley probably knew the ancient materials that inspired some of Farr 's motifs . Sutin also finds similarities between Thelema and the work of W. B. Yeats , attributing this to " shared insight " and perhaps to the older man 's knowledge of Crowley . 
 Crowley wrote several commentaries on The Book of the Law , the last of which he wrote in 1925 . This brief statement called simply " The Comment " warns against discussing the book 's contents , and states that all " questions of the Law are to be decided only by appeal to my writings " and is signed Ankh @-@ af @-@ na @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = True Will = = = 
 According to Crowley , every individual has a True Will , to be distinguished from the ordinary wants and desires of the ego . The True Will is essentially one 's " calling " or " purpose " in life . Some later magicians have taken this to include the goal of attaining self @-@ realization by one 's own efforts , without the aid of God or other divine authority . This brings them close to the position that Crowley held just prior to 1904 . Others follow later works such as Liber II , saying that one 's own will in pure form is nothing other than the divine will . Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law for Crowley refers not to hedonism , fulfilling everyday desires , but to acting in response to that calling . The Thelemite is a mystic . According to Lon Milo DuQuette , a Thelemite is anyone who bases their actions on striving to discover and accomplish their true will , when a person does their True Will , it is like an orbit , their niche in the universal order , and the universe assists them . In order for the individual to be able to follow their True Will , the everyday self 's socially @-@ instilled inhibitions may have to be overcome via <unk> . Crowley believed that in order to discover the True Will , one had to free the desires of the subconscious mind from the control of the conscious mind , especially the restrictions placed on sexual expression , which he associated with the power of divine creation . He identified the True Will of each individual with the Holy Guardian Angel , a daimon unique to each individual . The spiritual quest to find what you are meant to do and do it is also known in Thelema as the Great Work . 
 = = = Cosmology = = = 
 Thelema draws its principal gods and goddesses from Ancient Egyptian religion . The highest deity in the cosmology of Thelema is the goddess Nuit . She is the night sky arched over the Earth symbolized in the form of a naked woman . She is conceived as the Great Mother , the ultimate source of all things . The second principal deity of Thelema is the god Hadit , conceived as the infinitely small point , complement and consort of Nuit . Hadit symbolizes manifestation , motion , and time . He is also described in Liber AL vel Legis as " the flame that burns in every heart of man , and in the core of every star " . The third deity in the cosmology of Thelema is Ra @-@ Hoor @-@ Khuit , a manifestation of Horus . He is symbolized as a throned man with the head of a hawk who carries a wand . He is associated with the Sun and the active energies of Thelemic magick . Other deities within the cosmology of Thelema are Hoor @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> ( or Harpocrates ) , god of silence and inner strength , the brother of Ra @-@ Hoor @-@ Khuit , Babalon , the goddess of all pleasure , known as the Virgin Whore , and Therion , the beast that Babalon rides , who represents the wild animal within man , a force of nature . 
 = = = Magick and ritual = = = 
 Thelemic magick is a system of physical , mental , and spiritual exercises which practitioners believe are of benefit . Crowley defined magick as " the Science and Art of causing Change to occur in conformity with Will " , and spelled it with a ' k ' to distinguish it from stage magic . He recommended magick as a means for discovering the True Will . Generally , magical practices in Thelema are designed to assist in finding and manifesting the True Will , although some include celebratory aspects as well . Crowley was a prolific writer , integrating Eastern practices with Western magical practices from the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn . He recommended a number of these practices to his followers , including basic yoga ; ( asana and pranayama ) ; rituals of his own devising or based on those of the Golden Dawn , such as the Lesser ritual of the pentagram , for banishing and invocation ; Liber <unk> , a ritual for the invocation of the Holy Guardian Angel ; eucharistic rituals such as The Gnostic Mass and The Mass of the Phoenix ; and Liber Resh , consisting of four daily adorations to the sun . Much of his work is readily available in print and online . He also discussed sex magick and sexual gnosis in various forms including masturbatory , heterosexual , and homosexual practices , and these form part of his suggestions for the work of those in the higher degrees of the Ordo Templi Orientis . Crowley believed that after discovering the True Will , the magician must also remove any elements of himself that stand in the way of its success . 
 The emphasis of Thelemic magick is not directly on material results , and while many Thelemites do practice magick for goals such as wealth or love , it is not required . Those in a Thelemic magical Order , such as the A ∴ A ∴ , or Ordo Templi Orientis , work through a series of degrees or grades via a process of initiation . Thelemites who work on their own or in an independent group try to achieve this ascent or the purpose thereof using the Holy Books of Thelema and / or Crowley 's more secular works as a guide , along with their own intuition . Thelemites , both independent ones and those affiliated with an order , can practice a form of performative prayer known as Liber Resh . 
 One goal in the study of Thelema within the magical Order of the A ∴ A ∴ is for the magician to obtain the knowledge and conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel : conscious communication with their own personal daimon , thus gaining knowledge of their True Will . The chief task for one who has achieved this goes by the name of " crossing the abyss " ; completely relinquishing the ego . If the aspirant is unprepared , he will cling to the ego instead , becoming a Black Brother . Rather than becoming one with God , the Black Brother considers his ego to be god . According to Crowley , the Black Brother slowly disintegrates , while preying on others for his own self @-@ aggrandisement . 
 Crowley taught skeptical examination of all results obtained through meditation or magick , at least for the student . He tied this to the necessity of keeping a magical record or diary , that attempts to list all conditions of the event . Remarking on the similarity of statements made by spiritually advanced people of their experiences , he said that fifty years from his time they would have a scientific name based on " an understanding of the phenomenon " to replace such terms as " spiritual " or " supernatural " . Crowley stated that his work and that of his followers used " the method of science ; the aim of religion " , and that the genuine powers of the magician could in some way be objectively tested . This idea has been taken on by later practitioners of Thelema , chaos magic and magick in general . They may consider that they are testing hypotheses with each magical experiment . The difficulty lies in the broadness of their definition of success , in which they may see as evidence of success things which a non @-@ magician would not define as such , leading to confirmation bias . Crowley believed he could demonstrate , by his own example , the effectiveness of magick in producing certain subjective experiences that do not ordinarily result from taking hashish , enjoying oneself in Paris , or walking through the Sahara desert . It is not strictly necessary to practice ritual techniques to be a Thelemite , as due to the focus of Thelemic magick on the True Will , Crowley stated " every intentional act is a <unk> act " . 
 = = = Ethics = = = 
 Liber AL vel Legis does make clear some standards of individual conduct . The most primary of these is " Do what thou wilt " which is presented as the whole of the law , and also as a right . Some interpreters of Thelema believe that this right includes an obligation to allow others to do their own wills without interference , but Liber AL makes no clear statement on the matter . Crowley himself wrote that there was no need to detail the ethics of Thelema , for everything springs from " Do what thou Wilt " . Crowley wrote several additional documents presenting his personal beliefs regarding individual conduct in light of the Law of Thelema , some of which do address the topic interference with others : Liber OZ , Duty , and Liber II . 
 Liber Oz enumerates some of the rights of the individual implied by the one overarching right , " Do what thou wilt " . For each person , these include the right to : live by one 's own law ; live in the way that one wills to do ; work , play , and rest as one will ; die when and how one will ; eat and drink what one will ; live where one will ; move about the earth as one will ; think , speak , write , draw , paint , carve , etch , mould , build , and dress as one will ; love when , where and with whom one will ; and kill those who would thwart these rights . 
 Duty is described as " A note on the chief rules of practical conduct to be observed by those who accept the Law of Thelema . " It is not a numbered " Liber " as are all the documents which Crowley intended for A ∴ A ∴ , but rather listed as a document intended specifically for Ordo Templi Orientis . There are four sections : 
 A. Your Duty to Self : describes the self as the center of the universe , with a call to learn about one 's inner nature . <unk> the reader to develop every faculty in a balanced way , establish one 's autonomy , and to devote oneself to the service of one 's own True Will . 
 B. Your Duty to Others : An admonishment to eliminate the illusion of separateness between oneself and all others , to fight when necessary , to avoid interfering with the Wills of others , to enlighten others when needed , and to worship the divine nature of all other beings . 
 C. Your Duty to Mankind : States that the Law of Thelema should be the sole basis of conduct . That the laws of the land should have the aim of securing the greatest liberty for all individuals . Crime is described as being a violation of one 's True Will . 
 D. Your Duty to All Other Beings and Things : States that the Law of Thelema should be applied to all problems and used to decide every ethical question . It is a violation of the Law of Thelema to use any animal or object for a purpose for which it is unfit , or to ruin things so that they are useless for their purpose . Natural resources can be used by man , but this should not be done wantonly , or the breach of the law will be avenged . 
 In Liber II : The Message of the Master Therion , the Law of Thelema is summarized succinctly as " Do what thou wilt — then do nothing else . " Crowley describes the pursuit of Will as not only with detachment from possible results , but with tireless energy . It is Nirvana but in a dynamic rather than static form . The True Will is described as the individual 's orbit , and if they seek to do anything else , they will encounter obstacles , as doing anything other than the will is a hindrance to it . 
 = = Contemporary Thelema = = 
 = = = Diversity of Thelemic thought = = = 
 The core of Thelemic thought is " Do what thou wilt " . However , beyond this , there exists a very wide range of interpretation of Thelema . Modern Thelema is a syncretic philosophy and religion , and many Thelemites try to avoid strongly dogmatic or fundamentalist thinking . Crowley himself put strong emphasis on the unique nature of Will inherent in each individual , not following him , saying he did not wish to found a flock of sheep . Thus , contemporary Thelemites may practice more than one religion , including Wicca , Gnosticism , Satanism , <unk> and Luciferianism . Many adherents of Thelema , none more so than Crowley , recognize correlations between Thelemic and other systems of spiritual thought ; most borrow freely from the methods and practices of other traditions , including alchemy , astrology , <unk> , tantra , tarot divination and yoga . For example , Nu and Had are thought to correspond with the Tao and Teh of Taoism , Shakti and Shiva of the Hindu Tantras , Shunyata and <unk> of Buddhism , Ain Soph and Kether in the Hermetic Qabalah . 
 There are some Thelemites who do accept The Book of the Law in some way but not the rest of Crowley 's " inspired " writings or teachings . Others take only specific aspects of his overall system , such as his magical techniques , ethics , mysticism , or religious ideas , while ignoring the rest . Other individuals who consider themselves Thelemites regard what is commonly presented as Crowley 's system to be only one possible manifestation of Thelema , creating original systems , such as those of Nema and Kenneth Grant . And one category of Thelemites are non @-@ religious , and simply adhere to the philosophical law of Thelema . 
 = = = Thelemic holidays = = = 
 The Book of the Law gives several holy days to be observed by Thelemites . There are no established or dogmatic ways to celebrate these days , so as a result Thelemites will often take to their own devices or celebrate in groups , especially within Ordo Templi Orientis . These holy days are usually observed on the following dates : 
 March 20 . The Feast of the Supreme Ritual , which celebrates the Invocation of Horus , the ritual performed by Crowley on this date in 1904 that inaugurated the New Aeon . 
 March 20 / March 21 . The Equinox of the Gods , which is commonly referred to as the Thelemic New Year ( although some celebrate the New Year on April 8 ) . Although the equinox and the Invocation of Horus often fall on the same day , they are often treated as two different events . This date is the Autumnal equinox in the Southern Hemisphere . 
 April 8 through April 10 . The Feast of the Three Days of the Writing of the Book of the Law . These three days are commemorative of the three days in the year 1904 during which Aleister Crowley wrote the Book of the Law . One chapter was written each day , the first being written on April 8 , the second on April 9 , and the third on April 10 . Although there is no official way of celebrating any Thelemic holiday , this particular feast day is usually celebrated by reading the corresponding chapter on each of the three days , usually at noon . 
 June 20 / June 21 . The Summer solstice in the Northern Hemisphere and the Winter solstice in the Southern Hemisphere . 
 August 12 . The Feast of the Prophet and His Bride . This holiday commemorates the marriage of Aleister Crowley and his first wife Rose Edith Crowley . Rose was a key figure in the writing of the Book of the Law . 
 September 22 / September 23 . The Autumnal equinox in the Northern Hemisphere and the Vernal Equinox in the Southern Hemisphere . 
 December 21 / December 22 . The Winter solstice in the Northern Hemisphere and the Summer Solstice in the Southern Hemisphere . 
 The Feast for Life , celebrated at the birth of a Thelemite and on birthdays . 
 The Feast for Fire / The Feast for Water . These feast days are usually taken as being when a child hits puberty and steps unto the path of adulthood . The Feast for Fire is celebrated for a male , and the Feast for Water for a female . 
 The Feast for Death , celebrated on the death of a Thelemite and on the anniversary of their death . 
 = = = Contemporary Thelemic literature = = = 
 Aleister Crowley was highly prolific and wrote on the subject of Thelema for over 35 years , and many of his books remain in print . During his time , there were several who wrote on the subject , including U.S. O.T.O. Grand Master Charles Stansfeld Jones , whose works on Qabalah are still in print , and Major @-@ General J. F. C. Fuller . 
 Jack Parsons was a scientist researching the use of various fuels for rockets at the California Institute of Technology , and one of Crowley 's first American students , for a time leading the Agape Lodge of the Ordo Templi Orientis for Crowley in America . He wrote several short works during his lifetime , some later collected as Freedom is a Two @-@ edged Sword . He died in 1952 as a result of an explosion , and while not a prolific writer himself , has been the subject of two biographies ; Sex and Rockets by John Carter , and Strange Angel by George Pendle . 
 Since Crowley 's death in 1947 , there have been other Thelemic writers such as Israel Regardie , who edited many of Crowley 's works and also wrote a biography of him , The Eye in the Triangle , as well as books on Qabalah . Kenneth Grant wrote numerous books on Thelema and the occult , such as The Typhonian Trilogy . Lon Milo DuQuette has written several books which analyze Crowley 's system . 
 Other notable contemporary writers who address Thelema include Allen H. Greenfield , Christopher Hyatt , Richard Kaczynski , Marcelo Ramos Motta , Rodney Orpheus , <unk> , Phyllis Seckler , James Wasserman , Sam Webster , and Robert Anton Wilson . There are also journals which print original Thelemic writing . 
 = = = Thelemic organizations = = = 
 Several modern organizations of various sizes claim to follow the tenets of Thelema . The two most prominent are both organizations that Crowley headed during his lifetime : the A ∴ A ∴ , an Order founded by Crowley , based on the grades of the Golden Dawn system ; and Ordo Templi Orientis , an order which initially developed from the Rite of Memphis and <unk> in the early part of the 20th century , and which includes Ecclesia Gnostica <unk> as its religious arm . 
 Since Crowley 's death in 1947 , other organizations have formed to carry on his initial work , for example , the College of Thelema , the Temple of Thelema , the College of Thelema of Northern California , the Holy Order Of <unk> , the Temple of the Silver Star , the Typhonian Order of Kenneth Grant , the Order of Thelemic Knights , and The Open Source Order of the Golden Dawn . Other groups of widely varying character exist which have drawn inspiration or methods from Thelema , such as the <unk> of <unk> and the Temple of Set . Some groups accept the Law of Thelema , but omit certain aspects of Crowley 's system while incorporating the works of other mystics , philosophers , and religious systems . The <unk> Saturni ( Brotherhood of Saturn ) , founded in 1928 in Germany , accepts the Law of Thelema , but extends it with the phrase " <unk> Liebe ! " ( " <unk> love ! " ) . The Thelema Society , also located in Germany , accepts Liber Legis and much of Crowley 's work on magick , while incorporating the ideas of other thinkers , such as Friedrich Nietzsche , Charles Sanders Peirce , Martin Heidegger and Niklas <unk> . Horus @-@ Maat Lodge combines the ideas of the occultist Nema with those of Crowley . 
 Thelemites can also be found in other organizations . The president of the Church of All Worlds , <unk> <unk> , identifies as a Thelemite . A significant minority of other <unk> members also identify as Thelemites . 
 = = = Thelema and the British justice system = = = 
 In May 2009 Thelema was recognised by Her Majesty 's Court Service in the United Kingdom as a religion , as it has both a " Holy Book " ( The Book of the Law ) and deity ( primarily for the purposes of the oath , Nuit ) as required in law . John Mitchell of Seaford , East Sussex was on Jury Service at Lewes Crown Court and after providing information to Justice Richard Brown , the Senior Recorder for East Sussex – mainly Liber AL and the article " Your Duty to Mankind , " gained recognition of Thelema as a valid religion . The article , " Your Duty to Mankind , " states that : 
 Crime being a direct spiritual violation of the Law of Thelema , it should not be tolerated in the community . Those who possess the instinct should be segregated in a settlement to build up a state of their own , so to learn the necessity of themselves imposing and maintaining rules of justice . All artificial crimes should be abolished . When fantastic restrictions disappear , the greater freedom of the individual will itself teach him to avoid acts , which really restrict natural rights . Thus real crime will diminish automatically . 
 Mitchell demonstrated that Thelema was a religion and created an oath that could be used instead of the affirmation : " I swear upon Nuit and by my own True Will , that I will faithfully try the defendant and give a true verdict according to the evidence . " 
 The swearing of the oath was first used after the sitting Judge , Justice Tain , ruled it was acceptable ; after some confusion due to the regular court ushers being on holiday , word had not got to the judge before the case started , causing a delay in proceedings while the legal technicalities were sorted out . The stand @-@ in court officer had a copy of the letter from Justice Brown , saying Mitchell could use the oath and swear on Liber AL . Justice Tain ruled that if this is the case , HMCS should be notified so this sort of thing does not happen again to avoid embarrassment for Thelemites who are called up to jury service . 
 = Ellwood House = 
 The Ellwood House was built as a private home by barbed wire entrepreneur Isaac Ellwood in 1879 . It is located on First Street in DeKalb , Illinois , United States , in DeKalb County . The Victorian style home , designed by George O. Garnsey , underwent remodeling in 1898 @-@ 1899 and 1911 . The house was originally part of 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 km ² ) which included a large stable complex known as " Ellwood Green . " Isaac Ellwood lived here until 1910 when he passed the estate to his son , Perry Ellwood . 
 After Perry Ellwood inherited the home he remodeled the interior and exterior , drastically altering the home 's appearance . Thus , the Ellwood House incorporates elements from several architectural styles . The site contains four buildings in addition to the main house . A 50 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) tall water tower dominates the west side of the property while a 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 @-@ m ) tall miniature Stick style house is located nearer the main house . There is also a carriage house , which houses a visitor 's center and a museum house that was once used to hold Harriet Ellwood 's ( Isaac 's wife ) collection of " curiosities . " In 1964 the home was donated to the city of DeKalb and converted into a museum . The house was listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places in 1975 . 
 = = History = = 
 Construction on the original mansion began in April 1879 , George O. Garnsey , a Chicago architect , designed the Ellwood Mansion for DeKalb barbed wire entrepreneur Isaac Ellwood . At the time , Garnsey had designed other structures in DeKalb and Sycamore . By November 1879 the Ellwood family occupied the home . Newspaper accounts of the day put the cost somewhere between US $ 40 @,@ 000 and $ 50 @,@ 000 . The original Ellwood House had a number of elements common to Victorian designed homes and combined several styles . Its mansard roof remains one of the home 's most striking features . In addition , the home still incorporates Gothic columns , pitched gables , and a cast iron roof cresting with a trefoil design . 
 While Isaac Ellwood lived in the home large dinner parties , popular during the 19th century , were commonplace . The Ellwood House hosted prominent visitors throughout Isaac Ellwood 's residence there . Theodore Roosevelt dined in the Ellwood House dining room while he was a candidate for Vice President of the United States in 1900 . The dining room has also hosted U.S. Senators and U.S. state governors among other notable guests . Dinner parties at the Ellwood House followed customs typical to 19th century dinner partie . Guests " dressed " for the party , followed proper etiquette and were expected to know how to use the silverware properly . 
 The first remodeling work on the Ellwood Mansion took place as the 19th century drew to a close . The changes , commissioned by Isaac Ellwood , were meant to reflect more popular architectural styles including the Georgian and Colonial Revival . Many of the building 's original Gothic features were replaced with more Classical elements . On the home 's exterior , some of these changes can be observed in the addition of the portico and porte @-@ cochere . Inside the home , the dining room was enlarged with the addition of the semicircular bay on the mansion 's north facade . 
 Perry Ellwood inherited the house in 1910 , and , together with his wife , May Ellwood ( née <unk> ) , altered the mansion once again . The biggest changes were the addition of the terrace on the home 's south face , a sunroom wing , and the relocation of the porte @-@ cochere to the north side of the portico . This is the mansion that is visible today . 
 During World War II , and after Perry Ellwood died in 1943 , May Ellwood again altered the home ; to save on fuel oil , she had the upper floors of the house closed off . During this period , the library functioned as a guest room and a bathroom was added across the library 's west wall . The bathroom was removed before the house opened as a museum in 1967 . The library 's plaster cornice and other architectural details have been restored based on a 1912 photograph . In 1964 the home was donated to the city of DeKalb and converted into a museum . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The three @-@ story brick house includes a full elevated basement and a mansard roof with steeply pitched gabled dormers . Projecting from the roofline are plain corbeled chimneys and iron <unk> , the original roofing material was slate . The 1879 version of the Ellwood House featured dormer ornamentation with finial work . The original windows were all double @-@ hung and of modest size , occurring both singly and in pairs while showing a variety of lintel designs . The original front ( east ) facade appeared much different than it does at present . The front entryway has been completely altered , due to Perry Ellwood 's 1911 remodeling . The original entryway featured a one @-@ story stone porch supported with two pilasters and two granite columns . The square projecting porch bay was connected to the ground via 12 stone stairs . In the southeast corner of the house was a full three @-@ story projecting tower set at a 45 ° angle to the rest of the front facade . 
 Isaac Ellwood 's 1898 @-@ 1899 renovations were superficial , especially when compared to the alterations his son made to the original design a decade later . He had the bracketed cornice replaced with a Classical cornice with dentils and a projecting molding . The window lintels were altered in a style similar to the new cornice . On the tower , the two windows on the first floor were replaced with one larger window while the projecting bay over the east portico was removed and made flush with the rest of the house . The windows over that portico were replaced with a heavy double door that opened onto the roof over the veranda , which had been built over the entire front of the house . It was during this time that the first porte @-@ cochere was built on the south side of the home . 
 Perry Ellwood undertook major renovations which added and changed rooms in 1910 . On the home 's exterior the porte cochere was moved from the south facade to its present position on the north facade . On the south side of the home a large brick terrace was added and the conservatory moved from the southwest side of the house to the rear ( west ) . The full @-@ length tower on the home 's southwest corner was entirely removed during this renovation . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The general layout of the home 's interior has remained basically the same throughout the remodelings ; the rooms on each floor are accessed via a large central hallway which ends in an elegant rotunda . However , some of the changes made in 1910 and 1911 did alter the interior appearance . The parlor was converted into the library and the library was converted into the dining room after an extension was added on . In the home 's northwest corner a large kitchen was added , on the second @-@ floor , the room above the kitchen became servant 's quarters . 
 Upon entering the Ellwood House , guests of Isaac or Perry Ellwood would have been greeted or formally welcomed by members of the family . After Perry Ellwood inherited the house in 1910 the entry parlor began to become known as the library . Prominent among the library 's features is a carved Italian marble mantle with a large gilt mirror hung above it . The library 's bookshelves are cast in a Neo @-@ Italian Renaissance style and constructed of fine mahogany . Presently filling the shelves in the Ellwood House are a large collection of books with Ellwood family nameplates . Near the library window , which is adorned with its original walnut shutters , is an 1890s French statue . The statue was donated to the Ellwood House Association from someone in Sycamore who bequeathed it to the museum . 
 The dining room 's underwent an extensive remodel in 1898 because of Ellwood 's rise to national prominence through his barbed wire partnership with Joseph Glidden . The room was enlarged through the addition of a semi @-@ circular bay . Beyond the addition , the room was refurnished and redecorated to reflect the Georgian Revival alterations that were occurring on the home 's exterior . Elements of Georgian Revival architecture that were incorporated into the Ellwood dining room remodel include , mahogany paneling with dentil molding around the windows and doors , a cornice with Classical details , and brackets . Almost all of the dining room 's 1898 furniture and woodwork was custom made by Tobey & Company of Chicago and each piece is affixed with a dated brass plate . The main dining room table and chairs were cast in an early Georgian style and the table has twelve extra leaves which can extend it the length of the room . The dining room 's smaller table , situated within the bay addition , was used for Ellwood family breakfasts . 
 The Ellwood House living room did not exist until Perry Ellwood 's 1911 remodeling . The original living room space was laid out as two rooms with pocket doors joining them . In the living room , a wall between the sitting room was removed which created a large , open space to which a vaulted ceiling was added . Perry Ellwood 's living room was designed to function with the newly added sunroom and south terrace as one large living and entertaining space . The terrace can be accessed through French doors from both the living room and sunroom . The living room was designed to reflect English country houses c . 1650 , during the Stuart period . The room was designed by Roy Terwilliger , an interior designer with Marshall Field & Company in Chicago and May Ellwood 's cousin . The living room features a " <unk> " ceiling constructed of molded plaster and designed with a geometric theme . The large , Caen stone fireplace was carved in Chicago in 1911 . The sunroom was designed in the late 19th century and early 20th century Arts and Crafts style causing it to stand in stark contrast to the living room . The room was originally furnished with Mission style furniture to complement the oak woodwork . 
 = = Museum = = 
 Shortly before her death in 1964 May Ellwood donated the house to the DeKalb Park District for use as a historic house museum . The Ellwood House site is about 8 @.@ 5 acres ( 34 @,@ 000 m2 ) which includes a wooded area to the north of the house ; all that remains of the original 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 km2 ) . The house is now a museum , operated jointly by the Ellwood House Association and the DeKalb Park District and they offer guided tours for a fee . The museum offers tours seasonally beginning in late spring and ending after the annual holiday celebration in December . The Ellwood House Museum has a visitor 's center , which includes a barbed wire gallery , carriage gallery , special exhibits gallery , and a gift shop . The museum offers tourists a chance to glimpse what life was like for the <unk> . As part of the DeKalb Park District , the grounds are open to the public , and available for rental for use on public and private events . The DeKalb Area Garden Club hosts an annual Flower Show , community members hold weddings in the garden or visitors center , and the Ellwood House Association holds an annual Art Show , Ice Cream Social , and other events . 
 = = Outbuildings = = 
 = = = Water tower = = = 
 The Ellwood House grounds hold several extant outbuildings as well : the museum house , the carriage house , the water tower , and the Little House . On the west ( rear ) of the Ellwood House , the circular limestone water tower is about 50 feet ( 15 @.@ 2 m ) tall and has a diameter of 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) . The tower has windows occurring at different levels , which are arched and include keystones in their design . The water tower was built in 1879 , the same year as Ellwood House , and at that time the structure was topped with a wooden water tank with a conical roof . Between 1897 and 1910 the wooden tank was removed and replaced with an additional 30 courses of stone which matched the original structure . The arched door at the base of the water tower was replaced with a larger square @-@ shaped double door . The roof remained conical and of wood construction until about 1950 when it was replaced with sheet metal . 
 The water tower is the only surviving structure from what was once a large horse stable facility owned by Isaac Ellwood . The complex , known as " Ellwood Green , " was affiliated with the family 's Percheron horse business . Two major structures within the complex , were the 1879 brick stable buildings , both of which featured mansard roofs . Those buildings , along with all other original stable buildings ( save the water tower and including the home stable ) were demolished through the years . 
 = = = Carriage house = = = 
 Another of the property 's buildings , commonly called the carriage house , never lived up to its popular name . The building never housed any carriages ; it was , in fact , built to house automobiles . The southern section of the carriage house was constructed sometime between 1908 and 1912 and features a mansard roof . The building is sheathed in stucco and presently houses a collection of antique carriages and sleighs as well as a barbed wire history museum . 
 The carriage house , today the Ellwood House Museum 's Education and Visitors Center , was built by Perry Ellwood as a multi @-@ car garage . It had a grease pit for automobile repair work . On the second floor was an apartment for the Ellwood family chauffeur . The building originally had garage doors on both sides so cars could drive in one side and out the other side of the structure . The original doors are on display inside the Ellwood House Visitors Center . 
 = = = Museum House = = = 
 The one @-@ story red brick Museum House , another of the site 's outbuildings , stands to the south of the main house and was built in 1905 for Isaac Ellwood 's wife Harriett . The Ellwood 's grandchildren and other family members referred to the museum house as the " Curiosity Shop . " She used the building to store the many curiosities and items she collected while traveling throughout the world . Some of these items included Native American artifacts , minerals , seashells , and other specimens . The museum house measures almost exactly 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) on all four sides and has two doorways , one on the east and one on the north side . On its interior some of the museum house 's original oak display cases are still intact . 
 The Museum House is cast in Classical Revival style and was the last outbuilding constructed for Isaac Ellwood on the property . Today the Museum House 's exterior appears much the same as it did when it was newly constructed but for many years the structure was badly deteriorated . After Harriet Ellwood died in 1910 the objects remained inside the building while it began to decline . By 1934 the building was in serious need of repair and by the 1970s both porches were gone and the only way into the building was through the north door . The museum house restoration was undertaken more than ten years later . Prior to the addition of the Visitors Center to the Carriage House , the Museum House served as the visitors center and housed staff offices . 
 = = = Little House = = = 
 On the west ( rear ) side of the home , near the carriage house , is a miniature Stick style house known as Little House . Little House is 13 feet ( 4 m ) by 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) and stands 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) above its concrete foundation . The Little House 's roof is an exact replica of the original roof of the Ellwood House . Little House was built in 1892 with assistance from every carpenter in DeKalb ; the house was to be used as a float in a local parade . After the parade Isaac Ellwood 's son , Will , bought the house and had it placed on the Ellwood House property in the same location it stands today . The house was used by Will 's two daughters and later by Perry Ellwood 's children . 
 Between that time and 1973 the house had four or five other owners and it was moved several times . Eventually , the Little House wound up at the property of Mr. and Mrs. Burt <unk> , on Annie Glidden Road , where it again served as a playhouse for the couple 's children . At this point it was painted white , with green shutters . In 1973 Mrs. <unk> donated Little House to Ellwood House Association and it was returned to its place on the Ellwood property . In 1986 the Little House was restored to a Victorian <unk> scheme . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The house is most significant for its connection to Isaac Ellwood , who has been given credit , in part , for Joseph Glidden 's invention of barbed wire . Glidden 's patent was earlier , thus Ellwood 's connection with the actual invention is vague . He did , however , play a chief role in organizing the barbed wire industry into a viable and profitable business . Isaac Ellwood lived in the home throughout his later years and made his home in DeKalb through all of his years in barbed wire . The Ellwood House , including the four contributing properties on its 8 @.@ 2 @-@ acre ( 33 @,@ 000 m2 ) site , were added to the U.S. National Register of Historic Places on June 13 , 1975 . 
 = Butterfly = 
 Butterflies are insects in the clade Rhopalocera from the order Lepidoptera , which also includes moths . Adult butterflies have large , often brightly coloured wings , and conspicuous , fluttering flight . The group comprises the large superfamily Papilionoidea , along with two smaller groups , the skippers ( superfamily Hesperioidea ) and the moth @-@ butterflies ( superfamily Hedyloidea ) . Butterfly fossils date to the Palaeocene , about 56 million years ago . 
 Butterflies have the typical four @-@ stage insect life cycle . Winged adults lay eggs on the food plant on which their larvae , known as caterpillars , will feed . The caterpillars grow , sometimes very rapidly , and when fully developed pupate in a chrysalis . When metamorphosis is complete , the pupal skin splits , the adult insect climbs out and , after its wings have expanded and dried , it flies off . Some butterflies , especially in the tropics , have several generations in a year , while others have a single generation , and a few in cold locations may take several years to pass through their whole life cycle . 
 Butterflies are often polymorphic , and many species make use of camouflage , mimicry and aposematism to evade their predators . Some , like the monarch and the painted lady , migrate over long distances . Some butterflies have parasitoidal relationships with organisms including protozoans , flies , ants , and other invertebrates , and are predated by vertebrates . Some species are pests because in their larval stages they can damage domestic crops or trees ; other species are agents of pollination of some plants , and caterpillars of a few butterflies ( e.g. , harvesters ) eat harmful insects . Culturally , butterflies are a popular motif in the visual and literary arts . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The Oxford English Dictionary derives the word straightforwardly from Old English <unk> , butter @-@ fly ; similar names in Old Dutch and Old High German show that the name is ancient . A possible source of the name is the bright yellow male of the brimstone <unk> <unk> ; another is that butterflies were on the wing in meadows during the spring and summer butter season while the grass was growing . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The earliest Lepidoptera fossils are of a small moth , <unk> mane , of Jurassic age , around 190 million years ago ( mya ) . Butterflies evolved from moths , so while the butterflies are monophyletic ( forming a single clade ) , the moths are not . The oldest butterflies are from the Palaeocene <unk> or Fur Formation of Denmark . The oldest American butterfly is the Late Eocene Prodryas persephone from the Florissant Fossil Beds . 
 Traditionally , the butterflies have been divided into the superfamily Papilionoidea and the smaller groupings of the Hesperioidea ( skippers ) and the more moth @-@ like Hedyloidea of America . Phylogenetic analysis suggests that the traditional Papilionoidea is paraphyletic with respect to the other two groups , so they should both be included to form a single butterfly group , the clade Rhopalocera . 
 = = Biology = = 
 = = = General description = = = 
 Butterfly adults are characterized by their four scale @-@ covered wings , which give the Lepidoptera their name ( Ancient Greek <unk> <unk> , scale + πτερόν <unk> , wing ) . These scales give butterfly wings their colour : they are pigmented with melanins that give them blacks and browns , as well as uric acid derivatives and flavones that give them yellows , but many of the blues , greens , reds and iridescent colours are created by structural coloration produced by the micro @-@ structures of the scales and hairs . 
 As in all insects , the body is divided into three sections : the head , thorax , and abdomen . The thorax is composed of three segments , each with a pair of legs . In most families of butterfly the antennae are clubbed , unlike those of moths which may be threadlike or feathery . The long proboscis can be coiled when not in use for sipping nectar from flowers . 
 Nearly all butterflies are diurnal , have relatively bright colours , and hold their wings vertically above their bodies when at rest , unlike the majority of moths which fly by night , are often cryptically coloured ( well camouflaged ) , and either hold their wings flat ( touching the surface on which the moth is standing ) or fold them closely over their bodies . Some day @-@ flying moths , such as the hummingbird hawk @-@ moth , are exceptions to these rules . 
 Butterfly larvae , caterpillars , have a hard ( sclerotised ) head with strong mandibles used for cutting their food , most often leaves . They have cylindrical bodies , with ten segments to the abdomen , generally with short prolegs on segments 3 – 6 and 10 ; the three pairs of true legs on the thorax have five segments each . Many are well @-@ camouflaged ; others are aposematic with bright colours and bristly projections containing toxic chemicals obtained from their food plants . The pupa or chrysalis , unlike that of moths , is not wrapped in a cocoon . 
 Many butterflies are sexually dimorphic . Most butterflies have the ZW sex @-@ determination system where females are the heterogametic sex ( ZW ) and males <unk> ( ZZ ) . 
 = = = Distribution and migration = = = 
 See also lists of butterflies of Australia ( Tasmania , Victoria ) , Britain , India , Minorca , North America , Taiwan , Trinidad and Tobago 
 Butterflies are distributed worldwide except Antarctica , totalling some 18 @,@ 500 species . Of these , 775 are Nearctic ; 7 @,@ 700 Neotropical ; 1 @,@ 575 Palearctic ; 3 @,@ 650 <unk> ; and 4 @,@ 800 are distributed across the combined Oriental and Australian / Oceania regions . The monarch butterfly is native to the Americas , but in the nineteenth century or before , spread across the world , and is now found in Australia , New Zealand , other parts of Oceania , and the Iberian Peninsula . It is not clear how it dispersed ; adults may have been blown by the wind or larvae or pupae may have been accidentally transported by humans , but the presence of suitable host plants in their new environment was a necessity for their successful establishment . 
 Many butterflies , such as painted lady , the monarch , and several danaine migrate for long distances . These migrations take place over a number of generations and no single individual completes the whole trip . The eastern North American population of monarchs can travel thousands of miles southwest to overwintering sites in Mexico . There is a reverse migration in the spring . It has recently been shown that the British painted lady undertakes a 9 @,@ 000 @-@ mile round trip in a series of steps by up to six successive generations , from tropical Africa to the Arctic Circle — almost double the length of the famous migrations undertaken by monarch . Spectacular large @-@ scale migrations associated with the monsoon are seen in peninsular India . Migrations have been studied in more recent times using wing tags and also using stable hydrogen isotopes . 
 Butterflies navigate using a time @-@ compensated sun compass . They can see polarized light and therefore orient even in cloudy conditions . The polarized light near the ultraviolet spectrum appears to be particularly important . Many migratory butterflies live in semi @-@ arid areas where breeding seasons are short . The life @-@ histories of their host plants also influence butterfly behaviour . 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 Butterflies in their adult stage can live from a week to nearly a year depending on the species . Many species have long larval life stages while others can remain dormant in their pupal or egg stages and thereby survive winters . The Melissa Arctic ( <unk> <unk> ) overwinters twice as a caterpillar . Butterflies may have one or more broods per year . The number of generations per year varies from temperate to tropical regions with tropical regions showing a trend towards <unk> . 
 Courtship is often aerial and often involves pheromones . Butterflies then land on the ground or on a perch to mate . Copulation takes place tail @-@ to @-@ tail and may last from minutes to hours . The male passes a spermatophore to the female ; to reduce sperm competition , he may cover her with his scent , or in some species such as the Apollos ( Parnassius ) plugs her genital opening to prevent her from mating again . 
 The vast majority of butterflies have a four @-@ stage life cycle ; egg , larva ( caterpillar ) , pupa ( chrysalis ) and imago ( adult ) . In the genera <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Parnassius , a small number of species are known that reproduce semi @-@ parthenogenetically ; when the female dies , a partially developed larva emerges from her abdomen . 
 = = = = Egg = = = = 
 Butterfly eggs are protected by a hard @-@ ridged outer layer of shell , called the chorion . This is lined with a thin coating of wax which prevents the egg from drying out before the larva has had time to fully develop . Each egg contains a number of tiny funnel @-@ shaped openings at one end , called <unk> ; the purpose of these holes is to allow sperm to enter and fertilize the egg . Butterfly eggs vary greatly in size and shape between species , but are usually upright and finely sculptured . Some species lay eggs singly , others in batches . Many females produce between one hundred and two hundred eggs . 
 Butterfly eggs are fixed to a leaf with a special glue which hardens rapidly . As it hardens it contracts , deforming the shape of the egg . This glue is easily seen surrounding the base of every egg forming a meniscus . The nature of the glue has been little researched but in the case of Pieris brassicae , it begins as a pale yellow granular secretion containing acidophilic proteins . This is viscous and darkens when exposed to air , becoming a water @-@ insoluble , rubbery material which soon sets solid . Butterflies in the genus <unk> do not fix their eggs to a leaf , instead the newly laid eggs fall to the base of the plant . 
 Eggs are almost invariably laid on plants . Each species of butterfly has its own <unk> range and while some species of butterfly are restricted to just one species of plant , others use a range of plant species , often including members of a common family . In some species , such as the great spangled fritillary , the eggs are deposited close to but not on the food plant . This most likely happens when the egg overwinters before hatching and where the host plant loses its leaves in winter , as do violets in this example . 
 The egg stage lasts a few weeks in most butterflies , but eggs laid close to winter , especially in temperate regions , go through a diapause ( resting ) stage , and the hatching may take place only in spring . Some temperate region butterflies , such as the Camberwell beauty , lay their eggs in the spring and have them hatch in the summer . 
 = = = = Caterpillar larva = = = = 
 Butterfly larvae , or caterpillars , consume plant leaves and spend practically all of their time in searching for and eating food . Although most caterpillars are herbivorous , a few species are predators : <unk> <unk> eats scale insects , while <unk> such as <unk> <unk> are myrmecophilous , eating ant larvae . 
 Some larvae , especially those of the Lycaenidae , form mutual associations with ants . They communicate with the ants using vibrations that are transmitted through the substrate as well as using chemical signals . The ants provide some degree of protection to these larvae and they in turn gather honeydew secretions . Large blue ( Phengaris arion ) caterpillars trick Myrmica ants into taking them back to the ant colony where they feed on the ant eggs and larvae in a parasitic relationship . 
 Caterpillars mature through a series of developmental stages known as instars . Near the end of each stage , the larva undergoes a process called <unk> , mediated by the release of a series of <unk> . During this phase , the cuticle , a tough outer layer made of a mixture of chitin and specialized proteins , is released from the softer epidermis beneath , and the epidermis begins to form a new cuticle . At the end of each instar , the larva moults , the old cuticle splits and the new cuticle expands , rapidly hardening and developing pigment . Development of butterfly wing patterns begins by the last larval instar . 
 Caterpillars have short antennae and several simple eyes . The mouthparts are adapted for chewing with powerful mandibles and a pair maxillae , each with a segmented palp . Adjoining these is the labium @-@ hypopharynx which houses a tubular spinneret which is able to extrude silk . Butterfly caterpillars have three pairs of true legs on the thoracic segments and up to six pairs of prolegs arising from the abdominal segments . These prolegs have rings of tiny hooks called crochets that are engaged <unk> and help the caterpillar grip the substrate . The epidermis bears tufts of setae , the position and number of which help in identifying the species . There is also decoration in the form of hairs , wart @-@ like protuberances , horn @-@ like protuberances and spines . Internally , most of the body cavity is taken up by the gut , but there may also be large silk glands , and special glands which secrete distasteful or toxic substances . The developing wings are present in later stage instars and the gonads start development in the egg stage . 
 = = = = Pupa = = = = 
 When the larva is fully grown , hormones such as <unk> hormone ( PTTH ) are produced . At this point the larva stops feeding , and begins " wandering " in the quest for a suitable pupation site , often the underside of a leaf or other concealed location . There it spins a button of silk which it uses to fasten its body to the surface and moults for a final time . While some caterpillars spin a cocoon to protect the pupa , most species do not . The naked pupa , often known as a chrysalis , usually hangs head @-@ down from the cremaster , a spiny pad at the posterior end , but in some species a silken girdle may be spun to keep the pupa in a head @-@ up position . Most of the tissues and cells of the larva are broken down inside the pupa , as the constituent material is rebuilt into the imago . The structure of the transforming insect is visible from the exterior , with the wings folded flat on the ventral surface and the two halves of the proboscis , with the antennae and the legs between them . 
 The pupal transformation into a butterfly through metamorphosis has held great appeal to mankind . To transform from the miniature wings visible on the outside of the pupa into large structures usable for flight , the pupal wings undergo rapid mitosis and absorb a great deal of nutrients . If one wing is surgically removed early on , the other three will grow to a larger size . In the pupa , the wing forms a structure that becomes compressed from top to bottom and pleated from proximal to distal ends as it grows , so that it can rapidly be unfolded to its full adult size . Several boundaries seen in the adult colour pattern are marked by changes in the expression of particular transcription factors in the early pupa . 
 = = = = Adult = = = = 
 The reproductive stage of the insect is the winged adult or imago . The surface of both butterflies and moths is covered by scales , each of which is an outgrowth from a single epidermal cell . The head is small and dominated by the two large compound eyes . These are capable of distinguishing flower shapes or motion but not for clearly viewing distant objects . Colour perception is good , especially in some species in the blue / violet range . The antennae are composed of many segments and have clubbed @-@ tips ( unlike moths that have tapering or feathery antennae ) . The sensory receptors are concentrated in the tips and can detect odours . Taste receptors are located on the palps and on the feet . The mouthparts are designed for sucking and the mandibles are usually reduced in size or absent . The first maxillae are elongated into a tubular proboscis which is curled up at rest and expanded when needed to feed . The first and second maxillae bear palps which function as sensory organs . Some species have a reduced proboscis or maxillary palps and do not feed as adults . 
 The thorax of the butterfly is devoted to locomotion . Each of the three thoracic segments has two legs ( among <unk> , the first pair is reduced and the insects walk on four legs ) . The second and third segments of the thorax bear the wings . The leading edges of the forewings have thick veins to strengthen them , and the hindwings are smaller and more rounded and have fewer stiffening veins . The fore and hindwings are not hooked together ( as they are in moths ) but are coordinated by the friction of their overlapping parts . The front two segments have a pair of spiracles which are used in respiration . 
 The abdomen consists of ten segments and contains the gut and genital organs . The front eight segments have spiracles and the terminal segment is modified for reproduction . The male has a pair of clasping organs attached to a ring structure , and during copulation , a tubular structure is extruded and inserted into the female 's vagina . A spermatophore is deposited in the female , following which the sperm make their way to a seminal receptacle where they are stored for later use . In both sexes , the genitalia are adorned with various spines , teeth , scales and bristles , which act to prevent the butterfly from mating with an insect of another species . After it emerges from its pupal stage , a butterfly cannot fly until the wings are unfolded . A newly emerged butterfly needs to spend some time inflating its wings with hemolymph and letting them dry , during which time it is extremely vulnerable to predators . 
 = = = Behaviour = = = 
 Butterflies feed primarily on nectar from flowers . Some also derive nourishment from pollen , tree sap , rotting fruit , dung , decaying flesh , and dissolved minerals in wet sand or dirt . Butterflies are important as pollinators for some species of plants . In general , they do not carry as much pollen load as bees , but they are capable of moving pollen over greater distances . Flower constancy has been observed for at least one species of butterfly . 
 Adult butterflies consume only liquids , ingested through the proboscis . They sip water from damp patches for hydration and feed on nectar from flowers , from which they obtain sugars for energy , and sodium and other minerals vital for reproduction . Several species of butterflies need more sodium than that provided by nectar and are attracted by sodium in salt ; they sometimes land on people , attracted by the salt in human sweat . Some butterflies also visit dung , rotting fruit or carcasses to obtain minerals and nutrients . In many species , this mud @-@ puddling behaviour is restricted to the males , and studies have suggested that the nutrients collected may be provided as a nuptial gift , along with the spermatophore , during mating . 
 Butterflies use their antennae to sense the air for wind and scents . The antennae come in various shapes and colours ; the <unk> have a pointed angle or hook to the antennae , while most other families show knobbed antennae . The antennae are richly covered with sensory organs known as sensillae . A butterfly 's sense of taste is coordinated by chemoreceptors on the tarsi , or feet , which work only on contact , and are used to determine whether an egg @-@ laying insect 's offspring will be able to feed on a leaf before eggs are laid on it . Many butterflies use chemical signals , pheromones ; some have specialized scent scales ( androconia ) or other structures ( <unk> or " hair pencils " in the <unk> ) . Vision is well developed in butterflies and most species are sensitive to the ultraviolet spectrum . Many species show sexual dimorphism in the patterns of UV reflective patches . Color vision may be widespread but has been demonstrated in only a few species . Some butterflies have organs of hearing and some species make stridulatory and clicking sounds . 
 Many species of butterfly maintain territories and actively chase other species or individuals that may stray into them . Some species will bask or perch on chosen perches . The flight styles of butterflies are often characteristic and some species have courtship flight displays . Butterflies can only fly when their temperature is above 27 ° C ( 81 ° F ) ; when it is cool , they can position themselves to expose the underside of the wings to the sunlight to heat themselves up . If their body temperature reaches 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) , they can orientate themselves with the folded wings <unk> to the sun . Basking is an activity which is more common in the cooler hours of the morning . Some species have evolved dark <unk> to help in gathering more heat and this is especially evident in alpine forms . 
 As in many other insects , the lift generated by butterflies is more than can be accounted for by steady @-@ state , non @-@ transitory aerodynamics . Studies using Vanessa atalanta in a wind tunnel show that they use a wide variety of aerodynamic mechanisms to generate force . These include wake capture , vortices at the wing edge , rotational mechanisms and the Weis @-@ Fogh ' clap @-@ and @-@ fling ' mechanism . Butterflies are able to change from one mode to another rapidly . 
 = = = Ecology = = = 
 = = = = Parasitoids , predators and pathogens = = = = 
 Butterflies are threatened in their early stages by parasitoids and in all stages by predators , diseases and environmental factors . <unk> and other parasitic wasps lay their eggs in lepidopteran eggs or larvae and the wasps ' parasitoid larvae devour their hosts , usually pupating inside or outside the desiccated husk . Most wasps are very specific about their host species and some have been used as biological controls of pest butterflies like the large white butterfly . When the small cabbage white was accidentally introduced to New Zealand , it had no natural enemies . In order to control it , some pupae that had been parasitised by a chalcid wasp were imported , and natural control was thus regained . Some flies lay their eggs on the outside of caterpillars and the newly hatched fly larvae bore their way through the skin and feed in a similar way to the parasitoid wasp larvae . Predators of butterflies include ants , spiders , wasps and birds . 
 Caterpillars are also affected by a range of bacterial , viral and fungal diseases , and only a small percentage of the butterfly eggs laid ever reach adulthood . The bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis has been used in sprays to reduce damage to crops by the caterpillars of the large white butterfly , and the entomopathogenic fungus Beauveria bassiana has proved effective for the same purpose . 
 = = = = Defences = = = = 
 Butterflies protect themselves from predators by a variety of means . 
 Chemical defences are widespread and are mostly based on chemicals of plant origin . In many cases the plants themselves evolved these toxic substances as protection against herbivores . Butterflies have evolved mechanisms to sequester these plant toxins and use them instead in their own defense . These defense mechanisms are effective only if they are well advertised ; this has led to the evolution of bright colours in unpalatable butterflies ( aposematism ) . This signal is commonly mimicked by other butterflies , usually only females . A Batesian mimic imitates another species to enjoy the protection of that species ' aposematism . The common Mormon of India has female morphs which imitate the unpalatable red @-@ bodied swallowtails , the common rose and the crimson rose . Müllerian mimicry occurs when aposematic species evolve to resemble each other , presumably to reduce predator sampling rates ; Heliconius butterflies from the Americas are a good example . 
 Camouflage is found in many butterflies . Some like the <unk> butterfly and autumn leaf are remarkable imitations of leaves . As caterpillars , many defend themselves by freezing and appearing like sticks or branches . Others have deimatic behaviours , such as rearing up and waving their front ends which are marked with eyespots as if they were snakes . Some <unk> caterpillars such as the giant swallowtail Papilio <unk> resemble bird droppings . Some caterpillars have hairs and bristly structures that provide protection while others are gregarious and form dense aggregations . Some species are myrmecophiles , forming mutualistic associations with ants and gaining their protection . Behavioural defences include perching and angling the wings to reduce shadow and avoid being conspicuous . Some female <unk> butterflies guard their eggs from parasitoidal wasps . 
 The Lycaenidae have a false head consisting of eyespots and small tails ( false antennae ) to deflect attack from the more vital head region . These may also cause ambush predators such as spiders to approach from the wrong end , enabling the butterflies to detect attacks promptly . Many butterflies have eyespots on the wings ; these too may deflect attacks , or may serve to attract mates . 
 Many tropical butterflies have seasonal forms for dry and wet seasons . These are switched by the hormone <unk> . The dry @-@ season forms are usually more cryptic , perhaps offering better camouflage when vegetation is scarce . Dark colours in wet season forms may help to absorb solar radiation . 
 = = In culture = = 
 = = = In art and literature = = = 
 Butterflies have appeared in art from 3500 years ago in Ancient Egypt . In the ancient Mesoamerican city of Teotihuacan , the brilliantly coloured image of the butterfly was carved into many temples , buildings , jewellery , and emblazoned on incense burners . The butterfly was sometimes depicted with the maw of a jaguar , and some species were considered to be the reincarnations of the souls of dead warriors . The close association of butterflies with fire and warfare persisted into the Aztec civilisation ; evidence of similar jaguar @-@ butterfly images has been found among the Zapotec and Maya civilisations . 
 Butterflies are widely used in objects of art and jewellery : mounted in frames , embedded in resin , displayed in bottles , laminated in paper , and used in some mixed media artworks and furnishings . The Norwegian naturalist Kjell <unk> compiled a photographic Butterfly Alphabet containing all 26 letters and the numerals 0 to 9 from the wings of butterflies . 
 Sir John Tenniel drew a famous illustration of Alice meeting a caterpillar for Lewis Carroll 's Alice in Wonderland , c . 1865 . The caterpillar is seated on a toadstool and is smoking a hookah ; the image can be read as showing either the forelegs of the larva , or as suggesting a face with protruding nose and chin . Eric Carle 's children 's book The Very Hungry Caterpillar portrays the larva as an extraordinarily hungry animal , while also teaching children how to count ( to five ) and the days of the week . 
 One of the most popular , and most often recorded , songs by Sweden 's 18th century bard , Carl Michael Bellman , is Fjäriln vingad <unk> på Haga , " The butterfly wingèd is seen in Haga " , one of his Fredman 's Songs . 
 Madam Butterfly is a 1904 opera by Giacomo Puccini about a romantic young Japanese bride who is deserted by her American officer husband soon after they are married . It was based on John Luther Long 's short story written in 1898 . 
 = = = In mythology and folklore = = = 
 According to Lafcadio Hearn , a butterfly was seen in Japan as the personification of a person 's soul ; whether they be living , dying , or already dead . One Japanese superstition says that if a butterfly enters your <unk> and perches behind the bamboo screen , the person whom you most love is coming to see you . Large numbers of butterflies are viewed as bad omens . When Taira no Masakado was secretly preparing for his famous revolt , there appeared in Kyoto so vast a swarm of butterflies that the people were frightened — thinking the apparition to be a portent of coming evil . 
 Diderot 's Encyclopédie cites butterflies as a symbol for the soul . A Roman sculpture depicts a butterfly exiting the mouth of a dead man , representing the Roman belief that the soul leaves through the mouth . In line with this , the ancient Greek word for " butterfly " is <unk> ( <unk> ) , which primarily means " soul " or " mind " . According to Mircea Eliade , some of the Nagas of Manipur claim ancestry from a butterfly . In some cultures , butterflies symbolise rebirth . The butterfly is a symbol of being transgender , because of the transformation from caterpillar to winged adult . In the English county of Devon , people once hurried to kill the first butterfly of the year , to avoid a year of bad luck . In the Philippines , a lingering black butterfly or moth in the house is taken to mean a death in the family . Several American states have chosen an official state butterfly . 
 = = = Collecting , recording , and rearing = = = 
 Collecting butterflies was once a popular hobby ; it has now largely been replaced by photography , recording , and rearing butterflies for release into the wild . The zoological illustrator Frederick William Frohawk succeeded in rearing all the butterfly species found in Britain , at a rate of four per year , to enable him to draw every stage of each species . He published the results in the folio sized handbook The Natural History of British Butterflies in 1924 . 
 = = = In technology = = = 
 Study of the structural coloration of the wing scales of swallowtail butterflies led to the development of more efficient light @-@ emitting diodes . The structural coloration of butterflies is inspiring nanotechnology research to produce paints that do not use toxic pigments and in the development of new display technologies . 
 = = = Regional lists = = = 
 Europe : Spain and Portugal 
 North America 
 Africa : Ghana 
 Asia : Singapore Israel Indo @-@ China Sulawesi ( Southeastern Sulawesi ) Turkey 
 = New York State Route 430 = 
 New York State Route 430 ( NY 430 ) is a state highway located entirely within Chautauqua County , New York , in the United States . Its western terminus is located at the Pennsylvania state line near the hamlet of Findley Lake in the town of Mina . The eastern terminus is located in the city of Jamestown at a junction with NY 60 ( North Main Street ) . NY 430 is ceremoniously designated as the Senator Jess J. Present Memorial Highway in honor of Jess Present , a New York State Senator from Jamestown . 
 Municipalities NY 430 runs through include ( from west to east ) the villages of Sherman and Mayville , the hamlet of Maple Springs , the village of Bemus Point and the city of Jamestown . Besides NY 60 , NY 430 intersects with NY 76 in Sherman and NY 394 in Mayville . It meets the Southern Tier Expressway ( Interstate 86 or I @-@ 86 and NY 17 ) multiple times : in Sherman via NY 76 , twice in Bemus Point ( once by way of a short expressway designated as the unsigned NY 954J and also via an interchange located southwest of NY 954J ) , and in Jamestown via Strunk Road . NY 430 also runs along the east side of Chautauqua Lake , and services both Long Point State Park and Midway Park . 
 The portion of NY 430 east of Mayville was originally designated as part of NY 17 in 1924 ; the remainder was originally designated as New York State Route 75 as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . NY 75 was renumbered to NY 430 c . 1932 . NY 430 was extended eastward to its current terminus in Jamestown in the late 1970s after NY 17 was realigned onto a newly completed section of the Southern Tier Expressway between Bemus Point and Jamestown . 
 = = Route description = = 
 West of Mayville , NY 430 is a largely rural route connecting Erie , Pennsylvania , ( via Pennsylvania Route 430 or PA 430 ) to Mayville via Sherman ; however , east of Mayville , the route is a primary arterial serving the northern and eastern shores of Chautauqua Lake . 
 = = = Western Chautauqua County = = = 
 NY 430 begins at the Pennsylvania state line in rural western Chautauqua County as a continuation of PA 430 , which begins roughly 13 miles ( 21 km ) to the west in Erie . The route proceeds eastward as a county @-@ maintained , state @-@ numbered highway through the westernmost portion of the town of Mina to the hamlet of Findley Lake , a small community located at the northern tip of the lake of the same name . Here , the New York State Department of Transportation assumes maintenance of the route at a junction with NY 426 . NY 430 briefly overlaps with NY 426 through the community and past the northern tip of the waterbody that gives the hamlet its name . The two routes split at the eastern edge of the community . 
 While NY 426 leaves NY 430 to follow the eastern edge of the lake southward toward French Creek , NY 430 continues to the northeast , passing through the hamlet of Mina and over the Southern Tier Expressway ( I @-@ 86 and NY 17 ) on its way to the town of Sherman and the village of the same name . Within the village of Sherman , NY 430 becomes Main Street and intersects NY 76 west of the village center . The two routes overlap for a single block before separating at the heart of the village , with NY 76 continuing southward to an interchange with the Southern Tier Expressway just outside the village and , farther south , to its southern terminus at NY 474 in Clymer . NY 430 , however , exits Sherman to the east before turning northward to parallel an old railroad bed northward into the town of Chautauqua . 
 At the hamlet of <unk> , NY 430 curves to the northeast , generally following the former rail line into Mayville , a village situated at the northwestern tip of Chautauqua Lake . In the center of the village , NY 430 intersects NY 394 at an intersection that once was the eastern terminus of NY 430 . Now , however , NY 430 continues northeast past NY 394 and out of Mayville . 
 = = = Chautauqua Lake = = = 
 East of Mayville , NY 430 parallels the northern and eastern shoreline of Chautauqua Lake , providing access to several lakeside residences and communities along the route . Roughly halfway down the length of the lake in Ellery , NY 430 passes both Midway State Park , a local amusement park , and Long Point State Park . South of Long Point , NY 430 , a two @-@ lane undivided roadway up to this point , becomes a limited @-@ access highway as it approaches Bemus Point . NY 430 exits from the road soon after while the expressway heads south as NY 954J for another 1 @.@ 62 miles ( 2 @.@ 61 km ) to exit 10 on the Southern Tier Expressway . 
 NY 430 , once more a surface road , becomes county @-@ maintained again as it heads southwest on Lakeside Drive to Bemus Point , a village located at the narrowest point of Chautauqua Lake between Mayville and Jamestown . Due to the narrow width of the lake at Bemus Point , a ferry once ran from the end of Lakeside Drive to the North Harmony hamlet of Stow ; however , it has since been replaced with the Chautauqua Lake Bridge on the Southern Tier Expressway farther south . NY 430 , however , turns southeast at Main Street and connects to the aforementioned expressway at the eastern end of the Chautauqua Lake Bridge by way of an interchange near the southern edge of Bemus Point . 
 Past the exit , NY 430 becomes state @-@ maintained again as it parallels both the Southern Tier Expressway and Chautauqua Lake into the town of Ellicott , where NY 430 meets I @-@ 86 and NY 17 one final time at exit 11 ( via Strunk Road ) . NY 430 continues eastward into the city of Jamestown , where it becomes Fluvanna Avenue . Within the city , state maintenance of NY 430 ends for good at Washington Street , and NY 430 continues east as a city street for roughly four blocks before ending at an intersection with NY 60 ( North Main Street ) north of downtown . 
 = = History = = 
 When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , what is now NY 430 between Mayville and Jamestown was designated as part of NY 17 . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , this section of NY 17 was left unchanged while a previously unnumbered roadway leading from NY 17 in Mayville to Findley Lake via Sherman was designated as NY 75 . When U.S. Route 62 ( US 62 ) was extended into New York c . 1932 , NY 75 was reassigned to what had been designated as NY 62 as part of the 1930 renumbering . The original NY 75 was renumbered to NY 430 . 
 NY 430 remained unchanged until the late 1950s when the route was extended westward to the Pennsylvania state line to connect to the new PA 430 , an east – west highway leading to Erie . In the late 1970s , NY 17 was rerouted onto the new Southern Tier Expressway ( STE ) from Bemus Point to Jamestown . Its former at @-@ grade alignment between the two locations became an eastward extension of NY 430 . At the time , the portion of the STE between Sherman and Bemus Point was under construction , resulting in a temporary overlap between NY 17 and NY 430 from Mayville to modern NY 954J . Work began c . 1981 on the segment of the STE between Findley Lake and Sherman . The entirety of the Findley Lake – Bemus Point section of the expressway was completed by 1985 as a realignment of NY 17 . In 2005 , the entirety of NY 430 was ceremoniously designated as the " Senator Jess J. Present Memorial Highway " in honor of Jess Present , a New York State Senator from Jamestown . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Chautauqua County . 
 = Call It Stormy Monday ( But Tuesday Is Just as Bad ) = 
 " Call It Stormy Monday ( But Tuesday Is Just as Bad ) " ( commonly referred to as " Stormy Monday " ) is a song written and recorded by American blues electric guitar pioneer T @-@ Bone Walker . It is a slow twelve @-@ bar blues performed in the West Coast blues @-@ style that features Walker 's smooth , plaintive vocal and distinctive guitar work . As well as becoming a record chart hit in 1948 , it inspired B.B. King and others to take up the electric guitar . " Stormy Monday " became Walker 's best @-@ known and most @-@ recorded song . 
 In 1961 , Bobby " Blue " Bland further popularized the song with an appearance in the pop record charts . Bland introduced a new arrangement with chord substitutions , which was later used in many subsequent renditions . His version also incorrectly used the title " Stormy Monday Blues " , which was copied and resulted in royalties being paid to songwriters other than Walker . The Allman Brothers Band recorded an extended version for their first live album in 1971 , with additional changes to the arrangement . Through the album 's popularity and the group 's concert performances , they brought " Stormy Monday " to the attention of rock audiences . Similarly , R & B singer Latimore 's 1973 hit recording made it popular with a later R & B audience . 
 " Stormy Monday " is one of the most popular blues standards , with numerous renditions . As well as being necessary for blues musicians , it is also found in the repertoires of many jazz , soul , pop , and rock performers . The song is included in the Grammy , Rock and Roll , and Blues Foundation halls of fame as well as the U.S. Library of Congress ' National Recording Registry . 
 = = Background = = 
 T @-@ Bone Walker was one of the earliest musicians to use the electric guitar . After moving to Los Angeles around 1936 , he began performing regularly in the clubs along Central Avenue , then the center of the city 's jazz and blues music scene . He started as a singer and dancer with jazz and early jump @-@ blues bands , such as Les Hite and his orchestra , but by 1940 was playing electric guitar and singing in his own small combos . His particular style of jazz @-@ influenced blues guitar and showmanship , which included playing the guitar behind his neck and while doing the splits , brought him to the attention of Capitol Records . 
 In July 1942 , Walker recorded " Mean Old World " and " I Got a Break , Baby " as one of the first artists for the Los Angeles @-@ based record company . Music writer Bill Dahl described the songs as " the first sign of the T @-@ Bone Walker that blues guitar aficionados know and love , his fluid , elegant riffs and mellow , burnished vocals setting a standard that all future blues guitarists would measure themselves by " . Shortly thereafter , his recording career was interrupted by the 1942 – 44 musicians ' strike and the diversion of shellac ( a key material used in the manufacture of the then @-@ standard ten @-@ inch 78 rpm phonograph record ) for the U.S. war effort during World War II . By 1946 , Walker signed with producer Ralph Bass and Black & White Records . Although there is conflicting information regarding the recording date , " Call It Stormy Monday ( But Tuesday Is Just as Bad ) " was released as a single in November 1947 . 
 Meanwhile , " Stormy Monday Blues " , a jazz single by Earl Hines and His Orchestra with Billy Eckstine on vocals had become a number one hit on Billboard magazine 's Harlem Hit Parade chart in 1942 and also reached number 23 in the magazine 's pop chart . Credited to Eckstine , Hines , and Bob Crowder , the composition features a big band arrangement with different lyrics and does not include the words " stormy " or " Monday " . The fact that both Walker 's and the Eckstine / Hines song include " Stormy Monday " in the title has led to confusion regarding the songs ' true titles and authorship . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 There are conflicting accounts about the recording date for " Call It Stormy Monday ( But Tuesday Is Just as Bad ) " . In an interview , Walker claimed that he recorded the song in 1940 " just before the war " ( the U.S. entered World War II December 7 , 1941 ) , but that it was not released because of war @-@ time material restrictions . Journalist Dave Dexter , who worked for Capitol Records in the early 1940s , believed that Walker recorded it for Capitol before the Eckstine / Hines song ( March 1942 ) , but that it was not released because of the unavailability of shellac and the recording ban . However , Walker 's first single as a band leader , " Mean Old World " , which was recorded in July 1942 , was released in 1945 by Capitol . One <unk> places the recording of " Stormy Monday " on September 13 , 1947 , during his third session for Black & White Records . Blues writer Jim O 'Neal noted that blues discographies do not show a recording date before 1947 . 
 The recording took place in Hollywood , California , and was produced by Black & White 's Ralph Bass . " Stormy Monday " was performed in a " club combo " or West Coast @-@ blues style with a small back @-@ up band . The style , as heard in " Driftin ' Blues " ( one of the biggest hits of the 1940s ) , evokes a more intimate musical setting than the prevailing jump @-@ blues dance @-@ hall style . Accompanying Walker is pianist Lloyd Glenn , bassist Arthur Edwards , drummer Oscar Lee Bradley , and horn players John " Teddy " Bruckner ( trumpet ) and Hubert " Bumps " Myers ( tenor saxophone ) . A key feature of the song 's instrumentation is Walker 's prominent guitar parts , including the extensive use of ninth chords , which gives the song its distinctive sound . Author Aaron Stang explained : " The real sound of this riff is based on starting each 9th chord a whole step ( 2 frets ) above and sliding down . If we were to analyze this movement , the first chord is technically a 13th chord resolving down to a 9th chord " . Guitarist Duke Robillard added 
 The guitar chord line , it 's a little guitar ninth chord figure . That was a unique thing and it became T @-@ Bone 's signature . And that chord line seems to have grabbed everybody because everybody plays it with that line in it . And it 's almost like a law , that you have to , when you play ' Stormy <unk> 
 Walker also plays twelve bars of single @-@ string guitar solo , which writer Lenny Carlson has described as " remain [ ing ] largely in the middle register , but it contains some gems , particularly in the use of space , phrasing , and melodic development " . The horn accompaniment has been compared to that of Count Basie 's 1930s Kansas City jazz bands . 
 Walker uses a standard I @-@ IV @-@ V twelve @-@ bar blues structure for the song and it has been notated in 12 / 8 time in the key of G with a tempo of 66 beats per minute . The lyrics chronicle the feelings of lost love through the days of week , starting on Monday : " They call it stormy Monday , but Tuesday 's just as bad " . The mood improves by Friday , when " the eagle flies " , a metaphor for payday , which allows for carousing on Saturday . The lyrics end with Sunday , " when the blues and spirituals converged [ in ] a continuation of a trend used by earlier Mississippi Delta blues singers " and conclude with a prayer asking for the Lord 's help because the singer 's " Crazy about my baby , yeah send her back to me " . 
 = = Releases and charts = = 
 Black & White Records released " Call It Stormy Monday ( But Tuesday Is Just as Bad ) " in November 1947 . It entered Billboard 's Most Played Juke Box Race Records chart on January 24 , 1948 , and reached number five during a six @-@ week stay . It was T @-@ Bone Walker 's second highest charting single ( 1947 's " Bobby Sox Blues " reached number three ) . According to an article in Billboard for April 30 , 1949 , the single remained a " strong seller " for Black & White , although it had been out since 1947 . The article also announced Capitol Records ' purchase of all of Walker 's Black & White released and unreleased master recordings and with it the four @-@ year remainder of his recording contract . Two months later in June , Capitol reissued the single on their label . 
 Walker made several different studio and live recordings of the song for various record companies during his career . In 1956 , he recorded a version , titled " Call It Stormy Monday " , with pianist Lloyd Glenn , bassist Billy <unk> , and drummer Oscar Bradley ( Glenn and Bradley had performed for the original 1947 recording ) . It was produced by Nesuhi Ertegun and is included on Walker 's 1959 album , T @-@ Bone Blues , for Atlantic Records . Writer Bill Dahl described the remake as " luxurious " with Walker 's guitar " so crisp and clear it seems as though he 's sitting right next to you " . Another recording , titled " Stormy Monday " , is included on the 1968 album , Stormy Monday Blues for <unk> Records . A later recording of the song , which uses chord substitutions similar to Bobby Bland 's 1961 rendition , was included on The Sounds of American Culture series on NPR in 2008 . 
 = = Recognition and influence = = 
 In 1983 , T @-@ Bone Walker 's original " Call It Stormy Monday ( But Tuesday Is Just as Bad ) " was inducted into the Blues Foundation Blues Hall of Fame in the " Classic of Blues Recording — Single or Album Track " category . Writing for the foundation , Jim O 'Neal called it " one of the most influential records not only in blues history , but in guitar history " . In 1991 , it was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame which " honor [ s ] recordings of lasting qualitative or historical significance " . The song was included as one of the " 500 Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll " by the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1995 . The U.S. National Recording Preservation Board selected the song in 2007 for inclusion in the Library of Congress ' National Recording Registry of " sound recordings that are culturally , historically or aesthetically significant " . 
 B.B. King biographer David McGee referred to it as a " Mount Rushmore of a blues song " . Singer and writer Billy Vera noted " if T @-@ Bone had done nothing more in his career than write and record this one tune , his esteemed place in the history of American music would be guaranteed " . As an early electric blues guitar soloist , Walker influenced a generation of blues musicians . In several interviews , B.B. King has stated that " Stormy Monday " inspired him to begin playing electric guitar : 
 My greatest musical debt is to T @-@ Bone ... ' Stormy Monday ' was the first tune . ' They call it Stormy Monday ' , sang T @-@ Bone , ' but Tuesday 's just as bad ' . Yes , Lord ! The first line , the first thrilling notes , the first sound of his guitar , and the attitude in his voice was riveting . I especially loved ' Stormy Monday ' — and I still sing it today . 
 According to music journalist Charles Shaar Murray , other musicians similarly inspired to take up the electric guitar upon hearing Walker 's song include Clarence " Gatemouth " Brown , Lowell <unk> , and Albert King . 
 = = Other renditions = = 
 " Stormy Monday " has become a standard of the blues and also has a broader appeal . In addition to being necessary for virtually all blues musicians , the song is known to performers in several other genres , who would not otherwise play any blues . Its popularity is such that that one encyclopedia entry concludes , " What bluesman does not have his own version ? " Billy Vera wrote " rest assured , as you read these notes , someone somewhere is performing ' Call It Stormy Monday ' " . 
 = = = Confusion over name = = = 
 Due to its length , " Call It Stormy Monday ( But Tuesday Is Just as Bad ) " is shortened to " Call It Stormy Monday " or most often " Stormy Monday " . Confusingly , it is also sometimes referred to as " Stormy Monday Blues " , the same title as the 1942 song by Billy Eckstine and Earl Hines . According to T @-@ Bone Walker , he specifically gave his song the longer name to set it apart . However , trouble ensued when other artists began recording it using these shortened names . Walker blamed Duke Records owner Don Robey for giving it the wrong title for his artists , including Bobby Bland 's 1962 rendition , which appeared as " Stormy Monday Blues " . Bland 's version , which was an R & B and pop chart hit , was subsequently copied by other artists , who also used the incorrect title . As a result , Walker lost out on royalties when his song was misnamed " Stormy Monday Blues " and the payments were forwarded to Eckstine , Hines , and Crowder . Even though Latimore 's 1973 hit version of the song was titled " Stormy Monday " , the single incorrectly listed " Hines @-@ Eckstine " as the composers . 
 = = = Bobby Bland version = = = 
 American soul blues singer Bobby Bland recorded his interpretation of the song in Nashville , Tennessee , in September 1961 , during the same session that produced the song , " Turn On Your Love Light " . Drummer John " Jabo " Starks recalled 
 T @-@ Bone Walker 's ' Stormy Monday Blues ' was supposed to be a ' throwaway ' tune . We had already finished the album , and Bobby [ Bland ] said , ' Hey , man , I want to do that tune . Let 's do that tune , just for me ' . We said , ' Okay ' , and we sat there and did it , just the rhythm section . I think it was two takes . Wayne Bennett , the guitar player , wanted to change something . Hamp Simmons out of Houston played an old Kay electric bass . 
 Rather than copy Walker 's arrangement , Bland felt he had to do something different with the song . Most notably , his version features chord substitutions in bars seven through ten : 
 This minor @-@ chord progression had been used in several of Bland 's songs , including his 1957 breakthrough number " Farther Up the Road " , and is found in many subsequent renditions of " Stormy Monday " . Guitarist Wayne Bennett commented that he had been influenced by T @-@ Bone Walker and Pee Wee <unk> ; Bennett 's own playing on the recording influenced many guitarists , including Duane Allman . 
 When Duke Records released Bland 's version , it was inexplicably re @-@ titled " Stormy Monday Blues " . The single reached number five during a thirteen week stay on the R & B chart . It was also included on Bland 's 1962 album Here 's the Man ! , which reached number 53 on the Billboard album chart . Additionally , " Stormy Monday " went to number 43 on the pop chart and Bland made his fourth appearance on the music variety television program American Bandstand , where he performed it to dancing teenagers . 
 = = = The Allman Brothers Band version = = = 
 Brothers Duane and Gregg Allman began performing " Stormy Monday " with their early group , the Allman Joys , and it later became part of the Allman Brothers Band 's repertoire . A March 1971 performance of the song at the Fillmore East concert hall in New York City was recorded and released on their At Fillmore East album in 1971 . Their version is based on Bobby Bland 's 1961 recording , but expanded to over eight minutes with improvised soloing . In the bottom of bar 8 , they substituted the ♭ <unk> chord . Additionally , they substituted the V9 chord in bar 10 with a <unk> and the one in bar 12 with a <unk> . 
 The instrumentation of the song is typical of the group , consisting of vocals , two electric guitars , bass guitar , organ , and drums . It demonstrates a different style of music , however , from most Allman Brothers pieces , due to its slow tempo . Duane Allman takes the first solo , with Gregg Allman 's organ solo shifting to a jazz @-@ waltz feel , and Dickey Betts ' guitar solo being the last before a vocal coda . By means of a careful tape edit , a harmonica solo by Thom Doucette was omitted from the issued version in 1971 ; it was restored to the song in the 1992 release of the The Fillmore Concerts . At Fillmore East became one of the Allman Brothers Band 's most popular and enduring albums ; for rock audiences , their " Stormy Monday " became the definitive version of the song . 
 = = = Latimore version = = = 
 American R & B singer Latimore recorded " Stormy Monday " in 1973 . His rendering of the song as an uptempo , jazz @-@ influenced piece evokes a 1962 recording by Lou Rawls that was included on Rawls ' Stormy Monday album with Les McCann . However , according to music writer David <unk> , " its propulsive , pop @-@ tinged groove and Latimore 's own jubilant vocal directness made this incarnation of the classic entirely his own " . The song was not initially promoted as a potential hit single ; however , radio audiences responded so positively that it became his first major hit . " Stormy Monday " eventually reached number 27 on the R & B chart as well as number 102 on the pop chart and is included on Latimore 's self @-@ titled debut album for Glades Records . 
 = = Recordings by other artists = = 
 In addition to renditions that appear on music charts , many recordings of " Stormy Monday " are in release : 
 = German submarine U @-@ 162 ( 1941 ) = 
 German submarine U @-@ 162 was a Type IXC U @-@ boat of Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine during World War II . 
 She was ordered on 25 September 1939 and was laid down on 19 April 1940 at Deutsche <unk> und Maschinenbau AG , at <unk> Yard in Bremerhaven , Germany , as yard number 701 . She was launched on 1 March 1941 and commissioned under the command of Korvettenkapitän Jürgen Wattenberg on 9 September of that year . 
 During three war patrols , U @-@ 162 sank 14 vessels . However , on 3 September , three British destroyers hunted U @-@ 162 down and sank her . Of a crew of fifty @-@ one , only two died . The remainder were taken prisoner and sent to camps in the United States , where they were to remain for the rest of the war . 
 = = Design = = 
 German Type IXC submarines were slightly larger than the original Type <unk> . U @-@ 162 had a displacement of 1 @,@ 120 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 100 long tons ) when at the surface and 1 @,@ 232 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 213 long tons ) while submerged . The U @-@ boat had a total length of 76 @.@ 76 m ( 251 ft 10 in ) , a pressure hull length of 58 @.@ 75 m ( 192 ft 9 in ) , a beam of 6 @.@ 76 m ( 22 ft 2 in ) , a height of 9 @.@ 60 m ( 31 ft 6 in ) , and a draught of 4 @.@ 70 m ( 15 ft 5 in ) . The submarine was powered by two MAN M 9 V 40 / 46 supercharged four @-@ stroke , nine @-@ cylinder diesel engines producing a total of 4 @,@ 400 metric horsepower ( 3 @,@ 240 kW ; 4 @,@ 340 shp ) for use while surfaced , two Siemens @-@ Schuckert 2 GU 345 / 34 double @-@ acting electric motors producing a total of 1 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 740 kW ; 990 shp ) for use while submerged . She had two shafts and two 1 @.@ 92 m ( 6 ft ) propellers . The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to 230 metres ( 750 ft ) . 
 The submarine had a maximum surface speed of 18 @.@ 3 knots ( 33 @.@ 9 km / h ; 21 @.@ 1 mph ) and a maximum submerged speed of 7 @.@ 3 knots ( 13 @.@ 5 km / h ; 8 @.@ 4 mph ) . When submerged , the boat could operate for 63 nautical miles ( 117 km ; 72 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) ; when surfaced , she could travel 13 @,@ 450 nautical miles ( 24 @,@ 910 km ; 15 @,@ 480 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . U @-@ 162 was fitted with six 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes ( four fitted at the bow and two at the stern ) , 22 torpedoes , one 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 13 in ) SK C / 32 naval gun , 180 rounds , and a 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) as well as a 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . The boat had a complement of forty @-@ eight . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = 1st Patrol = = = 
 Following training exercises with the 4th U @-@ boat Flotilla from 9 September 1941 to 31 January 1942 , U @-@ 162 began her first war patrol as the lead boat of the 2nd U @-@ boat Flotilla on 1 February 1942 . She left her home port of Kiel on 7 February and ventured into the North Sea without stopping in occupied Norway . During 40 days at sea , U @-@ 162 sailed north of the British Isles and entered the North Atlantic , where she sank her first vessel , White Crest , on 24 February 1942 . 
 = = = 2nd Patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 162 returned to sea on 7 April 1942 . For this patrol , she cruised south into the Caribbean Sea and the northern coast of South America . During her 63 days at sea , U @-@ 162 sank nine ships : <unk> , <unk> , Eastern Sword , Florence M. Douglas , Frank Seamans , Mont Louis , Esso Houston , British Colony and Beth . Following these victories , U @-@ 162 returned to her new home port of Lorient on 8 June 1942 . 
 = = = 3rd Patrol and sinking = = = 
 U @-@ 162 's third and final sortie began on 7 July 1942 , when she left Lorient for the last time . Much like her second foray , U @-@ 162 spent her third patrol in the Caribbean Sea and off the coast of South America . From the 19th to 30 August , she sank four more vessels : West Celina , <unk> , Thelma and Star of Oregon . Nonetheless , just four days after sinking Star of Oregon , she was detected northeast of Trinidad . Three British destroyers , HMS Vimy , Pathfinder and Quentin , attacked and sank U @-@ 162 with depth charges . Two crewmen were killed , 49 others survived . 
 Following the sinking of U @-@ 162 , the surviving crew members were picked up by the three destroyers and sent to the United States where they gave US interrogators information about U @-@ 162 's history , including where and when she was laid down , how many ships she sank and details about her home port and the design and layout of submarines that were in her class . 
 = = = Summary of raiding history = = = 
 = HMS Shannon ( 1906 ) = 
 HMS Shannon was a Minotaur @-@ class armoured cruiser built for the Royal Navy in the mid @-@ 1900s . Before the First World War , she served with the Home Fleet , generally as the flagship of a cruiser squadron . The ship remained with the Grand Fleet , as the Home Fleet was renamed when the war began , for the entire war , but only participated in a single battle , the Battle of Jutland in May 1916 . Shannon spent most of the war unsuccessfully patrolling the North Sea for German warships and commerce raiders . She was paid off in 1919 and sold for scrap in 1922 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Shannon displaced 14 @,@ 600 long tons ( 14 @,@ 800 t ) as built and 16 @,@ 630 long tons ( 16 @,@ 900 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 519 feet ( 158 @.@ 2 m ) , a beam of 75 feet 6 inches ( 23 @.@ 0 m ) and a mean draught of 26 feet ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) . Her beam was 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 3 m ) wider and her draught one foot less than her sisters in the belief that she would prove to be the fastest ship in the class . Shannon was powered by a pair of four @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , using steam provided by 24 Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers . The engines were designed to reach a total of 27 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 20 @,@ 000 kW ) and were intended to give a maximum speed of 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) . Shannon proved to be the slowest ship in the class ; during her sea trials on 3 December 1907 her engines reached 29 @,@ 644 indicated horsepower ( 22 @,@ 106 kW ) , but she only reached a speed of 22 @.@ 592 knots ( 41 @.@ 8 km / h ; 26 @.@ 0 mph ) The ship carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 060 long tons ( 2 @,@ 090 t ) of coal and an additional 750 long tons ( 760 t ) of fuel oil that was sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . At full capacity , she could steam for 8 @,@ 150 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 090 km ; 9 @,@ 380 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Shannon was designed to carry 779 officers and enlisted men , but had a complement of 819 in 1908 and 842 in 1912 . 
 The ship 's main armament consisted of four BL 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch Mark X guns in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft . Her secondary armament of ten BL 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Mark II guns were mounted amidships in single turrets . Anti @-@ torpedo boat defence was provided by sixteen QF 12 @-@ pounder ( 3 @-@ inch ) 18 @-@ cwt guns . Shannon also mounted five submerged 17 @.@ 7 @-@ inch torpedo tubes , one of which was mounted in the stern . 
 The waterline armour belt consisted of 6 inches ( 152 mm ) of Krupp cemented armour roughly between the fore and aft 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch gun turrets , but was reduced in steps to three inches to the ends of the ship . The gun turrets and barbettes were protected by 6 – 8 inches ( 152 – 203 mm ) of armour . The thickness of the lower deck was 1 @.@ 5 – 2 inches ( 38 – 51 mm ) . The armour of the conning tower was 10 inches ( 254 mm ) thick . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Shannon was ordered as part of the 1904 – 05 naval construction programme as one of the three Minotaur @-@ class armoured cruisers . She was laid down on 2 January 1905 at Chatham Dockyard . The ship was christened on 27 April 1907 by Lady Carrington and commissioned on 19 March 1908 at the cost of £ 1 @,@ 415 @,@ 135 . While fitting out in Portsmouth , Shannon was accidentally struck on 5 December 1907 by the battleship Prince George which had broken loose from her anchorage ; both ships were only lightly damaged . 
 Upon commissioning , the ship became the flagship of the 5th Cruiser Squadron of Home Fleet and was later transferred to the 2nd Cruiser Squadron as a private ship when the fleet reorganized in April 1909 . She became the flagship of her squadron on 1 March 1910 and made a port visit to Torbay in January 1911 . Shannon was relieved as flagship by the battlecruiser Indomitable on 5 March 1912 and was transferred to the 3rd Cruiser Squadron as that squadron 's flagship . In January 1914 , she relieved Indomitable as flagship of the 2nd Cruiser Squadron during exercises off the northwest coast of Spain . The following month , Shannon , together with the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron and the rest of the 2nd Cruiser Squadron , made a port visit to Brest , France . 
 In October 1914 , the ship was patrolling off the coast of Norway and almost intercepted the armed merchant cruiser SS Berlin on several occasions . During a sweep into the Heligoland Bight on 26 November , she was unsuccessfully bombed by a German aircraft . She began a refit shortly afterwards that lasted until 24 January 1915 . Shannon was present in Cromarty Firth when the armoured cruiser Natal 's magazine exploded on 30 December 1915 and her crew attempted to rescue survivors from Natal . The ship received a QF 12 @-@ pounder ( three @-@ inch ) 12 @-@ cwt anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) gun and a QF 3 @-@ pounder ( 47 mm ) AA gun in 1915 – 16 . The 12 @-@ pounder gun was mounted on the aft superstructure and the 3 @-@ pounder on the quarterdeck at the extreme rear . Sometime afterwards , a fire @-@ control system was installed with a director mounted on a platform fitted to the foremast . 
 During the Battle of Jutland on 31 May 1916 , she was on the unengaged side of the fleet and did not fire her 9 @.@ 2 or 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns at all during the battle . The ship spent several days after the battle searching for survivors from her sister Defence and other sunken ships . Before the end of the war the 12 @-@ pounder AA gun mounted on the aft superstructure was moved to the roof of the forward 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch gun turret . Shannon was paid off on 2 May 1919 and became an accommodation ship until sold for breaking up on 12 December 1922 . 
 = Circles ( Christina Aguilera song ) = 
 " Circles " is a song by American recording artist Christina Aguilera , taken from her seventh studio album , Lotus ( 2012 ) . It was written by Aguilera , Dwayne Abernathy , Candice Pillay and co @-@ written and produced by Alex da Kid . Musically , the song is an uptempo alternative rock track . Lyrically , it finds Aguilera inviting her haters to " spin around in circles on her middle finger " . The track received favorable reviews from music critics , who praised its raunchy lyrics and its catchiness . Upon the release of Lotus , " Circles " debuted on the South Korean international singles chart at number 160 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the release of her sixth studio album , Bionic ( 2010 ) , Aguilera filed for divorce from her husband Jordan Bratman , starred in her first feature film , Burlesque ( 2010 ) and recorded the accompanying soundtrack . She then became a coach on NBC 's singing competition show The Voice and appeared as a featured artist on Maroon 5 's single " Moves Like Jagger " ( 2011 ) , which spent four weeks atop the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . Following these events , Aguilera announced that had plans to begin production of her seventh album , stating that she wanted high quality and " personal " songs for the record . Regarding the creative direction , she revealed that the album would be a " culmination of everything I 've experienced up until this point ... I 've been through a lot since the release of my last album , being on ( The Voice ) , having had a divorce ... This is all sort of a free rebirth for me . " She further said " I 'm embracing many different things , but it 's all feel @-@ good , super @-@ expressive [ and ] super @-@ vulnerable . " The added that the album would be about " self – expression and freedom " because of the personal struggles she had overcome during the last couple of years . Speaking about her new material during an interview on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno in 2012 , Aguilera said that the recording process for Lotus was taking a while because " I don 't like to just get songs from producers . I like them to come from a personal place ... I 'm very excited . It 's fun , exciting , introspective , it 's going to be great " . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 Recorded at Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California by Josh Mosser , " Circles " was written by Christina Aguilera , Candice Pillay , Alexander Grant and Dwayne Abernathy , and it was produced by Alex da Kid . Aguilera 's vocals were recorded by Oscar Ramirez at The Red Lips Room in Beverly Hills , California , while Aguilera and Pillay conducted the vocal production . Pillay also contributed additional vocals on the track , and J Browz added additional guitar . " Circles " is an alternative rock song , and runs for a duration of 3 : 25 ( three minutes and twenty @-@ five seconds ) . The lyrics of the " <unk> " chorus , " spin around in circles on my middle middle finger " , has been likened to a " ' 90s riot @-@ grrrl " . Andrew Hampp for Billboard thought as though it sounded like " mini @-@ Aguilera 's " were chanting the words " round and round " and " motherfucker " in childlike voices . " Circles " has a " playground " melodic structure , according to Robert Copsey of Digital Spy . He also thought the best lyrics in the song are " Why you always trying to get up in my mixture ? / I think you 're just bitter " . At the end of the song , Aguilera speaks out loud the word " motherfucker ! " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Circles " garnered mainly positive reviews from music critics . Andrew Hampp of Billboard was very positive , calling it " the biggest surprise on Lotus , and writing , " ' Circles ' is Aguilera at her most unapologetic and all the more delightful for it " . 4Music 's Chris Younie wrote that , " Aguilera is throwing tonnes of attitude and sass our way " . Digital Spy 's Robert Cospey praised its lyrics , labelling it " one of their immediate favourites " . <unk> Keane from the website entertainment.ie called it " fun and delicious " , while Entertainment Weekly critic Melissa Maerz called it a " sassy kiss @-@ off " . Story Gilmore of Neon Limelight was very positive , commenting , " As much as we love Xtina for her incredible voice , we also love her for her feisty personality . The tune is a brilliant mix of genres with a rockstar @-@ worthy chorus " . Popjustice writer Same Hine enjoyed the track and said that he liked it " when Christina gets a bit wobbly and the bubblegum melody sounds oddly good with the lyrics " , although it wasn 't " her finest pop moment " . Mike Wass from Idolator wrote that the song " sounds like <unk> Nine Inch Nails song ever recorded " , also commenting it as " a total trainwreck , but there 's something amusing about Xtina putting her haters in their place " . 
 Joseph R. Atilano of Inquirer Entertainment praised " Circles " as one of the catchiest songs of the album and compared the track to songs by Rihanna and Nicki Minaj . Kitty Empire of The Observer commented that the " sing @-@ song verse is redolent of Rihanna " . Montreal Gazette editor T 'cha Dunlevy simply described it as " a raunchy flip of the bird to haters " . HitFix writer Melinda Newman called it a " shape @-@ shifting " and compared Aguilera to Gwen Stefani " as she adopts a patois " . Annie <unk> of The A.V. Club was mixed , naming it a " bitter ' 90s alt @-@ rock crossed with M.I.A. ' s antagonistic attitude ; it should be an angry kiss @-@ off . Instead , cringe @-@ inducing lyrics sap its ire " . For Michael Gallucci of PopCrush , the song " dips back to the bubblegum pop of Aguilera 's debut for the verses , but pumps a ton of distortion into her voice during the refrains . ' Circles ' doesn 't seem to know what kind of song it wants it to be , so it settles for two not very good ones " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Westlake Studios , Los Angeles , CA . 
 Vocals recorded at The Red Lips Room , Beverly Hills , CA . 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Christina Aguilera , Candice Pillay , Alexander Grant , Dwayne Abernathy 
 Production – Alex da Kid 
 Vocal production – Christina Aguilera , Candice Pillay 
 Recording – Josh Mosser 
 Vocal recording – Oscar Ramirez 
 Additional background vocals – Candice Pillay 
 Additional guitar – J Browz 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Lotus , RCA Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Lotus , " Circles " debuted on the South Korean international singles chart at number 160 during the week of November 11 to 17 , 2012 , due to digital download sales of 1 @,@ 930 . 
 = Sip ' n Dip Lounge = 
 The Sip ' n Dip Lounge is a tiki bar in Great Falls , Montana opened in 1962 , when Polynesian themes were popular , and it has survived to the present day with its tiki theme intact . Located inside a local motel that was considered modern and trendy at the time it was built , the Sip ' n Dip is known for having women dressed up as mermaids swimming underwater in an indoor swimming pool visible through a window in the bar . Decorated with a bamboo ceiling and a South Seas theme , the bar also features " Piano Pat " Sponheim , who has played piano there since 1963 and is noted for her unique " jazzy " style . 
 The mermaid concept was introduced in 1995 , when there was a revival of the tiki fad , and it was the brainchild of the bar 's current owner , who wanted to add a " fun factor " . It became popular , particularly for Montana , a landlocked northern state where a tropical tiki theme is unexpected . Beginning in 2003 , the bar began to gain prominence outside of Montana , when the magazine GQ listed the lounge in its list of the top 10 bars in the world , ranking it as the " # 1 bar ... worth flying for " . The bar employs six women , who wear mermaid outfits designed and hand @-@ made by the bar 's manager , Sandra Johnson @-@ Thares . Mermen were brought back in 2016 , having previously appeared on occasion until 2004 . 
 Celebrity patrons of the Sip ' n Dip have included Nick Nolte , star of The Deep , and Daryl Hannah , who reprised her portrayal of a mermaid in Splash by swimming in the pool while wearing a mermaid tail . Both actors signed the glass window , though their autographs were lost two years later when the window cracked , forcing the pool to be drained , repaired , and the double @-@ paned glass replaced with a triple @-@ paned version . 
 = = History and design = = 
 The establishment features a glass wall behind the bar looking into an indoor swimming pool where swimmers can be seen under water . It is located inside the O 'Haire Motor Inn , which was built in 1962 . The concept of a swimming pool designed so underwater swimmers can be viewed from inside the bar was original to the building , as the person who built the O 'Haire had been inspired by a similar design he saw when visiting the Playboy Club in Chicago . When built in the 1960s , the O 'Haire Motor Inn was considered " swank " and modern , and the tiki concept was popular , in part due to the then @-@ recent admission of Hawaii to the United States as a state . The concept of a tropical theme was also viewed as a fun concept for Montana , a landlocked state with long , cold winters . Though tiki bars in general declined in popularity in the late 1970s and 1980s until the revival of the style in the 1990s , the Sip ' n Dip survived with few changes . During the 1990s , the idea of having mermaids swim in the pool during evening bar hours was the brainchild of the bar 's general manager , Sandra Johnson @-@ Thares and her mother , who wanted to add a " fun factor . " It began with a single " mermaid " in the pool on New Year 's Eve in 1995 . Today , Johnson @-@ Thares makes the mermaid costumes herself and said , " I never in my life believed the mermaid attraction would be such a big hit . People are fascinated with them , and it 's not something you 'd expect to see in Montana . " 
 The bar features a bamboo ceiling , traditional cocktails , local Montana <unk> , and specialty drinks such as the " fish bowl , " a 64 US fl oz ( 1 @.@ 9 L ) cocktail that features nine shots of different liquors . It also has an outdoor patio open during the summer , from June to September . 
 = = Entertainment = = 
 = = = Piano Pat = = = 
 " Piano Pat " Sponheim plays piano four nights a week . Called " the heart of the Sip ' n Dip , " Sponheim is an octogenarian and a great @-@ grandmother . She performs what one reviewer described as " unusual covers " of songs , particularly those of Frank Sinatra , Neil Diamond , and Elvis Presley . She has a playing style called " jazzy " and a voice described variously as " lived @-@ in " , " soulful " , and " husky . " One of her most requested covers is " Sweet Caroline , " where she often leads patrons in sing @-@ alongs . 
 Sponheim was originally from Rudyard , Montana , where her family owned an auto supply store . She began playing the piano at age five , when her mother would drive her on an 80 @-@ mile ( 130 km ) round trip to Havre to take classical piano lessons . By the age of 12 , she was playing with adults in a dance band , earning $ 10 per night . She began singing as well as playing the piano during a time in her life when she lived in Billings , Montana . She was a 28 @-@ year @-@ old divorced single mother of three when she started working as the Sip ' n Dip 's piano player in 1963 , taking the position as a second job in order to support her children . She simultaneously worked as a medical <unk> for 38 years before retiring from her day job in 2000 . She celebrated 50 years of employment at the Sip ' n Dip in December 2013 and at that time she was featured on CBS Sunday Morning . She has released two albums , only for sale at the Sip ' n Dip , and though she takes requests , she refuses to play modern rock music . She continues to work because it is not only a job but also her social life , " It 's a chance to get out of the house . I enjoy the lounge , and it keeps me going . " 
 = = = Mermaids and swimming pool = = = 
 The bar employs six women part @-@ time to wear mermaid costumes and swim in the pool five evenings a week . They are local women from all walks of life . The " mermaids " explain that it is fairly easy to stay afloat while wearing a mermaid tail , but the difficult part of the job is not floating ; staying underwater as much as possible is necessary in order for patrons to see them through the window . Because they cannot use their legs in a traditional manner , they must work harder with their arms to swim . Mermen also swim in the pool . They were hired early on , but fell out of favor by about 2004 . In 2016 , they were brought back by popular demand , primarily working during the bar 's Tuesday ladies ' night . 
 The bar 's most famous patrons appeared in 2002 , when Daryl Hannah , Anthony Edwards and Nick Nolte dropped by while working on the movie <unk> , which was filmed in the Great Falls area . The actors stopped by the bar and both Nolte , who had starred in The Deep , and Hannah signed the glass window . Then Hannah , who had portrayed a mermaid in Splash , donned a mermaid tail and swam in the pool . 
 The pool is also open to motel guests , and , in spite of signs warning swimmers that they can be viewed from the bar while swimming , people have been known to skinny dip . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 The Sip ' n Dip was called a " Polynesia on the Plains " in 2013 by CBS Sunday Morning . In 2003 , the magazine GQ listed the lounge as one of the top 10 bars in the world , ranking it as the " # 1 bar ... worth flying for " . Frommer 's travel guide calls it " one of the <unk> , wackiest , and flat @-@ out coolest nightspots , not just in Montana , but in the entire West . " In 2014 , USA Today ranked the Sip ' n Dip as one of the 10 best tiki bars in the United States . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 The bar faced a major crisis in October 2004 when a crack developed in the glass wall between the bar and the pool , which could have resulted in 22 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 83 @,@ 000 L ) of water emptying into the bar . The bar was open when the crack occurred and was noticed immediately . Staff of the O 'Haire Inn immediately began draining the pool , which took four hours to complete . The fire department also kept their pumper truck standing by in case more rapid removal of water was needed . The old double @-@ paned glass was replaced with triple @-@ paned glass , and while the repairs were performed the pool area was also given a new rubber coating . The autographs of Nolte and Hannah were lost , as the bar 's manager explained , " the crack went right through their signatures . " 
 = This Is It ( Michael Jackson song ) = 
 " This Is It " is a song co @-@ written by American pop star and musician Michael Jackson and Canadian singer @-@ songwriter Paul Anka . The song was recorded by the former and featured as a track on the album , This Is It ( 2009 ) , which accompanies the 2009 concert documentary Michael Jackson 's This Is It . It was premiered worldwide on Jackson 's official website on October 12 , 2009 four months after his death on June 25 , 2009 . Sony Music Entertainment misleadingly referred to the song as a " new single " during its promotion , but it was later confirmed that the song would only be sent for airplay , and not be available to buy as a single release . According to Anka , the song was recorded in 1983 and intended to be a duet between him and Jackson on Anka 's Walk a Fine Line album under the title " I Never Heard " , but these plans fell through . Thereafter , Sa @-@ Fire recorded the track for her album , I Wasn 't Born Yesterday ( 1991 ) . The duet version of the song was featured in Anka 's 2013 Duets album . While putting together the This Is It album , Jackson 's demo version of the song was found . His brothers ' vocals and additional instrumentation were then added to the recording . Immediately after its release , Anka threatened legal action against Jackson 's estate . The estate then agreed to give Anka 50 % of the song 's publishing rights . 
 A pop ballad , the song 's lyrics describe falling and being in love . The instrumentation includes piano , guitar , percussion , and strings . Jackson 's version , styled as a pop ballad , was his first song to chart on Billboard 's Hot Adult Contemporary Chart in over seventeen years . The song was generally well received by critics and enjoyed good chart performances globally . It became a top twenty hit on charts in Japan and Spain , and peaked at number 18 on both Billboard 's US Adult Contemporary and R & B / Hip @-@ Hop song charts . In 2011 , it received a Grammy Award nomination . The song was also accompanied by a music video , directed by Spike Lee , which consisted of footage of Jackson as a child , clips of him throughout his career , and footage of tributes from Jackson 's fans around the world . 
 = = Background = = 
 Although it shared its name , the song was not intentionally made for the 2009 concert documentary Michael Jackson 's This Is It . " This Is It " was written by recording artists Paul Anka and Michael Jackson , and a demo version of the song was recorded by Anka and Jackson in 1983 at Anka 's California recording studio . The song was intended to be added as an album track on Anka 's 1983 duets album Walk a Fine Line that he was in the process of recording at the time . Anka claimed in 2009 that following the release of Jackson 's 1982 album Thriller , Jackson " stole the [ master ] tapes " from Anka 's recording studio . 
 Soon after the alleged theft in the ' 80s , Anka threatened to take legal action if the recordings were not returned . Jackson 's version of " This Is It " was reportedly found in a box of tapes with only Jackson 's voice and a piano accompaniment , the song was described as having been a " bare @-@ bone " recording . Jackson subsequently returned the tapes , although Anka insisted that Jackson had made a copy of the recordings of " I Never Heard , " and retitled the track with his voice to " This Is It . " In 1990 , Anka allowed the Puerto Rican R & B recording artist Sa @-@ Fire to record " This Is It , " , which she did under the original title " I Never Heard " on her second studio album I Wasn 't Born Yesterday in 1991 . 
 = = Release = = 
 On September 13 , 2009 , it was reported that a " secret Michael Jackson single " was being produced to promote the film Michael Jackson 's This Is It , so that the song 's release would coincide with the release of the film . It was reported that Jackson had planned to release the song for his planned concerts but after his death it was shelved until producers in Los Angeles , California decided to remix the vocals with an orchestral accompaniment . On September 23 , Sony Music Entertainment announced they were planning on releasing a song entitled , " This Is It " as a single . The song was to feature backing vocals by several of Jackson 's brothers and would be included in a two @-@ disc album , This Is It . It was also confirmed that the song would be featured during the end credits of the movie production . Sony said , in response to the reports , that it was a coincidence that his upcoming concert series was also titled " This Is It , " explaining they had no evidence that he had planned to release the song . However , John McClain and John Branca , two representatives of Jackson 's estate said , in a prepared statement , that " This Is It " was " picked because the lyrics were appropriate because of the name Michael [ Jackson ] gave his tour " and that they were " thrilled to present " the song . 
 Although Sony did not release the track as a single , it was confirmed that " This Is It " would be released to radio stations for airplay , but that it would not be downloadable . Sony chose to release the song as an album @-@ only track as part of a strategy to encourage fans to buy the entire album . McClain , also a co @-@ producer of the This Is It album said , " This song only defines , once again , what the world already knows -- that Michael [ Jackson ] is one of God 's greatest gifts . " " This Is It " premiered , as scheduled , on Jackson 's official website <unk> on October 12 at midnight . 
 Within the day of the song 's release , via World Wide Web , listeners , unaware of the song 's background , drew comparisons of the song to Sa @-@ Fire 's " I Never Heard . " Soon after , media outlets The New York Times and TMZ.com informed Anka of the similarities between the songs . In response , Anka told the New York Times , that " This Is It " was " exactly the same song " as " I Never Heard " and only the titles were different . He also stated that he was planning on taking legal action against Jackson 's estate . Soon afterwards , Jackson 's estate acknowledged that Anka was a co @-@ writer on the song and agreed that Anka would receive 50 percent of the publishing rights from it . Anka said the estate " did the right thing , " and that he felt that he did not think " that anybody tried to do the wrong thing " and it was " an honest mistake . " Anka further stated " They realize it 's a mistake , they realize it 's my song , they realize it 's my production of his vocal in my studio and I am getting 50 percent of the whole project , actually , which is fair . " 
 Rob Stringer , the chairman of the Epic Label Group , stated that at the time of the song 's release he did not know when Jackson ’ s original tape had been recorded or of its similarity to Sa @-@ Fire 's version until it was discussed online over the weekend by Jackson 's fans . Prior to the estate and Anka reaching an agreement , Sa @-@ Fire ’ s manager , Sal <unk> , stated that he was contemplating filing a lawsuit on behalf of his client , commenting " This is a terrible mistake [ ... ] I ’ m pretty sure Paul Anka has a big case . I don ’ t know if Sa @-@ Fire has any legal right as the artist . I ’ ll have to contact my lawyers . But , hopefully . They ’ re advertising this movie everywhere . " <unk> also criticized Sony for not researching the possibility that the song might have had been previously released before releasing it . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " This Is It " is a pop ballad with a simple mid @-@ tempo keyboard that lasts three minutes and thirty @-@ six seconds . The song begins with Jackson singing , “ This is it , here I stand / I ’ m the light of the world , I feel grand / Got this love I can feel / And I know yes for sure it is real ” and then he tenderly hits his signature high notes about a new lover he feels he ’ s known " since 1 @,@ 000 years . " Jackson 's brothers Jackie , Tito , Jermaine and Marlon ( credited as The Jacksons ) are featured as background vocals throughout the song . Background music includes <unk> , a " soaring chorus , " big @-@ build strings and " bubbly guitars . " The song is played in the key of Bb major . Throughout the song , Jackson 's vocal range spans from F4 to C6 . The song 's tempo is moderate , and its metronome speed is 96 beats per minute . According to the music published on Musicnotes.com by Alfred Music Publishing and the Winnipeg Sun , the song is written in common time . The lyrics " toggle between grandiosity " ( " This is it , here I stand / I 'm the light of the world , I feel grand " ) and " shy , romantic yearning " ( " I never heard a single word about you / Falling in love wasn 't my plan " ) . <unk> Sterdan of the Winnipeg Sun felt that Jackson 's voice and the background music sounded " like a demo that 's been fleshed out with overdubs and <unk> backup vocals from his brothers . " Anthony McCartney , of the Associated Press felt that the finger @-@ snap percussion " echoes " that present in Jackson 's 1982 song " The Girl Is Mine " with Paul McCartney . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The track gained average @-@ to @-@ positive reviews and a nomination for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance at the 2011 53rd Grammy Awards . Gary Trust of Billboard reported that " response among radio programmers to the song has been almost universally positive . " Among these were Jay Lustig of The Star @-@ Ledger , who felt it was a " sweet , mid @-@ tempo love song " that , with " orchestral strings " and " creamy backing vocals " by Jackson 's brothers , gave it a " crisp beat . " In contrast , Darryl Sterdan of The Winnipeg Sun gave it a 3 out of 5 rating , saying , " This may be something , but it 's not ' It ' ... On the whole , it 's a sweet little number -- but it doesn 't live up to its authoritative title . " Todd Martens , of the Los Angeles Times 's Pop & Hiss music blog , called " This Is It " a " trifle " and while the track " certainly won 't embarrass Jackson 's legacy or break the hearts of fans eager to hear Jackson 's voice again " it does " bring the fallen pop icon a little back down to earth . " Jessica Robertson , an AOL music editor , said , " It 's a safe , mid @-@ tempo pop ballad that features what his fans love : his trademark breathy vocals and confident delivery . I don 't think it will set the world on fire , because it 's missing what fans and critics love most about his songs , which is a strong and powerful groove to carry it . " 
 Many reviewers noted similarities in the song to earlier Jackson songs . Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone felt musically , " This Is It " sounded similar to Jackson 's 1987 song " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You , " and Leah <unk> , of Entertainment Weekly thought " some listeners may pick up shades " of Jackson 's 1993 single " Will You Be There . " Cori Murray , an entertainment director at Essence magazine , described the track as " not bad , " and felt that it sounded " like something " Jackson " could have put on an album . " Dan Aquilante , of the New York Post , who described the song as " an optimistic , R & B ballad with an upbeat , percolating rhythm that has all the bombast and power of the New Jack Swing period of the early ' 90s . " James Montgomery , of MTV News , felt that the song was the " perfect MJ tune " and that Jackson " was a hell of a singer . " He also stated that he felt that Jackson had a " wonderous voice , " and the song " a prime showcase for Jackson 's prodigious pipes . " Montgomery went on to say that when he ignored the negative elements surrounding the song and focused , that he felt it was " wonderful " : 
 Ignore the trilling strings , and the soft @-@ jazz / light @-@ funk backing track ( which sort of make [ s ] the song sound like Off the Wall 's " I Can 't Help It . " ) Block out the hype surrounding the song 's release and the drama surrounding Jackson 's death . Focus on those vocals — the way Jackson counts it in with a boyish " one , two , three , four , " the way he glides from verse to verse with breathless , effortless phrasing , the lean @-@ yet @-@ heavy falsetto , the hint of gravel ( and gravitas ) is the verses , the soaring choruses — it 's all there , untarnished by time or tabloids . And it 's all wonderful . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Despite being a non @-@ downloadable album track , the song appeared on many charts due to radio play alone . Gary Trust of Billboard acknowledged that without " This Is It " having a digital ( distribution ) component its chances on making an impact on the Billboard Hot 100 would not be likely . During the week ending October 21 , 2009 , " This Is It " debuted at number 19 on Billboard 's Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks . " This Is It " returned Jackson and his brothers to the chart for the first time since 1970 , when , billed as The Jackson 5 , the group marked its sole previous entry , " I 'll Be There , " which went on to peak on the chart at number 24 . Its charting ended a 13 @-@ year , seven @-@ month absence Jackson had from the chart ; his prior entry was " You Are Not Alone , " which wrapped a 26 @-@ week run on the list dated March 16 , 1996 . This song is also Jackson 's 26th charted Adult Contemporary title , making him the seventh male artist to score a top 20 Adult Contemporary single in each decade since the 1970s . Eventually , the track peaked at number 18 on the Adult Contemporary chart . Also in " This Is It " ' s first week of release , the song debuted on Billboard 's Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs Chart at number 43 . " This Is It " went on to peak at number eighteen on the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Song @-@ genre chart . " This Is It " also charted on the Adult R & B Songs chart , peaking at number 9 . 
 " This Is It " ' s most successful charting country was Japan , where the song placed within the top ten , peaking at number five on Japan 's Hot 100 chart . Also , it peaked at number 30 on the Slovakian airplay chart , at number 22 on the Dutch singles chart , and at number 27 on the Czech airplay chart . The song peaked on the Canadian Hot 100 chart at number 56 but was quite successful in Spain : The track peaked at number 18 on the Spanish singles chart . According to Billboard , within the first 24 hours of release the song had over 800 radio plays in Europe . Another commercially successful territory for " This Is It " was China . It debuted at number one in Hit FM , China Radio International 's western music radio 's airplay charts , " Top 20 Countdown " on October 24 , 2009 . It held the top position for four consecutive weeks until Beyoncé Knowles 's " Broken @-@ Hearted Girl " superseded it on November 21 . However , the track bounced back to the top position of the chart on November 28 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 On December 27 , 2009 , the song 's official music video was released . It was directed by Academy Award @-@ nominee Spike Lee , who had previously worked with Jackson directing the video for the musician 's song entitled " They Don 't Care About Us " for his HIStory : Past , Present and Future , Book I ( 1995 ) album . The video for " This Is It " premiered on the webpage of Lee 's production company 40 Acres & A Mule Filmworks . The video , almost five @-@ minutes long , features various scenes of Jackson 's hometown and former residence in Gary , Indiana , along with photos and videos of him and tributes from his fans around the world . 
 The video opens with a clip of a poster in Gary pointing fans toward Jackson 's childhood home , at the corner of 2300 Jackson Street and Jackson Family Boulevard and the sound of a vintage recording of one of Jackson 's siblings yelling " Michael " repeatedly . An image , that is shown several times during the video , shows a one @-@ way traffic sign near Jackson 's old house that is covered in graffiti honoring Jackson , including " we <unk> <unk> Michael . " Images , shown as a slide @-@ show , of Jackson performing as a child are mixed in with shots of play sets , baseball bats and Gary 's gritty industrial skyline . A central image captured by Lee is a ' plea ' for tolerance etched onto a stop sign in Gary , where someone had written the message " This Is It " above the word " Stop " under which they 've added " <unk> ' . " Interspersed is archival footage of Jackson throughout his career and of him greeting his fans in various parts of the world . There are also shots of the musician 's fans paying tribute in their own Jackson memorabilia to him following his death . At one point in the video , one of the lyrics from the song , " I never heard a single word about you , " floats up out of the concrete , fading into two more shots of fan tributes from around the world and multiple flowers and messages laid at the gates of Jackson 's Neverland Ranch . The video , several times , shows a single red balloon floating in the air and empty swings swaying in the breeze . Towards the end of the video , there is footage of Jackson doing one of his signature dance moves , the moonwalk . It ends with footage of a black stool with Jackson 's trademark black fedora and silver glove on top of it under a spotlight in front of his family 's Gary residence at night . 
 George <unk> of JoBlo.com felt that the video was " clearly " a " loving patchwork of documentary footage , graphics , and original location shoots . " Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson of Entertainment Weekly described the video as being a " heart felt tribute " and said that , due to the circumstances of Lee having no footage of Jackson performing the song to work with , felt the director did a " very nice job " with it . A negative review came from Jim Farber , the music critic for the New York Daily News . He felt the video was a " mini retrospective " of Jackson 's life and criticized the " Stop Hatin ' " stop sign , feeling that it was promoting press censorship and discussion about the darker aspects of Jackson 's life . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Promo - CD single 
 " This Is It " ( album version ) – 3 : 37 
 " This Is It " ( orchestra single version ) – 3 : 43 
 " This Is It " ( edited orchestra version ) – 4 : 40 
 CD promo single 
 " This Is It " ( album version ) – 3 : 37 
 " This Is It " ( orchestra single version ) – 3 : 43 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Written by Michael Jackson and Paul Anka 
 Produced by Michael Jackson , John McClain and Mervyn Warren 
 Lead vocals by Michael Jackson 
 Vocal & track arrangements by Mervyn Warren 
 String arrangement by Clare Fischer 
 Background vocals by The Jacksons 
 Bass vocals by Alvin Chea 
 Piano by Greg Phillinganes 
 Guitar by Paul Jackson , Jr . 
 Percussion by Raphael Padilla 
 Recording Engineer : Jon <unk> 
 Recorded at Marvin 's Room in Hollywood , CA 
 Mixed by Allen Sides 
 Assistant Engineer : Wesley Seidman 
 Mixed at Oceanway Coordination Studios 
 Mastered by Alan Yoshida 
 Mastered at Oceanway Mastering 
 A & R Direction : John <unk> 
 Production Coordination : JoAnn Tominaga 
 Accounting Services : Martha <unk> 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Bath , Somerset = 
 Bath ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ; Latin : Aquae Sulis ) , is a city in the ceremonial county of Somerset , England , known for its Roman @-@ built baths . In 2011 , the population was 88 @,@ 859 . Bath is in the valley of the River Avon , 97 miles ( 156 km ) west of London and 11 miles ( 18 km ) south @-@ east of Bristol . The city became a World Heritage Site in 1987 . 
 The city became a spa with the Latin name Aquae Sulis ( " the waters of Sulis " ) c . AD 60 when the Romans built baths and a temple in the valley of the River Avon , although hot springs were known even before then . Bath Abbey was founded in the 7th century and became a religious centre ; the building was rebuilt in the 12th and 16th centuries . In the 17th century , claims were made for the curative properties of water from the springs , and Bath became popular as a spa town in the Georgian era . Georgian architecture , crafted from Bath stone , includes the Royal Crescent , Circus , Pump Room and Assembly Rooms where Beau Nash presided over the city 's social life from 1705 until his death in 1761 . Many of the streets and squares were laid out by John Wood , the Elder , and in the 18th century the city became fashionable and the population grew . Jane Austen lived in Bath in the early 19th century . Further building was undertaken in the 19th century and following the Bath Blitz in World War II . 
 The city has software , publishing and service @-@ oriented industries . Theatres , museums , and other cultural and sporting venues have helped make it a major centre for tourism with more than one million staying visitors and 3 @.@ 8 million day visitors to the city each year . There are several museums including the Museum of Bath Architecture , Victoria Art Gallery , Museum of East Asian Art , and the Holburne Museum . The city has two universities : the University of Bath and Bath Spa University , with Bath College providing further education . Sporting clubs include Bath Rugby and Bath City F.C. while TeamBath is the umbrella name for all of the University of Bath sports teams . 
 Bath became part of the county of Avon in 1974 , and , following Avon 's abolition in 1996 , has been the principal centre of Bath and North East Somerset . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Iron Age and Roman = = = 
 The hills in the locality such as Bathampton Down saw human activity from the Mesolithic period . Several Bronze Age round barrows were opened by John Skinner in the 18th century . Bathampton Camp may have been an Iron Age hill fort or stock enclosure . A long barrow site believed to be from the Beaker people was flattened to make way for RAF Charmy Down . 
 Archaeological evidence shows the site of the Roman baths ' main spring may have been treated as a shrine by the Britons , and was dedicated to the goddess Sulis , whom the Romans identified with Minerva ; the name Sulis continued to be used after the Roman invasion , appearing in the town 's Roman name , Aquae Sulis ( literally , " the waters of Sulis " ) . Messages to her scratched onto metal , known as curse tablets , have been recovered from the sacred spring by archaeologists . The tablets were written in Latin , and cursed people whom the writers felt had wronged them . For example , if a citizen had his clothes stolen at the baths , he might write a curse , naming the suspects , on a tablet to be read by the goddess . 
 A temple was constructed in 60 – 70 AD , and a bathing complex was built up over the next 300 years . Engineers drove oak piles into the mud to provide a stable foundation , and surrounded the spring with an irregular stone chamber lined with lead . In the 2nd century , the spring was enclosed within a wooden barrel @-@ vaulted structure that housed the caldarium ( hot bath ) , tepidarium ( warm bath ) , and frigidarium ( cold bath ) . 
 The town was later given defensive walls , probably in the 3rd century . After the failure of Roman authority in the first decade of the 5th century , the baths fell into disrepair and were eventually lost as a result of silting . 
 In March 2012 a hoard of 30 @,@ 000 silver Roman coins , one of the largest discovered in Britain , was unearthed in an archaeological dig . The coins , believed to date from the 3rd century , were found about 150 m ( 450 ft ) from the Roman baths . 
 = = = Post @-@ Roman and Medieval = = = 
 Bath may have been the site of the Battle of Badon ( c . 500 AD ) , in which King Arthur is said to have defeated the Anglo @-@ Saxons . The town was captured by the West Saxons in 577 after the Battle of Deorham ; the Anglo @-@ Saxon poem The Ruin may describe the appearance of the Roman site about this time . A monastery was founded at an early date – reputedly by Saint David although more probably in 675 by Osric , King of the Hwicce , perhaps using the walled area as its precinct . Nennius , a 9th @-@ century historian , mentions a " Hot Lake " in the land of the Hwicce along the River Severn , and adds " It is surrounded by a wall , made of brick and stone , and men may go there to bathe at any time , and every man can have the kind of bath he likes . If he wants , it will be a cold bath ; and if he wants a hot bath , it will be hot " . Bede described hot baths in the geographical introduction to the Ecclesiastical History in terms very similar to those of Nennius . King Offa of Mercia gained control of the monastery in 781 and rebuilt the church , which was dedicated to St. Peter . 
 By the 9th century the old Roman street pattern was lost and Bath was a royal possession . King Alfred laid out the town afresh , leaving its south @-@ eastern quadrant as the abbey precinct . In the Burghal Hidage , Bath is recorded as a burh ( borough ) and is described as having walls of 1 @,@ 375 yards ( 1 @,@ 257 m ) and was allocated 1000 men for defence . During the reign of Edward the Elder coins were minted in Bath based on a design from the Winchester mint but with ' BAD ' on the obverse relating to the Anglo @-@ Saxon name for the town , <unk> , <unk> or <unk> , meaning " at the baths " , and this was the source of the present name . Edgar of England was crowned king of England in Bath Abbey in 973 . 
 William Rufus granted the city to a royal physician , John of Tours , who became Bishop of Wells and Abbot of Bath , following the sacking of the city during the Rebellion of 1088 . It was papal policy for bishops to move to more urban seats , and John of Tours translated his own from Wells to Bath . The bishop planned and began a much larger church as his cathedral , to which was attached a priory , with the bishop 's palace beside it . New baths were built around the three springs . Later bishops returned the episcopal seat to Wells while retaining the name Bath in the title , Bishop of Bath and Wells . St John 's Hospital was founded around 1180 by Bishop Reginald Fitz Jocelin and is among the oldest almshouses in England . The ' hospital of the baths ' was built beside the hot springs of the Cross Bath , for their health @-@ giving properties and to provide shelter for the poor infirm . 
 Administrative systems fell within the hundreds . The Bath Hundred had various names including the Hundred of Le Buri . The Bath Foreign Hundred or <unk> covered the area outside the city and was later combined into the Bath Forum Hundred . Wealthy merchants had no status within the hundred courts and formed guilds to gain influence . They built the first guildhall probably in the 13th century . Around 1200 the first mayor was appointed . 
 = = = Early Modern = = = 
 By the 15th century , Bath 's abbey church was dilapidated and Oliver King , Bishop of Bath and Wells , decided to rebuild it on a smaller scale in 1500 . The new church was completed just a few years before Bath Priory was dissolved in 1539 by Henry VIII . The abbey church became derelict before being restored as the city 's parish church in the Elizabethan era , when the city experienced a revival as a spa . The baths were improved and the city began to attract the aristocracy . A Royal charter granted by Queen Elizabeth I in 1590 confirmed city status . 
 During the English Civil War , the city was garrisoned for Charles I. Seven thousand pounds was spent on fortifications , but on the appearance of parliamentary forces the gates were thrown open and the city surrendered . It became a significant post for the New Model Army under William Waller . Bath was retaken by royalists following the Battle of Lansdowne fought on the northern outskirts of the city on 5 July 1643 . Thomas <unk> , a student of chemistry and medicine at Wadham College , Oxford , set up a practice in the city in 1668 . He was interested in the curative properties of the waters , and he wrote A discourse of Bathe , and the hot waters there . Also , Some Enquiries into the Nature of the water in 1676 . It brought the health @-@ giving properties of the hot mineral waters to the attention of the country , and the aristocracy arrived to partake in them . 
 Several areas of the city were developed in the Stuart period , and more building took place during Georgian times in response to the increasing number of visitors who required accommodation . Architects John Wood the Elder and his son laid out the new quarters in streets and squares , the identical façades of which gave an impression of palatial scale and classical decorum . Much of the creamy gold Bath stone , a type of limestone used for construction in the city , was obtained from the Combe Down and Bathampton Down Mines owned by Ralph Allen ( 1694 – 1764 ) . Allen , to advertise the quality of his quarried limestone , commissioned the elder John Wood to build a country house on his Prior Park estate between the city and the mines . Allen was responsible for improving and expanding the postal service in western England , for which he held the contract for more than forty years . Although not fond of politics , Allen was a civic @-@ minded man and a member of Bath Corporation for many years . He was elected mayor for a single term in 1742 . 
 In the early 18th century , Bath acquired its first purpose @-@ built theatre , the Old Orchard Street Theatre . It was rebuilt as the Theatre Royal , along with the Grand Pump Room attached to the Roman Baths and assembly rooms . Master of ceremonies Beau Nash , who presided over the city 's social life from 1705 until his death in 1761 , drew up a code of behaviour for public entertainments . Bath had become perhaps the most fashionable of the rapidly developing British spa towns , attracting many notable visitors such as the wealthy London bookseller Andrew Millar and his wife , who both made long visits . 
 = = = Late Modern = = = 
 The population of the city was 40 @,@ 020 at the 1801 census , making it one of the largest cities in Britain . William Thomas Beckford bought a house in Lansdown Crescent in 1822 , and subsequently two adjacent houses to form his residence . Having acquired all the land between his home and the top of Lansdown Hill , he created a garden more than 1 ⁄ 2 mile ( 800 m ) in length and built Beckford 's Tower at the top . 
 Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia spent the four years in exile , from 1936 to 1940 , at Fairfield House in Bath . During World War II , between the evening of 25 April and the early morning of 27 April 1942 , Bath suffered three air raids in reprisal for RAF raids on the German cities of Lübeck and Rostock , part of the Luftwaffe campaign popularly known as the Baedeker Blitz . During the Bath Blitz , more than 400 people were killed , and more than 19 @,@ 000 buildings damaged or destroyed . Houses in the Royal Crescent , Circus and Paragon were burnt out along with the Assembly Rooms . A 500 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) high explosive bomb landed on the east side of Queen Square , resulting in houses on the south side being damaged and the Francis Hotel losing 24 metres ( 79 ft ) of its frontage . The buildings have all been restored although there are still signs of the bombing . 
 A postwar review of inadequate housing led to the clearance and redevelopment of areas of the city in a postwar style , often at variance with the local Georgian style . In the 1950s the nearby villages of Combe Down , Twerton and Weston were incorporated into the city to enable the development of housing , much of it council housing . In the 1970s and 1980s it was recognised conservation of historic buildings was inadequate , leading to more care and reuse of buildings and open spaces . In 1987 the city was selected by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site , recognising its international cultural significance . 
 Since 2000 , major developments have included the Thermae Bath Spa , the <unk> shopping centre , the residential Western Riverside project on the Stothert & Pitt factory site , and the riverside Bath Quays office and business development . 
 = = Government = = 
 = = = Historical development = = = 
 Bath had long been an ancient borough , having that status since 878 when it became a royal borough ( burh ) of Alfred the Great , and was reformed into a municipal borough in 1835 . It has formed part of the county of Somerset since 878 , when ceded to Wessex , having previously been in Mercia ( the River Avon had acted as the border between the two kingdoms since 628 ) . However , Bath was made a county borough in 1889 , independent of the newly created administrative county and Somerset County Council . Bath became part of Avon when the non @-@ metropolitan county was created in 1974 , resulting in its abolition as a county borough and instead becoming a non @-@ metropolitan district with borough status . With the abolition of Avon in 1996 , the non @-@ metropolitan district and borough were abolished too , and Bath has since been part of the unitary authority district of Bath and North East Somerset ( B & NES ) . Bath was returned to the ceremonial county of Somerset in 1996 , though as B & NES is a unitary authority , it is not part of the area covered by Somerset County Council . 
 = = = Charter Trustees = = = 
 Because Bath is unparished , there is no longer a city council ( or parish council ) — Bath City Council having ended in 1996 with the abolition of the district of Bath . The City of Bath 's ceremonial functions , including its formal status as a city , its twinning arrangements , the mayoralty of Bath – which can be traced back to 1230 – and control of the city 's coat of arms , are maintained by the charter trustees of the City of Bath . The councillors elected by the electoral wards that cover Bath ( see below ) are the trustees , and they elect one of their number as mayor . 
 The coat of arms includes two silver strips representing the River Avon and the hot springs . The sword of St. Paul is a link to Bath Abbey . The supporters , a lion and a bear , stand on a bed of acorns , a link to Bladud , the subject of the Legend of Bath . The knight 's helmet indicates a municipality and the crown is that of King Edgar . 
 = = = Bath City Forum = = = 
 Bath and North East Somerset ( B & NES ) Council has established the Bath City Forum , <unk> 12 nominated B & NES councillors representing wards in Bath ( and representing a cross @-@ section of political parties ) , 1 cabinet member of B & NES Council , and up to 13 co @-@ opted members drawn from the communities of the city . The first meeting of the Forum was held on 13 October 2015 , at the Guildhall , where the first Chair and Vice @-@ Chair were elected . 
 = = = Parliamentary elections = = = 
 Bath is one of the oldest extant parliamentary constituencies in the United Kingdom , being in continuous existence since the Model Parliament of 1295 . Before the Reform Act 1832 , Bath elected two members to the unreformed House of Commons , as an ancient parliamentary borough . From 1832 until 1918 it elected two MPs and then was reduced to one . 
 Historically the constituency covered only the city of Bath , however it was enlarged into some outlying areas between 1997 and 2010 . The constituency since 2010 once again covers exactly the city of Bath ( it is co @-@ extensive with the unparished area ) , and is currently represented by Conservative Ben Howlett , who replaced the retiring Liberal Democrat Don Foster at the 2015 general election . Foster 's election was a notable result of the 1992 general election , as Chris Patten , the previous Member ( and Cabinet Minister ) played a major part , as Chairman of the Conservative Party , in re @-@ electing the government of John Major , but failed to defend his marginal seat . 
 = = = Electoral wards = = = 
 The sixteen electoral wards of the Bath and North East Somerset unitary authority within Bath ( which are co @-@ extensive with the unparished area ) are : Abbey , Bathwick , Combe Down , Kingsmead , Lambridge , Lansdown , Lyncombe , Newbridge , Odd Down , Oldfield , Southdown , Twerton , Walcot , Westmoreland , Weston and Widcombe . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Physical geography = = = 
 Bath is in the Avon Valley near the southern edge of the Cotswolds , a range of limestone hills designated as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty . The hills that surround and make up the city have a maximum altitude of 781 feet ( 238 metres ) on the Lansdown plateau . Bath has an area of 11 square miles ( 28 square kilometres ) . 
 The floodplain of the Avon , on which the city centre is built , has an altitude of about 59 ft ( 18 m ) above sea level . The river , once an unnavigable series of braided streams broken up by swamps and ponds , has been managed by weirs into a single channel . Periodic flooding , which shortened the life of many buildings in the lowest part of the city , was normal until major flood control works were completed in the 1970s . Kensington Meadows is an area of mixed woodland and open meadow next to the river which has been designated as a local nature reserve . 
 Water bubbling up from the ground as geothermal springs originates as rain on the Mendip Hills . The rain percolates through limestone aquifers to a depth of between 9 @,@ 000 to 14 @,@ 000 ft ( 2 @,@ 700 to 4 @,@ 300 m ) where geothermal energy raises the water 's temperature to between 64 and 96 ° C ( c . 147 – 205 ° F ) . Under pressure , the heated water rises to the surface along fissures and faults in the limestone . Hot water at a temperature of 46 ° C ( 115 ° F ) rises here at the rate of 1 @,@ 170 @,@ 000 litres ( 257 @,@ 364 imp gal ) daily , from a geological fault ( the <unk> fault ) . In 1983 , a new spa @-@ water bore @-@ hole was sunk , providing a clean and safe supply for drinking in the Pump Room . There is no universal definition to distinguish a hot spring from a geothermal spring although , by several definitions , the Bath springs can be considered the only hot springs in the UK . Three of the springs feed the thermal baths . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Along with the rest of South West England , Bath has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of the country . The annual mean temperature is approximately 10 ° C ( 50 @.@ 0 ° F ) . Seasonal temperature variation is less extreme than most of the United Kingdom because of the adjacent sea temperatures . The summer months of July and August are the warmest , with mean daily maxima of approximately 21 ° C ( 69 @.@ 8 ° F ) . In winter , mean minimum temperatures of 1 or 2 ° C ( 33 @.@ 8 or 35 @.@ 6 ° F ) are common . In the summer the Azores high pressure affects the south @-@ west of England bringing fair weather ; however , convective cloud sometimes forms inland , reducing the number of hours of sunshine . Annual sunshine rates are slightly less than the regional average of 1 @,@ 600 hours . In December 1998 there were 20 days without sun recorded at Yeovilton . Most of the rainfall in the south @-@ west is caused by Atlantic depressions or by convection . Most of the rainfall in autumn and winter is caused by the Atlantic depressions , which is when they are most active . In summer , a large proportion of the rainfall is caused by sun heating the ground , leading to convection and to showers and thunderstorms . Average rainfall is around 700 mm ( 28 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , and June to August have the lightest winds . The predominant wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The 2011 census recorded a population of 88 @,@ 859 for the city of Bath . ( This figure represents the combined populations of the 16 wards that are co @-@ extensive with the unparished area that covers the city . ) An Office for National Statistics estimate of the population ( for mid @-@ 2010 ) for the urban area was put at 97 @,@ 311 . 
 According to the 2001 census , Bath , together with North East Somerset , which includes areas around Bath as far as the Chew Valley , had a population of 169 @,@ 040 , with an average age of 39 @.@ 9 ( the national average being 38 @.@ 6 ) . Demography shows according to the same statistics , the district is overwhelmingly populated by people of a white background at 97 @.@ 2 % – significantly higher than the national average of 90 @.@ 9 % . Other ethnic groups in the district , in order of population size , are multiracial at 1 % , Asian at 0 @.@ 5 % and black at 0 @.@ 5 % ( the national averages are 1 @.@ 3 % , 4 @.@ 6 % and 2 @.@ 1 % , respectively ) . 
 The district is largely Christian at 71 % , with no other religion reaching more than 0 @.@ 5 % . These figures generally compare with the national averages , though the non @-@ religious , at 19 @.@ 5 % , are significantly more prevalent than the national 14 @.@ 8 % . 7 @.@ 4 % of the population describe themselves as " not healthy " in the last 12 months , compared with a national average of 9 @.@ 2 % ; nationally , 18 @.@ 2 % of people describe themselves as having a long @-@ term illness ; in Bath it is 15 @.@ 8 % . 
 An inhabitant of Bath is known as a Bathonian . 
 = = Economy = = 
 = = = Industry = = = 
 Bath once had an important manufacturing sector , particularly in crane manufacture , furniture manufacture , printing , brass foundries , quarries , dye works and Plasticine manufacture , as well as many mills . Significant Bath companies included Stothert & Pitt , Bath Cabinet Makers and Bath & Portland Stone . 
 Nowadays , manufacturing is in decline , but the city boasts strong software , publishing and service @-@ oriented industries , being home to companies such as Future Publishing and London & Country mortgage brokers . The city 's attraction to tourists has also led to a significant number of jobs in tourism @-@ related industries . Important economic sectors in Bath include education and health ( 30 @,@ 000 jobs ) , retail , tourism and leisure ( 14 @,@ 000 jobs ) and business and professional services ( 10 @,@ 000 jobs ) . Major employers are the National Health Service , the city 's two universities , and the Bath and North East Somerset Council , as well as the Ministry of Defence although a number of MOD offices formerly in Bath have recently moved to Bristol . Growing employment sectors include information and communication technologies and creative and cultural industries where Bath is one of the recognised national centres for publishing , with the magazine and digital publisher Future Publishing employing around 650 people . Others include Buro Happold ( 400 ) and IPL Information Processing Limited ( 250 ) . The city boasts over 400 retail shops , half of which are run by independent specialist retailers , and around 100 restaurants and cafes primarily supported by tourism . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 One of Bath 's principal industries is tourism , with annually more than one million staying visitors and 3 @.@ 8 million day visitors . The visits mainly fall into the categories of heritage tourism and cultural tourism , aided by the city 's selection in 1987 as a World Heritage Site in recognition of its international cultural importance . All significant stages of the history of England are represented within the city , from the Roman Baths ( including their significant Celtic presence ) , to Bath Abbey and the Royal Crescent , to the more recent Thermae Bath Spa . The size of the tourist industry is reflected in the almost 300 places of accommodation – including more than 80 hotels , two of which have ' five @-@ star ' ratings , over 180 bed and breakfasts – many of which are located in Georgian buildings , and two campsites located on the western edge of the city . The city also has about 100 restaurants and a similar number of pubs and bars . Several companies offer open top bus tours around the city , as well as tours on foot and on the river . Since the opening of Thermae Bath Spa in 2006 , the city has attempted to recapture its historical position as the only town or city in the United Kingdom offering visitors the opportunity to bathe in naturally heated spring waters . 
 In the 2010 Google Street View Best Streets Awards , the Royal Crescent took second place in the " Britain 's Most Picturesque Street " award , first place being given to The Shambles in York . Milsom Street was also awarded " Britain 's Best Fashion Street " in the 11 @,@ 000 @-@ strong vote . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 There are many Roman archaeological sites throughout the central area of the city . The baths themselves are about 6 metres ( 20 ft ) below the present city street level . Around the hot springs , Roman foundations , pillar bases , and baths can still be seen , however all the stonework above the level of the baths is from more recent periods . 
 Bath Abbey was a Norman church built on earlier foundations . The present building dates from the early 16th century and shows a late Perpendicular style with flying buttresses and crocketed pinnacles decorating a crenellated and pierced parapet . The choir and transepts have a fan vault by Robert and William Vertue . A matching vault was added to the nave in the 19th century . The building is lit by 52 windows . 
 Most buildings in Bath are made from the local , golden @-@ coloured Bath Stone , and many date from the 18th and 19th century . The dominant style of architecture in Central Bath is Georgian ; this style evolved from the Palladian revival style that became popular in the early 18th century . Many of the prominent architects of the day were employed in the development of the city . The original purpose of much of Bath 's architecture is concealed by the honey @-@ coloured classical façades ; in an era before the advent of the luxury hotel , these apparently elegant residences were frequently purpose @-@ built lodging houses , where visitors could hire a room , a floor , or ( according to their means ) an entire house for the duration of their visit , and be waited on by the house 's communal servants . The masons Reeves of Bath were prominent in the city from the 1770s to 1860s . 
 The Circus consists of three long , curved terraces designed by the elder John Wood to form a circular space or theatre intended for civic functions and games . The games give a clue to the design , the inspiration behind which was the Colosseum in Rome . Like the Colosseum , the three façades have a different order of architecture on each floor : Doric on the ground level , then Ionic on the piano nobile , and finishing with Corinthian on the upper floor , the style of the building thus becoming progressively more ornate as it rises . Wood never lived to see his unique example of town planning completed as he died five days after personally laying the foundation stone on 18 May 1754 . 
 The most spectacular of Bath 's terraces is the Royal Crescent , built between 1767 and 1774 and designed by the younger John Wood . But all is not what it seems ; while Wood designed the great curved façade of what appears to be about 30 houses with Ionic columns on a rusticated ground floor , that was the extent of his input . Each purchaser bought a certain length of the façade , and then employed their own architect to build a house to their own specifications behind it ; hence what appears to be two houses is sometimes one . This system of town planning is betrayed at the rear of the crescent : while the front is completely uniform and symmetrical , the rear is a mixture of differing roof heights , juxtapositions and fenestration . This " Queen Anne fronts and Mary @-@ Anne backs " architecture occurs repeatedly in Bath . Other fine terraces elsewhere in the city include Lansdown Crescent and Somerset Place on the northern hill . 
 Around 1770 the neoclassical architect Robert Adam designed Pulteney Bridge , using as the prototype for the three @-@ arched bridge spanning the Avon an original , but unused , design by Andrea Palladio for the Rialto Bridge in Venice . Thus , Pulteney Bridge became not just a means of crossing the river , but also a shopping arcade . Along with the Rialto Bridge and the Ponte Vecchio in Florence , which it resembles , it is one of the very few surviving bridges in Europe to serve this dual purpose . It has been substantially altered since it was built . The bridge was named after Frances and William Pulteney , the owners of the Bathwick estate for which the bridge provided a link to the rest of Bath . The Georgian streets in the vicinity of the river tended to be built high above the original ground level to avoid flooding , with the carriageways supported on vaults extending in front of the houses . This can be seen in the multi @-@ storey cellars around Laura Place South of Pulteney Bridge , in the colonnades below Grand Parade , and in the grated coal holes in the pavement of North Parade . In some parts of the city , such as George Street , and London Road near Cleveland Bridge , the developers of the opposite side of the road did not match this pattern , leaving raised pavements with the ends of the vaults exposed to a lower street below . 
 The heart of the Georgian city was the Pump Room , which , together with its associated Lower Assembly Rooms , was designed by Thomas Baldwin , a local builder responsible for many other buildings in the city , including the terraces in Argyle Street and the Guildhall . Baldwin rose rapidly , becoming a leader in Bath 's architectural history . In 1776 he was made the chief City Surveyor , and in 1780 became Bath City Architect . Great Pulteney Street , where he eventually lived , is another of his works : this wide boulevard , constructed around 1789 and over 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 305 m ) long and 100 feet ( 30 m ) wide , is lined on both sides by Georgian terraces . 
 In the 1960s and early 1970s some parts of Bath were unsympathetically redeveloped , resulting in the loss of some 18th- and 19th century buildings . This process was largely halted by a popular campaign which drew strength from the publication of Adam Fergusson 's The Sack of Bath . Controversy has revived periodically , most recently with the demolition of the 1930s Churchill House , a neo @-@ Georgian municipal building originally housing the Electricity Board , to make way for a new bus station . This is part of the Southgate redevelopment in which an ill @-@ favoured 1960s shopping precinct , bus station and multi @-@ story car park were demolished and replaced by a new area of mock @-@ Georgian shopping streets . As a result of this and other changes , notably plans for abandoned industrial land along the Avon , the city 's status as a World Heritage Site was reviewed by UNESCO in 2009 . The decision was made to let Bath keep its status , but UNESCO has asked to be consulted on future phases of the Riverside development , saying the density and volume of buildings in the second and third phases of the development need to be reconsidered . It also demands Bath do more to attract world @-@ class architecture in new developments . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Bath became the centre of fashionable life in England during the 18th century when its Old Orchard Street Theatre and architectural developments such as Lansdown Crescent , the Royal Crescent , The Circus , and Pulteney Bridge were built . 
 Bath 's five theatres – Theatre Royal , Ustinov Studio , the Egg , the Rondo Theatre , and the Mission Theatre – attract internationally renowned companies and directors and an annual season by Sir Peter Hall . The city has a long @-@ standing musical tradition ; Bath Abbey , home to the Klais Organ and the largest concert venue in the city , stages about 20 concerts and 26 organ recitals each year . Another concert venue , the 1 @,@ 700 @-@ seat Art Deco Forum , originated as a cinema . The city holds the annual Bath International Music Festival and <unk> , the annual Bath Literature Festival ( and its counterpart for children ) , the Bath Film Festival , the Bath Fringe Festival , the Bath Beer Festival and the Bath Chilli Festival . The Bach Festivals occur at two and a half @-@ year intervals . An annual Bard of Bath competition aims to find the best poet , singer or storyteller . 
 The city is home to the Victoria Art Gallery , the Museum of East Asian Art , and Holburne Museum , numerous commercial art galleries and antique shops , as well as a number of other museums , among them Bath Postal Museum , the Fashion Museum , the Jane Austen Centre , the Herschel Museum of Astronomy and the Roman Baths . The Bath Royal Literary and Scientific Institution ( BRLSI ) in Queen Square was founded in 1824 from the Society for the encouragement of Agriculture , Planting , Manufactures , Commerce and the Fine Arts founded in 1777 . In September 1864 , BRLSI hosted the 34th annual meeting of the British Science Association , which was attended by explorers David Livingstone , Sir Richard Francis Burton , and John Hanning Speke . The history of the city is displayed at the Museum of Bath Architecture , which is housed in a building built in 1765 as the Trinity Presbyterian Church . It was also known as the Countess of Huntingdon 's Chapel , as she lived in the attached house from 1707 to 1791 . 
 = = = Bath in the arts = = = 
 During the 18th century Thomas Gainsborough and Sir Thomas Lawrence lived and worked in Bath . John Maggs , a painter best known for coaching scenes , was born and lived in Bath with his artistic family . 
 Jane Austen lived here from 1801 with her father , mother and sister Cassandra , and the family resided at four different addresses until 1806 . Jane Austen never liked the city , and wrote to Cassandra , " It will be two years tomorrow since we left Bath for Clifton , with what happy feelings of escape . " Bath has honoured her name with the Jane Austen Centre and a city walk . Austen 's Northanger Abbey and Persuasion are set in the city and describe taking the waters , social life , and music recitals . 
 William Friese @-@ Greene experimented with celluloid and motion pictures in his studio in the 1870s , developing some of the earliest movie camera technology . He is credited as being one of the inventors of cinematography . 
 Taking the waters is described in Charles Dickens ' novel The Pickwick Papers in which Pickwick 's servant , Sam Weller , comments the water has " a very strong flavour o ' warm flat irons " . The Royal Crescent is the venue for a chase between two characters , Dowler and Winkle . <unk> Caldecott 's novel The Waters of Sul is set in Roman Bath in 72 AD , and The Regency Detective , by David <unk> and Terence James , revolves around the exploits of Jack Swann investigating deaths in the city during the early 1800s . Richard Brinsley Sheridan 's play The Rivals takes place in the city , as does Roald Dahl 's chilling short story , " The Landlady " . 
 Many films and television programmes have been filmed using its architecture as the backdrop , including the 2004 film of Thackeray 's Vanity Fair , The Duchess ( 2008 ) , The Elusive Pimpernel ( 1950 ) and The Titfield Thunderbolt ( 1953 ) . In 2012 , Pulteney Weir was used as a replacement location during post production of the film adaptation of Les Misérables . Stunt shots were filmed in October 2012 after footage acquired during the main filming period was found to have errors . 
 In August 2003 The Three Tenors sang at a concert to mark the opening of the Thermae Bath Spa , a new hot water spa in the city centre , but delays to the project meant the spa actually opened three years later on 7 August 2006 . In 2008 , 104 decorated pigs were displayed around the city in a public art event called " King Bladud 's Pigs in Bath " . It celebrated the city , its origins and artists . Decorated pig sculptures were displayed throughout the summer and were auctioned to raise funds for Two Tunnels Greenway . 
 = = = Parks = = = 
 Royal Victoria Park , a short walk from the city centre , was opened in 1830 by the 11 @-@ year @-@ old Princess Victoria , and was the first park to carry her name . The public park is overlooked by the Royal Crescent and covers 23 hectares ( 57 acres ) . It has a skatepark , tennis courts , a bowling green , a putting green and a 12- and 18 @-@ hole golf course , a pond , open @-@ air concerts , an annual travelling funfair at Easter , and a children 's play area . Much of its area is lawn ; a notable feature is a ha @-@ ha that segregates it from the Royal Crescent while giving the impression from the Crescent of uninterrupted grassland across the park to Royal Avenue . It has a " Green Flag Award " , the national standard for parks and green spaces in England and Wales , and is registered by English Heritage as of National Historic Importance . The 3 @.@ 84 hectares ( 9 @.@ 5 acres ) botanical gardens were formed in 1887 and contain one of the finest collections of plants on limestone in the West Country . A replica Roman Temple was built at the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley in 1924 , and , following the exhibition , was dismantled and rebuilt in Victoria Park in Bath . In 1987 the gardens were extended to include the Great Dell , a disused quarry with a collection of conifers . 
 Other parks include : Alexandra Park on a hill overlooking the city ; Parade Gardens , along the river near the abbey in the city centre ; Sydney Gardens , an 18th @-@ century pleasure @-@ garden ; Henrietta Park ; <unk> Park ; and Alice Park . Jane Austen wrote " It would be pleasant to be near the Sydney Gardens . We could go into the Labyrinth every day . " Alexandra , Alice and Henrietta parks were built into the growing city among the housing developments . There is a linear park following the old Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway line . Cleveland Pools were built around 1815 close to the River Avon , now the oldest surviving public outdoor lido in England , and plans have been submitted for its restoration . 
 = = = Bath and Queen Victoria = = = 
 Victoria Art Gallery and Royal Victoria Park are named after Queen Victoria , who wrote in her journal " The people are really too kind to me . " . This feeling seemed to have been reciprocated by the people of Bath : " Lord James O 'Brien brought a drawing of the intended pillar which the people of Bath are so kind as to erect in commemoration of my 18th birthday . " . 
 = = = Food = = = 
 Several foods have an association with the city . Sally Lunn buns ( a type of <unk> ) have long been baked in Bath . They were first mentioned by name in verses printed in the Bath Chronicle , in 1772 . At that time they were eaten hot at public breakfasts in Spring Gardens . They can be eaten with sweet or savoury toppings and are sometimes confused with Bath buns , which are smaller , round , very sweet and very rich . They were associated with the city following The Great Exhibition . Bath buns were originally topped with crushed comfits created by dipping caraway seeds repeatedly in boiling sugar ; but today seeds are added to a ' London Bath Bun ' ( a reference to the bun 's promotion and sale at the Great Exhibition ) . The seeds may be replaced by crushed sugar granules or ' nibs ' . 
 Bath has lent its name to one other distinctive recipe – Bath Olivers – a dry baked biscuit invented by Dr William Oliver , physician to the Mineral Water Hospital in 1740 . Oliver was an anti @-@ obesity campaigner and author of a " Practical Essay on the Use and Abuse of warm Bathing in <unk> Cases " . In more recent years , Oliver 's efforts have been traduced by the introduction of a version of the biscuit with a plain chocolate coating . Bath <unk> , the salted and smoked cheek and jawbones of the pig , takes its name from the city and is available from a stall in the daily covered market . Bath Ales brewery is located in Warmley and Abbey Ales are brewed in the city . 
 = = = Twinning = = = 
 Bath is twinned with four other cities in Europe . Twinning is the responsibility of the Charter Trustees and each twinning arrangement is managed by a Twinning Association . 
 There is also a historic connection with Manly , New South Wales , Australia , which is referred to as a sister city , and there is a partnership arrangement with Beppu , Ōita Prefecture , Japan . 
 = = = = Formal twinning = = = = 
 Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence , France 
 Alkmaar , Netherlands 
 Braunschweig , Germany 
 Kaposvár , Hungary 
 = = Education = = 
 Bath has two universities , the University of Bath and Bath Spa University . Established in 1966 , the University of Bath was named University of the Year by The Sunday Times ( 2011 ) . It offers programs in politics , languages , the physical sciences , engineering , mathematics , architecture , management and technology . 
 Bath Spa University was first granted degree @-@ awarding powers in 1992 as a university college before being granted university status in August 2005 . It offers courses leading to a Postgraduate Certificate in Education . It has schools in the following subject areas : Art and Design , Education , English and Creative Studies , Historical and Cultural Studies , Music and the Performing Arts , Science and the Environment and Social Sciences . 
 Bath College offers further education , and Norland College provides education and training in childcare . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Bath Rugby is a rugby union team in the Aviva Premiership league . It plays in black , blue and white kit at the Recreation Ground in the city , where it has been since the late 19th century , following its establishment in 1865 . The team 's first major honour was winning the John Player Cup , now sponsored as the LV Cup and also known as the Anglo @-@ Welsh Cup , four years consecutively from 1984 until 1987 . The team then led the Courage league in six seasons in eight years between 1988 – 89 and 1995 – 96 , during which time it also won the renamed Pilkington Cup in 1989 , 1990 , 1992 , 1994 , 1995 and 1996 . It finally won the Heineken Cup in the 1997 – 98 season , and topped the Zürich Premiership ( now Aviva Premiership ) in 2003 – 04 . The team 's squad includes several members who also play , or have played in the English national team , including Lee Mears , Rob Webber , Dave Attwood , Nick <unk> and Matt <unk> . Colston 's School , Bristol , has had a large input in the team over the past decade , providing several current 1st XV squad members . The former England Rugby Team Manager and former Scotland national coach Andy Robinson used to play for Bath Rugby team and was captain and later coach . Both of Robinson 's predecessors , Clive Woodward and Jack Rowell , as well as his successor Brian Ashton , were also former Bath coaches and managers . 
 Bath City F.C. is the major football team . Bath City gained promotion to the Conference Premier from the Conference South in 2010 . Bath City F.C. play their games at Twerton Park . Until 2009 Team Bath F.C. operated as an affiliate to the University Athletics programme . In 2002 , Team Bath became the first university team to enter the FA Cup in 120 years , and advanced through four qualifying rounds to the first round proper . The university 's team was established in 1999 while the city team has existed since before 1908 ( when it entered the Western League ) . However , in 2009 , the Football Conference ruled Team Bath would not be eligible to gain promotion to a National division , nor were they allowed to participate in Football Association cup competitions . This ruling led to the decision by the club to fold at the end of the 2008 – 09 Conference South competition . In their final season , Team Bath F.C. finished 11th in the league . 
 Bath City narrowly missed out on election to The Football League in 1978 . Bath also has Non @-@ League football club Odd Down F.C. who play at Lew Hill Memorial Ground . 
 Many cricket clubs are based in the city , including Bath Cricket Club , who are based at the North Parade Ground and play in the West of England Premier League . Cricket is also played on the Recreation Ground , just across from where the Rugby is played . The Recreation Ground is also home to Bath Croquet Club , which was re @-@ formed in 1976 and is affiliated with the South West Federation of Croquet Clubs . 
 The Bath Half Marathon is run annually through the city streets , with over 10 @,@ 000 runners . 
 TeamBath is the umbrella name for all of the University of Bath sports teams , including the aforementioned football club . Other sports for which TeamBath is noted are athletics , badminton , basketball , bob skeleton , bobsleigh , hockey , judo , modern pentathlon , netball , rugby union , swimming , tennis , triathlon and volleyball . The City of Bath Triathlon takes place annually at the university . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Bath is approximately 11 miles ( 18 km ) south @-@ east of the larger city and port of Bristol , to which it is linked by the A4 road , which runs through Bath , and is a similar distance south of the M4 motorway . In an attempt to reduce the level of car use , park and ride schemes have been introduced , with sites at Odd Down , Lansdown and Newbridge . Paradoxically , a very large increase in city centre parking was provided under the new shopping centre , which necessarily introduces more car traffic . In addition , a bus gate scheme in Northgate aims to reduce private car use in the city centre . National Express operates coach services from Bath Bus Station to a number of cities . Bath also has a network of bus routes run by FirstGroup , with services to surrounding towns and cities . Wessex Bath and the <unk> Bus company also operate numerous services to surrounding towns . The Bath Bus Company runs open top double @-@ decker bus tours around the city . 
 The city is connected to Bristol and the sea by the River Avon , navigable via locks by small boats . The river was connected to the River Thames and London by the Kennet and Avon Canal in 1810 via Bath Locks ; this waterway – closed for many years but restored in the last years of the 20th century – is now popular with narrowboat users . Bath is on National Cycle Route 4 , with one of Britain 's first cycleways , the Bristol and Bath Railway Path , to the west , and an eastern route toward London on the canal towpath . Bath is about 20 miles ( 30 km ) from Bristol Airport . 
 Bath is served by the Bath Spa railway station ( designed by Isambard Kingdom Brunel ) , which has regular connections to London Paddington , Bristol Temple Meads , Cardiff Central , Cheltenham , Exeter , Plymouth and Penzance ( see Great Western Main Line ) , and also Westbury , Warminster , Salisbury , Southampton , Portsmouth and Brighton ( see Wessex Main Line ) . Services are provided by First Great Western . There is a suburban station on the main line , Oldfield Park , which has a limited commuter service to Bristol as well as other destinations . Green Park Station was once the terminus of the Midland Railway , and junction for the Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway , whose line , always steam hauled , went under Bear Flat through the Combe Down Tunnel and climbed over the Mendips to serve many towns and villages on its 71 @-@ mile ( 114 km ) run to Bournemouth . This example of an English rural line was closed by Beeching in March 1966 . Its Bath station building , now restored , houses shops , small businesses , the Saturday Bath Farmers Market and parking for a supermarket , while the route of the Somerset and Dorset within Bath has been reused for the Two Tunnels Greenway , a shared use path that extends National Cycle Route 24 into the city . 
 The Bath Tramways Company was introduced in the late 19th century , opening on 24 December 1880 . The 4 ft ( 1 @,@ 219 mm ) gauge cars were horse @-@ drawn along a route from London Road to the Bath Spa railway station , but the system closed in 1902 . It was replaced by electric tram cars on a greatly expanded 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) gauge system that opened in 1904 . This eventually extended to 18 miles ( 29 km ) with routes to Combe Down , Oldfield Park , Twerton , Newton St Loe , Weston and Bathford . There was a fleet of 40 cars , all but 6 being double deck . The first line to close was replaced by a bus service in 1938 , and the last went on 6 May 1939 . In 2005 a detailed plan was created and presented to the Council to re @-@ introduce trams to Bath , but the plan did not proceed , reportedly due to the focus by the Council on the government @-@ supported busway planned to run from the Newbridge park and ride into the city centre . Part of the justification for the proposed tram re @-@ introduction plan was the pollution from vehicles within the city was twice the legal levels , and the heavy traffic congestion due to high car usage . 
 A transportation study ( the Bristol / Bath to South Coast Study ) was published in 2004 after being initiated by the Government Office for the South West and Bath and North East Somerset Council . It was undertaken by <unk> Global as a result of the de @-@ trunking in 1999 of the A36 / <unk> trunk road network from Bath to Southampton . 
 = = Media = = 
 Bath 's local newspaper is the Bath Chronicle , owned by Local World . Published since 1760 , the Chronicle was a daily newspaper until mid @-@ September 2007 , when it became a weekly . 
 The BBC Somerset website has featured coverage of news and events within Bath since 2003 . 
 For television , Bath is served by the BBC West studios based in Bristol , and by ITV West ( formerly HTV ) with studios similarly in Bristol . 
 Radio stations broadcasting to the city include The Breeze on <unk> and Heart West Country ( formerly GWR FM ) as well as The University of Bath 's University Radio Bath , a student @-@ focused radio station available on campus and also online , and Classic Gold 1260 , a networked commercial radio station with local programmes . 
 Bath is sometimes covered by Bristol 's local media , including Bristol Live Magazine . 
 = Grumman XSBF = 
 The Grumman XSBF , also known by the company designation G @-@ 14 , was an American biplane scout bomber developed by Grumman Aircraft for the United States Navy during the 1930s . Derived from Grumman 's successful " Fifi " fighter , the aircraft was developed at a time when the biplane was giving way to the monoplane . In competition against other aircraft it proved to possess inferior performance in its intended role , and did not enter production . The sole prototype went on to serve as a liaison aircraft , as well as being used in experiments by NACA , before being destroyed in a crash in 1939 . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 In late 1934 , the U.S. Navy 's Bureau of Aeronautics ( BuAer ) issued a specification for new scout bomber and torpedo bomber designs . Eight companies submitted 10 designs in response , evenly split between monoplanes and biplanes . Grumman , having successfully provided the FF and F2F fighters to the Navy , along with the SF scout , submitted an advanced development of the SF @-@ 2 in response to the specification 's request for a 5 @,@ 000 lb ( 2 @,@ 300 kg ) aircraft capable of carrying a 500 lb ( 230 kg ) bomb . Given the model number G @-@ 14 by Grumman , the aircraft received the official designation XSBF @-@ 1 by the Navy , and a contract for a single prototype was issued in March 1935 . 
 The XSBF @-@ 1 was a two @-@ seat biplane , featuring an enclosed cockpit , a fuselage of all @-@ metal construction , and wings covered largely with fabric . Power was provided by a 650 hp ( 480 kW ) Pratt & Whitney R @-@ 1535 Twin Wasp Junior air @-@ cooled radial engine driving with a variable @-@ pitch propeller . Armament was planned to be two .30 in ( 7 @.@ 62 mm ) forward @-@ firing M1919 Browning machine guns , one of which could be replaced by a .50 in ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) M2 Browning ; the prototype carried only a single gun . A single .30 in weapon was fitted in the rear cockpit for defense , and one 500 lb ( 230 kg ) bomb to be carried in a launching cradle under the fuselage . The arrestor hook was carried in a fully enclosed position , while flotation bags were fitted in the wings in case the aircraft was forced to ditch . The landing gear of the XSBF @-@ 1 was similar to that of the F3F fighter . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 The XSBF @-@ 1 — piloted by test pilot Bud Gillies — flew for the first time on December 24 , 1935 . Following initial testing , which found the aircraft to be reasonably faultless , the XSBF @-@ 1 was delivered to the U.S. Navy for evaluation in competition with two other biplanes submitted to the 1934 specification , the Great Lakes <unk> and the Curtiss <unk> @-@ 3 . Unusually for biplanes , all three types possessed retractable landing gear . The evaluation showed that the design from Curtiss was superior to the Grumman and Great Lakes designs , and an order was placed for the Curtiss type , designated SBC @-@ 3 Helldiver in service , in August 1936 . 
 With the competition lost , the development of the XSBF @-@ 1 came to an end ; the sole prototype was assigned to Naval Air Station Anacostia , where it had been tested , for use as a liaison aircraft and hack . In addition , the XSBF was used by the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics ' Langley Research Laboratory as part of the facility 's work on aeronautical research . During its time at Anacostia , the aircraft was involved in three accidents , one each in 1937 , 1938 and 1939 ; after the first two accidents , it was repaired . The third accident — on May 25 , 1939 — resulted in the death of the pilot ; the XSBF @-@ 1 was no longer considered worth returning to flight status , and the aircraft was officially stricken from the Navy inventory in July 1939 . 
 The <unk> @-@ 1 designation , unusually , was re @-@ used by the Navy during World War II , assigned to SB2C Helldivers produced under license by Fairchild Aircraft . 
 = = Operators = = 
 United States 
 United States Navy 
 = = Specifications ( XSBF @-@ 1 ) = = 
 Data from 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 2 ( pilot and observer ) 
 Length : 25 ft 9 in ( 7 @.@ 85 m ) 
 Upper wingspan : 34 ft 6 in ( 10 @.@ 52 m ) 
 Lower wingspan : 31 ft 6 in ( 9 @.@ 60 m ) 
 Height : 11 ft 3 in ( 3 @.@ 43 m ) 
 Wing area : 310 sq ft ( 29 m2 ) 
 Airfoil : Clark <unk> 
 Empty weight : 3 @,@ 395 lb ( 1 @,@ 540 kg ) 
 Gross weight : 5 @,@ 002 lb ( 2 @,@ 269 kg ) 
 Fuel capacity : 130 US gal ( 490 l ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Pratt & Whitney R @-@ 1535 @-@ 72 Twin Wasp Junior radial engine , 650 hp ( 480 kW ) 
 Propellers : 2 @-@ bladed Hamilton Standard variable @-@ pitch 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 215 mph ( 346 km / h ; 187 kn ) 
 Stall speed : 67 mph ( 58 kn ; 108 km / h ) 
 Range : 525 mi ( 456 nmi ; 845 km ) 
 Combat range : 688 mi ( 598 nmi ; 1 @,@ 107 km ) 
 Service ceiling : 26 @,@ 000 ft ( 7 @,@ 925 m ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : 
 1 × .30 in ( 7 @.@ 62 mm ) machine gun in cowling 
 1 × .30 in machine gun in rear cockpit 
 Bombs : Up to 500 pounds ( 230 kg ) 
 = Pont @-@ y @-@ Cafnau = 
 The Pont @-@ y @-@ Cafnau ( English : Bridge of Troughs ) , sometimes written Pont y Cafnau or <unk> , is a 14 @.@ 2 @-@ metre ( 47 ft ) long iron truss bridge over the River Taff in Merthyr Tydfil , Wales . The bridge was designed by Watkin George and built in 1793 for his employer , the Cyfarthfa Ironworks , to support both a tramway and an aqueduct to carry limestone and water into the works . A Grade II * listed building and Scheduled Ancient Monument , the Pont @-@ y @-@ Cafnau is the world 's earliest surviving iron railway bridge . 
 = = History = = 
 The Cyfarthfa Ironworks were founded in 1765 and grew to the world 's largest ironworks by the early 19th century . In 1771 , the works obtained the right to quarry limestone from the <unk> Quarry for use in the works ' blast furnaces , and a 4 ft ( 1 @,@ 219 mm ) gauge tramway was built between 1792 and 1793 to carry the limestone from the quarry into the plant . Pont @-@ y @-@ Cafnau is situated shortly downstream of the confluence of the Taff Fawr and the Taff Fechan to form the Taff . A weir had previously been built upstream of the plant on each river , and leats were built to convey water into the works . The leat from the Taff Fawr was conveyed in a cast iron elevated aqueduct which ran along the north bank and crossed the Taff Fechan before crossing the Taff at Pont @-@ y @-@ Cafnau and entering the works to power a 50 @-@ foot cast iron water wheel known as Aeolus . The leat from Taff Fechan was at ground level and again crossed the Taff at Pont @-@ y @-@ Cafnau . This supplied water to the Cyfarthfa brick works . The three levels of Pont @-@ y @-@ Cafnau thus carried the elevated Taff Fawr leat , the tramway and Taff Fechan leat across the Taff River . The bridge was built between January and June 1793 , replacing a previous wooden structure , and is the world 's oldest known iron railway bridge . The elevated trough carrying the Taff Fawr leat was removed by 1850 , having been replaced by a leat along the south bank of that river . 
 = = Design = = 
 The present bridge was designed by Watkin George . George had been trained as a carpenter , but in 1792 became the chief engineer of the ironworks and a partner in the business . The bridge is composed of two cast iron A @-@ frame trusses supporting a rectangular 2 @-@ foot by 6 @-@ foot @-@ 2 @-@ inch cast iron trough . This lower trough carried the Taff Fechan leat and acts as a girder supporting the plates acting as the railway sleepers , into which the rail chairs are integrally cast . Wooden uprights were attached to the iron risers that passed through the apex of each of the A @-@ frames and these supported the upper trough carrying the Taff Fawr leat . Reflecting its designer 's roots in carpentry , the members composing the trusses are joined by dovetail and mortise and tenon joints commonly used in wooden structures . 
 = = Heritage = = 
 On 22 August 1975 , the bridge was listed as a Grade II * listed building ( reference number <unk> ) . It is also listed as a Scheduled Ancient Monument ( reference number <unk> ) . It has been refurbished by the local authority and is used as a footbridge . 
 = The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari = 
 The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari ( German : Das Cabinet des Dr. Caligari ) is a 1920 German silent horror film , directed by Robert Wiene and written by Hans Janowitz and Carl Mayer . Considered the quintessential work of German Expressionist cinema , it tells the story of an insane hypnotist ( Werner Krauss ) who uses a somnambulist ( Conrad Veidt ) to commit murders . The film features a dark and twisted visual style , with sharp @-@ pointed forms , oblique and curving lines , structures and landscapes that lean and twist in unusual angles , and shadows and streaks of light painted directly onto the sets . 
 The script was inspired by various experiences from the lives of Janowitz and Mayer , both pacifists who were left distrustful of authority after their experiences with the military during World War I. The film 's design was handled by Hermann Warm , Walter Reimann and Walter Röhrig , who recommended a fantastic , graphic style over a naturalistic one . 
 The film thematizes brutal and irrational authority ; Dr. Caligari represents the German war government , and Cesare is symbolic of the common man conditioned , like soldiers , to kill . In his influential book From Caligari to Hitler , Siegfried Kracauer says the film reflects a subconscious need in German society for a tyrant , and is an example of Germany 's obedience to authority and unwillingness to rebel against deranged authority . He says the film is a premonition of the rise of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party , and says the addition of the frame story turns an otherwise " revolutionary " film into a " <unk> " one . Other themes of the film include the destabilized contrast between insanity and sanity , the subjective perception of reality , and the duality of human nature . 
 The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari was released just as foreign film industries were easing restrictions on the import of German films following World War I , so it was screened internationally . Accounts differ as to its financial and critical success upon release , but modern film critics and historians have largely praised it as a revolutionary film . Critic Roger Ebert called it arguably " the first true horror film " , and film reviewer Danny Peary called it cinema 's first cult film and a precursor to arthouse films . Considered a classic , it helped draw worldwide attention to the artistic merit of German cinema and had a major influence on American films , particularly in the genres of horror and film noir . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As Francis ( Friedrich Feher ) sits on a bench with an older man who complains that spirits have driven him away from his family and home , a dazed woman named Jane ( Lil Dagover ) passes them . Francis explains she is his " fiancée " and that they have suffered a great ordeal . Most of the rest of the film is a flashback of Francis ' story , which takes place in Holstenwall , a shadowy village of twisted buildings and spiraling streets . Francis and his friend Alan ( Hans Heinrich von Twardowski ) , who are good @-@ naturedly competing for Jane 's affections , plan to visit the town fair . Meanwhile , a mysterious man named Dr. Caligari ( Werner Krauss ) seeks a permit from the rude town clerk to present a spectacle at the fair , which features a somnambulist named Cesare ( Conrad Veidt ) . The clerk mocks and berates Dr. Caligari , but ultimately approves the permit . That night , the clerk is found stabbed to death in his bed . 
 The next morning , Francis and Alan visit Dr. Caligari 's spectacle , where he opens a coffin @-@ like box to reveal the sleeping Cesare . Upon Dr. Caligari 's orders , Cesare awakens and answers questions from the audience . Despite Francis ' protests , Alan asks " How long will I live ? " . To Alan 's horror , Cesare answers , " Until dawn . " Later that night , a figure breaks into Alan 's home and stabs him to death in his bed . A grief @-@ stricken Francis investigates Alan 's murder with help from Jane and her father , Dr. Olsen ( Rudolf <unk> ) , who obtains police authorization to investigate the somnambulist . That night , the police apprehend a criminal ( Rudolf Klein @-@ Rogge ) with a knife who is caught attempting to murder an elderly woman . When questioned by Francis and Dr. Olson , the criminal confesses he tried to kill the elderly woman , but denies any part in the two deaths ; he was only trying to divert blame onto the murderer . 
 At night , Francis spies on Dr. Caligari , and observes what appears to be Cesare sleeping in his box . However , the real Cesare sneaks into Jane 's home as she sleeps . He raises a knife to stab her , but instead abducts her after a struggle , dragging her through the window onto the street . Chased by an angry mob , Cesare eventually drops Jane and flees , but collapses and dies . Francis also confirms the criminal has been locked away and could not have been involved in the abduction . Francis and the police investigate Dr. Caligari 's sideshow and realize the Cesare that appears to lie sleeping in the box is only a dummy . Dr. Caligari escapes in the confusion , but Francis follows him to an insane asylum . 
 Upon further investigation , Francis is shocked to learn that Dr. Caligari is the asylum 's director . With help from the asylum staff , Francis studies the director 's records and diary while the director is sleeping . The writings reveal his obsession with the story of an 18th @-@ century mystic named Caligari , who used a somnambulist named Cesare to commit murders in northern Italian towns . The director , in his determination to understand the earlier Caligari , experiments on a somnambulist admitted to the asylum , who becomes his Cesare . The director screams " I must become Caligari ! " . Francis and the doctors call the police to Dr. Caligari 's office , where they show him Cesare 's corpse . Dr. Caligari then attacks one of the staff . He is restrained in a straitjacket and becomes an inmate in his own asylum . 
 The narrative returns to the present , where Francis concludes his story . In a twist ending , however , it is revealed that Francis is actually an asylum inmate . Jane and Cesare are patients as well , but Jane believes she is a queen , and Cesare is alive . The man Francis believes is Dr. Caligari is actually the asylum director . Francis attacks him , but is restrained in a straitjacket and placed in the same cell Dr. Caligari was confined to in his story . The director announces that , now that he understands Francis ' delusion , he is confident he can cure him . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Werner Krauss as Dr. Caligari 
 Conrad Veidt as Cesare 
 Friedrich Feher as Francis 
 Lil Dagover as Jane 
 Hans Heinrich von Twardowski as Alan 
 Rudolf <unk> as Dr. Olsen 
 Hans <unk> @-@ <unk> as Old Man on Bench 
 Henri Peters @-@ Arnolds as Young Doctor 
 Ludwig Rex as Criminal 
 Elsa Wagner as Landlady 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari was written by Hans Janowitz and Carl Mayer , both of whom were pacifists by the time they met following World War I. Janowitz served as an officer during the war , but the experience left him embittered with the military , which affected his writing . Mayer feigned madness to avoid military service during the war , which led him to intense examinations from a military psychiatrist . The experience left him distrustful of authority , and the psychiatrist served as a model for the Dr. Caligari character . Janowitz and Mayer were introduced in June 1918 by a mutual friend , actor Ernst Deutsch . Both writers were penniless at the time . Gilda Langer , an actress with whom Mayer was in love , encouraged Janowitz and Mayer to write a film together . She later became the basis for the Jane character . Langer also encouraged Janowitz to visit a fortune teller , who predicted that Janowitz would survive his military service during the war , but Langer would die . This prediction proved true , as Langer died unexpectedly in 1920 , and Janowitz said it inspired the scene in which Cesare predicts Alan 's death at the fair . 
 Although neither had any associations the film industry , Janowitz and Mayer wrote a script over six weeks during the winter of 1918 – 19 . In describing their roles , Janowitz called himself " the father who planted the seed , and Mayer the mother who conceived and ripened it " . The Expressionist filmmaker Paul Wegener was among their influences . The story was partially inspired by a circus sideshow the two visited on <unk> in Berlin , called " Man or Machine ? " , in which a man performed feats of great strength after becoming hypnotized . They first visualized the story of Caligari the night of that show . Several of Janowitz 's past experiences influenced his writing , including memories of his hometown of Prague , and , as he put it , a mistrust of " the authoritative power of an inhuman state gone mad " due to his military service . Janowitz also believed he had witnessed a murder in 1913 near an amusement park on Hamburg 's Reeperbahn , beside the Holstenwall , which served as another inspiration for the script . According to Janowitz , he observed a woman disappear into some bushes , from which a respectable @-@ looking man emerged a few moments later , and the next day Janowitz learned the girl was murdered . Holstenwall later became the name of the town setting in Caligari . 
 Janowitz and Mayer are said to have set out to write a story denouncing arbitrary authority as brutal and insane . Janowitz said it was only years after the film was released that he realized exposing the " authoritative power of an inhuman state " was the " subconscious intention " of the writers . However , Hermann Warm , who designed the film 's sets , said Mayer had no political intentions when he wrote the film . Film historian David Robinson noted Janowitz did not refer to anti @-@ authority intentions in the script until many decades after Caligari was released , and he suggested Janowitz 's recollection may have changed in response to later interpretations to the film . The film they wrote was entitled Das Cabinet des Dr. Caligari , using the English spelling " Cabinet " rather than the German " Kabinett " . The completed script contained 141 scenes . Janowitz has claimed the name " Caligari " , which was not settled upon until after the script was finished , was inspired by a rare book called ‘ ’ Unknown Letters of Stendhal ' ’ , which featured a letter from the French novelist Stendhal referring to a French officer named Caligari he met at the La Scala theatre in Milan . However , no record of any such letter exists , and film historian John D. Barlow suggested Janowitz may have fabricated the story . The physical appearance of Dr. Caligari was inspired by portraits of the German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer . The character 's name is spelled " <unk> " in the only known surviving script , although in some instances the final " s " is removed . Other character names are also spelled differently from the final film : Cesare appears as " <unk> " , Alan is " Allan " or sometimes " Alland " and Dr. <unk> is " Dr. <unk> " . Likewise , unnamed characters in the final film have names in the script , including the town clerk ( " Dr. Lüders " ) and the house @-@ breaker ( " Jakob Straat " ) . 
 The story of Caligari is told abstractly , like a fairy tale , and includes little description about or attention toward the psychological motivations of the characters , which is more heavily emphasized in the film 's visual style . The original script shows few traces of the Expressionist influence prevalent in the film 's sets and costumes . Through film director Fritz Lang , Janowitz and Mayer met with Erich Pommer , head of production at the Decla @-@ <unk> film studio , on 19 April 1919 , to discuss selling the script . According to Pommer , he attempted to get rid of them , but they persisted until he agreed to meet with them . Pommer reportedly asked the writers to leave the script with him , but they refused , and instead Mayer read it aloud to him . Pommer and his assistant , Julius <unk> , were so impressed that he refused to let them leave until a contract was signed , and he purchased the script from them that night . The writers had originally sought no fewer than 10 @,@ 000 marks , but were given 3 @,@ 500 , with the promise of another 2 @,@ 000 once the film went into production and 500 if it was sold for foreign release , which the producers considered unlikely . The contract , today preserved at Berlin 's <unk> , gave Pommer the right to make any changes to the script deemed appropriate . Pommer said he was drawn to the script because he believed it could be filmed inexpensively , and it bore similarities to films inspired by the macabre horror shows of the Grand Guignol theatre in Paris , which were popular at the time . Pommer later said : " They saw in the script an ' experiment ' . I saw a relatively cheap film " . 
 = = = = Frame story = = = = 
 The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari makes use of a " <unk> " , or frame story . Both a prologue and epilogue establish the main body of the film as a flashback , an innovative technique at the time . Lang has said that , during early discussions about his possible involvement with the film , he suggested the addition of an opening scene with a " normal " style , which would lead the public into the rest of the film without confusion . However , it remains unclear whether Lang suggested the frame story structure itself , or simply gave advice on how to write a frame story that was already agreed upon , and some writers , like David Robinson , have questioned whether Lang 's recollection is correct . Director Robert Wiene was supportive of the changes . Janowitz has claimed he and Mayer were not privy to discussions about adding the frame story and strongly opposed its inclusion , believing it had deprived the film of its revolutionary and political significance ; he wrote that it was " an illicit violation , a raping of our work " that turned the film " into a cliché ... in which the symbolism was to be lost " . Janowitz claims the writers sought legal action to stop the change , but were unsuccessful . He also claims they did not see the finished film with the frame story until a preview was shown to studio heads , after which the writers " expressed our dissatisfaction in a storm of thunderous remonstrances " . They had to be persuaded not to publicly protest the film . 
 In his 1947 book From Caligari to Hitler , Siegfried Kracauer argued , based largely on an unpublished typescript written and provided by Janowitz , that the film originally included no frame story at all and only the main story , starting with the fair coming to town and ending with Dr. Caligari becoming institutionalized . Kracauer argued the frame story glorified authority and was added to turn a " revolutionary " film into a " <unk> " one . ( See the Themes section for more . ) No surviving copies of the script were believed to exist to confirm this fact , until the early 1950s when actor Werner Krauss revealed he still had his copy . Krauss refused to part with it , and it was not until 1978 , after his death , that it was purchased by the German film archive Deutsche <unk> . It remained unavailable for public consumption until 1995 , when a full transcript was published . 
 The script revealed that a frame story indeed was part of the original Caligari screenplay , albeit a significantly different one than that in the final film . The original manuscript opens on an elegant terrace of a large villa , where Francis and Jane are hosting a party , and the guests insist that Francis tell them a story that happened to him 20 years earlier . The conclusion to the frame story is missing from the script . Critics widely agree that the discovery of the screenplay strongly undermines Kracauer 's theory , with some , like German film historian Stephen Brockmann , even arguing it disproves his claims altogether . Others , however , like John D. Barlow , argues it does not completely settle the issue , as the original screenplay 's frame story simply serves to introduce the main plot , rather than subvert it as the final film 's version does . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Many details about the making of The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari are in dispute and will probably remain unsettled due to the large number of people involved in the making of the film , many of whom have recalled it differently or dramatized their own contributions to its production . Production of the film was delayed about four or five months after the script was purchased . Pommer originally chose Lang as the director of Caligari , and Lang even went so far as to hold preparatory discussions about the script with Janowitz , but he became unavailable due to his involvement with the filming of The Spiders , so Wiene was selected instead . According to Janowitz , Wiene 's father , a successful theatre actor , had " gone slightly mad when he could no longer appear on the stage " , and Janowitz believed that experience helped Wiene bring an " intimate understanding " to the source material of Caligari . 
 Decla producer Rudolf Meinert introduced Hermann Warm to Wiene and provided Warm the Caligari script , asking him to come up with proposals for the design . Warm believed " films must be drawings brought to life " , and felt a naturalistic set was wrong for the subject of the film , instead recommending a fantastic , graphic style , in which the images would be visionary , nightmarish and out of the ordinary . Warm brought to the project his two friends , painters and stage designers Walter Reimann and Walter Röhrig , both of whom were associated with the Berlin art and literary magazine Der Sturm . The trio spent a full day and part of the night reading the script , after which Reimann suggested an Expressionist style , a style often used in his own paintings . They also conceived the idea of painting forms and shadows directly onto the sets to ensure a dark and unreal look . ( See Visual Style for more . ) According to Warm , the three approached Wiene with the idea and he immediately agreed , although Wiene has made claims that he conceived the film 's Expressionist style . Meinert agreed to the idea after one day 's consideration , telling Warm , Reimann and Röhrig to make the sets as " crazy " and " eccentrically " as possible . He embraced the idea for commercial , not aesthetic reasons : Expressionism was fashionable at the time , so he concluded even if film received bad reviews , the artistic style would garner attention and make it profitable . 
 Wiene filmed a test scene to demonstrate Warm , Reimann , and Röhrig 's theories , and it so impressed the producers that the artists were given free rein . Pommer later said he was responsible for placing Warm , Reimann and Röhrig in charge of the sets . But Warm has claimed that , although Pommer was in charge of production at Decla when Caligari was made , he was not actually a producer on the film itself . Instead , he says Meinert was the film 's true producer , and that it was he who gave Warm the manuscript . Warm claimed Meinert produced the film " despite the opposition of a part of the management of Decla . " Meinert said Pommer had " not sanctioned " the film 's abstract visual style . Nevertheless , Pommer claimed to have supervised Caligari , and that the film 's Expressionistic style was chosen in part to differentiate it from competing Hollywood films . The predominant attitude at the time was that artistic achievement led to success in exports to foreign film markets . The dominance of Hollywood at the time , coupled with a period of inflation and currency devaluation , forced German film studios to seek projects that could be made inexpensively , with a combination of realistic and artistic elements so the films would be accessible to American audiences , yet also distinctive from Hollywood films . Pommer has claimed while Mayer and Janowitz expressed a desire for artistic experimentation in the film , his decision to use painted canvases as scenery was primarily a commercial one , as they would be a significant financial saving over building sets . 
 Janowitz claims he attempted to commission the sets from designer and engraver Alfred Kubin , known for his heavy use of light and shadow to create a sense of chaos , but Kubin declined to participate in the project because he was too busy . In a conflicting story , however , Janowitz claimed he requested from Decla " Kubin paintings " , and that they misread his instructions as " cubist painters " and hired Reimann and Röhrig as a result . David Robinson argues this story was probably an embellishment stemming from Janowitz 's disdain for the two artists . Janowitz has claimed that he and Mayer conceived the idea of painting the sets on canvas , and that the shooting script included written directions that the scenery be designed in Kubin 's style . However , the later rediscovery of the original screenplay refutes this claim , as it includes no such directions about the sets . This was also disputed in a 1926 article by Barnet Braverman in Billboard magazine , which claimed the script included no mention of an unconventional visual style , and that Janowitz and Mayer in fact strongly opposed the stylization . She claims Mayer later came to appreciate the visual style , but that Janowitz remained opposed to it years after the film 's release . 
 The set design , costumes and props took about two weeks to prepare . Warm worked primarily on the sets , while Röhrig handled the painting and Reimann was responsible for the costumes . Robinson noted the costumes in Caligari seem to resemble a wide variety of time periods . For example , Dr. Caligari and the fairground workers ' costumes resemble the Biedermeier era , while Jane 's embody Romanticism . Additionally , Robinson wrote , Cesare 's costume and those of policemen in the film appear abstract , while many of the other characters seem like ordinary German clothes from the 1920s . The collaborative nature of the film 's production highlights the importance that both screenwriters and set designers held in German cinema of the 1920s , although film critic Lotte H. Eisner said sets held more importance than anything else in German films at that time . The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari was the first German Expressionist film , although Brockmann and film critic Mike Budd claims it was also influenced by German Romanticism ; Budd notes the film 's themes of insanity and the outcry against authority are common among German Romanticism in literature , theatre and the visual arts . Film scholar Vincent LoBrutto said the theatre of Max Reinhardt and the artistic style of Die Brücke were additional influences on Caligari . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Janowitz originally intended the part of Cesare to go to his friend , actor Ernst Deutsch . Mayer wrote the part of Jane for Gilda Langer , but by the time the film was cast Langer 's interests had moved on from Janowitz and Mayer to director Paul Czinner , leaving the role to be played by Lil Dagover . Janowitz claimed he wrote the part of Dr. Caligari specifically for Werner Krauss , who Deutsch had brought to his attention during rehearsals for a Max Reinhardt play ; Janowitz said only Krauss or Paul Wegener could have played the part . The parts of Dr. Caligari and Cesare ultimately went to Krauss and Conrad Veidt , respectively , who enthusiastically took part in many aspects of the production . Krauss suggested changes to his own make @-@ up and costumes , including the elements of a top hat , cape , and walking stick with an ivory handle for his character . The actors in Caligari were conscious of the need to adapt their make @-@ up , costumes , and appearance to match the visual style of the film . Much of the acting in German silent films at the time was already Expressionistic , mimicking the pantomimic aspects of Expressionist theatre . The performances of Krauss and Veidt in Caligari were typical of this style , as they both had experience in Expressionist @-@ influenced theatre , and as a result John D. Barlow said they appear more comfortable in their surroundings in the film than the other actors . Prior to filming , Kraus and Veidt appeared on stage in the winter of 1918 in an Expressionist drama , Reinhold Goering 's <unk> , at the Deutsches Theater . By contrast , Dagover had little experience in Expressionist theatre , and Barlow argues her acting is less harmonious with the film 's visual style . 
 Wiene asked the actors to make movements similar to dance , most prominently from Veidt , but also from Krauss , Dagover and Friedrich <unk> , who played Francis . Krauss and Veidt are the only actors whose performances fully match the stylization of the sets , which they achieved by concentrating their movements and facial expressions . Barlow notes that " Veidt moves along the wall as if it had ' exuded ' him ... more a part of a material world of objects than a human one " , and Krauss " moves with angular viciousness , his gestures seem broken or cracked by the obsessive force within him , a force that seems to emerge from a constant toxic state , a twisted authoritarianism of no human scruple and total insensibility " . Most of the other actors besides Krauss and Veidt have a more naturalistic style . Alan , Jane and Francis play the roles of an <unk> happy trio enjoying youth ; Alan in particular represents the archetype of a sensitive 19th century student . Mike Budd points out realist characters in stylized settings are a common characteristic in Expressionist theatre . However , David Robinson notes even the performances of the more naturalistic supporting roles in Caligari have Expressionist elements , like Hans @-@ Heinz von Twardowski 's " strange , tormented face " as Alan . He also cites Feher 's " large angular movements , " especially in the scene where he searches the deserted fairground . Other minor roles are Expressionistic in nature , like two policemen who sit facing each other at their desks and move with exaggerated symmetry , and two servants who awaken and rise from their beds in perfect synchronization . Vincent LoBrutto said of the acting in the film : 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Shooting for The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari began at the end of December 1919 and concluded at the end of January 1920 . It was shot entirely in a studio without any exterior shots , which was unusual for films of the time , but dictated by the decision to give the film an Expressionist visual style . The extent to which Mayer and Janowitz participated during filming is disputed : Janowitz claims the duo repeatedly refused to allow any script changes during production , and Pommer claimed Mayer was on the set for every day of filming . But Hermann Warm claimed they were never present for any of the shooting or involved in any discussions during production . 
 Caligari was filmed in the <unk> @-@ Atelier film studio ( formerly owned by Continental @-@ <unk> ) at 9 Franz Joseph @-@ Strasse ( now Max <unk> ) , <unk> , a north @-@ eastern suburb of Berlin . Decla had been making films at the <unk> studio since October 1919 , having previously released three titles , Die Pest in Florenz ( 1919 ) and the two parts of Fritz Lang 's The Spiders ( Die <unk> ) . The relatively small size of the studio ( built some five years earlier in 1914 ) meant most of the sets used in the film do not exceed six meters in width and depth . Certain elements from the original script had to be cut from the film due to the limited space , including a procession of gypsies , a handcart pushed by Dr. Caligari , Jane 's carriage , and a chase scene involving horse @-@ cabs . Likewise , the script called for a fairground scene with roundabouts , barrel organs , sideshow <unk> , performers and menageries , none of which could be achieved in the restrictive space . Instead , the scenes use a painting of the Holstenwall town as a background ; throngs of people walk around two spinning merry @-@ go @-@ round props , which creates the impression of a carnival . The script also made references to modern elements like telephones , telegrams and electric light , but they were eliminated during the filming , leaving the final film 's setting with no indication of a specific time period . 
 Several scenes from the script were cut during filming , most of which were brief time lapses or transitioning scenes , or title screens deemed unnecessary . One of the more substantial scenes to be cut involved the ghost of Alan at a cemetery . The scene with the town clerk berating Dr. Caligari deviated notably from the original script , which simply called for the clerk to be " impatient " . He is far more abusive in the scene as it was filmed , and is perched atop an exaggeratedly high bench that towers over Dr. Caligari . Another deviation from the script comes when Dr. Caligari first awakens Cesare , one of the most famous moments in the film . The script called for Cesare to gasp and struggle for air , then shake violently and collapse in Dr. Caligari 's arms . As it was filmed , there is no such physical struggling , and instead the camera zooms in on Cesare 's face as he gradually opens his eyes . The original title cards for Caligari featured stylized , misshapen lettering with excessive <unk> , exclamation points and occasionally archaic spellings . The bizarre style , which matches that of the film as a whole , mimics the lettering of Expressionistic posters at the time . The original title cards were tinted in green , steely @-@ blue and brown . Many modern prints of the film do not preserve the original lettering . 
 Photography was provided by Willy <unk> , who went on to work with Wiene on several other films . The camera does not play a large part in Caligari , and is used primarily to show the sets . The cinematography tends to alternate only between medium shots at straight @-@ on angles and abrupt close @-@ ups to create a sense of shock , but with few long shots or panning movement . Likewise , there is very little <unk> editing . Most scenes follow the other without intercutting , which gives Caligari a more theatrical feel than a cinematic one . Heavy lighting is typically absent from the film , heightening the sense of darkness prevalent in the story . However , lighting is occasionally used to intensify the uneasiness created by the distortions of the sets . For example , when Cesare first awakens at the fair , a light is shone directly on a close @-@ up of his heavily made @-@ up face to create an unsettling glow . Additionally , lighting is used in a then @-@ innovative way to cast a shadow against the wall during the scene in which Cesare kills Alan , so the viewer sees only the shadow and not the figures themselves . Lighting techniques like this became frequently used in later German films . 
 = = Visual style = = 
 The visual style of The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari is dark , twisted and bizarre ; radical and deliberate distortions in perspective , form , dimension and scale create a chaotic and unhinged appearance . The sets are dominated by sharp @-@ pointed forms and oblique and curving lines , with narrow and spiraling streets , and structures and landscapes that lean and twist in unusual angles , giving the impression they could collapse or explode at any given moment . Film critic Roger Ebert described it as " a jagged landscape of sharp angles and tilted walls and windows , staircases climbing crazy diagonals , trees with spiky leaves , grass that looks like knives " . The sets are characterized by strokes of bold , black paint . The landscape of Holstenwall is painted on canvas , as opposed to a constructed set , and shadows and streaks of light are painted directly onto the sets , further distorting the viewer 's sense of perspective and three @-@ dimensionality . Buildings are clustered and interconnected in a cubist @-@ like architecture , surrounded by dark and twisted back alleys . Lotte Eisner , author of The Haunted Screen , writes that objects in the film appear as if they are coming alive and " seem to vibrate with an extraordinary spirituality " . Likewise , <unk> und Film writer Rudolf Kurtz wrote " the dynamic force of objects howls their desire to be created " . The rooms have radically offset windows with distorted frames , doors that are not squared , and chairs that are too tall . Strange designs and figures are painted on the walls of corridors and rooms , and trees outside have twisted branches that sometimes resemble tentacles . 
 As German film professor Anton Kaes wrote , " The style of German Expressionism allowed the filmmakers to experiment with filmic technology and special effects and to explore the twisted realm of repressed desires , unconscious fears , and deranged fixations " . The visual style of Caligari conveys a sense of anxiety and terror to the viewer , giving the impression of a nightmare or deranged sensibility , or a place transformed by evil , in a more effective way than realistic locations or conventional design concepts could . Siegfried Kracauer wrote that the settings " amounted to a perfect transformation of material objects into emotional ornaments " . The majority of the film 's story and scenes are memories recalled by an insane narrator , and as a result the distorted visual style takes on the quality of his mental breakdown , giving the viewers the impression that they are inside the mind of a madman . As with German Expressionist paintings , the visual style of Caligari reflects an emotional reaction to world , and in the case of the film 's characters represents an emotional response to the terror of society that Dr. Caligari and Cesare represent . Often in the film , set pieces are emblematic of the emotional state of the characters in the scene . For example , the courtyard of the insane asylum during the frame story is vastly out of proportion . The characters seem too big for the small building , and the courtyard floor features a bizarre pattern , all of which represent the patients ' damaged frames of mind . Likewise , the scene with the criminal in a prison cell features a set with long vertical painted shadows resembling arrowheads , pointing down at the squatting prisoner in an oppressive effect that symbolizes his broken @-@ down state . 
 Stephen Brockmann argues the fact that Caligari was filmed entirely in a studio enhances the madness portrayed by the film 's visuals because " there is no access to a natural world beyond the realm of the tortured human psyche " . The sets occasionally feature circular images that reflect the chaos of the film , presenting patterns of movement that seem to be going nowhere , such as the merry @-@ go @-@ round at the fair , moving at a titled angle that makes it appear at risk of collapsing . Other elements of the film convey the same visual motifs as the sets , including the costumes and make @-@ up design for Dr. Caligari and Cesare , both of which are highly exaggerated and grotesque . Even the hair of the characters is an Expressionistic design element , especially Cesare 's black , spiky , jagged locks . They are the only two characters in the film with Expressionistic make @-@ up and costumes , making them appear as if they are the only ones who truly belong in this distorted world . Despite their apparent normalcy , however , Francis and the other characters never appear disturbed by the madness around them reflected in the sets ; they instead react as if they are parts of a normal background . 
 A select few scenes disrupt the Expressionistic style of the film , such as in Jane 's and Alan 's home , which include normal backgrounds and bourgeois furniture that convey a sense of security and tranquility otherwise absent from the film . Eisner called this a " fatal " continuity error , but John D. Barlow disagrees , arguing it is a common characteristic for dream narratives to have some normal elements in them , and that the normalcy of Jane 's house in particular could represent the feeling of comfort and refuge Francis feels in her presence . Mike Budd argues while the Expressionistic visual style is jarring and off @-@ putting at first , the characters start to blend more harmoniously as the film progresses , and the setting becomes more relegated into the background . 
 Robinson suggested Caligari is not a true example of Expressionism at all , but simply a conventional story with some elements of the art form applied to it . He argues the story itself is not Expressionistic , and the film could have easily been produced in a traditional style , but that Expressionist @-@ inspired visuals were applied to it as decoration . Similarly , Budd has called the film a conventional , classical narrative , resembling a detective story in Francis 's search to expose Alan 's killer , and said it is only the film 's Expressionist settings that make the film transgressive . Hans Janowitz has entertained similar thoughts as well : " Was this particular style of painting only a garment in which to dress the drama ? Was it only an accident ? Would it not have been possible to change this garment , without injury to the deep effect of the drama ? I do not know . " 
 = = Themes and interpretations = = 
 = = = Authority and conformity = = = 
 Caligari , like a number of Weimar films that followed it , thematizes brutal and irrational authority by making a violent and possibly insane authority figure its antagonist . Kracauer said Dr. Caligari was symbolic of the German war government and fatal tendencies inherent in the German system , saying the character " stands for an unlimited authority that idolizes power as such , and , to satisfy its lust for domination , ruthlessly violates all human rights and values " . Likewise , John D. Barlow described Dr. Caligari as an example of the tyrannical power and authority that had long plagued Germany , while Cesare represents the " common man of unconditional obedience " . Janowitz has claimed Cesare represents the common citizen who is conditioned to kill or be killed , just as soldiers are trained during their military service , and that Dr. Caligari is symbolic of the German government sending those soldiers off to die in the war . The control Dr. Caligari yields over the minds and actions of others results in chaos and both moral and social perversion . Cesare lacks any individuality and is simply a tool of his master ; Barlow writes that he is so dependent on Caligari that he falls dead when he strays too far from the source of his sustenance , " like a machine that has run out of fuel " . 
 In his influential book From Caligari to Hitler , Kracauer argues the Dr. Caligari character is symptomatic of a subconscious need in German society for a tyrant , which he calls the German " collective soul " . Kracauer argues Dr. Caligari and Cesare are premonitions of Adolf Hitler and his rule over Germany , and that his control over the weak @-@ willed , puppet @-@ like somnambulist prefigures aspects of the mentality that allowed the Nazi Party to rise . He calls Dr. Caligari 's use of hypnotism to impose his will foreshadowing of Hitler 's " manipulation of the soul " . Kracauer described the film as an example of Germany 's obedience to authority and failure or unwillingness to rebel against deranged authority , and reflects a " general retreat " into a shell that occurred in post @-@ war Germany . Cesare symbolizes those who have no mind of their own and must follow the paths of others ; Kracauer wrote he foreshadows a German future in which " self @-@ appointed <unk> hypnotized innumerable <unk> into murder " . Barlow rejects Kracauer 's claims that the film glorifies authority " just because it has not made a preachy statement against it " , and said the connection between Dr. Caligari and Hitler lies in the mood the film conveys , not an endorsement of such tyrant on the film 's part . 
 Everyday reality in Caligari is dominated by tyrannical aspects . Authorities sit atop high perches above the people they deal with and hold offices out of sight at the end of long , forbidding stairways . Most of the film 's characters are caricatures who fit neatly into prescribed social roles , such as the outraged citizens chasing a public enemy , the authoritarian police who are deferential to their superiors , the oft @-@ harassed bureaucratic town clerk , and the asylum attendants who act like stereotypical " little men in white suits " . Only Dr. Caligari and Cesare are atypical of social roles , instead serving as , in Barlow 's words , " abstractions of social fears , the incarnations of demonic forces of a nightmarish world the bourgeoisie was afraid to acknowledge , where self @-@ assertion is pushed to willful and arbitrary power over others " . Kracauer wrote the film demonstrates a contrast between the rigid control , represented by such characters as Dr. Caligari and the town clerk , and chaos , represented by the crowds of people at the fair and the seemingly never @-@ ending spinning of the merry @-@ go @-@ rounds . He said the film leaves no room for middle ground between these two extremes , and that viewers are forced to embrace either insanity or authoritarian rigidity , leaving little space for human freedom . Kracauer writes : " Caligari exposes the soul wavering between tyranny and chaos , and facing a desperate situation : any escape from tyranny seems to throw it into a state of utter confusion " . 
 Dr. Caligari is not the only symbol of arrogant authority in the film . In fact , he is a victim of harsh authority himself during the scene with the dismissive town clerk , who brushes him off and ignores him to focus on his paperwork . Film historian Thomas <unk> argues that Dr. Caligari 's murderous rampage through Cesare can be seen as a rebellious , anti @-@ authoritarian streak in response to such experiences as these , even in spite of his own authoritarianism . The Expressionistic set design in this scene further amplifies the power of the official and the weakness of his supplicant ; the clerk towers in an excessively high chair over the small and humiliated Dr. Caligari . The scene represents class and status differences , and conveys the psychological experience of being simultaneously outraged and powerless in the face of a petty bureaucracy . Another common visual motif is the use of stairways to illustrate the hierarchy of authority figures , such as the multiple stairs leading up to police headquarters , and three staircases ascending to Dr. Caligari in the asylum . 
 Francis expresses a resentment of all forms of authority , particularly during the end of the frame story , when he feels he has been institutionalized because of the madness of the authorities , not because there is anything wrong with him . Francis can be seen , at least within the main narrative , as a symbol of reason and enlightenment triumphing over the irrational tyrant and unmasking the absurdity of social authority . But Kracauer contended the frame story undermines that premise . He argues if not for the frame story , the tale of Francis 's efforts against Dr. Caligari would have been a praiseworthy example of independence and rebellion against authority . However , with the addition of the frame story , which places the veracity of Francis 's claims into question , Kracauer argues the film glorifies authority and turns a reactionary story into an authoritarian film : " The result of these modifications was to falsify the action and to ultimately reduce it to the ravings of a madman . " Kracauer believed these changes were not necessarily intentional , but rather an " instinctive submission to the necessities of the screen " because commercial films had to " answer to mass desires " . Fritz Lang disagreed with <unk> 's argument , and instead believes the frame story makes the film 's revolutionary inclinations more convincing , not less . David Robinson said , as time passed , filmgoers have been less inclined to interpret the film as a vindication of authority because modern audiences have grown more skeptical of authority in general , and are more inclined to believe Francis 's story and interpret the asylum director as wrongly committing Francis to silence him . 
 = = = Point of view and perception of reality = = = 
 Another major theme of Caligari is , as Stephen Brockmann writes , " the destabilized contrast between insanity and sanity , and hence the destabilization of the very notion of sanity itself " . By the end of the film , viewers realize the story they have been watching has been told from the perspective of an insane narrator , and therefore they cannot accept anything they have seen as reliable truth . The film 's unusual visual abstractions and other stylized elements serve to show the world as one experienced by a madman . Similarly , the film has been described as portraying the story as a nightmare and the frame story as the real world . John D. Barlow said the film exemplifies a common Expressionist theme that " the ultimate perception of reality will appear distorted and insane to the healthy and practical mind " . The film serves as a reminder that any story told through a flashback <unk> the story from the perspective of the narrator . At the end of the film , the asylum director gives no indication that he means Francis ill will , and in fact he seems to truly care for his patients . But Francis nevertheless believes he is being persecuted , so in the story as told from his perspective , Dr. Caligari takes on the role of persecutor . 
 However , the Expressionistic visual elements of the film are present not only in the main narrative , but also in the epilogue and prologue scenes of the frame story , which are supposed to be an objective account of reality . For example , the frame story scenes still have trees with tentacle @-@ like branches and a high , foreboding wall in the background . Strange leaf and line patterns are seen on the bench Francis sits upon , flame @-@ like geometric designs can be seen on the walls , and his asylum cell has the same distorted shape as in the main narrative . If the primary story were strictly the delusions of a madman , the frame story would be completely devoid of those elements , but the fact they are present makes it unclear whether that perspective can be taken as reliable either . Instead , the film offers no true normal world to oppose to that of the twisted and nightmarish world as described by Francis . As a result , after the film 's closing scene , it can be seen as ambiguous whether Francis or the asylum director is truly the insane one , or whether both are insane . Likewise , the final shot of the film , with an iris that fades to a close @-@ up on the asylum director 's face , further creates doubt over whether the character is actually sane and trustworthy . As Brockmann writes , " In the end , the film is not just about one unfortunate madman ; it is about an entire world that is possibly out of balance " . Mike Budd notes that , during the scene in which asylum doctors restrain Francis , his movements closely mimic those of Dr. Caligari from a similar scene during the main story . Budd says this suggests a " dream logic of repetition " that throws further confusion on which perspective is reality . 
 = = = Double life = = = 
 Duality is another common theme in Caligari . Dr. Caligari is portrayed in the main narrative as an insane tyrant , and in the frame story as a respected authority and director of a mental institution . As a result of this duality , the viewer cannot help but suspect a malevolent aspect of him at the conclusion of the film , even despite all evidence indicating he is a kind and caring man . Even within the main narrative alone , Dr. Caligari lives a double life : holding a respectable position as the asylum director , but becoming a hypnotist and murderer at night . Additionally , the character is actually a double of the " real " Caligari , an 18th @-@ century mystic whom the film character becomes so obsessed with that he desires to penetrate his innermost secrets and " become Caligari " . Francis also takes on a double life of sorts , serving as the heroic protagonist in the main narrative and a patient in a mental institution in the frame story . Anton Kaes described the story Francis tells as an act of transference with his psychiatrist , as well as a projection of his feelings that he is a victim under the spell of the all @-@ powerful asylum director , just as Cesare is the hypnotized victim of Dr. Caligari . The Cesare character serves as both a persecutor and a victim , as he is both a murderer and the unwilling slave of an oppressive master . 
 Siegfried Kracauer said by coupling a fantasy in which Francis overthrows a tyrannical authority , with a reality in which authority triumphs over Francis , Caligari reflects a double aspect of German life , suggesting they reconsider their traditional belief in authority even as they embrace it . A contrast between levels of reality exists not only in the characterizations , but in the presentation of some of the scenes as well . This , as Barlow writes , " reveals a contrast between external calm and internal chaos " . For example , flashback scenes when Francis reads Dr. Caligari 's diary , in which the doctor is shown growing obsessed with learning hypnotic powers , take place as Dr. Caligari is sleeping peacefully in the present . Another example is the fair , which on the surface appears to represent fun and escapism , but reveals a lurking sense of chaos and disaster in the form of Dr. Caligari and Cesare . The visual elements of the film also convey a sense of duality , particularly in the contrasts between black and white . This is particularly prevalent in the sets , where black shadows are set against white walls , but also in other elements like the costumes and make @-@ up . For instance , Dr. Caligari wears mostly black , but white streaks are present in his hair and on his gloves . Cesare 's face is a ghostly white , but the <unk> of his eyes are heavily outlined in black . Likewise , Jane 's white face contrasts with her deep , dark eyes . 
 = = = Reflection on post @-@ war Germany = = = 
 Critics have suggested that Caligari highlights some of the neuroses prevalent in Germany and the Weimar Republic when the film was made , particularly in the shadow of World War I , at a time when extremism was rampant , reactionaries still controlled German institutions , and citizens feared the negative impact the Treaty of Versailles would have on the economy . Siegfried Kracauer wrote that the paranoia and fear portrayed in the film were signs of things to come in Germany , and that the film reflected a tendency in Germans to " retreat into themselves " and away from political engagement following the war . Vincent LoBrutto wrote that the film can be seen as a social or political analogy of " the moral and physical breakdown of Germany at the time , with a madman on the loose wreaking havoc on a distorted and off @-@ balanced society , a metaphor for a country in chaos " . 
 Anton Kaes , who called Caligari " an aggressive statement about war psychiatry , murder and deception " , wrote that Alan 's question to Cesare , " How long have I to live ? " reflected the trauma German citizens experienced during the war , as that question was often on the minds of soldiers and of family members back home concerned about their loved ones in the military . Francis 's despair after Alan 's murder can likewise be compared to that of the many soldiers who survived the war but saw their friends die on the battlefield . Kaes noted other parallels between the film and war experiences , noting that Cesare attacked Alan at dawn , a common time for attacks during the war . Thomas <unk> called Caligari an " outstanding example of how " fantastic " representations in German films from the early 1920s seem to bear the imprint of pressures from external events , to which they refer only through the violence with which they disguise and disfigure them . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Though often considered an art film by modern audiences , Caligari was produced and marketed the same as a normal commercial production of its time period , able to target both the elite artistic market as well as a more commercial horror genre audience . The film was marketed extensively leading up to the release , and advertisements ran even before the film was finished . Many posters and newspaper advertisements included the enigmatic phrase featured in the film , " Du <unk> Caligari werden ! " , or " You must become Caligari ! " Caligari premiered at the Marmorhaus theatre in Berlin on 26 February 1920 , less than one month after it was completed . The filmmakers were so nervous about the release that Erich Pommer , on his way to the theatre , reportedly exclaimed , " It will be a horrible failure for all of us ! " As with the making of the film , several urban legends surround the film 's premiere . One , offered by writers Roger <unk> and Heinrich Fraenkel in The German Cinema , suggest the film was shelved " for lack of a suitable outlet " , and was only shown at Marmorhaus because another film had fallen through . Another suggested the theatre pulled the film after only two performances because audiences demanded refunds and demonstrated against it so strongly . This story was told by Pommer , who claimed the Marmorhaus picked Caligari back up and ran it successfully for three months after he spent six months working on a publicity campaign for the film . David Robinson wrote that neither of these urban legends were true , and that the latter was fabricated by Pommer to increase his own reputation . On the contrary , Robinson said the premiere was highly successful , showing at the theatre for four weeks , an unusual amount for the time , and then returning two weeks later . He said it was so well received that women in the audience screamed when Cesare opened his eyes during his first scene , and fainted during the scene in which Cesare abducts Jane . 
 Caligari was released at a time when foreign film industries had just started easing restrictions on the import of German films following World War I. The film was acquired for American distribution by the Goldwyn Distributing Company , and had its American premiere at the Capitol Theatre on 3 April 1921 . It was given a live theatrical prologue and epilogue , which was not unusual for film premieres at major theatres at the time . In the prologue , the film is introduced by a character called " Cranford " , who identifies himself as the man Francis speaks with in the opening scene . In the epilogue , Cranford returns and exclaims that Francis has fully recovered from his madness . Mike Budd believes these additions simplified the film and " adjusted [ it ] for mass consumption " , though Robinson argued it was simply a normal theatrical novelty for the time . Capitol Theatre runner Samuel Roxy <unk> commissioned conductor Ernö <unk> to compile a musical accompaniment that included portions of songs by composers Johann Strauss III , Arnold Schoenberg , Claude Debussy , Igor Stravinsky and Sergei Prokofiev . <unk> wanted the score to match the dark mood of the film , saying : " The music had , as it were , to be made eligible for citizenship in a nightmare country " . 
 Caligari had its Los Angeles premiere at Miller 's Theater on 7 May 1921 , but the theatre was forced to pull it due to demonstrations by protestors . However , the protest was organized by the Hollywood branch of the American Legion due to fears of unemployment stemming from the import of German films into America , not over objections to the content of Caligari itself . After running in large commercial theatres , Caligari began to be shown in smaller theatres and film societies in major cities . Box office figures were not regularly published in the 1920s , so it has been difficult to assess the commercial success or failure of Caligari in the United States . Film historians Kristin Thompson and David B. Pratt separately studied trade publications from the time in an attempt to make a determination , but reached conflicting findings ; with Thompson concluding it was a box office success and Pratt concluding it was a failure . However , both agreed it was more commercially successful in major cities than in theatres in smaller communities , where tastes were considered more conservative . 
 Caligari did not immediately receive a wide distribution in France due to fears over the import of German films , but film director Louis Delluc organized a single screening of it on 14 November 1921 , at the Colisée cinema in Paris as part of a benefit performance for the Spanish Red Cross . Afterward , the <unk> company bought the film 's distribution rights and premiered it at the <unk> @-@ Opéra on 2 March 1922 . Caligari played in one Paris theatre for seven consecutive years , a record that remained intact until the release of Emmanuelle ( 1974 ) . According to Janowitz , Caligari was also shown in such European cities as London , Rome , Amsterdam , Stockholm , Brussels , Prague , Vienna , Budapest and Bucharest , as well as other countries like China , Japan , India , Turkey and South American nations . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 There are differing accounts as to how Caligari was first received by audiences and critics immediately after its release . Stephen Brockmann , Anton Kaes and film theorist Kristin Thompson say it was popular with both the general public and well @-@ respected by critics . Robinson wrote , " The German critics , almost without exception , ranged from favourable to ecstatic " . Kracauer said critics were " unanimous in praising Caligari as the first work of art on the screen " , but also said it was " too high @-@ brow to become popular in Germany " . Barlow said it was often the subject of critical disapproval , which he believes is because early film reviewers attempted to assign fixed definitions to the young art of cinema , and thus had trouble accepting the bizarre and unusual elements of Caligari . Some critics felt it imitated a stage production too closely . Other commentators , like critic Herbert <unk> and novelist Blaise Cendrars , objected to the presentation of the story as a madman 's delusion because they felt it belittled Expressionism as an artform . Theatre critic Helmut Grosse condemned the film 's visual design as clichéd and derivative , calling it a " cartoon and ( a ) reproduction of designs rather than from what actually took place on stage " . Several reviewers , like Kurt Tucholsky and Blaise Cendrars , criticized the use of real actors in front of artificially @-@ painted sets , saying it created an inconsistent level of stylization . Critic Herbert <unk> echoed this point in a 1920 review : " If actors are acting without energy and are playing within landscapes and rooms which are formally ' excessive ' , the continuity of the principle is missing " . 
 While Robinson said the response from American critics was largely positive and enthusiastic , Kaes said American critics and audiences were divided : some praised its artistic value and others , particularly those distrustful of Germany following World War I , wished to ban it altogether . Some in the Hollywood film industry felt threatened by the potential rivalry and spoke out against Caligari 's release , condemning it as a " foreign invasion " . Nevertheless , the film remained popular in the United States . Several American reviewers compared it to an Edgar Allan Poe story , including a 1921 review in Variety magazine , which praised the direction and " perfect tempo " of the film , as well as the sets that " squeeze and turn and adjust the eye , and through the eye the mentality " . A New York Times review likened it to modernist art , comparing the film 's sets to Marcel Duchamp 's Nude Descending a Staircase , No. 2 , and said the film " gives dimensions and meaning to shape , making it an active part of the story , instead of merely the conventional and inert background " , which was key to the film 's " importance as a work of cinematography " . Albert Lewin , a critic who eventually became a film director and screenwriter , called Caligari " the only serious picture , exhibited in America so far , that in anything like the same degree has the authentic thrills and shock of art " . A story in a November 1921 edition of Exceptional Photoplays , an independent publication issued by the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures , said it " occupies the position of unique artistic merit " , and said American films in comparison looked like they were made for " a group of defective adults at the nine @-@ year @-@ old level " . 
 Caligari was a critical success in France , but French filmmakers were divided in their opinions after its release . Abel Gance called it " superb " and wrote , " What a lesson to all directors ! " and René Clair said " overthrew the realist dogma " of filmmaking . Film critic and director Louis Delluc said the film has a compelling rhythm : " At first slow , deliberately laborious , it attempts to irritate . Then when the zigzag motifs of the fairground start turning , the pace leaps forward , <unk> , accelerando , and leaves off only at the word ' End ' , as abruptly as a slap in the face . " Jean Epstein , however , called it " a prize example of the abuse of décor in the cinema " and said it " represents a grave sickness of cinema " . Likewise , Jean Cocteau called it " the first step towards a grave error which consists of flat photography of eccentric decors , instead of obtaining surprise by means of the camera " . French critic Frédéric @-@ Philippe <unk> wrote of the film : " It has the odor of tainted food . It leaves a taste of cinders in the mouth . " The Russian director Sergei Eisenstein especially disliked Caligari , calling it a " combination of silent hysteria , partially coloured canvases , daubed flats , painted faces , and the unnatural broken gestures and action of monstrous chimaeras " . 
 While early reviews were more divided , modern film critics and historians have largely praised Caligari as a revolutionary film . Film reviewer Roger Ebert called it arguably " the first true horror film " , and critic Danny Peary called it cinema 's first cult film and a precursor for arthouse films . In October 1958 , Caligari was ranked as the twelfth @-@ best film of all time during a poll organized at the Brussels World ’ s Fair . With input from 117 film critics , filmmakers and historians from around the world , it was the first universal film poll in history . American film historian Lewis Jacobs said " its stylized rendition , brooding quality , lack of explanation , and distorted settings were new to the film world " . Film historian and critic Paul Rotha wrote of it , " For the first time in the history of the cinema , the director has worked through the camera and broken with realism on the screen ; that a film could be effective dramatically when not photographic and finally , of the greatest possible importance , that the mind of the audience was brought into play psychologically " . Likewise , Arthur Knight wrote in Rogue : " More than any other film , ( Caligari ) convinced artists , critics and audiences that the movie was a medium for artistic expression " . Entertainment Weekly included Caligari in their 1994 " Guide to the Greatest Movies Ever Made " , calling it a " landmark silent film " and saying , " No other film 's art direction has ever come up with so original a visualization of dementia " . It holds a rare 100 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 48 reviews . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Caligari is considered the quintessential work of German Expressionist cinema , and by far the most famous and well @-@ regarded example of it . It is considered a classic film , often shown in introductory film courses , film societies and museums , and is one of the most famous German films from the silent era . Film scholar Lewis Jacobs called it " most widely discussed film of the time " . Caligari helped draw worldwide attention to the artistic merit of German cinema , while also bringing legitimacy to the cinema among literary intellectuals within Germany itself . Lotte Eisner has said it was in Expressionism , as epitomized in Caligari , that " the German cinema found its true nature . " The term " <unk> " was coined as a result , referring to a style of similar films that focus on such themes as bizarre madness and obsession , particularly through the use of visual distortion . Expressionism was late in coming to cinema , and by the time Caligari was released , many German critics felt the art form had become commercialized and trivialized ; such well @-@ known writers as Kasimir <unk> , René Schickele , and Yvan <unk> had already pronounced the Expressionist movement dead by the time Caligari arrived in theatres . Few other purely Expressionistic films were produced , and Caligari was the only one readily accessible for several decades . Among the few films to fully embrace the Expressionist style were Genuine ( 1920 ) and <unk> ( 1923 ) , both directed by Wiene , as well as From Morn to Midnight ( 1920 ) , <unk> ( 1921 ) , Das Haus zum Mond ( 1921 ) , Haus ohne Tür und ohne Fenster ( 1921 ) and Waxworks . 
 While few other purely Expressionistic films were made , Caligari still had a major influence over other German directors , and many of the film 's Expressionist elements – particularly the use of setting , light and shadow to represent the dark psychology of its characters – became prevalent in German cinema . Among the films to use these elements were Murnau 's Nosferatu ( 1922 ) and The Last Laugh ( 1924 ) , G. W. Pabst 's Secrets of a Soul ( 1926 ) , and Lang 's Metropolis ( 1927 ) and M ( 1931 ) . The success of Caligari also affected the way in which German films were produced during the 1920s . For example , the majority of major German films over the next few years moved away from location shooting and were fully filmed in studios , which assigned much more importance to designers in German cinema . Robinson argues this led to the rise of a large number of film designers – such as Hans Dreier , Rochus Gliese , Albin Grau , Otto Hunte , Alfred Junge , Erich <unk> and Paul Leni – and that impact was felt abroad as many of these talents later emigrated from Germany with the rise of the Nazi Party . Additionally , the success of Caligari 's collaborative effort – including its director , set designers and actors – influenced subsequent film production in Germany for many years , making teamwork a hallmark of German cinema in the Weimar Republic . 
 The impact of Caligari was felt not just in German cinema , but internationally as well . Both Rotha and film historian William K. Everson wrote that the film probably had as much of a long @-@ term effect on Hollywood directors as Battleship Potemkin ( 1925 ) . In his book The Film Til Now , Rotha wrote that Caligari and Potemkin were the " two most momentous advances in the development of the cinema " , and said Caligari " served to attract to the cinema audience many people who had hitherto regarded the film as the low watermark of intelligence " . Caligari had an impact on the style and content of Hollywood films in the 1920s and early 1930s , particularly in films such as The Bells ( 1926 ) , The Man Who Laughs ( 1928 ) and Murders in the Rue Morgue ( 1932 ) , and had a major influence on American horror films of the 1930s , some of which featured an antagonist using Caligari @-@ like supernatural abilities to control others , such as Dracula ( 1931 ) , Svengali ( 1931 ) and The Mad Genius ( 1931 ) . Kaes said both Caligari 's stylistic elements , and the Cesare character in particular , influenced the Universal Studios horror films of the 1930s , which often prominently featured some sort of monster , such as Frankenstein ( 1931 ) , The Mummy ( 1932 ) , The Black Cat ( 1934 ) , and Bride of Frankenstein ( 1935 ) . The Expressionism of Caligari also influenced American avant @-@ garde film , particularly those that used fantastic settings to illustrate an inhuman environment overpowering an individual . Early examples include The Fall of the House of Usher ( 1928 ) , The Last Moment ( 1928 ) and The Life and Death of 9413 : a Hollywood Extra ( 1928 ) . LoBrutto wrote , " Few films throughout motion picture history have had more influence on the avant @-@ garde , art , and student cinema than Caligari " . 
 Caligari and German Expressionism heavily influenced the American film noir period of the 1940s and 50s , both in visual style and narrative tone . Noir films tended to portray everyone , even the innocent , as the object of suspicion , a common thread in Caligari . The genre also employs several Expressionistic elements in its dark and shadowy visual style , stylized and abstract photography , and distorted and expressive make @-@ up and acting . Caligari also influenced films produced in the Soviet Union , such as <unk> ( 1924 ) , and The Overcoat . Observers have noted the black and white films of Ingmar Bergman bear a resemblance to the German films of the 1920s , and film historian Roy Armes has called him " the true heir of Caligari " . Bergman himself , however , has downplayed the influence of German Expressionism on his work . Caligari has also had an impact on stage theatre . Siegfried Kracauer wrote that the film 's use of the iris @-@ in has been mimicked in theatrical productions , with lighting used to single out a lone actor . 
 Caligari continues to be one of the most discussed and debated films from the Weimar Republic . Two major books have played a large part in shaping the perception of the film and its impact on cinema as a whole : Siegfried Kracauer 's From Caligari to Hitler ( 1947 ) and Lotte Eisner 's The Haunted Screen ( 1974 ) . From Caligari to Hitler based its claims about the film largely on an unpublished typescript by Hans Janowitz called Caligari : The Story of a Famous Story , which gave Janowitz and Carl Mayer principal credit for the making of Caligari . Mike Budd wrote of Kracauer 's book : " Perhaps no film or period has been so thoroughly understood through a particular interpretation as has Caligari , and Weimar cinema generally , through Kracauer 's social @-@ psychological approach " . Prior to the publication of From Caligari to Hitler , few critics had derived any symbolic political meaning from the film , but Kracauer ’ s argument that it symbolized German obedience toward authority and a premonition of the rise of Adolf Hitler ( see the Themes section for more ) drastically changed attitudes about Caligari . Many of his interpretations of the film are still embraced , even by those who have strongly disagreed with his general premise , and even as certain claims Kracauer made have been disproven , such as his statement that the original script included no frame story . ( See Writing for more . ) Eisner 's book placed Caligari into historical context by identifying how it influenced Expressionist features in other films of the 1920s . 
 Film historian David Robinson claimed Wiene , despite being the director of Caligari , is often given the least amount of credit for its production . He believes this is in part because Wiene died in 1938 , closer to the release of the film than any other major collaborators , and was therefore unable to defend his involvement in the work while others took credit . In fact , Robinson argues Caligari ultimately hurt Wiene 's reputation because his subsequent films did not match its success , so he is often wrongly considered " a one @-@ film director who had a lucky fluke with Caligari " . 
 = = Sequels , remakes and musical works = = 
 Several unsuccessful attempts were made to produce sequels and remakes in the decades following Caligari 's release . Robert Wiene bought the rights to Caligari from Universum Film AG in 1934 with the intention of filming a sound remake , which never materialized before Wiene 's death in 1938 . He intended to cast Jean Cocteau as Cesare , and a script , believed to be written by Wiene , indicated the Expressionist style would have been replaced with a French surrealist style . In 1944 , Erich Pommer and Hans Janowitz each separately attempted to obtain the legal rights to the film , with hopes of a Hollywood remake . Pommer attempted to argue he had a better claim to the rights because the primary value of the original film came not from the writing , but " in the revolutionary way the picture was produced " . However , both Janowitz and Pommer ran into complications related to the invalidity of Nazi law in the United States , and uncertainty over the legal rights of sound and silent films . Janowitz wrote a treatment for a remake , and in January 1945 was offered a minimum guarantee of $ 16 @,@ 000 against a five @-@ percent royalty for his rights to the original film for a sequel to be directed by Fritz Lang , but the project never came to fruition . Later , Janowitz planned a sequel called Caligari II , and unsuccessfully attempted to sell the property to a Hollywood producer for $ 30 @,@ 000 . 
 Around 1947 , Hollywood agent Paul Kohner and German filmmaker Ernst Matray also planned a Caligari sequel ; Matray and his wife Maria <unk> wrote a screenplay called The Return of Caligari . That script would have reimagined Dr. Caligari as a former Nazi officer and war criminal , but the film was never produced . In 1960 , independent Hollywood producer Robert Lippert acquired the rights to Caligari from Matray and Universum Film AG for $ 50 @,@ 000 , and produced a film called The Cabinet of Caligari , which was released in 1962 . Screenwriter Robert Bloch did not intend to write a Caligari remake , and in fact the title was forced upon his untitled screenplay by director Roger Kay . The film had few similarities to the original Caligari except for its title and a plot twist at the end , in which it is revealed the story was simply the delusion of the protagonist , who believed she was being held captive by a character named Caligari . Instead , he was her psychiatrist , and he cures her at the end of the film . In 1981 , Bill Nelson was asked by the Yorkshire Actors Company to create a soundtrack for a stage adaptation of the film . That music was later recorded for his 1982 album Das <unk> ( The Cabinet Of Doctor Caligari ) . 
 A quasi @-@ sequel , called Dr. Caligari , was released in 1989 , directed by Stephen <unk> and starring Madeleine <unk> as the granddaughter of the original Dr. Caligari , now running an asylum and performing bizarre hormonal experiments on its patients . The sex @-@ driven story ultimately had little in common with the original film . In 1992 , theatre director Peter Sellars released his only feature film , The Cabinet of Dr. Ramirez , an experimental film loosely based on Caligari . However , the storyline was created as the film was being made , so it has few similarities with the original film . The film was screened only at the 1992 Sundance Film Festival and never theatrically released . An independent film remake of Caligari edited , written and directed by David Lee Fisher was released in 2005 , in which new actors were placed in front of the actual backdrops from the original film . The actors performed in front of a green screen , then their performances were superimposed in front of matte shots based on the original sets . Doug Jones played the role of Cesare . 
 Caligari was adapted into an opera in 1997 by composer John Moran . It premiered at the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge , Massachusetts , in a production by Robert McGrath . Numerous musicians have composed new scores to accompany the film . The Club Foot Orchestra premiered a score penned by ensemble founder and artistic director Richard Marriott in 1987 . In 2000 , the Israeli Electronica group <unk> made several live performances of their soundtrack for the film around Israel . In 2014 , Bertelsmann / BMG commissioned Timothy Brock to adapt his 1996 score for string orchestra for the new 2014 restoration ; Brock conducted the premiere in Brussels on September 15 , 2014 . In 2012 , the Chatterbox Audio Theatre recorded a live soundtrack , including dialogue , sound effects and music for Caligari , which was released on YouTube on October 30 , 2013 . 
 <unk> <unk> , noted <unk> and director from India , adapted the film into an hour @-@ long mixed @-@ media piece with the Performance Studies students at Ambedkar University Delhi as part of a course entitled " Space and <unk> . " The performance took place in a run @-@ down warehouse on the university campus and employed multimedia projection to create visual impact . The show premiered in February 2015 in Delhi . 
 In 2014 the movie was released in a 4K resolution restoration . The premiere of this version in the Netherlands was in April 2016 during the Imagine Film Festival accompanied with a live soundtrack , composed and performed by the Dutch psychedelic band <unk> . 
 2016 saw the production of another operatic version of Dr. Caligari composed by Karen MacIver for Scottish Opera 's Connect Company with a libretto provided by Allan Dunn . This opera has the action set in Glasgow 1898 . The first performances under the direction of Julie Brown took place on the 9th and 10 April 2016 in Glasgow 's Woodside Halls featured the Scottish Opera Connect Orchestra and Chorus conducted by Chris Gray . Alumni from Scottish Opera 's Emerging Artists Programme - Andrew McTaggart ( Baritone ) and Sarah Power ( Soprano ) - were cast as Dr. Caligari / Dr. Gallacher and Jane respectively alongside Daniel Keating Roberts ( Counter @-@ tenor ) as Cesare and Glen Cunningham ( Tenor ) as Francis with members of the Chorus providing additional roles . 
 = Edwin St Hill = 
 Edwin Lloyd St Hill ( 9 March 1904 – 21 May 1957 ) was a Trinidadian cricketer who played two Test matches for the West Indies in 1930 . His brothers , Wilton and Cyl , also played for Trinidad ; in addition , the former played Test matches for the West Indies . St Hill first played local cricket in Trinidad with some success and graduated to the Trinidad team . He played regularly for the next five years but was not selected for any representative West Indian teams . His increased success in 1929 attracted the attention of the West Indies selectors , and he played two Test matches against England in 1930 . Although not particularly successful , he bowled steadily and was chosen to tour Australia with the West Indies in 1930 – 31 . He was fairly effective in first @-@ class games but the form of the other fast bowlers in the team meant that he was not chosen for any of the Test matches . 
 By the time the tour was over , St Hill had signed a contract to play professional cricket in the Lancashire League in England for Lowerhouse Cricket Club . Playing as an all @-@ rounder , he performed relatively well with bat and ball for three seasons from 1931 to 1933 . He then played as a professional in several leagues , including the Huddersfield and Bradford leagues . During the Second World War , he joined the British Army and took part in the Dunkirk evacuation before returning to England ; he resumed his league career and played many wartime charity games . He died in Manchester , aged 53 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 St Hill was born in Port of Spain , Trinidad in 1904 , and according to the writer C. L. R. James , his family were lower middle @-@ class . His brothers , Wilton and Cyl played cricket for Trinidad ; in addition , the former played Test matches for the West Indies . St Hill first played in the Bonanza Cup , Trinidad 's main cricket competition , for a club called Durban Cricket Club in 1922 ; critics judged him to be promising , but he had little success . The following year , he moved to play for Shannon . Cricket in Trinidad at the time was divided along racial lines . Shannon was a club associated with black lower middle @-@ class players such as teachers or clerks . The team contained many strong bowlers , and St Hill opened the bowling . 
 St Hill 's success with Shannon was noticed by the regional selectors , and in 1924 he progressed to the Trinidad team ; he made his first @-@ class debut against British Guiana in the Inter @-@ Colonial Tournament on 14 February 1924 . He opened the bowling with his Shannon team @-@ mate , Learie Constantine , and took six wickets in the match . He played in the next game , the final of the tournament against Barbados , and took a further five wickets in the game , but his team lost . Over the following five years , he played regularly for Trinidad , and bowled with success for Shannon . He took four for 99 in an innings against British Guiana but otherwise did not take more than three wickets in an innings until the 1929 – 30 season , and after scoring 35 in his second game , he did not pass 20 runs in an innings . Apart from two games for Trinidad against the touring Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) touring team in 1926 , all his games came for Trinidad in the Intercolonial Tournament . He was overlooked for the representative West Indies team to play the MCC in 1926 , several bowlers being ahead of him in terms of selection . Neither was he selected for any of the trial games held to assist in choosing a team in 1928 ; that year , a West Indies team , including his brother Wilton , toured England and played its first Test matches . Instead , St Hill , between June and August 1928 , took part in a tour of the United States by a " West Indian XI " , playing mainly against teams of expatriate West Indians . He was very successful , taking over 100 wickets at a low cost . 
 = = West Indian cricketer = = 
 = = = Selection for Test team = = = 
