 In the October 1929 , St Hill recorded his best first @-@ class bowling figures when he took six for 119 ( six wickets for 119 runs ) against British Guiana in the final of the Intercolonial Tournament ; he took four wickets in the second innings to give him ten in the match , and also scored 67 in Trinidad 's second innings . Although he recorded his best performances with bat and ball , Trinidad still lost . By the following month , the Trinidad Sporting Chronicle considered him among the " second string " of players who were on the borderline of selection for the West Indies team . 
 In 1930 the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) undertook a tour of the West Indies which included four Test matches — the first Tests to be played in the West Indies . The MCC side was not at full international strength ; it included players who were either just beginning or just ending their international careers , and several star English bowlers were missing . The first Test was played in Barbados and St Hill was selected , making his debut for the West Indies on 11 February 1930 . He scored 0 and 12 with the bat , took two for 110 from 35 overs in the first innings and was wicketless in the second . The match was drawn . The MCC then travelled to Trinidad and played the cricket team in two games . St Hill played in the first , taking four wickets , but was rested from the second . The Trinidad Sporting Chronicle stated that he was omitted specifically to be ready for the second Test , also played in Trinidad , although he had not asked for a rest . The newspaper questioned why he had then been left out of the team for the Test match , and reported speculation that his omission was for political reasons to discredit the leadership of George Dewhurst , the Trinidad captain in the second game . It suggested that , given his ability with bat and ball , St Hill was worth a net 100 runs to any team in which he played . Having been omitted from the second Test , which West Indies lost , St Hill played in the third in British Guiana . West Indies won the game ; St Hill batted at number eleven in the batting order in his first innings , at number five in the second and scored three runs in each innings . With the ball , he took only one wicket and did not play another Test . A review of the series in the Barbados Advocate suggested that St Hill bowled steadily during both his Test appearances , but that his economical bowling figures in British Guiana were slightly unrepresentative as the English batsmen had been concentrating entirely on defence . The article stated that St Hill was more effective on matting pitches than on turf , but that he had many supporters in Trinidad . It believed he warranted a place on the forthcoming West Indian tour of Australia , but that he needed to work on his fielding , which was weak . 
 In August 1930 , St Hill signed a contract to play professional cricket in the Lancashire League in England , which meant that he was no longer eligible to play cricket for Shannon or Trinidad . At the time , competition rules barred professional cricketers from taking part . Consequently , the first @-@ class matches he played in Australia were the last of his career . In his eight seasons in the Bonanza Cup , St Hill took 224 wickets at an average of 9 @.@ 42 , and topped the bowling averages for the competition in 1924 and 1929 . 
 = = = Tour to Australia = = = 
 The West Indies played five Test matches in Australia in the 1930 – 31 season . They lost the series 4 – 1 and could not match the Australian team . St Hill played seven matches on the Australia tour , including four that were first @-@ class , but did not feature in any of the Tests . Against Tasmania he had first @-@ innings figures of four for 57 and against Victoria he took six wickets in the game . In total , he took 16 wickets at an average of 29 @.@ 81 , but his highest score in eight innings was 9 . A summary of the tour printed in the Sporting Chronicle of Trinidad suggested that St Hill had bowled well during his limited opportunities , but the success and form of the other three fast bowlers in the team meant that he had little chance to reach the Test team or to distinguish himself . A later article in the Daily Gleaner of Jamaica suggested that " sources " had told the newspaper " the reason for the infrequent playing of Edwin St Hill " , but did not elaborate . 
 After this tour , St Hill played no further first @-@ class cricket . In 17 games , he scored 274 runs at an average of 11 @.@ 91 and took 64 wickets at 28 @.@ 62 . 
 = = Professional cricketer in England = = 
 = = = With Lowerhouse = = = 
 For the 1931 season , Lowerhouse , the Lancashire League club which had finished bottom of the league in 1931 , signed St Hill as their professional cricketer . He was one of three West Indians playing professional league cricket in England , the others being Learie Constantine and George Francis . Early in the season , he spoke publicly to express his thanks for the welcome he had received . 
 In 1931 , Lowerhouse finished in equal fourth place , its best position in the league since 1908 . Reviewing the season , the Burnley News gave credit to St Hill for the revival . Describing him as a dependable batsman , it stated that he had a big impact with the ball . He scored 288 runs at 14 @.@ 40 , with a top score of 46 , to finish third in the club batting averages . He topped the bowling averages with 68 wickets , 46 of which were bowled , at 12 @.@ 20 . By the following season , St Hill 's wife had joined him in Lowerhouse . An end of season summary in the Burnley Express suggested that his batting had improved , and that he had surprised people with his ability . He played several longer innings , with a highest score of 85 , and he scored runs by " delightfully played cricket " . He headed the batting and bowling averages for the club with 477 runs at 20 @.@ 73 and 77 wickets at 13 @.@ 87 . However , the report stated that his bowling had been inconsistent and that it was surprising that he ended with such a good average . Nevertheless , his figures stood comparison with other leading professionals in the Lancashire League . The club dropped to equal fifth in the league . 
 St Hill 's contract ended in 1933 , a less successful season for the club . Lowerhouse finished equal 11th . St Hill topped the batting and bowling averages again . He increased his batting average to 28 @.@ 66 in scoring 602 runs , including a century , and according to the Burnley Express , gave " some delightful batting exhibitions " . With the ball , he was less successful , taking 56 wickets at 18 @.@ 82 . By then , St Hill had signed a new contract to play for Slaithwaite cricket club in the Huddersfield League . St Hill stated that he had been treated very kindly at Lowerhouse . At the end of the season , he returned to Trinidad for the winter . At this stage of his career , although his progress was still followed by the press in the West Indies , he was no longer a realistic Test match prospect . Other West Indians who played league cricket continued to be selected for the Test team , or to be considered for selection . 
 = = = Later life and career = = = 
 Slaithwaite were a moderate club in the Huddersfield League , where the quality of cricket was not as strong as in the Lancashire League . St Hill spent just one season at Slaithwaite ; his contract was not renewed at the end of the season , but the club awarded him a benefit match , in which Slaithwaite played a team chosen by Learie Constantine . During the season , St Hill was chosen in a team to represent the Huddersfield League against the Bradford League . 
 St Hill subsequently played in the Bradford League , first for East Bierley cricket club , then in 1937 he signed for Spen Victoria for whom he played until 1939 . He was particularly successful for Spen Victoria ; for instance , in 1939 he was the first bowler in the league to reach 50 wickets , but at the time the Bradford League had fallen in both popularity and standards . He missed the 1940 season — he had joined the army and took part in the Dunkirk evacuation . But he returned the following season , after being demobilised , and remained in the Bradford League until the end of the Second World War . He also appeared in several wartime charity games ; many were for a " West Indies XI " made up of West Indians living or working in England in wartime . In 1947 , St Hill returned to Slaithwaite , where he acted as the team 's reserve professional . By 1948 , he was playing as a professional at Kearsley cricket club in the Bolton Cricket League . In later years , the cricketer Jack Bond recalled St Hill as a very effective coach at the club , where Bond spent his early years . St Hill continued playing league cricket until 1951 . 
 St Hill died in Withington , Manchester , on 21 May 1957 . 
 = = Style and technique = = 
 St Hill 's bowling style led critics to name him the " Maurice Tate of the West Indies " ; Tate was a leading English bowler of the period who took 155 Test match wickets . In the late @-@ 1920s , St Hill was judged to be a cricketer of potential . At the time , a critic in Barbados rated him " medium to fast " , but noted that he was not as effective on turf pitches as he was on matting , and his fielding was weak . An article in the Trinidad Sporting Chronicle from the same period named him as " the best fast medium bowler in the West Indies " . It noted that he was capable of bowling to slow the scoring of runs , or to attempt to dismiss the batsmen , a good fielder and a fast @-@ scoring batsman . It called him a " real Test match cricketer " , and " a player whose accuracy of length , swerve and pace makes him an asset to any team and the equal of Constantine and Griffith at their best . " At the time he joined Lowerhouse , a profile in a Burnley newspaper stated that he was a steady bowler who kept to a consistent good length . Additionally , he was a good , although " impetuous " batsman . 
 More recent writers have judged him by his mediocre Test and first @-@ class statistical record . The cricket writer Martin Williamson , writing on the ESPNCricinfo website , believes his two Test match performances to have been " unimpressive " and judges : " In fairness , he was no more than a moderate late @-@ order batsman and regulation medium @-@ pacer " . Tony Barker , in his history of the Bradford League , calls St Hill " moderately talented " , and suggests that his success for Spen Victoria shows that the standard of play in the league at the time was poor . In her book on West Indian Test cricketers , Bridgette Lawrence describes him as " a capable all @-@ rounder " who " performed modestly " in his only Test series . 
 = NSB Gjøvikbanen = 
 NSB Gjøvikbanen AS is a Norwegian railway company that operates the passenger train service on the Gjøvik Line . A subsidiary of the state @-@ owned Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) , it operates a fleet of nine Class 69g three @-@ car electric multiple units . NSB Gjøvikbanen provides two different services : the Skøyen – Oslo S – Jaren service is part of the Oslo Commuter Rail ; while Oslo S – Gjøvik is a regional service , with only limited stops on the route until <unk> . Departures are each 40 minutes , with every third train running to Gjøvik . 
 The company was created in 2004 as NSB Anbud AS to compete for the tender bid for a ten @-@ year public service obligation ( PSO ) contract with the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications on the Gjøvik Line . The company won the bid and operations started on 11 June 2005 , with newly renovated trains . Following the September 2005 election , all further PSO offerings for railway operations were terminated , and the company was left with the single service , subsequently changing its name to reflect the single route . 
 = = Operations = = 
 The company operates both regional trains to Gjøvik , as well as line 300 , the Oslo Commuter Rail , to Hakadal or Jaren . Most north @-@ bound trains originate at Oslo Central Station ( Oslo S ) , but some rush @-@ hour services start at Skøyen , and operate through the Oslo Tunnel to Oslo S , to serve large working districts of Oslo . NSB Gjøvikbanen has a train leave and depart Oslo S every 40 minutes ; however , the trains have three different stopping patterns and termini , giving each of the three services a two @-@ hour headway . Two services are commuter trains , and stop at all stations . The one operates until Hakadal , while the other operates until Jaren . In addition , there is a regional services that operates to Gjøvik . The regional service only calls at the major stations until <unk> , but serves all stations after that . Travel time from Oslo S to Hakadal is 40 minutes , to Jaren it is 1 hour 22 minutes , while it is 1 hour 55 minutes to Gjøvik . The Gjøvik Line accounts for six percent of passenger transport on the national rail network . 
 NSB Gjøvikbanen has a staff of five in administration , 36 engineers and 32 conductors . Their offices are located at Jaren Station and Oslo S. This results in the Gjøvik Line being served by the same pool of train drivers and conductors , unlike the other commuter train services around Oslo , who use stock and staff interchangeably . In 2007 , the company had a revenue of NOK 132 million , and a net profit of NOK 7 million . 
 = = = Rolling stock = = = 
 NSB Gjøvikbanen operates nine Class 69g three @-@ car electric multiple unit . They were originally built by Strømmens Værksted in 1983 and 1984 , and delivered as part of the D @-@ series to NSB . They have since been operating as commuter trains . Prior to the PSO process , the trains were rebuilt by Danske Statsbaner in Denmark , and were completely renovated and refurbished , at the expense of the Ministry of Transport . The refurbishments included a new color design , where the deep red exterior was supplemented with details in silver and orange . The interior was also replaced , and consists of a silver scheme . Part of the end cars were converted into quiet zones , while another section is a comfort zone ( first class ) , which has a NOK 90 price supplement . Beverages are available from vending machines . The trains were also fitted with two wheelchair lifts and a wheelchair accessible toilet . 
 The trains have a capacity for 270 passengers . Each car has a Bo 'Bo ' wheel arrangement , and the train has a power output of 1 @,@ 188 kW ( 1 @,@ 593 hp ) . Maximum permitted speed is 130 km / h ( 81 mph ) , though there are few places along the Gjøvik Line that allow such high speeds . Due to restriction on the catenary north of Roa , only one train can be on the northern section at any given time . 
 = = = Route = = = 
 The Gjøvik Line ( Norwegian : Gjøvikbanen ) is a 123 @-@ kilometre ( 76 mi ) railway line between Oslo Central Station and Gjøvik Station . Originally named the North Line , the first section from Grefsen to Røykenvik opened on 20 December 1900 . On 28 November 1902 , the section from Grefsen to Oslo S and from Jaren to Gjøvik opened . The section from Jaren to Røykenvik then became the branch Røykenvik Line . The line was electrified at 15 kV 16 2 ⁄ 3 Hz AC north to Jaren in 1961 , and to Gjøvik two years later . At the same time , the section from Oslo S to Grefsen was rebuilt to double track . The rest of the line remains single track . There are 21 stations on the line , all served by NSB Gjøvikbanen . The southern part of the line , from Oslo to Roa , is also used by freight trains , who branch off on the Roa – Hønefoss Line to connect to the Bergen Line . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Following the right @-@ winged Second cabinet Bondevik victory in the 2001 parliamentary election , Minister of Transport , Torild Skogsholm from the Liberal Party announced that the government would make all subsidized passenger trains services in the country subject to public service obligation ( PSO ) . This had previously been done in several other European countries , such as Sweden and Germany . The initial plans launched in 2002 called for three routes to be subject to PSO : the Gjøvik Line , the Bratsberg Line and the Bergen Commuter Rail . These are the commuter train services least passengers , and the purpose was to use the initial tenders as a " learning exercise " and to create a more efficient system to implement in future tenders . The plans also called for transferring the responsibility for managing and financing the PSO contracts on commuter rail services to the counties , but this was not followed , in part because of a report from the Institute of Transport Economics , which concluded that this would provide a worse service . 
 At the time , the government was spending NOK 1 @.@ 4 billion annually on purchasing passenger transport from NSB . By introducing PSO , Skogsholm stated that she hoped the costs would be reduced , and that quality and safety levels would remain , or even improve . The counties have been allowed to issue PSO contracts on bus transport since 1994 ; and Skogsholm saw the competition in rail transport as a continuation of this . Following the announcement of the competition , CEO of NSB , Einar Enger , said that he did not see competition as a threat , but instead that NSB would introduce means to rationalize costs . In November 2002 , NSB laid off 100 employees , and reduced its administration by a third . The administration of all local and regional trains was reallocated to Oslo . Skogsholm stated that the government had no plans to sell NSB . 
 = = = Bid process = = = 
 In 2003 , Telemark County Municipality had attempted to create a PSO contract for the operation of the Bratsberg Line , that had been transferred from the state to the county . Five private companies had bid , but all five had been disqualified and the county was forced to sign a concession contract with NSB instead , despite NSB not having bid in the tender . The same year , the national process was delayed one year . However , the government announced that the bidding would happen in three stages ; first the Gjøvik Line and Bergen Commuter Rail , second the long @-@ distance trains as well as the Trøndelag Commuter Rail , and finally the rest of the Oslo Commuter Rail , as well as the Jæren Commuter Rail . Among the challenges was the ownership of the rolling stock and depots . The department considered creating a separate government @-@ owned company that would own these . Since NSB had been converted to a limited company , it would be necessary for the state to purchase the trains and depots for full price from NSB . With 69 multiple units delivered within the past five years , this could become an expensive transaction for the state . An alternative was launched were NSB would have to lease locomotives , carriages and multiple units to the winner , and also sell tickets for them at railway stations , a solution that was later chosen . In September 2004 , it was announced that current employees working for NSB along the Gjøvik Line would have the right to work for the winner , and could demand the same wage and pension rights as before . 
 The Gjøvik Line was chosen as the first service to be subject to PSO . The deadline for applying for <unk> was on 1 April 2004 , and seven companies applied . These were Norges Statsbaner , Ofotbanen , Arriva , Veolia , Danske Statsbaner ( DSB ) and Keolis . The companies were required to document their competency to be qualified for security and operation permits from the Norwegian Railway Inspectorate ; and were not allowed to subsidize the operations from activities that were not subject to competition . To participate in the bid , NSB established the subsidiary NSB Anbud AS in 2004 . 
 By the time the tenders were submitted , it turned out only NSB , DSB and Veolia had chosen bid . The tender was won by NSB Anbud on 30 May 2005 , wanting NOK 70 million annually for the contract , ten million less than with the former agreement . After the contract was won , NSB Anbud announced the schedule for the Gjøvik Line . The number of train services would increase by 40 % . Three stations serving the recreational area Nordmarka outside Oslo would be dropped — <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Skogsholm tried to make an agreement with NSB to not abandon all the stations , but since this had not been part of the PSO tender , an agreement could not be made and the service was canceled . 
 After the tender , 80 employees were transferred to the subsidiary , including the director , chartered engineer Arne Fosen . To the press he said that the increased efficiency in the organization was related to a small administration , and being able to use uniform trains . Previously both locomotive @-@ hauled trains , as well as Class 70 and Class 69 trains had been used . Following the PSO , NSB Anbud would operate nine Class 69g trains , which are somewhat smaller than the locomotive @-@ hauled and Class 70 trains . These would be owned by NSB , but rented by the subsidiary . The ministry would pay for a NOK 40 million overhaul of the stock . Representatives from the labor union said they feared for the flexibility of NSB , since 80 employees were now bound up in serving only a single line . <unk> Nordby replaced Fosen as director in August . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 Service was introduced on 11 June 2006 , with a contract lasting ten years . Along with the change of operator and stock , the Norwegian National Rail Administration , who owns the stations and tracks , did an overhaul of maintenance on many of the stations , in particular removing years of vandalism . In August , the company did a minor upgrade to the trains . The quiet sections were doubled from one to two sections , and new window shades for NOK 650 @,@ 000 were purchased . By August , the ridership on the Gjøvik Line had increased by 8 % , compared to the previous year . 
 In January 2007 , all the trains were equipped with weapons so the drivers could kill animals hit by the trains . About 100 game are killed each year along the line . In September , NSB Anbud launched a service allowing passenger riding from the Gjøvik and Toten areas to transfer to a coach at Roa Station , and continue onwards to Oslo Airport , Gardermoen . Since the establishment , NSB Anbud has requested an additional passing loop on the Gjøvik Line . This will allow more freight trains on the line , and reduce travel time for the passenger trains by four minutes . The investment would cost NOK 50 to 70 million . During 2007 , the company also accused the Norwegian National Rail Administration of giving the Gjøvik Line less priority in maintenance just because NSB Anbud had their train run more on time than trains operated by other companies . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 The PSO project costs the ministry at least 25 million . Millions were needed for external consultant fees to prepare the contracts , in addition to the cost of upgrading the rolling stock . The exact fees paid were not disclosed to the public . Following the left @-@ winged Stoltenberg 's Second Cabinet 's victory in the 2005 parliamentary election , the new Minister of Transport , Liv Signe Navarsete from the Centre Party , announced that there would be no more public tenders in the railway sector . The government stated that experience from Sweden and the United Kingdom showed that employees rights and safety was reduced after privatization was introduced . 
 = TNA King of the Mountain Championship = 
 The TNA King of the Mountain Championship is a professional wrestling championship owned by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) professional wrestling promotion . It was introduced on the October 23 , 2008 episode of TNA 's television program TNA Impact ! as the " TNA Legends Championship " . It has since been known as the " TNA Global Championship " and the " TNA Television Championship " . The title appeared in Global Force Wrestling ( GFW ) , during a talent exchange partnership . 
 As a professional wrestling championship , it is won via a scripted ending to a match or awarded to a wrestler because of a storyline . All title changes occurred at TNA @-@ promoted events so far . Reigns that occurred on TNA Impact ! , or its later title Impact Wrestling , usually air on tape delay . The first champion was Booker T , while the current champion is James Storm , who is in his first reign . There have been a total of 22 reigns among 16 wrestlers as of July 2016 . 
 = = History = = 
 The title was introduced during a storyline that pitted young talent within the company against veterans of professional wrestling . In the weeks leading up to the unveiling of the physical belt , Booker T carried around a steel briefcase . On the October 23 , 2008 , episode of Impact ! , Booker T introduced the belt by removing it from the briefcase , announcing its name as the " TNA Legends Championship " , and declaring himself the first champion . He went on to state that the championship was his and that he would defend it when he saw fit ; this meant that the championship was unsanctioned by TNA in the storyline . 
 On March 15 , 2009 , at TNA 's Destination X pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event , A.J. Styles defeated Booker T to win the championship . Afterwards on the March 19 , 2009 , episode of Impact ! , Styles was credited as becoming the first @-@ ever TNA Grand Slam Champion , by winning the World Heavyweight ( NWA or TNA ) , the World Tag Team ( NWA or TNA ) , the TNA X Division Championship , and the Legends Championship . TNA Management Director Jim Cornette then announced that the TNA Legends Championship had become an official TNA sanctioned championship thanks to Styles defeating Booker T for it legally via the contract the two had signed to make the match official . 
 On the October 29 , 2009 , episode of Impact ! , then @-@ champion Eric Young renamed the title the " TNA Global Championship " . He went on to declare that he was not going to defend it against any American wrestlers nor on American soil . However , Young 's first defense was on the December 10 , 2009 , episode of Impact ! in Orlando , Florida against Japanese female wrestler Hamada . Young 's second , third and fourth defenses lived up to his earlier decree , when he defended against Suicide in Glasgow , Hamada in Bournemouth , and unsuccessfully against Welsh wrestler Rob Terry in Cardiff , Wales at a live event on January 27 , 2010 . On the July 22 , 2010 , episode of Impact ! , Terry lost the Global Championship to A.J. Styles . Styles then renamed the title the " TNA Television Championship " on the July 29 , 2010 , episode of Impact ! . 
 On the April 19 , 2012 , episode of the newly titled Impact Wrestling , TNA General Manager Hulk Hogan ordered that the TNA Television Championship had to be defended every week . The weekly title defenses lasted until the June 21 , 2012 , episode of Impact Wrestling . 
 On July 3 , 2014 , TNA Executive Director Kurt Angle declared the championship inactive . The title was reactivated on June 25 , 2015 , by TNA under the new name the " TNA King of the Mountain Championship . " TNA announced that a new champion would be determined in a King of the Mountain match at their Slammiversary PPV event on June 28 . Jeff Jarrett defeated Matt Hardy , Eric Young , Drew Galloway , and Bobby Roode to win the newly titled championship at the event . Due to Jarrett having founded and currently running GFW , it was suspected in the storyline that Jarrett may defend the championship in that promotion . The title ended up appearing in GFW at a July 9 live event where Young attacked Jarrett and stole the championship belt . 
 = = Reigns = = 
 The inaugural champion was Booker T , who awarded the championship to himself on the October 23 , 2008 , episode of Impact ! . Eric Young holds the record for most reigns , with three , and is the only wrestler to hold the title under all four of its incarnations . Abyss ' second reign is the longest in the title 's history at 396 days . PJ Black 's only reign holds the record for shortest reign in the title 's history at one day . Abyss holds the record for combined days as champion , with 460 . 
 James Storm is the current champion in his first reign . He defeated Eli Drake on July 14 , 2016 , in Orlando , Florida during the Impact Wrestling tapings ( will air August 4 ) to win the title . Overall , there have been 25 reigns shared among 19 wrestlers , with three vacancies and one deactivation . 
 = Nina Tucker = 
 Nina Tucker is a fictional character from the Australian soap opera Neighbours , played by Delta Goodrem . She made her first screen appearance during the episode broadcast on 11 June 2002 . Goodrem was approached by producers after they saw her video for her debut single . Goodrem , who had just signed a record deal , almost turned down the role of Nina as she felt the character did not suit her style of music . The role was rewritten for her and she joined the cast . A year later , she was diagnosed with Hodgkin 's lymphoma and had to leave the show for treatment . Once her health improved , she made a return to Neighbours in 2004 to tie up Nina 's storylines . In 2005 , Neighbours celebrated its 20th anniversary with an episode that featured many ex @-@ cast members , in which Goodrem reprised her role as Nina once more . She returned again in March 2015 for the show 's 30th anniversary . 
 Nina was originally written as a bad girl character , but when the writers rewrote the role for Goodrem , she became a painfully shy school student who was described as being the " quintessential girl @-@ next @-@ door " . Nina learned to be independent from an early age as she was travelling with her parents all over the world . She has a complicated relationship with her mother , who she sees as an embarrassment to her . In 2004 , her personality underwent a change , and she was no longer shy ; she had grown up and had become more assured . Goodrem 's manager suggested that Nina should be an aspiring singer and Neighbours developed the character to suit her . Goodrem worked with the writers to incorporate her music into the show . One of Nina 's longest running storylines was her relationship with Jack Scully ( Jay Bunyan ) . They began their relationship while they were seeing other people and they break up twice . However , Nina realises that she loves Jack and returns from India to tell him . Goodrem believed Nina and Jack were soulmates . Nina was well received , and Goodrem won the Most Popular New Female Talent Logie Award for the role . 
 = = Casting = = 
 Neighbours approached Goodrem about appearing in the show after they saw the video for her debut single , " I Don 't Care " ; she was offered the role of Nina Tucker in early 2002 . Goodrem almost turned down the part because she was not happy with the character written for her . She had just signed a record deal with Sony Records and felt the part did not suit her music . The Neighbours producers agreed to rewrite the role of Nina for her . 
 In July 2003 , Goodrem was diagnosed with Hodgkin 's lymphoma and was forced to leave the show to begin treatment . Goodrem was written out of Neighbours , and script producer , Luke Devenish , said : " She had to concentrate on her health , so there was no getting around it . There was absolutely no question of attempting to keep her working . " Nina departed in October 2003 , with an exit storyline that allowed for a return in the future . Three months ' worth of scripts were rewritten , and a new character , Carmella Cammeniti ( Natalie Blair ) , was created and introduced to cover Nina 's planned storyline with Connor O 'Neill ( Patrick Harvey ) . 
 In March 2004 , it was announced that Goodrem would be returning to Neighbours to finish her contract . Of her return , a spokesperson said " We never thought we 'd see her back . Her illness stunned us all and her vastly improved health now thrills us . We can 't wait for the days she 's back on the set . This is where it all started for her . " Goodrem told TV Week that it was important to her to tie up Nina 's storylines and added : " I really felt that Nina and myself had a lot of unfinished business there . " Due to Goodrem 's busy schedule , the producers made sure all her scenes were shot in three days . She returned to screens in Australia on 6 September . Goodrem was one of many ex @-@ cast members who returned to Neighbours in 2005 for an episode that celebrated the 20th anniversary of the show . Goodrem said that she " couldn 't be happier " about going back to Neighbours . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Nina was initially meant to be a " bad girl " , but the writers rewrote the part for Goodrem , and the character became a " painfully shy schoolgirl " who gets a job in the Coffee Shop . The Age described Nina as the " quintessential girl next door " . Goodrem described her character as " a quiet , unassuming type of girl " , who did not think anything of her amazing gift . When Goodrem was asked if she was similar to Nina , she replied " I think I am in some ways and in some ways I 'm not . Nina 's very shy , I really like the character Nina but I think she 'd probably walk out of a room and I 'd probably chat all day I think that 's probably the difference , she 'd sneak out of a room and I 'd stay ! " The BBC agreed with Goodrem and said that Nina would not say " boo to a goose " and would flee if anyone looked her way . 
 In 2003 , Nina 's mother , Trixie ( Wendy Stapleton ) , arrived in Erinsborough after Nina 's father , Nick , ended their relationship . Nina was upset to learn about her parents split and went into denial . She believed that they would get back together . Trixie was a professional singer and , during a set at Lou 's Place , started to lose confidence , so Nina helped her out and saved the night . Stapleton stated that Nina and Trixie 's relationship was complicated , and there were issues between them . Nina saw Trixie as an embarrassment , but she helped her out because she saw how sad her mother was . Stapleton explained more about Nina 's early life saying , " Nina 's life has been almost a gypsy one – living out of a suitcase while her parents toured . She 's learned to be independent from an early age , though Trixie idolises her . " Nina retreated into books and her imagination instead of being worldly from the travelling she has done . Stapleton and Goodrem did not get a chance to explore their respective character 's relationship much further , as Goodrem was diagnosed with Hodgkin 's lymphoma three weeks into the storyline . Scripts were changed so Nina was not directly involved and she was only mentioned by other characters . 
 When she returned in 2004 , Nina was no longer shy and vulnerable . She had taken control of her life and became more assured . Goodrem welcomed her character 's development and said Nina came back strong and confident . She also said : " I think she had to grow up . If she didn 't come back a little bit older and wiser , then she wouldn 't have learnt and grown from what 's gone on in the year that she 's been missing . " 
 = = = Singing career = = = 
 Goodrem 's manager , Glenn Wheatley , suggested making Nina into an aspiring singer . He said : " We didn 't want that soap star @-@ turned @-@ singer vibe but how cool would it be if she already was a singer ? Neighbours developed a character to suit her rather than the other way around . " Goodrem worked with the writers to incorporate her music into the show , and Wheatley used the exposure that Neighbours gave Goodrem to relaunch her singing career . Nina had a powerful voice and wrote her own songs , but she was too shy to sing them in public . Harold Bishop ( Ian Smith ) discovered Nina 's singing talent one day , and Connor entered one of her songs , " Born To Try " , in a talent contest at <unk> , where it won . As Nina was too shy to go and receive the prize , Tahnee Coppin ( Anna Jennings @-@ Edquist ) tried to take credit for the song instead . Connor stopped her and Nina overcame her shyness to sing her song . Within weeks of it being performed , " Born to Try " became the number one single in Australia . 
 = = = Relationship with Jack Scully = = = 
 Nina was in her first relationship with fellow student Taj Coppin ( Jaime Robbie Reyne ) , when , during a trip away to the beach , Jack Scully ( Jay Bunyan ) realised he was attracted to her . When Nina was cast in Harold 's play , Mission Erinsborough , alongside Jack , she realised that she liked him too and they begin an affair . Peter <unk> of The Age said their love " bubbled until it almost erupted " . Nina broke up with Taj so she could be with Jack , but before Jack could break up with his girlfriend Lori Lee ( Michelle Ang ) , she was paralysed during an accident . Jack became torn over whether to leave Lori and be with Nina . Both Lori and Taj found out about Nina and Jack , so Nina decided to remain single , but eventually she and Jack began their relationship properly . When Nina told Jack that she was not ready to consummate their relationship , Jack cheated on her with Edwina Valdez ( Lucia <unk> ) . Taj told Nina about Jack 's cheating and she broke up with him . She later kissed Connor in front of Jack to make him jealous . Jay Bunyan commented , " Jack gets really angry , especially with Connor , who is supposed to be his mate . He threatens to tell Nina about Connor getting Lori pregnant , as a way of getting back at him . " Nina became confused about her love life and was unsure whether she still had feelings for Jack . She then decided to depart Erinsborough to go to India . 
 In 2004 , Nina returned to win Jack back , after becoming an actress in the Indian film industry and realising that she was alone . Goodrem told TV Week , " she 's been doing wonderful things in Bollywood and has been with her dad . But she was missing the love of life back in Australia , so she came back . " Nina 's arrival coincided with Jack 's decision to get his life back together following a car crash due to his partying . Jack was " shocked " and " overwhelmed " to see Nina . Goodrem explained that Nina reminded him of what he once had and that he still had feelings for her . She said that she believed Jack and Nina were soul mates and added : " They have had a very rocky relationship , but I think they 're even now . " As Jack and Nina talked things through , they " fall back into each other 's arms " . Jack chose to leave Erinsborough to be with Nina . 
 = = = Return ( 2015 ) = = = 
 On 25 November 2014 , it was announced that Goodrem had agreed to reprise her role for Neighbours ' 30th anniversary celebrations . Goodrem began filming that day and tweeted her excitement about Nina making a guest appearance . Her return featured during three episodes starting from 16 March 2015 . Series producer Jason Herbison confirmed that the theme of music would tie into the character 's return . It was later confirmed that Nina returns to Erinsborough after her relationship with Jack ends . Goodrem said she understood what her character was going through , saying " I have experienced the feelings Nina is going through . I 've had those moments where you question where you are going and you have to look back to know where to move forward . " The singer and actress said her return to Neighbours felt " natural " and she instantly knew what Nina would be wearing the moment she went into wardrobe . 
 Alana Wulff from TV Week reported that Nina would check into Lassiter 's Hotel under a fake name , in order to stay incognito during her return . However , she is soon spotted by Lou Carpenter ( Tom Oliver ) and Susan Kennedy ( Jackie Woodburne ) , who agree to keep her return a secret . This allows Nina to revisit her favourite haunts and reminisce about her time in Erinsborough . Goodrem told Wulff , " She 's walking around feeling nostalgic . And seeing where life was so simple before everything went down with her . " Nina even fills in for one of the maids at the hotel , which makes her feel " normal " again . When Paul Robinson ( Stefan Dennis ) see Nina , he asks her to perform at the Erinsborough Festival 's closing concert , but she turns him down . However , Lou persuades her to change her mind , believing the concert will make her feel better about her life and break up with Jack . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Nina enrolls at Erinsborough High after her school work suffers because she has been travelling the world with her parents , Nick and Trixie . Nina is shy and concealed as a result of her neglect by her parents . Nina takes up two jobs at the Coffee Shop and at Lassiter 's Hotel . The residents of Ramsay Street begin to notice that she is shy and has low self @-@ esteem . One night , Harold Bishop hears Nina singing and realises that she is good , but Nina disagrees . Harold manages to convince Nina to join the church choir , and she is asked to perform a solo , but her nerves get to her and is not able to go through with their performance . Connor O 'Neill also overhears Nina singing one day and becomes close with her , as he is the only teenager who knows about her talent . 
 Tahnee Coppin forces Nina to admit that she is in love with Connor and then threatens to tell his girlfriend , Michelle Scully ( Kate Keltie ) . Nina records a song called " Born to Try " , which is heard by Connor . He secretly enters the song into <unk> 's undiscovered talent contest . Nina is angry with Connor at first but tells her that he did it for her so she could realise her potential . Nina 's song wins the contest , but she is too shy to come forward , and Tahnee takes the credit instead . Connor takes Nina to the station and she admits that she wrote and sang the song . Nina then overcomes her fears to sing " Born to Try " for the crowd , which upsets Tahnee . Nina 's prize is to sing at a nightclub ; afterwards , she is approached by Glenn Wheatley , but she turns down his offer . 
 Nina asks out Taj Coppin , after he sends her text messages , and they begin a relationship . Nina and Jack Scully are pushed into auditioning for roles in Harold 's new play , and they have to perform a kiss on stage . As they went on rehearsing , they begin to get closer to each other , and they start an affair . Nina breaks up with Taj , but before Jack can break up with Lori Lee , she has an accident . Jack eventually tells Lori about Nina , and when Nina tries to apologise , Lori tells her that she will not be forgiven . Nina then tells Jack that they cannot be together . Nina sticks up for Tahnee when she is being bullied , and they become friends . Nina and Jack get back together , but when Jack tries to take things further , Nina tells him she is a virgin . Jack tells her that he is willing to wait . 
 Talent manager Melody Jones ( Robyn Arthur ) approaches Nina and asks her to sign with her . Nina forges her mother 's signature on the forms and gets a regular singing gig at Lou Carpenter 's pub . Nina leaves for a tour of Asia , but when she gets back she hears another singer singing one of her songs on the radio . Nina is told that she signed the rights to her music away , but Lou points out that the contract is not valid as Nina forged a signature on it . Nina sleeps with Jack for the first time , but when Taj tells her that Jack cheated on her with Edwina Valdez , their relationship ends . Nina starts getting closer to Connor and , to make Jack jealous , kisses Connor at the Lassiter 's Ball . 
 Nina 's mother , Trixie , arrives in town , and Lou gives her a singing job at his pub as he fancies her . Nina is upset to learn that Trixie and Nick are no longer together , and , when Trixie tells her that she was not married to her father , Nina leaves for Bombay to see Nick . Trixie and Lou later marry . Nina returns a year later after becoming an actress in Bollywood . She goes to see Jack and tells him that she wants to be with him . She also visits Lou and gives him some money , as Trixie had left him bankrupt . Lyn Scully ( Janet Andrewartha ) tells Nina that Jack needs to stay in Australia so he can sort himself out . Nina performs her last concert at Lou 's Place , and she tells Jack that she will wait for him . Months later , Jack flies out to Los Angeles to be with Nina . 
 In 2015 , Nina returns to Erinsborough . She checks into Lassiter 's under a false name , and catches up with Lou and Susan . Nina goes for a walk around the town and Ramsay Street , reminiscing about her time there . She later offers to be a chambermaid at the hotel , after seeing how short staffed Terese Willis ( Rebekah Elmaloglou ) is . Nina tries to avoid Paul Robinson , who wants her to play at the Erinsborough Festival . She admits to Karl and Susan that she and Jack have split up , which has affected her song writing . Nina uses her to write a song , but she refuses Paul 's offer to play at the festival . Nina changes her mind after Lou encourages her to take a chance , while Karl fakes a sore throat . Jack later texts asking her to meet him in Florence and she flies out to join him . 
 = = Reception = = 
 For her portrayal of Nina , Goodrem received the Most Popular New Female Talent accolade at the 2003 Logie Awards . She also earned a nomination for Best Newcomer at the Inside Soap Awards . The following year , Goodrem was nominated for Most Popular Actress and Most Popular Personality at the Logie Awards . A writer for the BBC 's Neighbours website said Nina 's most notable moment was " Cheating on Taj with Jack Scully " . 
 To celebrate Neighbours ' 25th anniversary , Sky included Nina in their list of the twenty @-@ five most memorable Neighbours characters . They stated , " Nina represents just about the only recognisable name from the lost years of Neighbours in the early noughties , as one of the least successful groups of teens in the programme 's history . Remember Lori ? Or Michelle ? Or , Lord help us , Taj ? In the absence of any usable characters , the writers did that always uncomfortable thing of letting a character get up and sing on screen . Repeatedly . " They described her most memorable scenes as being discovered singing by Harold , her mother 's marriage to Lou , and her relationship with Jack . 
 TV Week named Nina 's passion for singing as one of Neighbours ' " most exciting storylines ever " . They said : " When it was discovered she could sing , Nina Tucker was transformed from shy <unk> student into a star performer and a bit of a heart @-@ breaker . This was cut short when Delta was diagnosed with Hodgkin 's disease , leaving us in the lurch and wondering about her love affair ... triangle ... quadrangle ! " TV Week later included Nina in their " Top 25 Neighbours characters " . 
 = Quique = 
 Quique / <unk> / is the debut album by British music group Seefeel and was released through Too Pure Records . The album was recorded in July 1993 and released in December later that year . Quique is a predominantly instrumental recording that is a mixture of both electronic and rock music . Guitarist Mark Clifford worked continuously on tracks while other members either completed them or provided component ideas . 
 The album was released in December 1993 in the United Kingdom where it received positive reviews from the British music critics . The album was followed up with the EP <unk> on Warp in 1994 . It was re @-@ released in 2007 in a deluxe format that included unreleased , re @-@ mixed tracks and other music that was only released on compilations . The album continued to receive praise on its re @-@ issue . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 Mark Clifford formed Seefeel in 1992 after posting advertisements for potential group members . After performing a few shows and recording demos , Seefeel signed to the Too Pure Records label in late 1992 . Too Pure 's co @-@ owner Richard Roberts stated that upon hearing Seefeel 's demo " there was no obvious song for radio , but in my opinion it felt good . As we viewed ourselves as an experimental label that didn 't want to be tied to a sound or a scene , it seemed to make sense to release something with the band . " Seefeel chose Too Pure as they felt the label had respect for its artists , despite the low budget given to them to record Quique . 
 Clifford described the composition of the track as " messing around with a particular sound and then that sound would quite often just evoke a melody . Because the sounds we used were very much based around harmonics and stuff . " The songs were completed before recording in the studio and many tracks had been performed live prior to the album 's release . The only song written in the recording studio was " Charlotte 's Mouth " . All the songs on the album were completed in a way that would allow Seefeel to re @-@ create their music in a live setting . 
 Quique was recorded in July 1993 . During their time in the studio , Seefeel also recorded the EP More Like Space . Clifford felt that the tracks on More Like Space were simpler to create while those on Quique were more involved and took longer . 
 Daren Seymour stated that Clifford was " working on a constant basis . The other members of the band contributed either complete tracks or component ideas into the process – some where accepted or not as Mark acted as the editor , and quite rightly so at times ! " After the album was mastered , the group had Too Pure remove a track from the album before it was released . 
 = = Music = = 
 The music on Quique is predominantly instrumental . Some tracks include wordless vocals from Seefeel 's guitarist and vocalist Sarah Peacock . Peacock 's vocals are low in the audio mix and are heard on the tracks " Industrious " and " Charlotte 's Mouth " . The tone of the album has been described as less dark than the group 's follow @-@ up albums Succour and CH @-@ VOX . 
 Music critics have applied several different genres to Quique , including dream pop , ambient techno , Intelligent Dance Music , and shoegaze . Glenn Swan of AllMusic described the album 's mixture of genres as " a sort of electronic hybrid that had listeners simultaneously scratching their heads " , while Jess Harvell of Pitchfork stated that the audience will " hear the beginnings of a still @-@ thriving genre that remains slippery and unnamed , purely electronic music with a strange , tangy rock aftertaste . " 
 Clifford was irritated by being placed within a genre by critics , stating that Seefeel " weren 't trying to fit into any one of their scenes and it felt a little like we were almost having convention thrust upon us when that was the very thing we were reacting against . " AllMusic compared the songs to ambient music by the Aphex Twin , while Exclaim ! noted that " Quique follows a similar path as Aphex Twin 's Selected Ambient work but with structures that a more rock @-@ based band like Chapterhouse dreamed of matching . " The members of Seefeel were fans of Aphex Twin and said after playing shows with him and Autechre that they felt " more affinity with them than many of the bands we 'd met – Robin Guthrie and the Cocteau Twins excepted ! " 
 " Climactic Phase # 3 " contains minimal percussion , a bass line that rises and falls that creates a faint pulse to guide it . Clifford described " Climactic Phase # 3 " as " an attempt to see how much juice I could squeeze out of a few repetitive loops . " Both " Climatic Phase No. 3 " and " <unk> " contain guitar feedback and drum machines . The vocals on " <unk> " were described by Sarah Peacock as not having lyrics , but vocalizations invented for their sonic value . Peacock said that she loved the song 's " groovy and dubby " feel , but disliked the " pitchy vocals " " Imperial " , " Climatic Phase # 3 " and " Plainsong " were made from what Clifford called " an obsession for sampling and sequencing . Very standard technology now , but at the time the ability to sample and shift and manipulate guitar sounds was fascinating to me . " Clifford would later describe " Plainsong " as attempt to put " the vaguest hint of a song into the equation " , having had difficulty with the rhythm of the song changing it continuously . 
 " Industrious " showcases ambiance and drums which anchor the mix . Clifford characterized the song as an audio experiment by processing drum machines through guitar effects . " Charlotte 's Mouth " , named after Charlotte Gainsbourg , contains guitar , bass and metallic percussion . The song began as a loop of Justin Fletcher 's percussion which later had guitar and vocals added . " Through You " is the only Seefeel song to use a keyboard on Quique . Clifford composed it quickly , noting that it was made in " about two hours " . " Filter Dub " was described by Clifford as heavily influenced by Jah Wobble . It does not feature a large amount of sampled guitars like other tracks on the album . 
 When asked how the group felt about the album in 2013 , Clifford felt the album was " it holds up okay — some tracks more than others " and that he felt " mostly good about [ the songs ] " and " looked forward to playing certain tracks live " . Peacock spoke positively about the album saying that since it was their first album , it " will always be the fondest " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Quique was released in the United Kingdom in December 1993 on Too Pure Records . In February 1994 , Billboard announced that the American music label Astralwerks had recently signed Seefeel and were set to release their album in April 1994 . Quique was released on compact disc and cassette by Astralwerks . On 10 June 1994 , Astralwerks released " Plainsong " as a single , with two remixes of " Time to Find Me " by the Aphex Twin as b @-@ sides . In 2003 , Mark Clifford stated that Quique sold between sixteen or seventeen thousand copies . After the release of Quique , Seefeel left Too Pure Records and signed to the more electronic music oriented Warp . Warp released their follow @-@ up EP <unk> on 18 April 1994 . 
 In 2007 , Quique was re @-@ released in a deluxe edition . This version of the album included a bonus disc containing unreleased tracks , re @-@ mixes and songs that appeared on compilation albums . Quique was re @-@ released on vinyl on 27 August 2013 through Light in the Attic Records and its Modern Classics Recordings series , in conjunction with Medical Records . It was released with a gate fold sleeve with 1000 copies printed on blue vinyl . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Spin 's Simon Reynolds gave Quique a positive review , stating that Seefeel has " struck a sublime groove between MBV 's sensual tumult and Aphex Twin 's ambient serenity " Robert Christgau gave the album a " neither " rating , indicating that an album " may impress once or twice with consistent craft or an arresting track or two . Then it won 't . " Jon Savage of Mojo gave a positive review of the album , stating that " throughout much of Quique , Seefeel achieve that spacious weightlessness hinted at by their titles : ' Climactic Phase # 3 ' , ' Filter Dub ' , ' Signals ' " In his review for Melody Maker , Simon Reynolds wrote that the group 's album " sometimes need a bit more space in their sound , a bit of emptiness to punctuate the drone @-@ swarm . Like [ My Bloody Valentine ] on Loveless , they 're sometimes so blissed it 's suffocating " and that " overall , Quique is consummate , a blanched canvas for the imagination , and a cracking debut . " 
 In a review of the groups next album Succour , Select remarked negatively on Quique , opining that it " owed as much to My Bloody Valentine as Aphex , but never believably cemented the two influences . " The Times commented on the album in 1994 , stating that the album " drew sighs of admiration from critics and the public alike . " and that the album was " a beautiful document which has its roots in an experimentalism that began with La Monte Young and has , in recent years , been continued variously by Glenn Branca , the Swans and <unk> . The points of contact with any of the current crop of dance music @-@ makers are minimal . " In 1999 , CMJ summarized the British critics ' reception to Quique , stating that the album " earned Seefeel several months of adoration in the British music press and subsequent obscurity which usually follows such kudos " 
 Later reviews have been positive . Jess Harvell of Pitchfork opined that Quique " still sounds timeless . " Glenn Swan of AllMusic gave the album four and a half stars out of five , stating " this is Seefeel at their most ornate . They squint by staring into the geometric refractions of light and record the results . " Jason Ferguson of Harp described Quique as " <unk> with a futuristic ethereality that was far more substantial than the electro @-@ ambience of the era , but also much less assaultive than the <unk> Seefeel was affiliated with early on . " and that the 2007 re @-@ issue was " a fitting tribute to a very unique sound . " The Los Angeles Times described the album as " underrated " and " that even 20 years later sounds like nothing else . " The Sunday Times gave the Redux edition a positive review , referring to Quique as the group 's " finest moment " and " If you like music to have structure , Quique will drive you barmy ; but if you consider the presence of the word " texture " in an album review to be a positive , you might well enjoy this languid landmark . " Cam Lindsay wrote in Exclaim ! that " While it doesn 't feel like a timely release , the re @-@ discovery of Seefeel ( no word yet on a reunion ) certainly verifies their relevance in today 's music , especially in light of neo @-@ <unk> like Ulrich <unk> and Tim Hecker . " In 1999 , Ned Raggett ranked the album at number 34 on his list of " The Top 136 or So Albums of the Nineties " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Mark Clifford except where otherwise noted . 
 = = Credits = = 
 = Apalachee massacre = 
 The Apalachee massacre was a series of raids by English colonists from the Province of Carolina and their Indian allies against a largely pacific population of Apalachee Indians in northern Spanish Florida that took place during Queen Anne 's War in 1704 . Against limited Spanish and Indian resistance , a network of missions was destroyed ; most of the population either was killed or captured , fled to larger Spanish and French outposts , or voluntarily joined the English . 
 The only major event of former Carolina Governor James Moore 's expedition was the Battle of Ayubale , which marked the only large @-@ scale resistance to the English raids . Significant numbers of the Apalachee , unhappy with the conditions they lived in under the Spanish , simply abandoned their towns and joined Moore 's expedition . They were resettled near the Savannah and Ocmulgee Rivers , where conditions were only slightly better . 
 Moore 's raiding expedition was preceded and followed by other raiding activity that was principally conducted by English @-@ allied Creeks . The cumulative effect of these raids , conducted between 1702 and 1709 , was to depopulate Spanish Florida beyond the immediate confines of Saint Augustine and Pensacola . 
 = = Background = = 
 English and Spanish colonization efforts in southeastern North America began coming into conflict as early as the middle of the 17th century . The founding in 1670 by the English of Charles Town ( present @-@ day Charleston , South Carolina ) in the recently established ( 1663 ) Province of Carolina heightened tensions with the Spanish in Florida . Traders , raiders , and slavers from the new province penetrated into Florida , leading to raiding and reprisal expeditions on both sides . In 1700 , Carolina 's governor , Joseph Blake , threatened the Spanish with assertions that English claims to Pensacola , established by the Spanish in 1698 , would be enforced . Blake 's death later that year interrupted these plans , and he was replaced in 1702 by James Moore . 
 = = = La Florida = = = 
 The Spanish population of Florida at the time was fairly small compared to that of the nearby English colonies . Since its founding in the 16th century , the Spanish had set up a network of missions whose primary purpose was to pacify the local Indian population and convert them to Roman Catholicism . In the Apalachee Province ( roughly present @-@ day western Florida and southwestern Georgia ) there were 14 mission communities with a total population in 1680 of about 8 @,@ 000 . Many but not all of these communities were populated by the Apalachee ; others were inhabited by other tribes that had migrated southward to the area . By the early 18th century the Apalachee Province had become a major source of food for the principal towns of St. Augustine and Pensacola , which were situated near lands not well suited for agriculture . 
 The native populations of Florida were not entirely happy with Spanish rule ; there had been several uprisings against the Spanish in the 17th century . The Indians were often forced to do work for the Spanish military garrisons and plantation owners , including the labor of hauling goods to St. Augustine , about 100 miles ( 160 km ) away . These policies , and mistreatment by overbearing Spanish masters , led some Apalachees to flee to the English in Carolina . Spanish policy also forbade Indians the possession of muskets , which made them dependent on the Spanish for protection against the English @-@ armed Creeks . 
 = = Raids before 1704 = = 
 News that the War of the Spanish Succession ( known in North America as Queen Anne 's War ) had widened to include England arrived in Carolina by September 1702 , and Governor Moore convinced the provincial assembly in September 1702 to fund an expedition against St. Augustine . The expedition was a failure , and there was rioting in Charles Town over the expenses incurred . One significant accomplishment of the St. Augustine expedition was the destruction of coastal Spanish mission towns in Guale Province ( present @-@ day coastal Georgia ) . After the expedition , Florida Governor José de Zúñiga y la Cerda ordered the remaining Spanish missions in Apalachee and Timucua Province to be moved closer together for defensive purposes . Missions in <unk> Province were consolidated south of the St. Johns River , and those in Timucua were consolidated at San Francisco de Potano . In early 1703 Creeks attacked San José de <unk> and San Francisco de Potano , also raiding either <unk> or <unk> ; it is possible that as many as 500 Indians were enslaved as a result of these raids . 
 = = Ayubale = = 
 In 1703 ex @-@ Governor Moore presented to the Carolina assembly and his replacement , Nathaniel Johnson , a plan for an expedition against the Spanish towns in Apalachee Province . He promised that , unlike the St. Augustine expedition , the colony would not have to pay for anything ; he expected its costs to be recovered by the taking of loot and slaves . On September 7 , 1703 , the Carolina assembly approved the plan , asking Moore to go " to the Assistance of the <unk> and other our friendly Indians , and to <unk> the <unk> . " After recruiting 50 colonists , he traveled to the upper waters of the Ocmulgee River , where he recruited 1 @,@ 000 Creek Indians to join the expedition against their traditional enemies . 
 On January 25 , 1704 , Moore 's force arrived at Ayubale , one of the larger mission towns in Apalachee . While most of the Creeks raided the surrounding villages , Moore took most of the whites and 15 Creek into Ayubale itself around 7 : 00 am . The only resistance was organized by Father Angel Miranda , who retreated into the town 's church compound , which was surrounded by a mud wall . With 26 men he successfully held the English at bay for nine hours , and only surrendered himself , his men , and 58 women and children after they ran out of arrows . According to one Spanish account , Miranda threw himself and his followers on Moore 's mercy . He was , according to this account ( but apparently not others ; see below ) then summarily slain in cold blood by Moore 's Indian allies , and some of his followers were then tortured and killed . 
 Word of the attack reached San Luis de Apalachee , eight leagues ( about 24 miles ( 39 km ) ) south of Ayubale , where Captain Juan Ruíz de Mexía raised a force of 400 Apalachee and 30 Spanish cavalry . This force engaged Moore 's at Ayubale , and was decisively defeated . More than 200 Apalachees were killed or captured , three Spaniards were killed and eight were captured , with Mexía among the captured . There is evidence that as many as 50 Apalachee joined with the English against the Spanish @-@ led forces in this encounter . Moore considered making an attack on the fort at San Luis , but his force had suffered a significant number of wounds , so he opted instead for an attempt at extortion . Some of the Spanish prisoners managed to escape , so he released Miranda , Mexía and others to go to San Luis with the hope that the San Luis garrison commander would then pay a ransom for them . However , the garrison commander refused to pay . 
 = = Further raiding in Apalachee = = 
 Following the battle at Ayubale , Moore continued his march through Apalachee . One village , San Lorenzo de <unk> , survived when its leader surrendered his church 's gold ornaments and a train of supplies . Moore moved slowly , since many of the Apalachee apparently wanted to leave with the English . According to his report , most of the population of seven villages joined his march voluntarily . 
 In Moore 's report of the expedition he claimed to have killed more than 1 @,@ 100 men , women , and children . He also stated that he " removed into exile " 300 and " captured as slaves " more than 4 @,@ 300 people , mostly women and children . The only major missions to survive in Apalachee were San Luis and San Lorenzo de <unk> . The Spanish at first attempted to fortify these places , but they were eventually judged to be indefensible and abandoned . The survivors were consolidated at Abosaya , east of San Francisco de Potano . 
 James Moore did not identify by name the places his force destroyed . Historian Mark Boyd has analyzed English and Spanish sources documenting the missions and the effects of Moore 's raid . According to his analysis , the following missions were the ones most likely to have been destroyed : 
 La Concepción de Ayubale 
 San Francisco de <unk> 
 San Antonio de <unk> 
 San Martín de <unk> 
 Santa Cruz y San Pedro de Alcántara de <unk> 
 Spanish authorities in St. Augustine and Pensacola mobilized their meager forces , but did not return to Ayubale until after Moore 's force had clearly left the area . They buried the Christian dead , many of whom they reported as exhibiting evidence of torture . Despite the losses , they did not immediately abandon or consolidate the missions until further raiding took place , after which the demoralized surviving Apalachee insisted they would either retreat to Pensacola or go over to the English . 
 = = Later raids = = 
 In the wake of Moore 's raids , further raids were made into northern Florida , principally executed by the Creeks . In August 1704 , Creeks destroyed the <unk> missions of San Pedro and San Mateo ; a year later they attacked the Apalachee at Abosaya . Further attacks against Abosaya the next month prompted the survivors to flee to St. Augustine . In the spring of 1706 , Creek raiders besieged San Francisco de Potano and attacked the La Chua ranch near Abosaya ; both of these were abandoned , and Timucua was virtually depopulated by May 1706 . According to Apalachee scholar John Hamm , between Moore 's raids and these later ones , 2 @,@ 000 Indians went into exile , and an unknown number were enslaved . The French governor of Mobile , Jean @-@ Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville , wrote that raiding the Florida area resulted in the killing of 2 @,@ 000 Apalachees and the capture 32 Spaniards , 17 of whom were burned alive . By the end of 1706 the Spanish presence in Florida had been reduced to St. Augustine and Pensacola . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 Many survivors fled westward and settled near the French colonial outpost of Mobile , while others ended up near either St. Augustine or Pensacola ; Bienville reported that about 600 refugees were settled near Mobile . The Apalachees taken by Moore were resettled either along the Savannah River , or among the Creek on the Ocmulgee River . The free Apalachee refugees that settled these areas were frequently harassed by slavers ; in some cases Indians taken as slaves were freed after protests were made to Carolina authorities . 
 The Spanish responded to the raids by encouraging privateering raids against Carolina coastal plantations . In the following years , the English colonists continued to make inroads against Spanish and French interests in Florida and on the Gulf Coast , but they were never able to capture St. Augustine , Pensacola , or Mobile , the main Spanish and French settlements . Pensacola was twice besieged by Creek forces in 1707 , apparently with English colonial support . English @-@ supplied Indians also made incursions into French @-@ dominated territories to the west , but English intentions to assault Mobile never got beyond the planning stages ; there was a raid on an Indian village near Mobile in 1709 . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 Due in part to the somewhat fragmentary , unclear , and contradictory primary materials about these raids , historians have at times written widely varying accounts of the number of Indians that were enslaved . Although Moore claimed in his report that a large number of Apalachee were enslaved , modern historians believe that a significant number of those resettled by Moore went voluntarily , and were not actually slaves . Vernon Crane , in The Southern Frontier , 1670 – 1732 ( originally published in 1929 ) , uncritically accepts Moore 's numbers , and 19th century South Carolina historian Edward <unk> only mentions 1 @,@ 400 Apalachees being taken , of whom only 100 were slaves . Historian Allan <unk> , in a modern analysis , opines that the raids in 1704 alone resulted in the enslavement of between 2 @,@ 000 and 4 @,@ 000 Indians . 
 Opinions also differ as to the long @-@ term fate of the Indians that voluntarily went with Moore . Since a 1715 census of the Savannah River settlements counted fewer than 650 Apalachees , Allan <unk> believes that the balance were probably sold into slavery . James Covington believes that a combination of factors was to blame : in addition to active slaving against those settlements , disease , starvation , intermarriage with other tribes , and migration to other communities account for the difference . 
 = Slammiversary ( 2005 ) = 
 Slammiversary ( 2005 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion , which took place on June 19 , 2005 at the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . It was the first event under the Slammiversary chronology and the sixth event in the 2005 TNA PPV schedule . Nine professional wrestling matches , three of which featured championships , and one pre @-@ show match were featured on the event 's card . The event commemorated TNA 's third @-@ year anniversary , after forming on June 19 , 2002 . 
 The main event was the 2005 King of the Mountain match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship , in which then @-@ champion A.J. Styles defended the title against Abyss , Monty Brown , Sean Waltman , and Raven . Raven won the match and the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . The TNA X Division Championship was defended in a Three Way Elimination match by Christopher Daniels against Chris Sabin and Michael Shane . Daniels retained the championship in the encounter . On the undercard , America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) defeated the 3Live Kru ( B.G. James and Konnan ) in a tag team match . The debut of Samoa Joe was also promoted for the card . Joe defeated Sonjay Dutt in his first match for the company during the show . 
 The event is marked for the second @-@ ever King of the Mountain match and the debut of Samoa Joe . Jason Clevett of the professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer rated the event a 7 out of 10 , higher than the 2006 event 's ranking of 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 by Chris Sokol . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In March 2005 , it was announced TNA would be holding their third anniversary event on June 19 , 2005 . The name of the event was announced in late @-@ March as " Slammiversary " with credit for the name going to TNA wrestler Shark Boy and the location being the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . A section covering the event was created on TNA 's official website prior to the show . TNA held a poll heading into Slammiversary on their website asking fans to vote for their top five favorite moments in TNA 's three @-@ year existence . The results of the poll would then be shown throughout the show . TNA released a poster promoting the event featuring the tagline " Three Year Anniversary Spectacular " at some point beforehand . TNA planned a thirty @-@ minute pre @-@ show prior to the event . The debut of newly signed wrestler Samoa Joe was announced heading into the show where he would be pitted in a bout against Sonjay Dutt . 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 Slammiversary featured nine professional wrestling matches and one pre @-@ show matches that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds and storylines . Wrestlers portrayed villains , heroes , or less distinguishable characters in the scripted events that built tension and culminated into a wrestling match or series of matches . 
 The main event at Slammiversary was a King of the Mountain match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship , in which the champion A.J. Styles defended the title against four other competitors . At TNA 's Lockdown PPV event on April 24 , Styles defeated Abyss in a Six Sides of Steel Cage match . With the victory , he earned a shot at the NWA World Heavyweight Championship against then @-@ champion Jeff Jarrett at TNA 's Hard Justice PPV event on May 15 . At Hard Justice , Styles defeated Jarrett to win the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . On the May 20 episode of TNA 's television program TNA Impact ! , Jarrett demanded a rematch for the title from Director of Authority ( DOA ) Dusty Rhodes . Rhodes agreed , but instead announced that a King of the Mountain match would be held at Slammiversary in which Styles would defend the title against Jarrett , Monty Brown , Abyss — who won a Twenty @-@ Man Gauntlet for the Gold at Hard Justice to become number one contender — and a mystery wild card opponent . A storyline also connected to this match was the on @-@ screen suspension and quitting of TNA wrestler Raven . On the May 20 episode of Impact ! , Raven attacked Larry Zbyszko of the NWA Championship Committee after he refused to make Raven the wild card entrant in the King of the Mountain match . Rhodes suspended Raven for touching TNA personnel ; Raven therefore " quit " the company in the storyline . On the May 27 episode of Impact ! , Raven 's reasons for the attack and for quitting TNA were revealed : he felt Rhodes was holding him back from achieving his " destiny " of winning the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . 
 TNA promoted a Three Way match for the TNA X Division Championship between then @-@ champion Christopher Daniels and the challengers Chris Sabin and Michael Shane heading into Slammiversary . At Hard Justice , Sabin teamed with Traci to face the team of Shane and Trinity in a Mixed Tag Team match . The match ended with Traci and Shane turning on their partners , forming an alliance . On the May 20 episode of Impact ! , Shane attacked Daniels and demanded a championship match ; then Sabin attacked Shane , resulting in a brawl between the three wrestlers which was broken up by security . The following week on Impact ! , Sabin made an alliance with Trinity and Daniels versus Sabin and versus Shane for the title was promoted for Slammiversary . 
 A storyline heading into Slammiversary revolved around the recent losing streak and declension of America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ; AMW ) in the 3Live Kru ( B.G. James , Konnan , and Ron Killings ) . After <unk> , then @-@ reigning NWA World Tag Team Champions AMW lost the title to The Naturals ( Andy Douglas and Chase Stevens ) on the April 22 episode of Impact ! . AMW was granted a rematch for the titles at Hard Justice , but failed to reclaim the championship . On the May 20 episode of Impact ! , TNA held a match to determine the number one contenders to the NWA World Tag Team Championship . Team Canada ( Eric Young and Petey Williams ) defeated AMW in the bout , meaning they would challenge The Naturals at Slammiversary for the title . AMW continued to lose heading into the May 27 episode of Impact ! , where they lost to Killings and B.G. of the 3Live Kru . After the lost , AMW challenged 3Live Kru to a match at Slammiversary . At the same time , 3Live Kru were having unity problems in the narrative . In February 2005 , B.G. James ' former tag team partner Monty Sopp , now under the moniker " The Outlaw " , debuted at TNA 's Against All Odds PPV event . In the weeks after , it was unknown in the storyline whether B.G. would align with his former partner or remain with the 3Live Kru . On the May 27 episode of Impact ! , B.G. saved Killings from being attacked by The Outlaw . A bout between Killings and The Outlaw was promoted for Slammiversary later as well as a bout featuring AMW versus the 3Live Kru . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Show = = = 
 Prior to the beginning of the event , TNA held a thirty @-@ minute pre @-@ show during which Larry Zbyszko announced that DOA Dusty Rhodes had been relieved of his position in the storyline . After the show , Jeff Jarrett attacked a planted fan at ringside and was arrested in the storyline . Therefore , Jarrett was removed from the King of the Mountain match for being unable to compete . The team of Simon Diamond and Trytan defeated the team of Sonny Siaki and Apolo in a bout lasting 3 minutes and 56 seconds during the pre @-@ show . 
 = = = Miscellaneous = = = 
 The event featured employees other than the wrestlers involved in the matches . Mike Tenay and Don West were the commentators for the telecast . Jeremy Borash and David Penzer were ring announcers for the event . Andrew Thomas , Rudy Charles , and Mark " Slick " Johnson participated as referees for the encounters . Shane Douglas handled the interview duties for the event . Besides employees who appeared in a wrestling role , A @-@ 1 , Coach D 'Amore , Jimmy Hart , Traci , and Trinity all appeared on camera , either in backstage or in ringside segments . At the start of the event it was announced that Raven would take Jarrett 's place in the King of the Mountain match . Throughout the show , TNA counted down the top five favorite moments in TNA 's three @-@ year history , as voted on by the fans on TNA 's online poll . The fifth moment was A.J. Styles ' first NWA World Heavyweight Championship reign by defeating then @-@ champion Jarrett and Raven in a Three Way match on June 11 , 2003 . The fourth was the debut of Raven in January 2003 . The first ever all steel cage PPV Lockdown was third . The TNA debut of Jeff Hardy in June 2004 was second . The top favorite moment was Elix Skipper 's walk across the top of the Six Sides of Steel cage during the main event between America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) and Triple X ( Christopher Daniels and Skipper ) at TNA 's Turning Point PPV event on December 5 , 2004 . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match on the card was an X Division Six Way match between Amazing Red , Delirious , Elix Skipper , Jerrelle Clark , Shark Boy , and Zach Gowen . The contest lasted 6 minutes and 25 seconds . In the final moments of the bout , multiple near @-@ falls occurred . The first was by Gowen on Clark , ending in a two count . Then followed one by Skipper on Shark Boy , which was broken up by Amazing Red . Amazing Red then attempted a cover on Skipper , which was broken up by Clark , who then attempted to cover Amazing Red before it was stopped by Delirious . Shark Boy ended up gaining the pinfall on Delirious after using his signature maneuver the Dead Sea Drop . 
 Shocker fought Alex Shelley in the following bout . Its duration was 10 minutes and 13 seconds . During the contest , the two fought on the outside of the ring , where Shocker performed a dropkick on Shelley and went to follow up with a backflip splash . Shelley raised his legs , causing Shocker to crash his ribs directly on Shelley 's knees . Although , Shocker went on to win the encounter by using a roll @-@ up pin . 
 Ron Killings versus The Outlaw was the third encounter to take place on the card . It lasted 7 minutes and 30 seconds . The Outlaw attempted to apply a Cobra Clutch submission maneuver near the end ; Killings countered it by a roll @-@ up pin for the win . After the match , The Outlaw attacked Killings until B.G. James came down to the ring to save Killings as The Outlaw was about to bash Killings with a steel chair . 
 The Naturals ( Andy Douglas and Chase Stevens ) defended the NWA World Tag Team Championship against Team Canada ( Eric Young and Petey Williams ) , who were accompanied by A @-@ 1 and Coach D 'Amore , next . During the contest , The Naturals performed their Natural Disaster tag team maneuver on Young ; the pin attempt was broken up by Williams . Near the end , Williams attempted to perform his signature maneuver the Canadian Destroyer , but Jimmy Hart interfered in the contest and handed Stevens a megaphone . Stevens then bashed Williams with the megaphone and covered for the pin , retaining the NWA World Tag Team Championship at 15 minutes and 22 seconds . 
 The fifth match featured the TNA debut of Samoa Joe , who was pitted against Sonjay Dutt in a bout lasting 6 minutes and 22 seconds . Joe won the encounter by submission after performing his signature Muscle Buster maneuver and followed by placing Dutt in his Coquina Clutch submission hold . 
 Bobby Roode , who was accompanied by Coach D 'Amore , fought Lance Hoyt in the following encounter . D 'Amore interfered in the contest several times by distracting Hoyt , the referee , or aiding Roode in some way . Roode won the bout after performing his signature Northern Lariat maneuver at 7 minutes and 24 seconds . After the bout , Hoyt performed a backflip splash from the top of a padded turnbuckle onto a prone D 'Amore in the ring . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The seventh match pitted America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) against the 3Live Kru ( B.G. James and Konnan ) , who were accompanied by Ron Killings . The duration of the contest was 6 minutes and 54 seconds . Storm gained a near @-@ fall after kicking James in the face . The Outlaw interfered close to the end attacking Konnan , which distracted James . This allowed Storm to lift up James , so Harris could dive off the top rope and bash him in the chest with his forearm , thus giving AMW the victory . 
 The TNA X Division Championship was defended next in what was originally promoted as a Three Way match but was fought under elimination rules . Christopher Daniels defended the title against Chris Sabin , who was accompanied by Trinity , and Michael Shane , who was accompanied by Traci . Near the 11 minute mark , Sabin eliminated Shane after performing his signature Cradle Shock maneuver . With the match down to Sabin and Daniels , Daniels gained a near @-@ fall after performing his signature Best Moonsault Ever aerial maneuver . Sabin also gained a near @-@ fall after jumping off the ropes and driving Daniels ' head into the mat . Daniels eventually won the bout at 17 minutes and 10 seconds by utilizing his signature Angel 's Wings maneuver . 
 The main event was the King of the Mountain match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship , in which then @-@ champion A.J. Styles defended the title against Abyss , Monty Brown , Sean Waltman — who was revealed as the wildcard entrant earlier in the show — and Jeff Jarrett 's replacement Raven . In a King of the Mountain match , the objective is to climb a ladder and hang the championship belt on a hook above the ring . In order to do so , a wrestler must first qualify . To qualify a wrestler must either pin or make another wrestler submit in the match . A wrestler who is pinned or made to submit is this placed in a penalty box for two minutes . The match is fought under no disqualification rules . The match began with Waltman diving off the top of the penalty box onto Raven in the ring . Brown was the first to qualify by pinning Raven following his signature Pounce maneuver . Raven was then placed in the penalty box for two minutes . Waltman was later pinned by Brown following his signature Alpha Bomb , forcing Waltman to go to the penalty box . Raven was the next to qualify by pinning Styles on the outside of the ring following a Pounce by Brown . Styles was then forced to spend two minutes in the box . Later , Abyss pinned Brown after his signature Black Hole Slam maneuver , sending Brown to the box . Soon after , Styles qualified by pinning Abyss after forcing him through a table with his Spiral Tap maneuver . Waltman was the last to qualify by pinning Styles following his signature X @-@ Factor maneuver off the top of a ladder . Raven was the eventual winner of the contest , after hanging the championship belt above the ring at 14 minutes and 17 seconds . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A total of 775 people attended the event . Canadian Online Explorer writer Jason Clevett rated the entire event a 7 out of 10 , which was higher than the 6 ½ out of 10 given to the 2006 Slammiversary event by Chris Sokol . Clevett did not rate TNA 's previous event Hard Justice , but he gave a rating of 6 out of 10 to TNA 's Lockdown . Slammiversary was marked lower than TNA 's next PPV event No Surrender on July 17 , which was given an 8 out of 10 by Clevett . Compared to rival World Wrestling Entertainment 's Vengeance PPV event held on June 26 , Slammiversary was rated higher : Sokol gave Vengeance a 6 out of 10 . Clevett felt that overall Slammiversary was a " very good event " . Regarding the King of the Mountain match , Clevett thought it " was fun " . Although , he felt the rules were " so convoluted and confusing that it ended up being a complicated <unk> " . When speaking of the TNA X Division Championship match , Clevett wrote that it had a " good blend of the storyline involving Sabin , Trinity , Shane and Traci Brooks , Daniels fighting to keep his belt and some killer spots " . Clevett gave his highest match rating of 8 out of 10 in his review to the X Division and World Tag Team Championship matches . He gave his lowest rating of 4 out of 10 to the The Outlaw versus Ron Killings , Samoa Joe versus Sonjay Dutt , and AMW versus the 3Live Kru bouts . Clevett gave the main event a 7 out of 10 . 
 Wade Keller of the Pro Wrestling Torch rated the main event 4 ¼ of 5 , while he rated the X Division Championship match a 3 ½ out of 5 . He gave the lowest ranking to the AMW versus 3Live Kru bout , at ½ of a star , while his highest went to main event . Keller described the main event as an " absolutely crazy match , but they managed to create a sense of order and consequence from the chaos and big spots " . Keller thought that X Division Championship bout had " a lot of good moves and felt exciting " , but when it was over " it felt like too many spots and not enough story " . Keller spoke of Samoa Joe 's debut as a " great squash " , which showed " what sets him [ Joe ] apart . " TNA released a DVD counting down the top 50 moments in their history in 2007 , in which Raven fulfilled his destiny and won the NWA World Heavyweight Championship , listed at number 16 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After winning the NWA World Heavyweight Championship , Raven fought Abyss in a Dog Collar match which could only be won by pinfall at No Surrender . The match was set up on the June 24 episode of Impact ! , when Abyss attacked Raven after James Mitchell became his new manager . Raven challenged Abyss to a Dog Collar match on the July 1 episode of Impact ! , which Abyss accepted . Raven defeated Abyss at No Surrender to retain the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . A.J. Styles went on to No Surrender to face Sean Waltman . The feud was set up at Slammiversary during the King of the Mountain match when Styles and Waltman formed an alliance . The alliance ended when Waltman turned on Styles and performed an X @-@ Factor off the top of a ladder . Styles requested a match against Waltman on the July 8 episode of Impact ! , which he was granted by Larry Zbyszko after making Jerry Lynn the Special Guest Referee . Styles then defeated Waltman at No Surrender . Also at No Surrender , Christopher Daniels fought Petey Williams over the TNA X Division Championship . On the July 1 episode of Impact ! , Daniels announced he had beaten the best Mexican and American X Division wrestlers to retain the X Division Title . He was then challenged by Canadian wrestler Williams to a title defense at No Surrender , which Daniels accepted . Daniels retained the title at the event over Williams . 
 After Slammiversary Team Canada continued their feud with The Naturals and Lance Hoyt . On the July 1 episode of Impact ! , Team Canada attacked Hoyt after his match with Eric Young . At this time , The Naturals came to Hoyt 's defense , creating an alliance between them . Hoyt and The Naturals then defeated Team Canada ( A @-@ 1 , Bobby Roode , and Young ) in a Six Man Tag Team match on the July 8 episode of Impact ! . At No Surrender , Team Canada defeated Hoyt and The Naturals in a rematch . 
 The 3Live Kru went on to face Monty Brown and The Outlaw in a Tag Team Street Fight at No Surrender . On the June 24 episode of Impact ! , Brown and The Outlaw attacked Konnan and Killings during an interview with Mike Tenay . During this time , light was shown on the absence of B.G. James in the storyline . Brown and The Outlaw defeated Konnan and Killings at the event . Afterwards , James entered the ring , where The Outlaw offered him a steel chair to bash Konnan with , which he declined and left . 
 Following his debut at Slammiversary , Samoa Joe defeated Chris Sabin at No Surrender . He then competed in the 2005 TNA Super X Cup Tournament , defeating A.J. Styles in the finals at TNA 's Sacrifice PPV event on August 14 to win the tournament . Joe later went on to win the TNA X Division Championship on December 11 at TNA 's Turning Point PPV event from Styles . Eventually , Joe won other titles in TNA . He won the TNA World Tag Team Championship in July 2007 at TNA 's Victory Road PPV event and held it solo his entire reign . In April 2008 , Joe won the TNA World Heavyweight Championship at TNA 's Lockdown PPV event from Kurt Angle . 
 = = Results = = 
 TNA X Division Championship eliminations 
 King of the Mountain match statistics 
 = Herrenvolk ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Herrenvolk " is the fourth season premiere of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on October 4 , 1996 . It was directed by R.W. Goodwin , and written by series creator Chris Carter . " Herrenvolk " featured guest appearances by Roy Thinnes and Brian Thompson , and introduced Laurie Holden as recurring character Marita Covarrubias . The episode helped to explore the overarching mythology , or fictional history of The X @-@ Files . " Herrenvolk " earned a Nielsen household rating of 13 @.@ 2 , being watched by 21 @.@ 11 million people in its initial broadcast . 
 FBI special agent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) is shown more evidence of his sister 's abduction by the mysterious Jeremiah Smith ( Thinnes ) and makes a desperate attempt to rescue her , whilst being pursued by the Alien Bounty Hunter . Mulder 's informant X is found out by those he has betrayed — with fatal consequences . " Herrenvolk " is the second part of a two @-@ part episode , continuing the plot from the third season finale , " Talitha Cumi " . 
 " Herrenvolk " saw the death of Steven Williams ' character X , and featured the first appearance of Mulder 's sister Samantha , a character described by Carter as the " lifeblood " of the series , since the second season premiere , " Little Green Men " . The episode featured scenes filmed using swarms of bees , which caused problems due to the difficulty of taming and directing the animals . Other special effects in the episode were achieved through motion control photography . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In rural Alberta , Canada , a telephone lineman is stung by a bee as he works at the top of a pole . Five identical boys approach and watch as the lineman adversely reacts to the sting , causing him to fall to the ground and die . The boys look down at his body , then walk off silently . 
 At a remote industrial site , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) , Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , and Jeremiah Smith ( Roy Thinnes ) are approached by the Alien Bounty Hunter ( Brian Thompson ) . Mulder and Smith flee with both Scully and the Bounty Hunter in pursuit , eventually reaching a waterfront . Mulder sneaks up on the Bounty Hunter and stabs him in the neck with the alien stiletto . Both he and Jeremiah escape on a boat , leaving Scully alone with the seemingly dead Bounty Hunter . When she approaches the body , the Bounty Hunter wakes up and chokes her , demanding to know where Mulder and Smith are heading . He releases her after realizing she has no such knowledge . 
 On the boat , Mulder and Smith debate whether they should save Mulder ’ s mother Teena , despite the risk of Men in Black awaiting them . Mulder ultimately agrees that it would be too dangerous to visit her . Instead , they head towards Canada , where Smith says Mulder will find his sister , Samantha . Meanwhile , the First Elder ( Don S. Williams ) meets with The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) in Teena 's hospital room , confronting him with photos of his prior meeting with her , taken by X ( Steven Williams ) . They realize that there is a leak , and plan to smoke out its source by releasing false information about Teena being in danger . 
 The Bounty Hunter learns of Mulder 's whereabouts by listening in on a phone call between him and a captive Scully , leaving her to pursue him and Smith . In Washington , Scully reports to Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) , who informs her that the other Jeremiah Smiths have all disappeared . Scully and Agent Pendrell investigate the data that the Smiths were compiling , trying to decipher the encrypted files . Scully contacts X , who tells her that it is related to the government 's long @-@ running smallpox eradication program . X also tells her that he believes Teena 's life is in danger . 
 Meanwhile , in Canada , Smith and Mulder 's car runs out of gas . Walking the last few miles on foot , they come across the corpse of the electrician , grossly decomposed and covered in ants . Jeremiah takes Mulder to a mysterious field where they find a group of identical children ; the girls all resemble Samantha at the age when she was abducted . Jeremiah tells Mulder that the cloned children are mindless chattel used to tend the fields , incapable of speaking . After retrieving a gasoline can , Mulder tries to take one of the female clones with him . However , the Bounty Hunter arrives and chases them . As he corners them in a large bee hive , the Bounty Hunter is crushed and stung repeatedly in a trap set up by the trio . 
 Scully and Pendrell report to Skinner and the Office of Professional Responsibility on the data being tracked by the Smiths , which appears to be a cataloging of human beings . Meanwhile , the Bounty Hunter catches up to Mulder , Smith , and the clone , plowing into their car with a van . After knocking Mulder unconscious , the Bounty Hunter pursues a fleeing Jeremiah . Mulder returns to the hospital to see his mother , resigned to the fact that he cannot save her . The Syndicate leads X to a trap at Mulder 's apartment , where he is shot by the Grey @-@ Haired Man . X crawls into the apartment and writes the letters " SRSG " in his blood before dying . The letters lead Mulder to Marita Covarrubias ( Laurie Holden ) , the assistant to the Special Representative of the Secretary General of the United Nations . Covarrubias tells Mulder that the fields in Canada have been abandoned , but shows him a picture of the drone children tending to the shrubs . At the hospital , the Smoking Man directs the Bounty Hunter to heal Mulder 's mother , telling him that the fiercest enemy is the one with nothing to lose . 
 = = Production = = 
 The appearance of Samantha Mulder , this time as a clone of her from when she was still a little girl , was due to series creator Chris Carter 's desire to bring her back . Carter felt Samantha was an important element of the show , referring to her as being part of the lifeblood of the series . The decision to kill the character X was made at the end of the third season . The writers felt that they could only do so much with the character and decided that they would either make him a bigger player on the show , or have him pay the price for collaborating with Fox Mulder . Ultimately they decided on the latter . This led to the introduction of Marita Covarrubias at the end of the episode , Mulder 's latest informant . 
 The exterior shots of the crop fields in the episodes were filmed in ginseng fields , which writer Frank Spotnitz felt had an " otherworldly " quality to them . These fields were located near the city of Kamloops , which is approximately a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ hour drive from Vancouver ; a location from which the production had rarely strayed during its first five seasons . The hair , makeup and wardrobe truck ended up getting lost while driving there . A fiberglass composite lattice used by the aircraft industry was used to create the honeycombs through which the alien bounty hunter chases Mulder . 
 The death of X was a prominent scene in the episode , and it took several takes to complete the final scene ; with Spotnitz feeling that " it was a good way to send him off " . Director R. W. Goodwin has noted that he is responsible for directing the episodes that featured the deaths of X , Deep Throat , Mulder 's father , and Scully 's sister . 
 Thousands of live bees were used during production , with the understanding that the bees would not sting without a queen present . However , this theory proved incorrect , and Vanessa Morley , who played the Samantha Mulder clones , was stung during filming . She kept quiet and did not react until the scene had finished filming , leading Spotnitz to call her " a trooper " . The cold open for the episode , with multiple cloned boys , was achieved with motion control photography , allowing for two children to play all five of the clones ; multiple takes were recorded with the boys in different positions , and with the camera controlled by a computer to follow exactly the same motions for each take , these could be seamlessly composited together . 
 The episode title comes from the German word for " Master Race " . The tagline for this episode is " Everything Dies " instead of the usual " The Truth is Out There " . This phrase is uttered by the bounty hunter to Mulder during the episode . During the production of " Herrenvolk " , Carter had already begun the pre @-@ production phases of the series ' feature film adaptation , which would be released in 1998 . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Herrenvolk " premiered on the Fox network on October 4 , 1996 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on September 10 , 1997 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 13 @.@ 2 with a 23 share , meaning that roughly 13 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 23 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 21 @.@ 11 million viewers watched this episode during its original airing , making it the first episode of The X @-@ Files watched by more than 20 million people . 
 In an overview of the fourth season in Entertainment Weekly , " Herrenvolk " was rated an A- . It was noted that the episode " makes good use of locations " , and the ambiguous resolution to Jeremiah Smith 's plot arc was seen as a positive , as it " opens the door to all sorts of provocative potentialities " . Writing for The A.V. Club , Zack Handlen rated the episode a B + , though he felt it suffered from " treading @-@ water plotting " . Handlen also described the episode as being tense on its own , but suffering from " stagnation " when held as part of the series ' ongoing mythology . He cited the death of X as an example of this , feeling that the scene was " appropriately shocking " and perhaps " one of the most memorable deaths in the series " — however , the almost immediate introduction of a successor character , Marita Covarrubias , was seen as " <unk> [ ing ] the importance " of the events . 
 = Bachata Rosa = 
 Bachata Rosa ( English : Pink Bachata ) is the fifth studio album by Dominican singer @-@ songwriter Juan Luis Guerra and his group 4 @.@ 40 . It was released on December 11 , 1990 , by Karen Records . Written and produced by Guerra , the record sold over five million copies worldwide . It brought bachata music into the mainstream in the Dominican Republic and gave the genre an international audience . A Portuguese version of the record was released in 1992 under the title Romance Rosa ; it was certified gold in Brazil . The album received a Grammy Award for Best Tropical Latin Album and two Lo Nuestro Awards for Tropical Album of the Year and Tropical Group of the Year . 
 Seven singles were released from the record , three of which became top @-@ ten hits on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart . The album debuted at number one on the Billboard Tropical Albums . It remained the top @-@ selling album on the chart for 24 weeks and was certified platinum ( Latin field ) in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . In Spain , the album spent eight weeks at the number one position on the chart . In the Netherlands , the record peaked at number two on the Mega Album Top 100 and was certified gold . Bachata Rosa was praised by critics , who commended Guerra 's songwriting and the record 's production , citing it as one of his most important works . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the time , bachata was defined as music from the rural areas of the Dominican Republic with lyrics considered too crude and vulgar to the public 's taste . It was characterized by an acoustic guitar accompanied with bongo drums and maracas . After releasing the album <unk> Que <unk> Café , Juan Luis Guerra began experimenting with the genre by performing bachata alongside Dominican artist Sonia Silvestre on her album Quiero Andar . The result was an early demo of " Como Abeja al Panal " ( " Like a Bee to the Hive " ) . Silvestre said that Guerra was dismayed when he learned that Silvestre 's album Quiero Andar was in bachata ; he did not become fully committed to the genre until after " Como <unk> al panal " was released as a single where it was a hit in the United States . The song was first released for a Barceló TV commercial . 
 After " Como Abeja al Panal " was released as a single and achieved success , Guerra continued working on bachata music , which served as a key element in Bachata Rosa . Silvestre explained the name of the title by saying that " [ Guerra 's ] <unk> were rosa [ rosy ] while mine was red " . Guerra 's bachata focused on the language of lower @-@ class and used synthesizers for his production whereas Silvestre 's bachata relied on a synthesized accordion for her music . Recording took place in the 4 @-@ 40 studio in New York City , Guerra 's personal studio . The album was released by Karen Records . 
 = = Musical style , writing and composition = = 
 The album consists of ten tracks , including four bachata songs . The album starts with the opening track " Rosalia " , an upbeat merengue song . " Como Abeja al Panal " begins as a bachata tune and switches to salsa music in the middle of the song , falling back to bachata toward the end . " Carta de Amor " is a salsa track in which he writes a letter to his lover in his journal , punctuation marks included . " <unk> y <unk> " ( " Little Stars and Elves " ) is a bachata about living in his love 's memories as a rain @-@ shower of little stars and elves . " A Pedir su Mano " ( " Asking for Her Hand " ) is a cover of Lea <unk> 's song " Dede <unk> " from the Central African Republic which combines merengue and <unk> . 
 " La <unk> " ( " The <unk> " ) is a merengue song that describes a man in a hospital suffering from a high level of bilirubin from love and jealousy , which can only be cured by kisses , as no shots nor surgery are effective . " Burbujas de Amor " ( " Bubbles of Love " ) is a sexual bachata song about a man 's desire to become a fish and " make bubbles of love " in his lover 's fishbowl . The lyrics for the song " Bachata Rosa " were inspired by the opening lines of the poem " Book of Questions " by Chilean poet Pablo Neruda . " <unk> " ( " <unk> me " ) is a merengue track performed by 4 @-@ 40 vocalist <unk> Pantaleon . The last track " <unk> Civil " is a merengue song performed by Beny <unk> which deals with social awareness . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 In the United States , Bachata Rosa debuted at number one on the Billboard Tropical Albums on the week of January 12 , 1991 . It remained there for 24 nonconsecutive weeks and was bestselling Tropical album of the year in the United States . It peaked at number 19 on Billboard Top Latin Albums during the week of July 24 , 1993 . In 2004 , the album was certified platinum ( Latin field ) by the RIAA for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 copies . In Spain , the album reached number one on the Productores de Música de España chart , where it spent eight weeks . The album also performed well in the Netherlands , where it peaked at number two on the Mega Album Top 100 chart and was certified gold by the NVPI . A Portuguese version , titled Romance Rosa , was released in 1992 . It also contained songs from his earlier albums performed in Portuguese . It was certified gold in Brazil by the Associação Brasileira dos Produtores de Discos for sales of 100 @,@ 000 copies . As of 1994 , the album had sold over five million copies . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Como Abeja al Panal " was the first single released from the album . It peaked at 31 on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart in 1989 and 55 on Mega Single Top 100 in the Netherlands . " La <unk> " was the second single released from the album . It reached number nine on the Hot Latin Songs chart . The third single , " Burbujas de Amor " , was the most successful single from the album . It peaked at number two on the Hot Latin Songs chart and number three on the Mega Single Top 100 . The music video for the song features Guerra performing from a porch as he watches a couple dancing in the rain . The fourth single , " A Pedir su Mano , " peaked at 13 on the Hot Latin Songs chart . The music video shows people in traditional African dress dancing in sugarcane fields with a cartoon of a red train traversing the landscape . " <unk> y <unk> " , the fifth single released from the album , peaked at number three on the Hot Latin Tracks . The sixth single " Carta de amor " peaked at 35 on the Hot Latin Songs chart . The last single released from the album was " Bachata Rosa " , which peaked at 15 on the Hot Latin Songs chart . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The album was praised by critics . Jason Birchmeier of Allmusic gave Bachata Rosa 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and referred to the record as a " milestone effort " , writing " Not only is it his career @-@ defining work , it 's also one of the finest tropical albums of its era , or any other , for that matter " . Don Snowden of the Los Angeles Times gave the album a 3 out of 4 star rating and praised the arrangements of the album as " punchy " and " well @-@ crafted " . 
 At the 34th Grammy Awards , the album received the award for Best Tropical Latin Album . At the 1991 Lo Nuestro Awards , Guerra received three awards : Tropical Song of the Year for " Burbujas de Amor " , Video of the Year for the music video of " A Pedir su Mano " , and Tropical Group of the Year . A year later , Guerra received two Lo Nuestro awards : Tropical Album of the Year and Tropical Group of the Year . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Prior to the release of Bachata Rosa , bachata was generally regarded as lower @-@ class music in the Dominican Republican and did not receive media attention . After Guerra released the album , bachata became socially accepted by the middle- and upper @-@ classes . The genre became mainstream in the Dominican Republic , and the success of the album provided the genre with international exposure . In 2015 , Billboard listed Bachata Rosa as one of the Essential Latin Albums of Past 50 Year stating that " Guerra created an uplifting , love @-@ themed experience from start to finish and stretched bachata ’ s limits by playing with merengue , salsa and Afro @-@ Caribbean rhythms " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Juan Luis Guerra , except where noted . 
 All songs written and composed by Juan Luis Guerra , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following credits are from Allmusic and from the Bachata Rosa liner notes : 
 Juan Luis Guerra y 440 
 Additional personnel 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Okęcie Airport incident = 
 The Okęcie Airport incident ( Polish : <unk> na <unk> ) was a dispute between players and technical staff of the Poland national football team on 29 November 1980 , starting at the team hotel in Warsaw and climaxing at Okęcie Airport . An incident of footballing insubordination at a time when strike action and other forms of civil resistance were intensifying in communist Poland , it caused a domestic press storm , which led first to the suspension of several prominent players , then the resignation of the team manager , Ryszard Kulesza . 
 Józef Młynarczyk , the team 's goalkeeper , was hungover when the time came to leave the hotel for the airport , having not been to sleep following a night on the town with a friend . Kulesza and one of his assistants , Bernard Blaut , decided to leave Młynarczyk behind , much to the indignation of some players , including Stanisław Terlecki , Zbigniew Boniek , Włodzimierz Smolarek and Władysław Żmuda . Terlecki , a stridently pro @-@ Western intellectual with a reputation for mocking the communist establishment , was particularly angered , and himself drove Młynarczyk to the airport , where the players continued their protests . Kulesza eventually relented and allowed Młynarczyk to travel with the team . 
 The Polish media took hold of the story and vociferously attacked the rebellious players over the following days . Meanwhile , Terlecki again defied the communist authorities by arranging for the players to meet Pope John Paul II . The Polish Football Association sent Terlecki , Młynarczyk , Boniek and Żmuda home and imposed various bans preventing them from playing at the international and club level over the next year . Terlecki and Boniek in particular were condemned by the association as insubordinate " rabble @-@ rousers " . Smolarek received a more modest , suspended ban . Kulesza resigned in protest at the sanctions imposed on the players , saying they were too harsh . Most of the banned players were reinstated during 1981 , but Terlecki was not — he emigrated to the United States in June that year and although he returned home five years later , he never played for Poland again . 
 = = Background = = 
 In June 1976 , a series of protests took place across communist Poland soon after the government announced plans to increase sharply the fixed prices charged nationwide for many basic commodities . Violent incidents occurred in Płock , Radom and Ursus as the protests were forcibly put down , and the planned price hikes were cancelled . These demonstrations and the events surrounding them brought the Polish workforce and intellectual political opposition together , and by 1980 , a campaign of civil resistance for political change was intensifying strongly . Industrial strike action in Lublin in July 1980 — the so @-@ called Lublin July — preceded the formation of Solidarity ( Solidarność ) in the port city of Gdańsk during the following months . This was the first non @-@ communist trade union in an Eastern bloc country . The government took several steps to obstruct Solidarity 's emergence , enforcing press censorship and cutting off telephone connections between the coast and the hinterland , but despite these efforts four out of every five Polish workers were members of the union by late 1980 . 
 Poland 's national football team , managed by Ryszard Kulesza , was then regarded as one of the world 's best , having finished third at the 1974 World Cup . In November 1980 it was ranked sixth in the world by the Elo rating system . Late that month , the team was preparing for a 1982 World Cup qualifying match away against Malta on 7 December . The squad 's departure was scheduled for 29 November , 10 days before the game , so the players could attend a training camp in Italy , then contest a warm @-@ up match against a team representing the Italian league . 
 One of Poland 's key players at the time was Stanisław Terlecki , a forward whose club was ŁKS Łódź . The son of university lecturers , Terlecki held a degree in history from the University of Łódź , as well as fervent anti @-@ communist political views and a strident attitude regarding their display . He was known for openly mocking the establishment with subversive abandon , and regularly made jokes in public about communist authority figures and organisations , prompting the ire of the Polish Football Association ( PZPN ) and the Warsaw police force . The first Polish international player with a university degree in anything other than physical education , he eschewed the Polish sports magazines read by many of his team @-@ mates on road trips in favour of Western news journals such as Newsweek and Time . Like many Polish intellectuals , he sympathised with movements such as Solidarity ; following their example , he twice attempted to unionise Polish footballers during the late 1970s . The PZPN blocked both attempts , banning Terlecki from all organised football each time ; first for six months , then for a year . 
 = = Incident = = 
 = = = Main incident = = = 
 Late on 28 November 1980 , the night before the team 's departure for Italy , goalkeeper Józef Młynarczyk and forward Włodzimierz Smolarek , both of Widzew Łódź , left the team hotel in Warsaw , the Hotel Vera , without permission . According to Smolarek they did this to get some dinner because they did not like the food at the hotel . They met a friend of Młynarczyk 's , sports journalist Wojciech Zieliński , at the Adria nightclub . According to Andrzej Iwan , another member of the team , the main topic of conversation was Zieliński 's estranged wife , who had been caught prostituting herself around Warsaw , and had since moved to Italy . Several Poland players knew her , and Młynarczyk had just been to Italy to play for Widzew Łódź against Juventus . According to Iwan , the journalist encouraged Młynarczyk to drink as they talked , hoping the goalkeeper might have news of her . Smolarek left the club around 02 : 00 , but Młynarczyk and Zieliński stayed until about three hours later . 
 A senior national team official , Colonel Roman <unk> of the Polish Army , said he saw the goalkeeper and the journalist reach the hotel in a taxi soon after 05 : 00 — but rather than going to his room , Młynarczyk then left again with Zieliński before returning again around 07 : 00 . Tired and hungover , Młynarczyk joined the rest of the players for breakfast , and according to Terlecki spent most of the meal getting worked up about possible managerial retribution . Młynarczyk was in such bad shape that he was unable to carry his own bags ; Smolarek took them for him . Next to the team bus , one of Kulesza 's assistants , Bernard Blaut , confronted Smolarek and told him that Młynarczyk was to stay behind . 
 Smolarek , Terlecki and two other Polish players — Zbigniew Boniek and Władysław Żmuda , both of Widzew Łódź — angrily objected and nearly came to blows with Blaut . Grzegorz <unk> , one of the team 's forwards , did not join the protest but later said that he had not thought Młynarczyk drunk enough to warrant exclusion . The team eventually left without Terlecki or Młynarczyk . Terlecki , whose own car was to hand , drove himself and Młynarczyk to the airport , where the confrontation continued . 
 Terlecki tried to stop the many pressmen at the airport from photographing Młynarczyk by running around , yelling , and snatching cameras and microphones from their hands . Meanwhile , the other players attempted to talk Kulesza around , telling him that Młynarczyk had serious personal problems . Kulesza eventually relented and allowed the goalkeeper to travel with the team . 
 = = = Press storm ; players meet the Pope = = = 
 Among the journalists at the airport were Jacek <unk> of Polish Television , Bogdan <unk> of Polish Radio , and Remigiusz Hetman of the weekly football journal Piłka Nożna . News about the incident quickly spread across the country , partly because of Terlecki 's outlandish actions in the reporters ' presence — Iwan later reflected that Terlecki had " made so much commotion it was impossible to sweep everything under the carpet " . Boniek corroborates this version of events : " Terlecki was massively to blame . He brought Młynarczyk to the airport in his own car , then pulled the plug powering a TV camera out of the wall . " Grzegorz Majchrzak , a historian of the Polish Institute of National Remembrance , questions Boniek 's words , positing that he might have distorted events in an attempt to distance himself from Terlecki . 
 The government attempted to use the scandal as a popular distraction , aiming to deflect attention from the strikes and other industrial action . A number of journalists attacked the players who had supported Młynarczyk ; the Przegląd <unk> sports magazine ran the headline " No Mercy for Those Guilty of the Scandal at the Airport " while Tempo , another journal , was similarly severe , proclaiming " This Cannot Be <unk> " . Piłka Nożna condemned the " magnificent men ... who think they can do what they want " , but at the same time questioned the conduct of the team 's non @-@ playing staff . 
 In the Italian capital , Terlecki continued to defy the establishment . The players were under strict instructions not to associate with the Vatican while in Rome , but Terlecki arranged for them to meet Pope John Paul II , who was himself Polish . Seeing this as a second act of defiance , the PZPN promptly sent Terlecki , Młynarczyk , Boniek and Żmuda home , escorted by General Marian Ryba of the Polish Army , who was also the football association president . Lech Poznań 's Piotr <unk> replaced Młynarczyk for the match against Malta , which Poland won 2 – 0 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Hearings and suspensions = = = 
 Ryba announced on 1 December 1980 that he intended to bar the dissenting players from the Poland squad . When the rest of the team returned to Poland , Terlecki once again attempted to form a footballers ' union . Securing the support of 16 other Poland international players , he wrote a letter to the PZPN declaring their intention to do so , leading the authorities to order them to face a tribunal . Only Terlecki , Boniek , Żmuda and Młynarczyk continued to endorse the letter when challenged in court . 
 On 15 December , PZPN officials attempted to reconstruct the night 's events , asking various players and staff to give accounts of what had happened . Several journalists were present . The stories told contradicted each other in several places , notably regarding how much Młynarczyk had had to drink . The team 's technical staff said that he had been obviously intoxicated when they had seen him , while the goalkeeper insisted he had taken only " three glasses of champagne and a sip of beer " with his friend . Another point of contention regarded the conversation at the airport , which had caused Kulesza to yield . It was generally agreed that the players had talked the manager around by telling him that Młynarczyk had personal problems , but the non @-@ playing staff now accused them of emotional blackmail . The players said their intention had been to explain the goalkeeper 's off @-@ field issues to help the manager make a more informed decision . 
 Terlecki 's answers at this meeting under the questioning of General Ryba , a former military prosecutor , were typically provocative ; when the general asked what time Terlecki had left the hotel on 29 November , the ŁKS forward said 08 : 00 . " Are you sure it was 08 : 00 ? " Ryba pressed — " Are you sure it wasn 't 08 : 02 ? " The player replied that he wasn 't : " No . Maybe it was even 08 : 03 . I don 't know this time exactly , because I have one of your Russian watches . " 
 A week later , the PZPN announced its final verdict . The only versions of events accepted for consideration were those recounted by Kulesza and Blaut ; those of all the players and of the team physiotherapist and sport psychologist were dismissed . Żmuda and Młynarczyk were barred from playing for either Poland or their clubs for eight months , and Terlecki and Boniek for twelve . Smolarek received a two @-@ month ban , which was suspended for six months . Citing their previous records of insubordination and misconduct , the PZPN called Terlecki and Boniek " rabble @-@ rousers " . 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 Kulesza left his job soon afterwards ; according to Majchrzak , he resigned in protest at the players ' punishments , which he thought were too harsh . Officials at Widzew Łódź accused the PZPN of bias , saying the association had not supervised the players properly and should shoulder some of the blame . Directors at Widzew and ŁKS Łódź briefly considered resigning their PZPN memberships and organising their own league championship , but did not . The national team players ' council , at that time comprising Marek <unk> , Paweł <unk> and Wojciech Rudy , wrote an open letter expressing surprise at what they saw as excessive sanctions against Terlecki , Boniek , Żmuda and Młynarczyk . They admitted the goalkeeper 's conduct had been far from exemplary , but contended that the incident was only minor , and had been exacerbated by disproportionately prominent and negative press coverage . 
 Despite being without some of their top players , Widzew Łódź were crowned champions of Poland at the end of the 1980 – 81 season . Ryba left his post in April 1981 , along with a number of his contemporaries , described by Stefan <unk> , a sports journalist and football historian , as " honest officials , together with some football @-@ friendly Polish Army officers " . In their place came a number of communist officials , most prominently Włodzimierz <unk> , an erstwhile Politburo member , who took over as head of the football association despite a reputation for not liking the sport . 
 Młynarczyk , Boniek and Żmuda had their bans cancelled early . Żmuda and Młynarczyk returned in the 1 – 0 home win over East Germany on 2 May 1981 , and Boniek was reinstated four months later . The players ' recall was partly due to the efforts of Kulesza 's replacement , Antoni <unk> , to secure their return . According to Majchrzak , Boniek and Żmuda apologised for their actions before the General Committee for Physical Culture and Sport of the Polish People 's Republic , the PZPN 's governing body , but kept this from Terlecki , who appealed to have his ban lifted several times , but to no avail . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Terlecki openly participated in students ' strikes at his old university in Łódź and across Poland over the next few months , providing food to the students by the car @-@ load . ŁKS cancelled his registration in early 1981 . Majchrzak stresses that Terlecki was the only player involved in the incident not to regain his place in the Poland team , and claims that this was down to an intense grudge held against him by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Secret Police ( SB ) . Terlecki developed his own theory that the media circus following the airport incident had been deliberately engineered by the SB to head the players off forming their own trade union . There were several other incidents of drunkenness involving Młynarczyk , Majchrzak writes , but this was the only occasion when any player was punished for it . In October 1981 , when the team travelled to Argentina , Młynarczyk arrived at Okęcie " completely drunk " , according to Iwan , but far from reprimanding him , team staff gave him even more alcohol during the flight to help ease the pain of his broken finger . 
 Poland qualified for the 1982 World Cup with a perfect record , and performed strongly in the competition , losing to Italy in the semi @-@ finals but beating France in a play @-@ off to claim third place . Kulesza became the manager of Tunisia , and later founded a coaching school in Warsaw . 
 Saying he was " being treated like a leper " , Terlecki emigrated to the United States in June 1981 , and joined the Pittsburgh Spirit of the Major Indoor Soccer League . He pursued a new life in America with great vigour . Terlecki 's on @-@ field displays in the U.S. were widely praised — in three seasons with Pittsburgh he became the club 's all @-@ time top goalscorer — but managers reportedly had trouble " harness [ ing ] Terlecki 's fiery temper " , and his wife Ewa became intensely homesick . Terlecki announced his intention to move back to Poland in 1985 , saying that he believed the political situation had improved and that he wished to reunite his family . He returned home the following year , and resumed his career in Polish club football . He expressed a desire to play for the national team again , but was never selected . 
 = 2009 Hudson River mid @-@ air collision = 
 The 2009 Hudson River mid @-@ air collision was a flight accident that occurred on August 8 , 2009 , at 11 : 53 a.m. ( 15 : 53 UTC ) , in which nine people died when a tour helicopter and a small private airplane collided over the Hudson River near Frank Sinatra Park in Hoboken , New Jersey . 
 The aircraft were in an area known as the " Hudson River VFR Corridor " , which extends from the surface of the river to altitudes of 800 to 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 240 to 460 m ) at various locations along the Hudson River in the immediate area of New York City . Within this corridor , aircraft operate under visual flight rules , under which the responsibility to see and avoid other air traffic rests with the individual pilots rather than with the air traffic controller . 
 Because of the heavy commercial air traffic into Newark , LaGuardia , and Kennedy airports , an air traffic control clearance is required to operate in much of the airspace around the city . Since ATC is often unwilling to grant this discretionary VFR clearance because of traffic volume , many airplanes that need to transit the New York metro area use the VFR corridor as an alternative to going east of the city ( over water ) or west ( toward Pennsylvania ) . The corridor is also heavily used by helicopter tour companies , which take passengers on sight @-@ seeing tours of the New York skyline . Visual flight rules on the river corridors by Manhattan have been subject to considerable debate since the 2006 New York City plane crash , in which New York Yankees pitcher Cory Lidle crashed into an apartment building while flying using visual flight rules on the East River . This was the first aircraft collision over the Hudson River since 1976 . 
 The collision , which occurred opposite 14th Street in Manhattan , was about 40 blocks south of where US Airways Flight 1549 ditched in the Hudson River on January 15 , 2009 , with no loss of life , after the plane suffered a complete loss of thrust following a bird strike . 
 = = Collision = = 
 The light aircraft was a 1976 @-@ built 6 @-@ seat Piper PA @-@ 32R @-@ 300 Cherokee Lance piloted by Steven Altman with 2 passengers . Altman was given clearance from the tower at Teterboro Airport in Teterboro , New Jersey at 11 : 48 a.m. to take off . It departed at 11 : 49 a.m. , and was headed for Ocean City , New Jersey . 
 The helicopter , a Eurocopter AS350 carrying five Italian tourists and its pilot , took off from the West 30th Street Heliport at 11 : 52 a.m. At about the same time , Teterboro tower radioed Altman in the Piper at take @-@ off requesting him to pick his flight path towards Ocean City , and indicate whether he wished to head there via the Hudson River , or take a southwest tack . Altman replied " Either " . " Let me know " said the tower , and Altman replied " OK , tell you what , I will take down the river . " 
 Altman was then instructed to contact Newark Liberty International Airport , and he acknowledged the instruction . However , he did not contact the tower at Newark . It later transpired that , in acknowledging the instruction to contact Newark , Altman had read back the wrong frequency ( 127 @.@ 8 MHz instead of 127 @.@ 85 ) ; an error that the controller did not correct . Soon after , a controller at Newark who was concerned about aircraft in the Piper 's path contacted the Teterboro controller and asked the Teterboro controller to attempt to re @-@ establish contact . Attempts to contact Altman and change his aircraft 's heading were unsuccessful . After the unsuccessful attempts to contact Altman , a radar alert about a possible collision occurred in both the Newark and Teterboro towers . However , the two controllers did not remember seeing or hearing the alert . 
 While heading south down river , the airplane was seen to be behind the sightseeing helicopter , which was going about half as fast . The pilot of another helicopter ( refueling at the heliport ) saw the impending accident and attempted to warn both the airborne helicopter and the plane by radio but received no response . At 11 : 53 : 14 a.m. , the Piper 's right wing crashed into the Eurocopter , severing the right wing of the airplane and multiple rotor blades from the helicopter . Most witnesses reported the plane did a nose dive while spiraling into the water . Many reported that the helicopter just dropped into the water . The collision occurred at approximately 1 @,@ 100 feet ( 340 m ) MSL altitude and was caught on tape by an Italian tourist . Less than a minute after the collision occurred , the Teterboro controller contacted the Newark tower to inquire about the airplane , and was told that the airplane had not contacted Newark . 
 Killed in the airplane were the pilot Steven Altman , his brother Daniel , and his nephew Douglas . The helicopter tourists were in two groups ; the first was Michele <unk> and his son , Filippo <unk> . The other group was Fabio <unk> , his wife , <unk> <unk> , and his son , Giacomo <unk> . The pilot of the helicopter was New Zealander Jeremy Clarke , who had logged 2 @,@ 700 hours as a helicopter pilot . All recovered victims died from blunt trauma to the head , torso and extremities , according to the NYC medical examiner 's office . 
 National Weather Service weather conditions at noon in New York City stations on the day of the collision were described as " sunny " or " partly sunny " with a temperature of between 73 ° F and 75 ° F ( 22 @.@ 8 ° C and 23 @.@ 9 ° C ) and variable wind speed of 3 – 10 mph ( 4 @.@ 8 – 16 @.@ 1 km / h ; 2 @.@ 6 – 8 @.@ 7 kn ) . 
 Authorities said the Piper 's " low wing " design made it difficult to see below the aircraft and the helicopter 's rotors make it difficult to see above . In addition , neither small aircraft was required to have a flight data recorder or cockpit voice recorder . 
 = = Emergency response = = 
 = = = Rescue = = = 
 Immediately following the accident the Coast Guard had reported that the New York City Fire Department ( FDNY ) had rescued one survivor from the Hudson River ; however , this report was shown to be incorrect . In addition to FDNY , six rescue boat crews from Coast Guard Station New York , a Coast Guard rescue helicopter crew from Coast Guard Air Station Atlantic City , several Coast Guard Auxiliary assets , the New York City Police Department ( NYPD ) , New Jersey State Police , and local emergency services all participated in the rescue effort . The Red Cross and the New York Harbor Police also assisted in the efforts . At about 3 : 00 p.m. , Michael Bloomberg , the mayor of New York , addressed questions in a press conference . Calling the crash " an accident which we do not believe was survivable , " Bloomberg announced that the mission was no longer a rescue mission , but rather a recovery mission . 
 On the night of August 8 , 2009 , the US Coast Guard maintained a two @-@ mile safety zone from the Holland Tunnel to the Lincoln Tunnel , requiring vessels to move slowly and stay within 400 yards of the Manhattan side while passing through the area . The safety zone was maintained by the Coast Guard cutter Penobscot Bay . 
 = = = Recovery = = = 
 On the afternoon of the crash , divers had recovered two bodies from the water . By the next morning , a total of four bodies were found , while the other five victims were presumed dead . Meanwhile , the helicopter 's wreckage was found in about 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) of water , far from the wreckage fields of the plane . Aided by a sonar , investigators attempted to discover the plane 's debris in deeper water near the mid @-@ channel point of the Hudson . Their efforts were hindered , however , due to poor visibility underwater and a storm on August 9 . 
 The efforts succeeded on August 10 , when the plane 's wreckage was discovered in approximately 60 ft of water . The plane wreckage was recovered from the river on the afternoon of August 11 . Additionally , the last few bodies were found in the wreckage of the plane , ending the search for bodies . The recovery effort was led by the United States Army Corps of Engineers with the aid of NYPD boats , New Jersey State Police divers , and the FDNY . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 An investigation was conducted by the National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) , which sent a Go Team on the day of the crash . Senior NTSB Air Safety Investigator Robert Gretz was the Investigator @-@ in @-@ Charge of the 10 @-@ member team . NTSB Chairman Debbie Hersman accompanied the team and served as principal spokesperson for the on @-@ scene investigation . Keith Holloway is the NTSB press officer who joined the team in New York . 
 On August 14 , 2009 , the NTSB released a report regarding the incident . The report discussed several aspects of the collision , including locations of origin of the aircraft , planned destination , and air traffic control communications . In addition , the report discussed how one of the controllers at Teterboro Airport was on a phone call and did not warn the airplane pilot of the potential conflict . The National Air Traffic Controller 's Union ( NATCA ) then issued their own press release disputing some of the phrasing in the NTSB 's report . The NTSB then retracted some of its statements regarding the controller 's part in the crash , saying that the controller could not have warned the plane about the tour helicopter because the tour helicopter was not on the controller 's radar . The NTSB also removed NATCA as a party to the investigation as a result of NATCA 's press release , as parties to NTSB investigations agree to let the NTSB control publicity during the investigation . NATCA may still submit information to the board regarding the accident , but they will not hold a seat on the investigation board . 
 Due to the accident , the FAA put the Teterboro controller and his supervisor on leave and made comments about the phone call , which was deemed improper behavior . However , the NTSB rebuked the FAA for doing so , stating that only the NTSB has the authority to determine the controller 's contribution to the incident . 
 On September 14 , 2010 , the NTSB released its final report on the incident . The report cited two primary causes of the accident : ( 1 ) the " inherent limitations " of the see @-@ and @-@ avoid concept , which meant that from the airplane pilot 's point of view , the helicopter would have appeared as a small , stationary object against a backdrop of the New York City skyline until the final seconds before the collision ; and ( 2 ) the Teterboro controller 's personal phone call , which distracted him from his air traffic control duties and prevented him from correcting the airplane pilot 's incorrect <unk> of the Newark control tower 's radio frequency . [ 1 ] 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Reaction = = = 
 Reaction from government officials , aviation industry groups , and individuals has been widespread . The FAA convened a " New York Airspace Working Group " on August 14 , 2009 . The group will solicit comments from helicopter and aircraft operators , and will review the operating procedures of the Hudson and East River VFR corridors . They will report to FAA administrator Babbitt on August 28 . A NOTAM issued on August 11 , 2009 advises pilots flying in the area to turn on their lights , use the designated self @-@ announce radio frequencies , and fly at a speed of 140 knots or less . 
 15 members of Congress , led by Representative Jerrold Nadler ( D @-@ New York ) , sent a letter to FAA administrator J. Randolph Babbitt calling for " immediate action to provide greater oversight of small aircraft operations " . 
 In a press conference on August 8 , 2009 , New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg ( an airplane and helicopter pilot himself ) stated that " Until the National Transportation Safety Board makes a determination , nothing is a fact " and stressed that the investigation will take weeks or months before those facts are known . Representatives from the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association ( AOPA ) , including AOPA President Craig Fuller , have appeared on numerous news programs and collaborated with news sources to explain the workings of the Hudson River VFR corridor and the safety record of flights in that area . 
 = = = NTSB recommendations = = = 
 The NTSB issued a " Safety Recommendation " to the FAA on August 27 , 2009 . Because of the accident airplane 's intended flight path , the NTSB believes that the pilot may have wanted to climb out of the uncontrolled VFR corridor into the controlled Class B airspace above . However , for reasons unknown as yet , he was not in communication with any air traffic controllers after he switched frequencies from Teterboro tower . He also apparently was not communicating on the Corridor 's self @-@ announce frequency . 
 The NTSB recommended that the FAA revise the procedures for ATC facilities in the area to facilitate the process for VFR traffic that wishes to transit Class B airspace . This included establishing procedures to coordinate such requests between facilities ; requiring controllers to instruct pilots to self @-@ announce on the VFR corridor frequency if they are unable to immediately enter Class B airspace ; adding information to area Automatic Terminal Information Service ( ATIS ) broadcasts reminding pilots to use the self @-@ announce frequency ; and ensuring that pilots are provided with traffic advisories if they are in contact with a controller . 
 Additionally , the NTSB recommended that ATC controllers and supervisors be briefed in the circumstances of this accident ; that a Special Flight Rules Area ( <unk> ) be established for the location requiring special training for pilots transiting the area ; and that helicopters be required to operate at lower altitudes than airplanes in the corridor to minimize the speed differences . 
 = = = FAA changes = = = 
 On September 2 , 2009 the FAA announced a plan to improve safety of flights in the corridor . The proposed changes include standardizing the height of the VFR corridor to 1 @,@ 300 feet ( 400 m ) . In addition , many existing procedures that have been treated as " Suggested " items for flying the corridor will now be mandatory , including operating landing lights ; maintaining a speed of 140 knots ( 160 mph ) or less while flying in the corridor ; monitoring and announcing on the area Common Traffic Advisory Frequency ; and travelling along the west shore when southbound and along the east shore when northbound . Pilots will be required to have appropriate charts available , and to familiarize themselves with the applicable rules before flying in the corridor . Additionally , pilot training courses for both transient pilots and charter helicopter pilots will be developed . An implementation timeline was not initially announced . 
 On November 16 , 2009 , the FAA announced that the new rules for the Hudson River corridor would go into effect on November 19 , 2009 , at 4 p.m. The FAA elaborated on the new rules from their previous announcement . In the clarifications , they said that three air traffic zones for different purposes would be instituted . Under 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) , planes and helicopters for sightseeing and lingering would be allowed . From 1 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 300 feet ( 300 to 400 m ) , aircraft would be allowed to fly without air traffic control handling . Above 1 @,@ 300 feet ( 400 m ) , aircraft would be allowed to traverse the corridor under the handling of air traffic control . 
 = = See Also = = 
 List of civilian mid @-@ air collisions 
 = Johann Strauss II = 
 Johann Strauss II ( October 25 , 1825 – June 3 , 1899 ) , also known as Johann Strauss Jr . , the Younger , the Son ( German : Sohn ) , Johann Baptist Strauss , was an Austrian composer of light music , particularly dance music and operettas . He composed over 500 waltzes , polkas , quadrilles , and other types of dance music , as well as several operettas and a ballet . In his lifetime , he was known as " The Waltz King " , and was largely then responsible for the popularity of the waltz in Vienna during the 19th century . 
 Strauss had two younger brothers , Josef and Eduard Strauss , who became composers of light music as well , although they were never as well known as their elder brother . Some of Johann Strauss ' most famous works include " The Blue Danube " , " Kaiser @-@ Walzer " , " Tales from the Vienna Woods " , and the " <unk> @-@ Tratsch @-@ Polka " . Among his operettas , Die Fledermaus and Der Zigeunerbaron are the best known . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Strauss was born in St Ulrich near Vienna ( now a part of <unk> ) , Austria , on October 25 , 1825 , to the composer Johann Strauss I. His paternal great @-@ grandfather was a Hungarian Jew – a fact which the Nazis , who lionised Strauss 's music as " so German " , later tried to conceal . His father did not want him to become a musician but rather a banker . Nevertheless , Strauss Junior studied the violin secretly as a child with the first violinist of his father 's orchestra , Franz Amon . When his father discovered his son secretly practising on a violin one day , he gave him a severe whipping , saying that he was going to beat the music out of the boy . It seems that rather than trying to avoid a Strauss rivalry , the elder Strauss only wanted his son to escape the rigours of a musician 's life . It was only when the father abandoned his family for a mistress , Emilie <unk> , that the son was able to concentrate fully on a career as a composer with the support of his mother . 
 Strauss studied counterpoint and harmony with theorist Professor Joachim Hoffmann , who owned a private music school . His talents were also recognized by composer Joseph <unk> , who taught him exercises in harmony . It was during that time that he composed his only sacred work , the <unk> Tu qui regis totum <unk> ( 1844 ) . His other violin teacher , Anton <unk> , who was the ballet répétiteur of the Vienna Court Opera , also wrote excellent testimonials for him . Armed with these , he approached the Viennese authorities to apply for a license to perform . He initially formed his small orchestra where he recruited his members at the Zur Stadt Belgrad tavern , where musicians seeking work could be hired easily . 
 = = Debut as a composer = = 
 Johann Strauss I 's influence over the local entertainment establishments meant that many of them were wary of offering the younger Strauss a contract for fear of angering the father . Strauss Jr. was able to persuade the Dommayer 's Casino in <unk> , a suburb of Vienna , to allow him to perform . The elder Strauss , in anger at his son 's disobedience , and at that of the proprietor , refused to ever play at the Dommayer 's Casino again , which had been the site of many of his earlier triumphs . 
 Strauss made his debut at Dommayer 's in October 1844 , where he performed some of his first works , such as the waltzes " <unk> " , Op. 1 and " <unk> " , Op. 4 and the polka " <unk> " , Op. 3 . Critics and the press were unanimous in their praise for Strauss 's music . A critic for Der Wanderer commented that " Strauss ’ s name will be worthily continued in his son ; children and children ’ s children can look forward to the future , and three @-@ quarter time will find a strong footing in him . " 
 Despite the initial fanfare , Strauss found his early years as a composer difficult , but he soon won over audiences after accepting commissions to perform away from home . The first major appointment for the young composer was his award of the honorary position of " Kapellmeister of the 2nd Vienna Citizen 's Regiment " , which had been left vacant following Joseph Lanner 's death two years before . 
 Vienna was wracked by the revolutions of 1848 in the Austrian Empire and the intense rivalry between father and son became much more apparent . Johann Jr. decided to side with the revolutionaries . It was a decision that was professionally disadvantageous , as the Austrian royalty twice denied him the much coveted ' KK Hofballmusikdirektor ' position , which was first designated especially for Johann I in recognition of his musical contributions . Further , the younger Strauss was also arrested by the Viennese authorities for publicly playing " La Marseillaise " , but was later acquitted . The elder Strauss remained loyal to the monarchy , and composed his " Radetzky March " , Op. 228 ( dedicated to the Habsburg field marshal Joseph Radetzky von Radetz ) , which would become one of his best @-@ known compositions . 
 When the elder Strauss died from scarlet fever in Vienna in 1849 , the younger Strauss merged both their orchestras and engaged in further tours . Later , he also composed a number of patriotic marches dedicated to the Habsburg Emperor Franz Josef I , such as the " Kaiser Franz @-@ Josef <unk> " Op. 67 and the " Kaiser Franz Josef <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> " Op. 126 , probably to ingratiate himself in the eyes of the new monarch , who ascended to the Austrian throne after the 1848 revolution . 
 = = Career advancements = = 
 Strauss Jr. eventually surpassed his father 's fame , and became one of the most popular waltz composers of the era , extensively touring Austria @-@ Hungary , Poland , and Germany with his orchestra . He applied for the KK Hofballmusikdirektor Music Director of the Royal Court Balls position , which he eventually attained in 1863 , after being denied several times before for his frequent brushes with the local authorities . 
 In 1853 , due to constant mental and physical demands , Strauss suffered a nervous breakdown . He took a seven @-@ week vacation in the countryside in the summer of that year , on the advice of doctors . Johann 's younger brother Josef was persuaded by his family to abandon his career as an engineer and take command of Johann 's orchestra in the interim . 
 In 1855 , Strauss accepted commissions from the management of the Tsarskoye @-@ Selo Railway Company of Saint Petersburg to play in Russia for the Vauxhall Pavilion at Pavlovsk in 1856 . He would return to perform in Russia every year until 1865 . 
 Later , in the 1870s , Strauss and his orchestra toured the United States , where he took part in the Boston Festival at the invitation of bandmaster Patrick Gilmore and was the lead conductor in a " Monster Concert " of over 1000 performers ( see World 's Peace Jubilee and International Musical Festival ) , performing his " Blue Danube " waltz , amongst other pieces , to great acclaim . 
 = = Marriages = = 
 Strauss married the singer Henrietta <unk> in 1862 , and they remained together until her death in 1878 . Six weeks after her death , Strauss married the actress Angelika <unk> . <unk> was not a fervent supporter of his music , and their differences in status and opinion , and especially her indiscretion , led him to seek a divorce . 
 Strauss was not granted a divorce by the Roman Catholic Church , and therefore changed religion and nationality , and became a citizen of Saxe @-@ Coburg @-@ Gotha in January 1887 . Strauss sought solace in his third wife Adele Deutsch , whom he married in August 1887 . She encouraged his creative talent to flow once more in his later years , resulting in many famous compositions , such as the operettas Der Zigeunerbaron and <unk> , and the waltzes " Kaiser @-@ Walzer " Op. 437 , " Kaiser Jubiläum " Op. 434 , and " <unk> <unk> " Op. 462 . 
 = = Musical rivals and admirers = = 
 Although Strauss was the most sought @-@ after composer of dance music in the latter half of the 19th century , stiff competition was present in the form of Karl Michael <unk> and Émile <unk> ; the latter held a commanding position in Paris . Phillip <unk> also denied the younger Strauss the commanding position of the KK Hofballmusikdirektor when the latter first applied for the post . The German operetta composer Jacques Offenbach , who made his name in Paris , also posed a challenge to Strauss in the operetta field . 
 Strauss was admired by other prominent composers : Richard Wagner once admitted that he liked the waltz " Wein , <unk> und Gesang " Op. 333 . Richard Strauss ( unrelated to the Strauss family ) , when writing his Rosenkavalier waltzes , said in reference to Johann Strauss , " How could I forget the laughing genius of Vienna ? " 
 Johannes Brahms was a personal friend of Strauss ; the latter dedicated his waltz " Seid <unk> , <unk> ! " ( " Be <unk> , You Millions ! " ) , Op. 443 , to him . A story is told in biographies of both men that Strauss 's wife Adele approached Brahms with a customary request that he autograph her fan . It was usual for the composer to inscribe a few measures of his best @-@ known music , and then sign his name . Brahms , however , inscribed a few measures from the " Blue Danube " , and then wrote beneath it : " Unfortunately , NOT by Johannes Brahms . " 
 = = Stage works = = 
 The most famous of Strauss ' operettas are Die Fledermaus , Eine Nacht in <unk> , and Der Zigeunerbaron . There are many dance pieces drawn from themes of his operettas , such as " Cagliostro @-@ Walzer " Op. 370 ( from Cagliostro in Wien ) , " O <unk> Mai " Walzer Op. 375 ( from Prinz <unk> ) , " Rosen aus dem <unk> " Walzer Op. 388 ( from Das <unk> der Königin ) , and " <unk> @-@ Walzer " op . 400 ( from Der <unk> Krieg ) , that have survived obscurity and become well @-@ known . Strauss also wrote an opera , Ritter <unk> , and was in the middle of composing a ballet , <unk> , when he died in 1899 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Strauss was diagnosed with <unk> @-@ pneumonia , and on June 3 , 1899 he died in Vienna , at the age of 73 . He was buried in the Zentralfriedhof . At the time of his death , he was still composing his ballet <unk> . 
 As a result of the efforts by Clemens Krauss who performed a special all @-@ Strauss programme in 1929 with the Vienna Philharmonic , Strauss 's music is now regularly performed at the annual Vienna New Year 's Concert . Distinguished Strauss interpreters include Willi <unk> , who carried on the <unk> tradition of conducting with violin in hand , as was the Strauss family custom , as well as Herbert von Karajan , Carlos Kleiber , Lorin Maazel , Zubin Mehta and Riccardo Muti . In addition , the Wiener Johann Strauss Orchester , which was formed in 1966 , pays tribute to the touring orchestras which once made the Strauss family so famous . In 1987 Dutch violinist and conductor André Rieu also created a Johann Strauss Orchestra . 
 Most of the Strauss works that are performed today may once have existed in a slightly different form , as Eduard Strauss destroyed much of the original Strauss orchestral archives in a furnace factory in Vienna 's <unk> district in 1907 . Eduard , then the only surviving brother of the three , took this drastic precaution after agreeing to a pact between himself and brother Josef that whoever outlived the other was to destroy their works . The measure was intended to prevent the Strauss family 's works from being claimed by another composer . This may also have been fueled by Strauss 's rivalry with another of Vienna 's popular waltz and march composers , Karl Michael <unk> . 
 Two museums in Vienna are dedicated to Johann Strauss II . His residence in the <unk> where he lived in the 1860s is now part of the Vienna Museum . The Strauss Museum is about the whole family with a focus on Johann Strauss II . 
 = = Portrayals in the media = = 
 The lives of the Strauss dynasty members and their world @-@ renowned craft of composing Viennese waltzes are also briefly documented in several television adaptations , such as The Strauss Family ( 1972 ) , The Strauss Dynasty ( 1991 ) and Strauss , the King of 3 / 4 Time ( 1995 ) . Many other films used his works and melodies , and several films have been based upon the life of the musician , the most famous of which is called The Great Waltz ( 1938 ) , redone in 1972 . 
 Alfred Hitchcock made a low @-@ budget biographical film of Strauss in 1933 called Waltzes from Vienna . After a trip to Vienna , Walt Disney was inspired to create four feature films . One of those was The Waltz King , a loosely adapted biopic of Johann Strauss , which aired as part of the Wonderful World of Disney in the U.S. in 1963 . In Mikhail Bulgakov 's 1940 ( published 1967 ) novel , The Master and Margarita , Johann Strauss conducts the orchestra during Satan 's Great Ball at the invitation of Behemoth . 
 A Corny Concerto ( 1943 ) , a Warner Bros cartoon , directed by Bob Clampett with animation by Robert <unk> , features music that was composed by Johann Strauss , and is a parody of Walt Disney 's 1940 Fantasia . The cartoon is narrated by Elmer Fudd , parodying Deems Taylor 's appearance in Fantasia . 
 The 1950 animated short entitled " Tom and Jerry in the Hollywood Bowl " from the series " Tom and Jerry " makes use of Johann Strauss II 's Overture of Die Fledermaus . 
 Another 1953 animated short " Johann Mouse " from the series Tom and Jerry features a mouse mesmerised by the playing of several Strauss waltzes by Johann Strauss himself , and later , by Tom . 
 The 1968 film 2001 : A Space Odyssey features " The Blue Danube " . 
 = = Works = = 
 = Fortifications of Gibraltar = 
 The fortifications of Gibraltar have made the Rock of Gibraltar and its environs " probably the most fought over and most densely fortified place in Europe , and probably , therefore , in the world " , as Field Marshal Sir John Chapple has put it . The Gibraltar peninsula , located at the far southern end of Iberia , has great strategic importance as a result of its position by the Strait of Gibraltar where the Mediterranean Sea meets the Atlantic Ocean . It has repeatedly been contested between European and North African powers and has endured fourteen sieges since it was first settled in the 11th century . The peninsula 's occupants – Moors , Spanish , and British – have built successive layers of fortifications and defences including walls , bastions , casemates , gun batteries , magazines , tunnels and galleries . At their peak in 1865 , the fortifications housed around 681 guns mounted in 110 batteries and positions , guarding all land and sea approaches to Gibraltar . The fortifications continued to be in military use until as late as the 1970s and by the time tunnelling ceased in the late 1960s , over 34 miles ( 55 km ) of galleries had been dug in an area of only 2 @.@ 6 square miles ( 6 @.@ 7 km2 ) . 
 Gibraltar 's fortifications are clustered in three main areas . The densest fortifications are in the area where historically Gibraltar was under the most threat – at the north end of the peninsula , the North Front , facing the isthmus with Spain . Another group of fortifications guards the town and the harbour , referred to as the West Side . The southern end of the town is guarded by the South Land Front . Few fortifications exist on the east side , as the sheer cliff of the Rock of Gibraltar is a virtually impassable obstacle . Further fortifications occupy the plateaus of Windmill Hill and Europa Point at the southern end of the peninsula . Lookout posts and batteries on the summits of the Rock provide a 360 ° view across the Strait and far into Spain . Although Gibraltar is now largely demilitarised , many of the fortifications are still intact and some , such as the Great Siege Tunnels and the Charles V Wall – where many of Gibraltar 's famous " apes " live – have become tourist attractions . 
 = = Topography = = 
 The nature and position of Gibraltar 's defences have been dictated by the territory 's topography . It is a long , narrow peninsula measuring 5 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 2 miles ) by 1 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 1 mile ) wide at maximum , with a land area of about six square kilometres ( 2 @.@ 3 square miles ) . The only land access to the peninsula is via a sandy isthmus , only three metres ( 9 @.@ 8 feet ) above sea level , most of which is now occupied by the Spanish town of La Línea de la Concepción . The peninsula is dominated by the limestone massif of the Rock of Gibraltar , which presents a sheer cliff over 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 feet ) high at its north end , facing the isthmus . The Rock extends southwards for 2 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 6 miles ) with several peaks before it descends to two southern plateaus at heights of between 90 – 130 metres ( 300 – 430 feet ) and 30 – 40 metres ( 98 – 131 feet ) above sea level . The southern tip of Gibraltar is surrounded by steep cliffs . The Rock itself is asymmetric , with a moderate slope on the west side and a very steep ( and in places near @-@ vertical ) slope on the east side . The original core of the town of Gibraltar occupies the lower north @-@ west side of the Rock , adjoining the Bay of Gibraltar , though it has grown considerably to the point that the built @-@ up area now stretches all the way to Europa Point on the southern tip of the peninsula . A great deal of 20th century land reclamation on the west side has also widened the coastal area , which was formerly quite narrow . A couple of small settlements , originally fishing villages , occupy the east side . 
 These features have made Gibraltar a naturally strong defensive position . The isthmus lacks any natural cover , exposing any approaching enemy to opposing fire . The heights of the Rock form a natural barrier to movement and rocky ledges provide natural platforms for gun batteries . The sheer cliffs on the north and east sides of the Rock block access from those directions and the sea cliffs around the southern end of the peninsula make landings there difficult , especially if opposed . A single road connects Gibraltar with Spain , and within the territory most roads are narrow and often steep due to the restricted land area . Over the centuries , Gibraltar 's successive occupants have built an increasingly complex set of fortifications around , on top of and incorporating the territory 's natural features . 
 Writing in 1610 , the Spanish historian Fernando del Portillo commented that Gibraltar was " a stronghold from its very topography which with a little art could be made impregnable , " and so it has proved . The Irish writer George <unk> Wright observed in 1840 that " the surface of the Rock is wholly occupied by defensive works ; where it was possible , and often where it appeared almost impracticable , batteries and fortifications have been formed . From Europa Point , which pushes into the sea on the south side , to the highest point of the Rock , there is not a single point that has not been put into a defensible condition . . . Proceeding towards Europa Point , at the entrance of the town , fortifications , magazines , barracks , and batteries are placed wherever the nature of the surface would permit . " 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Moorish period = = = 
 Gibraltar 's fortifications have evolved in a number of stages . Its first permanent inhabitants , the Moors of North Africa , are said to have established a fort on Djebel Tarik ( the Mount of Tarik , a name that was eventually corrupted into Gibraltar ) " to be on guard and watch events on the other side of the Straits " as early as 1068 . Gibraltar was fortified for the first time in 1160 by the Almohad Sultan Abd al @-@ Mu 'min in response to the coastal threat posed by the Christian kings of Aragon and Castile . The Rock of Gibraltar was renamed Jebel al @-@ Fath ( the Mount of Victory ) , though this name did not persist , and a fortified town named Medinat al @-@ Fath ( the City of Victory ) was laid out on the upper slopes of the Rock . It is unclear how much of Medinat al @-@ Fath was actually built , as the surviving archaeological remains of Moorish Gibraltar are scanty . A portion of wall some 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) long still survives to the south of the main part of the city of Gibraltar , of similar design to defensive walls in Morocco . It may have protected a settlement on the upper part of the Rock , around where the modern Queen 's Road is , but firm archaeological evidence is lacking . 
 The city fell to the Castilians in 1309 after the first siege of Gibraltar and its fortifications were repaired and improved by King Ferdinand IV of Castile , who ordered the construction of a keep above the town . The Castilians maintained control of Gibraltar until 1333 , resisting a Moorish siege in 1315 , but relinquished it in 1333 after the third siege of Gibraltar . After defeating a Castilian counter @-@ siege which ended after two months , the Marinid sultan Abu al @-@ Hasan Ali ibn Othman ordered a refortification of Gibraltar " with strong walls as a halo surrounds the crescent moon " . Many details of the rebuilt city are known due to the work of Abu al @-@ Hasan 's biographer , Ibn <unk> , whose Musnad ( written around 1370 – 71 ) describes the reconstruction of Gibraltar . The city was expanded , and a new defensive wall was built to cover the western and southern flanks , with towers and connecting passages added to strengthen them . The existing fortifications were also strengthened and repaired . The weak points that the Castilians had exploited were improved . 
 The refortified city occupied the north @-@ eastern part of the present @-@ day city , reaching from the area of Grand Casemates Square up to Upper Castle Road . It was divided into three main quarters which functioned as a series of baileys through which troops could fall back in stages . The Tower of Homage ( now usually called the Moorish Castle , though more properly that name refers to the entire fortified area of the Moorish city ) was located at the highest point , serving as a final redoubt . The Tower was a formidable square keep situated within a kasbah and had the largest footprint of all the towers to be built in Moorish Al @-@ Andalus ( 320 square metres ( 3 @,@ 400 sq ft ) ) . It was a much @-@ strengthened rebuilding of an earlier tower and still bears scars on its eastern wall from projectiles shot by the Castilians during the siege of 1333 . The kasbah could only be accessed via a single gate , which still survives ; an inscription visible up to the 18th century recorded that it had been dedicated to Yusuf I , Sultan of Granada . 
 Below the kasbah was an area later called the Villa Vieja ( English : Old Town ) by the Spanish , accessed via the Bab el @-@ Granada ( English : Granada Gate ) , and below that was a port area called La Barcina by the Spanish , which may have taken its name from the Galley House ( Arabic : Dar el @-@ <unk> ) built there by the Moors . It had three separate access gates : the Land Gate ( now the Landport Gate ) , the Sea Gate ( now the Grand Casemates Gates ) and a southern gate , the Barcina Gate . The core of the city was surrounded by substantial defensive walls with tall towers topped by merlons . Other than the Tower of Homage , two such towers still survive ; one square based which was fitted with a clock in Victorian times ( now the Stanley Clock Tower ) and another constructed en bec ( beaked , a design intended to resist mining ) . The walls were at first built using <unk> , a lime @-@ based mortar made with the local sand and faced with decorative brickwork to simulate masonry . The builders later changed their construction methods to utilise stone interlaced with brick , a rather stronger structure . The southern flank of the walls has survived relatively intact , and vestiges of the other walls are most likely still to be found underlying the modern defensive walls constructed by the British . To the south of the fortified city was an urban area known as the Turba al Hamra , literally the " red sands " , named after the predominant colouration of the soil in that area . Ibn Battuta visited the city in 1353 – 54 and wrote : 
 I walked round the mountain and saw the marvellous works executed on it by our master , the late Sultan of Morocco , and the armament with which he equipped it , together with the additions made thereto by our master Abu <unk> , may God strengthen him ... [ He ] strengthened the wall of the extremity of the mount , which is the most formidable and useful of its walls . 
 = = = Spanish period = = = 
 Castile regained control of Gibraltar in the Eighth Siege of 1462 . The Moorish threat receded following the completion of the Reconquista and the fortifications were allowed to fall into decay , with very few cannon mounted on the batteries . In 1535 , the Spanish naval commander Álvaro de Bazán the Elder warned King Charles I that Gibraltar 's defences were seriously inadequate and recommended that the Line Wall Curtain be extended all the way to Europa Point on the southern tip of Gibraltar and that the town 's southern wall should be strengthened . However , his advice was ignored . The soldier and writer Pedro <unk> Maldonaldo noted that by 1540 Gibraltar 's north @-@ west bastion ( presumably referring to North Bastion ) had only four guns , while the castle 's few guns were all dismounted ( and therefore unusable ) , and there were no gunners . The garrison 's equipment was antiquated and their numbers were few . The town 's walls were still essentially medieval and could not have resisted mid @-@ 16th century artillery . The fall of Constantinople 90 years earlier showed just how vulnerable such walls could be in the face of a heavy artillery bombardment . 
 The town 's inhabitants paid the price for this neglect in September 1540 when Barbary pirates from North Africa carried out a major raid , taking advantage of the weak defenses . Hundreds of Gibraltar 's residents were taken as hostages or slaves . The Spanish crown responded to Gibraltar 's vulnerability by building the Charles V Wall to control the southern flank of the Rock . The wall 's builder , the Italian engineer Giovanni Battista Calvi , also strengthened the Landport Gate . Another Italian engineer , Giovan Giacomo <unk> <unk> , extended the wall onto the Upper Rock at some point probably between 1558 – 65 . A lookout tower , one of several constructed along Spain 's southern coast during this period , was built at the eastern end of the isthmus linking Gibraltar with the Spanish mainland . This structure , known as Devil 's Tower , was demolished during World War II . The German engineer Daniel Specklin is also thought to have been employed in improving Gibraltar 's fortifications between 1550 – 52 . Although there is no direct evidence , the Spanish fortifications at the southern end of the town are virtually identical in design to drawings in Specklin 's posthumously published Architectura von <unk> ( " The Architecture of Fortresses " ) and on this basis it has been suggested that he was the designer of Gibraltar 's southern works . 
 Although the 16th century works improved Gibraltar 's defences significantly , they still had major shortcomings . Fernandez del Portillo noted in 1610 that while Gibraltar was " girt by quite a good wall with bastions at corners " , there still remained work to be done to complete the fortification plans that had been drawn up in the previous century . He felt that " perhaps what does exist is enough to withstand an assault and more . " The biggest weakness was the lack of an effective sea wall to resist naval bombardments , and in 1618 Philip III of Spain authorised works to create a new mole for a deep @-@ water harbour , protected by a newly constructed gun platform and the Torre del <unk> fort . Philip IV subsequently ordered a major modernisation of Gibraltar 's fortifications due to hostile activity in the Strait by the Protestant powers of northern Europe – particularly England and the Dutch Republic . On visiting Gibraltar in 1624 , the king found that his carriage could not fit through the Landport Gate . He had to walk into the town instead and expressed his displeasure , to which Gibraltar 's military governor is said to have retorted : " Sir , the Gate was not made for the passage of carriages , but for the exclusion of enemies . " 
 The fortifications had only relatively thin crenelated walls , which were insufficiently strong to counter artillery bombardments . They were lined with many tall towers for archers , but could not be used to mount cannon . Don Luis Bravo de Acuña , the governor of Gibraltar , produced a report for the king recommending a series of changes to the territory 's fortifications . A series of new batteries was built along the Line Wall , each named after saints , and a New Mole ( later renamed the South Mole ) was built to provide additional protection to ships in the harbour . On the north side of Gibraltar , the Muralla de San <unk> ( now the Grand Battery ) was fully adapted to mount cannon facing the isthmus with the old archery towers being pulled down and replaced by bastions . The Old Mole , stretching into the Bay of Gibraltar , provided further mountings for cannon to sweep the isthmus . A series of defensive works constructed on a glacis above the entrance to the town provided further enfilading fire . A formidable bastion was constructed to protect the south of the town ; known as the Baluarte de Nuestra Señora del Rosario ( " Bastion of Our Lady of the Rosary " ) , and now as the South Bastion , it enfiladed the ditch across the Gate of Africa , now the Southport Gates . However , the effectiveness of the new fortifications was undermined by the continued failure of the Spanish crown to provide enough troops to man them . 
 In August 1704 , an Anglo @-@ Dutch invasion force sailed into the Bay of Gibraltar and rapidly overcame the poorly manned garrison . Don Diego de Salinas , the last Spanish governor of Gibraltar , had repeatedly called for the garrison and fortifications to be strengthened , but to no avail . When Admiral George Rooke 's fleet carried out the capture of Gibraltar , his 350 guns were opposed by only 80 iron and 32 brass cannon of various calibres in Gibraltar . Most of the Spanish guns were not even manned . De Salinas only had about 150 regular soldiers , very few of whom were gunners , and about 250 armed civilians . Gibraltar fell after only four days of fighting . A Franco @-@ Spanish army laid siege shortly afterwards and was able to inflict substantial damage on the old Spanish fortifications , which crumbled under the constant pounding . However , the Anglo @-@ Dutch garrison was able to repair the worst of the damage and repelled Franco @-@ Spanish attacks while being resupplied and reinforced by sea . After eight months the French and Spanish abandoned the twelfth siege of Gibraltar . 
 = = = British period = = = 
 = = = = Eighteenth century = = = = 
 The most substantial development of Gibraltar 's fortifications took place during the British occupation of the territory from 1704 to the present day . Little was done initially to improve the fortifications , beyond making modest upgrades and repairing the damage caused by the 1704 siege . In 1709 , General James Stanhope complained to the Earl of Galway that " the [ defence ] works in general are in a very bad condition , and the money they have cost I am afraid has been ill laid out " , by which he meant that it had been misappropriated . Rather than being spent on the fortifications , the funds had been diverted by corrupt officers to repair their own houses in the town . Other officers were accused of stealing cannons and selling them for profit in Lisbon . Stanhope expressed concern that the prospect of losing Gibraltar was " very practicable " given the poor condition of the defences . 
 Another siege was mounted in 1727 but the Spanish failed to retake Gibraltar , as the British were once again able to reinforce and resupply the garrison by sea . Following the siege , the Spanish began the construction in 1730 of the Lines of <unk> , a fortified structure across the entire width of the isthmus anchored by two major forts on each end . This was intended to block access from Gibraltar to the Spanish mainland , and also to serve as a base for any future sieges . The territory 's importance increased following Britain 's defeat in the Battle of Minorca in 1756 , when a French naval victory led to the surrender of the British garrison there . 
 The first tranche of serious improvements made by the British after the siege focused on the North Front , where the weight of any future attack was likely to be heaviest . A marshy area in front of the Landport Gate was flooded and turned into what became known as " the Inundation " , a pear @-@ shaped body of brackish water blocked with palisades , underwater ditches and other hidden obstacles to prevent passage . This left only two narrow approaches to the town , each guarded by barriers and watched over by cannon loaded with lethal grapeshot . The Devil 's Tongue Battery was constructed on the Old Mole to provide enfilading fire across the isthmus . The northern defences around the Grand Battery and the Landport were also strengthened . 
 Further improvements were made under Lord Tyrawley during his term as governor , but progress was hindered by his confrontational relationship with his senior engineer , William Skinner . Gibraltar 's defences were stronger than they had been in the earlier siege but still had many deficiencies . The fortress seemed at first sight to be well @-@ armed , with 339 cannon in 1744 , but this number concealed the fact that they consisted of at least eight different calibres , some made of brass and some of iron – which meant greatly differing levels of reliability – and they required many different types of spares and ammunition , adding to the garrison 's logistical problems . 
 Skinner and Tyrawley agreed that the most pressing threat was that of a combined land and sea assault focusing on the weakest part of the defences , the open ground between the South Front of the town and Europa Point at the end of the peninsula . However , they disagreed vehemently over where and how to construct the defences . Tyrawley put a great deal of energy into constructing new earthworks , batteries and a series of retrenched lines between the South Bastion and the New Mole , called the Prince of Wales Lines . It was said of him that he would never let a day pass " without visiting the works once or twice during his stay where there was a possibility of going out . " Skinner disagreed with the placement of the new fortifications and criticised the use of compacted earth and sun @-@ baked bricks , which had enabled them to be built at great speed and minimum cost , rather than stone . Skinner perhaps had a point , as most of Tyrawley 's works were washed away by rain within only a few years . 
 More fundamental and lasting changes were made under Colonel William Green , who was posted to Gibraltar as its senior engineer in 1761 . A veteran soldier with experience of campaigns in the Netherlands and Canada , he arrived in Gibraltar with a wealth of knowledge of the latest methods of fortification . He was strongly supported by Tyrawley 's successor as governor , Lieutenant General Edward Cornwallis , who wrote in 1768 : 
 Gibraltar has its faults , but , with them , as tenable in my opinion as any place in Europe : where it is vulnerable is the sea . . . though it has often been said that Gibraltar is impregnable , which no place is according to my notions , it was always understood " while you commend the sea " . The bay is extensive , our garrison small . . . " 
 Funds were scarce in the 1760s but a number of improvements were made to the North Front defences and the sea wall from South Bastion to Europa Point , which was severely damaged by a great storm in 1766 . Green spent several years reviewing the state of the fortifications and developing a plan to improve them . He sent a report to the Board of Ordnance in London in 1762 and another in 1768 . The following year he travelled to London to present his conclusions to a commission appointed by William Pitt the Elder . He summed up his three principal aims as being to prevent a possible landing by sea ; to improve the quality of the garrison and its provisioning ; and to keep the enemy at a distance with artillery . 
 After a lengthy debate the government approved his plans and Green returned to Gibraltar to implement them . The territory 's fortifications were still largely based around the old Spanish and Moorish defences , though these had been strengthened and supplemented over the years . The sea wall was still much as it had been in the Spanish period and still represented a weak point , and a lack of accommodation for the 4 @,@ 000 officers and men of the garrison was also a major problem . Green set about thoroughly overhauling , redesigning and re @-@ siting the fortifications , building new bastions , redans , storehouses , hospitals , magazines and bomb @-@ proof barracks and casemates . Among his most important improvements was the construction of the King 's Bastion , a fortification projecting from the sea wall between the Old and New Moles . It mounted twelve 32 @-@ pounder guns and ten 8 @-@ inch howitzers on its front , with another ten guns and howitzers on its flanks , allowing heavy fire to be directed out into the bay and enfilading the sea wall in both directions . Its massive structure , with solid stone parapets up to 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) thick , could house 800 men in its casemates . 
 To carry out the improvements more efficiently and cheaply , Green raised a Soldier Artificer Company – a predecessor of the Royal Engineers – of skilled labourers under military discipline . He also improved the garrison 's state of preparation for a fresh siege . The quality of the guns was improved ; by 1776 there were 98 pointing north plus two mortars and two howitzers . Another 300 were mounted on the Line Wall and the south front , and there was room for a further 106 . The guns were kept constantly loaded with several rounds positioned nearby in reserve , in case of a surprise attack . The Spanish historian López de Ayala remarked on how well prepared the garrison was : 
 One of the most noteworthy things about this place is that there is no cannon , there is no mortar or howitzer without its known and predetermined target . . . twice a day , at sunrise and sunset , the battery commander himself inspects the guns . He checks whether the wick is alight , the gun loaded , primed , and trained on its allotted target . " 
 Green 's improvements came just in time to meet the challenge of the Great Siege of Gibraltar between 1779 – 83 . Despite the siege , the defences were continually improved under Green 's supervision . More batteries and bastions were constructed on the North Front , all the way up to the summit of the Rock . The first of Gibraltar 's many tunnels was also constructed , with the original intention of reaching a rocky outcrop called the Notch on the north face of the Rock , to cover a blind angle on the Mediterranean side . As the tunnel was being constructed , an air vent was excavated using explosives . The tunnellers realised that they could use the shaft as an embrasure for a gun . They turned the tunnel into the first of a series of galleries with embrasures at intervals , overlooking the isthmus , which could be used to bombard the enemy lines with impunity . The tunnelling continued after the siege and by 1790 over 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) of tunnels had been excavated , providing bombproof communications routes between the various lines and batteries on the North Front of the Rock . The Notch was also reached and was hollowed out to become a large gallery , called St George 's Hall , capable of accommodating five guns . 
 Further works were carried out to repair , rebuild and improve the defences around the Waterport Front , which incorporated the old Waterport Gate . New casemates , counterguards , <unk> and lunettes were built in the area and the Montagu and Orange Bastions were enlarged . The work was carried out amidst considerable controversy , as there were vigorous disagreements between the governors and senior engineers of the time over how the works should be carried out and indeed whether some of them should be pursued at all . 
 = = = = Nineteenth century = = = = 
 Gibraltar remained at peace for 121 years after the Great Siege – one of the longest periods of peace in its history – but work continued to develop the fortifications , driven to a large extent by the increasingly rapid pace of change in the power and range of artillery . The Grand Casemates , a huge bombproof barracks , was built in 1817 . Proposals were put forward in 1826 to rebuild the Line Wall with new bastions , though they were never put into practice . In 1841 , General Sir John Thomas Jones of the Royal Engineers conducted a study of Gibraltar 's defences which prompted major changes and defined the nature of the fortifications for many years to come . 
 Jones 's recommendations were based on a number of key assumptions about the threats faced in particular sectors of the fortifications . First , the North Front was so strongly defended that it was very unlikely to be vulnerable . Second , the sea defences below the South Bastion could be breached but an invader would still face the barrier of the South Front . Third , the Europa defences might also be breached , but a defender holding the narrow Europa Pass or the heights of Windmill Hill could easily enfilade an invader ; as Jones put it , " two hundred men on Windmill Hill and Europa Pass ought to hold as many thousands at bay " . Fourth , the main threat was – as Green had recognised 80 years earlier – to the town itself . An enemy breaching the sea wall in the town would bypass the two land fronts and be able to attack them from their highly vulnerable rear . 
 Jones also recognised that the development of more powerful and accurate artillery made the old system of shoreline batteries extremely vulnerable . He proposed that the shoreline artillery should be pulled back some 300 yards ( 270 metres ) to " retired batteries " situated higher up the hill , equipped with the latest and most powerful guns and firing from barbettes rather than through embrasures . Such positions could not easily be seen from the sea , were out of the effective range of enemy ships and could not be flanked by landward guns . The sea wall would be defended solely by musket fire with the artillery support being provided from the bastions and retired batteries . 
 Jones 's recommendations were immediately accepted and put into practice . A series of new batteries aligned on a roughly north @-@ south axis facing west towards the harbour was constructed , including Jones ' , Civil Hospital , Raglan 's , Gardiner 's , Queen Victoria 's , Lady Augusta 's , Prince of Wales and Cumberland batteries . Further batteries and fortifications were constructed around <unk> Bay near the south of the peninsula and Windmill Hill was strengthened around its entire perimeter , with <unk> Barracks at its north end blocking access to the higher ground behind . The sea wall in the town was straightened and strengthened with the building of two new curtain walls , Prince Albert 's Front and Wellington Front . Defensive breakwaters were constructed in front of both to prevent an armoured enemy ship ramming the walls . 
 Gibraltar 's guns were reorganised and upgraded from 1856 . Many of the 24 @-@ pounder guns were replaced with 32 @-@ pounders and the retired batteries were equipped with 68 @-@ pounders . A wide variety of old guns was still in use , including iron @-@ cast 6- , 12- and 18 @-@ pounder , which complicated the supply and maintenance of the batteries . At its peak , the fortress had 681 guns in 110 batteries and positions . As the British artist William Henry Bartlett put it in 1851 , " Ranges of batteries rising from the sea , tier above tier , extend along its entire sea @-@ front , at the northern extremity of which is the town ; every nook in the crags bristles with artillery " . However , only a decade later the rapid introduction of rifled artillery firing explosive shells was already beginning to make the fortifications obsolete . As a result of recommendations by Colonel William Jervois , the coastal batteries were upgraded with armoured casemates made from expensively constructed iron laminates . He also proposed to build a sea fort in the bay , along the lines of Britain 's Palmerston Forts , though this was never carried out . 
 In 1879 the growing threat of ultra @-@ heavy naval artillery led to the installation of two giant RML 17 @.@ 72 inch guns , dubbed the " 100 ton guns " – the biggest , heaviest and among the last muzzle @-@ loading artillery pieces ever made . They were never used in anger and were not particularly reliable , suffering from a rate of fire of only one shot every four minutes . They were soon replaced by more reliable and powerful breech @-@ loading guns and the process of pulling back the guns to retired sites continued until it reached its logical end point of situating the principal batteries on the very peak of the Rock , 1 @,@ 400 feet ( 430 metres ) above sea level . At this height , weather and communications became serious problems . Gibraltar is prone to a weather formation called the <unk> cloud , which often obscures the top of the Rock . Telegraphic cables were installed criss @-@ crossing the Rock to allow the batteries to communicate with observation posts situated lower down . The observers would plot the movement of enemy targets and transmit the coordinates to the batteries high above . 
 The conversion of Gibraltar 's armament to breech @-@ loading guns led to a further reappraisal of the fortress 's defensive needs in 1888 . A report by Generals William Howley Goodenough and Sir Lothian Nicholson , the governor at the time , recommended reducing and standardising the guns to make them easier to maintain and supply . Six @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) quick @-@ firing guns and machine guns were introduced in the coastal positions and 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch guns were installed in the retired batteries . The smaller guns would be sufficient to protect against fast @-@ moving enemy vessels , such as torpedo boats , while the larger guns could cover the entire Strait as far as the North African shore and could fire right over the Rock to counter @-@ bombard land @-@ based artillery . Fourteen 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch guns were eventually installed , along with another fourteen 6 @-@ inch guns , to provide Gibraltar 's primary artillery defences . Another four 4 @-@ inch and ten 12 @-@ pounder guns were installed in various strategic positions , mostly along the coastline , to provide inshore defence . 
 = = = = Twentieth century = = = = 
 By the start of the 20th century it was clear that Gibraltar could be bombarded with relative impunity from the Spanish mainland . Proposals were put forward to build a new harbour on the east side of the Rock , where ships would be less vulnerable to direct artillery fire from the mainland , but were abandoned due to the vast expense and only marginal gains in security . A new round of tunnelling was carried out to provide more bombproof accommodation for the garrison , along with deep shelters and casemates capable of accommodating 2 @,@ 000 men . Ultimately it was decided in 1906 that Gibraltar faced no credible threat from land and that the defences would be organised to deal with a threat from the sea . 
 In the event , the biggest threat Gibraltar faced in the 20th century came from the air . The only action seen by Gibraltar 's coastal defences during the First World War occurred in August 1917 when the 6 @-@ inch gun at Devil 's Gap Battery engaged and sank a German U @-@ boat travelling on the surface . The Second World War presented a much greater challenge to Gibraltar 's defences as a result of the development of long @-@ range bomber aircraft . Numerous anti @-@ aircraft positions were established across Gibraltar , many of them built on top of existing fortifications and equipped with 40mm and 3 @.@ 7 @-@ inch anti @-@ aircraft guns . By March 1941 there were twenty @-@ eight 3 @.@ 7 @-@ inch guns and twenty @-@ two ( and eventually forty @-@ eight ) Bofors guns , plus two pom @-@ pom guns . Numerous searchlights were installed – by 1942 there were twenty @-@ four located around Gibraltar – and rocket projectors , an early though rather ineffectual form of anti @-@ aircraft missiles , were also brought in . Bunkers and pillboxes were built to guard against amphibious landings , especially on the eastern side of the Rock , and anti @-@ tank guns , ditches and obstacles were installed facing the isthmus to guard against a land attack . 
 The possibility of an attack from the land was not a theoretical concern , as Adolf Hitler sought Spanish support to carry out Operation Felix , an invasion of Gibraltar that would have enabled the Germans to close the entrance to the Mediterranean to the great disadvantage of the Allies . It was projected that Gibraltar would fall within only three days . In the event , Hitler failed to reach an agreement with the Spanish dictator Francisco Franco . Gibraltar 's defences were tested several times by air raids carried out by Italy and Vichy France , which only caused limited damage and light casualties , and by Italian submarine and sabotage attacks which damaged or sank a number of ships in the bay . 
 Despite the pinprick nature of the Axis attacks , a huge amount of work was done during the war to develop Gibraltar 's fortifications further . A new network of tunnels was dug under the Rock to accommodate a vastly increased garrison . The tunnels became what amounted to an underground city , secure from bombardment and capable of sheltering 16 @,@ 000 men . They included a hospital , storerooms , workshops , ammunition magazines , a bakery , food stores capable of holding enough rations to feed the entire garrison for sixteen months , a power station , a water distillation plant and a telephone exchange . Much of the spoil was used to build a runway across the isthmus and extending into the bay , with an eventual length of 1 @,@ 800 yards ( 1 @,@ 600 metres ) and a width of 150 yards ( 140 metres ) . The Royal Air Force base on Gibraltar supported Allied air operations in the Battle of the Atlantic , the Mediterranean and North Africa . During Operation Torch in 1942 , over 600 Allied aircraft were crammed onto Gibraltar 's single runway . 
 Following the Second World War , changes in Britain 's military commitments and the strategic environment eventually made Gibraltar 's role as a fortress superfluous . The Royal Navy 's historic role in the Mediterranean was effectively taken over by the United States Sixth Fleet and Britain 's strategic interests shifted to the Atlantic . Some further work took place between 1958 – 68 when Gibraltar was used as a NATO monitoring station to observe naval traffic through the Strait . Linking tunnels were dug to connect the existing tunnels , new storage chambers and reservoirs were built and access routes to permit easier movement between areas of the peninsula were constructed . The tunnelling work came to an end in April 1968 , marking the end of the British Army 's 200 years of tunnel @-@ building . The 9 @.@ 2 inch guns mounted on the Upper Ridge of the Rock remained in service until 7 April 1976 when the guns of Lord Airey 's , O 'Hara 's and Spur Batteries were all fired for the last time . In October 1985 , a single battery of Exocet anti @-@ ship missiles was installed on the Rock ; they were a specially adapted version of the <unk> ship borne missile known as " Excalibur " and were directed by a Type 1006 radar . The system had reportedly been withdrawn by 1997 . During the 1980s and 1990s , the British Ministry of Defence closed Gibraltar 's naval dockyard and greatly reduced the military presence in the territory , leaving the locally raised Royal Gibraltar Regiment as the main military force in Gibraltar . 
 = = = Gibraltar 's fortifications today = = = 
 Many of Gibraltar 's fortifications were already redundant well before the British garrison was withdrawn from the territory in the 1990s , and the rapid military rundown in the 1980s and the 1990s left the civilian authorities with a large amount of surplus military property . Many of the best @-@ preserved fortifications are in the Upper Rock Nature Reserve , a conservation area that covers about 40 % of the area of Gibraltar . A few of the Upper Rock batteries have been preserved intact ; all three of the 5 @.@ 25 @-@ inch guns at Princess Anne 's Battery are still in place , making it the only place in the world where a complete 5 @.@ 25 @-@ inch battery can still be seen . The 9 @.@ 2 inch guns at Breakneck , Lord Airey 's and O 'Hara 's Batteries are still in situ and can now be visited . Elsewhere , most of the ordnance has been removed . Two surviving 6 @-@ inch guns remain at Devil 's Gap Battery , one of which is the gun that engaged a German U @-@ boat in August 1917 . At Napier of Magdala Battery one of the two 100 @-@ ton RML 17 @.@ 72 inch guns is still in situ and has been restored , along with a 3 @.@ 7 inch quick @-@ firing anti @-@ aircraft gun . The site is now run by the Gibraltar Tourist Board in conjunction with the Nature Reserve . 
 Some of the 18th and 20th century tunnels can also be visited . The Upper Galleries ( now known as the Great Siege Tunnels ) on the North Face of the Rock of Gibraltar are a popular tourist attraction within the Nature Reserve . A number of tableaux have been installed to recreate the appearance of the original 18th century gun batteries housed within the tunnels . They include a number of Victorian 64 @-@ pounder cannon on original Gibraltar gun carriages . The Middle Galleries , where World War II tunnelling joins the original 18th century tunnels , are open under the name of the " World War II Tunnels " . The Lower Galleries are not open to visitors , as they are in a poor condition due to vandalism and neglect , but still contain many relics of their former military usage . 
 Many of the fortifications at sea level have survived , though not always in their original condition . A substantial number have been built over . The Inundation was drained after World War II and is now the site of the Laguna Estate , named after the Inundation 's lagoon . The glacis was likewise used as the foundations of the <unk> Estate . The flat ground of the retired batteries made them prime building spots during Gibraltar 's post @-@ war building boom , thus many of them have disappeared under recent developments . The city walls have almost entirely survived and are progressively being cleared of modern structures to restore them to something more like their original appearance . However , they are no longer at the water 's edge due to extensive land reclamation . Various parts of the fortifications have been converted to civilian use . After being used for some years as a hostel for Moroccan migrant workers , the Grand Casemates Barracks have been renovated and converted into restaurants and shops . An electricity generating station was built inside the King 's Bastion in the 1960s but has since been demolished and the bastion has been converted into a leisure centre . 
 The North Front defences , still following the course laid out by the Moors in the 11th century , are still substantially intact . A significant portion of the original Spanish and Moorish walls can still be seen , rising in a saw @-@ tooth ( en crémaillère ) fashion from the Grand Battery . Although gaps have been cut in the walls to allow vehicle traffic to enter the city centre , pedestrians can still walk over the wooden drawbridge over the North Front ditch to pass through the Landport Gate into the city . The Moorish Tower of Homage continues to stand above the Grand Battery on the lower slopes of the Rock . It is now open to the public as part of the Upper Rock Nature Reserve . 
 The walls of the South Front are also substantially intact . The Southport Gates still bear the arms of Charles V , with columns on either side representing the Pillars of Hercules entwined with scrolls reading " plus ultra " , the national motto of Spain . Flanking the base of the royal arms are the arms of Gibraltar and of one of the Spanish governors . The ditch that once adjoined the gates has largely been filled in , though a portion of it was reused to create the Trafalgar Cemetery adjoining the Southport Gates . Further south , the upper section of Charles V Wall is intact and can be walked on ; the lowest point of this section , Prince Ferdinand 's Battery , is now the site of the Apes ' Den , where many of Gibraltar 's colony of Barbary macaques live . Many of the clifftop defences and gun emplacements in the far south of the peninsula are still visible , though some have been built on and others have been turned into viewing platforms . 
 = = = Conserving the fortifications = = = 
 The preservation of Gibraltar 's fortifications , and of its architectural heritage in general , has been a problematic issue . The peninsula is extremely short of land ; in the early 1980s , nearly half the available land was in military usage , comprising the naval dockyard , the whole of the southern part of Gibraltar , the upper part of the Rock and a significant amount of property within the city walls , in addition to the runway and military facilities on the isthmus . Until recently , Gibraltar had no public sea front of its own due to military land usage . As the military presence has been run down , MOD property has been handed over to the Government of Gibraltar but the latter has lacked the resources to look after all of the buildings and land that have been transferred . This has led to the abandonment and severe physical deterioration of significant parts of Gibraltar 's military heritage . 
 A prime example is that of the Northern Defences , consisting of the King 's Lines , Queen 's Lines and Prince 's Lines overlooking the isthmus and the entrance to Gibraltar . Mostly dating during the Great Siege and shortly after , they have been described as " not merely one of the most , perhaps the most , hauntingly vivid experiences of a visit to Gibraltar . . . [ standing ] comparison with some of the most famous military sites in the world . " As John Harris of the Royal Institute of British Architects has put it , they are " capable of providing one of the great architectural experiences in the western world . . . the atmosphere of the Great Siege is vivid and evocative in the extreme . " The Gibraltar Conservation Society proposed a £ 500 @,@ 000 scheme in the early 1980s to preserve and reopen the Lines and the surrounding batteries , galleries and bombproof magazines , but the scheme did not go ahead and the Lines have continued to be neglected and vandalised despite being scheduled as an Ancient Monument . 
 = Joseph Byrne ( Holby City ) = 
 Joseph Charles Mortimer Byrne is a fictional character from the BBC medical drama Holby City , portrayed by Luke Roberts . Joseph first appeared in the 3 January 2006 episode " Mother Love " , series eight , episode twelve of the programme . Roberts had made an unrelated guest appearance in the previous series of the show , playing the relative of a deceased patient , and was asked to return in a more permanent role by the series producers . 
 Joseph 's role in the show is that of troubled surgeon – the resultant angst of his brother 's attempted suicide and his own anally retentive personality lead to the revelation the character suffers from Obsessive – compulsive disorder ( OCD ) . His major storylines included an accidental drugs overdose , and a relationship with fellow surgical registrar Jac Naylor , who cheated on him with his own father . Roberts ' performance resulted in a longlist nomination for the Most Popular Newcomer award at the 2006 National Television Awards . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Creation and casting = = = 
 Prior to joining the cast of Holby City as Joseph , Luke Roberts made a guest appearance in the series seven episode " No Pain , No Gain " as Daniel Fryer , the son of a deceased patient . Roberts was approached about returning in a more permanent role by BBC casting director Julie Harkin , who was also responsible for casting fellow newcomers Rakie Ayola as Kyla Tyson and Tom Chambers as Sam Strachan . Although his guest appearance constituted a single scene , Roberts believes it was enough to secure his call @-@ back for the part of Joseph . He recalls that it " got the attention of the producers " , and that actress Amanda Mealing , who portrayed Connie Beauchamp , " put a good word in for [ him ] " . He felt lucky to join alongside Chambers and Rosie Marcel as Jac Naylor , due to the " feeling of solidarity " which developed between them . 
 As preparation for the role , Roberts observed open heart surgery at University College Hospital , London , and researched OCD . He initially attempted to look up the medical terminology in his scripts , but later abandoned this in favour of accepting help from the series medical advisers . Having become a regular Holby City viewer from the time of his appearance as Daniel , the actor had a contextual basis for storylines upon his return as Joseph , who he deemed a " very complex " character . 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Roberts described Joseph as an " awkward and very bookish " character , one who struggled to relate to his patients , in contrast to the " happy @-@ go @-@ lucky Sam " , which resulted in comedy as " Sam is the antithesis of Joe . " He also deemed his character " incredibly honest and morally upright " , " a total oddball with all sorts of hang @-@ ups " , and as being " very stuck in his ways . " During his tenure , these aspects of his characterisation have each been explored . It was revealed in Joseph 's first appearance that both his father and grandfather had been pioneering cardiothoracic Consultants , and that it had always been expected of him to follow the same path . His residual guilt over his brother 's attempted suicide was developed throughout his first few months at Holby City Hospital . Roberts commented on the event that : " It underpins much of his behaviour . He is a man burdened by guilt and loss . I think I can be so bold as to say he transfers many of his feelings about his brother onto patients and staff alike , without ever betraying the source of his pain . " Joseph 's resultant <unk> developed into OCD , something he attempted to control and hide by use of relaxant medication . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Upon joining Holby City , Roberts was asked who he felt his character 's ideal woman would be . He replied : " Joseph is a man who suppresses and represses his emotions – especially regarding women . I think he harbours very strong feelings of admiration for Connie but is frankly surprised and secretly thrilled when any woman shows him affection . Although so far this is rare ! " 
 Joseph embarked on a relationship with fellow Registrar Jac , who hoped to impress Joseph 's father and secure herself a promotion to Consultant . When this was not forthcoming , Jac left Joseph for Lord Byrne . Throughout series eight , Joseph cultivated a friendship with Elliot 's daughter Martha , who had strong romantic feelings for him . Ultimately however , Jac won Joseph 's affections and Martha left the show to return to University . From October 2007 onward , Joseph was romantically linked with Ward Sister Faye Morton ( Patsy Kensit ) . Kensit confirmed that Faye " has a soft spot for ( him ) " . 
 Faye and Joseph became engaged in series ten , much to Jac 's displeasure . Roberts has relayed Marcel 's insight that , " Jac 's left with very little . She hasn 't got the consultancy post . Joseph 's father is long gone and I think she may be nostalgic for all of that . She 's hankering after Joseph again . She wants him for herself . " He added , on Joseph 's reaction to Jac 's meddling in his relationship with Faye ; " He 's a good guy but Jac brings out the evil in him . He does have a darker side . He will fight injustice with injustice . " In the episode " Locked Away " , Joseph and Jac are locked in theatre together – after being affected by an unknown poison – where they both reveal their true feelings for each other . Joseph admits that he still loves Jac , but would not take her back as she has hurt him too many times . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Joseph arrives at Holby City Hospital in episode " Mother Love " , when he and fellow cardiothoracic surgeon Sam Strachan vie for a registrar position . Although Consultant Connie Beauchamp initially intends to hire Sam , she is persuaded by Joseph 's father , Lord Byrne ( Ronald Pickup ) , to create a second position for Joseph . He joins Connie 's firm , but soon switches to work under the ward 's second Consultant , Elliot Hope ( Paul Bradley ) . The two become close , as Joseph becomes involved in Elliot 's troubled family life . In turn , Joseph begins to confide in Elliot , and reveals that his brother Harry is in a coma as a result of a failed suicide attempt . Joseph discloses his guilt about the incident , and explains that he knew his brother was worried about exams , but ignored a telephone call from him on the evening he took an insulin overdose . As a result , he can no longer bear to hear a phone left ringing , and has developed OCD . 
 To cover up the symptoms of his disorder , Joseph resorts to stealing pharmacy drug <unk> and self @-@ administering it before operations . In the episode " Before A Fall " he overdoses on the drug , but is saved by his colleague Jac Naylor . Shortly thereafter , they become a couple , although Joseph is unaware that Jac is only interested in him because of his father 's influence . Jac manipulates Joseph into having his father add her to a surgical team flying out to Dubai to perform pioneering surgery . When things go awry there , she convinces Joseph to lie about their qualifications so that they can perform the operation themselves , which endangers both their careers , and results in their lives being threatened by the patient 's influential father . In the episode " Paranoid Android " Jac begins cheating on Joseph with his own father , for a period of several months , until Lord Byrne calls an end to the deception and confesses their infidelity to his son . 
 Joseph quickly comes to loathe Jac , not only for cheating on him , but for breaking up his parents ' marriage . Before Lord Byrne is able to secure the promotion Jac wanted from him , he dies from complications arising from a perforated stomach ulcer . When Jac attends his funeral in the episode " Bad Reputation " , a furious Joseph slaps her and leaves her badly bruised . Jac continues to torment Joseph for several weeks , and flaunts the fact she inherited a ring in Lord Byrne 's will that had once been promised to Joseph by his grandmother . His friend and colleague Faye Morton takes it upon herself to steal the ring , and returns it to Joseph to do with as he sees fit , in the hopes that this will allow him to move on . 
 Early in series ten , Joseph 's brother 's condition deteriorates and he is admitted to Holby City Hospital in need of an operation . Faye supports Joseph , and the two kiss . Joseph 's hopes are raised when his brother opens his eyes , and he considers expensive neurology treatment in America to try and rouse Harry from his coma . Shortly thereafter , however , Harry 's condition worsens again , and Joseph and his mother allow Harry to die . Following his brother 's death , Joseph returns to work to find Jac on trial for Sam 's old position . This reignites their feud , and Joseph is unable to block Jac from gaining the position . His relationship with Faye develops slowly , however Joseph 's suspicions are raised when she lies to him about her whereabouts on several occasions , leading to the eventual discovery that the police suspect her of the murder of her second husband , Donald . An exhumation reveals that Donald did not die of cancer , as Faye insisted , but of arsenic poisoning . Joseph remains suspicious , but supports Faye as their relationship continues to develop . When Faye has a pregnancy scare , he proposes to her , and insists that he meant it even after the discovery she is not actually pregnant . Joseph is devastated when Faye appears to have stolen £ 5 @,@ 000 from him and left the country , but discovers she is in fact in trouble in South Africa . After flying out with colleague Linden Cullen ( Duncan Pow ) , Faye reveals she has a ten @-@ year @-@ old son , Archie , who lives in a care home because of a genetic disease . Joseph saves Archie 's life in a risky operation , and he and Faye return from South Africa engaged once more , much to Jac 's chagrin . 
 Despite subsequent setbacks in their relationship , such as Jac briefly deceiving Joseph into believing that she is pregnant with his child , Faye and Joseph marry . On the day of the ceremony , Linden confesses to Faye that he is in love with her , and they kiss . She instantly regrets it , however , and tells him that she loves Joseph . When Archie 's nurse Lauren later accidentally administers him the wrong drug , he dies . Faye and Joseph grow apart in the aftermath and she develops romantic feelings for Linden . She and Joseph separate , but after she begins a relationship with Linden , she discovers that she is pregnant with Joseph 's baby . Increasingly concerned that Faye may be a pathological liar , Linden terminates their relationship . Faye is later attacked by a heroin @-@ addicted patient , and when Linden attempts to defend her , he is hit in the head with a glass bottle and dies . Faye suffers a breakdown in the aftermath , and is admitted to a psychiatric unit . She self @-@ harms , and refuses to leave the unit when she goes into labour , until Jac assures her that Joseph does not intend to take their child away from her . Faye delivers a boy by Caesarean . She initially fails to bond with him , but when Joseph puts their divorce proceedings on hold , she makes an effort and names him Harry , after Joseph 's deceased brother . Despite Joseph 's opposition , she insists on returning to the psychiatric unit . Jac 's support during this time results in a renewal of their relationship , and when Faye secretly makes plans to leave the country with Harry , Jac helps convince her to leave the baby with Joseph . Joseph struggles as a working father , and accepts a job as a GP in Penrith . Jac declines his offer to accompany him , so he departs with Harry , leaving her in tears . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Roberts ' portrayal of Joseph earned him several award nominations . In 2006 , he was longlisted for the Most Popular Newcomer award at the National Television Awards ( NTAs ) , and named the nineteenth Best Actor at the BBC Drama Awards . He was nominated in the Best Actor category at the 2007 and 2009 <unk> and TV Choice Awards , and received a Best Drama Performance nomination at the 2010 NTAs . Bree Treacy 's of RTÉ ten 's rates Byrne her favorite character in the show , enjoying his love hate relationship with Jac and the intensity he brings to the show . According to her all the other storylines pale in comparison . Anne Robinson mocked Roberts portrayal of Byrne on The Weakest Link , asking why his character only ever got a sympathy shag , leading to a record number of complaints 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 On 28 February 2008 , BBC Two cooking programme Ready Steady Cook broadcast a Holby City special , featuring Luke Roberts and Sharon D. Clarke ( Lola Griffin ) . As well as competing over their cooking skills , the pair discussed their characters ' upcoming storylines , and crossover with sister show HolbyBlue . 
 = Lord of the Pi 's = 
 " Lord of the Pi 's " is the eighth episode of the third season of the American mystery television series Veronica Mars , and the fifty @-@ second episode overall . Written by executive producer Diane Ruggiero and directed by Steve Gomer , the episode premiered on The CW on November 21 , 2006 . The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars ( Kristen Bell ) as she deals with life as a college student while moonlighting as a private detective . 
 In this episode , Veronica and Keith ( Enrico Colantoni ) look into the mysterious disappearance of a wealthy heiress and college board trustee , Selma Rose ( Patty Hearst ) . The pair eventually find her in hiding in order to avoid a complex scam in which her husband would cheat her out of money in a divorce settlement . Meanwhile , Veronica investigates and eventually finds out some startling information related to the radical feminist Lilith House — that they faked several of the rapes supposedly perpetrated by the Hearst serial rapist . In addition , Logan and Veronica 's relationship becomes even more tumultuous , with Logan eventually coming to the realization that they need to break up . 
 Patty Hearst guest stars in the episode , something that was planned since July 2006 . Hearst did not know that she would be appearing on the show until after she was chosen due to a lack of communication between her and her agent . She was reluctant to appear as a character similar to herself , but she eventually agreed . In addition , Hearst 's character was initially scheduled to have a lesbian kiss with Keri Lynn Pratt 's character , but the scene was vetoed by the network for unknown reasons . 
 " Lord of the Pi 's " was viewed by 2 @.@ 57 million viewers in its initial airing and received a polarized reaction from television critics , with commentators being divided over Kristen Bell 's performance , Hearst 's appearance , and the plot twist that the feminist Lilith House faked several rapes . Eric Goldman of IGN thought that it was the best episode so far of season three , while Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club thought that it was too varied tonally . 
 = = Plot synopsis = = 
 After two people find Chip Diller ( David Tom ) , the president of the Pig Sigma fraternity , passed out , Veronica gets hired as a photographer for the Hearst newspaper . Logan ( Jason Dohring ) requests that Veronica stop looking into the serial rapist case , but she denies and they fight . The Hearst board of trustees is going to decide whether or not to shut down the fraternities , but an important member , Selma Rose , goes missing in the middle of the party . Dean O ’ Dell ( Ed Begley , Jr . ) immediately believes that she ’ s gone missing , asking Veronica and Keith to help . Veronica speaks to one of the feminist Lilith House girls , while Keith speaks to Selma ’ s husband . Veronica poses as a reporter to get news from Sheriff Lamb ( Michael Muhney ) on the case . Veronica speaks to Dick ( Ryan Hansen ) , who says that Chip Diller had a Roman numeral easter egg implanted in his anus , and Veronica suspects the Lilith House girls . 
 Keith finds out that Selma might have disappeared to get away from her husband . Veronica shows Wallace the Roman numerals , and they deduce that it is a date , and Veronica learns that a sorority house member died on that day . Veronica confronts a sorority girl about the dead member , and she implies that others believe that something happened to her . After finding out that leaving her husband after ten years would be beneficial to Selma , Veronica and Keith break into the Roses ’ house and find Selma on the couch . Selma tells the pair why she has “ disappeared ” : Mr. Rose is trying to scam her for more money and has blackmailed her with knowledge of a lesbian affair with her dog walker . 
 Chip Diller gets into a fight with the other Pi Sigs , and Veronica gets involved . However , Veronica is pulled away by a security guard hired by Logan . Veronica is angry with Logan about this , but they eventually reconcile and say “ I love you ” to each other . Sheriff Lamb arrests Mr. Rose when Selma is found in the guesthouse , and Selma forces Mr. Rose to give her a favorable settlement . Selma decides to dissolve the Greek system . Veronica discusses the girl who fell off the roof , and she attempted suicide when the Pi Sigs mistreated her . Veronica states her belief that the Lilith House girls faked more than one rape , and Logan becomes distraught when he sees Veronica decline his phone call . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Diane Ruggiero and directed by Steve Gomer , marking Ruggiero 's fifteenth writing credit , and Gomer 's fourth and final directing credit for the series . The episode features a guest appearance by Patty Hearst , a wealthy heiress and famous kidnapping victim . Series creator Rob Thomas came up with the idea for Hearst 's storyline in July 2006 , stating , " If we can get Patty Hearst to play a board of trustees member – what if she got kidnapped ? That would be a pretty great story to tell . It 's not an idea we 've broken , but it 's up on the wall as a possibility . " Hearst had recently appeared on single @-@ episode parts on Boston Common and Son of the Beach . Due to a miscommunication between Thomas , Hearst , and her agent , Hearst was booked for Veronica Mars before she knew about the guest role , with Thomas telling TV Guide that she was playing a character that was similar to herself . Hearst described reacting to the casting news : " I was on the computer one day and read that I was going to be on Veronica Mars . Rob Thomas was giving an interview and happily saying , ' Oh yes , and we ’ re very excited . ' " After hearing this news , Hearst contacted her agent and jokingly asked her when the agent was planning on telling her that she would be appearing on the show . 
 Hearst was reluctant to play a character similar to herself , commenting , " I 'd never gone in and done as cameo as myself or anything , and I wouldn 't do that . Yes , the college is called Hearst … which I thought was funny , and it 's certainly not related to publishing . " Hearst had never previously accepted roles where she was asked to play herself , stating that it was a " pathetic attempt to get attention " when other celebrities played themselves or characters similar to themselves . Hearst had heard of Veronica Mars and seen several episodes prior to her appearance ; nevertheless , she still needed to talk to Thomas about the series and her character before agreeing to guest star , commenting that she discovered that the character 's background was not exceedingly similar to her own life , as " Selma 's situation is nothing like anything I 've had to deal with . " When reading the script for the first time , Hearst was amused by the fact that her character was the heiress to the " Hearst Mart fortune " , comparing it to Walmart ; she stated , " when I read that in the script , I burst out laughing . It was a spit @-@ take kind of thing . I almost fell over . " When asked whether or not the character would become a recurring one , she responded that the idea had not come up in discussions with the crew . However , she stated that she would accept if given the opportunity , and she particularly enjoyed working with Kristen Bell , Enrico Colantoni , and Ed Begley , Jr .. 
 On the day of the episode 's airing , Hearst expected that most Veronica Mars fans would not remember her kidnapping and the subsequent events , stating " I won 't be a distraction for them . They can focus in on the juicy story line . " Charles Shaughnessy appears as Selma Rose 's husband , Budd . The episode was initially written to feature a lesbian kiss between Hearst 's character and Keri Lynn Pratt 's character , Hallie , when the two were discovered to be having an affair . However , The CW , the network the series aired on , stepped in and decided to cut the scene before it was filmed . Hearst reported , " I meet Keri and I 'm like , ' Hello . ' We didn 't know until we were on the set we couldn 't actually kiss . We were all set for that . " AOL TV commented that the network might have made the choice to prevent " Lord of the Pi 's " from becoming a lesbian kiss episode involving an older woman , while AfterEllen.com called the choice " bizarre " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , the episode received 2 @.@ 57 million viewers , ranking 84th of 89 in the weekly rankings and marking a decrease from the previous episode , " Of Vice and Men " , which was viewed by 2 @.@ 69 million . 
 The episode received a polarized critical reaction . Eric Goldman , writing for IGN , gave the episode an 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , indicating that it was " great " . He called it " the best so far of season three , as it did a nice job of going back and forth between the mystery of the week , the ongoing rape storyline , and Veronica 's personal issues , with each aspect well @-@ represented . While displeased with Hearst 's acting , he called the storyline " good , fun stuff " . He also enjoyed the emotional advancement of Veronica and Logan 's relationship , writing that he showed genuine emotion in the episode , in contrast to his usual sarcastic demeanor . Reviewer Alan Sepinwall , on his blog What 's Alan Watching , called it " one of the season 's strongest episodes . " He elaborated , " With Diane Ruggiero on script , you know there 's going to be the funny [ sic ] . [ … ] Plus , we did get a Veronica / Keith team @-@ up , just on the Mystery of the Week instead of the rape arc . " Television Without Pity gave the episode a " B " . 
 Other critics were more mixed or negative , with many criticizing the negative reveal of the feminist Lilith House . Keith McDuffee of AOL TV thought that the episode raised more questions than it answered : such as " [ the Lilith House girls ] seem to accept that several rapes were faked , and then Veronica seems to just leave without that question being answered , " arguing that the abrupt ending to the scene constituted an out @-@ of @-@ character moment ( she should have acted more negatively ) . In addition , he criticized Bell 's performance , commenting " Speaking of Veronica , she seemed like she was on something tonight . Just outright acting silly @-@ odd , dancing around with some pretty lame jokes . " Price Peterson of TV.com wrote , " Honestly , that fake @-@ rape reveal was enough for me to flip my television the bird . [ … ] Can we please end this nonsense and get into a main storyline that isn 't bad and offensive ? " However , he also added , " so yeah , other than the faked rapes , this was a largely entertaining episode . " Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club was very negative towards the episode , calling it " downright weird " and that it " veers wildly in tone " . He also was critical of Hearst 's plotline , saying that it was too referential to real @-@ life events and fictional works to stand well on its own . Concluding , the reviewer wrote , " The oscillations between drama and comedy , normally the show 's strength , seem excessive . [ … ] And the rape storyline continues to be tonally difficult at best , tone @-@ deaf at worst . " 
 Tanner Stransky , writing for Entertainment Weekly , enjoyed some aspects of the episode and disliked others . " Last night 's Veronica Mars was one of those love @-@ it @-@ or @-@ hate @-@ it episodes . " He enjoyed the development of the rape case , Veronica 's jokes , and Logan 's character development , while he disliked the reason that the rapes occurred , Patty Hearst 's acting , Veronica 's meanness , and Wallace 's absence . BuzzFeed ranked the episode as the worst of the series , calling it unmemorable . 
 = Cuvier 's dwarf caiman = 
 Cuvier 's dwarf caiman ( Paleosuchus palpebrosus ) is a small crocodilian from northern and central South America in the alligator family . It is found in Bolivia , Brazil , Colombia , Ecuador , French Guiana , Guyana , Paraguay , Peru , Surinam and Venezuela . It lives in riverine forests , flooded forests near lakes , and near fast @-@ flowing rivers and streams . It can traverse dry land to reach temporary pools and tolerates colder water than other species of alligator . Other common names for this species include the musky caiman , the dwarf caiman , Cuvier 's caiman and the smooth @-@ fronted caiman . It is sometimes kept in captivity as a pet and may be referred to as the wedge head caiman by the pet trade . 
 Cuvier 's dwarf caiman was first described by the French zoologist Georges Cuvier in 1807 and is one of only two species in the genus Paleosuchus , the other species being P. trigonatus . Their closest relatives are the other caimans in the subfamily <unk> . With a total length averaging 1 @.@ 4 m ( 4 @.@ 6 ft ) for males and typically up to 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) for females , Cuvier 's dwarf caiman is not only the smallest extant species in the alligator and caiman family , but also the smallest of all crocodilians . An adult will typically weigh around 6 to 7 kg ( 13 to 15 lb ) . Its lack of size is partly made up for by its strong body armour , provided by the bony bases to its dermal scales , which provides protection against predators . Juvenile dwarf caimans mainly feed on invertebrates , but also small fish and frogs , while adults eat larger fish , amphibians and invertebrates , such as large molluscs . This caiman sometimes uses a burrow as shelter during the day and in the Pantanal may aestivate in the burrow in order to stay cool in the dry season . The female buries her eggs on a mounded nest and these take about three months to hatch . She helps the hatchlings to escape from the nest and provides some parental care for the first few weeks of their life . This caiman has a wide range and large total population and the IUCN lists its conservation status as being of " least concern " . 
 = = Etymology and taxonomy = = 
 Cuvier 's dwarf caiman was first described by the French zoologist Georges Cuvier in 1807 as Crocodylus palpebrosus from a type locality described as " Cayenne " . Since then , it has been given a number of names by different authorities : Crocodilus ( Alligator ) palpebrosus ( <unk> , 1820 ) , <unk> <unk> ( <unk> , 1825 ) , <unk> <unk> ( Wagler , 1830 ) , Alligator palpebrosus ( <unk> and Bibron , 1836 ) , <unk> <unk> ( Natterer , 1841 ) , Caiman palpebrosus ( Gray , 1844 ) , Caiman ( <unk> ) palpebrosus ( Gray , 1862 ) and <unk> palpebrosus ( Vaillant , 1898 ) . Muller , in 1924 , and Schmidt , in 1928 , were the first to use the currently accepted name of Paleosuchus palpebrosus . No subspecies are recognised . 
 The genus Paleosuchus contains only two members , Paleosuchus trigonatus , commonly known as the smooth @-@ fronted or Schneider 's dwarf caiman , and Paleosuchus palpebrosus , both from South America . Paleosuchus is distinguished from other caimans in the alligator subfamily <unk> by the absence of an inter @-@ orbital ridge and the presence of four teeth in the premaxilla region of the jaw where other species of caiman have five . The genus name Paleosuchus is derived from the Greek <unk> meaning " ancient " and <unk> meaning " crocodile " . This refers to the belief that this crocodile comes from an ancient lineage that diverged from other species of caiman some thirty million years ago . The specific name palpebrosus is derived from the Latin <unk> meaning " eyelid " and <unk> meaning " full of " . This refers to the bony plates ( palpebrals ) present on the upper eyelids . 
 Common names include the musky caiman , the dwarf caiman , Cuvier 's caiman and the smooth @-@ fronted caiman , although the last of these is also used to refer to the closely related Paleosuchus trigonatus . In the pet trade , it is sometimes referred to as the wedge head caiman . 
 = = Description = = 
 Cuvier 's dwarf caiman is the smallest living New World crocodilian . Males grow to a maximum length of about 1 @.@ 6 metres ( 5 ft 3 in ) while females do not usually exceed 1 @.@ 2 metres ( 3 ft 11 in ) . The largest specimen on record measured 1 @.@ 72 m ( 5 @.@ 6 ft ) in length . This may be an underestimate of the animal 's maximum size as nearly all large adults have lost the tips of their tails and the largest specimen measured in the Pantanal region had a snout @-@ to @-@ vent length of 1 @.@ 125 m ( 4 ft ) ( equivalent to a total length of 2 @.@ 1 m ( 6 @.@ 9 ft ) with an intact tail ) . An adult will typically weigh around 6 to 7 kg ( 13 to 15 lb ) , around the same weight as a 6 – 12 @-@ month @-@ old specimen of several larger species of crocodilians . The Cuvier 's dwarf caiman has strong body armour on both the dorsal ( upper ) and ventral ( lower ) sides which may compensate for its small body size in reducing predation . The dermal scales that provide this protection have a bony base and are known as osteoderms . 
 The head has an unusual shape for a crocodilian , with a dome @-@ shaped skull and a short smooth , concave snout with an upturned tip , the shape rather resembling the head of a dog . The upper jaw extends markedly further forward than the lower jaw . There are four pre @-@ maxillary and fourteen to fifteen maxillary teeth on either side of the upper jaw and twenty @-@ one or twenty @-@ two teeth on each side of the lower jaw giving a total of about eighty teeth . The neck is relatively slender and the dorsal scutes are less prominent than in the smooth @-@ fronted caiman ( Paleosuchus trigonatus ) . The double row of scutes on the tail are small and project vertically . Adults are dark brownish @-@ black with a dark brown head while juveniles are brown with black bands . The iris of the eye is chestnut brown at all ages and the pupil is a vertical slit . 
 The <unk> ( arrangement of the scales ) helps to distinguish Cuvier 's dwarf caiman from Schneider 's dwarf caiman ( details of latter in brackets ) 
 Post <unk> - Usually 2 rows ( usually 1 row ) 
 <unk> - Usually 4 to 5 rows ( usually 4 rows but sometimes 5 ) 
 <unk> - 18 longitudinal rows and 6 to 10 transverse rows , neatly arranged , with 4 rows between hind legs ( 18 longitudinal and 6 to 7 transverse rows , haphazardly arranged , with usually 2 rows between hind legs ) 
 <unk> - 21 to 22 longitudinal rows and 16 transverse ( 19 to 21 longitudinal and 10 to 12 transverse rows ) 
 Tail - Single crest , usually 19 to 21 scales ( 17 to 19 scales ) 
 Tail - Double crest , usually 9 or 10 rows ( usually 9 or 10 rows ) 
 Tail - Lateral , small scales disrupt 2 or 3 rows ( 5 to 8 rows ) 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Cuvier 's dwarf caiman is native to tropical northern and central South America . It is present in the drainages of the Orinoco River , the São Francisco River and the Amazon River , and the upper reaches of the Paraná River and the Paraguay River . The countries in which it is found include Peru , Ecuador , Colombia , Venezuela , Guyana , Surinam , French Guiana , Brazil , Bolivia and Paraguay . The range of this species is rather larger than that of the sympatric smooth @-@ fronted caiman , as it extends into Paraguay and includes a larger area of Brazil . 
 Cuvier 's dwarf caiman is a freshwater species and is found in forested riverine habitats and areas of flooded forest around lakes . It seems to prefer rivers and streams with fast @-@ flowing water , but it is also found in quiet , nutrient @-@ poor waters in Venezuela and southeastern Brazil . It is able to travel quite large distances overland at night and sub @-@ adult individuals have sometimes been found in isolated , temporary pools . In the northern and southern parts of its range , it is also found in gallery forests in savannah country , but it is absent from such habitats in Los Llanos and the Pantanal . Cuvier 's dwarf caiman seems relatively tolerant of cool water compared to other species of alligator . During the day , individuals sometimes lie up in burrows but at other times rest on piles of rocks or sun themselves while lying , facing the sun , in shallow water with their backs exposed . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Cuvier 's dwarf caiman is mainly nocturnal . Adults feed on fish , amphibians , small mammals , birds , crabs , shrimps , molluscs and other invertebrates , which they catch in the water or on land . Juveniles eat fewer fish , but also consume crustaceans , tadpoles , frogs and snails as well as land invertebrates , such as beetles . The prey is mostly swallowed whole and is ground up by stones in the gizzard . In the Pantanal , Cuvier 's dwarf caiman <unk> in burrows during the dry season and is able to maintain its temperature at around 22 ° C ( 72 ° F ) for days at a time . 
 Adult Cuvier 's dwarf caiman are usually found singly or in pairs . The breeding of this species has been little studied but it does not appear to be seasonal in nature . The female builds a mound nest out of vegetation and mud somewhere in a concealed location and lays a clutch of from 10 to 25 eggs , hiding them under further vegetation . The incubation period is around 90 days and the sex of the hatchlings depends on the temperature of the nest during that time . When the eggs begin to hatch , the female opens the nest in response to the calls made by the young . Newly emerged juveniles have a coating of mucus and may delay entering the water for a few days until this has dried . Its continuing presence on their skin is believed to reduce algal growth . The female stays with the young for a few weeks after which time the hatchlings disperse . The young grow at the rate of about 8 to 10 cm ( 3 to 4 in ) per year and reach sexual maturity at around eight years . 
 Cuvier 's dwarf caiman is considered to be a keystone species whose presence in the ecosystem maintains a healthy balance of organisms . In its absence , fish , such as piranhas , might dominate the environment . The eggs and newly hatched young of Cuvier 's dwarf caiman are most at risk and are preyed on by birds , snakes , rats , raccoons and other mammals . Adult caimans are protected by the bony osteoderms under the scales and their main predators are jaguars , green anacondas ( <unk> murinus ) and large boa constrictors ( Boa constrictor ) . 
 = = Status and conservation = = 
 Many crocodilians are hunted for their skins , but this is not the case with the Cuvier 's dwarf caiman . This may be because the ventral skin in this species is too heavily armoured to make it easy to tan . Some individuals are killed by indigenous peoples for food and others , particularly in Guyana , are collected for the pet trade ; but there is no evidence that populations are dwindling as a result . There are some threats to this species from habitat destruction , including the mining of gold , but these are not thought to be of great significance . The estimated total population is over one million individuals . 
 In its Red List of Threatened Species , the IUCN lists Cuvier 's dwarf caiman as being of " Least Concern " . This is because its range is extensive , covering much of northern and central South America , and although its population trend is unknown , it appears to be abundant in many of the localities in which it is found . It is listed in Appendix II of CITES . 
 = = = Captive care = = = 
 Cuvier 's dwarf caiman can be kept as a pet , though providing suitable care is expensive and requires extremely large enclosures . In many countries , permits or licenses are necessary and most veterinarians have little experience of these exotic animals . 
 = Maybe This Christmas Too ? = 
 Maybe This Christmas Too ? is a holiday compilation album released in October 2003 through Nettwerk Records featuring contemporary musicians performing both classic and original Christmas songs . The compilation served as a sequel to Maybe This Christmas ( 2002 ) and preceded Maybe This Christmas Tree ( 2004 ) . A portion of the proceeds from the album went to Toys for Tots , a charity supported by the United States Marine Corps . Critical reception of the compilation , which failed to chart in any nation , was mixed . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Maybe This Christmas Too ? is a sequel to the 2002 compilation album Maybe This Christmas , which reached a peak position of number thirty @-@ eight on Billboard 's Top Holiday Albums chart . Maybe This Christmas Tree , released in 2004 , became the third installment to the series . A portion of proceeds from all three albums went to Toys for Tots , a charity supported by the United States Marine Corps . Maybe This Christmas Too ? features fourteen tracks recorded by various artists , most of which were associated with the Nettwerk record label during its release . Ten of the tracks were recorded specifically for this compilation album . Darin Harmon served as the album 's executive producer and Ianthe <unk> served as the project manager . Mastering for the compilation was donated by Louie Teran . In August 2003 , MTV reported on the possible inclusions of The Used 's " Alone This Holiday " , The Flaming Lips ' " Winter Wonderland " and The Polyphonic Spree 's " Winter <unk> " , none of which ended up on the final release . 
 The album opens with Rufus Wainwright 's " Spotlight on Christmas " , an acoustic @-@ based original track recorded exclusively for this set . " Spotlight on Christmas " was written and produced by Wainwright ; among other guests , the song features Teddy Thompson and Martha Wainwright on backing vocals and bells as well as Thompson on electric guitar . " The Winter Song " was written , arranged and produced by members of Eisley . " O Holy Night " , based on a poem by <unk> <unk> , was composed by Adolphe Adam and translated by John Sullivan Dwight . The song is performed by Avril Lavigne and Chantal Kreviazuk , the latter of which also produced the track . " Silent Night " , performed by Lisa Hannigan , was originally recorded by Damien Rice for his 2002 studio album O. The song is less than two minutes in length and features original lyrics . 
 The band Rilo Kiley contributed " Xmas Cake " , a song originally written by group members Jenny Lewis and Blake Sennett . The track was produced and mixed by Mike <unk> and features " jazzy guitar chords and a piano @-@ led wintery feel " to address poverty and conflict . " ¿ Dónde Está Santa Claus ? " ( Spanish for " Where Is Santa Claus ? " ) is performed by the band Guster and was produced , recorded and mixed by Peter <unk> . The track contains castanets , " bouncing " rhythm , and " silky " backing vocals . " Rudy " , a song about " Rudolf the red @-@ nosed wino " , was originally written by Danny <unk> ; the version appearing on the compilation album was arranged and performed by The Be Good <unk> . Instrumentation included guitar , mandolin , organ , piano , percussion and the twelve @-@ string guitar . " Christmas Song " was written by Dave Matthews and performed by the Dave Matthews Band . The " organ @-@ tinged , gospel rendition " of " Go Tell It on the Mountain " , originally written by John Wesley Work , Jr. with traditional music , was arranged and given additional lyrics by Suzie <unk> ( also known as Oh Susanna ) . 
 The Barenaked Ladies ' " Green Christmas " , a song credited to Steven Page and Ed Robertson about experiencing Christmas in a location where snow never falls , was originally recorded for the soundtrack to the 2000 film How the Grinch Stole Christmas . The acoustic studio version that appeared on Maybe This Christmas Too ? differed from the soundtrack version as well as a third version appearing on the band 's 2004 studio album Barenaked for the Holidays . Martina <unk> performs a " <unk> , bluesy " rendition of Edward Pola and George Wyle 's " It 's the Most Wonderful Time of the Year " . The track was produced and recorded by David Matheson . " Donna & Blitzen " was written and performed by Badly Drawn Boy and features " bouncy vintage rock piano " . Irving Berlin 's " White Christmas " is performed by The Flaming Lips . Sixpence None the Richer performs " It Came Upon a Midnight Clear " , the album 's final track . The song contains music by Richard Storrs Willis and lyrics by Edmund Hamilton . The version was arranged by Matt Slocum , produced by Sam Ashworth and Taylor Harris , and engineered and mixed by Harris . Leigh Nash performs vocals , Slocum features on guitar , pedal steel and Wurlitzer , Rob Mitchell plays drums , and Justin Cary plays bass . Ashworth also contributed on <unk> and percussion , and Harris on percussion and programming . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Allmusic 's MacKenzie Wilson wrote that Maybe This Christmas Too ? would appeal to " both casual and die @-@ hard music fans of all ages " . Wilson called Wainwright 's performance " classic chamber pop with a warm spirit " and also noted the " fetching " graphic design work for the album 's cover art by Brian " <unk> " Brooks of Cosmic Debris . Andrew Gilstrap 's review for PopMatters also complimented " Spotlight on Christmas " , calling the song a " clever piece of class @-@ conscious commentary " that provides a " perfect example of [ Wainwright 's ] meticulous <unk> brand of pop " . Simmy Richman of The Independent considered The Flaming Lips ' rendition of " White Christmas " to be the " strangest " he had ever heard . Gilstrap used the same adjective ( " strange " ) to describe " O Holy Night " , and thought " Silent Night " was " incredibly potent " despite its short length . The New York Times 's Kelefa Sanneh called " White Christmas " " spooky " and wrote that the album " brings to the world something more ambivalent than joy " . Gilbert concluded that Maybe This Christmas Too ? " feels just about right " and " does a fine job of representing the less than stellar aspects of a wintry , commercialized holiday like Christmas . " In 2008 The A.V. Club included " Spotlight on Christmas " as number thirty @-@ nine on its list of " 42 holiday entertainments that don 't make us want to claw our eyes out with rage " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Spotlight on Christmas " ( Rufus Wainwright ) , performed by Rufus Wainwright – 3 : 22 
 " The Winter Song " ( Eisley ) , performed by Eisley – 4 : 34 
 " O Holy Night " ( Adolphe Adam , <unk> <unk> , John Sullivan Dwight ) , performed by Avril Lavigne and Chantal Kreviazuk – 4 : 22 
 " Silent Night " ( Lisa Hannigan , traditional ) , performed by Lisa Hannigan – 1 : 48 
 " Xmas Cake " ( Jenny Lewis , Blake Sennett ) , performed by Rilo Kiley – 5 : 22 
 " ¿ Dónde Está Santa Claus ? " ( Alvin G. Grenier , Gordon Rod Parker , George Scheck ) , performed by Guster – 2 : 21 
 " Rudy " ( Danny <unk> ) , performed by The Be Good <unk> – 4 : 33 
 " Christmas Song " ( Dave Matthews ) , performed by Dave Matthews Band – 5 : 33 
 " Go Tell It on the Mountain " ( John Wesley Work , Jr . , traditional ) , performed by Oh Susanna – 3 : 48 
 " Green Christmas " ( Steven Page , Ed Robertson ) , performed by Barenaked Ladies – 2 : 37 
 " It 's the Most Wonderful Time of the Year " ( Edward Pola , George Wyle ) , performed by Martina <unk> – 2 : 45 
 " Donna & Blitzen " ( Badly Drawn Boy ) , performed by Badly Drawn Boy – 3 : 29 
 " White Christmas " ( Irving Berlin ) , performed by The Flaming Lips – 4 : 20 
 " It Came Upon a Midnight Clear " ( Edmund Hamilton , Richard Storrs Willis ) , performed by Sixpence None the Richer – 3 : 46 
 Track listing and song lengths adapted from album liner notes . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Allmusic and album liner notes . 
 = Hurricane Felix ( 1995 ) = 
 Hurricane Felix caused severe beach erosion along the East Coast of the United States in August 1995 . The seventh tropical cyclone , sixth named storm , and third hurricane of the 1995 Atlantic hurricane season , Felix developed from a tropical wave in the eastern Atlantic Ocean on August 8 . Although initially a tropical depression , it strengthened into Tropical Storm Felix later that day . Further intensification was slow , with Felix reaching hurricane status on August 11 . Under favorable conditions , Felix began to rapidly deepen while curving northwestward . Late on August 12 , Felix peaked as a low @-@ end Category 4 hurricane . However , it soon weakened rapidly to a Category 1 hurricane . Less than three days later , Felix passed only 75 mi ( 120 km ) southeast of Bermuda . Although it also posed a threat to the East Coast of the United States , Felix curved northward and then east @-@ northeastward while remaining offshore , thereby avoiding landfall . Felix briefly threatened Bermuda again , but weakened to a tropical storm and turned back to the northeast on August 20 . It accelerated east @-@ northeastward , and passed a short distance offshore of Newfoundland , where Felix transitioned into an extratropical storm on August 22 . 
 Large waves in Puerto Rico caused minor coastal flooding in Cataño . Near @-@ hurricane @-@ force winds in Bermuda downed trees and power lines , which left 20 @,@ 000 people without power . Rough surf on the island damaged a few boats and hotels . In addition , the passage of Felix postponed Bermuda 's 1995 independence referendum . Large waves produced by the storm affected nearly the entire East Coast of the United States . In New York , two houses were washed away in The Hamptons , and two boats capsized in Maine . While passing southeast of Newfoundland , Felix produced moderate rainfall and large waves across the island , although damage was minimal . Overall , Felix caused nine deaths due to drowning along the coasts of Rhode Island , New Jersey , and North Carolina . The storm did approximately $ 2 @.@ 5 million ( 1995 USD ) in damage on Bermuda , while rough seas produced about $ 132 @,@ 000 in losses along the United States coastline . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa on August 6 , and quickly showed signs of a developing circulation . After an increase in convection , or thunderstorms , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) classified the system as Tropical Depression Seven at 0000 UTC on August 8 , about 460 mi ( 740 km ) west @-@ southwest of the Cape Verde islands . With a strong ridge to the north , the nascent depression moved generally west @-@ northwestward , and the combination of favorable upper @-@ level conditions and warm sea surface temperatures allowed for gradual intensification . About 18 hours after the depression formed , the NHC upgraded it to Tropical Storm Felix . By August 9 , the storm had developed a large area of convection with associated outflow . After continuing to slowly intensify , Felix became a hurricane early on August 11 about 575 mi ( 925 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . 
 Soon after becoming a hurricane , Felix developed a well @-@ defined eye as Hurricane Hunters began investigating the storm . Beginning at 1200 UTC on August 11 , the hurricane began undergoing rapid deepening , and by the next day , concentric eyewalls were observed , indicative of a strong storm . On August 12 , the Hurricane Hunters observed flight @-@ level winds of 164 mph ( 264 km / h ) , suggesting peak surface winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) . At that time , Felix was located north of the Lesser Antilles , moving to the north @-@ northwest due to an approaching trough weakening the ridge . After peak winds , Felix weakened due to stronger wind shear and its eyewall replacement cycle . The eye became indistinct and opened on August 13 , and it became a minimal hurricane by August 14 with a broad inner core . Late on August 14 , Hurricane Felix turned more to the west @-@ northwest , after the trough that previously brought it northward split into two pieces of energy , one moving southward and the other moving northeastward . On August 15 , the hurricane passed about 75 mi ( 120 km ) south of Bermuda , and a building ridge was anticipated to allow Felix to continue its trajectory toward North Carolina . 
 Beginning on August 15 , the NHC began forecasting that the hurricane would make landfall on the Outer Banks of North Carolina within two days . Early on August 16 , the eye became better defined , although the feature diminished within a few hours , and the NHC was on the verge of downgrading Felix to tropical storm status . A break in the ridge allowed Felix to turn to the north , bringing it about 150 mi ( 250 km ) east of the Outer Banks . An approaching trough turned the hurricane to a northeast drift , and there was initial uncertainty whether Felix would loop back to the west or recurve to the northeast . During this time , the system remained a minimal hurricane , maintaining a large eye about 60 to 80 mph ( 95 to 130 km ) in diameter , but with weak convection due to cooler air . After the trough that turned Felix to the east @-@ northeast bypassed it to the north , the hurricane turned to the southeast , executing a small loop while northwest of Bermuda . On August 20 , Felix weakened below hurricane intensity for the first time in nine days , due to cooler waters and increased wind shear . By that time , the convection was removed from the center , and another trough brought the storm to the northeast . While passing east of Newfoundland on August 22 , Felix became extratropical . The remnants continued to the northeast , eventually passing north of the United Kingdom on August 25 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 While Felix was near peak intensity on August 12 , officials in Bermuda issued a hurricane watch for the island . A tropical storm warning was added the next day , which was upgraded to a hurricane warning on August 14 . The warnings were downgraded to a tropical storm warning and later discontinued after the hurricane bypassed the island . A tropical storm watch was later issued for Bermuda on August 19 late in Felix 's duration when it was drifting offshore the eastern United States . The threat of the storm caused flights to be canceled to and from the island . 
 Initial forecasts predicted a landfall on the Outer Banks of North Carolina , with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) ; however , these forecasts were made with great uncertainty . While Felix was still near Bermuda on August 15 , the NHC issued hurricane warnings for the eastern United States from Little River , South Carolina to Chincoteague , Virginia and including the Pamlico Sound , Albemarle Sound , and southern portions of the Chesapeake Bay . Tropical storm warnings were also issued from Chincoteague to near Manasquan , New Jersey , including the Chesapeake and Delaware bays . The watches and warnings remained in place until August 18 . Despite the lack of landfall , the NHC deemed the watches and warnings as appropriate due to the projected track . 
 The threat of the storm caused officials to issue evacuation orders for the Outer Banks of North Carolina , and about 200 @,@ 000 people left the island chain , including 125 @,@ 000 in Dare County . Evacuation orders were dropped and shelters were closed as the storm moved away . The loss of tourism revenue was estimated at $ 1 @.@ 2 million in Currituck County alone , and the loss of revenue for businesses in the Outer Banks was estimated at $ 4 million ( 1995 USD ) per day during the evacuations . Some people in Virginia Beach , Virginia also evacuated voluntarily . The storm delayed a search for the remains of the Civil War steamship USS Monitor off the coast of North Carolina . The United States Navy moved ships from Norfolk Naval Base to open waters to prevent damage along the docks from the high waves . Then @-@ Virginia governor George Allen declared a state of emergency due to the threat from the hurricane . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Though Felix did not make landfall , its large circulation created large swells across much of the western Atlantic Ocean . In Puerto Rico , 8 to 12 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 to 3 @.@ 7 m ) waves caused minor coastal flooding in Cataño . 
 While passing south of Bermuda , Felix produced sustained winds of 63 mph ( 102 km / h ) with gusts to 80 mph ( 129 km / h ) . The winds were strong enough to knock down trees and leave 20 @,@ 000 people without power , although most outages were quickly restored . Television service was also interrupted . The storm also destroyed a few fishing boats and damaged hotels along the island 's southern shore , where prolonged high surf caused considerable beach erosion . The Causeway connecting St. David 's Island with the mainland sustained some damage , contributing to an estimated $ 2 @.@ 5 million in losses on Bermuda . The hurricane 's passage postponed the scheduled vote for Bermuda 's independence . 
 While offshore the eastern United States , Hurricane Felix generated strong waves and rip currents that caused widespread coastal flooding and beach erosion , reaching as far south as Georgia and as far north as Maine . In North Carolina , high waves flooded high waves covered North Carolina Highway 12 during high tides , and three people were killed . Felix passed close enough to the state to produce wind gusts of 43 mph ( 68 mph ) in Buxton , which caused minor property damage , estimated at $ 57 @,@ 000 ( 1995 USD ) . In some portions of North Carolina , the storm increased beaches due to the displacement of sand , including Long Beach which grew by 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) . Beaches along the Outer Banks and Virginia were closed for several days , and about 200 people required rescue in New Hanover County , North Carolina . The Wakefield , Virginia National Weather Service likened the storm 's effects to " a strong nor 'easter " , with little damage in southeastern Virginia . In the months after the storm , beach nourishment occurred along the Outer Banks to repair the eroded coastlines , while in Virginia Beach . 
 The onshore flow from the hurricane disrupted a heat wave in Delaware and Maryland , while the rough surf caused beach erosion and beach closures . Several people were injured in New Jersey by the rough surf , and over 150 people required rescue in Cape May . Waves of 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in Atlantic City forced beaches to close for the first time since Hurricane Gloria in 1985 , and beaches were closed across the region for about five days . There was minor tidal flooding in the state due to astronomically low tides , although extensive beach erosion occurred after a week of strong waves ; in Ocean City , the storm eroded about 240 ft ( 73 m ) of beaches , leaving behind 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) cliffs . Five people drowned in the state due to rough surf . While still offshore , Felix produced wind gusts of 36 mph ( 57 km / h ) in Atlantic City . On Fire Island in New York , the waves washed away two houses . In Rhode Island , 6 to 10 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 0 m ) waves overturned a boat along the Sakonnet River , killing one passenger . Along Martha 's Vineyard in Massachusetts , waves reached 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) , and several beaches were closed across the state . In Maine on Bailey Island , a woman required rescue after being swept away by a wave , who became hypothermic and injured due to cuts . Two lobster boats sank in the state , with one occupant requiring rescue and the other swimming ashore . Damage to the boats totaled $ 75 @,@ 000 ( 1995 USD ) . 
 As Hurricane Felix was looping offshore the eastern United States , it produced swells of 26 ft ( 8 m ) along the Nova Scotia coast on an otherwise sunny day . Beaches were closed . Buoys near the Newfoundland coast recorded wave heights of 49 ft ( 15 m ) , while buoys farther offshore reported wave heights of 82 ft ( 27 @.@ 5 m ) . The outer rainbands of the storm dropped light rainfall , peaking at around 3 @.@ 43 mm ( 87 mm ) in northern Newfoundland . Offshore Caithness in Scotland , waves from the remnants of Felix submerged an experimental wave power station , damaging it further after previous waves damaged the system . 
 = Action of 1 August 1801 = 
 The Action of 1 August 1801 was a single @-@ ship action of the First Barbary War fought between the American schooner USS Enterprise and the Tripolitan polacca Tripoli off the coast of modern @-@ day Libya . 
 As part of Commodore Richard Dale 's Mediterranean Squadron , Enterprise had been deployed with the American force blockading the Vilayet of Tripoli . Enterprise , under the command of Lieutenant Andrew Sterett , had been sent by Commodore Dale to gather supplies at Malta . While cruising towards Malta , Enterprise engaged Tripoli , commanded by Admiral Rais Mahomet Rous . Tripoli put up a stubborn fight , and the engagement lasted for three hours before the polacca was finally captured by the Americans . 
 Although the Americans had taken the vessel , Sterett had no orders to take prizes and so was obliged to release her . Enterprise completed her journey to Malta , and received honor and praise from the squadron 's Commodore on her return to the fleet . The success of the battle boosted morale in the United States , since it was that country 's first victory in the war against the Tripolitans . The opposite occurred in Tripoli , where morale sank heavily upon learning of Tripoli 's defeat . Despite Enterprise 's triumph , the war continued indecisively for another four years . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the recognition of the independence of the United States ( US ) in 1783 , the new country 's early administrations had elected to make tribute payments to the Vilayet of Tripoli to protect American commercial shipping interests in the Mediterranean Sea . Tripoli , nominally a subject of the Ottoman Empire , was practically autonomous in conducting her foreign affairs , and would declare war on non @-@ Muslim states whose ships sailed in the Mediterranean in order to extract tribute from them . In 1801 , the payments demanded by Tripoli from the United States were significantly increased . The newly elected administration of Thomas Jefferson , an opponent of the tribute payments from their inception , refused to pay . As a result , Tripoli declared war on the United States , and its navy began to seize American ships and crews in an attempt to coerce the Jefferson administration into acceding to their demands . When word of these attacks on American merchantmen reached Washington , D.C. , the Jefferson administration gave the United States Navy the authority to conduct limited operations against Tripoli . As part of the American strategy , a squadron under Commodore Richard Dale was dispatched to blockade Tripoli . 
 By July 1801 , Dale 's force had begun to run low on water . In order to replenish his supplies , Dale dispatched the schooner USS Enterprise , commanded by Lieutenant Andrew Sterett , to provision at the British naval base on Malta , while the commodore himself remained off Tripoli with the frigate USS President to maintain the blockade . Soon after leaving the blockade , Enterprise came upon what appeared to be a Tripolitan cruiser sailing near her . Flying British colors as a ruse , Enterprise approached the Tripolitan vessel and hailed her . The Tripolitan answered that she was seeking American vessels . At this Enterprise struck the British colors , raised the American flag , and prepared for action . 
 The Tripolitan vessel , Tripoli , and Enterprise were quite evenly matched . Enterprise , with a complement of 90 , was a 12 @-@ gun , 135 @-@ ton schooner built in 1799 that had seen action in the Quasi @-@ War . In contrast , Tripoli , a lateen @-@ rigged polacca with two masts , was crewed by 80 men under Admiral Rais Mahomet Rous and armed with 14 guns . Although the Tripolitans held a slight advantage in firepower , Enterprise had to its advantage the larger crew and the element of surprise . The Americans were also significantly more experienced in gunnery action than the Tripolitans , who preferred to attack by boarding and taking over their opponents ' ships . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Shortly after Sterett had the American colors raised , he had his men open fire upon the Tripolitans at close range with muskets . In response , Tripoli returned fire with an ineffective broadside . The Americans returned fire with their own broadsides , which led Rous to break off the engagement and attempt to flee . Neither able to fight off the American vessel nor outrun her , the Tripolitans attempted to grapple Enterprise and board her . Once within musket range , Enterprise 's marines opened fire on the Tripoli , foiling its boarding attempt , and forced Tripoli to try to break away once more . Enterprise continued the engagement , firing more broadsides into the Tripolitan and blasting a hole in her hull . 
 Severely damaged , Tripoli struck her colors to indicate surrender . As Enterprise moved towards the vessel to accept its surrender , the Tripolitans hoisted their flag and fired upon Enterprise . The Tripolitans again attempted to board the American schooner , but were repelled by Enterprise 's broadsides and musketry . After another exchange of fire , the Tripolitans struck their colors a second time . Sterett once more ceased firing and moved closer to Tripoli . In response , Rous again raised his colors and attempted to board Enterprise . Enterprise 's accurate gunnery once more forced Tripoli to veer off . As the action continued , Rous <unk> feigned a third surrender in an attempt to draw the American schooner within grappling range . This time , Sterett kept his distance , and ordered Enterprise 's guns to be lowered to aim at the polacca 's waterline , a tactic that threatened to sink the enemy ship . The next American broadsides struck their target , causing massive damage , dismasting her mizzen @-@ mast , and reducing her to a sinking condition . With most of his crew dead or wounded , the injured Admiral Rous finally threw the Tripolitan flag into the sea to convince Sterett to end the action . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 At the end of the action Tripoli was severely damaged ; 30 of her crew were dead and another 30 were injured . The polacca 's first lieutenant was among the casualties and Admiral Rous himself was injured in the fighting . In what amounted to a total American victory over the Tripolitans , Enterprise had suffered only superficial damage and no casualties . Sterett , whose orders did not give him the authority to retain prizes , let the polacca limp back to Tripoli . However , before setting her free , the Americans cut down Tripoli 's masts and sufficiently disabled her so that she could barely make sail . Sterett then continued his journey to Malta and picked up the supplies for which he was sent before returning to the blockade . 
 After Enterprise left , Tripoli began its journey back to the port of Tripoli . On the way it ran into USS President and asked for assistance ; Rous falsely claimed that his vessel was Tunisian and that it had been damaged in an engagement with a French 22 @-@ gun vessel . Dale suspected the vessel 's true identity and merely provided Rous with a compass so he could find his way back to port . When he finally arrived at Tripoli , Rous was severely chastised by Yusuf Karamanli , the Pasha ( ruler ) of Tripoli . Stripped of his command , he was paraded through the streets draped in sheep 's entrails while seated backwards on a jackass before suffering 500 <unk> . 
 Enterprise 's victory over Tripoli had very different consequences for the two nations involved . In Tripoli , the defeat , combined with severity of the Rous ' punishment , severely hurt morale throughout the city , and led to significant reductions in recruitment for ships ' crews . In the United States , the exact opposite occurred , with wild publicity surrounding the arrival of news that the Americans had won their first victory over the Tripolitans . The American government gave a month 's pay as a bonus to each of Enterprise 's crew members , and honored Sterett by granting him a sword and calling for his promotion . Fanciful plays were written about the victorious Americans , and morale and enthusiasm about the war reached a high point . The victory did not have any long @-@ term consequences in the conduct of the war , however . Dale 's blockade of Tripoli was ineffective in preventing ships from entering and leaving the port , and was equally ineffective in altering the Pasha 's diplomatic stance toward the Americans . Dale 's squadron was relieved in 1802 by another under Richard Morris , and the war continued until 1805 . 
 = Alan Kulwicki = 
 Alan Dennis Kulwicki ( December 14 , 1954 – April 1 , 1993 ) , nicknamed " Special K " and the " Polish Prince " , was an American NASCAR Winston Cup Series ( now Sprint Cup Series ) racecar driver . He started racing at local short tracks in Wisconsin before moving up to regional stock car touring series . Kulwicki arrived at NASCAR , the highest and most expensive level of stock car racing in the United States , with no sponsor , a limited budget , and only a racecar and a borrowed pickup truck . Despite starting with meager equipment and finances , he earned the 1986 NASCAR Rookie of the Year award over drivers racing for well @-@ funded teams . 
 After Kulwicki won his first race at Phoenix International Raceway , he debuted what would become his trademark " Polish victory lap " . Kulwicki won the 1992 Winston Cup Championship by what was then the closest margin in NASCAR history . He died early in 1993 in a light aircraft accident , and therefore never defended his championship . He has been inducted into numerous racing halls of fame and was named one of NASCAR 's 50 greatest drivers . 
 Kulwicki was known for being a perfectionist and doing things his own way . An engineer by trade , his scientific approach to NASCAR racing inspired the way teams are now run . Despite lucrative offers from top car owners , he insisted on driving for his own race team , AK Racing , during most of his NASCAR career . Described by his publicist as " a real hard type of person to get to know " , he remained a bachelor throughout his life . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kulwicki grew up in Greenfield , Wisconsin , a suburb of Milwaukee known for its Polish @-@ American neighborhoods , near the Milwaukee Mile racetrack . After his mother died , his family moved in with his grandmother , who died when Kulwicki was in seventh grade . A year later , his only brother died of a hemophilia @-@ related illness . Kulwicki attended Pius XI High School , a Roman Catholic high school in Milwaukee , and received a bachelor of science degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Wisconsin – Milwaukee in 1977 . His knowledge of engineering has been cited as a contributing factor to his success as a driver , as it helped him better understand the physics of a racecar . He first raced on local tracks as an amateur while in college before becoming a full @-@ time professional racer in 1980 . A devout Roman Catholic , Kulwicki always competed with a Saint Christopher devotional medal in his car . 
 = = Racing career = = 
 = = = Early racing career = = = 
 Kulwicki began his racing career as a 13 @-@ year @-@ old kart racer . His father built engines as the crew chief for Norm Nelson and Roger McCluskey 's United States Automobile Club ( USAC ) racecars . Because his work involved travel , Kulwicki 's father was unable to help his son at most kart races , so Kulwicki 's resourcefulness was often tested trying to find someone to transport his kart to the track . Even when Kulwicki asked his father for advice , he typically ended up doing most of the work himself . " I showed him how " , Gerry Kulwicki said . " And he said : ' Why don 't you do it ? You can do it better . ' And I said , ' Well , if you do it for a while , you can do it better . ' " 
 Many local @-@ level American racetracks host their own season championships . In Wisconsin , numerous locations held dirt and asphalt short track racing . Kulwicki started racing stock cars at the local level at the Hales Corners Speedway and <unk> Speedway dirt oval tracks . In 1973 , he won the rookie of the year award at Hales Corners Speedway in the Milwaukee suburb of Franklin , and the next year started racing late models – the fastest and most complicated type of stock cars raced at the local level – at the same track . That season , he won his first feature race , at Leo 's Speedway in Oshkosh . 
 Kulwicki moved from dirt tracks to paved tracks in 1977 . He also teamed up with racecar builder Greg Krieger to research , model , engineer , and construct an innovative car with far more torsional stiffness than other late models . The increased stiffness allowed the car to handle better in the corners , which increased its speed . Racing at Slinger Super Speedway , he won the track championship in 1977 . In 1978 , Kulwicki returned to Slinger ; that same year he started racing a late model at Wisconsin International Raceway ( <unk> ) , finishing third in points in his rookie season at the track . In 1979 and 1980 , he won the <unk> late model track championships . 
 In 1979 , Kulwicki began competing in regional to national level events sanctioned by the USAC Stock Car series and the American Speed Association ( ASA ) , while remaining an amateur racer through 1980 . When Kulwicki raced against future NASCAR champion Rusty Wallace in the ASA series , the two became friends . Kulwicki 's highest finish in the ASA season points championship was third place , which he accomplished in both 1982 and 1985 , with five career victories and twelve pole positions . 
 = = = NASCAR career = = = 
 = = = = 1980s = = = = 
 Kulwicki raced in four NASCAR Busch Grand National Series ( now Xfinity Series ) races in 1984 . At the time , the Busch Grand National Series was considered NASCAR 's feeder circuit , a proving ground for drivers who wished to step up to the organization 's premiere circuit , the Winston Cup . Kulwicki qualified second fastest and finished in second place at his first career NASCAR race , which took place at the Milwaukee Mile , several city blocks from where he grew up . Later that year , he finished seventh at Charlotte and fifth at Bristol . The following year , Kulwicki placed sixteenth in the season @-@ opening Busch Series race at Daytona . Although he won the pole position at that year 's event in Milwaukee , he finished fourteenth because of engine problems . Kulwicki 's Busch Series successes caught car owner Bill Terry 's eye and he offered Kulwicki a chance to race for him in several Winston Cup events . 
 In 1985 , Kulwicki sold most of his belongings , including his short track racing equipment , to move approximately 860 miles ( 1 @,@ 380 km ) to the Charlotte area in North Carolina . He kept only a few things ; his pickup truck was loaded to tow a trailer full of furniture and tools . An electrical fire two days before he left destroyed his truck , so Kulwicki had to borrow one to pull the trailer . After arriving in the Charlotte area , he showed up unannounced at Terry 's shop ready to race . Veteran NASCAR drivers were initially amused by Kulwicki 's arrival on the national tour : He was a driver from the northern United States when the series was primarily a southern regional series , he had a mechanical engineering degree when few other drivers had completed college , and , with only six starts , had limited driving experience in the junior Busch Series . Kulwicki was described as very studious , hard working , no @-@ nonsense , and something of a loner . He frequently walked the garage area in his racing uniform carrying a briefcase . Kulwicki made his first career Winston Cup start at Richmond on September 8 , 1985 , for Bill Terry 's No. 32 Hardee 's Ford team . That season he competed in five races for Terry , with his highest finish being 13th . 
 Kulwicki started his rookie season in 1986 with Terry . After Terry decided to end support for his racing team mid @-@ season , Kulwicki fielded his own team . He started out as essentially a one @-@ man team in a time when other teams had dozens of people in supporting roles . Initially the driver , owner , crew chief , and chief mechanic , Kulwicki had difficulty acquiring and keeping crew members because he found it difficult to trust them to do the job with the excellence that he demanded , and because he was hands on in the maintenance of racecars to the point of being a " control freak " . He sought out crew members who had owned their own racecars , believing they would understand what he was going through : working long hours and performing his own car maintenance with a very limited budget . Notable crew members include his crew chief , Paul Andrews , and future Cup crew chiefs , Tony Gibson and Brian Whitesell . Future crew chief and owner , Ray Evernham , lasted six weeks with Kulwicki in 1992 . Evernham later said , " The man was a genius . There 's no question . It 's not a matter of people just feeling like he was a genius . That man was a genius . But his personality paid for that . He was very impatient , very straightforward , very cut @-@ to @-@ the @-@ bone . " With one car , two engines , and two full @-@ time crew members , Kulwicki won the 1986 Winston Cup Rookie of the Year award . He had competed in 23 of 29 events , with four top 10 finishes , three races not completed ( DNF ) , an average finish of 15 @.@ 4 , and had only one result below 30th place . Kulwicki finished 21st in the Winston Cup points standings for the season . 
 For the 1987 season , Kulwicki secured primary sponsorship from <unk> Antifreeze and changed his car number to seven . He picked up his first career pole position in the season 's third race , at Richmond . Later that season , he again qualified fastest at Richmond and Dover . Kulwicki came close to winning his first Winston Cup race at Pocono , finishing second after winner Dale Earnhardt passed him on the last lap . With nine top 10 finishes , eleven DNFs , and an average finish of 18 @.@ 2 in 29 events ; Kulwicki finished 15th in the Winston Cup points standings for the season . 
 In 1988 , Kulwicki hired Paul Andrews as his crew chief after Andrews was recommended by Rusty Wallace at the 1987 NASCAR Awards banquet . That year Kulwicki won his first NASCAR Winston Cup race in the season 's second @-@ to @-@ last race at Phoenix International Raceway after race leader Ricky Rudd 's car had motor problems late in the race . Kulwicki led 41 laps and won by 18 @.@ 5 seconds . After the race finished , he turned his car around and made , what he called , a " Polish victory lap " by driving the opposite way ( clockwise ) on the track , with the driver 's side of the car facing the fans . " This gave me the opportunity to wave to the crowd from the driver 's side " , Kulwicki explained . Andrews recalled , " He had wanted to do something special and something different for his first win and only his first . " 
 It 's been a long road and it 's taken a lot of hard work to get here , but this has made it all worthwhile . When you work for something so hard for so long , you wonder if it 's going to be worth all of the anticipation . Believe me , it certainly was . And what do you think of my Polish victory lap ? There will never be another first win and you know , everybody sprays champagne or stands up on the car . I wanted to do something different for the fans . 
 He finished the 1988 season with four pole positions in 29 events , nine top 10 finishes including two second @-@ place finishes , twelve DNFs , and an average finish of 19 @.@ 2 . Kulwicki finished 14th in the Winston Cup points standings for the season . 
 Kulwicki started his own engine @-@ building program for the 1989 season . He had four second place finishes that season and held the points lead after the fifth race of the season . The team dropped from fourth to fifteenth in points by suffering nine engine failures during a sixteen @-@ race stretch in the middle of the season . In 29 races , he had six pole positions , nine top 10 finishes , and finished 14th in season points . The team had a new workshop built during the season . 
 = = = = 1990s = = = = 
 Junior Johnson , owner of one of the top NASCAR teams , approached Kulwicki at the beginning of the 1990 season to try to get him to replace Terry Labonte in the No. 11 Budweiser Ford . Kulwicki declined , stating that he was more interested in running his own team . He won his second Cup race at Rockingham on October 21 , 1990 , and finished eighth in points that year , his first finish in the top 10 points in a season . In 29 races , he had thirteen top 10 finishes and one pole position . 
 Before the 1991 season , <unk> ended their sponsorship of Kulwicki 's team . Junior Johnson came calling again , looking for a driver for his revived second team that had last seen Neil Bonnett behind the wheel in 1986 . Kulwicki turned down Johnson 's $ 1 million offer thinking that he had secured a sponsorship deal with Maxwell House Coffee . Johnson then went to Maxwell House himself and obtained the sponsorship for his new car , which Sterling Marlin was hired to drive instead . Kulwicki was forced to begin the season without a sponsor , paying all of the team 's expenses out of his own pocket . At the opening race of the season , the 1991 Daytona 500 , five cars raced with paint schemes representing different branches of the United States military to show support for the American forces involved in the Gulf War . It was the first use of special paint schemes in NASCAR history . Kulwicki 's car was sponsored by the United States Army in a one @-@ race deal . After running the second and third races of the season in a plain white unsponsored car , Kulwicki 's luck finding a sponsor changed for the better at Atlanta Motor Speedway . 
 At the time , Hooters was sponsoring a car driven by Mark Stahl , another owner @-@ driver in the Cup series . Unlike Kulwicki , Stahl was a part @-@ time participant who had trouble making races . The Hooters car failed to make the field for the <unk> Quality Parts 500 and the Atlanta @-@ based chain , desiring a spot in the race , approached the <unk> Kulwicki to gauge his interest . The principals agreed to at least a one @-@ race deal , which became a much longer term deal when Kulwicki recorded an eighth @-@ place finish in the race . Later in the season , Kulwicki won the Bristol night race for his third career win . In 29 races , he had eleven top 10 finishes , four poles , and finished 13th in the points . 
 = = = = = 1992 NASCAR Winston Cup Championship = = = = = 
 Kulwicki passed Dale Jarrett with 27 laps left at the Food City 500 race on April 5 at Bristol to take a narrow victory . It was his fourth Winston Cup victory . After that race , he never left the top five in season points . Andrews attributed Kulwicki 's consistently strong finishes to the steady performance of newly adopted radial tires throughout their lifespan . He said , " It was hard to control them , and the driver 's ability to work with that car during practice in order to get the car set up meant so much more than it ever did . " Kulwicki 's second victory in the season was at the first race at Pocono . Discounted as a contender for the season championship during the year , Kulwicki was expected to fade from contention . He qualified on the pole position for the Peak <unk> 500 race on September 20 at Dover , but crashed early in the race and finished 34th . 
 Kulwicki was quite vocal that his 278 @-@ point deficit would probably be his undoing , and that the Dover race result would keep him from contending for the season title . He was quoted as saying , " This probably finishes us off in the championship deal . " On October 11 , Mark Martin had a narrow victory over Kulwicki at the Mello Yello 500 at Charlotte . For the second race in a row , points leader Bill Elliott had problems , which left six drivers within reach of the title with three races left to go . Elliott had problems again at the second @-@ to @-@ last race , and his cracked cylinder head allowed race winner Davey Allison to take the points lead , with fourth place finisher Kulwicki second in season points and Elliott third . 
 The 1992 Hooters 500 , the final race of the 1992 season , is considered one of the most eventful races in NASCAR history . It was the final race for Richard Petty and the first for Jeff Gordon . Six drivers were close enough in the points standings to win the championship that day . Allison led second @-@ place Kulwicki by 30 points , Bill Elliott by 40 , Harry Gant by 97 , and Kyle Petty by 98 and needed to finish sixth or better to clinch the championship . Kulwicki received approval from NASCAR and Ford to change the " Thunderbird " lettering on his bumper for the race to " <unk> " because he felt like the underdog in the contention for the championship . During Kulwicki 's first pit stop , the first gear in the car 's transmission broke . Andrews said , " We had to leave pit road in fourth gear , because we had broken metal parts in there , and only by leaving it in fourth are you not going to move metal around as much . We could only hope that the loose piece of metal didn 't get in there and break the gears in half . We had three or four pit stops after it broke . I held my breath all day long . " Allison was racing in sixth place , closely behind Ernie Irvan , when Irvan 's tire blew with 73 ( of 328 ) laps left in the event . As a result , Allison ran into the side of Irvan 's spinning car and his car was too damaged to continue . Kulwicki and Elliott were left to duel for the title . While leading late in the race , Andrews calculated the exact lap for his final pit stop so that Kulwicki would be guaranteed to lead the most laps and would gain five bonus points . Kulwicki made his final pit stop only after leading enough laps to guarantee the bonus points . To save time , the pit crew did a fuel @-@ only pit stop . Not changing tires allowed them to be available to push the car to prevent it from stalling , since the car had to start moving in a higher gear . Because the team 's fuel man hurried to add the gasoline during the quick stop , he did not add the desired amount into the tank . As a result , Kulwicki had to conserve fuel to ensure that his car was still running at the end of the race . Elliott won the race and Kulwicki stretched his fuel to finish second . Kulwicki won the 1992 Winston Cup Championship by maintaining his 10 @-@ point lead over Elliott . He celebrated the championship with his second Polish victory lap . Always conscious of his appearance for potential sponsors , Kulwicki combed his hair , making a national television audience wait for him to emerge from his car . 
 Kulwicki had overcome the 278 @-@ point deficit in the final six races of the season by ending with a fifth , a fourth , and two second @-@ place finishes . Kulwicki won the championship because of his consistent high finishes . It was the closest title win in NASCAR Cup Series history until the implementation of the Chase for the Cup format in 2004 . Kulwicki was the last owner @-@ driver to win the title for nearly two decades , the first Cup champion with a college degree , and the first Cup champion born in a northern state . The song that played during a short salute to Kulwicki at the year @-@ end awards banquet was Frank Sinatra 's " My Way " . During the prep work for the banquet , Elvis ' version of " My Way " was found , but Kulwicki insisted on Frank Sinatra 's version . 
 = = = = = = Championship honors = = = = = = 
 Kulwicki returned to his hometown , Greenfield , for Alan Kulwicki Day in January 1993 . The gymnasium at Greenfield High School was filled and surrounded by four to five thousand people . Local television crews filmed the event . Kulwicki signed autographs for six hours . 
 In celebration of his championship , sponsor Hooters made a special " Alan Tribute Card " that was used at all of the autograph sessions during the 1993 season . Kulwicki did not change his spending habits after winning the 1992 championship . " The only thing I really wanted to buy was a plane " , he said , " but it turns out Hooters has a couple I can use . " 
 = = Death = = 
 Kulwicki died in an airplane crash on Thursday April 1 , 1993 . He was returning from an appearance at the Knoxville Hooters in a Hooters corporate plane on a short flight across Tennessee before the Sunday spring race at Bristol . The plane slowed and crashed just before final approach at Tri @-@ Cities Regional Airport near <unk> . The National Transportation Safety Board attributed the crash to the pilot 's failure to use the airplane 's anti @-@ ice system to clear ice from the engine inlet system . 
 Kulwicki was buried at St. Adalbert 's Cemetery in Milwaukee ; the funeral was attended by NASCAR President Bill France , Jr. and numerous drivers . Kulwicki 's racecar transporter was driven from the rainy track later that Friday morning while other teams and the media watched it travel slowly around the track with a black wreath on its grille . In 2008 , Kyle Petty described the slow laps as " the saddest thing I 've ever seen at a racetrack ... We just sat and cried . " Kulwicki had competed in five NASCAR races that season with two Top 5 finishes , and was ranked ninth in points at his death . In his career , he had won five NASCAR Winston Cup races , 24 pole positions , 75 Top 10 finishes , and one championship in 207 races . 
 His car was driven by road course specialist Tommy Kendall on road courses and by Jimmy Hensley at the other tracks . It was raced for most of the 1993 season until the team was sold to Geoff Bodine , who operated it as Geoff Bodine Racing . 
 Kulwicki had been selected to compete in the 1993 International Race of Champions ( IROC ) series as the reigning Winston Cup champion . He competed in two IROC races before his death , finishing ninth at Daytona and eleventh at Darlington . Dale Earnhardt raced for Kulwicki in the final two IROC races , and the prize money for those races and their fifth place combined points finish was given to the Winston Cup Racing Wives Auxiliary , Brenner Children 's Hospital and St. Thomas Aquinas Church charities . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Three days after Kulwicki 's death , Bristol race winner Rusty Wallace honored his former short track rival by performing Kulwicki 's trademark Polish victory lap . Davey Allison died on July 13 , 1993 ; competitors who had been carrying a No. 7 sticker in memory of Kulwicki added a No. 28 sticker for Allison . After the final race of the season , series champion Dale Earnhardt and race winner Wallace drove a side @-@ by @-@ side Polish victory lap carrying flags for Kulwicki and Allison . Kulwicki finished 41st in the final points standings despite competing in only five races . Seven months after the death of Allison , Neil Bonnett died at Daytona . Racing Champions issued a die @-@ cast version of Alan Kulwicki 's No. 7 car that was a tribute to Kulwicki 's 1992 title . 
 The USAR Hooters Pro Cup championship , the " Four Champions Challenge " , is named in memory of the four victims of the plane crash . Established in 1997 , the challenge is a four @-@ race series , with each race named after one of the four who died in the crash : Kulwicki , Mark Brooks ( son of Hooters owner Bob Brooks ) , Dan Duncan , and pilot Charles Campbell . 
 Milwaukee County honored Kulwicki in 1996 by creating Alan Kulwicki Memorial Park , located near the corner of Highway 100 and Cold Spring Road in Greenfield ( Area Map ) . Hooters chairman Robert Brooks donated $ 250 @,@ 000 to build the 28 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 11 km2 ) park , which features a Kulwicki museum inside the Brooks Pavilion . 
 Bristol Motor Speedway named its grandstand in turns one and two in honor of Kulwicki , as well as a terrace above the grandstand . The 2004 Busch Series race at the Milwaukee Mile was named the " Alan Kulwicki 250 " in honor of Kulwicki . <unk> Paul Menard turned his car around after winning the 2006 Busch Series event and performed a Polish victory lap to honor Kulwicki . Slinger Super Speedway has held an annual Alan Kulwicki Memorial race since 1994 . 
 Kulwicki was posthumously inducted into the International Motorsports Hall of Fame in 2002 . He was inducted in the Lowe 's Motor Speedway Court of Legends in 1993 , the Wisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame in 1993 , Talladega @-@ Texaco Hall of Fame in 1996 , Bristol Motor Speedway Heroes of Bristol Hall of Fame in 1997 , the National Polish @-@ American Sports Hall of Fame in 2001 , and the Motorsports Hall of Fame of America in 2010 . Kulwicki has been nominated to the NASCAR Hall of Fame . 
 Kulwicki 's success as an owner @-@ driver sparked a small trend among NASCAR veterans . Geoff Bodine , his younger brother Brett , Ricky Rudd , Bill Elliott , and Joe Nemechek all began racing teams shortly after Kulwicki 's death . However , none were as successful as Kulwicki 's . Sprint Cup driver Tony Stewart is the only owner @-@ driver in NASCAR currently running the full schedule , though the team is fully funded by co @-@ owner Gene Haas . . Robby Gordon frequently mentions Alan as an inspiration for him as an owner @-@ driver , and selected car No. 7 as a tribute to Kulwicki . 
 Slinger Super Speedway began an Alan Kulwicki Memorial night in 1993 ; it has continued the annual memorial as of 2016 . In 2010 , the University of Wisconsin – Milwaukee created the Alan Kulwicki Memorial Student Center in their Engineering and Mathematical Sciences Building . The center , along with a scholarship for engineering students , was made possible in part by a donation from Thelma H. Kulwicki , the late racer 's stepmother , who also donated numerous items of memorabilia located in the center . 
 In May 2012 , the Milwaukee County Historical Society announced plans for a special exhibit celebrating the life and career of Kulwicki to open in early 2013 . The exhibit is called " Alan Kulwicki : A Champion 's Story " . 
 = = = Alan Kulwicki Driver Development Program = = = 
 In 2015 , Kulwicki 's friends began the Alan Kulwicki Driver Development program to " help worthy drivers along the way in reaching their dream ... while at the same time keep Alan Kulwicki 's memory and legacy alive . " The field is narrowed to 15 applicants and the program gives funds to support seven drivers ' career advancement . The first winner of the program was Ty <unk> . 
 = = Media = = 
 Father Dale <unk> , the priest who had presided over Kulwicki 's funeral , released a biography of his friend entitled Alan Kulwicki : NASCAR champion Against All Odds in 2009 . The book was the basis for a low @-@ budget feature film , Dare to Dream : The Alan Kulwicki Story , released on April 1 , 2005 . The film chronicles Kulwicki 's life from racing late models at Slinger Super Speedway , through his rise to NASCAR champion , and ends with his death . The movie was created by Kulwicki 's Wisconsin fans for less than $ 100 @,@ 000 . The star of the film , Brad Weber , was a Kulwicki fan and credits the late driver with being his inspiration to become an actor . 
 = = Motorsports career results = = 
 = = = NASCAR = = = 
 ( key ) ( Bold – Pole position awarded by qualifying time . Italics – Pole position earned by points standings or practice time . * – Most laps led . ) 
 = = = = Winston Cup Series = = = = 
 = = = = = Daytona 500 = = = = = 
 = = = = Busch Series = = = = 
 = = = International Race of Champions = = = 
 ( key ) ( Bold – Pole position . * – Most laps led . ) 
 = The Incredible Hulk ( film ) = 
 The Incredible Hulk is a 2008 American superhero film featuring the Marvel Comics character the Hulk , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Universal Pictures . It is the second film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) . The film was directed by Louis Leterrier , with a screenplay by Zak Penn . It stars Edward Norton , Liv Tyler , Tim Roth , Tim Blake Nelson , Ty Burrell , and William Hurt . In The Incredible Hulk , a new backstory is established where Bruce Banner becomes the Hulk as an unwitting pawn in a military scheme to reinvigorate the supersoldier program through gamma radiation . On the run , he attempts to cure himself of the Hulk before he is captured by General Thaddeus " Thunderbolt " Ross , but his worst fears are realized when power @-@ hungry soldier Emil Blonsky becomes a similar but more bestial creature . 
 After the mixed reception to the 2003 film Hulk , Marvel Studios reacquired the rights to the character . Leterrier , who had expressed interest in directing Iron Man , was brought onboard and Penn began work on a loose sequel that would be much closer to the comics and the 1978 television series of the same name . In April 2007 , Norton was hired to portray Banner and to rewrite Penn 's screenplay in order to distance itself from the 2003 film and establish its own identity , although he would go uncredited for his writing . Filming mostly took place in Toronto , Ontario , from July to November 2007 . Over 700 visual effects shots were created in post @-@ production using a combination of motion capture and computer @-@ generated imagery to complete the film . 
 The Incredible Hulk premiered on June 8 , 2008 at the Gibson Amphitheatre in Universal City , California and was released in theaters on June 13 , 2008 , receiving generally favorable reviews by critics upon release with critics praising the improved visuals , action sequences and the portrayal of the title character . The film was number one at the box office , grossing over $ 263 million worldwide . Norton was initially intended to again portray Bruce Banner in The Avengers and other future MCU installments featuring the character , but he was replaced by Mark Ruffalo , who has signed on to reprise the role in all potential sequels . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At Culver University in Virginia , General Thunderbolt Ross meets with Dr. Bruce Banner , the colleague and boyfriend of his daughter Betty , regarding an experiment that Ross claims is meant to make humans immune to gamma radiation . The experiment — part of a World War II era " super soldier " program that Ross hopes to recreate — fails , and the exposure to gamma radiation causes Banner to transform into the Hulk for brief periods of time , whenever his heart rate rises above 200 . The Hulk destroys the lab and injures or kills the people inside . Banner becomes a fugitive from the U.S. military and Ross in particular , who wants to weaponize the Hulk process . 
 Five years later , Banner works at a bottling factory in <unk> , Rio de Janeiro in Brazil , while searching for a cure for his condition . On the Internet , he collaborates with a colleague he knows only as " Mr. Blue " , and to whom he is " Mr. Green " . He is also learning meditative breathing techniques to help keep control , and has not transformed in five months . After Banner cuts his finger , a drop of his blood falls into a bottle , and is eventually ingested by an elderly consumer in Milwaukee , Wisconsin , giving him gamma sickness . Using the bottle to track down Banner , Ross sends a SWAT team , led by Russian @-@ born British Royal Marine Emil Blonsky , to capture him . Banner transforms into the Hulk and defeats Blonsky 's team . After Ross explains how Banner became the Hulk , Blonsky agrees to be injected with a small amount of a similar serum , which gives him enhanced speed , strength , agility , and healing , but also begins to deform his skeleton and impair his judgment . 
 Banner returns to Culver University and reunites with Betty , who is dating psychiatrist Leonard Samson . Banner is attacked by Ross and Blonsky 's forces , tipped off by the suspicious Samson , causing him to again transform into the Hulk . The ensuing battle outside the university proves to be futile for Ross ' forces and they eventually retreat , though Blonsky , whose sanity is starting to falter , boldly attacks and mocks the Hulk . The Hulk seemingly kills Blonsky and flees with Betty . After the Hulk reverts to Banner , he and Betty go on the run , and Banner contacts Mr. Blue , who urges them to meet him in New York City . Mr. Blue is actually cellular biologist Dr. Samuel Sterns , who tells Banner he has developed a possible antidote to Banner 's condition . After a successful test , he warns Banner that the antidote may only reverse each individual transformation . Sterns reveals he has synthesized Banner 's blood samples , which Banner sent from Brazil , into a large supply , with the intention of applying its " limitless potential " to medicine . Fearful of the Hulk 's power falling into the military 's hands , Banner wishes to destroy the blood supply . 
 Meanwhile , Blonsky is revealed to have survived the battle and has completely healed . He joins Ross ' forces for a third attempt to take Banner into custody . They succeed and Banner , along with Betty , are taken away in a helicopter . Blonsky stays behind and forces Sterns to inject him with Banner 's blood , as he covets the Hulk 's power . Sterns warns that the combination of the super @-@ soldier formula and Banner 's blood may cause him to become an " abomination " , but Blonsky insists . The experiment mutates Blonsky into a creature with size and strength surpassing that of the Hulk , but drives him mad . He attacks Sterns , who gets some of Banner 's blood in a cut on his forehead , causing him to begin mutating as well . Blonsky then rampages through Harlem . Realizing that the Hulk is the only one who can stop Blonsky , Banner convinces Ross to release him . He jumps from Ross ' helicopter and transforms after hitting the ground . After a long and brutal battle through Harlem , the Hulk defeats Blonsky . After having a small , peaceful moment with Betty , the Hulk flees from New York . 
 A month later , Banner is in Bella <unk> , British Columbia . Instead of trying to suppress his transformation , he successfully transforms in a controlled manner . In a final scene , Tony Stark approaches Ross at a local bar and informs him a team is being put together . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Edward Norton as Bruce Banner / Hulk : 
 A nuclear physicist who , because of exposure to gamma radiation , transforms into an enormous green humanoid monster when enraged or agitated . David Duchovny was a front @-@ runner for the film before Norton 's casting , while Louis Leterrier 's original choice for the role was Mark Ruffalo , who would later play Banner in The Avengers . Gale Anne Hurd recalled Norton 's portrayals of duality in Primal Fear and Fight Club , while Norton reminded Kevin Feige of Bill Bixby , who played Banner in the TV series . Lou Ferrigno , who played the Hulk with Bixby , remarked Norton " has a similar physique [ and a ] similar personality " . Norton was a Hulk fan , citing the first comic appearances , the Bixby TV show , and Bruce Jones ' run on the comic , as his favorite depictions of the character . He had expressed interest in the role for the first film . He initially turned down the part , recalling " there [ was ] the wince factor or the defensive part of you that recoils at what the bad version of what that would be " , as he felt the previous film " strayed far afield from a story that was familiar to people , [ ... ] which is a fugitive story " . When he met Leterrier and Marvel , he liked their vision , and believed they were looking to him to guide the project . Thus , Norton rewrote the script . " Edward 's script has given Bruce 's story real gravitas , " Leterrier said . " Admittedly I 'm not the most adult director , but just because we 're making a superhero movie it doesn 't have to just appeal to 13 @-@ year @-@ old boys . Ed and I both see superheroes as the new Greek gods . " 
 Lou Ferrigno voices Hulk : 
 During the 2008 New York Comic Con Leterrier publicly offered Ferrigno the chance to voice the Hulk for the film . This marks the third time Ferrigno portrayed the Hulk , having also voiced the character in the 1996 animated series . Originally , the Hulk 's only line was " Betty " at the film 's ending , which would have been his first word . Leterrier was aware that fans wanted him to speak normally , and added " leave me alone " and " Hulk smash ! " The latter line received cheers during a screening he attended . Ferrigno also has a cameo in the film as a security guard who is bribed by Banner with a pizza . 
 Liv Tyler as Betty Ross : 
 A cellular biologist and Bruce 's girlfriend , from whom he is separated as a result of his condition . Tyler was attracted to the love story in the script , and was a fan of the TV show , because of the " humanity and what [ Banner ] is going through " . She was called about the role while driving to her home , and she accepted the part after a day without reading the script . Tyler and Norton spent hours discussing Bruce and Betty 's life before he became the Hulk . She said filming the part " was very physical , which was fun " , and compared her performance to " a deer caught in the headlights " , because of Betty 's shock at Bruce 's unexpected return into her life . 
 Tim Roth as Emil Blonsky / Abomination : 
 A Russian @-@ born officer in the United Kingdom 's Royal Marines Commandos loaned to Gen. Ross who , lusting for the Hulk 's power , is injected with various serums to transform into a monster more powerful than the Hulk himself . Roth said he took the part to please his sons , who are comic @-@ book superhero fans . As a teenager , Roth was a fan of the 1970s TV series , and he also found Leterrier 's ideas " very dark and very interesting " . Roth started watching the 2003 film to prepare for the part , but stopped as he did not want to be caught up in the controversy over its quality , and to compare himself to it . It was Roth who suggested Blonsky be a soldier , whereas in the comics he was a KGB agent . Leterrier was a fan of Roth 's work , and felt " it 's great watching a normal Cockney boy become a superhero ! " , but Marvel and Norton were initially reluctant to cast him . Before he was cast in Punisher : War Zone , Ray Stevenson was in discussions for the role . Roth prepared for the part by learning to fire guns and break into rooms with two experts . Roth found it tough shooting the chases , because to show Blonsky 's aging he could not work out . He especially found it difficult to run while pulled with a harness , which was used to show the injected Blonsky 's 30 – 40 mile per hour running abilities . Cyril Raffaelli performed some of Roth 's stunts . Roth enjoyed the motion capture , which reminded him of fringe theatre , and he hired his trainer from Planet of the Apes to aid him in portraying the monster 's movement . 
 Tim Blake Nelson as Samuel Sterns : 
 The cellular biologist who develops a possible antidote to Banner 's condition . Towards the end of the film , Sterns is exposed to some substance that begins his transformation into Leader . 
 Ty Burrell as Leonard Samson : 
 The psychiatrist in a relationship with Betty during Bruce 's absence . Burrell had performed with Norton in the off Broadway play Burn This in 2003 , and when Leterrier met him , he recognized Burrell as the " jerk " from the 2004 Dawn of the Dead remake , which was how Samson was characterized in the script before Norton rewrote it . 
 William Hurt as Thaddeus " Thunderbolt " Ross : 
 Betty 's arrogant father , who has dedicated himself to capturing the Hulk . Leterrier cast Hurt because " Ross is more physical , more explosive in this movie , and no actor goes from zero to 100 as well as William . " He compared Ross to Captain Ahab . The Hulk is Hurt 's favorite superhero , and his son is also a big fan of the character . Hurt found production very different from the typical " pure anxiety " of a studio film , finding it more akin to an independent film . He described Ross as " humiliated by Hulk 's conscience : he actually sees and recognizes that it 's more developed than his own , even though he 's a patriot and a warrior for his country . He 's sacrificed [ much ] for that purpose , but at the expense at times of his humanity – which he occasionally recovers . " In June 2015 , when reflecting on how his reprisal in Captain America : Civil War was different from this film , Hurt said , " What I created [ for The Incredible Hulk ] was a Ross who was right out of the graphic novel type of thing , where he was as much of a cartoon , in a way , as the monsters were . His ego was just as big and his problems were just as big . I really did do that consciously . I created a General Ross before which created a verisimilitude for the monsters , by making him a human monster . I worked really hard on the makeup and the exaggerated behavior and things like that and a controlled psychosis . " Sam Elliott , who played Ross in the first film , would have liked to reprise the role , noting it was odd seeing someone take his part , " but I 'll be looking forward to seeing this one " . 
 Robert Downey , Jr. has an uncredited cameo as Tony Stark at the end of the film . Downey appeared as a favor to Marvel Studios , which he acknowledged as a smart move on Marvel 's part , because when he was promoting his film he would also have to mention their other production . Hulk co @-@ creator Stan Lee cameos as a man who becomes ill when drinking the soda poisoned by Banner 's blood . Michael K. Williams appears as a Harlem bystander , a role that was written for him by Norton , who is a fan of The Wire . Paul <unk> , who voiced Banner in the 1966 The Marvel Superheroes cartoon , appears as Stanley , a kindly pizza restaurant owner who helps Banner . Additionally , the late Bill Bixby appears , when a scene featuring Bixby on his TV comedy @-@ drama The Courtship of Eddie 's Father plays on a television Banner is watching at the beginning of the film . Rickson Gracie has a small role as Bruce Banner 's martial arts instructor , despite his Brazilian Jiu @-@ Jitsu background , he is credited as an Aikido instructor . Peter Mensah plays a small role as General Joe Gellar , one of General Ross ' military friends / associates . Martin Starr plays a college student , identified as Amadeus Cho in the novelization for the film . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 At the time of the release of Ang Lee 's Hulk , screenwriter James Schamus was planning a sequel , featuring the Grey Hulk . He was also considering the Leader and the Abomination as villains . Marvel wanted the Abomination because he would be an actual threat to the Hulk , unlike General Ross . During the filming of Hulk , producer Avi Arad had a target May 2005 theatrical release date . On January 18 , 2006 Arad confirmed Marvel Studios would be providing the money for The Incredible Hulk 's production budget , with Universal distributing , because Universal did not meet the deadline for filming a sequel . Marvel felt it would be better to deviate from Ang Lee 's style to continue the franchise , arguing his film was like a parallel universe one @-@ shot comic book , and their next film needed to be , in Kevin Feige 's words , " really starting the Marvel Hulk franchise " . Producer Gale Anne Hurd also felt the film had to meet what " everyone expects to see from having read the comics and seen the TV series " . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Louis Leterrier , who enjoyed the TV series as a child and liked the first film , had expressed interest in directing the Iron Man film adaptation . Jon Favreau had taken that project , so Marvel offered him the Hulk . Leterrier was reluctant as he was unsure if he could replicate Lee 's style , but Marvel explained that was not their intent . Leterrier 's primary inspiration was Jeph Loeb and Tim Sale 's Hulk : Gray ( a retelling of the character 's first appearance ) . He replicated every comic book panel that he pinned @-@ up during pre @-@ production , from the many comics he browsed , in the final film . Leterrier said that he planned to show Bruce Banner 's struggle with the monster within him , while Feige added the film would explore " that element of wish fulfillment , of overcoming an injustice or a bully and tapping into a strength that you didn 't quite realize you had in yourself " . Arad also said the film would be " a lot more of a love story between Bruce Banner and Betty Ross " . 
 Zak Penn , who wrote a draft of the first film in 1996 , said the film would follow up Hulk , but stressed it would be more tonally similar to the TV show and Bruce Jones ' run on the comic . He compared his script to Aliens , which was a very different film from Alien , but still in the same continuity . He included two scenes from his 1996 script : Banner jumping from a helicopter to trigger a transformation , and realizing he is unable to have sex with Betty . After the studio rejected a treatment by another screenwriter in 2006 , Penn wrote three drafts before departing in early 2007 to promote his film The Grand . Norton , that April , began discussions to play Banner , and arranged a deal that included him as both an actor and a writer , with a screenplay draft he was contractually obligated to turn in in under a month . He did so , and continued to polish his draft as late as halfway through principal photography . In November 2006 , a June 13 , 2008 release date was set . Leterrier acknowledged the only remaining similarity between the two films was Bruce hiding in South America , and that the film was a unique reboot , as generally audiences would have expected another forty @-@ minute origin story . There were previous discussions to set the first act in Thailand . Leterrier felt audiences were left restless waiting for the character to arrive in Ang Lee 's film . 
 Shortly after the release of The Incredible Hulk , Gale Anne Hurd commented on the uncertainty of its relationship with Ang Lee 's Hulk film . " We couldn 't quite figure out how to term this ... It 's kind of a reboot and it 's kind of sequel . " Hurd said that " <unk> " , a portmanteau of " reboot " and " sequel " , was a " perfect " description for the film . Norton explained his decision to ignore Lee 's origin story : " I don 't even like the phrase ' origin story ' , and I don 't think in great literature and great films that explaining the roots of the story doesn 't mean it comes in the beginning . " " Audiences know this story , " he added , " [ so ] deal with it artfully . " He wanted to " have revelations even in the third act about what set this whole thing in motion " . The new origin story references Ultimate Marvel 's take on the Hulk , which also had him created in an attempt to make super soldiers . Norton removed Rick Jones and toned down S.H.I.E.L.D. ' s presence . He also added the scene where Banner attempts to extract a cure from a flower and his e @-@ mailing with Samuel Sterns , which references Bruce Jones ' story . Norton rewrote scenes every day . Ultimately , the Writers Guild of America decided to credit the script solely to Penn , who argued Norton had not dramatically changed his script . Journalist Anne Thompson explained " The Guild tends to favor plot , structure and pre @-@ existing characters over dialogue . " Penn said in 2008 , " I wasn 't happy with [ Norton ] coming to Comic @-@ Con saying that he wrote the script . " Before either Penn and Norton joined the project , an anonymous screenwriter wrote a draft and lobbied for credit . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Leterrier had to direct four units with a broken foot . Filming began on July 9 , 2007 . Shooting primarily took place in Toronto , because mayor David Miller is a Hulk fan and promised to be very helpful to the crew when closing Yonge Street for four nights in September to shoot the Hulk and Blonsky 's climactic fight . Despite messing the street with explosives and overturned burning vehicles , the crew would clean @-@ up within twenty minutes so business could continue as normal each day . The first action sequence shot was the Culver University battle , which was filmed at the University of Toronto and Morningside Park . The filmmakers built a glass wall over a walkway at the University for when the soldiers trap Banner inside to smoke him out . There was also shooting in the Financial District . A factory in Hamilton , Ontario , which was due for demolition , was the interior of the Brazilian factory . The site 's underground floors were used for Ross ' military command center . The crew also shot part of the Hulk and Blonsky 's fight on a backlot in Hamilton . Other Canadian locations included CFB Trenton and a glacier in Bella <unk> , British Columbia . Afterwards , there was a week @-@ long shoot in New York City and two weeks in Rio de Janeiro . While there , the crew shot at <unk> , Lapa , <unk> Forest and Santa Teresa . Filming concluded in November after eighty @-@ eight days of filming . 
 The Incredible Hulk joined Toronto 's Green @-@ Screen initiative , to help cut carbon emissions and waste created during filming . Producer Gale Anne Hurd acknowledged the Hulk , being green , was a popular environmental analogy , and Norton himself was an environmentalist . Hybrid and fuel efficient vehicles were used , with low sulfur diesel as their energy source . The construction department used a sustainably harvested , locally sourced yellow pine instead of <unk> for the sets , and also used zero @-@ or low @-@ VOC paint . The wood was generally recycled or given to environmental organizations , and paint cans were handed to waste management . In addition , they used cloth bags , biodegradable food containers , china and silverware food utensils , a stainless steel mug for each production crew member , a contractor who removed bins , recycled paper , biodegradable soap and cleaners in the trailers and production offices , and the sound department used rechargeable batteries . The Incredible Hulk became the first blockbuster film to receive the Environmental Media Association 's Green Seal , which is displayed during the end credits . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Leterrier cited Andy Serkis ' motion capture portrayals of Gollum and King Kong in The Lord of the Rings and King Kong , respectively , as the standard he was aiming for . Norton and Roth filmed 2500 takes of different movements the monsters would make ( such as the Hulk 's " thunder claps " ) . <unk> face paint applied to the actors ' faces and strobe lighting would help record the most subtle mannerisms into the computer . Others including Cyril Raffaelli provided motion capture for stunts and fights , after the main actors had done video referencing . Leterrier hired Rhythm and Hues to provide the CGI , rather than Industrial Light & Magic who created the visual effects for Ang Lee 's Hulk . Visual effect company , Image Engine , spent over a year working on a shot where Banner 's gamma @-@ irradiated blood falls through three factory floors into a bottle . Overall 700 effects shots were created . Motion capture aided in placing and timing of movements , but overall key frame animation by Rhythm and Hues provided the necessary " finesse [ and ] superhero quality " . Many of the animators and Leterrier himself provided video reference for the climactic fight . 
 Dale Keown 's comic book artwork of the Hulk was an inspiration for his design . Leterrier felt the first Hulk had " too much fat [ and ] the proportions were a little off " . He explained , " The Hulk is beyond perfect so there is zero grams of fat , all chiseled , and his muscle and strength defines this creature so he 's like a tank . " Visual effects supervisor Kurt Williams envisioned the Hulk 's physique as a linebacker rather than a bodybuilder . A height of nine feet was chosen for the character as they did not want him to be too inhuman . To make him more expressive , computer programs controlling the inflation of his muscles and saturation of skin color were created . Williams cited flushing as an example of humans ' skin color being influenced by their emotions . The animators felt green blood would make his skin become darker rather than lighter , and his skin tones , depending on lighting , either resemble an olive or even gray slate . His animation model was completed without the effects company 's full knowledge of what he would be required to do : he was rigged to do whatever they imagined , in case the model was to be used for The Avengers film . The Hulk 's medium @-@ length hair was modeled on Mike Deodato 's art . He originally had a crew cut , but Leterrier decided flopping hair imbued him with more character . Leterrier cited An American Werewolf in London as the inspiration for Banner 's transformation , wanting to show how painful it was for him to change . As a nod to the live action TV series , Banner 's eyes change color first when he transforms . Leterrier changed the Abomination 's design from the comics because he felt the audience would question why he resembled a fish or a reptile , instead of " an über @-@ human " like the Hulk . Rather , his hideousness is derived from being injected multiple times into his skin , muscles and bones ; creating a creature with a protruding spine and sharp bones that he can use to stab . His green skin is pale , and reflects light , so it appears orange because of surrounding fire during the climactic battle . The motion capture performers , including Roth , tried to make the character behave less gracefully than the Hulk . They modeled his posture and the way he turns his head on a shark . The character also shares Roth 's tattoos . A height of eleven feet was chosen for the character . Leterrier tried to work in the character 's pointed ears , but realized the Hulk would bite them off ( using the example of Mike Tyson when he fought Evander Holyfield ) , and felt ignoring that would make the Hulk come across as stupid . 
 Leterrier had planned to use prosthetic makeup and animatronics to complement the computer @-@ generated imagery that was solely used in the previous film . The make @-@ up artists who worked on X @-@ Men : The Last Stand were set to portray Blonsky 's gradual transformation , which Zak Penn said would portray Blonsky " not [ being ] used to having these properties . Like he 's much heavier , and we talked about how when he walks down the sidewalk , his weight destroys the sidewalk and he 's tripping . [ It 's all about ] the humanization of these kinds of superhero characters , showing the effects physics may actually have on [ them ] . " Tom Woodruff , Jr. of Amalgamated Dynamics ( who created all the costumes for the Alien films since Alien 3 ) was in negotiations , and created two busts of the Hulk and prosthetic hands to act as stand @-@ ins for the character . A full animatronic was never created as it was decided it would complicate production to set up shots for a puppet and then a computer graphic . An animatronic was used for Sterns ' mutating head , however . Destruction was mostly done practically . A model of a bottling machine was smashed through a wall for when the Hulk escapes the factory . The filmmakers used steam and dry ice for the gas used to smoke out the Hulk , and they destroyed a real Humvee by dropping a weight on it when shooting the Culver University battle . Pipes blew fire for when the Hulk strikes down the computer @-@ generated helicopter . When Banner falls from the helicopter to trigger the Hulk into fighting the Abomination , Norton was attached to a surface held by a bar which turned 90 degrees while the camera was pulled to the ceiling to simulate falling . Leterrier jokingly remarked that making Norton fall that distance would obviously render him unable to act . 
 = = Music = = 
 The Incredible Hulk : Original Motion Picture Score is the soundtrack for the film , composed by Craig Armstrong . Armstrong was the arranger for Massive Attack , a band Leterrier was fond of and had collaborated with on the 2005 film Unleashed . Armstrong was his first choice , which surprised Marvel , not knowing if he had scored an action film ( he did compose 2001 's Kiss of the Dragon ) . Even the temp track consisted of Armstrong 's work and similar music by others . The Hulk , alongside the Green Lantern , was one of Armstrong 's favorite comics as a child , although he did not see Ang Lee 's Hulk . 
 Armstrong began composing in his home in Glasgow , Scotland with three sequences ; the Hulk and Betty in the cave ; the Abomination and the Hulk 's alley fight ; and Bruce and Betty 's reunion . The majority was composed in a few weeks in Los Angeles , California , which was very intense for the director and composer . The score was recorded over four days during late 2007 in a chapel in <unk> University , located in Kenmore , Washington . Pete Lockett played ethnic instruments in the score , which were recorded in London and mixed together with the orchestra and electronics . The score was orchestrated by Matt Dunkley , Tony <unk> , Stephen Coleman , David Butterworth , and Kaz Boyle . Leterrier suggested the score be released on two discs , which Armstrong believed to be a joke . Only when he compiled the album – and Marvel asked why they were only given one disc – did he realize they were serious . 
 The Hulk and the Abomination both have two themes , representing their human and monstrous forms . The Hulk 's theme was meant to be iconic and simple , like Jaws ( 1975 ) , with string glissandos on a bass C note . Banner 's theme is tragic and includes parts of Joe Harnell 's " The Lonely Man " theme from the television series . Armstrong played the piano for one scene featuring that piece . Blonsky has a dark theme , which becomes aggressive when he transforms . Armstrong inter played the Hulk and the Abomination 's themes during their battle , and found scoring the action sequences similar to a dance . There is also a suspenseful theme , and a love theme . 
 Critical opinion is split with the Chicago Tribune describing the soundtrack as " the dullest musical score of the year " in their review of the film , while Dan Goldwasser of Soundtrack.net described it as " bombastic , thematic and energy @-@ filled " . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 All music composed by Craig Armstrong . 
