 = = Release = = 
 The Incredible Hulk premiered on June 8 , 2008 at the Gibson Amphitheatre in Universal City , California and was released in theaters on June 13 . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 Seventy minutes of footage , mostly dealing with the origin , were not included in the final cut . Much of this back @-@ story was unscripted and the filmmakers were never sure of including it into the final cut , and had considered releasing some of these clips on the internet . Editor Kyle Cooper , creator of the Marvel logo ( with the flipping pages ) and the montage detailing Iron Man 's biography in that film , edited together much of this footage into the opening credits . Leterrier explained a negative test screening , where flashbacks were placed across the film that the audience found too similar to Hulk , had resulted in compressing these to the film 's start . This replaced the original opening , where Banner comes to the Arctic to commit suicide . When the scene ends , in an instant the frozen body of Captain America is partially seen in the ice . Leterrier said he did not want this scene to be lost amid the opening montage . 
 Norton and Leterrier disputed with the producers over the final running time : they wanted it to be near 135 minutes , while the producers wanted the film to be under two hours . This was made public , and rumors spread that Norton " made it clear he won 't cooperate with publicity plans if he 's not happy with the final product " . Norton dismissed this , " Our healthy process [ of collaboration ] , which is and should be a private matter , was misrepresented publicly as a ' dispute ' , seized on by people looking for a good story , and has been distorted to such a degree that it risks distracting from the film itself , which Marvel , Universal and I refuse to let happen . It has always been my firm conviction that films should speak for themselves and that knowing too much about how they are made diminishes the magic of watching them . " 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Effort was made to promote the story as having a romance and a physical antagonist , and the title was used for promotional puns ( such as 7 @-@ Eleven 's " Incredible Gulp " <unk> , and " Incredible Dad " themed Father 's Day gifts at Kmart ) . Burger King also promoted the film , and General Nutrition Centers used the title character as a role model for strength training . Hasbro created the toy line , which they released on May 3 , 2008 , while Sega released a video game on June 5 , 2008 . The film was promoted in an episode of American Gladiators on June 9 , 2008 , which was hosted by Hulk Hogan and featured Lou Ferrigno . 
 Following the edit dispute , Universal 's Adam <unk> and Norton planned a promotional tour which would avoid constant media interviews and therefore uncomfortable questions . He attended the premiere , took part in a Jimmy Kimmel Live ! sketch and would also promote the film in Japan . However , during the film 's release he chose to do charity work in Africa . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Incredible Hulk was released on Blu @-@ ray and DVD on October 21 , 2008 . It includes behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurettes , audio commentary , deleted scenes , and an alternate opening . The film was number one in sales when released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on October 21 , 2008 , in the United States ( having been available in the United Kingdom since October 13 ) . There are widescreen and fullscreen single @-@ disc editions ; a three @-@ disc special edition ; and a two @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray package . The first disc contains an audio commentary by Leterrier and Roth , while the second comes with special features and deleted scenes , and the third with a digital copy of the film . The Blu @-@ ray edition compresses the content of the first two DVDs onto one , while the second disc contains the digital copy . 
 The film was also collected in a 10 @-@ disc box set titled " Marvel Cinematic Universe : Phase One – Avengers Assembled " which includes all of the Phase One films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . It was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on April 2 , 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Incredible Hulk earned $ 134 @.@ 8 million in North America , as well as $ 128 @.@ 6 million internationally for a worldwide total of $ 263 @.@ 4 million . The film , even though it barely passed its predecessor , and equalled if the smaller budget of the first film is taken into account , is still considered successful . Entertainment analyst David Davis told The Hollywood Reporter , " The first Hulk had such high expectations after the NBC Universal merger and was supposed to be critical favorite Ang Lee 's breakout commercial blockbuster . Then with the new Hulk film , Marvel was able to underplay the importance of the success after the great success of Iron Man this summer . So the new one <unk> , relative to its <unk> . " 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 In its opening weekend , the film grossed $ 55 @.@ 4 million in 3 @,@ 505 theaters in the United States and Canada , ranking No. 1 at the box office . The previous film earned $ 62 @.@ 2 million in its opening weekend , but dropped 70 % in its second weekend . The second film by comparison , dropped 60 % in its second weekend . Behind Fantastic Four : Rise of the Silver Surfer , it was the second @-@ highest gross for a film released over a Father 's Day weekend . This surpassed industry expectations of a $ 45 million opening , following the disappointing response to the 2003 film . Universal believed word of mouth would contribute to the film breaking even eventually . 
 = = = = Outside North America = = = = 
 It also opened in thirty @-@ eight other countries , adding $ 31 million to the total opening . The film outgrossed the 2003 film in South Korea , while its openings in Mexico and Russia created records for Universal . The film grossed 24 million yuan ( roughly $ 3 @.@ 4 million ) in its Chinese opening on August 26 , outgrossing the previous film 's overall gross of ten million yuan . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 67 % approval rating with an average rating of 6 @.@ 2 / 10 based on 219 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " The Incredible Hulk may not be quite the smashing success that fans of Marvel 's raging behemoth might hope for , but it offers more than enough big green action to make up for its occasionally puny narrative . " Metacritic gave the film an average score of 61 out of 100 , based on 38 reviews . The site characterized reviews as " generally favorable " . A CinemaScore poll indicated the majority of viewers were male and graded the film an A- , and 82 % of them had seen the 2003 film . 
 Todd McCarthy of Variety said , " what seemed , in theory , the least @-@ necessary revival of a big screen superhero emerges as perfectly solid summer action fare in The Incredible Hulk . " He emphasized " it 's all par @-@ for @-@ the @-@ course cinematic demolition and destruction , staged efficiently and with a hint of enthusiasm , " and " penned with sporadic wit [ ... ] Visuals lean toward the dark and murky , but editing by three — actually six — hands is fleet , and Craig Armstrong 's ever @-@ present score is simultaneously bombastic and helpfully supportive of the action . Effects are in line with pic 's generally pro but not inspired achievements . " Rene Rodriguez of The Miami Herald applauded that the film " does a lot of things [ Ang ] Lee 's Hulk didn 't : It 's lighter and faster @-@ paced , it 's funnier and it embraces ( instead of ignoring ) the 1970s TV series that furthered the character 's popularity " . Mark <unk> of The Seattle Times wrote that , " The relaunch of Marvel 's green goliath is an improvement over director Ang Lee 's ponderous 2003 Hulk in nearly every way – except that the actual Hulk still looks scarcely better than something from a video game , and he still barely talks " . Lou Lumenick of the New York Post said , " What lingers in my memory ... is the lengthy , essentially animated climactic battle between the Hulk and the Abomination on the streets and rooftops of Harlem , and an earlier showdown between the title creature and the U.S. Army , which is deploying high @-@ tech weapons including sound @-@ wave cannons . These are expertly staged by director Louis Leterrier , who disposes of the backstory under the opening credits and wraps up the whole thing in twenty @-@ four minutes less than [ Ang ] Lee took " . Roger Ebert was not a fan of the film stating , " The Incredible Hulk is no doubt an ideal version of the Hulk saga for those who found Ang Lee 's Hulk too talky , or dare I say , too thoughtful . But not for me . It sidesteps the intriguing aspects of <unk> and spends way too much time in , dare I say , noisy and mindless action sequences . " 
 Conversely , Christy Lemire of the Associated Press found that " the inevitable comparisons to Iron Man , Marvel Studios ' first blockbuster this summer , serve as a glaring reminder of what this Hulk lacks : wit and heart . Despite the presence of Edward Norton , an actor capable of going just as deep as Robert Downey Jr . , we don 't feel a strong sense of Bruce Banner 's inner conflict " . A.O. Scott of The New York Times opined , " ' The Adequate Hulk ' would have been a more suitable title . There are some big , thumping fights and a few bright shards of pop @-@ cultural wit , but for the most part this movie seems content to aim for the generic mean " . David Ansen of Newsweek wrote , " Leterrier has style , he 's good with action and he 's eager to give the audience its money 's worth of bone @-@ crunching battles . Still , once the movie leaves the atmospheric Brazilian settings , nothing in this " Hulk " sinks in deeply : its familiar genre pleasures are all on the surface . ... The movie 's scene stealer is Tim Blake Nelson , making a comically welcome third act appearance as the unethical but madly enthusiastic scientist Samuel Sterns " . 
 The film was nominated for best superhero film at the 2008 National Movie Awards and for Best Science Fiction Film at the Saturn Awards , but lost to The Dark Knight and Iron Man , respectively . 
 = = Future = = 
 On a potential sequel , Norton said , " The whole thing was to envision it in multiple parts . We left a lot out on purpose . [ The Incredible Hulk is ] definitely intended as chapter one . " Leterrier made the film 's final shot of Banner ambiguous ; the thought being if there is a sequel , it would mean Banner finally masters control over his anger ; if there is not a sequel , the shot indicates instead that he becomes a menace in The Avengers . Leterrier had also intended for a scene in the credits showing Blonsky , human once more , imprisoned and chained in a box . The character of Samuel Sterns , played by Tim Blake Nelson , was introduced to set him up as a villain in a possible future film , where he would become the Leader . Aaron Sims , the lead designer on The Incredible Hulk , also took time to work on concepts for the Leader . Nelson is " signed on " to reprise the role . Ty Burrell wants to portray the superpowered Doc Samson faithfully to the comics . 
 Leterrier and Roth were originally contracted to return . Leterrier also stated Norton was not signed on , but in October 2008 , Hurd stated that Norton was contracted to reprise the role . The film had outgrossed its predecessor and Universal indicated interest in a sequel , though Leterrier believed a sequel would not be made because of the film 's box office return . Feige said the film met Marvel 's expectations and that Hulk would return , but after the crossover . Hurd was not concerned that a sequel may not be produced until at least 2012 , citing the positive reception to the film and having produced the Terminator series , the second and third film of which had a 12 @-@ year gap . Tim Roth confirmed that Marvel had signed him for three more films . Leterrier , after having previously said he did not want to direct a sequel , said in late 2009 he had changed his mind and was now amenable . 
 Mark Ruffalo began his role as Banner / Hulk in The Avengers , after Feige said he chose not to bring back Norton . In October 2014 , Norton claimed he chose never to play Hulk again because he " wanted more diversity " with his career , and did not want to be associated with only one character . In April 2012 , despite Ruffalo being on board to play the Hulk in the sequel , Feige confirmed to Collider that Marvel had no plans at that time to film another Hulk film . In a Q & A session , Feige and Ruffalo confirmed that discussions are underway to produce another Hulk film due to the positive audience response to Ruffalo 's performance in The Avengers . In September 2012 , Feige , while exploring all possible story options for a sequel film , including a film based on the " Planet Hulk " and " World War Hulk " storylines , stated , " everything [ in terms of stories from the comics ] is on the table . Do I think Hulk can carry a movie and be as entertaining as he was in Avengers ? I do believe that . I do believe he absolutely could . We certainly are not even going to attempt that until Avengers 2 . So there 's a lot of time to think about it . " 
 In June 2014 , Ruffalo said he believed the studio might be considering doing a new standalone Hulk film , saying , " I think they are , for the first time , entertaining the idea of it . When we did The Avengers it was basically ' No ! ' , and now there is some consideration for it . But there 's still nothing definitive , not even a skeletal version of what it would be . " In July , Feige stated that the studio was not considering a " Planet Hulk " film at that time , due to wanting to feature Ruffalo 's Banner in the film . However , he did not rule out a story that saw the Hulk and Banner end up in space and explained why a solo Hulk film did not occur in Phase Two of the MCU , by saying , " After the first Avengers , Iron Man had his own movie , Thor had his own movie , Captain America had his own movie , and Widow and Fury were in The Winter Soldier . So it was really about , frankly , saving somebody so that the only place you could get Hulk between Avengers movies is the next Avengers movie , so [ director Joss Whedon ] could continue to play with that in [ Avengers : Age of Ultron ] . Where we go after that , we 'll see . " In October 2014 , again on a solo film , Feige said " we 'll see . We 'd love to do it , we 'd love to find the place to put it , but right now , Hulk will be appearing , with his friends , in their [ Phase Three ] films . " 
 In April 2015 , Ruffalo said Universal holding the distribution rights to Hulk films may be an obstacle to releasing a future Hulk standalone film , and reiterated this in October . Marvel reacquired the film rights for the character , but Universal retained the distribution rights for The Incredible Hulk as well as the right of first refusal to distribute future Hulk films . According to The Hollywood Reporter , a potential reason why Marvel has not reacquired the film distribution rights to the Hulk as they did with Paramount Pictures for the Iron Man , Thor , and Captain America films is because Universal holds the theme park rights to several Marvel characters that Marvel 's parent company Disney wants for its own theme parks . In December , Ruffalo stated that the strained relationship between Marvel and Universal may be another obstacle to releasing a future standalone Hulk film . The following month , he indicated that the lack of a standalone Hulk film allowed the character to play a more prominent role in Thor : Ragnarok and the two part Avengers : Infinity War , stating , " we ’ ve worked a really interesting arc into Thor [ : Ragnarok ] , Avengers [ : Infinity War – Part 1 and 2 ] for Banner that I think will – when it ’ s all added up – will feel like a Hulk movie , a standalone movie . " 
 = Here We Go Again ( Demi Lovato song ) = 
 " Here We Go Again " is a song performed by American recording artist Demi Lovato . It was written by Isaac Hasson , Lindy Robbins and <unk> Filian and produced by SuperSpy , for Lovato 's second studio album of the same name . It was released as the album 's lead single on June 23 , 2009 , through Hollywood Records . " Here We Go Again " is a power pop song with guitar lines and pop hooks and the lyrics speak of the protagonist 's on @-@ off relationship with a hesitant boyfriend . 
 The song received positive reviews from critics , who praised its pop hook and made comparisons with works by Kelly Clarkson . " Here We Go Again " peaked at number 15 on the Billboard Hot 100 and became Lovato 's first top 40 hit on the chart as a solo artist . The song was certified platinum by the RIAA in 2014 . It also peaked at number 36 in New Zealand and in the lower region of the Canadian Hot 100 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Lovato released her debut studio album , Don 't Forget , in September 2008 . Shortly thereafter in January 2009 , she had already begun writing material for her sophomore effort . The recording sessions for the album began in January 2009 , right after filming from the first season of Sonny with a Chance . According to Lovato , the album 's writing process was nearly finished in just two weeks . Unlike Don 't Forget , Lovato did not collaborate with the Jonas Brothers for her second album as she wanted to see what her sound would be like without their input . " Here We Go Again " was written by Isaac Hasson , Lindy Robbins and <unk> Filian , and produced by Hasson and Filian under the production name SuperSpy . The duo also co @-@ wrote and produced the album track " U Got Nothin ' on Me " . 
 " Here We Go Again " was recorded at three different recording studios in California ; SuperSpy Studios in Los Angeles , Resonate Studios in Burbank , and The Jungle Room in Glendale . Additional recording took place at Safe House Studios in Greensboro , North Carolina . Co @-@ writer Robbins contributed backing vocals . Hasson provided programming , guitars and synths , and Filian handled programming and keys . The instruments were played by Dorian Crozier , who provided drums , and Kenny Johnson , who played the bass . The song was ultimately mixed by Chris Lord @-@ Alge . " Here We Go Again " premiered during Planet Premiere on Radio Disney on June 17 , 2009 , and was released as the lead single for the album of the same name via digital download on June 23 , through Hollywood Records . It was later released in Australia and New Zealand on July 17 , 2009 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Here We Go Again " is an uptempo power pop song , with guitar lines and pop hooks . Critics made comparisons with works by Kelly Clarkson , particularly the song " Since U Been Gone " . According to sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Kobalt Music Publishing , " Here We Go Again " is written in the time signature of common time , with a moderately fast tempo of 144 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of F major and Lovato 's vocal range spans from the low @-@ note of C3 to the high @-@ note of F5 . It has a basic sequence of F – Dm – Dm – Gm / B ♭ – F as its chord progression . The song 's lyrics chronicle the protagonist 's on @-@ off relationship with an indecisive boy as she sings that " Something about you is so addictive " . Lovato explained : " So it 's about , basically , being in a relationship where you break @-@ up and you make @-@ up , and you break @-@ up and it 's like ' Here we go again , we just keep doing this over and over ' . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Here We Go Again " received generally positive reviews from music critics . The Arizona Republic 's Ed Masley referred it to as " an explosion of pop hooks delivered with a winning blend of heartache and bravado " . Kerri Mason of Billboard called the song a potential hit single and noted that Lovato " almost sounds like Kelly Clarkson 's kid sister " . Margaret Wappler of Los Angeles Times compared it to Clarkson 's " Since U Been Gone " and wrote that Lovato " tells a guy where to stick it over buff guitar lines " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic called the album " not quite as much fun " as Don 't Forget , " but still fun , particularly when Lovato tears into hooky power pop like ' Here We Go Again ' . " Erlewine also named it one of the best tracks on the album . Chicago Tribune 's Althea Legaspi referred it to as " anthemic " and " catchy " , while Houston Chronicle critic Joey Guerra described it was not as " immediate a grabber " as Lovato 's previous singles . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 In the United States , " Here We Go Again " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 51 on July 11 , 2009 . After two weeks on the chart , it fell to number 66 , before rising to number 24 the next week , in addition to being named the " greatest digital gainer " . Coinciding with the release of the parent album , the song peaked at number 15 on August 8 , 2009 . The song became Lovato 's highest @-@ peaking solo single on the chart until " Skyscraper " , peaked at number 10 in July 2011 . The song has sold 862 @,@ 000 digital copies in the United States , according to Nielsen SoundScan . In Canada , " Here We Go Again " debuted at number 86 on July 11 , 2009 of the Canadian Hot 100 . It fell off the following week , and re @-@ entered on August 8 , 2009 at number 61 , which became its peak position . In New Zealand , the song entered and peaked at number 38 , becoming Lovato 's first entry on the chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 " Here We Go Again " was directed by Brendan Malloy and Tim Wheeler , both who directed Lovato 's previous video " La La Land " . The music video was filmed on June 8 , 2009 in Los Angeles , California . The video premiered on June 26 , 2009 on Disney Channel , following the premiere of Princess Protection Program ( which stars Lovato ) . The video begins with Lovato in her dressing room to prepared for her concert . Lovato is talking to her boyfriend ( portrayed by Christopher Mason ) over the phone . After hanging up , she rips up a photograph of the two of them together , implying he ended their relationship . He tries to call her back , but she ignores the call and heads to the stage . The boyfriend is shown visiting the concert and after Lovato is finished the performance , she returns to her dressing room . He meets her with a rose and they begin their relationship again . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Lovato has performed " Here We Go Again " on several occasions . To promote the album , she appeared on The Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien to perform the song on July 17 , 2009 . She performed it alongside the album cut " Catch Me " on Good Morning America on July 23 , while performing " Here We Go Again " only on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon and The View later the same day . The song was also performed during her first headlining tour , Summer Tour 2009 , where it was the closing song . In September 2011 , Lovato performed the song during the revue concert An Evening with Demi Lovato as part of a medley with " Get Back " and " La La Land " . She later performed the same medley during the tour A Special Night with Demi Lovato . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 US / Europe CD single / digital download 
 " Here We Go Again " – 3 : 46 
 " Here We Go Again ( Jason Navis Remix ) - 6 : 34 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at SuperSpy Studios , Los Angeles , California ; Resonate Studios in Burbank , California ; The Jungle Room , Glendale , California ; and Safe House Studios , Greensboro , North Carolina 
 Personnel 
 Credits are adapted from the Here We Go Again liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Ten ( Pearl Jam album ) = 
 Ten is the debut studio album by the American rock band Pearl Jam , released on August 27 , 1991 through Epic Records . Following the disbanding of bassist Jeff Ament and guitarist Stone Gossard 's previous group Mother Love Bone , the two recruited vocalist Eddie Vedder , guitarist Mike McCready , and drummer Dave Krusen to form Pearl Jam in 1990 . Most of the songs began as instrumental jams , to which Vedder added lyrics about topics such as depression , homelessness , and abuse . 
 Ten was not an immediate success , but by late 1992 it had reached number two on the Billboard 200 chart . The album produced three hit singles : " Alive " , " Even Flow " , and " Jeremy " . While Pearl Jam was accused of jumping on the grunge bandwagon at the time , Ten was instrumental in popularizing alternative rock in the mainstream . In February 2013 , the album crossed the 10 million mark in sales and has been certified 13x platinum by the RIAA . It remains Pearl Jam 's most commercially successful album . 
 = = Background = = 
 Guitarist Stone Gossard and bassist Jeff Ament had played together in the pioneering grunge band Green River . Following Green River 's dissolution in 1987 , Ament and Gossard played together in Mother Love Bone during the late 1980s . Mother Love Bone 's career was cut short when vocalist Andrew Wood died of a drug overdose in 1990 , shortly before the release of the group 's debut album , Apple . Devastated , it took months before Gossard and Ament agreed to play together again . Gossard spent his time afterwards writing material that was harder @-@ edged than what he had been doing previously . After a few months , Gossard started practicing with fellow Seattle guitarist Mike McCready , whose band Shadow had broken up ; McCready in turn encouraged Gossard to reconnect with Ament . The three then went into the studio for separate sessions with Soundgarden drummer Matt Cameron and former Shadow drummer Chris Friel to record some instrumental demos . Five of the songs recorded — " Dollar Short " , " Agytian Crave " , " Footsteps " , " Richard 's E " , and " E Ballad " — were compiled onto a tape called Stone Gossard Demos ' 91 that was circulated in the hopes of finding a singer and drummer for the trio . 
 San Diego musician Eddie Vedder acquired a copy of the demo in September 1990 , when it was given to him by former Red Hot Chili Peppers drummer Jack Irons . Vedder listened to the demo , went surfing , and wrote lyrics the next day for " Dollar Short " , " Agytian Crave " , and " Footsteps " . " Dollar Short " and " Agytian Crave " were later retitled " Alive " and " Once " , respectively . Gossard and Ament heard the demo with Vedder 's vocals and lyrics , and were impressed enough to fly Vedder out to Seattle for an audition . Meanwhile , Vedder had written lyrics for " E Ballad " , retitled " Black " . Vedder arrived on October 13 , 1990 and rehearsed with the band ( now joined by drummer Dave Krusen ) for a week , writing eleven songs in the process . Vedder was soon hired as the band 's singer , and the group signed to Epic Records shortly thereafter . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The band , then named Mookie Blaylock , entered London Bridge Studios in Seattle , Washington in March 1991 with producer Rick Parashar to record its debut album . After working with Parashar on " Temple Of The Dog , Stone and Jeff asked him to co @-@ produce and engineer Ten . Parashar also contributed piano , Fender Rhodes , percussion , co @-@ wrote vocal harmonies and co wrote the intro / outro of the album . A few tracks were previously recorded at London Bridge in January , but only " Alive " was carried over from that session . The album sessions were quick and lasted only a month , mainly due to the band having already written most of the material for the record . " Porch " , " Deep " , " Why Go " , and " Garden " were first recorded during the album sessions , everything else had been previously recorded during demo sessions at some point . McCready said that " Ten was mostly Stone and Jeff ; me and Eddie were along for the ride at that time . " Ament stated , " We knew we were still a long way from being a real band at that point . " 
 The recording sessions for Ten were completed in May 1991 . Krusen left the band once the sessions were completed , checking himself into rehabilitation . According to Krusen , he was suffering from personal problems at the time . Krusen said , " It was a great experience . I felt from the beginning of that band that it was something special , " and added , " They had to let me go . I couldn 't stop drinking , and it was causing problems . They gave me many chances , but I couldn 't get it together . " In June , the band joined Tim Palmer in England for mixing . Palmer decided to mix the album at Ridge Farm Studios in Dorking , a converted farm that according to Palmer was " about as far away from an L.A. or New York studio as you can get . " Palmer made a few additions to the already @-@ recorded songs , including having McCready finish up the guitar solo on " Alive " and tweaking the intro to " Black " . Palmer overdubbed a pepper shaker and a fire extinguisher as percussion on " Oceans " . 
 In subsequent years , band members have expressed dissatisfaction with the way the album 's mixing turned out . In 2001 , Ament said , " I 'd love to remix Ten . Ed , for sure , would agree with me ... It wouldn 't be like changing performances ; just pull some of the reverb off it . " In 2002 , Gossard said , " It was ' over @-@ rocked ' , we were novices in the studio and spent too long recording , doing different takes , and killing the vibe and overdubbing tons of guitar . There 's a lot of reverb on the record . " In 2006 , Vedder said , " I can listen to the early records [ except ] the first record ... it 's just the sound of the record . It was kind of mixed in a way that was ... it was kind of produced . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Several of the songs on Ten started as instrumental compositions that Vedder added lyrics to after he joined the band . Regarding the lyrics , Vedder said , " All I really believe in is this fucking moment , like right now . And that , actually , is what the whole album talks about . " Vedder 's lyrics for Ten deal with subjects like depression , suicide , loneliness , and murder . The album also tackles social concerns such as homelessness ( " Even Flow " ) and the use of psychiatric hospitals ( " Why Go " ) . The song " Jeremy " and its accompanying video were inspired by a true story in which a high school student shot himself in front of his classmates . 
 Many listeners interpreted " Alive " as an inspirational anthem due to its decidedly uplifting instrumentals and chorus . Vedder has since revealed that the song tells the semi @-@ autobiographical tale of a son discovering that his father is actually his stepfather ( his real father having died long ago ) , while his mother 's grief turns her to sexually embrace her son , who strongly resembles the biological father . " Alive " and " Once " formed part of a song cycle in what Vedder later described as a " mini @-@ opera " entitled Momma @-@ Son ( the third song , " Footsteps " , appeared as a B @-@ side on the " Jeremy " single ) . Vedder explained that the lyrics told the story of a young man whose father dies ( " Alive " ) , causing him to go on a killing spree ( " Once " ) which leads to his capture and execution ( " Footsteps " ) . It was later revealed that Vedder 's lyrics were inspired by his long @-@ held hurt in discovering at age 17 that the man he thought was his father was not , and that his real father had already died . 
 While Ten deals with dark subject matter , it has generally been seen as a high @-@ water mark of the early 1990s alternative rock sound , with Vedder 's unusually deep and strong ( and later much @-@ imitated ) voice alternating between solidity and vibrato against the unrestrained , guitar @-@ heavy , hard rock sound that drew influence from Led Zeppelin and other rock bands of the 1970s . Ten 's musical style , influenced by classic rock , combined an " expansive harmonic vocabulary " with an anthemic sound . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic stated that the songs on the album fused " the riff @-@ heavy stadium rock of the 1970s with the grit and anger of ' 80s post @-@ punk , without ever neglecting hooks and choruses . " 
 Ten features a two @-@ part track entitled " Master / Slave " that both opens and closes the album . The first part begins the album , before " Once " starts , and the second part closes the album , after " Release " . It begins about ten seconds after the album 's closer " Release " as a hidden track , but both count as one track on the CD . The song is entirely instrumental ( except for random unintelligible words Vedder utters throughout ) with a dominant fretless bass line makes up the core of the song ( which Ament referred to in a 1994 Bass Player magazine interview as " my tribute to ( fretless bass instrumentalist ) Mick Karn " ) , along with some guitar and sounds that seem to come from the drums . Producer Rick Parashar stated in 2002 , " As I recall , I think Jeff had , like , a bass line ... I heard the bass line and then we kind of were collaborating on that in the control room , and then I just started programming on the keyboard all this stuff ; he was jamming with it and it just kind of came about like that . " 
 = = = Outtakes = = = 
 The album 's singles featured two B @-@ sides from the Ten recording sessions which weren 't included on the album , " Wash " and " Yellow Ledbetter " . The former was a B @-@ side on the " Alive " single while the latter was featured on the " Jeremy " single and eventually became a radio hit in 1994 . Both songs were included on the 2003 Lost Dogs collection of rarities , although the included version of " Wash " is an alternate take . The song " Alone " was also originally recorded for Ten ; a 1992 re @-@ recorded version of the song is on the " Go " single . Another version of " Alone " , with re @-@ recorded vocals , appears on Lost Dogs . According to McCready , " Alone " was cut from Ten because the band already had enough mid @-@ tempo songs for the album . The song " Dirty Frank , " which was released as a b @-@ side on the " Even Flow " single and often thought to be a Ten outtake , was recorded after Ten was released . Thus , " Dirty Frank " is not from the Ten recording sessions . 
 The song " Footsteps " began as an instrumental demo and was compiled onto the Stone Gossard Demos ' 91 tape . Vedder added vocals to this version after he received the demo tape . The music for " Footsteps " was also used for Temple of the Dog 's " Times of Trouble " . " Footsteps " was featured as a B @-@ side on the " Jeremy " single , however this version is taken from a 1992 appearance on the radio show Rockline . This version of " Footsteps " is also featured on Lost Dogs , however a harmonica intro has been overdubbed on to the recording . 
 Other songs rejected from the album but later included on Lost Dogs are " Hold On " and " Brother " , the latter of which was turned into an instrumental for Lost Dogs . " Brother " was cut because Gossard was no longer interested in playing the song , a decision which Ament objected to and almost caused him to quit the band . The version of " Brother " with vocals appears on the 2009 Ten reissue and became a radio hit that same year . Both " Breath " and " State of Love and Trust " were recorded with the intention of the two songs possibly appearing in the film Singles . The versions heard in the film and on its soundtrack were recorded a year later in 1992 . The versions from the Ten sessions appear on the 2009 Ten reissue . Other songs rejected from the album but included on the 2009 Ten reissue are " Just a Girl " , " 2 @,@ 000 Mile Blues " , and " Evil Little Goat " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 = = = Packaging = = = 
 The album 's cover art features the members of the band at the time of recording in a group pose and standing in front of a wood cut @-@ out of the name " Pearl Jam " . The wood cut @-@ out was constructed by Ament . Ament said , " The original concept was about really being together as a group and entering into the world of music as a true band ... a sort of all @-@ for @-@ one deal . " Ament is credited for the album 's artwork and art direction , Lance Mercer receives credit for photography , and both Lisa <unk> and Risa <unk> are credited for design . Ament stated , " There was a bit of headbutting going on with the Sony art department at that time . The version that everybody got to know as the Ten album cover was pink and it was originally intended to be more of a burgundy color and the picture of the band was supposed to be black and white . " Pearl Jam 's original name was taken from the professional basketball player Mookie Blaylock . It was changed after the band signed to Epic Records , as record executives were concerned about intellectual property and naming rights following Blaylock 's inking of an endorsement deal with Nike . In commemoration of the band 's original name , the band titled its first album Ten after Blaylock 's jersey number . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 Ament stated that " essentially Ten was just an excuse to tour , " adding , " We told the record company , ' We know we can be a great band , so let 's just get the opportunity to get out and play . ' " Pearl Jam faced a relentless touring schedule for Ten . Drummer Dave Abbruzzese joined the band for Pearl Jam 's live shows supporting the album . Halfway through its own planned North American tour , Pearl Jam cancelled the remaining dates in order to take a slot opening for the Red Hot Chili Peppers on the band 's Blood Sugar Sex Magik tour in the fall of 1991 in North America . The spot was arranged by Jack Irons , who had called his former band asking for them to get an opportunity to his friend Vedder . The Smashing Pumpkins and Nirvana were also supporting acts . Nirvana was initially brought in because the tour promoters decided that Pearl Jam should be replaced with a more successful act , but the departure of The Smashing Pumpkins still kept the group in the concert bill . Epic executive Michael Goldstone observed that " the band did such an amazing job opening the Chili Peppers tour that it opened doors at radio . " 
 In 1992 , the band embarked on its first ever European tour . On March 13 , 1992 , at the Munich , Germany show at <unk> , Pearl Jam played Ten in its entirety in order mid @-@ way through its set . The band would only do this again in 2016 at Philadelphia 's Wells Fargo Center , as the arena management homaged the band 's tenth straight sellout concert in the city . Following the European leg , Pearl Jam did another tour of North America . Goldstone noted that the band 's audience expanded , saying that unlike before , " everyone came . " The band 's manager , Kelly Curtis , stated , " Once people came and saw them live , this lightbulb would go on . Doing their first tour , you kind of knew it was happening and there was no stopping it . To play in the Midwest and be selling out these 500 seat clubs . Eddie could say he wanted to talk to Brett , the sound guy , and they 'd carry him out there on their hands . You hadn 't really seen that reaction from a crowd before ... " When Pearl Jam came back for a second go @-@ around in Europe the band appeared at the Pinkpop Festival and the Roskilde Festival in June 1992 . The band cancelled its remaining European dates in the summer of 1992 after the Roskilde Festival due to a confrontation with security at that event as well as exhaustion from touring . Ament said , " We 'd been on the road over 10 months . I think there just came a point about half way through that tour it was just starting to get pretty intense . I mean just being away from home , being on the road all the time and being lonely or being depressed or whatever . " The band would go on to play the 1992 Lollapalooza tour with the Red Hot Chili Peppers , Soundgarden , Ministry and Ice Cube , among others . 
 = = = 2009 re @-@ release = = = 
 On March 24 , 2009 , Ten was reissued in four editions ( Legacy , Deluxe , Vinyl , and Super Deluxe ) . It was the first reissue in a planned re @-@ release of Pearl Jam 's entire catalogue that led up to the band 's 20th anniversary in 2011 . The extras on the four editions include a remastering and remix of the entire album by producer Brendan O 'Brien , re @-@ designed packaging , six bonus tracks ( " Brother " , " Just a Girl " , " Breath and a Scream " , " State of Love and Trust " , " 2 @,@ 000 Mile Blues " , and " Evil Little Goat " ) , a DVD of the band 's 1992 appearance on MTV Unplugged ( including a bonus performance of " Oceans " , which along with " Rockin ' in the Free World " was originally excluded from the broadcast version ) , vinyl versions of the album , an LP of the band 's September 20 , 1992 concert at Magnuson Park in Seattle ( also known as Drop in the Park ) , a replica of the original Momma @-@ Son demo cassette , and a replica of Vedder 's composition notebook containing personal notes and mementos . 
 Regarding his remix of the album , O 'Brien stated , " The band loved the original mix of Ten , but were also interested in what it would sound like if I were to deconstruct and remix it ... The original Ten sound is what millions of people bought , dug and loved , so I was initially hesitant to mess around with that . After years of persistent nudging from the band , I was able to wrap my head around the idea of offering it as a companion piece to the original — giving a fresh take on it , a more direct sound . " 
 The Ten reissue sold 60 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , the second biggest selling week for the album since Christmas 1993 . Since Billboard considers the Ten reissue a catalog item , Ten did not appear on the Billboard 200 , Top Modern Rock / Alternative , or Top Rock Albums , since those charts do not include catalog items . Had it been included on the Billboard 200 , the 60 @,@ 000 copies sold of the Ten reissue would have placed it at number five . The reissue also re @-@ entered the Australian Albums Chart at number 11 , giving it a new peak chart position in Australia and its highest chart placing since June 14 , 1992 . 
 Tying in with the re @-@ release of the album , in March 2009 , the entire album was made available as downloadable content for the Rock Band series of video games . In addition , three Ten @-@ era bonus tracks were made available for the Rock Band video game for those who purchase the Ten re @-@ release through Best Buy : " Brother " , " Alive " , and " State of Love and Trust " , the latter two as live versions taken from the band 's September 20 , 1992 concert . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Ten initially sold slowly upon its release , but by the second half of 1992 it became a breakthrough success , attaining an RIAA gold certification . Almost a year after its release , the album finally broke into the top ten of the Billboard 200 album chart on May 30 , 1992 , reaching number eight . Ten would eventually peak at number two for four weeks . It was held off the top spot by the Billy Ray Cyrus album , Some Gave All . The album spent a total of 256 weeks on the Billboard charts , making it one of the top 15 charting albums ever . By February 1993 , American sales of Ten surpassed those of Nevermind , the breakthrough album by fellow grunge band Nirvana . Ten continued to sell well two years after its release ; in 1993 it was the eighth best @-@ selling album in the United States , outselling Pearl Jam 's second album , Vs . As of February 2013 , Ten has sold 10 million copies in the United States according to Nielsen SoundScan , and has been certified 13x platinum by the RIAA . 
 Ten produced three hit singles , " Alive " , " Even Flow " , and " Jeremy " , all of which had accompanying music videos ( The " Oceans " video was released only outside of the U.S. ) . The singles all placed on the Mainstream Rock and Modern Rock charts . The song " Black " reached number three on the Mainstream Rock chart , despite never being released as a single . The video for " Alive " was nominated for the MTV Video Music Award for Best Alternative Video in 1992 . " Jeremy " became one of Pearl Jam 's best @-@ known songs , and received nominations for Best Rock Song and Best Hard Rock Performance at the 1993 Grammy awards . The video for " Jeremy " , directed by Mark Pellington , was put into heavy rotation by MTV and became a huge hit , receiving five nominations at the 1993 MTV Video Music Awards , of which it won four , including Video of the Year and Best Group Video . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In a contemporary review for Rolling Stone , music critic David Fricke gave the album a favorable review , saying that Pearl Jam " hurtles into the mystic at warp speed . " He also added that Pearl Jam " wring a lot of drama out of a few declarative power chords swimming in echo . " Allan Jones of Melody Maker suggested in his review of Ten that it is Vedder that " provides Pearl Jam with such a uniquely compelling focus . " AllMusic staff writer Steve Huey called it a " flawlessly crafted hard rock masterpiece " and felt that Vedder 's " impressionistic lyrics " are more effective through his passionate vocal delivery rather than their " concrete meaning . " Q called it " raucous modern rock , spiked with infectious guitar motifs and powered with driving bass and drums , " and said it " may well be the face of the 90 's metal . " Stereo Review said that " the band sounds larger than life , producing a towering inferno of roaring guitars , monumental bass and drums , and from @-@ the @-@ gut vocals . " Don Kaye of Kerrang ! defined the album " introspective and charged with a quiet emotional force " . Greg Kot wrote in the Chicago Tribune , " Occasionally overwrought and unrelentingly humorless , the music nonetheless exerts a hypnotic power at its best . " 
 In a less enthusiastic review for Entertainment Weekly , David Browne found Pearl Jam to be derivative of " fellow Northwestern rockers like Soundgarden , Alice in Chains , and the defunct Mother Love Bone " , and felt that it " goes to show that just about anything can be harnessed and packaged . " NME accused Pearl Jam of " trying to steal money from young alternative kids ' pockets . " Nirvana 's Kurt Cobain angrily attacked Pearl Jam , claiming the band were commercial sellouts , and argued Ten was not a true alternative album because it had so many prominent guitar leads . Robert Christgau , writing in The Village Voice , gave the album a " B- " and viewed it as another in a " slew of Seattle albums " that " modulate the same misguided ethos " , which he said was " hippie " rather than " punk " . Christgau described it as " San Francisco ballroom music " whose " distinguishing characteristics " could only be discerned by listeners if they " take the right drugs " . He later gave Ten a two @-@ star honorable mention , citing " Once " and " Even Flow " as highlights , and quipped , " in life , abuse justifies melodrama ; in music , riffs work better " . Charles R. Cross wrote in The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) that Ten sounded less original and more self @-@ important than Nirvana 's Nevermind , but it also showcases the band 's intricate guitar style and Vedder 's distinctive singing . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In 2003 , the album was ranked number 209 on Rolling Stone 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . Readers of Q voted Ten as the 42nd greatest album ever ; however , three years later the album was listed lower at 59th . In 2003 , VH1 placed it at number 83 on their list of the 100 greatest albums of rock and roll . In 2006 , British Hit Singles & Albums and NME organised a poll of which , 40 @,@ 000 people worldwide voted for the 100 best albums ever and Ten was placed at number 66 on the list . It was also ranked number 15 in the October 2006 issue of Guitar World on the magazine 's list of the 100 greatest guitar albums of all time . In 2007 , the album was included at number 11 on the list of the " Definitive 200 " albums of all time developed by the National Association of Recording Merchandisers . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Eddie Vedder ; except on bonus track " I 've Got a Feeling " , by John Lennon and Paul McCartney . 
 ^ " Release " contains the hidden track " Master / Slave " at 5 : 20 . 
 European edition bonus tracks 
 ^ * Recorded live on August 3 , 1991 at <unk> in Seattle , Washington . 
 Japanese bonus tracks 
 Reissue bonus tracks 
 iTunes reissue bonus tracks 
 Live tracks recorded on December 31 , 1992 at The Academy Theater in New York , New York . 
 = = = Reissue bonus material = = = 
 = = = = MTV Unplugged DVD = = = = 
 " Oceans " 
 " State of Love and Trust " 
 " Alive " 
 " Black " 
 " Jeremy " 
 " Even Flow " 
 " Porch " 
 = = = = Momma @-@ Son cassette = = = = 
 All lyrics written by Vedder , all music composed by Gossard . 
 = = = = Drop in the Park LP = = = = 
 Side one 
 All lyrics written by Vedder . 
 Side two 
 All lyrics written by Vedder . 
 Side three 
 All lyrics written by Vedder . 
 Side four 
 All songs written and composed by Vedder . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Sami Salo = 
 Sami Sakari Salo ( born 2 September 1974 ) is a Finnish former professional ice hockey defenceman of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He began his professional career with TPS of the SM @-@ liiga before being selected by the Ottawa Senators with their last pick in the 1996 NHL Entry Draft . He joined the Senators in 1998 – 99 and was selected to the NHL All @-@ Rookie Team . In the 2002 off @-@ season , he was traded to the Vancouver Canucks with whom he has recorded three 30 @-@ point campaigns . Prior to the 2012 – 13 NHL season he signed with the Lightning as a free agent . Due to the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout , Salo played overseas with Frölunda HC of the Swedish Elite League and helped the club capture the Le Mat Trophy as league champions . Internationally , Salo has competed for Finland , appearing in two World Championships , three Winter Olympics and one World Cup . He won silver medals at the 2001 World Championships and the 2006 Winter Olympics , as well as a bronze medal at the 2010 Winter Olympics . Throughout his career , Salo has become infamous for being injury prone , having suffered over 40 career injuries . Despite his injuries , he is known as a two @-@ way defenceman with a powerful slapshot . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = TPS and Jokerit = = = 
 After developing his skills with the junior club of his hometown , Turku , Finland , Salo turned professional with TPS of the SM @-@ Liiga in 1994 – 95 . He appeared in seven games , recording a goal and two assists in his first season in the SM @-@ Liiga . The following campaign , he recorded a Finnish career @-@ high 14 assists and 21 points over 47 games . In the off @-@ season , Salo was selected by the Ottawa Senators with their last selection in the 1996 NHL Entry Draft , 239th overall in the ninth round . He remained in Finland for two more seasons upon being drafted . He improved from seven goals to nine in 1996 – 97 . The following season , he transferred from TPS to Jokerit . In his lone season with the Helsinki @-@ based team , he tallied three goals and eight points over 35 games . 
 = = = Ottawa Senators = = = 
 Following a four @-@ year career in Finland , Salo signed with the Senators in July 1998 . He played in the first 3 games of the 1998 / 99 season before he was assigned to the Detroit Vipers , Ottawa 's International Hockey League ( IHL ) affiliate , due to his first NHL injury and was recalled on 18 November 1998 . Twenty @-@ seven games into his rookie campaign , he scored his first NHL goal against Boston Bruins goaltender Byron Dafoe , a game @-@ winner , in a 3 @-@ 1 win on 21 January 1999 . Completing the 1998 – 99 season with seven goals and 19 points , he was named to the NHL All @-@ Rookie Team . The following season , Salo notched a hat trick in a 6 – 4 win against the Pittsburgh Penguins on 30 March 1999 . His campaign was shortened , however , to 37 games due to injury and he was limited to 14 points . In 2000 , he missed two games as he suffered from a snakebite . 
 Salo continued to be sidelined in 2000 – 01 with various ailments , including shoulder , foot and knee injuries , as well as the flu . In March 2001 , he was also cross @-@ checked in the face by Rick Tocchet of the Philadelphia Flyers , suffering broken teeth and a mild concussion . He finished his third NHL season with 18 points in 31 games . 
 Before the 2001 – 02 season began , Salo injured his groin in an exhibition game against the Toronto Maple Leafs in September . In addition to missing the first three games of the season , he was later sidelined for a total of 13 more contests due to separate cases of the flu , a broken finger and back spasms . He recorded 18 points in 66 games . In the proceeding off @-@ season , Salo underwent shoulder surgery . Becoming a free agent , he accepted an $ 880 @,@ 000 qualifying offer from the Senators on 31 July 2002 . Nearly two months later , he was traded to the Vancouver Canucks in exchange for forward Peter Schaefer on 21 September . 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks = = = 
 Salo established himself as a top @-@ four defenceman with the Canucks , ranking fourth among team blueliners in average ice time per game during his first season with Vancouver . He also appeared in a career @-@ high 79 games while recording nine goals and 30 points . The Canucks re @-@ signed him in the off @-@ season to a two @-@ year , $ 3 @.@ 2 million contract . The following campaign , he recorded seven goals and 26 points in 74 games . 
 Due to the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout , Salo went overseas to play for Frölunda HC in the Swedish Elite League . He notched six goals and 14 points in 41 games , helping Frölunda to the league 's best regular season record . The club went on to capture the Le Mat Trophy as playoff champions , defeating Färjestads BK four games to one in the finals . Salo assisted on the overtime goal by Niklas Andersson in game five to win the championship . Salo completed the playoffs with a goal and seven points in 14 post @-@ season contests . 
 As NHL play was set to resume the following season , Salo signed another two @-@ year contract with the Canucks at $ 1 @.@ 5 million per season . He was limited to 59 games in the subsequent 2005 – 06 season , suffering a shoulder injury with the Finnish national team during the 2006 Winter Olympics , colliding with a teammate during a line change . He recorded 10 goals and 33 points with the Canucks , second among team defencemen in scoring . His 23 assists were also a career @-@ high . 
 In 2006 – 07 , Salo sprained his knee in a game against the Minnesota Wild on 2 November 2006 . Soon after returning , he sustained nerve damage in his shoulder from a hit against the Edmonton Oilers in December . Towards the end of the season , he suffered a groin injury , sidelining him for five games in March and April . Although he cumulatively missed 15 games , Salo still managed to have a career year , recording personal bests with 14 goals , 23 assists and 37 points . He tied for 10th among league defencemen in goals and ranked first in game @-@ winning goals with six . Late in the season , he avoided his pending unrestricted free agency by re @-@ signing with the Canucks to a four @-@ year , $ 14 million contract extension on 29 March 2007 . The Canucks entered the 2007 playoffs as the third seed . After eliminating the Dallas Stars in the first round , Vancouver was defeated by the Anaheim Ducks in five games . Salo missed the first two games of the second round due to the flu . He notched an assist over 10 post @-@ season games . 
 With an accumulation of injuries over the years , Salo spent the 2007 off @-@ season recovering from chronic groin , back and shoulder problems . Salo was immediately sidelined once more before the start of the 2007 – 08 season , fracturing his wrist during an intra @-@ squad game in training camp . Shortly after returning , he was hit in the face by a clearing attempt from teammate Alexander Edler during a game against the Nashville Predators on 2 November 2007 . The impact from the puck broke his nose and he <unk> 19 games . In 63 games , Salo recorded 25 points , his lowest output since his 2001 – 02 season with the Senators . Despite this , he still led all Canucks defencemen in scoring , as all the team 's blueliners also suffered injuries over the season . 
 The 2008 – 09 season began with more time off in November due to separate leg and shoulder injuries . After returning , he was hit into the boards by Edmonton Oilers captain Ethan Moreau on 17 December 2008 , and suffered a broken rib . He missed 15 games before returning on 20 January 2009 . Limited to 60 games , he managed five goals and 25 points in the regular season . In the ensuing playoffs , Salo scored seven points in seven games , including game @-@ winning goals in both game ones of the first and second rounds against the St. Louis Blues and Chicago Blackhawks , respectively . Salo injured himself in game two of the second round , tearing his gluteus medius muscle while taking a slapshot in which he scored . He played through the injury the following game before missing the next two matches . Following his return , the Canucks were eliminated in the sixth game by the Blackhawks . Salo had three goals and seven points in seven games . 
 Early in the 2009 – 10 season , Salo suffered a medial collateral ligament ( MCL ) sprain to his right knee during a game against the Dallas Stars on 11 October 2009 . Sidelined for seven games , he returned by the end of the month . Salo missed additional games during the season to various injuries , ending the campaign with nine goals and 28 points in 68 games . Towards the second half of the season , Salo took on a more defensive role , replacing Willie Mitchell , who was sidelined with a concussion , as the team 's primary shutdown defenceman . 
 In game five of the second round of the 2010 playoffs , Salo was hit in the groin by a slapshot from Chicago Blackhawks defenceman Duncan Keith . Needing to be helped off the ice , he was taken to hospital with what was falsely believed to be a ruptured testicle . He played through an undisclosed injury the following game , as the Canucks were eliminated by the Blackhawks by a 5 – 1 score . He completed the playoffs with a goal and six points in 12 post @-@ season games . 
 Playing floorball in the off @-@ season , Salo tore his achilles tendon on 22 July 2010 . After undergoing surgery , he was sidelined for the first four months of the 2010 – 11 season . The injury was so severe that Salo later admitted thinking his career was over during his rehabilitation . Before returning to the Canucks lineup , he was sent to the team 's American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Manitoba Moose , for a conditioning assignment . Making his AHL debut on 4 February 2011 , he scored two goals for the Moose in a 3 – 2 win against the Wilkes @-@ Barre / Scranton Penguins . Salo played two more games for the Moose , going pointless in both , before being called up by the Canucks on 11 February . Salo appeared in 27 games in 2010 – 11 , recording three goals and four assists . During the first and second rounds of the 2011 playoffs , Salo missed four games with a leg injury . The Canucks eliminated the Blackhawks and Nashville Predators in the first two rounds to qualify for the Western Conference Finals against the San Jose Sharks . During Game 4 of the series , Salo set a Canucks playoff record for fastest back @-@ to @-@ back goals , scoring 16 seconds apart on a pair of 5 @-@ on @-@ 3 powerplays . The feat also tied Larry Murphy 's NHL record for fastest two power play goals in the playoffs since 1957 . Combined with Ryan Kesler 's goal a minute and thirty @-@ nine seconds previously , the trio of goals were also the fastest scored in Canucks playoff history at a minute and fifty @-@ five seconds . Vancouver went on to win the game 4 – 2 , while winning the series 4 – 1 . Advancing to the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals , the Canucks were defeated in seven games by the Boston Bruins . During the off @-@ season , Salo re @-@ signed with the Canucks to a one @-@ year , $ 2 million deal on 1 July 2011 , prior to becoming an unrestricted free agent . 
 In the first half of the 2011 – 12 season , Salo suffered a minor groin injury that sidelined him on two separate occasions , costing him three games and one game , respectively . In January 2012 , the Canucks and Bruins played against each other for the first time since the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals . During the contest , Salo sustained a concussion after a clipping hit from opposing forward Brad Marchand . Salo left the game immediately , while Marchand received a five @-@ minute major and game misconduct ; he was later additionally suspended for five games following a hearing with the league . 
 = = = Tampa Bay Lightning = = = 
 On 1 July 2012 , Salo signed a 2 @-@ year , $ 7 @.@ 5 million contract with the Tampa Bay Lightning . 
 He officially announced his retirement from professional hockey on 13 August 2015 . 
 = = International play = = 
 Salo made his international debut with the Finnish national team at the 2001 World Championships in Germany . He recorded an international career @-@ high nine points in nine games , second among tournament defencemen to Finnish teammate Petteri <unk> . Finland advanced to the gold medal game , where they lost 3 – 2 to the Czech Republic , earning silver . 
 On 13 December 2001 , Salo was selected to the Finnish national team for the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City , along with Senators teammate Jani <unk> . He appeared in four games without registering a point as Finland was defeated by the gold @-@ medal winning Canadians in the quarterfinal by a 2 – 1 score . 
 In Salo 's next World Championships appearance in 2004 , he recorded three assists in seven games . Finland failed to medal , losing their quarterfinal to Canada . Salo assisted on the go @-@ ahead goal in the third period before Canada tied up the score and won 5 – 4 in overtime . Several months later , at the 2004 World Cup , Salo helped Finland to the final , notching three assists in seven games . For his third straight national team appearance , however , Finland was eliminated by Canada , losing the championship game 3 – 2 . 
 He made his second Olympics appearance at the 2006 Games in Turin . He recorded four points in six games before suffering a tournament @-@ ending shoulder injury in a collision with teammate Ville Peltonen during a line change in front of the team bench . The injury kept him from playing in the semifinal and gold medal game , where Finland won the silver medal in a 3 – 2 loss to Sweden . Despite missing two games , Salo ranked second among team defencemen , behind Kimmo Timonen , with a goal and four points in six games . Four years later , Salo competed once again for Finland at the 2010 Winter Olympics in his NHL hometown Vancouver . He recorded two points in six games , while leading all Finnish players in ice time . He scored his lone goal during the bronze medal game , opening the score against Slovakia in a 5 – 3 win . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Salo is known as a two @-@ way defenceman , capable of being matched up against opposing team 's top players , while also contributing offensively . His offensive game is characterized by his powerful slapshot . He has won numerous hardest shot titles with the Canucks in the team 's SuperSkills competitions , clocking one shot at 102 @.@ 7 miles @-@ per @-@ hour ( 163 @.@ 5 <unk> ) in 2012 . As a result , he is used frequently on the powerplay , being set up by teammates for shots from the point . A well @-@ rounded defenceman , Salo also earns time on the penalty kill . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Salo has a wife , Johanna , and three children . From youngest to oldest , they are Peppi , Oliver and Julia . Salo has spent time coaching Oliver , his only son , on his hockey team . 
 Growing up in Turku , Finland , Salo had aspirations of playing with the Finnish national team , rather than the NHL . He idolized Jari Kurri and was more familiar with other Finnish players , such as Esa Peltonen and Heikki <unk> , than he was with any NHL stars . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = Transactions = = 
 22 June 1996 - Drafted by Ottawa Senators in the 9th round , 239th overall , in the 1996 NHL Entry Draft . 
 31 July 2002 - Signed a one @-@ year , $ 880 @,@ 000 qualifying offer from the Ottawa Senators . 
 21 September 2002 - Traded to the Vancouver Canucks for Peter Schaefer . 
 17 July 2003 - Re @-@ signed to a two @-@ year , $ 3 @.@ 2 million contract with the Vancouver Canucks . 
 15 September 2004 – Signed to a one @-@ year contract with Frölunda HC . 
 14 August 2005 - Re @-@ signed to a two @-@ year contract with the Vancouver Canucks . 
 29 March 2007 - Signed to a four @-@ year , $ 14 @-@ million contract extension with the Vancouver Canucks . 
 1 July 2011 - Re @-@ signed with the Canucks to a one @-@ year , $ 2 million contract . 
 1 July 2012 - Signed to a 2 @-@ year , $ 7 @.@ 5 million contract with the Tampa Bay Lightning . 
 = Death of Ian Tomlinson = 
 Ian Tomlinson ( 7 February 1962 – 1 April 2009 ) was a newspaper vendor who collapsed and died in the City of London after being struck by a police officer during the 2009 G @-@ 20 summit protests . After an inquest jury returned a verdict of unlawful killing , the officer , Simon Harwood , was prosecuted for manslaughter . He was found not guilty but was dismissed from the police service for gross misconduct . 
 The first autopsy concluded that Tomlinson had suffered a heart attack , but a week later The Guardian published video of Harwood , a constable with London 's Metropolitan Police Service , striking Tomlinson on the leg with a baton , then pushing him to the ground . Tomlinson was not a protester , and at the time he was struck was trying to make his way home through the police cordons . He walked away after the incident , but collapsed and died minutes later . 
 After the Independent Police Complaints Commission ( IPCC ) began a criminal inquiry , further autopsies indicated that Tomlinson had died from internal bleeding caused by blunt force trauma to the abdomen , in association with cirrhosis of the liver . The Crown Prosecution Service ( CPS ) decided not to charge Harwood , because the disagreement between the first and later pathologists meant they could not show a causal link between the death and alleged assault . That position changed in 2011 ; after the verdict of unlawful killing , the CPS charged Harwood with manslaughter . He was acquitted in 2012 and dismissed from the service a few months later . 
 Tomlinson 's death sparked a debate in the UK about the relationship between the police , media and public , and the independence of the IPCC . In response to the concerns , the Chief Inspector of Constabulary , Denis O 'Connor , published a 150 @-@ page report in November 2009 that aimed to restore Britain 's consent @-@ based model of policing . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Ian Tomlinson = = = 
 Tomlinson was born to Jim and Ann Tomlinson in Matlock , Derbyshire . He moved to London when he was 17 to work as a <unk> . At the time of his death , at the age of 47 , he was working casually as a vendor for the Evening Standard , London 's evening newspaper . Married twice with nine children , including stepchildren , Tomlinson had a history of alcoholism , as a result of which he had been living apart from his second wife , Julia , for 13 years , and had experienced long periods of homelessness . He had been staying since 2008 in the Lindsey Hotel , a shelter for the homeless on Lindsey Street , Smithfield , <unk> . At the time of his death , he was walking across London 's financial district in an effort to reach the Lindsey Hotel , his way hampered at several points by police lines . The route he took was his usual way home from a newspaper stand on Fish Street Hill outside Monument tube station , where he worked with a friend , Barry Smith . 
 = = = London police , IPCC = = = 
 With over 33 @,@ 000 officers , the Metropolitan Police Service ( the Met ) is the largest police force in the United Kingdom , responsible for policing Greater London , except for the financial district , the City of London . The latter has its own force , the City of London Police . The Met 's commissioner at the time was Sir Paul Stephenson ; the City of London Police commissioner was Mike <unk> . Responsibility for supervising the Met falls to the Metropolitan Police Authority , chaired by the Mayor of London , at the time Boris Johnson . 
 The officer seen pushing Tomlinson was a constable with the Met 's Territorial Support Group ( TSG ) , identified by the " U " on their shoulder numbers . The TSG specializes in public @-@ order policing , wearing military @-@ style helmets , flame @-@ retardant overalls , stab vests and balaclavas . Their operational commander at the time was Chief Superintendent Mick Johnson . 
 The Independent Police Complaints Commission ( IPCC ) began to operate in 2004 ; its chair when Tomlinson died was Nick Hardwick . Created by the Police Reform Act 2002 , the commission replaced the Police Complaints Authority ( PCA ) following public dissatisfaction with the latter 's relationship with the police . Unlike the PCA , the IPCC operates independently of the Home Office , which regulates the police . 
 = = = Operation Glencoe = = = 
 The G20 security operation , codenamed " Operation Glencoe , " was a " Benbow operation , " which meant the Met , City of London Police and British Transport Police worked under one Gold commander , in this case Bob Broadhurst of the Met . 
 There were six protests on 1 April 2009 : a security operation at ExCeL London , a Stop the War march , a Free Tibet protest outside the Chinese Embassy , a People & Planet protest , a Climate Camp protest , and a protest outside the Bank of England . Over 4 @,@ 000 protesters were at the Climate Camp and the same number at the Bank of England . On 1 April over 5 @,@ 500 police officers were deployed and the following day 2 @,@ 800 , at a cost of £ 7 @.@ 2 million . Officers worked 14 @-@ hour shifts . They ended at midnight , slept on the floor of police stations , were not given a chance to eat , and were back on duty at 7 am . This was viewed as having contributed to the difficulties they faced . 
 The Bank of England protesters were held in place from 12 @.@ 30 pm until 7 @.@ 00 pm using a process police called " containment " and the media called " <unk> " — corralling protesters into small spaces until the police dispersed them . At 7 pm senior officers decided that " reasonable force " could be used to disperse the protesters around the bank . Between 7 : 10 and 7 : 40 pm the crowd surged toward the police , missiles were thrown , and the police pushed back with their shields . <unk> broke out and arrests were made . This was the situation Tomlinson wandered into as he tried to make his way home . 
 = = Incident = = 
 = = = Earlier encounter with police = = = 
 Several newspapers published images of Tomlinson 's first encounter with police that evening . Barry Smith says Tomlinson left the newspaper stand outside Monument Tube Station at around 7 pm . The Daily Mail published an image showing Tomlinson smoking a cigarette in front of a police van in Lombard Street . The Mail writes that an eyewitness , IT worker Ross Hardy , said Tomlinson was drunk and refusing to move ; a police van tried to nudge him out of the way , and when that didn 't work he was moved by four riot officers . The newspaper published a second image of him apparently being pushed by the police . On 16 April The Guardian published three images of Tomlinson taken at the same time as the Daily Mail images . 
 Tomlinson stayed on Lombard Street for another half hour , then made his way to King William Street , toward two lines of police cordons , where police had " <unk> " thousands of protesters near the Bank of England . At 7 : 10 pm he doubled back on himself , walking up and down Change Alley where he encountered more cordons , and five minutes later was on Lombard Street again , crossed it , walked down Birchin Lane , and reached Cornhill at 7 : 10 – 7 : 15 pm . 
 A few minutes later he was at the northern end of a pedestrian precinct , Royal Exchange Passage ( formally called Royal Exchange Buildings ) , near the junction with Threadneedle Street , where a further police cordon stopped him from proceeding . He turned to walk south along Royal Exchange Passage instead , where , minutes before he arrived , officers had clashed with up to 25 protesters . Riot police from the Met 's TSG , accompanied by City of London police dog handlers , had arrived there from the cordon in Threadneedle Street to help their colleagues . 
 = = = Encounter with officer = = = 
 Police officers followed Tomlinson as he walked 50 yards ( 50 m ) along the street . He headed towards Threadneedle Street , but again ran into police cordons and doubled back on himself towards Cornhill . According to a CPS report , he was bitten on the leg by a police dog at 7 : 15 pm , when a dog handler tried to move him out of the way , but he appeared not to react to it . 
 The same group of officers approached Tomlinson outside a Montblanc store at the southern end of Royal Exchange Passage , near the junction with Cornhill . He was walking slowly with his hands in his pockets ; according to an eyewitness , he was saying that he was trying to get home . 
 The first Guardian video shows one officer lunge at Tomlinson from behind , strike him across the legs with a baton and push his back , causing him to fall . On 8 April Channel 4 News released their own footage , which showed the officer 's arm swing back to head height before bringing it down to hit Tomlinson on the legs with the baton . Another video obtained by The Guardian on 21 April shows Tomlinson standing by a bicycle rack , hands in his pockets , when the police approach him . After he is hit , he can be seen scraping along the ground on the right side of his forehead ; eyewitnesses spoke of hearing a noise as his head hit the ground . 
 = = = Collapse = = = 
 Tomlinson can be seen briefly remonstrating with police as he sits on the ground . None of the officers offered assistance . After being helped to his feet by a protester , Tomlinson walked 200 feet ( 60 m ) along Cornhill , where he collapsed at around 7 : 25 pm outside 77 Cornhill . Witnesses say he appeared dazed , eyes rolling , skin grey . They also said he smelled of alcohol . An ITV News photographer tried to give medical aid , but was forced away by police , as was a medical student . Police medics attended to Tomlinson , who was pronounced dead on arrival at hospital . 
 = = Simon Harwood = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Simon Harwood , the officer who struck Tomlinson , was a police constable with the Territorial Support Group ( TSG ) at <unk> Lane police station in Lambeth , South London . Harwood had faced 10 complaints in 12 years , nine of which had been dismissed or unproven . The complaint that was upheld involved unlawful access to the Police National Computer . The complaints included a road @-@ rage incident in or around 1998 while he was on sick leave , during which he reportedly tried to arrest the other driver , who alleged that Harwood had used unnecessary force . On Friday , 14 September 2001 , before the case was heard by a discipline board , Harwood retired on medical grounds . Three days later , on Monday , 17 September , he rejoined the Met as a civilian computer worker . 
 In May 2003 Harwood joined the Surrey Police as a constable . Surrey Police said he was frank about his history . In January 2004 he was alleged to have assaulted a man during a raid on a home . In November 2004 , on his request , Harwood was transferred back to the Met . There were three more complaints after that , before the incident with Tomlinson . 
 = = = On the day = = = 
 Harwood was involved in several confrontations on the day of Tomlinson 's death . He had been on duty since 5 am , assigned as a driver , and had spent most of the day in his vehicle . While parked on Cornhill in the evening , he saw a man write " all cops are bastards " on the side of another police van , and left his vehicle to arrest him . The suspect 's head struck a van door , triggering a response from the crowd that made Harwood believe it was unsafe to return to his vehicle . He told the inquest that he had been hit on the head , had fallen over , lost his baton , had been attacked by the crowd and feared for his life , but later acknowledged this had not happened . 
 Shortly after his attempted arrest of the graffiti man , Harwood swung a coat at a protester , pulled a BBC cameraman to the ground , used a palm strike against one man , and at 7 : 19 pm pushed another man to the ground for allegedly threatening a police dog handler . It was seconds after this that he saw Tomlinson standing with his hands in his pockets beside a bicycle rack , being told by police to move away . Harwood told the inquest he made a " split @-@ second decision " that there was justification for engagement , then struck Tomlinson on the thigh with his baton and pushed him to the ground . He said it was a " very poor push " and he had been shocked when Tomlinson fell . Harwood made no mention of the incident in his notebook ; he told the inquest he had forgotten about it . 
 = = = Identification = = = 
 Newspapers did not release Harwood 's name until July 2010 . On the day of the incident , he appeared to have removed his shoulder number and covered the bottom of his face with his balaclava . The Daily Mail published an image showing his shoulder ID missing . Simon Israel of Channel 4 News reported a detailed description of the officer on 22 April 2009 ; the IPCC sought but failed to obtain an injunction to prevent Channel 4 broadcasting the description , alleging that it might prejudice their inquiry . Fifteen months later , when announcing in July 2010 that no charges would be brought against Harwood , the Crown Prosecution Service still referred to him as " PC A. " It was only on that day that newspapers decided to name him . 
 Harwood said he first realized on 8 April , when he saw the Guardian video , that Tomlinson had died . He reportedly collapsed at home and had to be taken to hospital by ambulance . Harwood and three colleagues made themselves known to the IPCC that day . 
 = = Early accounts = = 
 = = = First police statement = = = 
 The Met issued its first statement on 1 April at 11 : 36 pm , four hours after Tomlinson died , a statement approved by the IPCC 's regional director for London . The statement said that police had been alerted that a man had collapsed and were attacked by " a number of missiles " as they tried to save his life , an allegation that was inaccurate , according to later media reports . 
 According to Nick Davies in The Guardian , the statement was the result of an intense argument in the Met 's press office , after an earlier draft had been rejected . He wrote that both the Met and IPCC said the statement represented the truth as they understood it at the time , and that there had been no allegation at that point that Tomlinson had come into contact with police . Davies asked why the IPCC were involved if they had not realized there had been police contact . He alleged that senior sources within the Met said privately that the assault on Tomlinson had been spotted by the police control room at Cobalt Street in south London , and that a chief inspector on the ground had also reported it . The Met issued a statement saying they had checked with every chief inspector who had been part of Operation Glencoe , and that none of them had called in such a report . 
 = = = First eyewitness accounts = = = 
 On 2 April the Met handed responsibility for the investigation to the City of London police ; the officer in charge was Detective Superintendent Anthony Crampton . After police briefings , the Evening Standard reported on 2 April that " police were bombarded with bricks , bottles and planks of wood " as they tried to save Tomlinson , forced by a barrage of missiles to carry him to a safe location to give him mouth @-@ to @-@ mouth resuscitation . 
 Eyewitnesses said the story was inaccurate . They said protesters had provided first aid and telephoned for medical help . Others said that one or two plastic bottles had been thrown by people unaware of Tomlinson 's situation , but other protesters had told them to stop . According to The Times , an analysis of television footage and photographs showed just one bottle , probably plastic , being thrown . Video taken by eyewitness Nabeela Zahir , published by The Guardian on 9 April , shows one protester shouting , " There is someone hurt here . Back the fuck up . " Another voice says , " There 's someone hurt . Don 't throw anything . " 
 = = = Officers report the incident = = = 
 Three police constables from the Hammersmith and Fulham police station — Nicholas Jackson , Andrew Moore , and Kerry Smith — told their supervisor , Inspector Wynne Jones , on 3 April that they had witnessed the incident . They can be seen in The Guardian video standing next to Tomlinson . Jackson was the first to tell the inspector ; officers then contacted Moore and Smith , who had been standing next to Jackson at the time . 
 Jackson , Moore and Smith did not recognize Simon Harwood , the officer who struck Tomlinson , and according to the newspaper assumed he was with the City of London police . This was four days before The Guardian published the video . The inspector passed this information at 4 : 15 pm on 3 April to Detective Inspector Eddie Hall , the Met 's point of contact for Tomlinson 's death . Hall said he passed it to the City of London police before the first autopsy was conducted that day by Freddy Patel , which according to The Guardian began at 5 pm . 
 = = Autopsies = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 An inquest was opened on 9 April 2009 by Paul Matthews , the City of London coroner . Three autopsies were conducted : on 3 April by <unk> Saeed <unk> " Freddy " Patel for Paul Matthews ; on 9 April by Nathaniel Cary for the IPCC and Tomlinson 's family ; and on 22 April jointly by Kenneth Shorrock for the Metropolitan police and Ben Swift for Simon Harwood . The coroner was criticized for reportedly having failed to allow IPCC investigators to attend the first , and for failing to tell Tomlinson 's family that they had a legal right to attend or send a representative . The family also said he had not told them where and when it was taking place . 
 = = = First autopsy = = = 
 According to Detective Sergeant Chandler of the City of London police , he was not told until the first autopsy was over , or at an advanced stage , that three police officers had seen another officer hit and push Tomlinson . Apparently neither Patel nor the IPCC were told about the three witnesses . Patel said he was told only that the case was a " suspicious death " ; the police had asked that he " rule out any assault or crush injuries associated with public order . " 
 Patel concluded that Tomlinson had died of coronary artery disease . His report noted " intraabdominal fluid blood about 3l with small blood clot , " which was interpreted by medical experts to mean that he had found three litres of blood in Tomlinson 's abdomen . This would have been around 60 percent of Tomlinson 's total blood volume , a " highly significant indicator of the cause of death , " according to the Crown Prosecution Service ( CPS ) . In a report for the CPS a year later , on 5 April 2010 , Patel wrote that he had meant " intraabdominal fluid with blood . " He did not retain samples of the fluid for testing . This issue became pivotal regarding the decision not to prosecute Harwood . The City of London police issued a statement on 4 April : " A post @-@ mortem examination found he died of natural causes . [ He ] suffered a sudden heart attack while on his way home from work . " 
 The IPCC told reporters that the autopsy showed no bruising or scratches on Tomlinson 's head and shoulders . When the family asked the City of London police , after the autopsy , whether there had been marks on Tomlinson 's body , they were told no ; according to The Guardian , Detective Superintendent Anthony Crampton , who was leading the investigation , wrote in his log that he did not tell the family about a bruise and puncture marks on Tomlinson 's leg to avoid causing " unnecessary stress or alarm . " On 5 April The Observer published the first photograph of Tomlinson lying on the ground next to riot police . After it was published , Freddy Patel was asked to return to the mortuary , where he made a note of bruising on Tomlinson 's head that he had not noticed when he first examined him . On 24 April Sky News obtained an image of Tomlinson after he collapsed , which showed bruising on the right side of his forehead . 
 = = = Second and third autopsies = = = 
 The IPCC removed the Tomlinson inquiry from the City of London police on 8 April . A second autopsy , ordered jointly by the IPCC and Tomlinson 's family , was carried out that day by Dr. Nathaniel Cary , known for his work on high @-@ profile cases . Cary found that Tomlinson had died because of internal bleeding from blunt force trauma to the abdomen , in association with cirrhosis of the liver . He concluded that Tomlinson had fallen on his elbow , which he said " impacted in the area of his liver causing an internal bleed which led to his death a few minutes later . " 
 Because of the conflicting conclusions of the first two , a third autopsy was conducted on 22 April by Dr. Kenneth Shorrock on behalf of the Metropolitan police , and Dr. Ben Swift on behalf of Simon Harwood . Shorrock and Swift agreed with the results of the second autopsy . The Met 's point of contact for Tomlinson 's death , Detective Inspector Eddie Hall , told the pathologists before the final autopsy that Tomlinson had fallen to the ground in front of a police van earlier in the evening , although there was no evidence that this had happened . The IPCC ruled in May 2011 that Hall had been reckless in making this claim , but had not intended to mislead . 
 = = = Freddy Patel = = = 
 At the time of Tomlinson 's death , Patel was on the Home Office 's register of accredited forensic pathologists . He qualified as a doctor at the University of Zambia in 1974 , and registered to practise in the UK in 1988 . The Metropolitan Police had written to the Home Office in 2005 raising concerns about his work . At the time of Tomlinson 's death he did not have had a contract with the police to conduct autopsies in cases of suspicious death . 
 In 1999 Patel was reprimanded by the General Medical Council ( GMC ) for having released medical details about Roger Sylvester , a man who had died in police custody . In 2002 the police dropped a criminal inquiry because Patel said the victim , Sally White , had died of a heart attack with no signs of violence , although she was reportedly found naked with bruising to her body , an injury to her head and a bite mark on her thigh . Anthony Hardy , a mentally ill alcoholic who lived in the flat in which her body was found locked in a bedroom , later murdered two women and placed their body parts in bin bags . The police investigated Patel in relation to that autopsy , but the investigation was dropped . In response to the criticism , Patel said the GMC reprimand was a long time ago , and that his findings in the Sally White case had not been contested . 
 Patel was suspended from the government 's register of pathologists in July 2009 , pending a GMC inquiry . The inquiry concerned 26 charges related to autopsies in four other cases . In one case Patel was accused of having failed to spot signs of abuse on the body of a five @-@ year @-@ old girl who had died after a fall at home , and of having failed to check with the hospital about its investigation into her injuries . The child 's body was exhumed for a second postmortem , and her mother was convicted . The hearings concluded in August 2010 ; Patel was suspended for three months for " deficient professional performance . " In May 2011 the GMC opened an investigation into his handling of the Tomlinson autopsy . He was struck off the medical register in August 2012 . 
 = = Images = = 
 = = = Observer photograph = = = 
 On 5 April The Observer ( the Guardian 's sister paper ) published the first photograph of Tomlinson lying on the ground next to riot police . Over the next few days the IPCC told reporters that Tomlinson 's family were not surprised that he had had a heart attack . When journalists asked whether he had been in contact with police officers before his death , they were told the speculation would upset the family . 
 = = = Guardian video = = = 
 The first Guardian video was shot on a digital camera by an investment fund manager from New York who was in London on business , and who attended the protests out of curiosity . On his way to Heathrow airport , he realized that the man he had filmed being assaulted was the man who had reportedly died of a heart attack . At that point , 2 am on 7 April , he passed his footage to The Guardian , which published it on its website that afternoon . The newspaper passed a copy to the IPCC , which opened a criminal inquiry . 
 = = = Channel 4 video = = = 
 A video by Ken McCallum , a cameraman for Channel 4 News , was broadcast on 8 April . Shot from a different angle , the footage shows Harwood draw his arm back to head height before bringing the baton down on Tomlinson 's legs . McCallum was filming another incident at the time ; the Tomlinson incident was unfolding in the background , unseen by the journalists but recorded by the camera . Half an hour later Alex Thomson , chief correspondent of Channel 4 News , was doing a live broadcast when the camera was damaged . It took engineers days to recover the tape , which is when they saw that Tomlinson 's assault was on it . 
 = = = Nabeela Zahir video = = = 
 On 9 April The Guardian published footage from Nabeela Zahir , a freelance journalist , showing Tomlinson after his collapse . The police can be seen moving away at least one woman who tried to help him , and a man , Daniel McPhee , who was on the phone to the ambulance services . The footage shows that the Met 's initial claim that there had been a barrage of missiles from protesters while police tried to save Tomlinson was inaccurate . Protesters can be heard calling for calm ; one shouts " Don 't throw anything . " According to The Guardian , 56 seconds into the video , three officers can be seen with their face masks pulled halfway up their faces . 
 = = = Cornhill video = = = 
 The Guardian obtained a four @-@ minute video on 21 April from an anonymous bystander who had been filming on Cornhill between 7 : 10 and 7 : 30 pm . The footage shows Tomlinson standing behind a bicycle rack in Royal Exchange Passage with his hands in his pockets , and a group of advancing police officers . When a police dog approaches him , he turns his back . At that point , he is hit on the legs and pushed by the TSG constable , and can be seen scraping along the ground on the right side of his forehead . Eyewitnesses said they heard a noise as his head hit the ground . The IPCC sought an injunction against the broadcast of the video by Channel 4 News , but a judge rejected the application . An image obtained by Sky News on 24 April appears to show bruising on the right side of Tomlinson 's forehead . A head injury was recorded by the second and third pathologists . 
 = = = CCTV cameras = = = 
 Nick Hardwick , chair of the IPCC , said on 9 April that there were no CCTV cameras in the area . On 14 April the Evening Standard wrote that it had found at least six CCTV cameras in the area around the assault . After photographs of the cameras were published , the IPCC reversed its position and said its investigators were looking at footage from cameras in Threadneedle Street near the corner of Royal Exchange Passage . 
 = = Early reaction and analysis = = 
 = = = British policing = = = 
 Tomlinson 's death sparked a discussion about the nature of Britain 's policing and the relationship between the police , public , media and IPCC . The mayor of London , Boris Johnson , dismissed the criticism of the police as " an orgy of cop bashing . " The death was compared to others that had acted as a watershed in the public 's perception of policing , including that of Blair Peach ( 1979 ) , Stephen Lawrence ( 1993 ) and Jean Charles de Menezes ( 2005 ) . The IPCC was criticized for having taken seven days from Tomlinson 's death , and five days after hearing evidence that police may have been involved , to remove the City of London police from the investigation . 
 David Gilbertson , a former assistant inspector who had worked for the Home Office formulating policing policy , told The New York Times that the British police used to act with the sanction of the public , but that tactics had changed after a series of violent assaults on officers in the 1990s . Now dressing in military @-@ style uniforms and equipped with anti @-@ stab vests , extendable metal batons and clubs that turn into handcuffs , an entire generation of officers has come to regard the public as the enemy , the newspaper said . 
 = = = The Guardian , police and IPCC = = = 
 Tomlinson 's death was confirmed in a statement that accused protesters of having hampered police efforts to save his life . His family were not told he had died until nine hours after his death . The police and IPCC told journalists that his family were not surprised to hear he had had a heart attack . Journalists who asked whether police had had any contact with Tomlinson were asked not to speculate in case it upset the family . Direct contact with the family was refused . The police issued a statement on behalf of the family instead , which said the police were keeping them informed . 
 The Observer ( The Guardian 's sister paper ) published an image of Tomlinson on the ground on Sunday , 5 April . That morning Tomlinson 's family attended the scene of his death , where they met Paul Lewis , a Guardian reporter who had worked on The Observer story . Tomlinson 's wife said this meeting was the first the family had heard of police contact with Tomlinson before his death . The family 's police liaison officer later approached the newspaper to say he was " extremely unhappy " that Lewis had spoken to the family , and that the newspaper had to stay away from them for 48 hours . The IPCC accused the newspaper of " <unk> the family at a time of grief . " On the same day , the IPCC briefed other journalists that there was nothing in the story that Tomlinson might have been assaulted by police . During this period , according to Tomlinson 's family , they were prevented from seeing his body ; they were first allowed to see him six days after his death . 
 On 7 April The Guardian published the American banker 's video , and later that evening handed it to an IPCC investigator and a City of London police officer who arrived at the newspaper 's offices . The officers asked that the video be removed from the website , arguing that it jeopardized their inquiry and was not helpful to the family . Nick Hardwick , chair of the IPCC , said the IPCC had asked The Guardian to remove the video only because it would have been better had witnesses not seen it before being questioned . 
 = = = Metropolitan police response = = = 
 The Chief Inspector of Constabulary , Denis O 'Connor , published a 150 @-@ page report in November 2009 that aimed to restore Britain 's consent @-@ based model of policing . 
 O 'Connor wrote that there had been a hardening of police attitudes , with officers believing that proportionality meant reciprocity . The deployment of officers in riot gear had become a routine response to lawful protest , largely the result of an ignorance of the law and a lack of leadership from the Home Office and police chiefs . Officers were being trained to use their riot shields as weapons . Police forces across the country differed in their training , the equipment they had access to , and their understanding of the law . The failure to understand the relevant legislation was in part due to its complexity , the report said , with 90 amendments to the Public Order Act passed since 1986 . 
 The report made several recommendations , including the creation of a set of national principles emphasizing the minimum use of force at all times , and making the display of police ID a legal requirement . In February 2010 the Met announced that 8 @,@ 000 of its officers had been issued with embroidered epaulettes , as several had complained that the numbers were falling off , rather than being removed deliberately . 
 = = Legal aftermath = = 
 = = = Decision not to prosecute = = = 
 In April 2010 The Guardian published an open letter from several public figures asking the Crown Prosecution Service ( CPS ) to proceed with a prosecution or explain its position . In July that year Keir Starmer , director of the CPS , announced that there would be no prosecution because of the medical disagreement between the three pathologists . Starmer said there was enough evidence for an assault charge , but the six @-@ month deadline for that had expired . 
 The area of conflict concerned Patel 's finding during the first autopsy of " intraabdominal fluid blood about 3l with small blood clot . " This was interpreted by other medical experts to mean that Patel had found three litres of blood in Tomlinson 's abdomen . Starmer said this would have been around 60 percent of Tomlinson 's blood volume , a " highly significant indicator of the cause of death . " 
 In April 2010 Patel introduced an ambiguity in a second report for the CPS , saying he had found " intraabdominal fluid with blood about 3l with small blood clot " ( emphasis added ) . The ambiguity had to be clarified , because the second and third pathologists had relied in part on Patel 's original notes to form their views . Patel was interviewed twice by the CPS . According to Starmer , Patel " maintained that the total fluid was somewhat in excess of three litres but that it was mainly ascites ( a substance which forms in a damaged liver ) , which had been stained with blood . He had not retained the fluid nor had he sampled it in order to ascertain the proportion of blood because , he said , he had handled blood all his professional life and he knew that this was not blood but blood @-@ stained ascites . " Patel also said he had found no internal rupture that would have led to this degree of blood loss . 
 Several conclusions were drawn from discussions between Patel and the CPS , Starmer said : ( a ) because Patel had not retained or sampled the three litres of fluid , no firm conclusions could be drawn about the nature of it ; ( b ) for Tomlinson 's death to have resulted so quickly from blood loss , there would have to have been a significant internal rupture ; ( c ) Patel found no such rupture ; ( d ) the later <unk> also found no visible rupture ; and ( e ) because Patel was the only person to have examined Tomlinson 's intact body , he was in the best position to judge the nature of the fluid , and whether there was a rupture that could have caused it . This meant that Patel 's evidence would significantly undermine the evidence of the second and third pathologists . 
 Nathaniel Cary , the second pathologist , objected to the CPS 's decision . Cary told The Guardian that the push had caused a haemorrhage to Tomlinson 's abdomen , and the haemorrhage caused him to collapse . Cary said Tomlinson was vulnerable to this because he had liver disease . The CPS had erred in dismissing a charge of actual bodily harm ( ABH ) , in his view . In a letter to Tomlinson 's family , the CPS described Tomlinson 's injuries as " relatively minor " and therefore insufficient to support such a charge . But Cary told The Guardian : " The injuries were not relatively minor . He sustained quite a large area of bruising . Such injuries are consistent with a baton strike , which could amount to ABH . It 's extraordinary . If that 's not ABH I would like to know what is . " 
 = = = Inquest = = = 
 The inquest was opened and adjourned in April 2009 . The City of London coroner , Paul Matthews , expressed concern about whether he had appropriate expertise , and Peter Thornton QC , who specializes in protest law , took over . The inquest opened on 28 March 2011 before a jury . The court heard from Kevin <unk> , a cardiologist at Royal Hallamshire Hospital , who analysed electrocardiogram ( ECG ) data from the defibrillator paramedics had used on Tomlinson . He said the readings were inconsistent with an <unk> heart attack , but consistent with death from internal bleeding . Pathologist Nat Carey concurred regarding the cause of death . Graeme Alexander , a <unk> , said that in his opinion Tomlinson had died of internal bleeding as a result of trauma to the liver after the fall . He told the court that Tomlinson had been suffering from serious liver disease , which would have made him susceptible to collapse from internal bleeding . 
 Giving evidence over three days , Harwood said that Tomlinson " just looked as if he was going to stay where he was forever and was almost inviting physical confrontation in terms of being moved on . " He said he had not warned Tomlinson and had acted because Tomlinson was encroaching a police line , which amounted to a breach of the peace . The court heard that Tomlinson 's last words after collapsing were , " they got me , the fuckers got me " ; he died moments later . On 3 May 2011 the jury returned a verdict of unlawful killing , ruling that the officer — Harwood was not named for legal reasons — had used excessive and unreasonable force in hitting Tomlinson , and had acted " illegally , recklessly and dangerously . " 
 = = = IPCC reports = = = 
 In May 2011 the IPCC released three reports into Tomlinson 's death , written between April 2010 and May 2011 . The main report contained material revealed during the inquest . The third report detailed an allegation from Tomlinson 's family that the police had offered misleading information to the pathologists before the third autopsy on 22 April 2009 . The Met 's point of contact for Tomlinson 's death , Detective Inspector Eddie Hall , had told the pathologists that Tomlinson had fallen to the ground in front of a police van earlier in the evening , although there was no evidence to support this . The IPCC ruled that Hall had been reckless in making this claim , but had not intended to mislead the pathologists . 
 = = = Trial of Simon Harwood = = = 
 Keir Starmer , director of the CPS , announced on 24 May 2011 that a summons for manslaughter had been issued against Harwood . He said the CPS had reviewed its decision not to prosecute because new medical evidence had emerged during the inquest , and because the various medical accounts , including that of the first pathologist , had been tested during questioning . The trial opened on 18 June 2012 . Harwood entered a plea of not guilty , and was acquitted on 19 July . 
 The court was shown extensive video footage of Tomlinson and Harwood on the day . Harwood was seen trying to arrest a man who had daubed graffiti on a police van , then joining a line of officers who were clearing Royal Exchange Passage . Harwood pushed a man who blew a <unk> at him , then appeared to push a BBC cameraman who was filming the arrest of another man . The footage showed Harwood push a third man out of the way , and shortly after this ( the passageway now almost empty ) the officers reached Tomlinson . 
 Mark Dennis QC , for the prosecution , argued that Harwood 's use of force against Tomlinson had been unnecessary and unreasonable , and had caused Tomlinson 's death . He argued that a " clear temporal link " between the incident and Tomlinson 's collapse had been provided by the Guardian video , that Tomlinson had posed no threat , and that the use of force had been a " gratuitous act of aggression . " The defence argued that Tomlinson 's health was relevant . The court heard that he had liver and brain disease caused by alcohol abuse , numbness in his legs and balance problems , and that he had been treated at least 20 times between 2007 and 2009 , mostly at A & E departments , related to falling while drunk . On the day he died , The Times reported , he had drunk a bottle of red wine , a small bottle of vodka and several cans of 9 @-@ per @-@ cent super @-@ strength lager . 
 Harwood told the court that Tomlinson had ignored orders to move along . He acknowledged that he had pushed Tomlinson firmly , but said he had not expected him to fall . He also acknowledged that he had " got it wrong , " and said he had not realized Tomlinson was in such poor health . The jury found him not guilty after deliberating for four days . 
 = = = Dismissal , civil suit = = = 
 Harwood was dismissed from the Metropolitan Police Service in September 2012 after a disciplinary hearing found that he had acted with " gross misconduct " in his actions towards Tomlinson . Tomlinson 's family filed a lawsuit against the Metropolitan Police , which paid the family an undisclosed sum in August 2013 . Deputy Assistant Commissioner Maxine de Brunner issued a formal apology for " Simon Harwood 's use of excessive and unlawful force , which caused Mr Tomlinson 's death , and for the suffering and distress caused to his family as a result . " 
 = Sponge = 
 Sponges are animals of the phylum Porifera ( / <unk> / ; meaning " pore bearer " ) . They are multicellular organisms that have bodies full of pores and channels allowing water to circulate through them , consisting of jelly @-@ like mesohyl sandwiched between two thin layers of cells . Sponges have unspecialized cells that can transform into other types and that often migrate between the main cell layers and the mesohyl in the process . Sponges do not have nervous , digestive or circulatory systems . Instead , most rely on maintaining a constant water flow through their bodies to obtain food and oxygen and to remove wastes . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Sponges are similar to other animals in that they are multicellular , heterotrophic , lack cell walls and produce sperm cells . Unlike other animals , they lack true tissues and organs , and have no body symmetry . The shapes of their bodies are adapted for maximal efficiency of water flow through the central cavity , where it deposits nutrients , and leaves through a hole called the osculum . Many sponges have internal skeletons of spongin and / or spicules of calcium carbonate or silicon dioxide . All sponges are sessile aquatic animals . Although there are freshwater species , the great majority are marine ( salt water ) species , ranging from tidal zones to depths exceeding 8 @,@ 800 m ( 5 @.@ 5 mi ) . 
 While most of the approximately 5 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 known species feed on bacteria and other food particles in the water , some host photosynthesizing micro @-@ organisms as endosymbionts and these alliances often produce more food and oxygen than they consume . A few species of sponge that live in food @-@ poor environments have become carnivores that prey mainly on small crustaceans . 
 Most species use sexual reproduction , releasing sperm cells into the water to fertilize ova that in some species are released and in others are retained by the " mother " . The fertilized eggs form larvae which swim off in search of places to settle . Sponges are known for regenerating from fragments that are broken off , although this only works if the fragments include the right types of cells . A few species reproduce by budding . When conditions deteriorate , for example as temperatures drop , many freshwater species and a few marine ones produce gemmules , " survival pods " of unspecialized cells that remain dormant until conditions improve and then either form completely new sponges or recolonize the skeletons of their parents . 
 The mesohyl functions as an endoskeleton in most sponges , and is the only skeleton in soft sponges that encrust hard surfaces such as rocks . More commonly , the mesohyl is stiffened by mineral spicules , by spongin fibers or both . Demosponges use spongin , and in many species , silica spicules and in some species , calcium carbonate exoskeletons . Demosponges constitute about 90 % of all known sponge species , including all freshwater ones , and have the widest range of habitats . Calcareous sponges , which have calcium carbonate spicules and , in some species , calcium carbonate exoskeletons , are restricted to relatively shallow marine waters where production of calcium carbonate is easiest . The fragile glass sponges , with " scaffolding " of silica spicules , are restricted to polar regions and the ocean depths where predators are rare . Fossils of all of these types have been found in rocks dated from 580 million years ago . In addition Archaeocyathids , whose fossils are common in rocks from 530 to 490 million years ago , are now regarded as a type of sponge . 
 The single @-@ celled <unk> resemble the choanocyte cells of sponges which are used to drive their water flow systems and capture most of their food . This along with phylogenetic studies of ribosomal molecules have been used as morphological evidence to suggest sponges are the sister group to the rest of animals . Some studies have shown that sponges do not form a monophyletic group , in other words do not include all and only the descendants of a common ancestor . Recent phylogenetic analyses suggest that comb jellies rather than sponges are the sister group to the rest of animals . 
 The few species of demosponge that have entirely soft fibrous skeletons with no hard elements have been used by humans over thousands of years for several purposes , including as padding and as cleaning tools . By the 1950s , though , these had been overfished so heavily that the industry almost collapsed , and most sponge @-@ like materials are now synthetic . Sponges and their microscopic endosymbionts are now being researched as possible sources of medicines for treating a wide range of diseases . Dolphins have been observed using sponges as tools while foraging . 
 = = Distinguishing features = = 
 Sponges constitute the phylum Porifera , and have been defined as sessile metazoans ( <unk> immobile animals ) that have water intake and outlet openings connected by chambers lined with choanocytes , cells with whip @-@ like flagella . However , a few carnivorous sponges have lost these water flow systems and the choanocytes . All known living sponges can remold their bodies , as most types of their cells can move within their bodies and a few can change from one type to another . 
 Like cnidarians ( jellyfish , etc . ) and ctenophores ( comb jellies ) , and unlike all other known metazoans , sponges ' bodies consist of a non @-@ living jelly @-@ like mass sandwiched between two main layers of cells . Cnidarians and ctenophores have simple nervous systems , and their cell layers are bound by internal connections and by being mounted on a basement membrane ( thin fibrous mat , also known as " basal lamina " ) . Sponges have no nervous systems , their middle jelly @-@ like layers have large and varied populations of cells , and some types of cells in their outer layers may move into the middle layer and change their functions . 
 = = Basic structure = = 
 = = = Cell types = = = 
 A sponge 's body is hollow and is held in shape by the mesohyl , a jelly @-@ like substance made mainly of collagen and reinforced by a dense network of fibers also made of collagen . The inner surface is covered with choanocytes , cells with cylindrical or conical collars surrounding one flagellum per choanocyte . The wave @-@ like motion of the whip @-@ like flagella drives water through the sponge 's body . All sponges have ostia , channels leading to the interior through the mesohyl , and in most sponges these are controlled by tube @-@ like <unk> that form closable inlet valves . <unk> , plate @-@ like cells , form a single @-@ layered external skin over all other parts of the mesohyl that are not covered by choanocytes , and the pinacocytes also digest food particles that are too large to enter the ostia , while those at the base of the animal are responsible for anchoring it . 
 Other types of cell live and move within the mesohyl : 
 <unk> are amoeba @-@ like cells that move slowly through the mesohyl and secrete collagen fibres . 
 <unk> are another type of collagen @-@ producing cell . 
 <unk> cells secrete polysaccharides that also form part of the mesohyl . 
 <unk> and <unk> are reproductive cells . 
 <unk> secrete the mineralized spicules ( " little spines " ) that form the skeletons of many sponges and in some species provide some defense against predators . 
 In addition to or instead of sclerocytes , demosponges have <unk> that secrete a form of collagen that polymerizes into spongin , a thick fibrous material that stiffens the mesohyl . 
 <unk> ( " muscle cells " ) conduct signals and cause parts of the animal to contract . 
 " Grey cells " act as sponges ' equivalent of an immune system . 
 <unk> ( or <unk> ) are amoeba @-@ like cells that are totipotent , in other words each is capable of transformation into any other type of cell . They also have important roles in feeding and in clearing debris that block the ostia . 
 = = = Glass sponges ' syncytia = = = 
 Glass sponges present a distinctive variation on this basic plan . Their spicules , which are made of silica , form a scaffolding @-@ like framework between whose rods the living tissue is suspended like a cobweb that contains most of the cell types . This tissue is a syncytium that in some ways behaves like many cells that share a single external membrane , and in others like a single cell with multiple nuclei . The mesohyl is absent or minimal . The syncytium 's cytoplasm , the soupy fluid that fills the interiors of cells , is organized into " rivers " that transport nuclei , organelles ( " organs " within cells ) and other substances . Instead of choanocytes , they have further syncytia , known as <unk> , which form bell @-@ shaped chambers where water enters via perforations . The insides of these chambers are lined with " collar bodies " , each consisting of a collar and flagellum but without a nucleus of its own . The motion of the flagella sucks water through passages in the " cobweb " and expels it via the open ends of the bell @-@ shaped chambers . 
 Some types of cells have a single nucleus and membrane each , but are connected to other single @-@ nucleus cells and to the main syncytium by " bridges " made of cytoplasm . The sclerocytes that build spicules have multiple nuclei , and in glass sponge larvae they are connected to other tissues by cytoplasm bridges ; such connections between sclerocytes have not so far been found in adults , but this may simply reflect the difficulty of investigating such small @-@ scale features . The bridges are controlled by " plugged junctions " that apparently permit some substances to pass while blocking others . 
 = = = Water flow and body structures = = = 
 Most sponges work rather like chimneys : they take in water at the bottom and eject it from the osculum ( " little mouth " ) at the top . Since ambient currents are faster at the top , the suction effect that they produce by Bernoulli 's principle does some of the work for free . Sponges can control the water flow by various combinations of wholly or partially closing the osculum and ostia ( the intake pores ) and varying the beat of the flagella , and may shut it down if there is a lot of sand or silt in the water . 
 Although the layers of pinacocytes and choanocytes resemble the epithelia of more complex animals , they are not bound tightly by cell @-@ to @-@ cell connections or a basal lamina ( thin fibrous sheet underneath ) . The flexibility of these layers and re @-@ modeling of the mesohyl by <unk> allow the animals to adjust their shapes throughout their lives to take maximum advantage of local water currents . 
 The simplest body structure in sponges is a tube or vase shape known as " <unk> " , but this severely limits the size of the animal . The body structure is characterized by a stalk @-@ like <unk> surrounded by a single layer of choanocytes . If it is simply scaled up , the ratio of its volume to surface area increases , because surface increases as the square of length or width while volume increases proportionally to the cube . The amount of tissue that needs food and oxygen is determined by the volume , but the pumping capacity that supplies food and oxygen depends on the area covered by choanocytes . <unk> sponges seldom exceed 1 mm ( 0 @.@ 039 in ) in diameter . 
 Some sponges overcome this limitation by adopting the " <unk> " structure , in which the body wall is pleated . The inner pockets of the pleats are lined with choanocytes , which connect to the outer pockets of the pleats by ostia . This increase in the number of choanocytes and hence in pumping capacity enables <unk> sponges to grow up to a few centimeters in diameter . 
 The " <unk> " pattern boosts pumping capacity further by filling the interior almost completely with mesohyl that contains a network of chambers lined with choanocytes and connected to each other and to the water intakes and outlet by tubes . <unk> sponges grow to over 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) in diameter , and the fact that growth in any direction increases the number of choanocyte chambers enables them to take a wider range of forms , for example " encrusting " sponges whose shapes follow those of the surfaces to which they attach . All freshwater and most shallow @-@ water marine sponges have <unk> bodies . The networks of water passages in glass sponges are similar to the <unk> structure . In all three types of structure the cross @-@ section area of the choanocyte @-@ lined regions is much greater than that of the intake and outlet channels . This makes the flow slower near the choanocytes and thus makes it easier for them to trap food particles . For example , in <unk> , a small <unk> sponge about 10 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) tall and 1 centimetre ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) in diameter , water enters each of more than 80 @,@ 000 intake canals at 6 cm per minute . However , because <unk> has more than 2 million flagellated chambers whose combined diameter is much greater than that of the canals , water flow through chambers slows to 3 @.@ 6 cm per hour , making it easy for choanocytes to capture food . All the water is expelled through a single osculum at about 8 @.@ 5 cm per second , fast enough to carry waste products some distance away . 
 = = = Skeleton = = = 
 In zoology a skeleton is any fairly rigid structure of an animal , irrespective of whether it has joints and irrespective of whether it is biomineralized . The mesohyl functions as an endoskeleton in most sponges , and is the only skeleton in soft sponges that encrust hard surfaces such as rocks . More commonly the mesohyl is stiffened by mineral spicules , by spongin fibers or both . Spicules may be made of silica or calcium carbonate , and vary in shape from simple rods to three @-@ dimensional " stars " with up to six rays . Spicules are produced by <unk> cells , and may be separate , connected by joints , or fused . 
 Some sponges also secrete exoskeletons that lie completely outside their organic components . For example , <unk> ( " hard sponges " ) have massive calcium carbonate exoskeletons over which the organic matter forms a thin layer with choanocyte chambers in pits in the mineral . These exoskeletons are secreted by the pinacocytes that form the animals ' skins . 
 = = Classes = = 
 Sponges were traditionally distributed in three classes : calcareous sponges ( Calcarea ) , glass sponges ( <unk> ) and demosponges ( Demospongiae ) . However , studies have shown that the Homoscleromorpha , a group thought to belong to the Demospongiae , is actually phylogenetically well separated . Therefore , they have recently been recognized as the fourth class of sponges . 
 Sponges are divided into classes mainly according to the composition of their skeletons : 
 = = Vital functions = = 
 = = = Movement = = = 
 Although adult sponges are fundamentally sessile animals , some marine and freshwater species can move across the sea bed at speeds of 1 – 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 039 – 0 @.@ 157 in ) per day , as a result of amoeba @-@ like movements of pinacocytes and other cells . A few species can contract their whole bodies , and many can close their <unk> and ostia . Juveniles drift or swim freely , while adults are stationary . 
 = = = Respiration , feeding and excretion = = = 
 Sponges do not have distinct circulatory , respiratory , digestive , and excretory systems – instead the water flow system supports all these functions . They filter food particles out of the water flowing through them . Particles larger than 50 micrometers cannot enter the ostia and pinacocytes consume them by phagocytosis ( engulfing and internal digestion ) . Particles from 0 @.@ 5 μm to 50 μm are trapped in the ostia , which taper from the outer to inner ends . These particles are consumed by pinacocytes or by archaeocytes which partially extrude themselves through the walls of the ostia . Bacteria @-@ sized particles , below 0 @.@ 5 micrometers , pass through the ostia and are caught and consumed by choanocytes . Since the smallest particles are by far the most common , choanocytes typically capture 80 % of a sponge 's food supply . <unk> transport food packaged in vesicles from cells that directly digest food to those that do not . At least one species of sponge has internal fibers that function as tracks for use by nutrient @-@ carrying archaeocytes , and these tracks also move inert objects . 
 It used to be claimed that glass sponges could live on nutrients dissolved in sea water and were very averse to silt . However a study in 2007 found no evidence of this and concluded that they extract bacteria and other micro @-@ organisms from water very efficiently ( about 79 % ) and process suspended sediment grains to extract such prey . Collar bodies digest food and distribute it wrapped in vesicles that are transported by dynein " motor " molecules along bundles of microtubules that run throughout the syncytium . 
 Sponges ' cells absorb oxygen by diffusion from water into cells as water flows through body , into which carbon dioxide and other soluble waste products such as ammonia also diffuse . <unk> remove mineral particles that threaten to block the ostia , transport them through the mesohyl and generally dump them into the outgoing water current , although some species incorporate them into their skeletons . 
 = = = Carnivorous sponges = = = 
 A few species that live in waters where the supply of food particles is very poor prey on crustaceans and other small animals . So far only 137 species have been discovered . Most belong to the family <unk> , but a few members of the <unk> and <unk> are also carnivores . In most cases little is known about how they actually capture prey , although some species are thought to use either sticky threads or hooked spicules . Most carnivorous sponges live in deep waters , up to 8 @,@ 840 m ( 5 @.@ 49 mi ) , and the development of deep @-@ ocean exploration techniques is expected to lead to the discovery of several more . However one species has been found in Mediterranean caves at depths of 17 – 23 m ( 56 – 75 ft ) , alongside the more usual filter feeding sponges . The cave @-@ dwelling predators capture crustaceans under 1 mm ( 0 @.@ 039 in ) long by entangling them with fine threads , digest them by enveloping them with further threads over the course of a few days , and then return to their normal shape ; there is no evidence that they use venom . 
 Most known carnivorous sponges have completely lost the water flow system and choanocytes . However the genus <unk> uses a highly modified water flow system to inflate balloon @-@ like structures that are used for capturing prey . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Freshwater sponges often host green algae as endosymbionts within archaeocytes and other cells , and benefit from nutrients produced by the algae . Many marine species host other photosynthesizing organisms , most commonly cyanobacteria but in some cases dinoflagellates . Symbiotic cyanobacteria may form a third of the total mass of living tissue in some sponges , and some sponges gain 48 % to 80 % of their energy supply from these micro @-@ organisms . In 2008 a University of Stuttgart team reported that spicules made of silica conduct light into the mesohyl , where the photosynthesizing endosymbionts live . Sponges that host photosynthesizing organisms are most common in waters with relatively poor supplies of food particles , and often have leafy shapes that maximize the amount of sunlight they collect . 
 A recently discovered carnivorous sponge that lives near hydrothermal vents hosts methane @-@ eating bacteria , and digests some of them . 
 = = = " Immune " system = = = 
 Sponges do not have the complex immune systems of most other animals . However they reject grafts from other species but accept them from other members of their own species . In a few marine species , gray cells play the leading role in rejection of foreign material . When invaded , they produce a chemical that stops movement of other cells in the affected area , thus preventing the intruder from using the sponge 's internal transport systems . If the intrusion persists , the grey cells concentrate in the area and release toxins that kill all cells in the area . The " immune " system can stay in this activated state for up to three weeks . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 = = = = Asexual = = = = 
 Sponges have three asexual methods of reproduction : after fragmentation ; by budding ; and by producing gemmules . Fragments of sponges may be detached by currents or waves . They use the mobility of their pinacocytes and choanocytes and reshaping of the mesohyl to re @-@ attach themselves to a suitable surface and then rebuild themselves as small but functional sponges over the course of several days . The same capabilities enable sponges that have been squeezed through a fine cloth to regenerate . A sponge fragment can only regenerate if it contains both <unk> to produce mesohyl and archeocytes to produce all the other cell types . A very few species reproduce by budding . 
 <unk> are " survival pods " which a few marine sponges and many freshwater species produce by the thousands when dying and which some , mainly freshwater species , regularly produce in autumn . <unk> make gemmules by wrapping shells of spongin , often reinforced with spicules , round clusters of archeocytes that are full of nutrients . Freshwater gemmules may also include <unk> symbionts . The gemmules then become dormant , and in this state can survive cold , drying out , lack of oxygen and extreme variations in salinity . Freshwater gemmules often do not revive until the temperature drops , stays cold for a few months and then reaches a <unk> " normal " level . When a <unk> germinates , the archeocytes round the outside of the cluster transform into pinacocytes , a membrane over a pore in the shell bursts , the cluster of cells slowly emerges , and most of the remaining archeocytes transform into other cell types needed to make a functioning sponge . <unk> from the same species but different individuals can join forces to form one sponge . Some gemmules are retained within the parent sponge , and in spring it can be difficult to tell whether an old sponge has revived or been " recolonized " by its own gemmules . 
 = = = = Sexual = = = = 
 Most sponges are hermaphrodites ( function as both sexes simultaneously ) , although sponges have no gonads ( reproductive organs ) . Sperm are produced by choanocytes or entire choanocyte chambers that sink into the mesohyl and form <unk> cysts while eggs are formed by transformation of archeocytes , or of choanocytes in some species . Each egg generally acquires a yolk by consuming " nurse cells " . During spawning , sperm burst out of their cysts and are expelled via the osculum . If they contact another sponge of the same species , the water flow carries them to choanocytes that engulf them but , instead of digesting them , metamorphose to an <unk> form and carry the sperm through the mesohyl to eggs , which in most cases engulf the carrier and its cargo . 
 A few species release fertilized eggs into the water , but most retain the eggs until they hatch . There are four types of larvae , but all are balls of cells with an outer layer of cells whose flagellae or cilia enable the larvae to move . After swimming for a few days the larvae sink and crawl until they find a place to settle . Most of the cells transform into archeocytes and then into the types appropriate for their locations in a miniature adult sponge . 
 Glass sponge embryos start by dividing into separate cells , but once 32 cells have formed they rapidly transform into larvae that externally are ovoid with a band of cilia round the middle that they use for movement , but internally have the typical glass sponge structure of spicules with a cobweb @-@ like main syncitium draped around and between them and <unk> with multiple collar bodies in the center . The larvae then leave their parents ' bodies . 
 = = = = Life cycle = = = = 
 Sponges in temperate regions live for at most a few years , but some tropical species and perhaps some deep @-@ ocean ones may live for 200 years or more . Some calcified demosponges grow by only 0 @.@ 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 0079 in ) per year and , if that rate is constant , specimens 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) wide must be about 5 @,@ 000 years old . Some sponges start sexual reproduction when only a few weeks old , while others wait until they are several years old . 
 = = = Coordination of activities = = = 
 Adult sponges lack neurons or any other kind of nervous tissue . However most species have the ability to perform movements that are coordinated all over their bodies , mainly contractions of the pinacocytes , squeezing the water channels and thus expelling excess sediment and other substances that may cause blockages . Some species can contract the osculum independently of the rest of the body . Sponges may also contract in order to reduce the area that is vulnerable to attack by predators . In cases where two sponges are fused , for example if there is a large but still unseparated bud , these contraction waves slowly become coordinated in both of the " Siamese twins " . The coordinating mechanism is unknown , but may involve chemicals similar to neurotransmitters . However glass sponges rapidly transmit electrical impulses through all parts of the syncytium , and use this to halt the motion of their flagella if the incoming water contains toxins or excessive sediment . <unk> are thought to be responsible for closing the osculum and for transmitting signals between different parts of the body . 
 Sponges contain genes very similar to those that contain the " recipe " for the post @-@ synaptic density , an important signal @-@ receiving structure in the neurons of all other animals . However , in sponges these genes are only activated in " flask cells " that appear only in larvae and may provide some sensory capability while the larvae are swimming . This raises questions about whether flask cells represent the predecessors of true neurons or are evidence that sponges ' ancestors had true neurons but lost them as they adapted to a sessile lifestyle . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Habitats = = = 
 Sponges are worldwide in their distribution , living in a wide range of ocean habitats , from the polar regions to the tropics . Most live in quiet , clear waters , because sediment stirred up by waves or currents would block their pores , making it difficult for them to feed and breathe . The greatest numbers of sponges are usually found on firm surfaces such as rocks , but some sponges can attach themselves to soft sediment by means of a root @-@ like base . 
 Sponges are more abundant but less diverse in temperate waters than in tropical waters , possibly because organisms that prey on sponges are more abundant in tropical waters . Glass sponges are the most common in polar waters and in the depths of temperate and tropical seas , as their very porous construction enables them to extract food from these resource @-@ poor waters with the minimum of effort . Demosponges and calcareous sponges are abundant and diverse in shallower non @-@ polar waters . 
 The different classes of sponge live in different ranges of habitat : 
 = = = As primary producers = = = 
 Sponges with photosynthesizing endosymbionts produce up to three times more oxygen than they consume , as well as more organic matter than they consume . Such contributions to their habitats ' resources are significant along Australia 's Great Barrier Reef but relatively minor in the Caribbean . 
 = = = Defenses = = = 
 Many sponges shed Sponge spicules , forming a dense carpet several meters deep that keeps away echinoderms which would otherwise prey on the sponges . They also produce toxins that prevent other sessile organisms such as bryozoans or sea squirts from growing on or near them , making sponges very effective competitors for living space . One of many examples includes <unk> . 
 A few species , the Caribbean fire sponge <unk> ignis , cause a severe rash in humans who handle them . Turtles and some fish feed mainly on sponges . It is often said that sponges produce chemical defenses against such predators . However an experiment showed that there is no relationship between the toxicity of chemicals produced by sponges and how they taste to fish , which would diminish the usefulness of chemical defenses as deterrents . Predation by fish may even help to spread sponges by detaching fragments . 
 Glass sponges produce no toxic chemicals , and live in very deep water where predators are rare . 
 = = = Predation = = = 
 Sponge flies , also known as <unk> @-@ flies ( Neuroptera , <unk> ) , are specialist predators of freshwater sponges . The female lays her eggs on vegetation overhanging water . The larvae hatch and drop into the water where they seek out sponges to feed on . They use their elongated mouthparts to pierce the sponge and suck the fluids within . The larvae of some species cling to the surface of the sponge while others take refuge in the sponge 's internal cavities . The fully grown larvae leave the water and spin a cocoon in which to pupate . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The Caribbean chicken @-@ liver sponge <unk> <unk> secretes toxins that kill coral polyps , allowing the sponges to grow over the coral skeletons . Others , especially in the family <unk> , use corrosive substances secreted by their archeocytes to tunnel into rocks , corals and the shells of dead mollusks . Sponges may remove up to 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) per year from reefs , creating visible notches just below low @-@ tide level . 
 = = = Diseases = = = 
 Caribbean sponges of the genus Aplysina suffer from Aplysina red band syndrome . This causes Aplysina to develop one or more rust @-@ colored bands , sometimes with adjacent bands of necrotic tissue . These lesions may completely encircle branches of the sponge . The disease appears to be contagious and impacts approximately 10 percent of A. <unk> on Bahamian reefs . The rust @-@ colored bands are caused by a cyanobacterium , but it is unknown whether this organism actually causes the disease . 
 = = = Collaboration with other organisms = = = 
 In addition to hosting photosynthesizing endosymbionts , sponges are noted for their wide range of collaborations with other organisms . The relatively large encrusting sponge <unk> <unk> is most common on rocky surfaces , but has extended its range into seagrass meadows by letting itself be surrounded or overgrown by seagrass sponges , which are distasteful to the local starfish and therefore protect <unk> against them ; in return the seagrass sponges get higher positions away from the sea @-@ floor sediment . 
 Shrimps of the genus Synalpheus form colonies in sponges , and each shrimp species inhabits a different sponge species , making Synalpheus one of the most diverse crustacean genera . Specifically , Synalpheus regalis utilizes the sponge not only as a food source , but also as a defense against other shrimp and predators . As many as 16 @,@ 000 individuals inhabit a single loggerhead sponge , feeding off the larger particles that collect on the sponge as it filters the ocean to feed itself . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 = = = Fossil record = = = 
 24 @-@ isopropylcholestane is a stable derivative of 24 @-@ <unk> , which is said to be produced by demosponges but not by eumetazoans ( " true animals " , i.e. cnidarians and bilaterians ) . Since choanoflagellates are thought to be animals ' closest single @-@ celled relatives , a team of scientists examined the biochemistry and genes of one <unk> species . They concluded that this species could not produce 24 @-@ <unk> but that investigation of a wider range of choanoflagellates would be necessary in order to prove that the fossil 24 @-@ isopropylcholestane could only have been produced by demosponges . Although a previous publication reported traces of the chemical 24 @-@ isopropylcholestane in ancient rocks dating to 1 @,@ 800 million years ago , recent research using a much more accurately dated rock series has revealed that these biomarkers only appear before the end of the <unk> glaciation approximately 635 million years ago , and that " <unk> analysis has yet to reveal any convincing evidence for ancient sponges pre @-@ dating the first globally extensive Neoproterozoic glacial episode ( the <unk> , ~ 713 million years ago in Oman ) " . Nevertheless , this ' sponge biomarker ' could have other sources – such as marine algae — so may not constrain the origin of Porifera . 
 Although molecular clocks and biomarkers suggest sponges existed well before the Cambrian explosion of life , silica spicules like those of demosponges are absent from the fossil record until the Cambrian , although one unsubstantiated report exists of spicules in rocks dated around 750 million years ago , although this appears unlikely based on the above reference . Well @-@ preserved fossil sponges from about 580 million years ago in the Ediacaran period have been found in the Doushantuo Formation . These fossils , which include spicules , pinacocytes , <unk> , archeocytes , sclerocytes and the internal cavity , have been classified as demosponges . Fossils of glass sponges have been found from around 540 million years ago in rocks in Australia , China and Mongolia . Early Cambrian sponges from Mexico belonging to the genus <unk> show evidence of fusion of several smaller spicules to form a single large spicule . Calcium carbonate spicules of calcareous sponges have been found in Early Cambrian rocks from about 530 to 523 million years ago in Australia . Other probable demosponges have been found in the Early Cambrian Chengjiang fauna , from 525 to 520 million years ago . Freshwater sponges appear to be much younger , as the earliest known fossils date from the Mid @-@ Eocene period about 48 to 40 million years ago . Although about 90 % of modern sponges are demosponges , fossilized remains of this type are less common than those of other types because their skeletons are composed of relatively soft spongin that does not fossilize well . Earliest sponge symbionts are known from the early Silurian . 
 Archaeocyathids , which some classify as a type of coralline sponge , are common in the Cambrian period from about 530 million years ago , but apparently died out by the end of the Cambrian 490 million years ago . 
 = = = Family tree = = = 
 In the 1990s sponges were widely regarded as a monophyletic group , in other words all of them descended from a common ancestor that was itself a sponge , and as the " sister @-@ group " to all other metazoans ( multi @-@ celled animals ) , which themselves form a monophyletic group . On the other hand , some 1990s analyses also revived the idea that animals ' nearest evolutionary relatives are choanoflagellates , single @-@ celled organisms very similar to sponges ' choanocytes – which would imply that most Metazoa evolved from very sponge @-@ like ancestors and therefore that sponges may not be monophyletic , as the same sponge @-@ like ancestors may have given rise both to modern sponges and to non @-@ sponge members of Metazoa . 
 Analyses since 2001 have concluded that Eumetazoa ( more complex than sponges ) are more closely related to particular groups of sponges than to the rest of the sponges . Such conclusions imply that sponges are not monophyletic , because the last common ancestor of all sponges would also be a direct ancestor of the Eumetazoa , which are not sponges . A study in 2001 based on comparisons of ribosome DNA concluded that the most fundamental division within sponges was between glass sponges and the rest , and that Eumetazoa are more closely related to Calcareous sponges , those with calcium carbonate spicules , than to other types of sponge . In 2007 one analysis based on comparisons of RNA and another based mainly on comparison of spicules concluded that demosponges and glass sponges are more closely related to each other than either is to calcareous sponges , which in turn are more closely related to Eumetazoa . 
 Other anatomical and biochemical evidence links the Eumetazoa with Homoscleromorpha , a sub @-@ group of demosponges . A comparison in 2007 of nuclear DNA , excluding glass sponges and comb jellies , concluded that : Homoscleromorpha are most closely related to Eumetazoa ; calcareous sponges are the next closest ; the other demosponges are evolutionary " aunts " of these groups ; and the chancelloriids , bag @-@ like animals whose fossils are found in Cambrian rocks , may be sponges . The sperm of Homoscleromorpha share with those of Eumetazoa features that those of other sponges lack . In both Homoscleromorpha and Eumetazoa layers of cells are bound together by attachment to a carpet @-@ like basal membrane composed mainly of " type IV " collagen , a form of collagen not found in other sponges – although the spongin fibers that reinforce the mesohyl of all demosponges is similar to " type IV " collagen . 
 The analyses described above concluded that sponges are closest to the ancestors of all Metazoa , in other words of all multi @-@ celled animals including both sponges and more complex groups . However , another comparison in 2008 of 150 genes in each of 21 genera , ranging from fungi to humans but including only two species of sponge , suggested that comb jellies ( <unk> ) are the most basal lineage of the Metazoa included in the sample . If this is correct , either modern comb jellies developed their complex structures independently of other Metazoa , or sponges ' ancestors were more complex and all known sponges are drastically simplified forms . The study recommended further analyses using a wider range of sponges and other simple Metazoa such as Placozoa . The results of such an analysis , published in 2009 , suggest that a return to the previous view may be warranted . ' Family trees ' constructed using a combination of all available data – morphological , developmental and molecular – concluded that the sponges are in fact a monophyletic group , and with the cnidarians form the sister group to the bilaterians . 
 Archaeocyathids are very common fossils in rocks from the Early Cambrian about 530 to 520 million years ago but are not found after the Late Cambrian . It has been suggested that they were produced by : sponges ; cnidarians ; algae ; foraminiferans ; a completely separate phylum of animals , <unk> ; or even a completely separate kingdom of life , labeled <unk> or <unk> . Since the 1990s <unk> have been regarded as a distinctive group of sponges . 
 It is difficult to fit chancelloriids into classifications of sponges or more complex animals . An analysis in 1996 concluded that they were closely related to sponges on the grounds that the detailed structure of <unk> sclerites ( " armor plates " ) is similar to that of fibers of spongin , a collagen protein , in modern <unk> ( horny ) demosponges such as <unk> . However another analysis in 2002 concluded that chancelloriids are not sponges and may be intermediate between sponges and more complex animals , among other reasons because their skins were thicker and more tightly connected than those of sponges . In 2008 a detailed analysis of chancelloriids ' sclerites concluded that they were very similar to those of halkieriids , mobile bilaterian animals that looked like slugs in chain mail and whose fossils are found in rocks from the very Early Cambrian to the Mid Cambrian . If this is correct , it would create a dilemma , as it is extremely unlikely that totally unrelated organisms could have developed such similar sclerites independently , but the huge difference in the structures of their bodies makes it hard to see how they could be closely related . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Linnaeus , who classified most kinds of sessile animals as belonging to the order <unk> in the class Vermes , mistakenly identified the genus <unk> as plants in the order Algae . For a long time thereafter sponges were assigned to a separate subkingdom , <unk> ( " beside the animals " ) , separate from the Eumetazoa which formed the rest of the kingdom Animalia . They are now classified as a paraphyletic phylum , from which the higher animals have evolved . 
 The phylum Porifera is further divided into classes mainly according to the composition of their skeletons : 
 <unk> ( glass sponges ) have silicate spicules , the largest of which have six rays and may be individual or fused . The main components of their bodies are syncytia in which large numbers of cell share a single external membrane . 
 Calcarea have skeletons made of calcite , a form of calcium carbonate , which may form separate spicules or large masses . All the cells have a single nucleus and membrane . 
 Most Demospongiae have silicate spicules or spongin fibers or both within their soft tissues . However a few also have massive external skeletons made of aragonite , another form of calcium carbonate . All the cells have a single nucleus and membrane . 
 <unk> are known only as fossils from the Cambrian period . 
 In the 1970s , sponges with massive calcium carbonate skeletons were assigned to a separate class , <unk> , otherwise known as " coralline sponges " . However , in the 1980s it was found that these were all members of either the Calcarea or the Demospongiae . 
 So far scientific publications have identified about 9 @,@ 000 <unk> species , of which : about 400 are glass sponges ; about 500 are calcareous species ; and the rest are demosponges . However some types of habitat , vertical rock and cave walls and galleries in rock and coral boulders , have been investigated very little , even in shallow seas . 
 = = Use = = 
 = = = By dolphins = = = 
 A report in 1997 described use of sponges as a tool by bottlenose dolphins in Shark Bay in Western Australia . A dolphin will attach a marine sponge to its rostrum , which is presumably then used to protect it when searching for food in the sandy sea bottom . The behavior , known as sponging , has only been observed in this bay , and is almost exclusively shown by females . A study in 2005 concluded that mothers teach the behavior to their daughters , and that all the sponge @-@ users are closely related , suggesting that it is a fairly recent innovation . 
 = = = By humans = = = 
 = = = = Skeleton = = = = 
 The calcium carbonate or silica spicules of most sponge genera make them too rough for most uses , but two genera , <unk> and <unk> , have soft , entirely fibrous skeletons . Early Europeans used soft sponges for many purposes , including padding for helmets , portable drinking utensils and municipal water filters . Until the invention of synthetic sponges , they were used as cleaning tools , applicators for paints and ceramic glazes and discreet contraceptives . However , by the mid @-@ 20th century , over @-@ fishing brought both the animals and the industry close to extinction . See also sponge diving . 
 Many objects with sponge @-@ like textures are now made of substances not derived from <unk> . Synthetic sponges include personal and household cleaning tools , breast implants , and contraceptive sponges . Typical materials used are cellulose foam , polyurethane foam , and less frequently , silicone foam . 
 The <unk> " sponge " , also spelled <unk> , which is commonly sold for use in the kitchen or the shower , is not derived from an animal but mainly from the fibrous " skeleton " of the sponge gourd ( Luffa aegyptiaca , Cucurbitaceae ) . 
 = = = = Antibiotic compounds = = = = 
 Sponges have medicinal potential due to the presence in sponges themselves or their microbial symbionts of chemicals that may be used to control viruses , bacteria , tumors and fungi . 
 = = = = Other biologically active compounds = = = = 
 Lacking any protective shell or means of escape , sponges have evolved to synthesize a variety of unusual compounds . One such class is the oxidized fatty acid derivatives called <unk> . Members of this family have been found to have anti @-@ cancer , anti @-@ bacterial and anti @-@ fungal properties . One example isolated from the Okinawan <unk> sponges , <unk> A , has shown potential as a cytotoxin to murine lymphoma cells . 
 = Having a Rave Up with The Yardbirds = 
 Having a Rave Up with the Yardbirds , or simply Having a Rave Up , is the second American album by English rock group the Yardbirds . It was released in November 1965 , eight months after Jeff Beck replaced Eric Clapton on guitar . It includes songs with both guitarists and reflects the group 's blues rock roots and their early experimentations with psychedelic and hard rock . The title refers to the driving " rave up " arrangement the band used in several of their songs . 
 The album contains some of the earliest live recordings with Clapton . Recorded in March 1964 , they appeared on the band 's British debut album , Five Live Yardbirds , which was not <unk> in the United States . The songs with Beck were recorded in the studio in the months after he joined the group in March 1965 . These include several charting singles and introduced " The Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " , one of the Yardbirds ' most copied arrangements . Although most were not written by the group , the songs became a fixture of the group 's concert repertoire and continued to be performed after Jimmy Page replaced Beck . 
 Next to their 1967 Greatest Hits collection , Having a Rave Up is the Yardbirds ' highest @-@ charting album in the US and remains their longest @-@ lasting release . The album continues to be reissued , often with bonus material , such as the next single " Shapes of Things " , demo recordings for their follow @-@ up album , and " Stroll On " , featuring dual lead guitar by Beck and Page , from the Blow @-@ Up soundtrack . Several music critics have cited the album 's influence , particularly on hard rock guitar . Rolling Stone magazine called it " the bridge between beat groups and psychedelia " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Singer and harmonica player Keith Relf , rhythm guitarist Chris Dreja , bassist Paul Samwell @-@ Smith , drummer Jim McCarty , and lead guitarist Top Topham formed the Yardbirds near London in mid @-@ 1963 . The group were a part of the early British rhythm and blues scene that produced bands such as the Rolling Stones , whom they replaced as the resident act at the Crawdaddy Club . Songs by American blues and rhythm and blues artists such as Muddy Waters , Howlin ' Wolf , and Bo Diddley made up the repertoire of the early British R & B groups . The Yardbirds ' set lists included " I Wish You Would " , " Smokestack Lightning " , " Who Do You Love ? " , " You Can 't Judge a Book by the Cover " , and " Too Much Monkey Business " . 
 Eric Clapton replaced Topham in October 1963 and by early 1964 , the Yardbirds had expanded their following on the home counties club circuit . The group made several attempts at recording in the studio , but were unable to reproduce their live sound to their satisfaction . Manager Giorgio Gomelsky then arranged to have a March performance at London 's Marquee Club recorded . A key element of the Yardbirds ' live shows was an extended instrumental section during some songs . Clapton recalled , " While most other bands were playing three @-@ minute songs , we were taking three @-@ minute numbers and stretching them out to five or six minutes , during which time the audience would go crazy " . Dubbed a " rave up " , this musical arrangement usually came during the middle instrumental section , in which the band shifted the beat into double @-@ time and built the instrumental improvisation to a climax . The rave up has roots in jazz and became a signature part of the Yardbirds ' sound . Musicologist Michael Hicks describes it : 
 Wherever it occurred , the rave @-@ up made a small narrative curve that introduced a basic conflict ( backbeat vs. off @-@ beats ) , drove that conflict to a climax ( by getting more and more raucous ) , then resolved it ( by returning it to a ' normal ' beat ) . Through this technique the Yardbirds created a rock mannerism ; sometimes the rave @-@ up seemed the whole point of the song . 
 Several songs recorded at the Marquee show use this arrangement and are included on the debut album , Five Live Yardbirds , which was released in the UK in December 1964 . Although AllMusic critic Bruce Eder calls it " the best such [ British rock ] live record of the entire middle of the decade " , it did not reach the charts and was not issued in the US . Four songs from the album made their first American appearance on Having a Rave Up . 
 After their first two singles , " I Wish You Would " and " Good Morning Little Schoolgirl " , had limited success , the Yardbirds were under pressure to deliver a hit record by their label , Columbia Records . Samwell @-@ Smith interested the group in recording " For Your Love " , a new pop rock @-@ oriented song written by Graham Gouldman . Clapton expressed displeasure over departing from the group 's blues roots , and he left the Yardbirds two days before the song was released on 5 March 1965 . " For Your Love " became their first Top 10 hit in both the UK and the US . To replace Clapton , the group needed a lead guitarist who was experienced with blues and R & B , but also willing to explore more progressive and experimental material . They approached Jimmy Page , but he was unwilling to give up his steady employment as one of London 's most popular studio guitarists . Page recommended Jeff Beck , who was invited to an informal audition . Drummer McCarty recalled the tryout : " Not only could he play all the Eric stuff , but also a lot more ... There was the Les Paul thing , the rockabilly thing , the whole lot . His style was also kind of futuristic . We were impressed . " Beck was asked to join and played his first gig with the Yardbirds the same day " For Your Love " was released . 
 Shortly thereafter , the Yardbirds began recording a successful string of forward @-@ looking singles with Beck 's pioneering hard rock and psychedelic guitar work . Their first American album , For Your Love , which included Beck 's earliest recordings with the group and earlier singles and demos with Clapton , was rush @-@ released in June 1965 as they were preparing for their first American tour . In November 1965 , Having a Rave Up was released less than a month before the beginning of the Yardbirds ' second tour of the US and also combined songs recorded with both Clapton and Beck . 
 = = Composition and musical style = = 
 With the exception of " Still I 'm Sad " , the songs on Having a Rave Up were not composed by the Yardbirds . Two of the album 's hits , " Heart Full of Soul " and " Evil Hearted You " , were written for the group by Gouldman , who had composed " For Your Love " . Both songs saw the group continuing to move beyond their blues @-@ rock beginnings with Beck 's experimental guitar work . " Heart Full of Soul " is one of the earliest rock songs to incorporate Indian musical influences . Several months before the Beatles popularised the sound with " Norwegian Wood " , demos for " Heart Full of Soul " were attempted with sitar accompaniment . However , the Indian sitar player had difficulty with the 44 metre and the instrument lacked the power the group desired . Instead , Beck produced a sitar @-@ like effect by bending the higher notes on his guitar in an Eastern @-@ sounding scale and using a Tone Bender distortion device to get a more distinctive tone . The minor key , pop @-@ oriented " Evil Hearted You " also incorporates exotic @-@ sounding elements . Rock critic Richie Unterberger notes the " haunting Middle Eastern @-@ influenced melody ... typically eerie backup harmonies , [ and ] Keith Relf 's menacing , hurt lead vocal " . Beck provides a steel guitar @-@ like slide solo , which biographer Martin Power describes as a " shimmering two @-@ octave slide solo sounding almost ghostly " . " You 're a Better Man Than I " was written by Mike Hugg and his brother Brian . The song reflects the folk @-@ rock style of the time with socially conscious lyrics . Relf 's folk @-@ ballad vocal is complemented by Beck 's <unk> and sustain @-@ heavy guitar solo . " Still I 'm Sad " is the album 's sole original tune by the band , written by Samwell @-@ Smith and McCarty . It is a slow , brooding piece with psychedelic pop elements . Built on a mock @-@ Gregorian chant , the song has seven vocal parts with producer Gomelsky adding a droning bass vocal under Relf 's melody . 
 The balance of the songs are blues and R & B numbers . Two versions of the Bo Diddley tune " I 'm a Man " are on the album – a live rendering with Clapton and a re @-@ worked studio version with Beck . These two recordings illustrate differences between Clapton 's and Beck 's styles during their tenures with the Yardbirds . Clapton employs a more traditional sound with chording , whereas Beck takes a more novel approach , which Power describes : " [ T ] hings changed radically at one minute , 28 seconds into the song when Beck 's foot smashed into his Tone Bender [ and he ] and Relf chased after each other in a manic harmonica / guitar interface , notes swooping in and out of the mix " . Although just over two and a half minutes , critic Cub Koda calls the Beck version " perhaps the most famous Yardbirds rave @-@ up of all " and Power asserts " it was the closest the group had yet come to capturing the sound of the ' rave @-@ up ' on tape " . 
 The remaining three live songs with Clapton feature extended instrumental improvisation . Bo Diddley 's " Here ' Tis " and the Isley Brothers ' " Respectable " are fast @-@ tempo , rhythmic @-@ based songs that are essentially rave ups . On " Here ' Tis " , Clapton adds an uncharacteristically energetic rhythm guitar over Samwell @-@ Smith 's driving bass lines . In his autobiography , Clapton identifies Howlin ' Wolf 's " Smokestack Lightning " as the Yardbirds ' most popular live number . They usually played it every night and performances of the song could last up to 30 minutes . On the 5 : 35 album version , Clapton trades guitar licks with Relf 's harmonica lines . Howlin ' Wolf reportedly referred to the group 's " Smokestack Lightning " as " the definitive version of his song " . 
 The Yardbirds based their version of " The Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " on the 1956 rockabilly arrangement by Johnny Burnette and the Rock and Roll Trio . However , their recording adds a brief rave up section , new guitar parts , and a harmonica solo . Beck biographer Annette Carson notes , " the Yardbirds ' recording plucked the old Rock & Roll Trio number from obscurity and turned it into a classic among classics " . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The recordings with Beck for Having a Rave Up took place at various studios between April and September 1965 . Three were recorded during the Yardbirds ' first American tour – " The Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " and " You 're a Better Man than I " were recorded 12 September 1965 by Sam Phillips at his Phillips Recording studio in Memphis , Tennessee , and " I 'm a Man " ( studio version ) at the Chess Studios in Chicago by Ron Malo 19 September 1965 . Further refinements to the three songs were recorded at the Columbia Recording Studio in New York City by Roy Halee 21 and 22 September 1965 . 
 Another three songs with Beck were recorded by Roger Cameron at Advision Studios in London – " Heart Full of Soul " 20 April 1965 , " Still I 'm Sad " 17 August 1965 ( also at Olympic Studios by Keith Grant 27 July 1965 ) , and " Evil Hearted You " 23 August 1965 . The four remaining live songs with Clapton were recorded in March 1964 at the Marquee Club in London – " Smokestack Lightning " , " Respectable " , " I 'm a Man " , and " Here ' Tis " . These were taken from the UK debut album Five Live Yardbirds . 
 The album was produced by the Yardbirds ' manager Gomelsky with Samwell @-@ Smith . Clapton acknowledges that Samwell @-@ Smith was behind the group 's rave up sound and on " For Your Love " , Samwell @-@ Smith assumed the role of de facto producer . He received a credit as " Musical Director " for their first American album as well as Having a Rave Up . By the time Samwell @-@ Smith left the group in June 1966 , Koda notes , " he was shouldering most , if not all , of the production and arranging responsibilities " . 
 = = Release and charts = = 
 Having a Rave Up was released in the US on 15 November 1965 by the Yardbirds ' American label , Epic Records . The album cover photo shows the group posing in matching black suits in a mock performance ; Yardbirds ' biographer Adam Clayson compares it to " more of a tea dance than a rave @-@ up " . Clapton , who left the band eight months earlier , is not pictured on the album cover . The liner note reads like ad copy , with no mention of the band members or recording information . The album entered Billboard magazine 's Top LPs chart in December 1965 at number 137 and reached number 53 in February 1966 . In total , it spent 33 weeks in the chart . Having a Rave Up remained in print until 1972 , longer than any other Yardbirds album on Epic . 
 Having a Rave Up or an equivalent was not released in the UK , where it was the practice at the time not to include singles on albums . The live tracks with Clapton appeared on Five Live Yardbirds , which was issued on 31 December 1964 . Between June and October 1965 , " Heart Full of Soul " , " Evil Hearted You " , and " Still I 'm Sad " were released as singles and reached the pop chart Top 10 . In February 1966 , " You 're a Better Man than I " became the UK B @-@ side of " Shapes of Things " . " The Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " and " I 'm a Man " ( studio version ) were not released in the UK until 1976 and 1977 , well after the group had disbanded . In January 1966 , the Yardbirds ' UK label , Columbia , pressed Having a Rave Up for export to Germany and Sweden . In Canada , the album was issued by Capitol Records in 1966 . 
 = = Live and film performances = = 
 Five songs from Having a Rave Up , plus the following two singles , made up the core of the Yardbirds ' concert repertoire : " Smokestack Lightning " , " I 'm a Man " , " Heart Full of Soul " , " You 're a Better Man Than I " , " The Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " , " Shapes of Things " , and " Over Under Sideways Down " . Numerous live performances were recorded beginning in mid @-@ 1965 and include these songs . They were also recorded by the BBC on various dates for broadcast . In 1991 , several were released on Yardbirds ... On Air ( reissued in 1997 as BBC Sessions ) . 
 During one of many appearances on Ready Steady Go ! , the UK pop music variety television programme , the Yardbirds performed an updated version of " Here ' Tis " with Beck . After Page joined the group in June 1966 , film director Michelangelo Antonioni wanted to add a scene of the Yardbirds performing " The Train Kept A @-@ Rollin ' " to his 1966 film Blowup . Relf wrote new lyrics and the group worked out a new instrumental arrangement with both Beck and Page on lead guitars , retitled " Stroll On " . The performance is included in the film and on the Blow @-@ Up soundtrack album . 
 When Beck left the group in October 1966 , Page became the sole guitarist . Although several new songs were added , set lists still included their earlier material . A 1968 live performance in New York City ( released in 1971 as Live Yardbirds : Featuring Jimmy Page ) features the core songs , plus the Page solo piece " White Summer " and an early version of " Dazed and Confused " . Page carried over these songs to Led Zeppelin and " Smokestack Lightning " became a medley , which developed into " How Many More Times " . Dreja sums up the lasting appeal : " We all feel , I think , that the period Jeff spent with the band was the most creative . His scope of inventiveness was probably the widest of the three guitarists we played with — and none of them were exactly slouches . " 
 = = Critical reception and influence = = 
 Having a Rave Up was released before the advent of critical rock music journalism . A December 1965 staff review in Billboard indicated the album 's potential to enter the Top LPs chart . Several retrospective reviews have been favourable . AllMusic 's Eder gave the album four and a half out of five stars and describes it as " one of the best LPs of the entire British invasion , on a par with the greatest mid @-@ 1960s work of the Beatles and the Rolling Stones " . Author Denise Sullivan noted , " Among British blues @-@ rock albums , this Giorgio Gomelsky production is the pick for its wealth of hits and its influence on garage rock and hard rock lead guitar . " 
 Clapton biographer David Bowling calls the album " early and important rock ' n ' roll ... It remains an important step in the evolution of rock music . " A review in Guitar Player magazine included : 
 Today [ circa 1989 ] , the Yardbirds ' second American album sounds something like the ultimate garage band meets an end @-@ of @-@ the @-@ world guitarist . For a while in ' 65 , though , Having a Rave Up with the Yardbirds ( Epic , LN <unk> ) contained rock 's freshest , most vital guitar playing . 
 In 2010 , Rolling Stone magazine ranked the album at number 355 on its list of the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . The accompanying review noted , " Freed from Eric Clapton 's blues purism and spurred by Jeff Beck 's reckless exhibitionism , the Yardbirds launched a noisy rock & roll avant @-@ garde . This is the bridge between beat groups and psychedelia . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Original album = = = 
 = = = Album reissues = = = 
 The Yardbirds ' 2001 compilation album Ultimate ! contains eight of the ten tracks from the original album . Having a Rave Up has been reissued by several record labels , including Repertoire ( 1999 , 2007 ) , Get Back ( 1999 ) , JVC ( 2000 , 2009 ) , and Sunspots ( 2002 ) . In addition to the ten tracks from the original album , the Repertoire reissue includes the Yardbirds ' next US single ( tracks 11 – 12 ) ; demos recorded March – April 1966 for their upcoming Yardbirds / Over Under Sideways Down ( a.k.a. Roger the Engineer ) album ( tracks 13 – 18 ) ; backing tracks for a Ready Steady Go ! television appearance ( tracks 19 – 20 ) ; and the soundtrack contribution to Blow @-@ Up ( track 21 ) . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Keith Relf – vocals , harmonica , acoustic guitar , percussion 
 Jeff Beck – lead guitar ( Side 1 and all reissue bonus tracks ) 
 Eric Clapton – lead guitar ( Side 2 ) 
 Jimmy Page – second lead guitar on " Stroll On " bonus track 
 Chris Dreja – rhythm guitar ( except on " Stroll On " bonus track where he plays bass ) 
 Paul Samwell @-@ Smith – bass guitar , backing vocals , musical director 
 Jim McCarty – drums , backing vocals 
 Giorgio Gomelsky – producer , backing bass vocal on " Still I 'm Sad " 
 Ron Prentice – bass on " Heart Full of Soul " 
 = Mother 3 fan translation = 
 The Mother 3 fan translation is a complete English @-@ language localization of the 2006 Japanese video game Mother 3 by members of the EarthBound fan community led by Clyde " Tomato " Mandelin . The original game was released in Japan after a decade of development hell . When fan interest in an English localization went unanswered , the EarthBound fansite Starmen.net announced their own fan translation in November 2006 . 
 The dozen fans who worked on the project had been vetted by Mandelin and had prior localization experience . Thousands of hours were put into the project between hacking the game data and translating the 1 @,@ 000 pages of scripted dialogue . They built their own tools for the work . The final version was released in October 2008 and issued as a patch . The patch was downloaded over 100 @,@ 000 times in its first week . A fan @-@ made , full @-@ color , 200 @-@ page , professional @-@ quality player 's guide was released alongside the translation . The Verge cited the effort as proof of the fan base 's dedication . 
 = = Fan community = = 
 After a decade of " delays , downgrades , and cancellations " , Mother 3 — the Game Boy Advance sequel to 1995 Super NES video game EarthBound — was released in April 2006 for Japanese audiences . The American EarthBound fan community , in support of the series , had rallied support via events and petitions for the release . One such petition used custom petition software and hand @-@ checked name verification , and the 819 pages of 31 @,@ 000 signatures were sent to Nintendo 's Japanese and American offices with fan art . Despite receiving the backing of the wider gaming community , Nintendo did not respond . In turn , the new release became a " rallying point " for the community . 1UP.com wrote that " no other game in the history of time garnered such a rabid demand for translation " . 
 The fan community did not expect an official English localization when Mother 3 was released in April 2006 . Four months later , they received news that Nintendo was not interested , and in November , received confirmation in an interview with Nintendo of America 's " Treehouse " localization group . Within days , the fan translation was announced at EarthBound community site Starmen.net. Reid Young , a co @-@ founder of the site , said that a fan translation " was as much about the fans as it was about the game " . 
 = = Development = = 
 The Mother 3 fan translation project was announced in November 2006 . Led by Clyde " Tomato " Mandelin , a professional game translator whose previous work includes games such as Kingdom Hearts II and anime such as Dragon Ball , a group of around a dozen individuals translated the game from Japanese to English in a process that took two years and thousands of work @-@ hours . Those who worked on the localization were largely already known for their contributions to other fan translations , and Tomato 's own experience in the fan translation community helped the project get the necessary resources . Tomato worked on the project as " a second full @-@ time job " in addition to his full @-@ time job as a translator . Young , who did public relations for the project and had little involvement in the process , estimated Tomato to have put over 1 @,@ 000 hours into the project , <unk> to have nearly 1 @,@ 000 , and even the smallest contributors to have put between 50 and 100 hours into the project , though no one tracked hours . The team chose to not alter the game aside for adding a new intro screen , which meant not adding their names to the credits . The localization included two elements : hacking the game data ( ROM ) and translating the scripted dialogue . 
 The ROM hacking entailed assembly @-@ level changes to the game code . Young equated the process to teaching someone another language by slowly altering their DNA bit by bit , through trial and error . Some of the technical changes included " variable width fonts " , graphics hacks , and custom software . The game was coded in such a way that there was not enough system memory available to display the requisite onscreen text . Since Japanese characters all occupy the same amount of space ( monospaced ) , the team had to custom @-@ code the new English characters to fit properly . Tomato said that " no text display routine wound up untouched " , such that the fixes for variable width fonts were useless until the team manually made room for the characters . Graphics hacks included the new intro screen and images imported from the English EarthBound , so as to preserve continuity of features . For example , an octopus statue pun from Mother 2 was converted to a pencil statue in the EarthBound English localization and was changed accordingly in the Mother 3 localization . The team also built custom software to aid in the translation , such as a cross @-@ assembler and tools for handling the script and patching . Members of the hacking team included Tomato , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , among others . 
 About 1 @,@ 000 pages of text were translated . They estimated the theoretical freelance cost of the translation at $ 30 @,@ 000 . Young described Tomato as a perfectionist , and said that he kept the translation team small so as not to bog down progress , though he did request group input for aspects such as pun translation , where more input was seen to be helpful . Some decisions made during translation included the choice to translate a character named <unk> ( similar to the Japanese word for " greed " ) to Fassad ( similar to the English word " facade " ) , and the choice to convert mice characters who used a Japanese dialect to use a thick cockney English dialect . 
 The team reported that " the highest levels " of Nintendo of America knew about their project , though they did not intervene . Young said that their localization team transparently stated that they would curb the project if the company were to make an announcement about the future of the game . Though the team acknowledged that the legality of the localization was unclear , Young said that it would not be reasonable to call the fan translation " impetuous or unfair " . The team added that they were against software piracy . They directed others to import the game from Japan ( or otherwise purchase official merchandise when the game began to go out @-@ of @-@ print ) , with the ultimate aim to help the franchise . Tomato received encouragement from a Square Enix employee who anticipated the translation . At the end of the project , the team felt that the fan translation would lead to more protection against fan translations rather than more encouragement , so as to maximize the underserved audience . Tomato said that he was unable to appreciate his work since it was so familiar to him , with every original and translated line memorized . He expected that would change in five years . The project left Tomato with a greater respect for the craft of writing . 
 = = Release = = 
 The localization patch was finished in October 2008 . Though Tomato predicted the game to have " a couple dozen thousand downloads total " , it was downloaded over 100 @,@ 000 times in its first week , not including downloads from other locations . The patch requires a ROM file of the game to be used . Along with the translation , the team announced the Mother 3 Handbook , an English player 's guide for the game that had been in development since June 2008 . Wired reported the full @-@ color , 200 @-@ page player 's guide to be akin to a professional strategy guide , with quality " on par with ... Prima Games and BradyGames " . Tomato released an updated version in 2009 . As of 2010 , the patch was undergoing translation into languages including French , Italian , and Spanish . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Frank Caron of Ars Technica wrote that the " massive undertaking ... stands as a massive success " and that the fan translation realized the dreams of many gamers including his own . He added that " one cannot even begin to fathom " why Nintendo would not release their own English localization . Kotaku 's Mike Fahey wrote that he felt that the translators were wrong to suggest purchasing official merchandise where players were unable to find an import copy . The Verge cited the two @-@ year fan translation of Mother 3 as proof of the fan base 's dedication . 
 = Back to December = 
 " Back to December " is a song written and recorded by American singer / songwriter Taylor Swift for her third studio album Speak Now ( 2010 ) . The song was sent to country radio in the United States on November 15 , 2010 , as the second single from Speak Now . According to Swift , " Back to December " is the first time she ever apologizes to someone in a song . Critics speculate that the song is about Taylor Lautner , Swift 's ex @-@ boyfriend , although neither Swift nor Lautner have commented on these allegations . " Back to December " is considered an orchestral country pop ballad and its lyrics are a remorseful plea for forgiveness for breaking up with a former lover . 
 " Back to December " received positive reviews from critics , who regarded it as one of the highlights of Speak Now . Critics have praised the song for its expressive lyrics , its indelible melody , and Swift 's vocal improvement . The song enjoyed commercial success , peaking at number six on the United States Billboard Hot 100 , and at number seven in Canada . It also peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot Country Songs . The song received moderate success internationally , peaking at number 24 in New Zealand , and number 26 in Australia . 
 The song 's accompanying music video , directed by Yoann Lemoine , laments the aftermath of a break @-@ up between Swift and her boyfriend . The music video garnered mixed to positive reviews from critics ; some praised the spectacular visual sense in portraying the somber mood while others criticized its inadequate narrative . Swift has performed " Back to December " in several live appearances , notably at the 44th annual Country Music Association Awards and at the 38th American Music Awards . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 According to Swift , " Back to December " is an apology to a former lover in the form of a song , something that she has never done before . She continued " I 've never felt the need to apologize in a song before . But in the last two years I 've experienced a lot , [ including ] a lot of different kinds of learning lessons . And sometimes you learn a lesson too late and at that point you need to apologize because you were careless . " Critics have speculated that the song is Swift 's apology to her ex @-@ boyfriend , The Twilight Saga actor Taylor Lautner , due , in part , to the lyrics " your tan skin , your sweet smile " , as well as the hidden lyrics in the booklet , which spelled out " TAY . " However , neither Swift nor Lautner have confirmed or denied these rumors . " Back to December " was first released as a promotional single from Speak Now on October 12 , 2010 as a part of the exclusive campaign by the iTunes Store leading up to the album 's release . On November 15 , 2010 , the song was released as the second single from Speak Now . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Back to December " is a country pop song with a length of four minutes and 55 seconds . Stephen M. Deusner from Engine 145 called the song " an elegant ballad full of orchestral swells , solemn guitars , and pleading lyrics " . It is set in common time and has a ballad tempo of 72 beats per minute . It is written in the key of D major , and Swift 's vocals span more than one octave , from the note of F ♯ 3 to A4 . It follows the chord progression of D – Bm7 – G @-@ D. Randy Lewis from Los Angeles Times commented that " Back to December " is one of two songs where Swift has first incorporated an orchestra on record ( the other being " Haunted " ) . 
 The song 's narrative is in first person , and depicts Swift apologizing to a young man whose heart she broke . Mandi Bierly from Entertainment Weekly describes the song as " a melancholy mea culpa with the kind of driving chorus and age @-@ appropriate yet universal honesty " , adding that " in the tune [ ... ] she says she ’ s sorry for the last time he saw her ( ' You gave me roses , and I left them there to die ' ) and that she wishes she realized what she had ( ' I ’ d go back to December , turn around , and change my own mind / I go back to December all the time ' ) . 
 Leah Greenblatt from Entertainment Weekly ranked these couplets from the song ; ( " Your guard is up and I know why , because the last time you saw me is still burned in the back of your mind / You gave me roses and I left them there to die " ) , at number two out of ten best couplets from Speak Now sheet . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song has received critical acclaim . Rob Sheffield from Rolling Stone gave the song a positive review commenting , " Swift 's voice is unaffected enough to mask how masterful she has become as a singer ; she lowers her voice for the payoff lines in the classic mode of a shy girl trying to talk tough . " Jonathan Keefe from Slant Magazine complimented Swift 's ability " to write an indelible melody " and praised the production of the song , writing " [ the song ] showcase ( s ) Swift 's unique knack for matching the overall tone of a melody to the broader themes of a song " . He added that " it isn 't easy to make a melancholy song like " Back to December " sound catchy at the same time , but that 's what Swift does , and it 's an impressive trick . " Bobby Peacock from Roughstock gave the song four stars out of five and praised Swift 's vocal , saying that " it 's her best vocal since " Tim McGraw " " . He concluded that " [ the song ] feels a little more focused , a little more mature and a little better @-@ sung than her previous material . " The Oxonian Review considers it the centerpiece of the melancholic album , noting how " equating regret with December is a mainstream American musical tradition " and this song is " the congruence of her singing and songwriting at its finest . " 
 Ryan Brockington from New York Post lauded the song , writing " it ’ s a very surprising , and somewhat brilliant , apology track where Taylor sings about wishing to fix a relationship she wished she wouldn 't have ruined in the first place . " His point was echoed by Rudy Klapper from Sputnikmusic , who described the song as a " regret @-@ filled apology " . Stephen M. Deusner from Engine 145 gave the song a thumbs @-@ up and praised Swift as " an expressive singer " , calling the song " a dark fantasy of apology and reconciliation " which is " a true heartbreaker " . Kevin John Coyne of Country Universe graded the production of the song as " B " , complimenting the lyrics in particular , by writing " it ’ s always a good sign when there ’ s a line as memorable as that one , the kind that lingers around in your head more than the song itself . " He also added that he " appreciate ( s ) the restrained vocal , though a more varied melody would ’ ve made the chorus quite a bit more distinctive . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Back to December " is one of 14 songs on the standard edition of Speak Now which has charted within the top 40 of the Billboard Hot 100 . Upon its release as a promotional single , " Back to December " debuted at number six on the Billboard Hot 100 with sales of 242 @,@ 000 digital downloads ( approximately ) , on October 12 , 2010 . Following its single release , the song re @-@ entered Billboard Hot 100 at number 74 on the week ending November 27 , 2010 . It reached a position of number 18 . It also peaked at number one on Hot Digital Songs , number 11 on ' Pop Songs and at number 12 on the Adult Pop Songs . " Back to December " also became Swift 's fifth song to have failed to reach the top spot on the Hot Country Songs , instead peaked at the top three ( the previous songs were " Teardrops on My Guitar " at number two , " Picture to Burn " at number three , and both of " White Horse " and " Mine " at number two ) and her ninth overall song to reach the top ten , but failed to reach the top spot ( the previous songs were " Tim McGraw " at number six , " Fifteen " at number seven , " Fearless " at number ten , and four Top five songs previously mentioned . ) The song was number 38 on the year @-@ end chart of Hot Country Songs and number 74 on the year @-@ end chart of Hot 100 . It is the only song from Speak Now that charted on the Hot 100 year @-@ end chart in 2011 . As of November 2014 , " Back to December " has sold 1 @.@ 9 million copies in the United States . 
 Internationally , " Back to December " had moderate success . The song entered in Canada and peaked at number seven on the week ending October 30 , 2010 . In Australia , the song entered at number 26 on the week ending October 31 , 2010 . On the week ending October 18 , 2010 , the song debuted at number 24 in New Zealand . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development and release = = = 
 " Back to December " ' s accompanying music video was directed by Yoann Lemoine , who directed the video for Katy Perry 's " Teenage Dream " , and was filmed in late December 2010 before Christmas Day . In an interview with Country Music Television , Lemoine explained that he developed the idea for the video after being inspired from the film , E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial . He also told MTV News that he wanted the video to be simple yet metaphorical . He added , " I wanted to work on the coldness of feelings in a very visual way , playing with the snow , the distance and sadness . " He wanted to focus on Swift 's look in the video so that she would come off as accessible , saying " I wanted her to perform a very natural way , to make her look very European . This was the main challenge to me . All of Taylor 's world is very far away from my culture , but I saw something in her that could be very rough and heartbreaking ; far from the princess glittery outfits and glam that she often goes for . " Lemoine was allowed to take control of the whole production of the video , although it was Swift 's idea to have her character leave the letter for her beloved . Swift 's love interest in the video was played by male model , <unk> <unk> . Lemoine commented that <unk> was the perfect fit for Swift 's love interest , saying " I wanted a boy that was fragile and beautiful . I didn 't want to go for a hunk or a perfect cheesy boy that would have killed the sincerity of the video . " The music video premiered on January 13 , 2011 , on CMT and Great American Country . <unk> of the school and baseball stadium in the video were filmed in Binghamton , New York , in MacArthur Park while scenes with Swift were shot in an old country mansion outside of Nashville . The video reached 100 million views on Vevo , in June 2015 , becoming Swift 's 13th certified video . To date , the video has over 134 million views on YouTube . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins when a young man is seen walking alone in a small town to the snowy football fields in a morning winter . A cut @-@ scene shows Swift inside a house wearing a comfy sweater draped over one shoulder . She is brooding and singing about her lost love while wandering morosely around her apartment . She is also seen sitting in the bathtub , missing her boyfriend who she didn 't treat well when they were together . About halfway through , it starts to snow inside the spacious house . A montage of Swift writing a letter is shown alternately with scenes of her boyfriend strolling around the town . It is then revealed that the whole situation is the aftermath of a break @-@ up between Swift and her boyfriend . It is also shown that Swift slips the letter that she has written in his coat pocket before he leaves . The final scene shows her ex @-@ boyfriend sitting in the bleachers , reading her apology letter . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Critical receptions towards the music video were positive . Jillian Mapes of Billboard believed that the video is " appropriately understated " considering the fact that the song is all about making an apology . The Improper noticed that the video has " the look and feel of a Hallmark movie and is almost as maudlin , " while Amos Barshad of the New York felt that the video was " terrible . " Tamar Anitai of MTV described the video as " a bummer " , writing " [ It ] isn 't just about a girl with her calendar permanently stuck on the twelfth month of the year . It 's not just about feeling like a Lady Antebellum song . It 's about getting stuck in a place of romantic regret . " In a different perspective , Kyle Anderson of MTV argued that the music video puts Swift in a " pantheon of modern classics " with regards to its " almost haunting visual sense " which makes up for the inadequate narrative . Leah Collins of <unk> called the music video as " dreamy and moody " . Her points are echoed by Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly , who deemed the video as " kind of lovely " , which corresponds with the melancholic yet regretful mood of the song . <unk> Vena of MTV noticed that the video is " darker " and " somber " , something that is not synonymous with Swift . Yet , The Oxonian Review considers Swift 's " listlessness , the bare trees , and snowy indoors " in the music video attuned to the tenor of the song , achieved by " mixing wide shots , medium close ups , and cut @-@ ins of Ms Swift and her ex , matching their gazes across frames , and blurring focus tastefully . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Swift first performed " Back to December " in Paris at a showcase at the Salle Wagram theater , on October 18 , 2010 , to promote her upcoming album , Speak Now , set for release on the October 25 , 2010 . Swift also performed the song on Speak Now : Taylor Swift Live From New York City , a special programme which was streamed live on <unk> , MTV.com , VH1.com and other MTV Networks websites in Europe , Asia , Australia and Latin America to celebrate the release of her new album . 
 Swift also performed " Back to December " on several other occasions . On November 10 , 2010 , she performed the song live at the 44th annual Country Music Association Awards at Bridgestone Arena in Nashville , Tennessee . Her performance of the song during that event was graded as a " B + " in the Los Angeles Times , noting she " kept it simple " and " rose to the occasion " . On November 21 , 2010 , Swift mashed " Back to December " with OneRepublic 's " Apologize " at the 38th American Music Awards . Her rendition in that event was graded as a " B- " in the Los Angeles Times , noting that " a brief end @-@ song breakaway into OneRepublic 's " Apologize " seemed unnecessary " . 
 Swift performed " Back to December " and several songs from Speak Now on November 24 , 2010 during Thanksgiving night , on NBC . She later performed the song on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on December 2 , 2010 . On January 31 , 2011 , she sang the song in JetBlue ’ s Terminal 5 in New York as part of JetBlue ’ s Live at Terminal 5 concert series . She also performs the song on her Speak Now World Tour . The performance was released on Swift 's first live album called Speak Now : World Tour Live . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 European digital download 
 " Back to December " – 4 : 54 
 UK digital download 
 " Back to December " – 4 : 54 
 US digital download 
 " Back to December " – 4 : 54 
 US Acoustic digital download 
 " Back to December " ( Acoustic Version ) – 4 : 52 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Lead Vocals : Taylor Swift 
 Writers : Taylor Swift 
 Producers : Taylor Swift , Nathan Chapman 
 Mixing : Justin Niebank 
 Mastering : Hank Williams 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 Since May 2013 RIAA certifications for digital singles include on @-@ demand audio and / or video song streams in addition to downloads . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Stainforth and Keadby Canal = 
 The Stainforth and Keadby Canal is a navigable canal in South Yorkshire and Lincolnshire , England . It connects the River Don Navigation at Bramwith to the River Trent at Keadby , by way of Stainforth , Thorne and Ealand , near Crowle . It opened in 1802 , passed into the control of the River Don Navigation in 1849 , and within a year was controlled by the first of several railway companies . It became part of the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation , an attempt to remove several canals from railway control , in 1895 . There were plans to upgrade it to take larger barges and to improve the port facilities at Keadby , but the completion of the New Junction Canal in 1905 made this unnecessary , as Goole could easily be reached and was already a thriving port . 
 The canal was a centre for boatbuilding between 1858 , when Richard Dunston moved his yard to Thorne from Torksey , and 1984 when the yard closed . Dunston 's company were pioneers in the use of welded construction and innovative tug propulsion systems . The operation was always restricted by the size of Keadby Lock , although vessels longer than the lock could pass through when the river was level with the canal and both sets of gates could be opened . The largest ship to be built required Dunston 's to build a dam across the canal , as the canal company feared that it might get stuck in the lock , resulting in flooding and draining of the canal . 
 The canal passes through a region which is largely rural , much of which is drained artificially . For most of its length , it is flanked by the North Soak Drain and the South Soak Drain , because it disrupted the established drainage scheme . Thorne Moors lie to the north and Hatfield Chase lies to the south . Until its demise in 1966 , the canal was crossed by the Axholme Joint Railway at Ealand . The swing bridge was retained for several years after closure , so that stators from the nearby Keadby Power Station could be taken away for repairs , as there were no road bridges which could support the weight . 
 = = History = = 
 The River Don , which flows through Sheffield and Doncaster , had originally split into two channels below Stainforth , one of which emptied into the River Trent near Adlingfleet , close to its junction with the River Ouse , while the other headed north to join the River Aire near Rawcliffe . Following the work of the Dutch drainage engineer Cornelius Vermuyden to drain Hatfield Chase , the Adlingfleet outlet was closed off , and the channel to the River Aire , passing through Newbridge , was improved to take all of the flow . The scheme was not entirely successful , and after severe flooding near Sykehouse , Fishlake and Snaith , accompanied by riots , a new channel was cut between Newbridge and the River Ouse near what became Goole . The old course of the Don gradually silted up . Navigation on the Don was improved by the construction of cuts and locks , with the lowest lock situated at Stainforth . From there to the Ouse , boats used the Dutch River , Vermuyden 's artificial drain , which was hazardous due to its fast flows , its tides and its shallowness at times . 
 The idea of reconnecting the Don to the Trent was first raised in 1763 , when James Brindley assisted the manager of the River Don Navigation to survey a route for a canal to do this . In 1772 a second survey was made , this time by John Thompson , the Don Navigation 's engineer , for a canal from Stainforth to Althorpe , some 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) above Keadby on the River Trent . An agreement to build the canal , which would have had three locks and cost £ 14 @,@ 614 , was reached , but no further action occurred . The plan was revived in 1792 , by which time the cost had risen to £ 24 @,@ 200 , and an Act of Parliament to authorise the work was obtained in 1793 . This allowed the Stainforth and Keadby Canal Navigation Company to raise £ 24 @,@ 200 by issuing shares , and a further £ 12 @,@ 000 if necessary . Work began at the Keadby end in late 1793 . A second Act , obtained in 1798 , allowed the company to raise an additional £ 20 @,@ 000 from shareholders , instead of the original £ 12 @,@ 000 , and to raise £ 10 @,@ 000 by mortgage . The canal opened without ceremony in early 1802 . 
 The canal had a lock at Thorne and another where it joined the River Trent at Keadby . This lock had four sets of gates , so that it could be used whether the level of the river was higher or lower than that of the canal . It could take keels up to 81 by 22 @.@ 5 feet ( 24 @.@ 7 by 6 @.@ 9 m ) , which could carry up to 200 tons . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In 1828 , there was a proposal to build a canal from West <unk> on the River Trent to the River Don at Doncaster , which would have bypassed the Stainforth and Keadby . There was also a plan for a lower Don bypass , to connect direct to the Goole Canal , avoiding the difficult Dutch River . Neither scheme progressed any further , but the Keadby end of the canal was improved , and a new deep water jetty was constructed on the Trent in 1833 . Traffic improved , with boats using the canal as an easier way to reach the Don than the Dutch River . The Don Navigation Company then proposed a new canal from Stainforth to the River Ouse at Swinefleet in 1836 . They needed to buy 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of the Stainforth and Keadby from the Don towards Stainforth , and started to negotiate , while applying for an Act of Parliament . The Stainforth and Keadby opposed the bill , and an agreement was reached in May 1836 that the Don would buy the whole canal for £ 48 @,@ 000 . A bill to authorise the sale was opposed by some of the Stainforth and Keadby shareholders and was rejected by the House of Lords . After several more abortive plans at amalgamation , where the Stainforth and Keadby pulled out at the last minute , agreement was finally reached , and the Don Navigation took control of the canal on 1 January 1849 . A year later , it became part of the South Yorkshire Railway and River Dun Company , after the Don Navigation and the Doncaster and Goole Railway companies merged . 
 Under an Act of Parliament of 1874 , the South Yorkshire company was absorbed into the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway . Despite the railway competition , traffic levels remained healthy , with the waterways carrying a total of 982 @,@ 000 tons in 1878 , but there was a growing dissatisfaction with the situation , particularly the high tolls compared to the railways , and the refusal to allow steam haulage , which had been in use on the neighbouring Aire and Calder Navigation for over 50 years . In an attempt to improve the situation , the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Canal Company Ltd was formed in 1888 , with the intention of buying back the canals from the railway company , and upgrading them to offer effective competition to the railways . As a result of their efforts , the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation Co was created by an Act of Parliament dated 26 August 1889 , with powers to raise £ 1 @.@ 5 million to purchase and improve four canals . These were the Sheffield Canal , the River Don Navigation , the Dearne and Dove Canal and the Stainforth and Keadby Canal . The intention was to upgrade the Don and the Stainforth and Keadby to take 300 or 400 ton barges , to investigate the use of compartment boats , and to build a new port facility at Keadby , where coal could be trans @-@ shipped to seagoing vessels . Negotiations with the railway company were long and bitter , and the Navigation company only managed to raise £ 625 @,@ 000 of the £ 1 @.@ 14 million purchase price , with the result that although ownership of the waterways was transferred to them , the railway company still nominated five of the ten directors , and thus retained significant control . 
 During the protracted negotiations , the company had also been talking to the Aire and Calder about compartment boats , which resulted in a proposal to jointly fund and build a canal from Bramwith to the Aire and Calder . The 5 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 9 km ) New Junction Canal was authorised in 1891 , and finally opened in 1905 . This removed the need to build a new port at Keadby , and the planned upgrade to take larger vessels was also shelved , because the company were unable to raise significant working capital . Despite the lack of investment and the difficulties of the First World War , the waterways were still quite busy , with traffic recovering from 381 @,@ 727 tons in 1926 , the year of the general strike , to over 800 @,@ 000 tons in 1937 . Bramwith lock , the first on the Stainforth and Keadby , was lengthened in 1932 , and a new colliery <unk> was constructed to enable compartment boats to reach Hatfield Main Colliery . Stainforth lock , which connected the canal to the River Don , was closed in 1939 . The winter of 1947 was particularly severe , and the Stainforth and Keadby was closed for a period due to ice . After the Second World War , the canals of the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation were nationalised on 1 January 1948 , together with most other operational canals in Britain . 
 They were initially managed by the British Transport Commission , but control passed to British Waterways with the passing of the Transport Act 1962 , which also disbanded the Transport Commission . The Transport Acts of 1968 and 1983 divided British canals into Commercial waterways , which were still carrying commercial traffic , cruising waterways , which had potential for leisure use , and remainder waterways , for which no economic use could be seen at the time . The Stainforth and Keadby was designated as a commercial waterway , and traffic was restricted to working boats carrying freight . With the steady demise of freight traffic , British Waterways encouraged the use of the canals for leisure cruising , walking and fishing , and later recognised their environmental value . Following the cessation of coal carrying from Hatfield Main colliery , and the closure of Dunston 's boatyard at Thorne , all use of the canal is now by leisure boaters . A further change of ownership took place in 2012 with the creation of the Canal & River Trust , which took over all of the assets of British Waterways . 
 = = Boatbuilding = = 
 Large numbers of boats were built beside the Stainforth and Keadby Canal . Richard Dunston set up a boatyard at Thorne , on the north bank just below the lock , in 1858 , after selling his previous boatyard at Torksey . He initially constructed clinker @-@ built sailing barges , capable of carrying up to 80 tons . The boatyard was fairly self @-@ contained , using timber which was grown locally and was sawn by hand at the yard . It included a ropewalk , which made ropes for many industries in the locality , as well as for rigging of the boats , and supplied sails , masts and chandlery to much of the Humber region . Gradually , carvel @-@ built barges with their smoother hulls replaced clinker @-@ built ones , and boat sizes became more standard , with Sheffield @-@ sized keels and larger sloops . Shortly after Richard 's grandson took over the yard in 1910 , it was remodelled to build iron and steel ships , and only one wooden boat was built subsequently . 
 One of the issues with the yard was that the size of boats that could be built was restricted by the locks at either side of the site . Sheffield @-@ sized boats were around 61 @.@ 5 by 15 @.@ 5 feet ( 18 @.@ 7 by 4 @.@ 7 m ) , and could leave the yard either by passing through Thorne Lock and on to the Don Navigation , or by travelling to Keadby and entering the Trent . <unk> were restricted to the Keadby route , because of their larger size , and the largest boats built at Thorne before the 1940s were 700 @-@ brake @-@ horsepower ( 520 kW ) tugs , 300 @-@ ton coasters and 300 @-@ ton lighters . From 1933 , the yard began experimenting with welded rather than riveted construction , and their first all @-@ welded steam tugs were constructed for the Admiralty in 1942 . They continued to lead the field with developments in tug propulsion in the 1960s , and by the last 1970s had build seventeen tugs with Kort nozzle or Kort rudder steering and twenty tugs with Voith @-@ Schneider propulsion systems at Thorne . With the yard at Hessle on the Humber , bought from Henry Scarr in 1932 , they were one of the largest un @-@ nationalised shipbuilders in Britain . 
 The Empire Laird , a self @-@ trimming diesel collier measuring 140 by 21 @.@ 5 feet ( 42 @.@ 7 by 6 @.@ 6 m ) with a draught of 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) , was one of the largest vessels ever constructed at Thorne . It was built for the Admiralty in 1943 for use in the Bristol area , delivering coal to power stations . It was fitted with a 275 bhp ( 205 kW ) Crossley engine and a single propeller . Keadby Lock is much shorter than the ship , and so it had to sail through when the river made a level with the canal , and both sets of gates could be opened at the same time . However , the canal company were worried that because of its width , it might jam in the lock , which would cause flooding of the hinterland at high tide , and draining of the canal at low tide . Dunston 's had to build a dam across the canal beyond the lock , to prevent both consequences . Once built , the ship successfully passed through the lock , and the dam was removed . During the Second World War , Dunston 's designed and built TID ( Tugs in Dock ) tugs . They were constructed from eight pre @-@ fabricated sections , manufactured by companies who were not normally involved in shipbuilding . The sections weighted less than 6 tons , with a maximum size of 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) by 17 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) by 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) , and were delivered by lorry to the yard . There they were joined together by welders , many of whom were women , and fitted with steam engines . The first TID tug was completed in February 1943 , and for more than a year , one left the yard every five days . 
 In the early 1980s , there were still 80 workers involved in construction work at Thorne , and 15 other staff . A total of 1 @,@ 358 vessels were built there between 1932 and the end of shipbuilding in 1984 . The yard closed completely in 1987 , and had been cleared by 1993 . Subsequently , it has become a housing estate , where a number of the roads reflect the former use of the site , including <unk> Rope Way and Dunstan Drive , although the spelling of " Dunston " is not quite the same . 
 = = Route = = 
 The Stainforth and Keadby follows a fairly direct course from west to east , running for 14 @.@ 9 miles ( 24 @.@ 0 km ) from Bramwith Junction , where it meets the New Junction Canal and the River Don Navigation , to Keadby Lock , where it joins the River Trent . There is a lock at both ends and one part way along at Thorne , which is smaller than the other two . Maximum boat sizes over the entire canal are 61 @.@ 7 feet ( 18 @.@ 8 m ) long by 17 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) wide . Boats can draw 7 @.@ 25 feet ( 2 @.@ 21 m ) and headroom is restricted to 10 @.@ 9 feet ( 3 @.@ 3 m ) . 
 The New Junction Canal and the Stainforth and Keadby Canal leave the end of the River Don Navigation , and both head broadly north east , but whereas the New Junction Canal continues in a straight line for its entire length , the Stainforth and Keadby gradually turns to the east . Shortly after the junction , Bramwith Lock lowers the level of the canal . The River Don , after flowing under the New Junction Canal , joins the canal and continues close to the north bank for several miles . Bramwith Swing Bridge is the first of several swing bridges , most of which are operated by boaters . The tiny village of Kirk Bramwith is just to the north of the canal and river . Its notable buildings include the church of St Mary , much of which dates from the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries , with a twelfth @-@ century southern doorway . The building is a grade II * listed structure . The hamlet of South Bramwith lies to the south , with Bramwith Hall , a grade II listed 3 @-@ storey , 5 @-@ bay eighteenth @-@ century country house , which was rebuilt in the early nineteenth century , situated close to the canal . The canal passes to the north of Stainforth , where there is a fixed bridge . A basin , with its former connection to the Don , is now used as moorings by Thorne Cruising Club . This first section is now generally considered to be part of the Stainforth and Keadby Canal , although it was originally part of the Don Navigation as far as Stainforth Lock . 
 After a large pipe bridge , the canal widens to form a loading bay where coal from Hatfield Main Colliery was transferred to barges . A railway , which has now been dismantled , connected the site to the mine . About 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from Stainforth , the Don turns towards the north , while the canal continues to the east , passing under the M18 motorway . As it approaches Thorne , it passes under the Sheffield to Hull Railway near Thorne North railway station . Immediately beyond the bridge is <unk> Marina , followed by Thorne Lock , with a swing bridge crossing its head . The canal turns briefly to the south , to pass under the A614 road and the Doncaster to Cleethorpes railway near Thorne South railway station . The railway remains close to the northern bank for most of the way to Keadby . There is another marina near <unk> Lift Bridge , and after Moor 's Swing Bridge , the canal crosses open countryside . 
 The land besides the canal is low lying , and there is evidence of strip farming , with a series of farms each with a long thin strip of land behind it . In this case the strips were 1 acre ( 0 @.@ 4 ha ) strips , <unk> 220 by 22 yards ( 201 by 20 m ) in size . The land is crossed by drainage ditches . To the north are those of Thorne Moors , while to the south , the drains include Boating Dyke , which was used for the export of peat during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries . The network of peat canals were largely destroyed by the cutting of the canal in 1802 , and Boating Dyke now feeds into the North Engine Drain , which crosses Hatfield Chase and discharges into the River Trent at Keadby . After Maud 's Swing Bridge is a long straight stretch , with the railway on the north bank . The North Soak Drain and South Soak Drain flank the canal on both sides , and were built because the canal disrupted the natural drainage of the area . Near to Crook o <unk> Swing Bridge was Medge Hall peat works , which exported peat from the moors by railway until it was closed in 1966 . 
 Just before <unk> Swing Bridge , the northern soak drain crosses to the north side of the railway . As the canal approaches Ealand there are some large lakes to the north , which are now used for sailing . Crowle Bridge carries the A161 road over the railway and the canal , and Crowle railway station is sandwiched between the canal and the North Soak Drain . A little further east are the remains of Crowle railway bridge . It carried the Axholme Joint Railway over the canal , and consisted of four arches built from bricks , with a central swinging section , to allow keels to sail along the canal . The bridge was retained after the railway was closed in 1966 , because stators from Keadby Power Station were too heavy to be transported over the A161 road bridge . The stators were carried by road to Ealand , loaded onto the railway , and crossed the bridge to Belton , where they were transferred back to a road vehicle . The process became unnecessary when Lindsey County Council rebuilt the A161 bridge in 1970 , and the railway bridge was demolished in 1972 . 
 On the outskirts of Keadby , there are two more bridges . <unk> Swing Bridge is a conventional swing bridge , but the railway crosses to the south side of the canal on a sliding bridge . The bridge deck is only around 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) above the level of the water . When boats need to pass , the deck is winched sideways , and clears the waterway because it crosses it at an angle . The bridge was built in 1925 @-@ 26 and rebuilt in 2004 , and is controlled from a signal box nearby . Beyond the bridge , Keadby gas @-@ fired power station is located on the north bank . The final bridge is Keadby Swing Bridge , situated at the head of Keadby Lock . The lock controls passage to the River Trent , which is tidal at this point , and it therefore has four sets of gates . The main structure of the lock dates from the opening of the canal , and is grade II listed . The gates and sills were replaced in 1932 . There are wharves on the river for larger ships , and Keadby pumping station is situated just to the south . It was built in the 1930s , and pumps water from Hatfield Chase into the Trent . Since 1945 it has also dealt with water from the North and South Soak Drains . When the South Yorkshire Railway opened their line along the banks of the canal in 1859 , it terminated beside the lock , but was diverted to the south to cross the Trent on Keadby Bridge in 1864 . 
 = = Points of interest = = 
 = Hippeastrum = 
 Hippeastrum / <unk> / is a genus of about 90 species and over 600 hybrids and cultivars of perennial herbaceous bulbous plants . They generally have large fleshy bulbs and tall broad leaves , generally evergreen , and large red or purple flowers . 
 Hippeastrum is a genus in the family Amaryllidaceae ( subfamily Amaryllidoideae , tribe <unk> , and subtribe <unk> ) The name Hippeastrum , given to it by William Herbert , means " Knight 's @-@ star @-@ lily " , although precisely what Herbert meant by the name is not certain . For many years there was confusion among botanists over the generic names Amaryllis and Hippeastrum , one result of which is that the common name " amaryllis " is mainly used for cultivars of this genus , often sold as indoor flowering bulbs particularly at Christmas in the northern hemisphere . By contrast the generic name Amaryllis applies to bulbs from South Africa , usually grown outdoors . The genus is native to tropical and subtropical regions of the Americas from Argentina north to Mexico and the Caribbean . 
 Reproduction is generally by <unk> ( cross @-@ pollination ) and Hippeastrum may be propagated by seed or offset bulbils ( <unk> ) , although commercial ventures use in vitro techniques , or splitting of the bulb into sections . The genus has been intensely bred and cultivated since the early nineteenth century to produce large colourful showy flowers . In temperate climes these can be placed outside in the summer , and after a dormancy period , be induced to <unk> inside in the winter . 
 = = Description = = 
 Most Hippeastrum bulbs are tunicate ( a protective dry outer layer and fleshy concentric inner scales or leaf bases ) . The bulbs are generally between 5 – 12 cm ( 2 " – 5 " ) in diameter and produce two to seven long @-@ lasting evergreen or deciduous leaves that are 30 – 90 cm ( 12 " – 36 " ) long and 2 @.@ 5 – 5 cm ( 1 " – 2 " ) wide . The leaves are hysteranthous ( develop after flowering ) , sessile , rarely persistent and <unk> . 
 The flowers are arranged in <unk> inflorescences which are <unk> or <unk> ( 2 @-@ 14 flowers ) , supported on an erect hollow scape ( flower stem ) which is 20 – 75 cm ( 12 " – 30 " ) tall and 2 @.@ 5 – 5 cm ( 1 " – 2 " ) in diameter with two free bracts forming a spathe which is bivalve with free leaflets at its base . Depending on the species , there are two to fifteen large showy flowers , which are more or less <unk> and hermaphrodite . Each flower is 13 – 20 cm ( 5 " – 8 " ) across , and the native species are usually purple or red . They are funnelform ( funnel shaped ) and declinate ( curving downwards and then upwards at the tip ) in shape . The perianth has six brightly colored tepals ( three outer sepals and three inner petals ) that may be similar in appearance or very different . The perianth segments are subequal or unequal . The tepals are united at the base to form a short tube , usually with a rudimentary scaly paraperigonium with <unk> or a callose ridge present at the throat . 
 The <unk> consists of six stamens with filiform ( thread like ) filaments , which are <unk> ( in close bundles ) and declinate or ascendent . The anthers are <unk> or versatile . In the <unk> , the ovary is inferior and trilocular with <unk> locules . The style is filiform , and the stigma <unk> . The fruit forms a <unk> capsule containing seeds which are dry , flattened , obliquely winged or irregularly discoid , hardly ever turgid , and globose ( spherical ) or subglobose , with a brown or black <unk> testa . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 = = = Separation of Hippeastrum from Amaryllis = = = 
 The taxonomy of the genus is complicated . The first issue is whether the name should more properly be Amaryllis L .. In 1753 Carl Linnaeus created the name Amaryllis belladonna , the type species of the genus Amaryllis , in his Species Plantarum along with eight other Amaryllis species . Linnaeus had earlier worked on the Estate of George Clifford near Haarlem between 1735 and 1737 describing the plants growing there in his Hortus Cliffortianus in 1738 . It is to this work that he refers in his Species Plantarum . This was assumed to be the South African Cape Belladonna , although not precisely known . Clifford 's herbarium is now preserved at the Natural History Museum in London . 
 At the time both South African and South American plants were placed in this same genus . By the early nineteenth century Amaryllis had become a polymorphic ( diverse ) genus with about 50 species from what we would consider a dozen genera today , and attempts were made to separate it into different genera . This work commenced in 1819 with the contributions of the English botanist , the Revd . William Herbert in Curtis 's Botanical Magazine which he expanded in 1821 in The Botanical Register , identifying 14 species of the new genus of Hippeastrum , and only leaving three species in Amaryllis . The rest of the Amaryllis species he transferred to other genera , several of which he created . Herbert further refined his descriptions of Hippeastrum in his work on the Amaryllidaceae in 1837 . 
 = = = Nomenclature debate = = = 
 Since then a key question has been whether Linnaeus 's original type was a South African plant ( now Amaryllis ) or a South American plant ( now Hippeastrum ) . If the latter , the correct name for the genus Hippeastrum would then be Amaryllis and a new name would need to be found for the South African genus . In 1938 JCT <unk> claimed , with some evidence , that the plant was in fact the South American Hippeastrum equestre ( Linn. fil . ) Herb . ( syn . Amaryllis equestris ( Linn. fil . ) ex Aiton , accepted name H. puniceum ) a plant which Carl Linnaeus ' son , Linnaeus the Younger ( Linn. fil . ) had described c . 1781 @-@ 3 ( unpublished ) but soon after appearing in the Hortus Kewensis of 1789 . This paper sparked a debate over the next half century , that delayed the official transfer of species from Amaryllis to Hippeastrum . This debate involved botanists on both sides of the Atlantic and the final outcome was a decision by the 14th International Botanical Congress in 1987 that Amaryllis L. should be a nomen <unk> ( conserved name , i.e. correct regardless of priority ) and ultimately based on a specimen of the South African Amaryllis belladonna from the Clifford Herbarium . Thus Amaryllis L. is the correct name for the South African genus , not the South American genus ( Hippeastrum ) . 
 = = = Claim for Leopoldia = = = 
 The second issue is whether the name should be Leopoldia . In 1819 Herbert had proposed Leopoldia as a nomen <unk> ( provisional name ) for the same taxon as he called Hippeastrum in 1821 . Although Leopoldia was subsequently validated ( i.e. became the correct name ) , this was overlooked , and Hippeastrum rather than Leopoldia was used for the genus of New World <unk> . Following Filippo Parlatore in 1845 , the name Leopoldia was used for a genus of grape hyacinth species , allied to <unk> . In order to preserve the widespread usage of both Hippeastrum and Leopoldia , Fabio <unk> and Werner <unk> proposed in 1970 that Herbert 's Hippeastrum and Parlatore 's Leopoldia should be conserved and Herbert 's Leopoldia rejected . This was accepted and Hippeastrum <unk> is now a nomen <unk> ( conserved name ) , i.e. the correct name regardless of the fact that it does not have priority over Leopoldia . 
 = = = <unk> hybrids = = = 
 While interspecific hybrids of Hippeastrum are relatively common , hybridization with other genera of Amaryllidaceae are more rare . The most conspicuous exception is the hybrid obtained through crossbreeding with the Mexican <unk> <unk> Herb . ( St James 's lily , Aztec lily , Jacobean lily ) , another member of the tribe <unk> , originally called Amaryllis <unk> , which is <unk> . × <unk> is the name given to this cross . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A number of subgenera have been proposed over the years . For instance in the 1870s and 1880s John Gilbert Baker considerably reorganised Hippeastrum . In 1878 he described nine sections of the genus , but by 1888 he included seven subgenera , namely ( number of species in parentheses ) Habranthus ( 10 ) , <unk> ( 3 ) , Rhodophiala ( 5 ) , <unk> ( 1 ) , Omphalissa ( 6 ) , <unk> ( 10 ) and Lais ( 3 ) , some of which have since been treated as separate genera ( Habranthus , Rhodophiala ) . Baker both reduced the original number of species of Herbert , but also enlarged the genus by adding in other genera such as Habranthus , <unk> , Rhodophiala and <unk> ( also called <unk> , and subsequently moved to <unk> ) , which he included as separate sections of Hippeastrum . In addition , he included many new species being discovered in South America , particularly Chile . His 1878 classification included 47 species , reduced to 38 by 1888 . 
 Currently these subgenera are not widely used due to indistinct boundaries of some of the divisions . For reference , these are : 
 <unk> ( Salisb . ) Baker ( e.g. H. reginae , H. <unk> , H. <unk> , H. <unk> , H. leopoldii , H. reticulatum , H. <unk> ) 
 <unk> Traub ( e.g. H. <unk> ) 
 Lais ( Salisb . ) Baker ( e.g. H. striatum , H. vittatum , H. <unk> ) 
 <unk> Baker ( e.g. H. elegans ) 
 Omphalissa ( Salisb . ) Baker ( e.g. H. aulicum , H. <unk> , H. <unk> , H. cybister , H. pardinum , H. <unk> , H. <unk> ) 
 <unk> Traub ( e.g. : H. reticulatum ) 
 = = = Selected species = = = 
 As of November 2013 , the World Checklist of Selected Plant Families accepts 91 species : 
 Unplaced names include Hippeastrum <unk> , considered in the Kew World Checklist of Selected Plant Families as probably a <unk> . 
 Hybrids include Hippeastrum × ' <unk> ' . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The name Hippeastrum was first given to the genus by Herbert , being derived from the Ancient Greek , meaning a " Knight 's Star " from <unk> ( <unk> , mounted knight ) and <unk> ( <unk> , star ) , to describe the first recognized species , Hippeastrum reginae . Herbert proposed to call the genus , which he distinguished from Linnaeus ' Amaryllis , Hippeastrum , or " Knight 's @-@ star @-@ lily " . He states ; 
 " I have named [ them ] Hippeastrum or Knights @-@ star @-@ lily , pursuing the idea which gave rise to the name Equestris " ( <unk> ) . 
 Herbert 's fourteen species included this Hippeastrum equestre . This ' equine ' connection refers to Carl Linnaeus the Younger who had named ( in an unpublished manuscript ) a West Indian species as Amaryllis equestris , because of its similarity to the African genus Amaryllis . This name and attribution was first published by William Aiton in 1789 , in his Hortus Kewensis . Which species this was is not known precisely . However , in 1795 William Curtis , described Amaryllis equestris or the Barbados lily in his Botanical Magazine , referring to Aiton : 
 " The <unk> is composed of two leaves , which standing up at a certain period of the plant 's flowering like ears , give to the whole flower a fancied resemblance of a horse 's head ; whether <unk> derived his name of equestris from this circumstance or not , he does not condescend to inform us . " 
 In 1803 John Sims claimed Curtis had made a mistake in this attribution , and that ; 
 " this name was given from the remarkable likeness the front view of it has to a star of some of the orders of knight @-@ hood ; an appearance well expressed by <unk> 's figure in the Hortus <unk> " 
 Despite much speculation , there is no definitive explanation of either Linnaeus fils or Herbert 's thinking . For instance the ' Knight 's Star ' has been compared to Linnaeus ' decoration as a Knight of the Order of the Polar Star . The Latin word equestris ( of a knight , or horseman ) may have been confused with equi ( of a horse ) , or possibly Herbert was making a literary Knight 's Move on the Linnaean term . The flower name has even been compared to the mediaeval weapon , the spoked mace or Morning Star which it superficially resembles . 
 = = = = Common name = = = = 
 Although the 1987 decision settled the question of the scientific name of the genus , the common name " amaryllis " continues to be used . Bulbs sold as amaryllis and described as ready to bloom for the holidays belong to the genus Hippeastrum . " Amaryllis " is also used in the name of some societies devoted to the genus Hippeastrum . Separate common names are used to describe the genus Amaryllis , e.g. " Naked Lady " . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Hippeastrum species are concentrated in two centres of diversity , the main one in Eastern Brazil and the other in the central southern Andes of Peru , Bolivia and Argentina , on the eastern slopes and nearby foothills . Some species are found as far north as Mexico and the West Indies . The genus is thought to have originated in Brazil where at least 34 of the species have been found . Their habitat is mainly tropical and subtropical , though those species found south of the equator , or at sufficient altitude may be considered temperate . Hippeastrum is found in a wide range of habitats . Many are found in underbrush , while others prefer full sun . Hippeastrum angustifolium is an example of a species preferring flood areas , while other species prefer a drier habitat . There are also epiphytic species such as Hippeastrum aulicum , Hippeastrum <unk> , Hippeastrum papilio and Hippeastrum <unk> , which require air circulation around their roots , which are in the subgenus Omphalissa . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Flowering = = = 
 Hippeastrum hybrids and cultivars are valued for their large ornamental flowers , particularly for indoor cultivation during the northern hemisphere winter . The larger the bulb , the more flowers it will produce . The largest bulbs measure 14 to 16 inches ( 36 to 41 cm ) in circumference and will produce three or more scapes ( flower stems ) with four or more blooms each . The commonest bulbs measure 10 ½ to 12 ½ inches ( 27 to 32 cm ) with two scapes with four to six flowers each depending on the cultivar . Some bulbs put up two flower scapes at the same time ; others may wait several weeks between blooms and sometimes the second scape will have only two or three flowers rather than the usual four . A bulb needs to produce large , healthy leaves in the summer growing season before it can send up a scape the following year . Bulbs are often described by the country of origin of the bulb producers , since they may have different characteristics , e.g. ' Dutch Amaryllis ' , ' South African <unk> ' . Dutch bulbs usually produce flowers first , then , after they have finished blooming ( hysteranthous ) , the plant will begin growing leaves . Bulbs from the South African growers usually put up a scape and leaves at the same time ( <unk> ) . 
 Of the many hybrids , the best known are those producing flowers with red , pink , salmon , orange and white colors . Other flower colors include yellow and pale green with variations on these including <unk> , with different colored mottling , stripes or edges on the petals . Some flowers have uniform colors or patterns on all six petals while others have more pronounced colors on the upper petals than on the lower ones . 
 Although many names are used to describe hybrids and cultivars , e.g. ' Large Flowering ' , ' Dutch ' , ' Royal Dutch ' , there are five types that are commonly sold ; 
 Single flower ( large flowering ) 
 Double flower 
 Miniature ( dwarf , or small flowering ) 
 Trumpet 
 Jumbo ( mammoth ) 
 <unk> ' , as the name suggests , have flared , tube @-@ shaped flowers . Single , double , and miniature bulbs are the ones typically sold by nurseries and other stores for the holidays in December and for Valentine 's Day and Easter . 
 Of the commercially available Hippeastrum species , sometimes sold as ' exotic ' amaryllis , Hippeastrum cybister has extremely thin petals often described as spider @-@ like . The miniature evergreen Hippeastrum papilio or ' Butterfly Amaryllis ' whose petals resemble a butterfly ( papilio ) has a unique color and pattern with broad rose @-@ burgundy center stripes and striations of pale green on the upper petals and narrow stripes on the bottom three . It has been crossed with both cybister and single flower cultivars to produce hybrids with unusual striping . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Species are generally diploid with 2n = 22 chromosomes , but some species , such as Hippeastrum <unk> , have 24 . The genus has a degree of interspecies <unk> allowing crossing . 
 Some species , such as the Uruguayan Hippeastrum petiolatum , are sterile and unable to produce seeds . H. petiolatum is a sterile triploid that reproduces asexually , producing many bulbils around the mother bulb . These are light , and easily carried on the surface of water ensuring distribution of the species during the rainy season . Other species such as Hippeastrum reticulatum are self @-@ pollinating , reproducing by distributing seed . Although this does not guarantee genetic diversity in natural populations , it is widely used by colonising species . These two examples are not however typical of the genus , which commonly reproduces through <unk> . One mechanism that limits self @-@ pollination is that of self @-@ incompatibility by which seeds are only produced by pollination from other plants . Furthermore , the plant generally releases its pollen about two days before its stigma is receptive , making cross @-@ pollination more likely . Pollinators include Humming birds in subtropical areas , and moths . 
 = = = Pests = = = 
 Hippeastrum species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species including <unk> picta ( <unk> grub ) as well as <unk> ( <unk> ) , large , and small narcissus bulb flies ( Eumerus <unk> and E <unk> ) , thrips , mites , aphids , snails and slugs . A fungal disease attacking Hippeastrum is <unk> curtisii ( red blotch , red leaf spot or red fire ) . The leaves are also eaten by grasshoppers , and grasshoppers commonly plant egg pods in the ground near Hippeastrum bulbs , which erupt in the spring , covering the plant with nymphs . 
 = = Breeding and propagation = = 
 Intense cultivation of a number of species , particularly from Brazil , Bolivia and Peru , has occurred because of the beauty and size of the flowers , resulting in many hybrids and cultivars . 
 = = = History = = = 
 Hippeastrum breeding began in 1799 when Arthur Johnson , a watchmaker in Prescot , England , crossed Hippeastrum reginae with Hippeastrum <unk> , obtaining hybrids that were later given the name Hippeastrum × ' <unk> ' ( Johnson 's amaryllis , ' hardy amaryllis ' or St. Joseph 's lily ) . Johnson shared his work with the Liverpool Botanic Garden which was fortunate , since his greenhouse was destroyed in a fire . His hybrid was being cultivated in the US by the mid @-@ nineteenth century . Many new hybrid lines followed as new species were sent to Europe from South America , the most important of which were Reginae and <unk> . 
 The Reginae strain hybrids were produced by Jan de Graaff and his two sons in the Netherlands in the mid 19th century by crossing Hippeastrum <unk> and Hippeastrum striatum with Hippeastrum <unk> and some of the better hybrids available in Europe at the time . Some of the most successful hybrids were <unk> and Empress of India . 
 <unk> hybrids arose from the work of the British explorer and botanist Richard Pearce , an employee of James Veitch & Sons , a plant nursery . Pearce brought back specimens of Hippeastrum leopoldii and Hippeastrum pardinum from the Andes . These two species were notable for large flowers that were wide open and relatively symmetrical . Crossing these two species with the best of the Reginae strain produced a lineage of very large open flowered specimens , with up to 4 @-@ 6 flowers on each scape . The Veitch nursery dominated the commercial development of Hippeastrum leopoldii and other varieties up to the early years of the twentieth century , the best of their hybrids setting the standard for modern commercial development . 
 The late 19th and early 20th century saw Amaryllis breeding develop in the United States , particularly in Texas , California , and Florida in conjunction with the USDA ( 1910 – 1939 ) . The major US contribution came from the work of Henry <unk> and Theodore Mead , whose hybrids crossed with Dutch stock have produced some modern hybrids , although not matching the European strains . 
 In 1946 , two Dutch growers moved to South Africa and began cultivation there . Although most cultivars of Hippeastrum come from the Dutch and South African sources , bulbs are now being developed in the United States , Japan , Israel , India , Brazil and Australia . The double flowers from Japan are particularly beautiful . Nurseries may list Amaryllis bulbs as being ' Dutch ' , ' Israeli ' , ' Peruvian ' etc . , depending on the country of origin . 
 Most modern commercial hybrids are derived from the following species : 
 H. vittatum 
 H. leopoldii 
 H. pardinum 
 H. reginae 
 H. puniceum 
 H. aulicum 
 = = = Propagation = = = 
 Three main methods are used for propagating Hippeastrum : seeds , bulbils and ' twin scales ' . More recently micropropagation in vitro has been used on a commercial scale . 
 Seeds 
 Seed multiplication may be used for the development of new cultivars or to increase the yield of native species . Seeds are generally sown in early summer in <unk> , and then transplanted to larger containers . They require warmth frequent watering , and should not be given a dormant period . Seeds do not breed true . Plants obtained from seeds take about six years to bloom . 
 <unk> 
 Home propagation is best performed by using offset bulbils . Commercially , only cultivars that produce at least three bulbils on the mother bulb are used for this form of propagation . Plants grown from this method take three to four years to bloom . 
 Twin scales 
 The most common commercial propagation method is referred to as ' twin scales ' . This involves the division of the bulb into 12 sections and then separating each section into twin scales connected by the basal plate . The cuttings that are derived from these are grown in moist vermiculite in the dark till bulbils appear . More recently growing them in sunlight produce a better crop . 
 In vitro 
 The technique of plant tissue culture in vitro improves the propagation of Hippeastrum by decreasing the time required to reach the minimum size to start the reproductive cycle , using sections of bulbs grown in artificial media with the addition of plant hormones . 
 = = = Fragrance = = = 
 Most modern cultivars lack any fragrance although ' Dancing Queen ' represents an exception . Fragrance is genetically related to flower colour ( white , or pastel shades ) and is a recessive characteristic , so that when fragrant and non fragrant varieties are crossed , not all progeny will be fragrant , whereas two fragrant progenitors will produce an all fragrant progeny . 
