 On January 31 , the government of Swaziland declared a state of emergency and requested assistance from the international community . South Africa provided two helicopters to the country to survey the affected areas . Various countries and United Nations agencies provided about $ 1 @.@ 01 million in cash and supplies to Swaziland . The United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs provided $ 20 @,@ 000 . The European Economic Community donated about $ 80 @,@ 000 to purchase tents and blankets . The Lutheran World Federation donated $ 20 @,@ 000 in cash , along with generators and blankets , while World Vision International sent $ 10 @,@ 000 in cash . Within a week , workers reopened most major roads to travel , and by February 24 , most roads were reopened . Workers also quickly restored the downed power lines . Relief items were distributed by both air and road in the weeks following the storm , coordinated by the Swaziland Red Cross and assisted by volunteer organizations . In part due to Domoina as well as the previously occurring drought , the economy of Swaziland stagnated through 1985 . 
 Following the storm in South Africa , workers restored the original course of the Umfolozi River after it had moved . Officials later purchased a new dredge to remove sediment from Lake St. Lucia , and the canal connecting the lake to the Umfolozi River was later finished . Local governments coordinated relief efforts in the country , including delivering food and providing shelter for those who lost their homes . The South African Red Cross provided food to storm victims , many of whom were beneficiaries of the food program during the extended drought . The South African government declared KwaZulu Natal as a disaster areas . The country 's military provided 25 helicopters to rescue flood victims and donated 3 @,@ 000 tents . The government later authorized $ 85 million to fund repairing damaged rails and roads . The American government donated $ 100 @,@ 000 to the country , mostly to purchase supplies . West Germany also donated about $ 231 @,@ 000 , mostly for the feeding program . 
 = Tales of Destiny 2 = 
 Tales of Destiny 2 ( Japanese : テイルズ オブ <unk> 2 , Hepburn : Teiruzu Obu <unk> Tsū ) is a Japanese role @-@ playing video game , co @-@ developed by Wolfteam and Telenet Japan , and published by Namco . It is the fourth main entry in the Tales series of video games , and a direct sequel to 1997 's Tales of Destiny . It released on PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) in November 2002 in Japan , March 2003 in South Korea and August 2003 in China . The overseas versions were published by Sony Computer Entertainment . An updated port for the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) , developed by Alfa System , was released in February 2007 , and March of the same year in South Korea . This version was published by Namco Bandai Games . Neither version has received a western release . 
 The story , set eighteen years after Destiny , follows Kyle Dunamis , the son of the previous game 's protagonists Stahn Aileron and Rutee <unk> . Shortly after meeting a mysterious girl named Reala while trying to save Rutee 's orphanage from bankruptcy , Kyle is drawn into conflict with Barbatos , a cruel warrior responsible for killing Stahn , and the machinations of <unk> , a religious leader seeking to bring peace to mankind . The gameplay uses two @-@ dimensional character sprites and backgrounds , and the battle system is a revamped version of the series ' trademark Linear Motion Battle System . 
 Development began after the release of Tales of Eternia in 2000 , taking approximately two years to complete , and was the last Tales game to be developed by the original Wolfteam before it became Namco Tales Studio . The scenario was handled by Japanese writing company Gekko , the characters were designed by Mutsumi Inomata , and the music was composed by Motoi Sakuraba and Shinji Tamura . The PSP port was made after a similar port of Eternia met with commercial success . It was a highly anticipated game , and Namco promoted it heavily in the months prior to release . The game sold over 700 @,@ 000 units by January 2003 , and received critical acclaim from both Japanese and western critics . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Tales of Destiny 2 is a role @-@ playing video game featuring two @-@ dimensional ( 2D ) sprite characters navigating both 2D environments such as dungeons and towns , and a three @-@ dimensional overworld . The overworld features environmental effect such as fog . In towns found across the world , non @-@ playable characters provide both information relevant to the story and world , and provide items and equipment through shops ; merchants accept the Tales series currency , Gald , which can be obtained from battle or treasure chests on the dungeon and town maps . 
 Throughout the game , visiting certain individuals in towns will activate optional events and side @-@ quests . Prisons , sewers , forests and story @-@ centric locations serve as dungeon locales ; these areas are scattered with treasure chests containing rare items , some of which cannot be purchased in stores . Dungeons frequently contain puzzles and mazes , such as boxes that must be reoriented to form a bridge , which must be cleared to advance ; the " Sorcerer 's Ring " , a relic that shoots tiny plumes of fire , often plays a central role in puzzle resolution , along with the " Sorcerer 's Scope " , a tool that reveals hidden objects . Aspects of characters such as their current experience level , equipment and money levels , party organization , and assigned abilities . Cooking , a recurring series mechanic , is present : characters learn and cook various recipes using a selection of six ingredients which grant boons upon them such as restoring health . Optional voiced conversations between characters called Skits can be activated when they appear in random locations or after story events . Mini @-@ games within the world include acting as a waiter in a restaurant , and battle arenas where players fight against random enemies . 
 The game 's battle system is the series ' trademark Linear Motion Battle System ( LMBS ) , which places up to four playable characters on a 2D plain against enemies in real @-@ time combat similar to a beat ' em up . The version used in Destiny 2 is called the " Trust and Tactical LMBS " . When entering battle , the camera follows characters , zooming in and out depending on their distance from an enemy . During battle , one character is controlled at any one time , with the others being governed by the game 's artificial intelligence ( AI ) : the AI can be customized to behave in various ways , such as adjusting their aggression level , and balancing magical and physical attacks . In addition to real @-@ time commands given in battle , the player can issue commands to all characters by pulling up the battle menu and issuing commands . A character 's performance in battle is governed by their current level of Spirit Points ( SP ) : the more SP a character has , the higher their defensive and offensive abilities . A character 's health is represented by Health Points ( HP ) . Three types of attack are available and activated progressively depending on the number of hits an enemy has taken : a standard attack , named attacks called Artes , and special high @-@ damage attacks called Mystic Artes . At the end of each battle , its performance is assessed an given a Grade , which can sometimes trigger a bonus such as learning new skills . Some bonuses are also carried over into the next playthrough . In addition to the single @-@ player functions , a local multiplayer option is available , supporting up to four players : when additional controllers with players are connected to the system , AI functions for selected characters are disabled , switching to manual control . An auto @-@ battle option , which has the game 's AI controlling all characters during a fight , is also available . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Destiny 2 is set on an unnamed world that was struck by a comet 1000 years before , triggering a prolonged winter . Desperate for heat and energy , the people used a type of gemstone brought by the comet called Lens to create a floating city called Dycroft . The people of Dycroft eventually dominated the people below , which led to a conflict between the two realms known as the War of Heaven and Earth . Eventually , a team of defecting Dycroft scientists developed sentient weapons called Swordians that turned the tide of war in the surface people 's favor . This conflict reemerged eighteen years prior during the events of Tales of Destiny . The Swordians found new masters to wield them against Dycroft 's vengeful ruler , including Stahn Aileron , Rutee <unk> and Leon Magnus . Stahn 's group succeeds in restoring peace , but the world was damaged by Dycroft 's weapons , and Leon was killed after he betrayed the group . Destiny 2 begins eighteen years after the events of Tales of Destiny . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Kyle Dunamis ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is the main protagonist of Destiny 2 . Kyle is very much like his father , Stahn , although Kyle remembers little of his father . His defining personality trait is an aversion towards peacefulness and boredom , always seeking out new things to try . Kyle is voiced by Jun Fukuyama . 
 Reala ( <unk> , <unk> ) is the main female protagonist , appearing suddenly and holding an air of mystery . While she bears an overly @-@ strong sense of responsibility , she is also bright and highly inquisitive . She is one of the two avatars of the goddess Fortuna ( <unk> , <unk> ) . Reala is voiced by <unk> Yuzuki . 
 Loni Dunamis ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Roni <unk> ) is a young man raised alongside Kyle , being considered a brother by him . A member of the Atamoni <unk> , the military branch of the Order of Atamoni , he has a firm and steady personality that balances against Kyle 's <unk> . Loni is voiced by Toshihiko Seki . 
 Judas ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a mysterious swordsman who appears before Kyle when the latter is in a pinch . A genius swordsman , he wears a beast skull as a mask to hide his face . His true identity is that of Leon Magnus . Judas is voiced by Hikaru Midorikawa . 
 Nanaly Fletch ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a master archer who opposes the Order of Atamoni . In direct contrast to the Order , she believes that happiness should be won by people rather than given to them . Nanaly is voiced by Tomoko Kawakami . 
 Harold <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a famous scientist , and the original creator of the Swordians . Something of a mad scientist , she shares Kyle 's love of adventure and has a passionate curiosity about the world . Harold is voiced by Akiko Hiramatsu . 
 Elrane ( <unk> , <unk> ) is the main antagonist of Destiny 2 . Regarded as a living goddess due to her powers , she has an outwardly meek demeanor and espouses bringing happiness to all mankind . She is one of the two avatars of the goddess Fortuna . Elrane is voiced by Yoshiko Sakakibara . 
 Barbatos Goetia ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is one of the primary antagonists of Destiny 2 . A veteran of the War of Heaven and Earth , he was forgotten by history and consequently holds a burning desire to be recognized . His chief traits are an intense desire to live and a callous disregard for others . Barbatos is voiced by Norio Wakamoto . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Kyle Dunamis , the adventurous son of Stahn and Rutee , lives at an orphanage run by Rutee . With the orphanage on the brink of bankruptcy , Kyle defies his mother to go on a quest to search for funds , together with his best friend Loni . Finding a giant Lens , a mysterious girl named Reala emerges from it , claiming to be in search of a hero . Believing that he should become a hero like his parents , he follows Reala so he can prove himself as such . Finding the Lens missing , officials from the Order of Atamoni arrest Kyle and Lori for its theft . They escape with the help of the masked swordsman Judas . After this , Kyle becomes embroiled in the attempts by a man named Barbatos Goetia to kill those who accompanied his parents , eventually learning that Barbatos also killed Stahn when Kyle was five . During his quest , a series of Lens thefts is orchestrated by Elrane , the Holy Woman of the Order of Atamoni who is capable of performing miracles using Lens and seeks to bring happiness to the world through uniting it under a single religion . 
 During a great theft of Lens , Elrane attacks the group directly , sending them ten years into the future . In this period , the world is beset by conflict between the Order of Atamoni and factions wanting independence from its control . During their travels there , they are joined by Nanaly Fletch . While in this time period , Reala becomes conflicted about who she is , and the group encounters a figure known as the Goddess Fortuna . During this encounter , it is revealed that Elrane and Reala are avatars of Fortuna , designed to save the world and bring happiness to humanity in different ways . Due to her unstable emotions , Reala accidentally transports Nanaly into their time . Feeling guilty because of this , Reala confronts Elrane alone and is captured . Traveling to the ship where the stolen Lens is stored , the group confront Barbatos and Elrane , successfully defeating them and saving Reala . During this confrontation , they learn that " Judas " is in fact the resurrected Leon , who was brought back to life by Elrane just as Barbatos was , but rebelled against her when he knew her full plan . 
 However , their efforts result in the destruction of the ship , and Reala uses the energy of the Lens to send them through time again . They appear in an alternate timeline where the War of Heaven and Earth was won by the underground dwellers , and Barbatos and Elrane are hailed as saviors . Traveling back to the time of the War , when the initial interference was caused , they ally with Harold <unk> to return history to its proper state . While they are successful and Barbatos is felled , Elrane continues to distort history in her favor . Confronting her one last time , she is defeated , then they are confronted by Fortuna . Defeating her , the group realize that the only way to correct the distorted timeline is to destroy the Lens that forms Fortuna 's life source , which will mean Reala will be erased from history . When Reala comes to terms with this and gives her blessing , Kyle destroys Fortuna 's Lens , which erases all the changes wrought by her agents and returns the timeline to its original state , sending everyone back to their original times and conditions . In the corrected timeline , Kyle , now raised and trained by both Stahn and Rutee , goes on a journey to the temple where he first met Reala . While her Lens is missing , Kyle 's strong will succeeds in bringing Reala back into existence and restoring his memories of her . 
 = = Development = = 
 Tales of Destiny 2 was co @-@ developed by Wolfteam and Telenet Japan . Development began after work had finished on Tales of Eternia , taking roughly two years to complete . During its early development , the staff consisted of thirty people : when in full development , a team of between sixty and a hundred worked on it . It was developed under the working title Tales of X. After Eternia was completed , the development team considered what to do next , whether a new standalone game or a sequel . As Destiny had a large amount of lore created for it and there were story possibilities for a next generation of characters , it was decided to make a sequel to Destiny . This would be the first direct sequel in the Tales series . Because of the state of the world as it would have evolved after the events of Destiny , it was decided to set the events eighteen years after them and focus on the son of Destiny 's protagonist . The key themes for the story were " fate " and " happiness " . For the story , the team wanted to effectively portray Kyle 's journey to becoming a hero . For this , they drew on themes of " learning from the teacher " as seen in films such as Star Wars and Raiders of the Lost Ark . To create the atmosphere , the team worked at balancing elements of reality and fantasy . The story and script was handled by Japanese scenario company Gekko . Two separate scripts were created for the main story and additional elements such as skits . Both scripts were quite large . 
 Character designs were created by Mutsumi Inomata . A key element of the designs was the variation of time periods many characters came from . To make the character sprites as close as possible to the original artwork , the team took Inomata 's artwork and turned them into 2D " dot @-@ by @-@ dot " sprite pictures . This gave the sprites roughly four times the detail of most environments . They then built the world around the sprites . The sprite details sometimes caused problems , as they would appear larger than the environments when the camera zoomed in . The animated cutscenes were created by anime company Production I.G. The game 's opening was the longest ever created for a Tales game up to that point . While many contemporary PS2 role @-@ playing games were being developed around three @-@ dimensional characters , Destiny 2 used two @-@ dimensional sprites for its characters . Part of the reason behind this was that the development team wanted to create the " ultimate 2D RPG " . As opposed to previous Tales games , where gameplay development was focused on the battle system , the development leads requested that the gameplay should be " waste @-@ free and strategic " . The Grade system and new skill customizing elements , later staples of the series , were also developed . The game 's artificial intelligence was markedly improved , the combat system was made both more elaborate and more user @-@ friendly , and health and magic systems were adjusted . The PlayStation 2 hardware enabled the expansion of mini @-@ games , the improvement of the game 's graphics , and the incorporation of advanced interactive elements on the world map . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The music was composed by regular series composers Motoi Sakuraba and Shinji Tamura . Sakuraba primarily worked on the battle themes and arrangements of previous themes , while Tamura handled selected boss battle tracks and created Reala 's theme . They were able to create more tracks with greater detail to them due to the expanded storage capacities of the PS2 . As with previous games , a licensed theme song was created by a Japanese artist for the game 's opening . For Destiny 2 , the theme song was " Key to My Heart " from the album Fairy Tale , by Japanese singer @-@ songwriter Mai Kuraki . Its lyrics were designed to " express the world " of Destiny 2 . Arrangements of " Key to My Heart " were featured in the soundtrack . Unlike previous Tales games , where voice work was recorded out of order , the voice work was recorded in order of the game 's events to add dramatic weight to the performances . This consequently created difficulties with scheduling and put an added strain on the actors . 
 = = Release = = 
 Destiny 2 was announced in February 2002 at a special conference about future developments and games for the platform . It was the first Tales title to receive a numbered designation in Japan . As with previous Tales games , it featured a characteristic genre name : " RPG to Release Destiny " ( <unk> , Unmei wo <unk> RPG ) . To promote the game , Namco created a themed PlayStation 2 memory card . In addition , a special competition was organized where the top @-@ tier prizes were copies of the script books for Destiny 2 autographed by the main characters ' voice actors . As a pre @-@ order bonus , a special limited edition DVD featuring interviews with the voice cast was created . In addition , a downloadable ring tone based on the theme song and screen displays featuring the main characters was created for mobile phones of the time and released in 2003 . The game was released on November 28 , 2002 in Japan . It was celebrated with an official launch event , featuring interviews with the production staff and cast . Destiny 2 would be the last Tales game developed by Wolfteam prior to its acquisition by Namco in 2003 and rebranding as Namco Tales Studio . 
 Destiny 2 was later ported to the PSP . Development began in 2005 , after the commercial success of Eternia 's PSP port . The port was developed by Alfa System , a frequent collaborator with the Tales team on spin @-@ off titles . The project was directed by Yoshito Higuchi , who had worked on Destiny 2 and became the director of the GameCube port of Tales of Symphonia . While the earlier port of Destiny made significant changes , the Destiny 2 port was meant to preserve and add onto the content of the original . Some of the adjustments included minor tweaks to gameplay , adjustments to fit the PSP 's control layout , and adjusting the graphics from 4 : 3 to 16 : 9 screen ratio . A new dungeon featuring added story elements was also created . It was released on February 15 , 2007 . 
 Outside Japan , Destiny 2 was released in China and South Korea by Sony Computer Entertainment in 2003 : the Korean version was released on March 27 , and the Chinese version was released on August 14 . The game was going to be part of a world tour by Sony Computer Entertainment to promote the next generation of role @-@ playing games , but the tensions between America and Iraq at the time and the consequent risks of a terrorist attack caused them to cancel the trip . Asked at the launch event whether an overseas version of the game was being developed , producer Makoto Yoshizumi said he was " not certain " . The PSP port was released in South Korea by Namco Bandai Games 's local branch on March 5 , 2007 . Neither the original nor the port has been released in the west , making it one of three mainline Tales titles to remain exclusive to Japan . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Namco had high expectations for Destiny 2 , anticipating sales of 600 @,@ 000 units . During its debut week , Destiny 2 reached the top of Japanese gaming sales charts : according to different sources , it sold between just over 498 @,@ 000 ( Famitsu ) and under 558 @,@ 000 ( Dengeki ) units . For the next three weeks , it remained in second place on the charts behind Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire , accumulating sales of over 603 @,@ 000 . By January 2003 , the game had sold over 702 @,@ 000 units , becoming the eighth best @-@ selling game within that period . The PlayStation 2 version of Tales of Destiny 2 has shipped 977 @,@ 000 copies worldwide as of December 2007 , being the second most successful title in the series at the time . The PSP version sold 73 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , ranking second in weekly video games sales . By the following week , it had dropped to # 25 . By the end of 2007 , the game had sold just under 115 @,@ 000 units , reached 146th place in the five hundred top @-@ selling games of the year . In South Korea , the game reached # 10 in the country 's gaming sales charts . Worldwide shipments of the port as recorded by Namco have reached 129 @,@ 000 units . 
 Famitsu Weekly found the story enjoyable , though noted that those who had played Destiny would get more enjoyment out of it , and praised the voice acting . They also found the gameplay and pacing enjoyable , positively noting the option to auto @-@ battle . The game ranked as the 89th all @-@ time favorite game in a 2006 Famitsu readers poll . Japanese website Game Impress Watch found the story impressive , citing its use of time travel and the continued use of Destiny 's world and lore . The gameplay , mini @-@ games and customization options was also generally praised , with the reviewer recommending the title to players of the series . RPGFan 's <unk> Lee was also positive , praising the gameplay despite the very high encounter rate , and was pleased that an auto @-@ battle option was included . One point that received a more mixed response was the game 's music , with the exception of the opening song . In a preview for IGN , David Smith was generally positive about the game . While he disliked the art style and its low @-@ tech look compared to its hardware , he found the gameplay enjoyable and the opening parts of the story fairly relatable . He ended by hoping that Namco would put the effort into localizing the title . 
 = = = Additional media = = = 
 Multiple print adaptations have been made of Destiny 2 : these include one three @-@ volume comic anthology , a serialized comic adaptation originally released through Square Enix 's Gangan Comics and later collected into five volumes , and an eight @-@ volume yonkoma comic , and a second single @-@ edition yonkoma . Novel adaptations include a novel focusing on Nanaly called Tales of Destiny 2 : The Amber Wind , and <unk> light novels that told segments of the story from the point of view of different characters , particularly Judas . An illustration book featuring Inomata 's artwork for the game was released in March 2005 . A five @-@ part CD Drama adaptation was also developed , following the events of the game . The five volumes were released between April and August 2003 , under the umbrella titled Tales of Destiny 2 Drama CD . 
 = In Bloom = 
 For the 2013 film of the same name , see In Bloom ( 2013 film ) 
 " In Bloom " is a song by American rock band Nirvana . Written by frontman Kurt Cobain , the song addresses people outside of the underground music community who did not understand the band 's message . 
 Nirvana made its first music video for an early version of " In Bloom " in 1990 ; however the song did not appear on a commercial release until the release of the group 's second album , Nevermind , in 1991 . " In Bloom " became the fourth and final single from the album in late 1992 . It was accompanied by a new music video which parodied musical performances of 1960s variety shows . The music video for " In Bloom " won Best Alternative Video at the MTV Video Music Awards in 1993 . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Nirvana first played the song the night before it was demoed . Bassist Krist Novoselic recalled that it " originally sounded like a Bad Brains song . Then Kurt turned it into a pop song " . Cobain went home and reworked the song , playing the revised version of it over the phone to Novoselic . The band recorded " In Bloom " with producer Butch Vig at Smart Studios in Madison , Wisconsin during April 1990 . The material recorded at Smart Studios was intended for the group 's second album for the independent record label Sub Pop . The song originally had a bridge section that Vig removed . Novoselic said that after the band recorded the song , Vig cut out the bridge from the 16 @-@ track master tape with a razor blade and threw it in the garbage . The songs from these sessions were placed on a demo tape that circulated amongst the music industry , generating interest in the group among major record labels . 
 After signing to DGC Records , Nirvana began recording its second album Nevermind in May 1991 . " In Bloom " was one of the first songs the band recorded during the album sessions at Sound City Studios in Van Nuys , California ; Vig thought it would be good to start recording a song previously recorded at Smart Studios . The arrangements for " In Bloom " and the other songs previously recorded with Vig in 1990 were largely unchanged ; the recently hired drummer Dave Grohl stayed mostly with what his predecessor Chad Channing had recorded , but added more power and precision to the recording . Cobain sang progressively " harder " during the recording of the song , which made it difficult for Vig to balance the volume levels between the verses and choruses . Vig recalled that he had to change the input level " on the fly " and hoped that Cobain would not " change the phrasing or do something different " while recording . 
 Cobain chose not to overdub a harmony vocal part during the Smart Studios sessions , possibly due to time constraints . During the Nevermind sessions , Vig had Grohl sing harmonies on the song . Grohl had difficulty hitting the proper notes , but ultimately was able to sing what Vig wanted . Vig often had to trick Cobain , who was averse to performing multiple takes , into recording additional takes for overdubs on the record . The producer convinced Cobain to double @-@ track his vocals on " In Bloom " by telling him , " John Lennon did it . " After doubling Cobain 's vocals , Vig decided he might as well double Grohl 's and had the drummer record an additional track of backing harmonies . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Like many Nirvana songs , " In Bloom " shifts back and forth between quiet verses and loud choruses . Cobain uses a Mesa Boogie guitar amplifier for the verses , and during the chorus he switches to a Fender Bassman amp ( suggested by Vig ) for a heavier , double @-@ tracked fuzztone sound . The rhythm section of Novoselic and Grohl kept its parts simple ; Grohl stated it was " an unspoken rule " to avoid unnecessary drum fills , while Novoselic said he felt his role was about " serving the song " . During the choruses , vocalist Cobain and drummer Grohl harmonize while singing " He 's the one / Who likes all our pretty songs / And he likes to sing along / And he likes to shoot his gun / But he knows not what it means " . The song 's intro reappears at the end of each chorus . 
 Cobain 's lyrics address the people outside of the underground music scene that began showing up at Nirvana shows after the release of the group 's debut album Bleach . Nirvana biographer Michael Azerrad wrote , " But remarkably , [ the song 's lyrics ] translated even better to the mass popularity the band enjoyed . " Regarding the song 's chorus , Azerrad commented , " The brilliant irony is that the tune is so catchy that millions of people actually do sing along to it . " In his biography of Cobain , Heavier Than Heaven , Charles R. Cross asserted that the song was a " thinly disguised portrait " of Cobain 's friend Dylan Carlson . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " In Bloom " was released as the fourth single from Nevermind on November 30 , 1992 . The single was only released commercially in the United Kingdom ; promotional copies were released in the United States . The 7 @-@ inch vinyl and cassette editions of the single contained a live version of " Polly " as a B @-@ side , while the 12 @-@ inch vinyl and CD versions featured a performance of " Sliver " ; both songs were recorded at the same December 28 , 1991 concert . The single peaked at number 28 on the British singles chart . While lacking an American commercial release , the song charted at number five on the Billboard Album Rock Tracks chart . 
 Nirvana biographer Everett True wrote an uncharacteristically unfavorable review in Melody Maker , accusing the single of being a cash @-@ in on Nevermind 's success . " Whoop whoop bloody whoop " , he wrote , " Forgive me if I don 't sound too thrilled . This release is stretching even my credulity beyond repair . Like , milking a still @-@ breathing ( sacred ) cow , or what ? Badly inferior live versions of ' Polly ' and ' Sliver ' on the flip don 't help matters either . " In 2011 Rolling Stone magazine ranked the song number 415 on its list of the " 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Nirvana first made a music video for " In Bloom " in 1990 for the Sub Pop Video Network Program VHS compilation ( 1991 ) . The recording of the song featured in the video is the version recorded during the Smart Studios sessions . The Sub Pop video features the band walking around various parts of lower Manhattan including the South Street Seaport , the Lower East Side , and Wall Street . While filming the video , Novoselic shaved his head as penance for a bad performance the band gave in New York City . This caused discontinuity in the final cut ; shots of the band feature the bassist with and without hair throughout the video . This video was later compiled on the Nirvana box set With the Lights Out ( 2004 ) . The audio of this version of " In Bloom " was later released on CD2 of the 20th Anniversary Deluxe Edition of the Nevermind album in 2011 . 
 The second video , created to accompany the 1992 single release that was recorded at Sound City Studios , was directed by Kevin Kerslake , who had previously directed the band 's videos for " Come as You Are " and " Lithium " . Cobain 's original concept for the video told the story of a young girl born into a Ku Klux Klan family who one day realizes how evil they are . His concept was too ambitious , so Cobain instead decided to parody musical performances by bands on early 1960s variety shows , such as The Ed Sullivan Show . The humorous tone of the video was a result of Cobain being " so tired for the last year of people taking us so seriously . . . I wanted to fuck off and show them that we have a humorous side to us " . Kerslake filmed the video on old <unk> cameras , and the band improvised its performance . The video begins with an unnamed variety show host ( played by Doug Llewelyn , former host of The People 's Court ) introducing Nirvana to an in @-@ studio crowd of screaming teenagers ; their non @-@ stop screaming is heard throughout the duration of the song . The band members , whom the host refers to as " thoroughly all right and decent fellas " , perform dressed in Beach Boys @-@ style outfits ; Cobain wears glasses that blurred his vision , while Novoselic cut his hair short and liked it so much he kept it that way afterwards . As the video progresses , the band destroys the set and its instruments . 
 Three different edits of the Kerslake video were made . Cobain intended to replace the first version of the video after a period with a new take featuring the band wearing dresses instead of suits . MTV 's alternative rock show 120 Minutes insisted on premiering the video , but Cobain felt the program would not properly convey the humor of the " pop idol " version . Instead , a new edit was produced which contained shots of the band in both suits and dresses . The original edit of the video never aired . This video won the award for Best Alternative Video at the 1993 MTV Video Music Awards , and topped the music video category in the 1992 Village Voice Pazz & Jop critics ' poll . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Kurt Cobain . 
 7 " , cassette 
 " In Bloom " – 4 : 17 
 " Polly " ( live ) – 2 : 47 
 12 " , CD 
 " In Bloom " – 4 : 17 
 " Sliver " ( live - Del Mar - 28 @.@ 12 @.@ 1991 ) – 2 : 06 
 " Polly " ( live - Del Mar - 28 @.@ 12 @.@ 1991 ) – 2 : 47 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Covers = = 
 <unk> Simpson recorded a country cover in 2016 which received air play on alternative stations . 
 = Lady in the Lake trial = 
 The Lady in the Lake trial was a 2005 murder case in which Gordon Park ( 25 January 1944 – 25 January 2010 ) a retired teacher from Leece , near Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness , Cumbria , England , was jailed for life for the murder of his first wife , Carol Ann Park , in 1976 . 
 Carol Park went missing on 17 July 1976 , and was never seen alive again by her family . In 1997 , her body was discovered by divers in Coniston Water and Gordon was arrested on suspicion of murder . The charges were subsequently dropped but in 2004 Gordon was arrested again and found guilty of his wife 's murder . The trial judge sentenced him to life imprisonment and recommended that he should serve a minimum of 15 years before being considered for parole . He was held at Garth prison , Leyland , Preston . In December 2007 he lodged an appeal against his conviction which was dismissed in November 2008 . On 25 January 2010 , he was found hanged in his cell , and pronounced dead at the scene . 
 The details of the murder are sketchy . Carol was killed due to blunt trauma to her face by means of some instrument , alleged in court to have been an ice axe . She was then bound with rope , using complex knots , weighed down with rocks and lead pipes and thrown overboard from a boat on Coniston Water . The body landed on an underwater ledge where it was later found by amateur divers . Had it been dropped a few metres further from the shore , it would have sunk to the much deeper bottom and probably never have been discovered . 
 There was a great deal of controversy surrounding the case . Gordon received much support from his family and friends and maintained his innocence . There was a large amount of local interest in the trial as shown by the sales of the local paper , the North @-@ West Evening Mail . Some claimed that much of the evidence against him could be discounted and there were vigils and petitions in attempts to free Gordon from prison and clear his name . The case featured prominently in the book No Smoke : The Shocking Truth About British Justice which outlined seven cases the author believed to be examples of innocent people being convicted of murder . 
 = = Case history = = 
 = = = Carol Park vanishes = = = 
 Prior to her disappearance , according to her friends , Carol was feeling depressed . She had talked of tracing her biological parents , as she was adopted . On 17 July 1976 , she went missing . Gordon claimed that she had left home for another man , and Carol had left their home in Leece twice before . It was for this reason , Gordon claimed , that he did not report her missing for six weeks . Carol was said to time her periods away from home to coincide with the school holidays . Gordon claimed that it wasn 't until she didn 't return in time to take up her job as a primary school teacher in September ( the start of the school term ) that he realised that there was a problem . At this time he reported her missing via his solicitor , and her family was informed . On the day she vanished , the family had been due to visit Blackpool on a day trip . However , Carol said she felt unwell and wanted to remain behind in bed . She was never seen alive again by her family . Gordon claimed he returned home to find Carol had left the house , leaving behind her wedding ring , and that there was no sign of a struggle . A missing persons enquiry was launched , but nothing came of it . This missing persons report was subsequently lost , and it was implied by some that it was because both Gordon and a senior police commander ( who , by the time the article was published , had died ) involved in the case were freemasons . This was refuted by Sandra Lean , who , in No Smoke , claimed that Gordon had never been a freemason . At the time , police told Gordon that , should a body be found , he would be the main suspect . 
 = = = Discovery of body and post mortem results = = = 
 On 13 August 1997 , amateur divers discovered Carol Park 's body , clad only in a nightdress , 75 feet down at the bottom of Coniston Water . She was nicknamed " the Lady in the Lake " by detectives after the 1943 detective novel by Raymond Chandler , The Lady in the Lake . The body had been wrapped in a pinafore dress , a canvas rucksack and plastic bags , tied with several knots , and weighed down with lead piping . Her eyes had been covered by plasters . It was later reported that the body had landed on an underwater ledge , and had it been thrown into the water a few metres farther from the land , it would probably never have been found . 
 Details of Carol 's death were revealed in the post mortem . There were severe injuries to the skull , and it was said that her face had been smashed by multiple blows . It was later found in court that the murder weapon had been an ice axe . The body was found to be in a foetal position , which suggested that the body had been dealt with within a few hours of death , before rigor mortis could settle in . It has since been said that the investigators failed to acknowledge that rigor mortis passes in a 24 ‑ to 48 ‑ hour time period , and that the body could feasibly have been trussed once rigor mortis had passed . Many unusual knots were used to tie the body , and the same knots were said to be used in Gordon Park 's house and boat . This was one of the key pieces of evidence used against Gordon in the trial . 
 = = = Gordon Park is arrested , but charges are dropped = = = 
 At the time of the discovery of the body , Gordon and his third wife , Jenny , were on a cycling holiday in France . They heard news of the discovery of the body , and are said to have seen footage of the police searching their house . On 24 August , they arrived home , and Gordon was arrested on suspicion of murder at <unk> the next morning . He was charged with the murder of Carol Park , and remanded in Preston prison . However , after two weeks , his solicitors managed to persuade the court to grant him bail . On 6 January 1998 , the charges against Gordon were dropped due to lack of evidence . The Crown Prosecution Service released a statement <unk> 
 After a conference with leading counsel and the police , a decision was taken , in agreement with all parties , that there was insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction . 
 Reportedly he told another inmate that " she deserved it " as had discovered his wife being unfaithful . 
 After the charges were dropped , Gordon said that he wished to " try to put all this , including the events of 21 years ago , behind me and try to return to my everyday life " . However , the fact that the charges were dropped angered Carol 's brother , Ivor Price , who said that he was disgusted by the way that Carol was portrayed in the proceedings , and talked of how Carol was not " someone who [ was ] cheap or had a string of lovers . " 
 = = = Gordon Park 's second arrest and trial = = = 
 Gordon was again arrested on 13 January 2004 . Police said at the time that the murder file had never been closed , and that the arrest followed new leads . These new leads were later reported to be a confession by Michael Wainwright , who claimed to have been a cellmate of Gordon 's during his short prison stay in 1997 . The police then revisited the site where the body was discovered , and found a piece of Westmorland green slate , a stone that matched the rocks that made up the wall of the family 's bungalow . The case was brought to trial at Manchester Crown Court , and lasted ten weeks . There was no single piece of evidence that pointed to Gordon indisputably , but the prosecution argued that when the evidence was placed together , it could only point at Park , and not a " mysterious stranger or secret lover " . Primarily , the case for the prosecution rested on circumstantial evidence , with the jury being asked to consider knots , rocks used to weight down the body and the ice axe , all linking Gordon Park to the crime . However , the statements of Michael Wainwright , and another of Gordon 's cellmates , who had learning difficulties , were also used as evidence by the prosecution . He was sentenced to be jailed for life , and told that he must serve at least 15 years . The judge said that he had taken into account the " terrible concealment " of the body . 
 Park claimed he and his wife had an open marriage 
 The court found that Gordon had first put his hands around Carol 's neck to strangle her , but that she had struggled . He then grabbed his ice axe , and brought it down with what was described as " considerable " force on Carol 's face , and smashed the front right @-@ hand side of her face , splitting open her head and smashing her teeth . He then did this again – the attack was described as consisting of " two big heavy , crushing blows " by pathologist Dr. Edwin Tapp . After this , Gordon dumped his wife 's body in the lake , and went back to his day @-@ to @-@ day life . During the trial , the prosecution speculated that Gordon had " drugged his wife , possibly on or around the 17 July , tied her up and stored her body in a chest freezer before dumping it in Coniston Water " . 
 = = = Gordon Park 's appeal = = = 
 On 6 December 2007 , it was reported that Clarion Solicitors , representing Gordon Park , said that they would launch an appeal . In a public statement , they said : 
 The appeal is based upon fresh evidence that was not available at the original trial , it is hoped the conviction will be quashed and a retrial ordered ... Upon his conviction , Mr Park 's family and friends launched a campaign to clear his name , claiming there was no single piece of evidence that pointed indisputably to him . 
 Representing Park in the appeal was solicitor Rob Rode and Simon Bourne @-@ <unk> QC . They did not initially reveal what the new evidence was , only that it " was not available at the original trial " and that it was " very strong and significant " . Cumbria Constabulary released a statement saying : 
 Detectives from Cumbria Constabulary carried out a full and thorough investigation and the full facts of the case were presented to the CPS . The case was then tried by a jury , where Gordon Park was found guilty of the murder of Carol Park in 1976 . 
 In October , campaigners in support of Park said " We have in our possession , a signed , witnessed , statement , made this week , by one of the main prosecution witnesses , stating , ‘ police officers did put words in my mouth regarding Gordon Park ’ and ‘ the police told me what to say in court . ’ " Pastor George Harrison , acting as a spokesperson for the campaigners , also claimed that the appeals process was flawed and " rendered virtually impossible " due to costs . 
 In November 2008 , the appeal bid was rejected by three judges at the Court of Appeal in London . QC Simon Bourne , representing Park , had wanted to call an expert witness to challenge geological evidence used at the trial . Lord Justice Keene said that the new evidence did not raise " a reasonable doubt as to the safety of this conviction " , saying that the geological evidence was only a small element of the " strong circumstantial case against the applicant " . The new evidence presented by geologist Andrew Moncrief concerned the rock found with the body , said to have been from the wall outside the Parks ' house . Moncrief argued that the rock was " indistinguishable " from others in the area , and therefore " meaningless " . 
 = = = Gordon Park 's death = = = 
 On 25 January 2010 , the morning of Park 's 66th birthday , he was found hanged and unconscious in his prison cell in Garth Prison , and pronounced dead at the scene later in the morning . It is believed that a ligature was involved , and that Park inflicted the injuries upon himself . Park had not been assessed for the risk of suicide . Jeremy Park said that " we are all completely devastated and still believe his innocence 100 % . " Since his death , Carol Park 's family have tried to trace her ashes . 
 = = Review = = 
 On 26 November 2014 , it was confirmed that the Criminal Cases review Commission were examining the verdict , and new DNA evidence had come to light . Carol Park 's niece has accused Gordon Park 's family of ' clutching at straws ' and has argued : " Gordon went to the High Court of Appeal and lost , so what makes them think after all this time they could find any information that could overturn the court ’ s decision ? " 
 = = Case controversy = = 
 = = = Support for Park = = = 
 There was much local interest in the matter , as was shown by the sales of the local paper , the North @-@ West Evening Mail , when it ran special editions on the case . Park maintained his innocence , and received much support from his family and friends . His children , Jeremy and Rachael , appointed a new legal team in an attempt to find grounds for appeal . Jeremy also set up a website , <unk> , in a bid to raise awareness and support of the case for Gordon . Notable individuals offering support include Tony Benn , who said that there was considerable doubt about Gordon 's conviction , and that he would do all he can to help campaign for his freedom . Benn has been quoted as saying the case is a " grave injustice " . He is one of the over 300 people who have signed the " Gordon Park is Innocent " petition . 
 A year into Park 's life sentence , around 40 family members and friends held a vigil at Strangeways Prison , in a bid to raise awareness of " the fact that there is an innocent man in prison " . Another was held a year later , led by Jenny Park , and a third on the third anniversary of Park 's imprisonment . It was due to these vigils , claimed Evangelical Pastor George Harrison , that he was barred from visiting Park once he was transferred to Garth prison , in Lancashire . Other fronts for the campaign included an offer of £ 5 @,@ 000 for anyone providing evidence that lead to Gordon 's freedom . Included in this were planned adverts in the North @-@ West Evening Mail and leaflets to 20 @,@ 000 homes in the Furness area . However , this was being organised by Harrison , with whom Gordon and his third wife Jennifer stayed during the trial . Jeremy Park wrote to the North @-@ West Evening Mail to confirm that he wanted nothing to do with the reward , and that Harrison had no right to include his name , contact details or email address , or mention the <unk> website , in the adverts . Subsequently , Harrison claimed to have delivered 6 @,@ 000 booklets and leaflets in the Furness area . 
 Not everyone with a link to the family supported Gordon 's attempts to clear his name . Vanessa Fisher , Park 's adoptive daughter , appeared as a witness for the prosecution at the trial , telling of how her father would hit the children with " a stick or cane " and how he would not discuss his wife 's disappearance . She was not in court at the time of Park 's sentencing . Ivor Price , Carol 's brother , has spoken publicly at various times about his feelings about Gordon , and the Price family even sat away from Park 's supporters during the trial itself . In a statement shortly after Park 's guilty verdict , he said he had " no doubt " that justice had been done , and added that " Carol was a lovely , bubbly girl who was very clever and intelligent . What has been said about her has been heartbreaking . This was about one thing : justice for Carol . " Around the same time , Price said that although he believed Gordon at the time of Carol 's disappearance , upon the news of a body being found in Coniston Water , he " knew it was her , and knew who had done it " , expressing his conviction of Park 's guilt . More recently , he said that he was " distressed " by the ongoing campaign to free Park . After Park 's unsuccessful appeal , Price 's daughters , Kay Washford and Claire Gardener spoke to the North @-@ West Evening Mail , their parents having died before the appeal was rejected . Washford said " It is brilliant , an amazing result . Our mum and dad Ivor and Maureen Price fought hard for this justice and now they can rest in peace because justice has been done . We are so thankful for the result and so glad he will be staying in there . " She added that " It is finally justice for Carol . " The Park family and Cumbria Constabulary did not comment . 
 = = = Claims of flawed investigation = = = 
 The case was reported to be difficult for the prosecution , with the time between the murder and the trial making it extremely difficult to track potential witnesses . Keith Churchman , a police officer involved in the case , said that " the other difficulty was of course the body was taken away from the place where it was killed . " However , on top of the difficulties outlined by the police , the <unk> website detailed a number of what Park 's supporters claim are holes in the evidence used to convict him . A story about the problems with the evidence was published in the Daily Mail on October 12 , 2005 , at the request of Jeremy , though it was not written by him . Bob <unk> , the author , later wrote an article for Inside Time , in December 2006 , talking about the trial and its controversies . Another similar article , pointing out holes in the evidence , was published in the Sunday Herald , on July 23 , 2006 . 
 = = = = Witnesses = = = = 
 The first problem with the evidence is the use of inmate informant evidence , such as that from Michael Wainwright , described as " the most disreputable [ form of evidence ] of all " , despite the fact that it was one of the key pieces of evidence in the trial . Glen Banks , a man with whom Park had briefly shared a cell and who claimed in court that Park had admitted his guilt to him , was described as " highly suggestible " , frequently changed his story , and also claimed that Park had admitted to killing Carol while sailing to Blackpool . Wainwright , the other informant , was said to bea heavy cannabis smoker and admitted to hearing voices . He claimed that Gordon had said that he went upstairs , found Carol in bed with another man , and killed her in a fit of rage . This seemed unlikely , as the Parks lived in a bungalow , and the supposed lover has never come forward . Park also claimed to have never actually met Wainwright . 
 Joan Young , who was the only first @-@ hand witness , is challenged in both articles . She came forward in 2004 , claiming that she had seen someone push something over the side of a boat on Coniston Water . This testimony is challenged , because so much time has passed and the fact that her husband saw nothing . However , he claims to have been reading his paper at the time . Also , it has been said that Young was too far away to identify the person in the boat , and that it couldn 't have been Carol Park 's body that was being dumped , as the Youngs were positioned so that the location Carol 's body was found would have been visibly blocked by an island . The article even points out that Young described a boat that appeared to be a cruiser yacht . Despite the fact that Gordon did own a large yacht in 1997 , in 1976 he owned only a 505 racing dinghy , which he sold later that year . 
 There are three witnesses who provide direct evidence supporting the idea that Park was innocent . The first , a neighbour , claims that they saw Carol at the bottom of her driveway . A second , another neighbour , claims that they saw an unidentified man in a Volkswagen Beetle in the Parks ' drive for twenty minutes . The presence of the unidentified car has never been accounted for . Around 6pm that night , another witness , a woman who knew Carol , saw her at Charnock Richard services . She had mentioned to her husband the fact that Carol had not greeted her , describing her as " snobby " . 
 = = = = Other evidence = = = = 
 The rock supposedly found in the lake , said to be taken from the Park 's garden wall , has been challenged as evidence in multiple places . Both articles say that the police diver had no memory of recovering it , and he claimed that if he had found it , he would have placed it back . Professor Kenneth Pye , a defense witness , said that there was no evidence that the rock had ever been on the lake bed at all . The article in the Sunday Herald also claims that the policeman said to be responsible for finding the rock fainted when it was produced in court , offering no explanation , but still denying that he ever found it . 
 Two more issues are addressed in the Sunday Herald article , but not in the Daily Mail article . The first is of the knots used to tie up Carol 's body – the knots on Carol 's body were mostly granny knots , of which there was no evidence that Gordon ever used – indeed during the trial he was specifically asked this , and he responded , " I do not use granny knots " . The granny knot is always a mistake , used by someone who should have used a reef knot ; those learning knot @-@ tying frequently make this mistake . Gordon Park , an experienced knot @-@ <unk> , would likely never use a granny knot , and their frequent appearance on the body of Carol is strong evidence that it was not Gordon who tied them . The article also claims that the evidence of knots was irrelevant anyway , as climbers and yachtsmen were so common in the area . The other piece of evidence related to another rock taken from the lakebed , which had supposedly come from the Parks ' roof . However , the prosecution eventually admitted that Westmoreland green slate had been worked in the area for hundreds of years , and could have come from anywhere . The Herald also mentions the fact that the police files from the original missing persons inquiry into Carol Park had gone missing themselves , but does not draw any conclusions from this . 
 Both articles address the issue of who the killer could alternatively have been , and both of them mention Carol 's other lovers , and John <unk> , responsible for murdering Carol 's sister . Both of the articles mention that he was in the Barrow area around the time of the murder , but both of them are careful to point out that they are not accusing him of being the murderer . 
 = = = No Smoke = = = 
 On 1 May 2007 , No Smoke – The Shocking Truth About British Justice , by Sandra Lean , was published by Exposure Publishing . This book features the stories of seven high @-@ profile convicted murderers , including Park , Luke Mitchell and Sion Jenkins . The book claims that the expert testimonies in the Lady in the Lake trial were flawed , that certain evidence was withheld , and that the sensationalist reporting of the press at the time influenced the court by persuading them that Park was the only person who could have killed his wife . 
 = = Personal life of Gordon Park = = 
 Park worked as a village primary school teacher , but was retired by the time he was prosecuted for the murder of his first wife , Carol . Park had two children by Carol , Jeremy and Rachael . Gordon and Carol also adopted their niece Vanessa when she was 18 months old after her mother , Christie ( who was Carol 's sister ) , was murdered by her boyfriend in 1969 , aged 17 . This was described as a " rare and appalling coincidence " , but has been picked up on by the case for the defence since the trial . 
 Park remarried twice after Carol was murdered . His second wife was named Catherine , and his third , to whom he remained married until his death , is named Jenny . Park met all of his wives through teaching , Carol was a teacher at Askam Village School when she was killed . When rejecting Park 's request for appeal , Lord Justice Keene , Mr Justice Beatson and Mr Justice Macduff noted that both Gordon and Carol had had affairs in the year leading up to Carol 's disappearance . 
 Park 's interests included sailing and climbing , which was relevant to the case due to the knots used to tie his wife 's body . While in prison , Park spent time practising t 'ai chi , taking a maths degree and keeping fit . 
 In an exclusive written interview with The Westmorland Gazette nine months into his sentence , Park talked of how he had struggled with prison , saying : " They [ other inmates ] may smoke incessantly , play loud music , the TV or video games , rifle your drawers , steal , lie etc . There is not a lot you can do about it ... I watched a guy " chasing the dragon " . It frightened me to death . I had never seen that before . " He refused to answer detailed questions about the trial or case , but protested his innocence , saying " If I knew who killed my wife , how , where , why , then I would have said so . I did not know then . I do not know now . " 
 = Dover Athletic F.C. = 
 Dover Athletic Football Club is a professional association football club based in the town of Dover , Kent , England . The club was formed in 1983 after the dissolution of the town 's previous club , Dover F.C. , whose place in the Southern League was taken by the new club . In the 1989 – 90 season Dover Athletic won the Southern League championship , but failed to gain promotion to the Football Conference as the club 's ground did not meet the required standard . Three seasons later the team won the title again and this time gained promotion to the Conference , where they spent nine seasons before being relegated at the end of the 2001 – 02 season . The club was transferred to the Isthmian League Premier Division in 2004 , but another poor season and financial problems that had been mounting led the club to a further relegation . After three seasons were spent in the Isthmian League Division One South , the club won the championship and with it promotion back to the Premier Division , followed immediately the following season by another championship and with it promotion to Conference South . Five seasons were spent in that division with the club coming close to gaining promotion several times , reaching the play @-@ offs three times . In the 2013 – 14 season , Dover reached the play @-@ off final for the second successive season and defeated Ebbsfleet United to return to the Conference Premier after a twelve @-@ year absence . 
 The team usually wear white shirts and are consequently nicknamed the Whites . They have played at the Crabble Athletic Ground since the club 's formation . The club 's best performance in the FA Cup was an appearance in the third round proper in the 2010 – 11 and 2014 – 15 seasons , while the best performance registered in the FA Trophy , the national competition for higher @-@ level non @-@ league clubs , was a run to the semi @-@ finals in the 1997 – 98 season . 
 = = History = = 
 Dover Athletic F.C. was formed in 1983 after the town 's previous club , Dover , folded due to its debts . The new club took Dover 's place in the Southern League Southern Division , with former Dover player Alan Jones as manager and a team consisting mainly of reserve players from the old club . Initially Athletic struggled , finishing second from bottom of the table in the 1984 – 85 season . In November 1985 Steve McRae , who had succeeded Jones a year earlier , was sacked and replaced by Chris Kinnear . 
 Under Kinnear the club 's fortunes turned round , with two top @-@ five finishes followed by the Southern Division championship , and with it promotion , in the 1987 – 88 season . The team started strongly in the Premier Division , finishing in sixth place at the first attempt , and then winning the championship in the 1989 – 90 season . The club was denied promotion to the Football Conference , however , as the Crabble Athletic Ground did not meet the standard required for that league . After finishing fourth and second in the subsequent two seasons , Dover won the title again in the 1992 – 93 season and this time were admitted to the Conference . 
 Although Dover finished in eighth place in their first season in the Conference , the following season saw the club struggling against relegation , and Kinnear was dismissed due to a combination of the team 's poor performances and his own personal problems . John Ryan was appointed as the club 's new manager , but his reign was a short one and he was dismissed when the club lost seven of its first eight matches in the 1995 – 96 season . The club then appointed former England international Peter Taylor as manager , but he was unable to steer the team away from the foot of the table , and Dover held onto their place in the Conference only because Northern Premier League runners @-@ up Boston United failed to submit their application for promotion before the required deadline . 
 Bill Williams took over as manager in 1997 and led the club to the FA Trophy semi @-@ finals in the 1997 – 98 season and a best league finish to date of sixth place in the 1999 – 2000 season . Williams left the club to take a senior position with Conference rivals Kingstonian in May 2001 . By now the club was in severe financial difficulties , with a number of directors resigning and debts exceeding £ 100 @,@ 000 . Amid the crisis the entire board of directors resigned , forcing the club 's Supporters ' Trust to take over the running of the club , and manager Gary Bellamy was sacked after just six months in the job . Former Everton goalkeeper Neville Southall took over but was dismissed just three months later , with Clive Walker taking over in March 2002 with the club rooted to the foot of the table . The club finished the season bottom of the Conference and was relegated back to the Southern League Premier Division . The club 's ongoing financial problems led to it entering a Company Voluntary Arrangement ( CVA ) , a process by which insolvent companies offset their debts against future profits , due to debts that were now estimated at £ 400 @,@ 000 . 
 In Dover 's first season back in the Southern League Premier Division the Whites finished in third place , albeit 17 points adrift of Tamworth , who claimed the one promotion place available that season . A poor start to the following season saw Walker replaced by Richard Langley . Dover finished the season in 19th place , before being switched to the Isthmian League Premier Division in the summer of 2004 following a re @-@ organisation of the English football league system . The new season started with six successive defeats , which saw Langley sacked , and the financial problems continued , with the club coming within two months of being closed down . Dover were relegated to the Isthmian League Division One at the end of the season , but were saved from possible extinction in January 2005 when former director Jim Parmenter returned to head up a consortium that took over the club . Parmenter quickly sacked manager Steve Browne and convinced Clive Walker to return to the club to replace him , and also arranged for the club 's outstanding CVA debts to be cleared , putting the club on a firm financial footing for the first time in many years . 
 Dover Athletic narrowly missed out on an immediate return to the Premier Division in the 2005 – 06 season , reaching the play @-@ offs for promotion but losing out to Tonbridge Angels . The following season Dover again reached the play @-@ offs but lost in the semi @-@ final to Hastings United , after which Walker did not have his contract renewed and was replaced by former Gillingham manager Andy Hessenthaler . In his first season in charge he led the club to the Division One South championship and promotion to the Isthmian League Premier Division . The following season Dover won a second consecutive championship and thus gained promotion to Conference South . In the 2009 – 10 season , Dover reached the play @-@ offs for promotion to the Conference National , but lost at the semi @-@ final stage to Woking . The following season the club reached the third round of the FA Cup for the first time after wins over Kent rivals Gillingham in the first round and another League Two club , Aldershot Town , in the second round . In the 2012 – 13 season the club again reached the play @-@ offs , but this time lost in the final to Salisbury City . The following season the team reached the second round of the FA Cup , losing 1 – 0 to Milton Keynes Dons , The last 16 of the FA Trophy , narrowly losing 3 – 2 to Eastleigh and made the play @-@ offs once more . A 4 – 1 aggregate victory over Sutton United in the semi @-@ final set up a match with fellow Kent team Ebbsfleet United in the final . On 10 May 2014 , Dover beat Ebbsfleet 1 – 0 at Stonebridge Road with a goal from Nathan Elder enough to seal the club 's return to the top flight of non @-@ league football for the first time since 2002 . In the 2014 – 15 season Dover went on another FA Cup run , beating Morecambe 1 – 0 in the first round , then Cheltenham Town 1 – 0 in the second round to reach the third round proper for only the second time ever , but lost 4 – 0 at home to Premier League side Crystal Palace . The following season the team qualified for the play @-@ offs for promotion to League Two . 
 = = Colours and crest = = 
 Dover Athletic 's traditional colours are white and black , which were also the colours worn by the earlier Dover club . Away colours worn by the club have included red , yellow & green , pink and blue . The club 's crest contains a stylised representation of the town 's two most famous landmarks , Dover Castle and the white cliffs , enclosed in a circle bearing the club 's name . The club 's shirts have been sponsored by companies including Criccieth Homes , Paul Brown of Dover , Jenkins and Pain , cross @-@ channel ferry operators Hoverspeed and SeaFrance , local car dealership Perry 's and are now sponsored by produce suppliers Gomez , the company owned by Dover Athletic chairman Jim Parmenter . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Dover Athletic 's home ground since the club 's foundation has been the Crabble Athletic Ground , which was also the home of the former Dover club . The word Crabble , which is also found in the name of a local corn mill , may derive from the Old English <unk> hol , meaning a hole in which crabs are found . The stadium , commonly known simply as " Crabble " or , imprecisely , as " The Crabble " , forms part of a larger council @-@ owned complex , and the earlier Dover club originally shared the lower pitch with a rugby club , but moved to the upper pitch in the 1950s , adding a grandstand in 1951 , followed soon after by terracing and floodlights . 
 Dover Athletic continued to make improvements to the ground , although not in time to allow the club to take its place in the Football Conference in 1990 . Subsequently new turnstiles were installed and two new terraces and a second grandstand added . These improvements meant that the club was able to gain promotion after its second Southern League title in 1993 . The stadium 's modern capacity is 5 @,@ 745 with 1 @,@ 010 seats and 3 @,@ 642 spectators under cover . 
 In 2007 the club announced that under the new sponsorship deal with SeaFrance the stadium would be known officially as the SeaFrance Crabble Stadium , but a year later it was announced that the deal would not be renewed due to the ferry operator 's financial constraints . On 1 July 2008 local car dealership Perry 's was announced as the club 's new main sponsor and the stadium rebranded as the Perry 's Crabble Stadium , an arrangement which lasted until 2012 . Between 2003 and 2004 it was known as the Hoverspeed Stadium under the terms of another such agreement . Margate played their home matches at Crabble for two seasons from 2002 until 2004 , while their own Hartsdown Park ground was being redeveloped . 
 = = Supporters = = 
 In the club 's early days Athletic struggled to attract crowds of over 150 , but by the time the club reached the Conference , crowds at Crabble were averaging around 1 @,@ 000 . After the club 's relegation to the Isthmian League Division One South , the average attendance fell to just over 800 , but when the club returned to the Premier Division for the 2008 – 09 season , the average attendance at Crabble was 1 @,@ 293 , the highest in the division . The highest home attendance in the club 's history was 5 @,@ 645 for the match against Crystal Palace in the third round of the FA Cup on 4 January 2015 . Although Athletic 's improved monetary position means that the Supporters ' Trust is no longer required to financially support the club , it remains active as a fundraising organisation . 
 = = Statistics and records = = 
 Dover Athletic 's highest finish in the English football league system was in the 1999 – 2000 season , in which the team finished in sixth place in the Football Conference , the highest level of non @-@ league football and the fifth level overall . The Whites have made 13 appearances in the final qualifying round of the FA Cup , but have only progressed to the first round proper three times . In the 2010 – 11 season , Dover reached the third round for the first time , defeating Football League Two teams Gillingham and Aldershot Town in the first two rounds before losing to Huddersfield Town of Football League One . In the 1997 – 98 season the Whites reached the semi @-@ finals of the FA Trophy but missed out on an appearance at Wembley , losing to Cheltenham Town . The largest number of points the team has accrued is 102 in the 1989 – 90 season , and the highest total number of goals scored in a season is 89 , scored in 40 matches in the 1985 – 86 season . The team 's biggest ever win was an 8 – 0 defeat of East Preston in September 2009 , and the heaviest defeat was a 7 – 1 loss to Poole Town in April 1984 . 
 The holder of the record for most appearances for Dover Athletic is Jason Bartlett , who played in 539 matches , and the all @-@ time top goalscorer is Lennie Lee , with 160 goals . The club 's record signing is Dave <unk> , who joined the club from Farnborough Town in 1993 for £ 50 @,@ 000 , which at the time was the highest transfer fee ever paid between non @-@ league clubs . The highest confirmed fee received by the club was also £ 50 @,@ 000 , paid by Brentford in 1997 for Ricky Reina . 
 = = Players = = 
 As of 16th July 2016 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Former players = = = 
 For a list of former Dover Athletic players with Wikipedia articles , see Category : Dover Athletic F.C. players . 
 = = Managers = = 
 Dover Athletic have had 17 permanent managers ( excluding caretaker managers ) in the club 's 25 @-@ year history , with Chris Kinnear 's 10 @-@ year stint being the longest . The shortest stay was Ian Hendon who was announced as manager on 28 May 2010 and resigned only 18 days later to join Andy Hessenthaler at Gillingham . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Southern League 
 Premier Division champions 1989 – 90 , 1992 – 93 
 Southern Division champions 1987 – 88 
 Isthmian League 
 Premier Division champions 2008 – 09 
 Division One South champions 2007 – 08 
 Kent Senior Cup 
 Winners 1990 – 91 
 Conference South 
 Play @-@ off winners 2013 – 14 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 Dover Athletic 's main rivalry is with nearby Folkestone Invicta . A meeting between the two teams in 2004 was watched by a crowd of 2 @,@ 278 , a record attendance for a league match at Invicta 's ground . The club also has a rivalry with Margate . In the 2001 – 02 season , when both teams were in the Football Conference , the two games between Margate and Dover were watched by a combined total of more than 6 @,@ 000 spectators . The game played at Margate 's Hartsdown Park stadium drew a crowd of 3 @,@ 676 , and 2 @,@ 325 were in attendance for the game at Dover . 
 = Plum cake = 
 Plum cake refers to a wide range of cakes made with either dried fruit ( such as grapes , currants , raisins or prunes ) or with fresh fruit . There is a wide range of popular plum cakes and puddings . Since the meaning of the word " plum " has changed over time , many items referred to as plum cakes and popular in England since at least the eighteenth century have now become known as fruitcake . The English variety of plum cake also exists on the European mainland , but may vary in ingredients and consistency . Settlers in British colonies brought the dried fruit variety of cake with them , so that for example , in India it was served around the time of the Christmas holiday season and in the American colonies , where it became associated with elections , one version came to be called " election cake " . 
 Plum cakes made with fresh plums came with other migrants from other traditions in which plum cake is prepared using plum as a primary ingredient . In some versions , the plums may become jam @-@ like inside the cake after cooking , or be prepared using plum jam . Plum cake prepared with plums is also a part of Ashkenazi Jewish cuisine , and is referred to as <unk> or <unk> . Other plum @-@ based cakes are found in French , Italian and Polish cooking . 
 = = Terms = = 
 The term " plum cake " and " fruit cake " have become interchangeable . Since dried fruit is used as a sweetening agent and any dried fruit used to be described as " plums " , many plum cakes and plum puddings do not contain the plum fruit now known by that name . ( Plum pudding is a similar , richer dish prepared with similar ingredients , cooked by steaming the mixture rather than baking it . ) The term " plum " originally referred to prunes , raisins or grapes . Thus the so @-@ called plums from which English plum puddings are made " were always raisins , not the plump juicy fruits that the name suggests today . " 
 In Old English , the term <unk> was " from medieval Latin <unk> , from Latin <unk> , " which equated to " prune " . <unk> in modern French means plum , so plum tarts have names such as <unk> aux prunes . In English , prunes are dried plums , and when modern cakes use them as a primary ingredient , they may be referred to as a plum cake or type of plum cake . 
 = = By region = = 
 = = = Britain = = = 
 Plum cake has historically referred to an early type and style of fruitcake in England since around 1700 . Raisins and currants were used , which in the English language were referred to as plums since around 1660 . The various types of dried fruit ( grapes , currants and raisins ) were familiar to English kitchens through trade with The Levant and Mediterranean but before they became available through " trouble @-@ free " imports from Australia , South Africa and California , preparing them required " an immense amount of labour ... on account of the rough and ready methods by which the fruit was picked , dried , packed and exported " . 
 In 1881 Colonel Henry @-@ Herbert said that " a good English plum cake ... is a national institution " . At times , Thomas Carlyle was one among many who ate a light style of plum cake with tea , into which he would dip the cake , which he described as bun @-@ like with currants " dotted here and there " . Elizabeth David wrote that " Christmas mincemeat and Christmas plum pudding and cake are all such typical examples of the English fondness for spiced fruit mixtures that it seems almost unnecessary to include recipes for them ... " 
 Plum cakes were raised by whipping air into the cake batter , rather than by the use of yeast . A range of plum cakes and puddings were published in the popular Book of Household Management ( published 1859 @-@ 1861 ) by Isabella Beeton . Mrs Beeton included recipes for " A Common Plum Cake " and " A Nice Plum Cake " as well as " Baked Plum @-@ Pudding " , " An Unrivalled Plum @-@ Pudding " , " A Plain Christmas Pudding for Children " , " Plum @-@ Pudding of Fresh Fruit " , " Plum Tart " , " Christmas Plum @-@ Pudding " , " A Pound Plum Pudding " and " Christmas Cake " . The comment in an Indian Household Management book is indicative both of the reach of Mrs Beeton 's book as well as the range of interpretations of plum cake and plum pudding . The author says , " Mrs Beeton ’ s recipe is by far the best if modified a little : 12 units of <unk> raisins ... " 
 Up to World War I , cakes , including plum cakes , were baked along with loaves of bread . " A smaller cake or pasty might be slipped in or pulled out after the baking had begun , but a raised pie with well @-@ protected sides , or a large plum cake , would take at least the same time as the loaves , and experienced housewives made them in sizes to do so . " 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 The English variety of plum cake also exists on the European mainland , although " plum cake " there more usually refers to baked cakes made with fresh , rather than dried fruit . 
 In French cooking , plums are an ingredients in a significant tradition of cake making : " ... throughout the districts of the Loire , the Dordogne , the Lot and the Périgord , there [ was ] hardly a celebration , a wedding feast or celebration at which the dessert [ did ] not include some sort of plum or <unk> tart , made with fresh or dried plums or jam according to the season . " The <unk> plum is a specific cultivar used to make <unk> aux <unk> ( plum tart ) . A Galette aux fruits is a type of <unk> made with yeast dough and covered with previously cooked fruit in season , such as plums ( or quinces , apples , apricots ) . The fruit in these open tarts or flans is cut into suitably sized pieces and the cake is glazed : red glaze is recommended for red plum and rhubarb flans , whereas apricot glaze is recommended in yellow plum and apricot flans . 
 The German plum cake , known as <unk> , can be found all over the country , although its home is Bavaria . In chef Robert Carrier 's recipe for it , the base is made from yeast pastry rather than often used shortcrust pastry , because the yeast pastry " soaks up the juice form the plums without becoming soggy " . 
 In Italy , plum cake is known by the English name , baked in an oven using dried fruit and often yoghurt . 
 The Polish version of plum cake , which also uses fresh fruit , is known as <unk> z <unk> . 
 = = = India = = = 
 In India plum cake has been served around the time of the Christmas holiday season , and may have additional ingredients such as rum or brandy added . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Plum cake in the United States originated with the English settlers and was prepared in the English style in sizes ranging from small , such as for parties in celebration of Twelfth Night and Christmas , to large , such as for weddings . This original fruitcake version of plum cake in the United States has been referred to as a reigning " standard American celebration cake through the time of the civil war " . 
 During colonial times , one version of plum cake was called " election cake " , and was prepared with currants , raisins , molasses and spices , with the addition of brandy in the recipe occurring later . Election cakes were typically leavened with yeast . In New England , large election cakes weighing around 12 pounds ( 5 @.@ 4 kg ) would traditionally be served while people waited for election results . It has been stated that the first published election cake recipe appeared in 1796 in American Cookery . 
 Plum cake recipes in the fruitcake style appeared in early cookbooks in the Southern United States , and did not actually call for plums . After 1830 plum cake was often referred to as fruit cake or black cake . In 1885 , in a description of plum cake that sounds like plum pudding , it was described as " mucilaginous " - a solid , dark @-@ colored , thick cake with copious amounts of plums , gritty notes from raisins . 
 = Kedok Ketawa = 
 Kedok Ketawa ( [ <unk> <unk> ] ; Indonesian for The Laughing Mask , also known by the Dutch title Het <unk> <unk> ) is a 1940 action film from the Dutch East Indies ( now Indonesia ) . Union Films ' first production , it was directed by Jo An Djan . Starring Basoeki Resobowo , Fatimah , and Oedjang , the film follows a young couple who fight off criminals with the help of a masked man . 
 Advertised as an " Indonesian cocktail of violent actions ... and sweet romance " , Kedok Ketawa received positive reviews , particularly for its cinematography . Following the success of the film , Union produced another six works before being shut down in early 1942 during the Japanese occupation . The film , screened until at least August 1944 , may be lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Cibodas , Banten , a young woman named Minarsih ( Fatimah ) is rescued from four thugs by the painter Basuki ( Basoeki Resobowo ) . They fall in love and begin planning their life together . However , a rich man interested in taking Minarsih to be his wife sends a gang to kidnap her . Basuki is unable to repel them , but is soon joined by a masked vigilante known only as the " The Laughing Mask " ( Oedjang ) , who has almost supernatural fighting abilities . After two battles with the gang , Basuki and The Laughing Mask are victorious . Basuki and Minarsih can live together in peace . 
 = = Production = = 
 Kedok Ketawa was the first film produced by Union Films , one of four new production houses established after the success of Albert Balink 's Terang Boelan revived the ailing film industry of the Dutch East Indies . Union was headquartered in Prinsenlaan , Batavia ( now Mangga Besar , Jakarta ) and funded by the ethnic Chinese businessman Ang Hock Liem , although Tjoa Ma Tjoen was in charge of day @-@ to @-@ day operations . The film was shot on @-@ location in Cibodas , and featured fighting , comedy , and singing . 
 The film was directed by Jo An Djan and starred Oedjang , Fatimah , and Basoeki Resobowo . Other members of the cast included S Poniman and Eddy Kock . Oedjang had been a stage actor before appearing in the film , while Fatimah and Basoeki were nobles with a formal education . The Indonesian film historian Misbach Yusa Biran writes that this is evidence the film was targeted at intellectual audiences , a manifestation of Union 's stated goal of " improv [ ing ] the quality of Indonesian art " . 
 Following the success of Terang Boelan ( 1937 ; based on The Jungle Princess ) , the domestic film industry began to model their productions after Hollywood works , as this was expected to ensure financial success . The Indonesian film scholars <unk> Imanjaya and Said Salim write that Kedok Ketawa was influenced by Bram Stoker 's 1897 novel Dracula through its Hollywood adaptations . Neither writer gives comparisons to illustrate this influence . 
 Kedok Ketawa was not the first contemporary film featuring a masked hero . Tan 's Film had released Gagak Item ( The Black Crow ) , with Rd Mochtar as the masked Black Crow , in 1939 , and later productions , including Java Industrial Film 's Srigala Item ( The Black Wolf ; 1941 ) , continued the trend . As was common for contemporary productions , the soundtrack for Kedok Ketawa – performed by Poniman – consisted of kroncong songs . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Kedok Ketawa was released in Batavia in July 1940 , with a press screening on 20 July . By September it was being shown in Surabaya . In some newspaper advertisements , such as in Pemandangan , it was referred to as Pendekar dari Preanger ( Warrior from Preanger ) , while in others it was advertised with the Dutch title Het <unk> <unk> . It was marketed as an " Indonesian cocktail of violent actions ... and sweet romance " and rated for all ages . 
 The critic and screenwriter Saeroen , writing for Pemandangan , praised Kedok Ketawa , especially its cinematography and the beauty of its scenery ; he compared the film to imported Hollywood films . An anonymous review in Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad found that the film was a mix of native and European sensibilities and lauded its cinematography . According to the review , the film surpassed expectations , but it was evident that this was a first production . Another review , in Soerabaijasch Handelsblad , considered the film among the best local productions , emphasising the quality of its cinematography and acting . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Soon after the success of Kedok Ketawa , Saeroen joined Union Films and wrote four films for the company . These were not directed by Jo An Djan , who left Union for the competitor Populair 's Film , but by the newly hired R Hu and Rd Ariffien . Union Film ultimately produced a total of seven films in 1940 and 1941 before being closed following the Japanese invasion in early 1942 . Of the film 's main cast , only Fatimah and Oedjang are recorded as continuing their acting career , both appearing in several further Union productions . However , in the 1950s Resobowo continued his career behind the screen , serving as art director of such films as Darah dan Doa ( The Long March ; 1950 ) . 
 Kedok Ketawa was screened as late as August 1944 , but may now be lost . Movies in the Indies were recorded on highly flammable nitrate film , and after a fire destroyed much of Produksi Film Negara 's warehouse in 1952 , old films shot on nitrate were deliberately destroyed . While the American visual anthropologist Karl G. Heider suggests that all Indonesian films from before 1950 are lost , J.B. Kristanto 's Katalog Film Indonesia records several as having survived at Sinematek Indonesia 's archives , and Biran writes that some Japanese propaganda films have survived at the Netherlands Government Information Service . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = My Boo ( Usher and Alicia Keys song ) = 
 " My Boo " is a duet between American R & B singers Usher and Alicia Keys , written by Usher , Keys , Jermaine Dupri , Adonis Shropshire , and Manuel Seal , Jr .. The song was released as the album 's fourth single in 2004 . Set over a hip hop @-@ style track , it was produced by Dupri and No I.D. It was included on the re @-@ release of Usher 's fourth studio album , Confessions ( 2004 ) . 
 The song received positive reviews from critics , and has garnered awards . The single stayed on top of the Billboard Hot 100 for six weeks , making it the third most @-@ successful single from the album after " Yeah ! " and " Burn " , respectively . It was also ranked as the 36th biggest song of the 2000 – 2009 decade in the US . 
 = = Background = = 
 Usher and Alicia Keys had previously collaborated with the remix of Keys ' 2004 single " If I Ain 't Got You " , which was released in the United Kingdom . During the production of Usher 's fourth studio album , Confessions , they thought of various female singers to pair him with on the song . Usher and <unk> Kaycee <unk> 's rare demo version can be found floating on the Internet . Although it was and still is widely believed that it was Beyoncé . However , Jermaine Dupri , who co @-@ wrote the song including Usher 's number @-@ one hits " Yeah ! " , " Burn " , and " Confessions Part II " , felt that he had established good relationship with Keys since she had worked with him and Usher . 
 The song is written from the perspectives of Keys and Usher , who play the role of an ex @-@ couple . For him , Usher and Keys " talk about how they used to be in love and how those feelings are still lingering despite the two not being involved anymore . " For Keys , " The song is talking about the first person you ever really had feelings for . Even though you move on and meet new people , you always remember that first person . " 
 = = Release = = 
 " My Boo " was among the songs that were not included in the final track listing of Confessions , including " Red Light " and songs recorded Usher recorded with P. Diddy and The Neptunes . " My Boo " and " Red Light " were leaked to the internet , along with other records that were not included during the first release . The song was included in the expanded version of Confessions , alongside " Red Light " and " Sweet Lies " which were only released in the UK version of the album . Dupri thought of releasing " My Boo " as the fourth single from Confessions once " Confessions Part II " would be leaving the charts . LaFace Records sent " My Boo " to US contemporary hit radio on August 29 , 2004 and to US urban contemporary radio on August 30 , 2004 . The single was released in the United States as a 12 " single on September 21 , 2004 . It was a double A @-@ side with " Confessions Part II " when it was released in the United Kingdom on December 28 , 2004 . " My Boo " was re @-@ released in the United Kingdom on January 18 , 2005 . 
 = = Composition and reception = = 
 " My Boo " is a hip hop @-@ tinged R & B song with a mid @-@ tempo melody . It is composed in the key of D minor , in common time . The lyrics are constructed in verse @-@ chorus @-@ chorus form . Usher starts the intro , and Keys followed her rap @-@ intro , with background vocals from Usher . He proceeds to the first verse and chorus , leading to Keys singing another chorus , altering some of the lyrics of the original chorus to create a dialogue . Keys sings the second verse and Usher for the chorus , with background vocals from Keys . Keys repeats her version for the chorus . The song breaks with Usher and Keys singing " My oh , My oh , My oh , My oh , My Boo " , one after the other . Usher repeats the chorus again , and they sing the intro of Keys . 
 The song received mixed reviews from critics . Azeem Ahmad of OMH Media proposed to ban " My Boo " because he felt that the collaboration was a competition among Usher and Alicia Keys " over the hip @-@ pop like beat " . Jon Caramanica of Rolling Stone found the duet sentimental . At the 2005 Grammy Awards , it was nominated for Best R & B Song and Best R & B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals ; to which it won the latter and the former was awarded to Alicia Keys ' song , " You Don 't Know My Name " . Usher and Keys won for Best R & B / Soul Single by a Duo or Group during the 2005 Soul Train Music Awards . In 2011 , Billboard ranked the song seventh on a special The 40 Biggest Duets of All Time listing . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " My Boo " was successful in the United States , living up to the chart performances of " Yeah ! " , " Burn " and " Confessions Part II " . The single debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 twenty @-@ nine , the highest U.S. entry among all singles released from the album . It entered the top ten , two weeks after , and peaked at number one during its eighth @-@ week stay on the chart . The single remained on the top for six weeks , beating its predecessor " Confessions Part II " , which charted at number one for two weeks . However , it failed to match the success of " Yeah ! " and " Burn " for twelve- and eight @-@ week run on the top , respectively . It stayed on the top ten for nineteen weeks , leaving the chart after twenty @-@ six weeks . The single was successful on Billboard component charts , topping the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs and Hot Ringtones . In Europe , the single had divided responses . The single reached the top five in United Kingdom , Germany , the Netherlands , Norway and Switzerland . It entered the top twenty in France , Finland and Switzerland , and top thirty in Austria . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Directed by both Usher and music video director Chris Robinson , " My Boo " clip was filmed in New York City . The storyline of the video is a reflection of the song 's lyrics . The footage starts with Usher in a living room watching a video for " Bad Girl " , a song from Confessions . The " Bad Girl " intro features Usher singing the song in a club setting while admiring a scantily @-@ dressed woman . He turns the set off and slumps down on the sofa before laying on it with his foot propped up . After a moment of silent , nostalgic reflection , he begins to sing the intro of " My Boo " . The video then shows him and Alicia Keys in their separate quarters , preparing to head out , while singing their part of the song . Usher eventually steps out on streets of New York ; likewise , Keys is out in her car . She leaves the car and walks down the street , and the couple meet up in the middle of Times Square , cuddling each other and on the brink of kissing . The music video debuted on MTV 's Total Request Live at number nine on September 16 , 2004 . It remained on the countdown for twenty @-@ seven days , becoming the only Confession video to chart . 
 Usher recorded " My Boo " aside from Keys with various female artists . He collaborated with fellow R & B singer Brandy Norwood and Usher recorded their own version as well , which appeared on her fourth album Afrodisiac . Brandy changed some of the lyrics , singing like having a conversation . However , neither of the two was included in the album . A remix of " My Boo " was also produced , featuring guest vocals from Nelly ; however , Keys ' part was omitted . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 UK CD 1 
 " Confessions Part II " 
 " My Boo " ( Duet with Alicia Keys ) 
 UK CD 2 
 " Confessions Part II " 
 " My Boo " ( Duet with Alicia Keys ) 
 " Confessions Part II " ( Remix ) ( featuring Shyne , Kanye West & Twista ) 
 " Confessions Part II " ( Music Video ) 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Rio de Janeiro bid for the 2016 Summer Olympics = 
 The Rio de Janeiro bid for the 2016 Summer Olympics and Paralympics was a successful bid to host the Games of the XXXI Olympiad and the XV Paralympic Games , respectively . It was submitted on September 7 , 2007 , and recognized as an Applicant city by the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) one week after . On June 4 , 2008 , the IOC Executive Board shortlisted Rio de Janeiro with three of the six other Applicant cities — Chicago , Madrid and Tokyo ; over Baku , Doha and Prague — becoming a Candidate city during the 2008 SportAccord Convention in Athens , Greece . 
 Rio de Janeiro was shortlisted receiving a 6 @.@ 4 score , according to a study of its Application File delivered to the IOC Working Group on January 14 , 2008 . As a Candidate city , Rio de Janeiro submitted its Candidature File to the IOC on February 11 , 2009 . The dossier was analyzed by the IOC Evaluation Commission , which arrived in the city on April 27 , 2009 , to assess the quality of the bid . Between April 29 and May 2 , the Commission attended technical presentations and made inspections in all the existing venues across the city , giving a favorable assessment in its final report . 
 The Brazilian Olympic Committee ( COB ) chose Rio de Janeiro as its bidding city to host the 2016 Summer Olympics and Paralympics , during its Annual Assembly on September 1 , 2006 . This was the city 's first bid that proceeded to the Candidature phase , after three failed attempts to host the Games in 1936 , 2004 and 2012 . The lengthy and intensive bidding process was concluded with the election of Rio de Janeiro as the host city during the 121st IOC Session , held in Copenhagen , Denmark , on October 2 , 2009 . It will be the first city in South America to host the Games . 
 Rio de Janeiro planned to organize the Games at a cost of USD 14 @.@ 4 billion , being able to hold all sport events ( excepting football ) inside the city . There will be 30 competition venues in four Olympic zones — Barra , Copacabana , Deodoro , and Maracanã — apart from venues for golf and rugby union , which were added to the Olympic program after the election . Football matches will be held in the cities of Belo Horizonte , Brasília , Salvador and São Paulo . The proposed dates range from August 5 to 21 for the Olympic Games , and September 7 to 18 for the Paralympic Games . 
 = = Bid process = = 
 Rio de Janeiro 's bidding process began on July 28 , 2006 , when the Executive Council of the Brazilian Olympic Committee ( COB in the Portuguese acronym ) met to consider the possibility of nominating a Brazilian city to host the 2016 Summer Olympics and Paralympics . This meeting was prompted by the fact that several cities in the world demonstrated interest around the election , some having already announced their bidding intention . Then a technical analysis was commissioned by COB to evaluate the conditions of the city , unveiled on August 25 , 2006 . A week later , on September 1 , 2006 , the COB 's Annual Assembly decided by acclamation that Rio de Janeiro would be the Brazilian representative seeking to host the Olympic and Paralympic Games in 2016 . The Assembly felt it was the only city in Brazil and South America which would possess Olympic @-@ level facilities ready for an Olympic and Paralympic bid , a legacy of its upcoming hosting of the XV Pan American Games in 2007 , later considered to be the best in history . Another positive aspect was that Rio de Janeiro could host all Olympic sports within the city limits , although the Olympic football tournament is hosted by multiple cities . The Brazilian government immediately expressed its support to the bid . Carlos Arthur Nuzman , president of COB , and César Maia , then Mayor of Rio de Janeiro , approved the decision , thus making the bid official . 
 The International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) officially launched the bid process for the 2016 Summer Olympics and Paralympics on May 16 , 2007 . All then 203 National Olympic Committees ( NOCs ) were invited to submit the name of a city within their jurisdiction until September 13 , 2007 . On September 14 , the IOC recognized seven cities — Baku , Chicago , Doha , Madrid , Prague , Rio de Janeiro and Tokyo — which had been put forward by their respective NOCs to bid . On October 1 , 2007 , the Rio de Janeiro bid committee paid the required fee of USD 150 @,@ 000 to the IOC and signed the Candidature Acceptance Procedure . Soon after , from October 15 to 19 , Rio officials attended the 2016 Applicant cities ' Seminar organized by the IOC at the Olympic Museum in Lausanne , Switzerland , where they learnt more about technical areas that would be analyzed throughout the application process . On January 14 , 2008 , the seven Applicant cities returned documents , known as the Application Files , containing the answers and guarantees requested by the 2016 Candidature Acceptance Procedure , which provided to the IOC an overview of each city 's project . The responses were studied by the IOC Working Group for months and served as the basis to the shortlist of Chicago , Tokyo , Rio de Janeiro and Madrid on June 4 , 2008 , becoming Candidate cities during a meeting of the IOC Executive Board at the 2008 SportAccord Convention in Athens , Greece . 
 Rio de Janeiro bid to host the 1936 , 2004 and the 2012 Games , but failed on every occasion ; missing the shortlist in the two latest attempts , while the bidding process for 1936 did not follow the current standards . For the first time in the Candidature phase , the official bid flag was raised during a ceremony held at the Palácio da Cidade ( English : City 's Palace ) on June 23 , 2008 , celebrating the Olympic Day . On July 3 , 2008 , the Rio de Janeiro bid committee paid a fee of USD 500 @,@ 000 to the IOC and signed the Candidature Procedure , reconfirming its acceptance of the rules . Then , Rio officials participated in the Olympic Games Observers Program from August 8 to 24 , during the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China ; and attended the IOC Official <unk> of the Beijing Games from November 24 to 27 , in London , United Kingdom . On February 11 , 2009 , the Rio de Janeiro bid committee delivered its Candidature File to the IOC in Lausanne and , eight days later , to the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) in Bonn , Germany ; containing the responses to the 2016 Candidature Procedure and Questionnaire , as well as guarantees and undertakings . The Candidature File had three volumes containing 568 pages of detailed answers to 300 technical questions , divided into 17 themes . Finally , on June 17 , 2009 , the IOC organized the 2016 Candidate Cities Briefing to 93 of its members at the Olympic Museum , being the first such meeting in its history and the most important before the election . Rio officials came out stronger after a presentation of 45 minutes , considered to be exceptional , followed by a session of 16 questions . 
 Throughout the campaign , the Rio de Janeiro bid committee introduced its plans to the General Assemblies of all Associations of National Olympic Committees ( <unk> ) , making the bid 's first official presentation on October 11 , 2008 , to the Pan American Sports Organization ( PASO ) , in Acapulco , Mexico . On October 21 , the vision was presented to the Olympic Council of Asia ( OCA ) in Bali , Indonesia , followed by the European Olympic Committees ( EOC ) on November 21 , in Istanbul , Turkey . On March 26 , 2009 , Rio officials made a praised presentation during the 2009 SportAccord Convention in Denver , United States . For the first time , a world map of the past Olympic host cities was displayed , subsequently becoming an icon of Rio 's campaign due to the void in South America . On March 31 , 2009 , the Rio de Janeiro bid committee made its plea to the Oceania National Olympic Committees ( <unk> ) in Queenstown , New Zealand ; and on July 7 , to the Association of National Olympic Committees of Africa ( ANOCA ) in Abuja , Nigeria . The bid committee also attended many sporting events , such as the Australian and European Youth Olympic Festivals , the Commonwealth Youth Games , the Asian Youth Games and the Mediterranean Games , as well as the Aquatics , Athletics , Rowing and Judo World Championships . The three @-@ year campaign culminated with the beginning of the 13th Olympic Congress in Copenhagen , Denmark , which was officially opened in a ceremony held at the city 's Opera House , and after a lunch offered by Margrethe II , Queen of Denmark , to the heads of state of the four Candidate cities at the Amalienborg Palace . 
 = = = Evaluation = = = 
 Rio de Janeiro was primarily evaluated during the Applicant phase , accurately on March 14 , 2008 , when the IOC Working Group released its report after four days of meetings , giving a weighted @-@ average score of 6 @.@ 4 to the bid . It was based on a thorough technical analysis of the projects presented on the Application File , which was developed by the Rio de Janeiro bid committee after having access to the Olympic Games Knowledge Management database as well as the official IOC Technical Manuals . The Working Group composed of several experts assessed the city 's potential for staging successful Olympic Games according to eleven criteria presented in the Application File . Rio de Janeiro 's highest score came from Government support , legal issues and public opinion due to the strong government commitment , and its lowest from Safety and security due to the city 's chronic problems of violence . Experience in major events also yielded good scores , while a shortage in the number of required hotel rooms undermined the accommodation theme . The Working Group also gave an 8 @.@ 3 score to Tokyo , 8 @.@ 1 to Madrid , 7 @.@ 0 to Chicago , 6 @.@ 9 to Doha , 5 @.@ 3 to Prague and 4 @.@ 3 to Baku ; being the basis for the selection to the Candidature phase . On September 18 , 2008 , after the shortlist which concluded the Application phase , the IOC announced the composition of its Evaluation Commission . The commission inspected the four Candidate cities under the leadership of Nawal El Moutawakel , who also chaired the Evaluation Commission for the bid process of the 2012 Summer Olympics and Paralympics . 
 The IOC Evaluation Commission arrived in Rio de Janeiro on April 27 , 2009 , to assess the quality of the bid , stating that the welcoming activities prepared by the city had been the best . Unlike the first evaluation , the committee did not assign scores , but analyzed the probability of execution of the plans . During the first two days of the visit , the Evaluation Commission held internal meetings at Copacabana Palace , the host hotel . Between April 29 and 30 , the Commission attended technical presentations in a large ballroom equipped with lighting and multi @-@ media resources , where it participated in question @-@ and @-@ answer sessions about each of the seventeen themes presented in the Candidature File . May Day was marked by the inspectors ' visits to all existing venues across the city . On May 2 , 2009 , the Evaluation Commission made a press conference to highlight the main points of the visit . According to El Moutawakel , the Commission was very impressed with the unity of government support , the quality of the presentations and the level of integration of the Games in the country 's long @-@ term development plan . After seven days of inspections involving 300 professionals , the thirteen members of the IOC Evaluation Commission left Rio de Janeiro on May 3 , 2009 , on the way to Madrid . One month before the election , on September 2 , 2009 , Rio officials welcomed the released of the 2016 Evaluation Commission Report . It gave a very positive assessment to the city and described the documents submitted by Rio de Janeiro as " of a very high quality " . 
 = = = Election = = = 
 The election of the host city took place at Bella Center on October 2 , 2009 , in Copenhagen , during the 121st IOC Session . Rio de Janeiro was the third city to present plans to the IOC members , entering the Hall A of Bella Center at 12 : 05 ( CEST ) with a delegation of 60 people , among bid leaders , government authorities and athletes . João Havelange made the opening speech and invited everyone to celebrate his centenary in Rio de Janeiro in 2016 . Carlos Arthur Nuzman was the next speaker , talking about experiences of the Olympic movement , and who introduced the iconic map of past Olympic host cities . Governor Sérgio Cabral then spoke about projects related to security and transportation , followed by Henrique Meirelles , who explained the economic situation of Brazil . Mayor Eduardo Paes was responsible for presenting the venues plan alongside Carlos Roberto Osório , while they were complemented by Olympic sailor Isabel Swan , who stated that the project had been made thinking on athletes . Swan cited the other athletes present in the plenary : former football player Pelé , Paralympic swimmer Daniel Dias and junior athlete Bárbara <unk> . After that , President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva made a plea to bring the Games for the first time to South America , saying that was " time to light the Olympic cauldron in a tropical country " . Nuzman returned and concluded the presentation , which included a short film ( called <unk> ) by Academy Award nominated director Fernando Meirelles , and a music video ( called <unk> ) with an English version of " Aquele Abraço " by Gilberto Gil . 
 After the presentation , the session was opened for questions . Nuzman clarified doubts by Arne <unk> about doping legislation ; Osório and Cabral answered two questions by Prince Albert of Monaco about accommodation and the project 's legacy , respectively ; and the President of Brazil himself responded to a question by Austin Sealy about organization risks . Following the presentations by the four Candidate cities , Nawal El Moutawakel presented the report of the Evaluation Commission to the Session . From a total of 106 eligible IOC members , 95 were available to vote in the first round . Members from the four bidding countries were not allowed to vote until their city was eliminated . Alpha Ibrahim <unk> , Kun Hee Lee , Saku Koivu and the IOC president were eligible members who did not vote . Chicago fell in the first round with 18 votes , while Tokyo received 22 , Rio 26 , and Madrid 28 . In the second round , Tokyo was eliminated with 20 votes , while Madrid received 29 and Rio 46 . Rio de Janeiro was elected in the final round with 66 votes over 32 for Madrid . The winning city was revealed by Jacques Rogge at 6 : 30 ( CEST ) during an announcement ceremony hosted by Lillian <unk> Kretz and Jonathan Edwards . Nearly 100 @,@ 000 people celebrated the victory on Copacabana beach while watching the live broadcast . Following the announcement , Richard Carrión , Rogge , Nuzman and Paes signed the Host City Contract and officialized Rio de Janeiro as the host of the 2016 Olympic and Paralympic Games . 
 = = Bid concept = = 
 According to the Rio de Janeiro bid committee , the bid 's concept was based on four principles — technical excellence , experience of a lifetime , transformation , and supporting the Olympic and Paralympic Movements — highlighting the city 's celebration lifestyle , as seen on its promotional video ( called <unk> ) . The 2016 Summer Olympics and Paralympics will embed the Games in society as a catalyst for social integration , through programs for job generation , education , community outreach , volunteerism , training and up @-@ skilling initiatives . The campaign also focused on youth and the fact that South America never hosted the Olympic Games , considering it to be a " self affirmation " of the Brazilian people . Rio de Janeiro integrated economic , environmental and social elements into its " Green Games for a Blue Planet " vision and planted <unk> seedlings to offset 716 tons of carbon emitted over the two years of campaign . Athletes and spectators will enjoy good climatic conditions in Rio de Janeiro , where mild southern hemisphere winter with absence of heavy rainfall provides favorable atmosphere for athletic performance . Average midday temperature of 24 @.@ 2 ° C ( 75 @.@ 6 ° F ) is predicted during the proposed dates for the Games , with temperatures ranging from 18 @.@ 9 ° C ( 66 @.@ 0 ° F ) to 28 @.@ 1 ° C ( 82 @.@ 6 ° F ) and humidity levels of 66 @.@ 4 % . 
 The visual identity of the candidature consisted of a logo and a slogan , which were applied in marketing moves during the campaign . Designed by Ana Soter and selected among four finalists by a special jury , the logo was unveiled during the 2007 Brazilian Olympic Awards , held at the Municipal Theater of Rio de Janeiro , on December 17 , 2007 . The Sugarloaf Mountain was chosen to be the symbol as one of the city 's most famous landmarks . According to the Rio de Janeiro bid committee , the design as a whole conveys a heart shape , representing Brazilian passion and enthusiasm for sports . First with only the inscription " Applicant city " , the logo received the Olympic rings and the label " Candidate city " after being shortlisted . At midnight on January 1 , 2009 , the bid 's slogan " Live your passion " was launched as part of the New Year 's celebrations , which was attended by nearly two million people . According to the Rio de Janeiro bid committee , the slogan reflected the Brazilian 's way of getting passionately involved in whatever they do . It was projected onto the Rio de Janeiro 2016 @-@ themed Ferris wheel after the countdown to the beginning of 2009 . The structure erected on Copacabana beach to promote the candidature was 36 m ( 118 ft 1 in ) high , weighed 80 tonnes ( 180 @,@ 000 lb ) and had 24 gondolas for 144 people . 
 Rio de Janeiro previously hosted major sporting , business and cultural events . On the sporting front , these events included World Cups and World Championships in many Olympic sports , as well as regional championships . From July 13 to July 29 , 2007 , the city successfully staged the 15th and largest ever edition of the Pan American Games ( over 5 @,@ 650 athletes competing in 34 sports ) and the accompanying Parapan American Games ( over 1 @,@ 150 athletes competing in 10 sports ) . Rio de Janeiro hosted the 1950 FIFA World Cup and recently hosted the 2014 FIFA World Cup , just two years before the 2016 Olympic and Paralympic Games , which includes upgrades to security , telecommunications and tourism infrastructure . The 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup will also be organised by Brazil and used as a test event for the 2014 FIFA World Cup . The proposed competition schedule spreads medals across the entire program with two peaks at the weekends , being similar to the 2008 Summer Olympics program . The period proposed by the Rio de Janeiro bid committee to stage the 2016 Summer Olympics is from Friday , August 5 , to Sunday , August 21 , 2016 . It is also proposed that the 2016 Summer Paralympics begin on the Independence Day of Brazil , Wednesday , September 7 , and last until Sunday , September 18 . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 The Rio de Janeiro bid committee was an incorporated non @-@ profit entity under the leadership of an Honorary Council and an Executive Board , both chaired by Carlos Arthur Nuzman . At the highest level , the Honorary Council comprised the President of the Federative Republic of Brazil Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva , the Governor of the State of Rio de Janeiro Sérgio Cabral , the Mayor of the Municipality of Rio de Janeiro Eduardo Paes , and the two Brazilian IOC members : Nuzman and João Havelange . At the executive level , the Executive Board was divided in four departments — Government Coordination Commission , Business Council , Legacy Committee and Athletes ' Commission — being responsible for the main operations of the campaign . The Board also included representations from the three levels of Government with the specific authority to make commitments on behalf of their respective Governments . Technical aspects of the bid were supported by various Councils and Committees composed of a professionals staff , and supplemented by a team of domestic and international experts ; which were coordinated by Carlos Roberto Osório , Secretary General of the bid committee . Mike Lee , former Director of Communications and Public Affairs for the London bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics , was the lead advisor to the bid of Rio de Janeiro . His company , Vero Campaigning Communications , was responsible for planning the bid 's advertising campaign strategy , presentation scripts , visual support development and international media relations , as well as international press conferences . 
 Rio de Janeiro had full political backing from the three levels of the Government of Brazil — Federal , State and City — providing all guarantees and covenants required by the IOC , as well as some additional undertakings . All levels government , as well as all major political parties in the country , pledged complete support for the bid and endorsed the conduct of the Olympic and Paralympic Games in Brazil . On June 23 , 2008 , the Brazilian president formed the Government Action Management Committee , under the patronage of the Minister of Sport Orlando Silva , which coordinated Federal government actions during the bid process . Another act created the Olympic Development Authority ( ODA ) on January 17 , 2009 , to coordinate public services and infrastructure delivery for eventual Games in Rio de Janeiro , based in the pioneer model developed by Sydney for the 2000 Summer Olympics and Paralympics . Under legal aspects , the Organising Committee for the Olympic Games ( OCOG ) would be the entity responsible for planning and staging the 2016 Olympic and Paralympic Games . According to the IOC , the existing legislation was sufficient to enable the organization of the Games and would be amended or modified to suit the Olympic Charter if needed . The Ministry of External Relations and the Ministry of Labor guaranteed the entry , exit and working arrangements for Games personnel . People in possession of a valid passport and an Olympic or Paralympic Identity and Accreditation Card , in lieu of a visa , will be able to enter the Brazilian territory . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 The IOC 's decision to <unk> Rio de Janeiro over Doha generated criticism , as the Doha bid committee accused the IOC of " closing the door on the Arab world " and of making a political decision rather than judging on technical grounds . Doha outperformed Rio de Janeiro in the majority of the categories assessed , but according to the IOC , Doha 's desire to stage the Olympics in October because of high temperatures was the reason the bid was rejected . On May 3 , 2009 , the Rio de Janeiro bid committee accused the Madrid bid committee of sending a spy to Rio de Janeiro during the visit of the Evaluation Commission , and considered filing a formal ethics complaint with the IOC . Simon Walsh , who claimed to be a reporter working for EFE , omitted the fact that he was a paid consultant of the Madrid bid committee and was stripped of his media accreditation . Madrid officials denied the accusations . On June 14 , 2009 , the American television network NBC aired the episode " The Glory That Was ... " from the series Law & Order : Criminal Intent , in which a security company , interested in millionaire contracts with the possibility of hosting the 2016 Summer Olympics in Brazil , bought votes of members of the " Olympic Site Selection Committee " for Rio de Janeiro and murdered a member of the Belgian Olympic Committee . When aired by AXN in Brazil on September 3 , 2009 , the episode received much criticism . Eduardo Paes called the show " ridiculous and pathetic " , while the Rio de Janeiro bid committee condemned the " irresponsible and reckless use " of the city 's image . 
 Ahead of the election , the Rio de Janeiro bid committee lodged an official complaint against Madrid with the IOC Ethics Commission about comments made on September 30 , 2009 , by José Maria Odriozola , vice president of the Spanish Olympic Committee ( SOC ) ; and considered doing it against Chicago due to comments by Richard M. Daley , Mayor of Chicago , on September 21 , 2009 . Odriozola called Rio de Janeiro " the worst of the four candidates " , while Rio officials believe that Daley implied that the city was incapable of hosting the Olympics when he said it was " not the same as hosting the [ 2014 ] FIFA World Cup " . Mercedes <unk> apologised for Odriozola 's comments on behalf of the Madrid bid committee . According to the IOC rules , rival cities are not allowed to directly criticise other bidders . After the conclusion of the bid process , Shintarō Ishihara , Governor of Tokyo , blamed " invisible dynamics " and political deals for Tokyo 's failure . Rio officials repudiated " the inappropriate statements " and sent a formal notification to the IOC on October 6 , 2009 . On November 30 , 2009 , the Hollywood actor Robin Williams caused embarrassment due to humorous comments made in an interview with David Letterman . During the Late Show with David Letterman , broadcast by CBS , Williams said that Rio de Janeiro was elected as host city because it sent " 50 strippers and a pound of blow " to compete with Michelle Obama and Oprah Winfrey , from Chicago . The comments were widely criticized by the Brazilian media and government authorities . 
 = = Bid project = = 
 Rio de Janeiro proposed to hold all sporting events within the city limits — apart from the football ( soccer ) tournaments which would be held in the cities of Belo Horizonte , Brasília , Salvador and São Paulo — making the Games more compact and technically feasible . The competition venues will be located in four Olympic zones — Barra , Copacabana , Deodoro , and Maracanã — and divided in seven Olympic clusters — Barra , Copacabana , Deodoro , Flamengo , João Havelange , Lagoa and Maracanã — with four Olympic precincts — Maracanã , Olympic Park , <unk> and X Park . The Olympic and Paralympic Village , the International Broadcast Centre ( IBC ) and the Main Press Centre ( MPC ) will be located at the Barra zone , which is the core of the project and includes the largest number of competition venues . A television tower will be built at the IBC / MPC complex to complement broadcasting operations and provide panoramic studios . There will be a media @-@ exclusive hotel within the complex , accessible directly from the IBC / MPC . The Olympic and Paralympic Village complex will include an Olympic Village Training Center , an Olympic Village Park , an Olympic Beach and direct access to the Olympic Park , in addition to the 8 @,@ 856 rooms to accommodate over 17 @,@ 770 athletes and team officials , including accredited additional officials . 
 Rio de Janeiro 's competition venues meet the International Federation 's ( IFs ) technical requirements and both IOC and IPC standards , and align with the City Master Plan and legacy strategy . Most venues are already operational , recently developed or renovated . According to the Rio de Janeiro 2016 bid committee , there are ten ( 29 % ) existing venues with no permanent works required and eight ( 24 % ) venues requiring reforms , while nine ( 26 % ) new permanent venues and seven ( 21 % ) temporary venues will be built . In total there will be 34 competition venues alongside 29 training venues , as part of the training venues strategy . The most significant legacy project from the bid is the Olympic Training Center ( OTC ) program and facilities with its headquarters located in Barra zone . Furthermore , the Rio de Janeiro 2016 bid committee recognized the possibility of new sports being added to the Olympic Program and , following detailed analysis for each of the seven potential sports — baseball , golf , karate , roller sports , rugby , softball and squash — confirmed its capability to accommodate any of them in respect to venues , transport and other operational or logistical aspects . In addition , Rio de Janeiro and the four proposed cities to hold football ( soccer ) competitions — Brasília , Belo Horizonte , Salvador and São Paulo — were chosen to host the 2014 FIFA World Cup . 
 Rio de Janeiro will build the Summer Paralympics , upon the experience of hosting the III Parapan American Games — considered " the best ever " by the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) and the Americas Paralympic Committee ( APC ) — as well as many other international competitions for athletes with disabilities . For this purpose , the organizing committee will include representatives of the Brazilian Paralympic Committee ( BPC ) and create a specific department responsible for supervising the Games . Another element that will bring the Paralympics up to par with their Olympic counterpart is the reuse of twenty Olympic competition venues for the equivalent Paralympic sports . Promotion of accessibility @-@ friendly measures by the hospitality and tourism industries will also be encouraged and recognized by the government . 
 = = = Infrastructure = = = 
 Rio de Janeiro 's infrastructure , systems , management structures and staff readiness will be tested during the 2014 FIFA World Cup and during dedicated test events for the transport network in 2015 . There will be 49 @,@ 750 rooms to meet IOC requirements , of which some 1 @,@ 700 are located in apartment hotels in the city and more than 13 @,@ 000 in hotels throughout Rio de Janeiro and the football tournament host cities . Rio de Janeiro proposed the use of cruise ships and condominium apartments to overcome a possible shortage in the number of hotel rooms . Six modern cruise ships will provide more than 8 @,@ 500 cabins . Media would be accommodated in a combination of media villages and hotels . Rio de Janeiro plans to implement 150 km ( 93 mi ) of Olympic lanes connecting the four Olympic zones and the Antônio Carlos Jobim International Airport . An existing corridor of high @-@ capacity rail and metro systems as well as motorways and major roads links three of the four Olympic zones , and with the development of the western corridor , all four zones will be connected . Bus Rapid Transit ( BRT ) system is going to be the main solution to the city 's topography . Security and disaster @-@ related risks for the event will be mitigated by the implementation of a comprehensive security operation . Crime in parts of Rio de Janeiro was considered to be an issue for the safety of people attending the Games . Rio de Janeiro 's experience in mounting security structures around highly mediatized and crowd @-@ attracting events is a positive aspect . The Federal Government will be responsible for the security of the 2016 Summer Olympics and Paralympics . 
 = = = Finance = = = 
 The three levels of Brazilian government assured the free provision of a range of services to the bid , including security , medical services , customs , transport , immigration , and other governmental services and support . Rio de Janeiro also approved funding of US $ 240 billion from the Program for Growth Acceleration ( PAC ) of the federal government . Other revenue @-@ generating activities include sponsorship sales , ticketing program , licensing and merchandising . These revenues will be supplemented by IOC @-@ secured commercial and broadcast contributions . Capital expenditure on infrastructure by the government or the private sector includes already committed and ongoing investments of US $ 3 @.@ 9 billion on projects such as airport and subway expansions and construction of the metropolitan road arc . The OCOG budget does not assume any capital contributions to the construction of permanent or legacy venues , other than for Games overlay , including the construction of temporary venues . The balance of OCOG expenditures will be funded by the public sector , involving a combination of government commitments from Federal , State and Municipal levels . The OCOG budget and operating expenses are projected at US $ 2 @.@ 8 billion , with its Olympic @-@ related budget , including capital investments in transportation , sports venues and incremental costs being US $ 11 @.@ 6 billion . The government submitted guarantees to cover any potential shortfall . The bid expenses for both Applicant and Candidature phases were of R $ 85 @,@ 792 million , as released during the official closing of the campaign on November 11 , 2009 . 
 = New Jersey Route 65 = 
 Route 65 is a former state highway in the city of Newark , New Jersey . The route went for 4 @.@ 12 miles ( 6 @.@ 63 km ) along Port Street and Doremus Avenue through the industrial districts of the city . Route 65 began at an intersection with U.S. Route 1 and 9 near Newark Liberty International Airport . The route crossed over the New Jersey Turnpike along Port Street until an intersection with Doremus Avenue , where it turned northward for the rest of the distance , terminating at an intersection with U.S. Route 1 and 9 Truck . 
 Route 65 was originally planned in 1939 as a spur of Route 25 , Route 25B , in Newark to connect that route with Route 25T ( now U.S. Route 1 / 9 Truck ) . The route lasted for 14 years , until January 1 , 1953 , when the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering occurred . Route 25B was decommissioned on that day , along with its parent route , Route 25 . Route 25B was redesigned as Route 65 , and was removed from the state highway system by 1963 . The two roads are now maintained by the city of Newark . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 65 began at an intersection with U.S. Route 1 and 9 in the area of Newark Liberty International Airport in the city of Newark . The route progressed eastward along Port Street , a divided highway for a short distance . The route crossed the access road to the airport before crossing over the newly constructed New Jersey Turnpike south of Interchange 14 . From there , Route 65 continued as Port Street but as one roadway into the industrial districts in Newark . The route progressed further over a railroad before intersecting with Doremus Avenue , where Route 65 turned northward off of Port Street . Both Port Street and Doremus Avenue dead @-@ end right after this respective intersection , Doremus Avenue to the south and Port Street to the east . 
 From there , Route 65 headed northward along Doremus Avenue , crossing over the Newark Bay Extension ( Interstate 78 ) just north of the intersection . The route continued through the industrial district , reaching higher in elevation on a bridge over the Central Railroad of New Jersey ( now Conrail Shared Assets Operations , <unk> ) . From there , the route paralleled the turnpike 's mainline along Doremus Avenue . At the intersection with Raymond Boulevard , Route 65 became a divided highway once again , terminating at an intersection with U.S. Route 1 / 9 Truck in the city of Newark . 
 = = History = = 
 Route 65 was originally designated in 1939 as State Highway Route 25B , a spur off of State Highway Route 25 ( now U.S. Route 1 and 9 ) at a traffic circle near the Newark Metropolitan Airport ( now Newark Liberty International Airport ) . The route was then to commence along Port Street and Doremus Avenue to an intersection with State Highway Route 25T ( now U.S. Route 1 and 9 Truck ) . Route 25B remained intact along the alignment of Port Street and Doremus Avenue until January 1 , 1953 . On that day , the New Jersey State Highway Department renumbered routes in the state , and eliminated Route 25 entirely . Due to decommissioning of Route 25 , Route 25B was renumbered to Route 65 , eliminating the relation to former Route 25 or U.S. Route 1 and 9 . Route 65 remained on the Port Street and Doremus Avenue alignment for a short time , and was completely eliminated from the state system by 1963 . Port Street and Doremus Avenue are both now maintained by the city of Newark but both are of the National Highway System as of 2009 . In 2001 , the bridge over the <unk> line was reconstructed . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Newark , Essex County . 
 = Giacomo Meyerbeer = 
 Giacomo Meyerbeer ( born Jacob Liebmann Beer ; 5 September 1791 – 2 May 1864 ) was a German opera composer of Jewish birth who has been described as perhaps the most successful stage composer of the nineteenth century . With his 1831 opera Robert le diable and its successors , he gave the genre of grand opera ' decisive character ' . Meyerbeer 's grand opera style was achieved by his merging of German orchestra style with Italian vocal tradition . These were employed in the context of sensational and melodramatic libretti created by Eugène Scribe and were enhanced by the up @-@ to @-@ date theatre technology of the Paris Opéra . They set a standard which helped to maintain Paris as the opera capital of the nineteenth century . 
 Born to a very wealthy Berlin family , Meyerbeer began his musical career as a pianist but soon decided to devote himself to opera , spending several years in Italy studying and composing . His 1824 opera Il crociato in Egitto was the first to bring him Europe @-@ wide reputation , but it was Robert le diable ( 1831 ) which raised his status to great celebrity . His public career , lasting from then until his death , during which he remained a dominating figure in the world of opera , was summarized by his contemporary Hector Berlioz , who claimed that he ' has not only the luck to be talented , but the talent to be lucky . ' He was at his peak with his operas Les Huguenots ( 1836 ) and Le prophète ( 1849 ) ; his last opera ( L 'Africaine ) was performed posthumously . His operas made him the most frequently performed composer at the world 's leading opera houses in the nineteenth century . 
 At the same time as his successes in Paris , Meyerbeer , as a Prussian Court Kapellmeister ( Director of Music ) from 1832 , and from 1843 as Prussian General Music Director , was also influential in opera in Berlin and throughout Germany . He was an early supporter of Richard Wagner , enabling the first production of the latter 's opera , Rienzi . He was commissioned to write the patriotic opera Ein <unk> in Schlesien to celebrate the reopening of the Berlin Royal Opera House in 1844 and wrote music for certain Prussian state occasions . 
 Apart from around 50 songs , Meyerbeer wrote little except for the stage . The critical assaults of Wagner and his supporters , especially after his death , led to a decline in the popularity of his works ; his operas were suppressed by the Nazi regime in Germany , and were neglected by opera houses through most of the twentieth century . Meyerbeer 's works are only infrequently performed today . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Meyerbeer 's birthname was Jacob Liebmann Beer ; he was born in <unk> ( now a part of <unk> ) , near Berlin , then the capital of Prussia , to a Jewish family . His father was the enormously wealthy financier Judah Herz Beer ( 1769 – 1825 ) and his mother , Amalia ( Malka ) Wulff ( 1767 – 1854 ) , to whom he was particularly devoted , also came from the moneyed elite . Their other children included the astronomer Wilhelm Beer and the poet Michael Beer . He was to adopt the surname Meyerbeer on the death of his grandfather Liebmann Meyer Wulff ( 1811 ) and the first name Giacomo during his period of study in Italy , around 1817 . 
 Judah Beer was a leader of the Berlin Jewish community and maintained a private synagogue in his house which leaned towards reformist views . Jacob Beer wrote an early cantata for performance at this synagogue . Both Judah Herz Beer and his wife were close to the Prussian court ; when Amalia was awarded in 1816 the Order of Louise , she was given , by Royal dispensation , not the traditional Cross but a portrait bust of the Queen . The Beer children were provided with a fine education ; their tutors included two of the leaders of the enlightened Jewish intelligentsia , the author Aaron Halle @-@ <unk> and Edmund <unk> , ( later a reform movement rabbi in Hamburg ) to whom they remained attached into their maturity . The brothers Alexander von Humboldt , the renowned naturalist , geographer and explorer , and the philosopher , linguist and diplomat Wilhelm von Humboldt were close friends of the family circle . 
 Beer 's first keyboard instructor was Franz <unk> , a pupil of Johann Georg <unk> and a favoured teacher at the Berlin court . Beer also became one of Muzio Clementi 's pupils while Clementi was in Berlin . The boy made his public debut in 1801 playing Mozart 's D minor Piano Concerto in Berlin . The Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung reported : ' The amazing keyboard playing of young Bär ( a Jewish lad of 9 ) , who carried off the difficult passages and other solo parts with aplomb , and has fine powers of rendition even more rarely found in one of his age , made the concert even more interesting ' . 
 Beer , as he still named himself , studied with Antonio Salieri and the German master and friend of Goethe , Carl Friedrich Zelter . Louis Spohr organised a concert for Beer at Berlin in 1804 and continued his acquaintance with the lad later in Vienna and Rome . A portrait of Jacob commissioned by the family at this time shows him ' confidently facing the viewer , his hair romantically dishevelled … his left hand rests on the keyboard , and his right hand grasps a musical manuscript … plac [ ing ] its subject in the tradition of the young Mozart ' . Beer 's first stage work , the ballet Der Fischer und das <unk> ( The Fisherman and the Milkmaid ) was produced in March 1810 at the Court Opera in Berlin . His formal training with the Abbé Vogler at Darmstadt between 1810 and 1812 was , however , of crucial importance , and at around this time he begins to sign himself ' Meyer Beer ' . Here , with his fellow students ( who included Carl Maria von Weber ) , he learnt not only the craft of composition but also the business of music ( organising concerts and dealing with publishers ) . Forming a close friendship with Weber and other pupils , Meyerbeer established the <unk> Verein ( Musical Union ) , whose members undertook to support each other with favourable press criticism and networking . On 12 February 1813 Beer received the first of the string of honours he was to accumulate throughout his life when he was appointed ' Court Composer ' by Grand Duke Ludwig of Hesse @-@ Darmstadt . 
 Throughout his early career , although determined to become a musician , Beer found it difficult to decide between playing and composition . Certainly other professionals in the decade 1810 – 1820 , including Moscheles , considered him amongst the greatest virtuosi of his period . He wrote during this period numerous piano pieces , including a concerto and set of variations for piano and orchestra , but these have been lost . To this period also belongs a Clarinet Quintet written for the virtuoso Heinrich <unk> ( 1784 – 1847 ) who remained a close friend of the composer . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = In Italy = = = 
 Despite performances of his oratorio Gott und die Natur ( God and Nature ) ( Berlin , 1811 ) and his early operas <unk> <unk> ( Jephtha 's Vow ) ( Munich , 1812 ) and Wirth und Gast ( Landlord and Guest ) ( Stuttgart , 1813 ) in Germany , Meyerbeer had set his sights by 1814 on basing an operatic career in Paris . In the same year , his opera Die beiden <unk> ( The Two Caliphs ) , a version of Wirth und Gast , was a disastrous failure in Vienna . Realizing that a full understanding of Italian opera was essential for his musical development , he went to study in Italy , enabled by the financial support of his family . He arrived in Italy at the beginning of 1816 , after visits to Paris and London , where he heard Cramer play . In Paris , he wrote to a friend , ' I go from museum to museum , library to library , theatre to theatre , with the restlessness of the Wandering Jew ' . 
 During his years in Italy Meyerbeer became acquainted with , and impressed by , the works of his contemporary Gioachino Rossini , who by 1816 , at the age of 24 , was already director of both major opera houses in Naples and in the same year premiered his operas The Barber of Seville and Otello . Meyerbeer wrote a series of Italian operas on <unk> models , including <unk> e Costanza ( Padua , 1817 ) , Semiramide <unk> ( Turin , 1819 ) , Emma di <unk> ( Venice , 1819 ) , Margherita d 'Anjou ( Milan 1820 ) and L <unk> di Granata ( Milan 1821 ) . All but the last two of these had libretti by Gaetano Rossi , whom Meyerbeer continued to support until the latter 's death in 1855 , although not commissioning any further libretti from him after Il crociato in Egitto ( 1824 ) . During a visit to Sicily in 1816 , Meyerbeer noted down a number of folksongs , and these in fact constitute the earliest collection of folk music of the region . In a birthday greeting from Rossi 's wife in 1817 occurs the earliest use discovered of Meyerbeer 's adopted forename ' Giacomo ' . 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 The name Giacomo Meyerbeer first became known internationally with his opera Il crociato in Egitto — premiered in Venice in 1824 and produced in London and Paris in 1825 ; incidentally , it was the last opera ever written to feature a castrato , and the last to require keyboard accompaniment for recitatives . This ' breakthrough ' in Paris was exactly what Meyerbeer had been aiming for over the past ten years ; he had been carefully preparing for it , developing contacts , and fully reaped his reward . 
 In 1826 , shortly after the death of his father , Meyerbeer married his cousin , Minna Mosson ( 1804 – 1886 ) . The marriage which may have been ' dynastic ' in its origins proved to be stable and devoted ; the couple were to have five children , of whom the three youngest ( all daughters ) survived to adulthood . In the same year , following the death of Carl Maria von Weber , Weber 's widow asked Meyerbeer to complete her husband 's unfinished comic opera Die drei Pintos . This was to cause him much trouble over future years , as he found the material insufficient to work on . Eventually in 1852 he settled the matter with Weber 's heirs by handing them Weber 's drafts and a cash compensation . ( The opera was later completed by Gustav Mahler ) . 
 With his next opera Meyerbeer became virtually a superstar . Robert le diable ( with libretto by Eugène Scribe and Germain Delavigne ) , produced in Paris in 1831 , was one of the earliest grand operas . The libretto , originally planned in 1827 as a three @-@ act opéra comique for the Opéra @-@ Comique theatre , was refashioned after 1829 in a five @-@ act form to meet the requirements of the Paris Opéra . Its revised characterisation as a ' grand opera ' placed it in succession to Auber 's La muette de Portici ( 1828 ) and Rossini 's Guillaume Tell ( 1829 ) in this new genre . The composer undertook further work on the opera in early 1831 adding ballet episodes , including the " Ballet of Nuns " , which was to prove one of the opera 's great sensations , becoming an early example of the ballet blanc genre . He also rewrote the two major male roles of Bertrand and Robert to suit the talents of Nicolas Levasseur and Adolphe Nourrit , respectively . At the invitation of Nourrit , Cornélie Falcon made her debut at the age of 18 at the Opéra in the role of Alice on 20 July 1832 , and she made a vivid impression on the public , which included on that night Auber , Berlioz , Halévy , Maria Malibran , Giulia Grisi , Honoré Daumier , Alexandre Dumas and Victor Hugo . On hearing her in the role , Meyerbeer himself declared his opera at last ' complete ' . 
 The success of the opera led to Meyerbeer himself becoming a celebrity . In January 1832 he was awarded membership of the Légion d 'honneur . This success – coupled with Meyerbeer 's known family wealth – inevitably also precipitated envy amongst his peers . Berlioz – who had commented that ' Meyerbeer not only had the luck to be talented , he had the talent to be lucky ' – wrote ' I can 't forget that Meyerbeer was only able to persuade [ the Opéra ] to put on Robert le diable ... by paying the administration sixty thousand francs of his own money ' ; and Chopin lamented ' Meyerbeer had to work for three years and pay his own expenses for his stay in Paris before Robert le diable could be staged .... Three years , that 's a lot – it 's too much . ' King Frederick William III of Prussia who attended the second performance of Robert le diable , swiftly invited him to compose a German opera , and Meyerbeer was invited to stage Robert in Berlin . Within a few years the opera had been staged with success all over Europe , and also in the USA . 
 The fusion of dramatic music , melodramatic plot , and sumptuous staging in Robert le diable proved a sure @-@ fire formula , as did the partnership with Scribe , which Meyerbeer would go on to repeat in Les Huguenots , Le prophète , and L 'Africaine . All of these operas held the international stage throughout the 19th century , as did the more pastoral Dinorah ( 1859 ) , making Meyerbeer the most frequently performed composer at leading opera houses in the nineteenth century . 
 = = = Between Paris and Berlin = = = 
 = = = = 1832 – 1839 = = = = 
 <unk> describes Meyerbeer 's mature life as ' a tale of two cities ... His artistic triumph and legendary status were achieved in Paris ... but he never abandoned Prussia , especially his home city of Berlin ' . His wife Minna was based in Berlin ( she did not enjoy Paris ) as was his beloved mother ; and he had a series of Royal duties from the Prussian court , stemming from his appointment as Court Kapellmeister in 1832 . For these reasons his life from 1830 onwards is characterised by travel between these two centres . 
 In Paris Meyerbeer had been asked by Louis Véron , the director of the Opéra , for a new work . At first he attempted to persuade Véron to accept the opéra @-@ comique Le <unk> to a libretto by Scribe , which he had been contracted to compose in early 1831 ; but Véron insisted on a full five @-@ act piece . Together with Scribe , Meyerbeer reviewed many subjects before deciding , in 1832 , on Les Huguenots . The contract which Meyerbeer signed with Véron contained a penalty clause if the work was not delivered by the end of 1833 . When the time came and the opera was not ready , Véron claimed his 30 @,@ 000 francs under this clause ; Meyerbeer was perhaps unique amongst composers in being able to pay this . In fact Véron refunded the money under a further agreement , when the opera was delivered in late 1834 ; but Veron himself was replaced as director of the Opera by Henri Duponchel before Les Huguenots was premiered on 29 February 1836 . It was an immediate and immense success , its splendid staging and effects exceeding even those of Fromental Halévy 's La Juive , which had premiered the previous year . Berlioz called the score " a musical encyclopaedia " , and the singing , especially of Nourrit and Falcon , was universally praised . Les Huguenots was the first opera to be performed at the Opéra more than 1 @,@ 000 times ( the 1,000th performance being on 16 May 1906 ) and continued to be produced up to 1936 , more than a century after its premiere . Its many performances in all other of the world 's major opera houses give it a claim to being the most successful opera of the 19th century . 
 However , in Berlin Meyerbeer faced many problems , including the enmity of the jealous Gaspare Spontini , who since 1820 had been Court Kapellmeister and director of the Berlin Hofoper . Complaints were made in the Berlin press about the delay of the Berlin premiere of Robert le diable ( which finally took place in June 1832 ) , and Meyerbeer 's music was decried by the critic and poet Ludwig Rellstab . There was no sign of the German opera expected from Meyerbeer . Moreover , reactionary censorship laws prevented production of Les Huguenots in Berlin , ( and indeed in many other cities of Germany ) . Nevertheless , Meyerbeer , who ( as he wrote to a friend ) ' years ago ... swore to myself never to respond personally to attacks on my work , and never under any circumstances to cause or respond to personal polemics ' , refused to be drawn on any of these matters . 
 Meanwhile , in Paris Meyerbeer began to seek new libretti , initially considering Le prophète of Scribe , Le cinq mars by Henri Saint @-@ Georges and eventually settling on Scribe 's Vasco da Gama ( later to become L 'Africaine ) , which he contracted to complete by 1840 . However , Meyerbeer had envisaged that the main role in L 'Africaine would be written for Falcon ; after the catastrophic failure of her voice in 1837 , he turned instead to Le prophète . 
 On 20 August 1839 Meyerbeer , whilst relaxing at Boulogne in the company of Moscheles , met for the first time with Richard Wagner , who was en route to Paris . Their ensuing relationship ( see below ) was to have major repercussions for the careers and reputations of both . At this meeting Wagner read to Meyerbeer from the libretto of Rienzi , and Meyerbeer agreed to look through the score , which indeed he subsequently recommended for performance at Dresden . 
 = = = = The 1840s = = = = 
 By the end of 1841 , Meyerbeer had completed the first draft of Le prophète , but refused to stage it because the then director of the opera , Leon Pillet , wished to cast his mistress , Rosine Stoltz , in the part of <unk> , the hero 's mother . ( Berlioz characterised Stoltz as ' la <unk> du Directeur ' ) . Meyerbeer insisted on Pauline Viardot for the role . Meyerbeer lodged the score with a Parisian lawyer , and refused to countenance any production until his wishes were met . It was not until 1849 when the Opéra was willing to agree his conditions . Meyerbeer was unique in his time in having the wealth and influence to impose his will as a composer in this way . 
 In the meantime , the situation in Prussia was changing . Following the death of Frederick William III , the new regime of Frederick William IV was far more liberal . Spontini was dismissed , and the Berlin premiere of Les Huguenots was arranged ( 20 May 1842 ) . On the instigation of Alexander von Humboldt , Meyerbeer was installed later in the year as Prussian <unk> and director of music for the Royal Court . Meyerbeer wrote a number of works for court occasions , and also provided music , at the King 's request , for the first staging on Berlin in 1856 of his brother Michael 's play Struensee ( based on the life of Johann Friedrich Struensee ) , which had also been proscribed under the previous regime . 
 In 1843 , the Berlin Opera house burnt down . The creation of the new building gave a new opportunity to commission a German opera from Meyerbeer . The subject of the opera , Ein <unk> in Schlesien ( A Silesian Encampment ) , was an episode in the life of Frederick the Great . As this patriotic opera ' needed ' Prussian creators , Meyerbeer arranged that whilst the trusted Scribe would write the libretto , Rellstab would translate it and take the credit ( and the royalties ) . This had the added advantage of winning over the formerly hostile Rellstab . Meyerbeer had hoped to have Jenny Lind ( for whom he had written the part ) sing the lead role of <unk> , but the opera premiered on 7 December 1844 without her ( although she did appear in subsequent performances ) . The libretto was revised by Charlotte Birch @-@ Pfeiffer to a Bohemian background as <unk> for a production in Vienna ( 1847 ) . ( In a further incarnation , the music was later used by Meyerbeer for a revamped libretto by Scribe featuring Peter the Great , and produced as an opéra comique in Paris ( L <unk> du nord , 1854 ) ) . 
 With the continuing delays in the production of Le prophète and L 'Africaine , Meyerbeer was now becoming subject to increasing sniping in Paris . In 1846 Meyerbeer began work on a new project with Scribe and Saint @-@ Georges , <unk> , but in the following year Pillet was sacked from the opera and the direction was resumed by Duponchel . As a consequence , Meyerbeer was at last able to stage Le prophète with a cast to his liking , ( including Viardot as <unk> ) , and it premiered on 16 April 1849 . Again Meyerbeer 's new opera was an outstanding success – despite the unusual feature of the lead female role being the hero 's mother , rather than his lover . Amongst those at the 47th performance in February 1850 was Richard Wagner , now an impoverished political exile ; the success of a work so fundamentally against his own operatic principles was one of the spurs to his spiteful anti @-@ Jewish denunciation of Meyerbeer and Mendelssohn , ' Das Judenthum in der Musik ' ( 1850 ) . 
 = = = = Last years = = = = 
 Increasing ill @-@ health ( or possibly hypochondria ) now began to restrict Meyerbeer 's output and activities . The death of his beloved mother in 1854 was also a blow . However the success of L <unk> du nord in 1854 demonstrated that he could still pack the theatres . Following this he began on two new projects , an opera by Scribe based on the biblical story of Judith , and an opéra comique , Le pardon de <unk> , ( also known as Dinorah , the title given to the Italian version performed at London ) to a libretto by Jules Barbier . The latter premiered on 4 April 1859 at the Opéra Comique at Paris ; the former , like many previous projects , remained only as sketches . The death of Scribe in 1861 was a further disincentive to Meyerbeer to proceed with his operatic work in progress . In 1862 , in accordance with his original contract with Scribe , he paid Scribe 's widow compensation for not completing Judith . 
 Nevertheless , Meyerbeer 's last years saw the composition of a good deal of non @-@ operatic music , including a Coronation March for William I of Prussia , ( 1861 ) , an overture for the 1862 International Exhibition in London , and incidental music ( now lost ) to Henry Blaze de Bury 's play La jeunesse de Goethe ( 1860 ) . He composed a few settings of liturgical material , including one of the 91st Psalm ( 1853 ) ; and also choral works for the synagogue at Paris . 
 Meyerbeer died in Paris on 2 May 1864 . Rossini , who , not having heard the news , came to his apartment the next day intending to meet him , was shocked and fainted . He was moved to write on the spot a choral tribute ( <unk> , <unk> , muse sublime ! ) . A special train bore Meyerbeer 's body from the Gare du Nord to Berlin on 6 May , where he was buried in the family vault at the Jewish cemetery in <unk> Allee . 
 L 'Africaine was eventually premiered after Meyerbeer 's death at the Salle Le Peletier on 28 April 1865 in a performing edition undertaken by François @-@ Joseph Fétis . 
 = = Personality and beliefs = = 
 Meyerbeer 's immense wealth ( increased by the success of his operas ) and his continuing adherence to his Jewish religion set him apart somewhat from many of his musical contemporaries . They also gave rise to rumours that his success was due to his bribing musical critics . Richard Wagner ( see below ) accused him of being interested only in money , not music . Meyerbeer was , however , a deeply serious musician and a sensitive personality . He philosophically resigned himself to being a victim of his own success : his extensive diaries and correspondence – which survived the turmoil of 20th @-@ century Europe and have now been published in eight volumes – are an invaluable source for the history of music and theatre in the composer 's time . 
 Meyerbeer 's personal attachment to Judaism was a mature personal decision – after the death of his maternal grandfather in 1811 he wrote to his mother ' Please accept from me a promise that I will always live in the religion in which he died ' . In his diaries he noted significant family events including birthdays , not by their Gregorian calendar occurrence , but by their Jewish calendar dates . Moreover , he regularly suffered from ( and / or imagined ) anti @-@ Jewish slights throughout his life , warning his brothers frequently in his letters against <unk> ( Yiddish for ' Jew @-@ hatred ' ) . Writing to Heinrich Heine in 1839 , he offered the fatalistic view : 
 I believe that <unk> is like love in the theatres and novels : no matter how often one encounters it ... it never misses its target if effectively wielded ... [ Nothing ] can grow back the foreskin of which we are robbed on the eighth day of life ; those who , on the ninth day , do not bleed from this operation shall continue to bleed an entire lifetime , even after death . 
 It was probably a similar fatalism that led Meyerbeer never to enter public controversy with those who slighted him , either professionally or personally , although he occasionally displayed his grudges in his Diaries ; for example , on hearing Robert Schumann conduct in 1850 : ' I saw for the first time the man who , as a critic , has persecuted me for twelve years with a deadly <unk> 
 In his mature operas Meyerbeer selected stories which almost invariably featured as a major element of storyline a hero living within a hostile environment . Robert , Raoul the Huguenot , Jean the prophet , and the defiant Vasco da Gama in L 'Africaine are all ' outsiders ' . It has been suggested that ' Meyerbeer 's choice of these topics is not accidental ; they reflect his own sense of living in a potentially inimical <unk> 
 Meyerbeer 's relationship with Heine displays the awkwardness and <unk> of the social personae of both parties . Meyerbeer , apart from any of his personal feelings , needed Heine onside as an influential personality and writer on music . He genuinely admired Heine 's verse , and made a number of settings from it . Heine , living in Paris from 1830 , always equivocal about his loyalties between Judaism and Christianity , and always short of money , asked Meyerbeer to intervene with Heine 's own family for financial support and frequently took loans and money from Meyerbeer himself . He was not above threatening Meyerbeer with blackmail by writing satirical pieces about him ( and indeed Meyerbeer paid Heine 's widow to suppress such writings ) . And yet , at Heine 's death in 1856 , Meyerbeer wrote in his diary ' Peace be to his ashes . I forgive him from my heart for his ingratitude and many <unk> against me.' 
 = = Music and theatre = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Meyerbeer did not operate on the basis of any theory or philosophy of music and was not an innovator in harmony or musical form . In the words of John H. Roberts , " He had a rich fund of appealing if somewhat short @-@ breathed melody , commanded an increasingly rich harmonic vocabulary , and was a master of brilliant and novel orchestral effect . But he had very limited skill in thematic development and even less in contrapuntal combination . " 
 All of his significant music is for the voice ( opera and songs ) and this reflects his detailed grounding in Italian opera . Throughout his career he wrote his operas with specific singers in mind and took great care to temper his writing to their strengths ; but at the same time he seemed little interested in expressing the emotions of his characters , preferring to use his music to underline the larger @-@ scale machinations of the plot . In this way he was close to the ideas of his teacher Vogler , himself renowned for his dramatic depictions of nature and incident in keyboard music , who wrote in 1779 that " writing beautifully is easy ; expression is not too difficult ; but only the genius of a great painter ... can choose for each picture agreeable and natural colours that are particular to it . " Indeed , his devotion to the voice often led him to ignore the dramatic cohesion of his operas ; typically , he would write far too much music and the scores of his operas would have to be drastically cut during rehearsals . ( The lengthy overture to Le prophète had to be cut in its entirety , surviving only in a piano arrangement by Charles @-@ Valentin Alkan ) . 
 The first signs of Meyerbeer breaking with the Italian traditions in which he had trained are in Il crociato in Egitto . Amongst other notable features of the opera were its lavish orchestral forces ( extending to two onstage military bands in the final act ) . The grandiosity of the work reflected the need to make an impact on the sophisticated and technologically advanced stages of London and Paris , for which it was extensively rewritten . Meyerbeer 's contribution was revealed at this stage to be the combination of Italian vocal lines , German orchestration and harmony , and the use of contemporary theatrical techniques , ideas which he carried forward in Robert and his later works . However Meyerbeer 's background in the Italian operatic traditions can be clearly seen as late as 1859 in the ' mad scene ' in Dinorah ( the virtuoso aria <unk> légère ) . 
 Typical of Meyerbeer 's innovative orchestration is the use in Robert le diable of dark @-@ toned instruments – bassoons , timpani and low brass , including <unk> – to characterise the diabolical nature of Bertram and his associates . At one point the arrival of a character is announced by a combination of three solo timpani and pizzicato double @-@ basses . Similar adventurousness is shown in Les Huguenots where the composer uses a solo bass clarinet and solo viola d 'amore to accompany arias . For Le prophète , Meyerbeer considered using the newly invented saxophone . Becker suggests that Meyerbeer in all his grand operas often ' created a deliberately ' unbeautiful ' sound ..... with unusual orchestration designed to express ... content rather than produce a sensuous sound ' and opines that this explains much of the criticism he received from German writers on music . 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 Meyerbeer 's concern to integrate musical power with all the resources of contemporary theatre anticipated in some ways the ideas of Wagner 's Gesamtkunstwerk . Becker writes : 
 Wagner 's idea of music drama ... was originally developed by way of grand opera ... his ideas could never have been realised in their particular form without the pioneering development [ s ] ... that Meyerbeer 's operas were the first to demand . 
 Meyerbeer was always concerned to intensify the theatricality of his operas , even when new ideas emerged at a relatively late stage in the music 's composition . An example of his receptiveness was the addition of the provocative " Ballet of the Nuns " in the third act of Robert le diable , at the suggestion of Duponchel . The set for the ballet was an innovative and striking design by Duponchel and Pierre @-@ Luc @-@ Charles Ciceri . Duponchel had also introduced technical innovations for the staging , including ' English traps ' for the sudden appearance and disappearance of the ghosts . ( Meyerbeer was led in fact to complain that the spectacle was too much and was pushing his music into the background ) . In Le prophète the skating ballet , which created a great sensation , was composed after rehearsals had begun , in order to capitalise on the new craze for roller skates . The theatre was also able to use new electrical lighting effects to create a powerful sunrise , and to depict the conflagration which ends the opera . 
 Meyerbeer 's large choral ' tableaux ' also made a major contribution to the overall dramatic effect ; the composer particularly sought opportunities to write such large @-@ scale crowd scenes , and preferred libretti which offered such possibilities . <unk> writes : ' These massive developed sections are the chief glory of the <unk> opera , for they are not only big in volume but big in their structural design ' . 
 Mention should also be made of Meyerbeer 's intense concern with the business of opera , which indeed had formed part of his studies under Vogler . This gave him the background not only to deal with complex contractual issues and to negotiate with publishers , but extended to wooing the press and ' marketing ' in general . Indeed , he was probably the originator of the ' press conference ' at which journalists were fed refreshment and information . This marketing and commercialisation of opera was reinforced by Meyerbeer 's Paris publisher Maurice Schlesinger who had established his fortune on the back of Robert , and even persuaded Honoré de Balzac to write a novella ( <unk> ) to promote Les Huguenots . Schlesinger 's publication of Franz Liszt 's Reminiscences de Robert le diable sold out on the day of issue and was immediately reprinted . Such manoeuvres did little to endear Meyerbeer to his fellow artists , and indeed engendered envious comments of the sort already quoted from Berlioz and Chopin . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Musical influence = = = 
 Meyerbeer had no pupils and no direct ' school ' . Yet as his works spanned the golden age of grand opera , clear traces of his influence can be found in the grand operas of Fromental Halévy , Gaetano Donizetti , Giuseppe Verdi and others . After 1850 , Huebner notes a continuing tradition of operas at Paris where ' principals appear with chorus at the end of an act and where private intrigue <unk> a well @-@ articulated public dimension in the plot ' and cites amongst others Charles Gounod 's La <unk> sanglante ( 1854 ) , Ambroise Thomas 's Hamlet and operas by Jules Massenet , amongst them Le roi de Lahore ( 1877 ) and Le Cid ( 1885 ) . The line of succession was however virtually washed away in the tide of Wagner in Paris after 1890 ( see below ) . The influence of Meyerbeer has also been detected in the operas of Antonín Dvořák and other Czech composers , and in the operas of Russian composers including Rimsky @-@ Korsakov and the young Tchaikovsky , who thought Les Huguenots ' one of the greatest works in the repertoire ' . 
 Themes from Meyerbeer 's works were used by many contemporary composers , often in the form of keyboard <unk> or fantasies . Perhaps the most elaborate and substantial of these is Franz Liszt 's monumental Fantasy and Fugue on the chorale " Ad nos , ad <unk> <unk> " , <unk> ( 1852 ) , for organ or pédalier , based on the chorale of the Anabaptist priests in Le prophète and dedicated to Meyerbeer . The work was also published in a version for piano duet ( <unk> ) which was much later arranged for solo piano by Ferrucio Busoni . 
 Liszt also wrote piano works based on Robert le diable , notably the <unk> de Robert le diable subtitled Valse <unk> . He also transcribed two pieces from L 'Africaine , as " Illustrations de l <unk> L 'Africaine " . Frédéric Chopin and Auguste Franchomme jointly composed a Grand duo <unk> on themes from the opera , for cello and piano , in 1832 , and the Italian pianist and composer Adolfo Fumagalli composed an elaborate fantasy on the opera for left hand alone as his Op. 106 . Other pieces based on the opera included works by Adolf von Henselt and Jean @-@ Amédée <unk> . Similar works , of varying musical quality , were churned out by composers for each of the further operas in attempts to cash in on their success . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Meyerbeer 's operas consistently enjoyed enormous popularity during his lifetime , and the verdict of ( the then pro @-@ Meyerbeer ) Wagner in 1841 , when the Paris Opéra was vainly awaiting Le prophète and L 'Africaine , was not atypical : 
 The Paris Opéra lies dying . It looks for its salvation to the German Messiah , Meyerbeer ; if he keeps it waiting much longer , its death agonies will begin ... It is for that reason ... that one only sees Robert le Diable and Les Huguenots turning up again when the mediocrities are forced to withdraw . 
 However , dissenting voices were heard from critics . Not all of these however were on musical grounds . Berlioz for example raised the issue of the inhibiting effects of Meyerbeer 's success ( which he felt particularly as one who struggled to get his works performed ) : " The pressure [ Meyerbeer ] exerts on managers , artists and critics , and consequently on the Paris public , at least as much by his immense wealth as by his eclectic talent , makes all serious success at the Opéra virtually impossible . This baneful influence may still be felt ten years after his death : Heinrich Heine maintains he has ' paid in advance ' . " 
 Mendelssohn disapproved of Meyerbeer 's works on moral grounds , believing Robert le diable to be ' ignoble ' . 
 Schumann 's attack on Les Huguenots was clearly a personal diatribe against Meyerbeer 's Judaism : ' Time and time again we had to turn away in disgust ... One may search in vain for a sustained pure thought , a truly Christian sentiment ... It is all contrived , all make believe and hypocrisy ! ... The shrewdest of composers rubs his hands with <unk> 
 Wagner 's disciple Theodor <unk> followed Schumann 's <unk> line in his 1850 review of Le prophète : ' To a good Christian [ it ] is at best contrived , exaggerated , unnatural and slick , and it is not possible that the practised propaganda of the Hebrew art @-@ taste can succeed using such means . ' <unk> 's phrase ' the Hebrew art @-@ taste ' was to be used by Richard Wagner to spark off his attack on Meyerbeer , ' Das Judenthum in der Musik ( Jewishness in Music ) . ' ( see below ) . 
 In 1911 , the composer Charles Villiers Stanford cited Meyerbeer 's music as an example of the dangers he believed lay in improvising at the piano without a clear plan , ( although there is in fact no evidence to suggest Meyerbeer worked in this way ) , writing : ' Man of genius though he was , as any man who wrote the fourth act of the Huguenots must have been , Meyerbeer is a sign @-@ post of this danger of trusting to the pianoforte as a medium of <unk> 
 = = = Wagner 's campaign against Meyerbeer = = = 
 The vitriolic campaign of Richard Wagner against Meyerbeer was to a great extent responsible for the decline of Meyerbeer 's popularity after his death in 1864 . This campaign was as much a matter of personal spite as of racism – Wagner had learnt a great deal from Meyerbeer and indeed Wagner 's early opera Rienzi ( 1842 ) was facetiously called by Hans von Bülow ' Meyerbeer 's best opera ' . Meyerbeer supported the young Wagner , both financially and in helping to obtain the premiere productions of both Rienzi and The Flying Dutchman at Dresden . 
 Wagner 's early correspondence with Meyerbeer , up to 1846 , is <unk> obsequious . However , from the early 1840s , as Wagner developed Tannhäuser and Lohengrin , his ideas on opera increasingly diverged from <unk> standards ; even in 1843 Wagner had written to Schumann condemning Meyerbeer 's work as ' a striving after superficial popularity ' . During 1846 Meyerbeer turned down Wagner 's application for a loan of 1 @,@ 200 thalers , and this may have marked a turning point . 
 In particular , after 1849 , Wagner resented Meyerbeer 's continuing success at a time when his own vision of German opera had little chance of prospering . After the May Uprising in Dresden of 1849 , Wagner was for some years a political refugee facing a prison sentence or worse should he return to Saxony . During his period of living in exile he had few sources of income and little opportunity of getting his own works performed . The success of Le prophète sent Wagner over the edge , and he was also deeply envious of Meyerbeer 's wealth . In reaction he published , under a pseudonym , his 1850 essay ' Jewishness in Music ' . Without specifically naming Meyerbeer , he interpreted the popular success of the latter as the undermining of German music by alleged Jewish venality and willingness to cater to the lowest tastes , and attributed the supposed poor quality of such ' Jewish music ' to Jewish speech and song patterns , which ' though the cultured son of Jewry takes untold pains to strip them off , nevertheless they shew an impertinent obstinacy in cleaving to him ' . 
 In his major theoretical statement , ' Opera and Drama ' ( 1852 ) , Wagner objected to the music of Meyerbeer , asserting its superficiality and incoherence in dramatic terms ; this work contains Wagner 's well @-@ known put @-@ down of Meyerbeer 's operas as ' effects without causes ' . It also contains the sardonic crack that ' [ Rossini ] never could have dreamt that it would some day occur to the Bankers , for whom he had always made their music , to make it for themselves ' . ' Jewishness in Music ' was reissued in 1869 , ( after Meyerbeer 's death ) in an extended form , with a far more explicit attack on Meyerbeer . This version was under Wagner 's own name – and as Wagner had by now a far greater reputation , his views obtained far wider publicity . These attacks on Meyerbeer ( which also included swipes at Felix Mendelssohn ) are regarded by Paul Lawrence Rose as a significant milestone in the growth of German anti @-@ Semitism . 
 As Wagner prospered , it became second @-@ nature for him , his wife Cosima and the Wagner circle to deprecate Meyerbeer and his works , and Cosima 's Diaries contain numerous instances of this – ( as well as recording a dream of Wagner 's in which he and Meyerbeer were reconciled ) . Wagner 's autobiography ' Mein Leben ' , circulated amongst his friends ( and published openly in 1911 ) , contains constant sniping at Meyerbeer and concludes with Wagner exulting over Meyerbeer 's death . The downgrading of Meyerbeer became a commonplace amongst Wagnerites : in 1898 , George Bernard Shaw , in The Perfect Wagnerite , commented that " Nowadays young people cannot understand how anyone could have taken Meyerbeer 's influence seriously . " 
 Thus as Wagner 's stock rose , Meyerbeer 's fell . In 1890 , the year before the Paris premiere of Wagner 's Lohengrin , there were no Wagner performances at the Paris Opéra , and 32 performances of Meyerbeer 's four grand operas . In 1909 , there were 60 Wagner performances , and only three of Meyerbeer ( Les Huguenots being the sole work performed ) . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Meyerbeer 's costly operas , requiring grand casts of leading singers , were gradually dropped from the repertoire in the early 20th century . They were banned in Germany from 1933 , and subsequently in subject countries , by the Nazi regime because the composer was Jewish , and this was a major factor in their further disappearance from the repertory . 
 One of the first serious post @-@ war studies of Meyerbeer and grand opera was <unk> 's 1948 book Grand Opera : An Art and a Business which laid out the themes and standards for much subsequent research . A major contribution to revival of interest in Meyerbeer was the work of the scholar Heinz Becker , leading to the complete publication , between 1960 and 2006 , of Meyerbeer 's complete diaries and correspondence in German , which are an important source for musical history of the era . The English scholar Robert <unk> has translated the diaries and undertaken a wide range of Meyerbeer studies . Not least , the establishment of a ' Meyerbeer Fan Club ' in America has stimulated interest . 
 Most importantly the operas themselves are now beginning to be revived and recorded , although despite the efforts of such champions as Dame Joan Sutherland , who took part in performances of , and recorded , Les Huguenots , they have yet to achieve anything like the huge popular following they attracted during their creator 's lifetime . Recordings are now available of all the operas from Il crociato onwards , for many of the earlier Italian operas , and for other pieces including his songs and the incidental music for Struensee . 
 Amongst reasons often adduced for the dearth of modern productions are the scale of Meyerbeer 's more ambitious works and the cost of mounting them , as well as the alleged lack of virtuoso singers capable of doing justice to Meyerbeer 's demanding music . However , recent successful productions of some of the major operas at relatively small centres such as Strasbourg ( L 'Africaine , 2004 ) and Metz ( Les Huguenots , 2004 ) show that this conventional wisdom can be challenged . A highly successful production of Les Huguenots conducted by Marc Minkowski with stage direction by Gilbert Py was presented at Brussels ' Théâtre de la Monnaie in 2011 , and a new production of the same work opened at the <unk> Nürnberg in 2014 , conducted by Guido Johannes <unk> with stage direction by Tobias Kratzer , a co @-@ production with Opéra de Nice . In December 2012 , the Royal Opera House in London premiered its first performance of Robert le diable in 120 years . In 2013 , Meyerbeer 's original version of L 'Africaine in a new critical edition by Jürgen <unk> was performed by Chemnitz Opera House under the original title Vasco de Gama . The production was a success with audiences and critics and won the poll of German critics award presented by <unk> magazine annually as " Rediscovery of the year " in 2013 . 
 On 9 September 2013 a plaque to mark Meyerbeer 's last residence was put up at Pariser Platz 6a , Berlin . 
 = = On film = = 
 Vernon <unk> played the role of Giacomo Meyerbeer in the 1983 film Wagner . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 A Meyerbeer discography ( updated whenever an additional opera by Meyerbeer is issued on CD ) at the Wayback Machine ( archived October 27 , 2009 ) 
 Recordings of Meyerbeer 's operas as listed on <unk> @-@ opera @-@ <unk> / 
 = Washington State Route 221 = 
 State Route 221 ( SR 221 ) is a 25 @.@ 95 @-@ mile ( 41 @.@ 76 km ) long state highway located entirely within Benton County , Washington , United States . The highway serves to connect the unincorporated community of Paterson to the county seat Prosser . The highway has existed since at least 1926 and was designated as Primary State Highway 8E from 1937 until the 1964 renumbering of Washington state highways . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Washington State Route 221 ( SR 221 ) starts at an intersection with SR 14 in the unincorporated community of Paterson . After leaving Paterson the highway travels north through rural farm land as a two @-@ lane highway . A few minor roads are intersected before the roadway turns to the west after about 17 mi ( 27 km ) , before turning back to the north . After the highway resumes its northerly course it climbs into the Horse Heaven Hills , gaining a passing lane through the uphill segments , before finally terminating at SR 22 in south Prosser . 
 Every year the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2009 , WSDOT calculated that as few as 2 @,@ 000 cars traveled through the central part of the highway , and as many as 2 @,@ 500 cars at the interchange with SR 22 . 
 = = History = = 
 The roadway on its current alignment has existed since at least 1926 , however there are records of a road between Paterson and Prosser since 1906 . The highway was designated Secondary State Highway 8E ( SSH 8E ) in 1937 , but the route number was changed to SR 221 during the 1964 state highway renumbering . 
 High winds have forced the closure of SR 221 in 2003 , 2004 , and 2005 due to large amounts of dust being blown around , causing visibility to drop to almost zero through the Horse Heaven Hills . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is within unincorporated Benton County . 
 = Superman : Escape from Krypton = 
 Superman : Escape from Krypton ( originally known as Superman : The Escape ) is a steel shuttle roller coaster located at Six Flags Magic Mountain in Valencia , California . When it opened in 1997 , it was the tallest roller coaster in the world , and its speed of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) was tied for the fastest with Tower of Terror II , a similar roller coaster which opened two months earlier at Dreamworld in Australia . These two coasters were the first to utilize Linear Synchronous Motor ( LSM ) technology to propel vehicles to top speed . The park originally intended to open the ride in 1996 , but the opening was delayed because of several issues with the launch system . The ride was closed in late 2010 for refurbishment , and it emerged in 2011 as " Superman : Escape from Krypton " . The refurbished ride featured new trains which face backward , and it was painted with a new color scheme . As of 2013 , Superman : Escape from Krypton has the third @-@ tallest structure , the fifth @-@ fastest speed and the third @-@ longest drop in the world . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Superman : The Escape ( 1997 — 2010 ) = = = 
 While in the planning stages , the ride was going to be named Velocetron and themed as The Man of Steel . The ride was announced on January 5 , 1996 as Superman : The Escape , breaking records as the first roller coaster to reach 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) , passing Desperado and Phantom 's Revenge at 82 miles per hour ( 132 km / h ) . The ride was designed by Intamin , a Swiss roller coaster firm . It was originally intended to open on June 1 , 1996 . However , due to a range of problems with the launch system , its opening was delayed . In late 1996 , there was a preview for season pass holders . After 10 months of testing and <unk> , the ride opened on March 15 , 1997 . After its opening , the media claimed Superman to be the fastest roller coaster in the world . However , since it was delayed , a similar roller coaster known as Tower of Terror , which also has a 100 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour launch ( 160 km / h ) , had opened about a month earlier at Dreamworld in Australia . Superman therefore lost its claim as being the first roller coaster to reach 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) , although it was then tied with Tower of Terror as the fastest roller coaster in the world . However , the ride became the first roller coaster in the world to go over 400 ft , therefore becoming the tallest roller coaster in the world at the time . 
 In June 2004 , Superman : The Escape 's seat belts were modified because of an incident on the Superman – Ride of Steel roller coaster at Six Flags New England . California State Regulators asked the park to make modifications to the rides ' restraint systems to prevent a similar incident in the future . 
 Just after July 4 weekend of 2010 , Superman : The Escape ceased operations with no reason given . A sign posted in front of the ride indicated that it would not reopen until the 2011 season , with hints that there would be improvements made to the ride experience . After Superman : The Escape 's sister ride , the Tower of Terror II at Dreamworld , underwent a major refurbishment in 2010 which entailed a new vehicle which launches backward , speculation turned to the possibility of a similar modification to the Magic Mountain ride . Six Flags Magic Mountain officials quickly denied rumors that it would receive a Bizarro <unk> , similar to roller coasters at other Six Flags parks . 
 = = = Superman : Escape from Krypton ( 2011 — present ) = = = 
 On October 20 , 2010 , Six Flags Magic Mountain officially announced the refurbishment and re @-@ theming of Superman : The Escape , in addition to the construction of two new roller coasters . As part of the refurbishment , the ride was renamed to Superman : Escape from Krypton and featured new backward launching cars and a new color scheme . The upgraded ride reopened to the public on March 19 , 2011 . 
 Superman : Escape from Krypton closed again on February 5 , 2012 ( almost a year after the refurbishment ) to prepare for the new 2012 attraction Lex Luthor : Drop of Doom . Two drop towers , also built by Intamin , were integrated into the existing sides of Superman : Escape from Krypton 's structure . The ride reopened when construction was finished on July 7 , 2012 . 
 To enable the construction of the park 's 2013 roller coaster , Full Throttle , Superman : Escape from Krypton was temporarily closed from December 2012 . It reopened in mid @-@ January with Six Flags Magic Mountain stating the ride may have intermittent closures as the construction of Full Throttle continues . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 = = = Queue and station = = = 
 At the entrance to the ride , the Superman " S " shield is imprinted and now painted onto the ground . The entrance area and queue are modeled after the Fortress of Solitude , Superman 's headquarters . The station is lit green , modeled as Krypton , the planet that is full of Kryptonite rock that can take away Superman 's powers . Inside is a crystalline @-@ looking environment which recreates Superman 's fortress in the Arctic . If the Velocetron name had been chosen , the queue and station would have had ancient ruins and a giant laser . A page on display in the Sky Tower , the park 's observation tower , shows the concept art for Velocetron . 
 = = = Layout = = = 
 The roller coaster has two parallel tracks , with both tracks being identical . The vehicle is accelerated by Linear Synchronous Motors in reverse out of the station from 0 to 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) in approximately 7 seconds . Riders experience a g @-@ force of 4 @.@ 5 during the launch . The vehicle then climbs up 415 feet ( 126 m ) at a 90 degree angle . Riders climb this vertical section facing directly downward , before slightly stopping near the top of the tower . During the vertical section of the ride , riders experience weightlessness for about 6 @.@ 5 seconds . The vehicle drops 328 feet ( 100 m ) and is slowed down before re @-@ entering the station . 
 = = = Vehicles = = = 
 The roller coaster originally featured two vehicles , each with three rows of four seats and one row of three seats for a total of 15 riders per vehicle . Both vehicles were built to only run forward . After the ride was refurbished in 2010 , new " streamlined " vehicles with the Superman logo were introduced . The new vehicles were designed with low @-@ profile sides to enhance the open @-@ air feeling . Although they are wider , the row of the three seats in the older vehicle was reduced to two , resulting in a lower total of 14 riders per vehicle . Both of the new trains were configured to run backward , though they were designed to run forward as well . It was reported that the park would eventually run one side forward to give riders a choice , but both trains have remained facing backward . 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The steel track is approximately 1 @,@ 235 feet ( 376 m ) in length and the height of the tower is approximately 415 feet ( 126 m ) . The tower is in an " L " shape with two parallel tracks . When the ride opened , the entire structure was painted white . After the ride was refurbished , the top third of the structure was painted red , the track was painted yellow and the rest was painted blue . 
 = = Records = = 
 For the first four years of operation , Superman : Escape from Krypton was tied with Tower of Terror II as the fastest roller coaster in the world . In 2001 , the speed record was taken by Dodonpa in Japan which features a top speed of 106 @.@ 9 miles per hour ( 172 @.@ 0 km / h ) . Superman : Escape from Krypton held the record for the tallest roller coaster in the world until 2003 when the record was taken by the 420 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 130 m ) Top Thrill Dragster at Cedar Point . As of 2015 , it has the fifth fastest speed , the third tallest structure and the third @-@ highest drop in the world . 
 = Battle of Hubbardton = 
 The Battle of Hubbardton was an engagement in the Saratoga campaign of the American Revolutionary War fought in the village of Hubbardton , Vermont . Vermont was then a disputed territory sometimes called the New Hampshire Grants , claimed by New York , New Hampshire , and the newly organized and not yet recognized but de facto independent government of Vermont . On the morning of July 7 , 1777 , British forces , under General Simon Fraser , caught up with the American rear guard of the forces retreating after the withdrawal from Fort Ticonderoga . It was the only battle in Vermont during the revolution . ( The Battle of Bennington was fought in what is now Walloomsac , New York . ) 
 The American retreat from Fort Ticonderoga began late on July 5 after British cannons were seen on top of high ground , Mount Defiance ( aka Rattlesnake Mountain and Sugar Loaf Hill ) that commanded the fort . The bulk of General Arthur St. Clair 's army retreated through Hubbardton to Castleton , while the rear guard , commanded by Seth Warner , stopped at Hubbardton to rest and pick up stragglers . 
 General Fraser , alerted to the American withdrawal early on July 6 , immediately set out in pursuit , leaving a message for General John Burgoyne to send reinforcements as quickly as possible . That night Fraser camped a few miles short of Hubbardton , and the German General Friedrich Adolf Riedesel , leading reinforcements , camped a few miles further back . Rising early in the morning , Fraser reached Hubbardton , where he surprised some elements of the American rear , while other elements managed to form defensive lines . In spirited battle , the Americans were driven back , but had almost succeeded in turning Fraser 's left flank when Riedesel and his German reinforcements arrived , eventually scattering the American forces . 
 The battle took a large enough toll on the British forces that they did not further pursue the main American army . The many American prisoners were sent to Ticonderoga while most of the British troops made their way to Skenesboro to rejoin Burgoyne 's army . Most of the scattered American remnants made their way to rejoin St. Clair 's army on its way toward the Hudson River . 
 = = Background = = 
 General John Burgoyne began his 1777 campaign for control of the Hudson River valley by moving an army of 8 @,@ 000 down Lake Champlain in late June , arriving near Fort Ticonderoga on July 1 . On July 5 , General Arthur St. Clair 's American forces defending Fort Ticonderoga and its supporting defenses discovered that Burgoyne 's men had placed cannons on a position overlooking the fort . They evacuated the fort that night , with the majority of the army marching down a rough road ( now referred to locally as the 1776 Hubbardton Military Road ) toward Hubbardton in the disputed New Hampshire Grants territory . The day was hot and sunny , and the pace was rapid and grueling ; most of the army marched 30 miles ( 48 km ) to Castleton before making camp on the evening of July 6 . 
 = = British troops give chase = = 
 The British general , a Scotsman named Simon Fraser discovered early on July 6 that the Americans had abandoned Ticonderoga . Leaving a message for General Burgoyne , he set out in pursuit with companies of grenadiers ( 9th , 29th , 34th , and 62nd Foot ) and light infantry ( 24th , 29th , 34th , 53rd , and 62nd ) , as well as two companies of the 24th Regiment and about 100 Loyalists and Indian scouts . Burgoyne ordered Riedesel to follow ; he set out with a few companies of Brunswick jägers and grenadiers , leaving orders for the rest of his troops to come as rapidly as possible . Fraser 's advance corps was only a few miles behind Colonel Ebenezer Francis ' 11th Massachusetts Regiment , which acted as St. Clair 's rear guard . 
 American general St. Clair paused at Hubbardton to give the main army 's tired and hungry troops time to rest while he hoped the rear guard would arrive . When it did not arrive in time , he left Colonel Seth Warner and the Green Mountain Boys behind , along with the 2nd New Hampshire Regiment under Colonel Nathan Hale , at Hubbardton to wait for the rear while the main army marched on to Castleton . When Francis ' and Hale 's men arrived , Warner decided , against St. Clair 's orders , that they would spend the night there , rather than marching on to Castleton . Warner , who had experience in rear @-@ guard actions while serving in the invasion of Quebec , arranged the camps in a defensive position on Monument Hill , and set patrols to guard the road to Ticonderoga . 
 Baron Riedesel caught up with Fraser around 4 pm , and insisted that his men could not go further before making camp . Fraser , who acquiesced to this as Riedesel was senior to him in the chain of command , pointed out that he was authorized to engage the enemy , and would be leaving his camp at 3 am the next morning . He then advanced until he found a site about three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from Hubbardton , where his troops camped for the night . Riedesel waited for the bulk of his men , about 1 @,@ 500 strong , and also made camp . 
 = = Attack = = 
 Fraser 's men were up at 3 am , but did not make good time due to the darkness . Riedesel left his camp at 3 am with a picked group of men , and was still behind Fraser when the latter arrived at Hubbardton near dawn and very nearly surprised elements of Hale 's regiment , which were scattered in the early fighting . A messenger had arrived from General St. Clair delivering news that the British had reached Skenesboro , where the elements of the retreating army had planned to regroup , and that a more circuitous route to the Hudson River was now required . St. Clair 's instructions were to follow him immediately to Rutland . Francis ' men had formed a column to march out around 7 : 15 when the British vanguard began cresting the hill behind them . Rapidly reforming into a line behind some cover , the Massachusetts men unleashed a withering volley of fire at the winded British . General Fraser took stock of the situation , and decided to send a detachment around to flank the American left , at the risk of exposing his own left , which he hoped would hold until Riedesel arrived . Riedesel reached the top of another hill , where he observed that the American line , now including parts of Hale 's regiment , was in fact pressing on Fraser 's left . He therefore sent his grenadiers to support Fraser 's flank and directed the jägers against the American center . 
 At some point early in the conflict , St. Clair was made aware of the gunfire off in the distance . He immediately dispatched Henry <unk> Livingston and Isaac Dunn to send the militia camped closest to Hubbardton down the road in support of the action . When they reached the area of those camps they found those militia companies in full retreat away from the gunfire in the distance , and no amount of persuasion could convince the men to turn around . Livingston and Dunn continued riding toward Hubbardton . 
 Falling back to a secure position on Monument Hill , the Americans repulsed several vigorous British assaults , although Colonel Francis was hit in the arm by a shot . He soldiered on , directing troops to a perceived weakness on Fraser 's left . The tide of the battle turned when , after more than an hour of battle , Riedesel 's grenadiers arrived . These disciplined forces entered the fray singing hymns to the accompaniment of a military band to make them appear more numerous than they actually were . The American flanks were turned , and they were forced to make a desperate race across an open field to avoid being enveloped . Colonel Francis fell in a volley of musket fire as the troops raced away from the advancing British and scattered into the countryside . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The scattered remnants of the American rear laboriously made their way toward Rutland in order to rejoin the main army . Harassed by Fraser 's scouts and Indians , and without food or shelter , it took some of them five days to reach the army , which was by then nearing Fort Edward . Others , including Colonel Hale and a detachment of 70 men , were captured by the British as they mopped up the scene . Colonel Francis , in a sign of respect from his opponents , was buried with the Brunswick dead . 
 Baron Riedesel and the Brunswickers departed for Skenesboro the next day , much to General Fraser 's chagrin . Their departure left him in " the most disaffected part of America , every person a Spy " , with 600 tired men , a sizable contingent of prisoners and wounded , and no significant supplies . On July 9 he sent the 300 prisoners , under light guard but with threats of retaliation should they try to escape , toward Ticonderoga while he marched his exhausted forces toward Castleton and then Skenesboro . 
 Livingston and Dunn , the two men sent toward the battle by St. Clair , were met by retreating Americans on the Castleton road after the battle was over . They returned to Castleton with the bad news , and the army marched off , eventually reaching the American camp at Fort Edward on July 12 . 
 = = Losses = = 
 The official casualty return for the Hessian troops gives 38 Hessian soldiers and 1 French @-@ Canadian killed and 125 Hessians and 2 French @-@ Canadians wounded . A separate return for the German troops has 10 killed and 14 wounded , for a grand total of 49 killed and 141 wounded . Historian Richard M. Ketchum gives different British casualties of 60 killed and 168 wounded . The American casualties were 41 killed , 96 wounded and 230 captured . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A local body commissioned the erection of a monument on the battlefield site in 1859 , and the state began acquiring battlefield lands in the 1930s for operation as a state historic site . The battlefield was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1971 , and is the site of annual Revolutionary War reenactments . 
 = Odaenathus = 
 Lucius Septimius Udaynath , Latinized as Odaenathus ( Aramaic : <unk> / <unk> ; Arabic : <unk> / Udaynath ; 220 – 267 ) , was the founder king ( Mlk ) of the Palmyrene Kingdom centered at the city of Palmyra , Syria . He lifted his city from the position of a regional center subordinate to Rome into the supreme power in the East . Odaenathus was born into an aristocratic Palmyrene family who had received Roman citizenship in the 190s under the Severan dynasty . He was the son of Hairan the descendant of Nasor . The circumstances surrounding his rise are ambiguous ; he became the lord ( Ras ) of the city , a position created for him , as early as the 240s and by 258 , he was styled a consularis , indicating a high status in the Roman Empire . 
 The defeat and captivity of emperor Valerian at the hands of the Persian Sassanian monarch Shapur I in 260 left the eastern Roman provinces largely at the mercy of the Persians . Odaenathus stayed on the side of Rome ; assuming the title of king , he led the Palmyrene army and fell upon the Persians before they could cross the Euphrates to the eastern bank , and inflicted upon them a considerable defeat . Then , Odaenathus took the side of emperor Gallienus , the son and successor of Valerian , who was facing the usurpation of Fulvius Macrianus . The rebel declared his sons emperors , leaving one in Syria and taking the other with him to Europe . Odaenathus attacked the remaining usurper and quelled the rebellion . He was rewarded many exceptional titles by the emperor who formalized his self @-@ established position in the East . In reality , the emperor could have done little but to accept the declared nominal loyalty of Odaenathus . 
 In a series of rapid and successful campaigns starting in 262 , he crossed the Euphrates and recovered Carrhae and Nisibis . He then took the offensive to the heartland of Persia , and arrived at the walls of its capital Ctesiphon . The city withstood the short siege but Odaenathus reclaimed the entirety of Roman lands occupied by the Persians since the beginning of their invasions in 252 . Odaenathus celebrated his victories and declared himself King of Kings , crowning his son Hairan I as co @-@ king . By 263 , Odaenathus was in effective control of the Levant , Mesopotamia and Anatolia 's eastern region . 
 Odaenathus observed all due formalities towards the emperor , but in practice ruled as an independent monarch . In 266 , the king launched a second invasion of Persia but had to abandon the campaign and head north to Bithynia to repel the attacks of Germanic riders besieging the city of Heraclea Pontica . He was assassinated in 267 during or immediately after the Anatolian campaign , together with Hairan . The identities of the perpetrator or the instigator are unknown and many stories , accusations and speculations exist in ancient sources . He was succeeded by his son Vaballathus under the regency of his widow Zenobia , who used the power established by Odaenathus to forge the Palmyrene Empire in 270 . 
 = = Name , Odaenathus I and origin = = 
 " Odaenathus " is the Roman version of the king 's name who was born Lucius Septimius Udaynath c . 220 AD . " Udaynath " is the king 's personal name , an Arabic name that means " little ear " . " Septimius " was the family 's <unk> ( surname ) adopted as an expression of loyalty to the Roman Severan dynasty , whose emperor Septimius Severus granted the family Roman citizenship in the late second century . 
 In the Temple of Bel at Palmyra , a stone block with a sepulchral inscription was found mentioning the building of a tomb and recording the genealogy of the builder : Odaenathus son of Hairan son of Wahb Allat son of Nasor . Traditional scholarship believed the builder to be an ancestor of the king and he was given the designation " Odaenathus I " . In an inscription dated to 251 , the name of the " Ras " ( lord ) of Palmyra Hairan son of Odaenathus is written , and he was thought to be the son of Odaenathus I. 
 Prior to the 1980s , the earliest known inscription attesting king Odaenathus was dated to 257 , leading traditional scholarship to believe that Hairan Ras of Palmyra is the father of the king and that Odaenathus I was his grandfather . However , an inscription published in 1985 by archaeologist Michael Gawlikowski and dated to 252 mentions king Odaenathus as a " Ras " and records the same genealogy found in the sepulchral inscription confirming the name of king Odaenathus ' grandfather as Wahb Allat . Therefor , it is certain that king Odaenathus is the builder of the tomb ruling out the existence of " Odaenathus I " . Ras Hairan mentioned in the 251 inscription is identical with Odaenathus ' elder son and co @-@ ruler prince Hairan I. 
 The origin of the family is Aramean , while the king himself appears to be of mixed Aramean and Arab descent ; his name is Arabic , while the names of his ancestors ( father Hairan and great grandfather Nasor ) are Aramaic . Zosimus asserted that Odaenathus descended from " illustrious forebears " , but the position of the family in Palmyra is debated ; it was probably part of the wealthy mercantile class . Alternatively , the family could have belonged to the tribal leadership who amassed a fortune as landowners and patrons of the Palmyrene caravans . In Dura @-@ Europos , a relief dated to 159 was commissioned by Hairan son of <unk> son of Nasor ; this Hairan might have been the head of the Palmyrene trade colony in Dura @-@ Europos and probably belonged to the same family of Odaenathus . " Nasor " father of <unk> mentioned in the Dura @-@ Europos inscription could therefore be Odaenathus ' great @-@ great @-@ great grandfather . 
 = = Rise = = 
 Palmyra was an autonomous city subordinate to Rome and part of Syria Phoenice province . Odaenathus descended from an aristocratic family , albeit not a royal one as the city was ruled by a council and had no tradition of hereditary monarchy . Bilingual inscriptions from Palmyra record the title of the Palmyrene ruler as " Ras " in Palmyrene and <unk> in Greek , meaning the " Lord of Palmyra " . The title was created for Odaenathus , and was not a usual title in the Roman Empire or a part of the traditional Palmyrene governance institutions ; whether it indicated a military or a priestly position is unknown , but the military role is more likely . 
 The rise of the aggressive Sasanian Empire in 224 and the Iranian incursions which affected Palmyrene trade , combined with the weakness of the Roman empire , were probably the reasons behind the Palmyrene council 's decision to elect a lord for the city in order for him to lead a strengthened army . The " Ras " title enabled the bearer to tackle the difficult situation that arose due to the Sasanian insurgencies ; the supreme authority of the Ras probably made him the supreme civil and military commander with authority over the entire Palmyrene army , which was previously decentralized and led by different generals . 
 = = = Ras of Palmyra = = = 
 An undated inscription refers to Odaenathus as a Ras and records the gift of a throne to him by a Palmyrene citizen named " <unk> son of <unk> <unk> Hadda " , which confirms the supreme character of Odaenathus ' title . The earliest known inscriptions mentioning the title are dated to October 251 and April 252 ; the 251 inscription refer to Odaenathus ' eldest son Hairan I as Ras while the 252 inscription mention Odaenathus with that title . Hairan I was apparently elevated to co @-@ lordship status by his father . Although the written evidence for Odaenathus lordship dates to 251 , it is possible that he acquired the title as early as the 240s ; following the death of Roman emperor Gordian III in 244 during a campaign against Persia , the Palmyrenes might have elected Odaenathus to defend the city . 
 Odaenathus was described as Roman senator in the undated tomb inscription and Hairan I was mentioned with the same title in the 251 inscription . Scholarly opinions vary on the exact date of Odaenathus ' elevation to the position ; Gawlikowski and Jean Starcky maintain that the senatorial rank predates the Ras elevation . Udo Hartmann concludes that Odaenathus first became a Ras in the 240s then a senator in 250 . Another possibility is that the senatorial rank and lordship occurred simultaneously ; Odaenathus was chosen as a Ras following Gordian 's death , then after Philip the Arab concluded a peace with the Persians , the emperor ratified Odaenathus ' lordship and admitted him to the senate to guarantee Palmyra 's continuous subordination . 
 As early as the 240s , Odaenathus inflated the Palmyrene army , recruiting the desert nomads and increasing the numbers of the Palmyrene heavy cavalry units ( clibanarii ) . In 252 , Persian emperor Shapur I started a full @-@ scale invasion of the Roman provinces in the east . During the second campaign of the invasion , Shapur conquered Antioch and headed south where his advance was checked in 253 by Emesa 's priest king <unk> Antoninus . The events of 253 were mentioned in the works of the sixth century historian John Malalas who also mentioned a leader by the name " <unk> " inflicting a defeat upon the retreating Shapur near the Euphrates . " <unk> " is probably identical with Odaenathus , and while Malalas ' account indicate that Odaenathus defeated the Persians in 253 , there is no proof that the Palmyrene leader engaged Shapur before 260 and Malalas ' account seems to be confusing Odaenathus ' future actions during 260 with the events of 253 . 
 Shapur I destroyed the Palmyrene trade colonies all along the Euphrates ( including the colonies at Anah in 253 and at Dura @-@ Europos in 256 ) ; Peter the Patrician says that Odaenathus approached Shapur to negotiate Palmyrene interests but was rebuffed and the gifts sent to the Persians were thrown into the river . The date for the attempted negotiations is debated ; Some scholars including John F. Drinkwater set the event in 253 while others such as Alaric Watson set it in 256 following the destruction of Dura @-@ Europos . 
 = = = Governor of Syria Phoenice = = = 
 Several inscriptions dating to the end of 257 or early 258 show Odaenathus bearing the title " ὁ <unk> <unk> " ( <unk> <unk> ) ; this could be a mere honoring or a sign that he was appointed as the Legatus of Phoenice . However , the title ( ὁ <unk> <unk> ) was sometimes used in Syria to denote the provincial governor and William Waddington proposed that Odaenathus was indeed the governor of Phoenice . 
 Five of the inscriptions mentioning Odaenathus as consul are dated to the Seleucid year 569 ( 258 AD ) during which no governor for Phoenice is attested , which might indicate that this was Odaenathus ' year of governorship . In the city of Tyre , Phoenice 's capital , the lines " To Septimius Odaenathus , the most illustrious . The <unk> colony of Tyre " were found inscribed on a marble base ; the inscription is not dated and if it was set after 257 then it indicates that Odaenathus was appointed as the governor of the province . 
 These speculations cannot be proven without doubt but as a governor , Odaenathus would have been the highest authority in the province and above any legionary commander and provincial officials ; this would make him the commander of the Roman forces in the province . Whatever the case may be , starting from 258 , Odaenathus strengthened his position and extended his political influence in the region . By 260 , Odaenathus held the rank , credibility and power to pacify the Roman east following the Battle of Edessa . 
 = = = Edessa = = = 
 Faced with Shapur 's third campaign , the Roman emperor Valerian marched against the Persian monarch but was defeated near Edessa in late spring 260 and taken as a prisoner . The Persian emperor then ravaged Cappadocia , Cilicia and claimed to have captured Antioch , the metropolis of Syria . Taking advantage of the situation , Fulvius Macrianus , the commander of the imperial treasury , declared his sons Quietus and Macrianus Minor as joint emperors in August 260 opposing Valerian 's son Gallienus . Fulvius Macrianus took Antioch as his center and organized the resistance against Shapur ; he dispatched Balista , his praetorian prefect , to Anatolia . Shapur was defeated in the region of Sebaste at <unk> prompting the Persians to evacuate Cilicia while Balista went back to Antioch . Balista 's victory was only partial , as Shapur withdrew east of Cilicia where the marauding Persian units continued to occupy the area , while a Persian force took advantage of Balista 's return to Syria and headed further west in Anatolia . 
 = = Reign = = 
 According to the Augustan History , Odaenathus was declared king of Palmyra as soon as the news of the Roman defeat at Edessa reached the city . It is not known if Odaenathus contacted Fulvius Macrianus and there is no evidence that he took orders from him . 
 = = = Early Persian war and Syria = = = 
 Odaenathus assembled the Palmyrene army and Syrian peasants then marched north to meet the Persian emperor , who was back from Cilicia . The Palmyrene monarch fell upon the retreating Shapur at a place between Samosata and Zeugma west of the Euphrates in late summer 260 . Odaenathus defeated the Persians , expelling Shapur from the province of Syria . However , the Sassanians kept the regions east of the Euphrates . 
 In the beginning of 261 , Fulvius Macrianus headed to Europe accompanied by Macrianus Minor leaving Quietus and Balista in Emesa . Odaenathus ' whereabouts during this episode are not clear ; he could have distributed the army in garrisons along the frontier or might have brought it back to his capital . The Palmyrene monarch seems to have waited until the situation clear , declaring loyalty neither to Fulvius Macrianus nor to Gallienus . In the spring of 261 , Fulvius Macrianus arrived in the Balkans but was defeated and killed along with Macrianus Minor ; Odaenathus then marched on Emesa where Quietus and Balista were staying . The <unk> killed Quietus as Odaenathus approached the city , while Balista was captured and executed by the king in autumn 261 . 
 = = = = Ruler of the East = = = = 
 The elimination of the usurpers left Odaenathus as the most powerful leader in the Roman east ; he was granted many titles by the emperor but those honors are debated among scholars : 
 Dux Romanorum ( commander of the Romans ) : was probably given to Odaenathus to recognize his position as the commander in chief of the forces in the east against the Persians ; it was inherited by Odaenathus ' son and successor Vaballathus . 
 Corrector totius orientis ( commander of the entire East ) : it is generally accepted by modern scholars that he bore this title . The corrector had an overall command of the Roman armies and authority over the Roman provincial governors in the designated region . There are no known attestations of the title during Odaenathus ' lifetime . Evidences for the king bearing the title are two inscriptions in Palmyrene dialect ; one posthumous dedication describing him as MTQNNʿ of the East ( derived from the Aramaic root <unk> , meaning to set in order ) , and the other describing his heir Vaballathus with the same title albeit using the word <unk> instead of MTQNNʿ . 
 However , the sort of authority accorded by this position is widely discussed . The problem arise from the word MTQNNʿ ; its exact meaning is debated . The word is translated to Latin as corrector but <unk> is another possible translation ; the latter title was an honorary one meant to praise the bearer for driving enemies out of Roman territories . However , the inscription of Vaballathus is clearer as the word <unk> is not a Palmyrene word but a direct Palmyrene translation of the Greek term <unk> which is usually an equivalent to corrector . 
 According to David Potter , Vaballathus inherited his father 's exact titles . Hartmann points that there have been cases where a Greek word was translated directly to Palmyrene and a Palmyrene equivalent was also used to mean the same thing . The dedication to Odaenathus would be the using of a Palmyrene equivalent , while the inscription of Vaballathus would be the direct translation . Despite all the arguments , it cannot be certain without doubt that Odaenathus was a corrector . 
 Imperator totius orientis ( emperor of the entire East ) : only the Augustan History claims that Odaenathus was conferred with this title , and also goes so far as to claim that he was made an Augustus ( co @-@ emperor ) following his defeat of the Persians . Both claims are dismissed by scholars . Odaenathus seems to have been acclaimed as Imperator by his troops which is a salutation reserved for the Roman emperor ; this acclamation might explain the erroneous reports of the Augustan History . 
 Regardless of the titles , Odaenathus controlled the Roman East with the approval of Gallienus who could do little but to formalize Odaenathus self achieved status and settle for his formal loyalty . Palmyra itself , although officially still part of the Roman empire , became a de facto allied state to Rome instead of a provincial city . Outside of Palmyra , Odaenathus ' authority extended from the Pontic coast in the north to Palestine in the south . This area included the Roman provinces of Syria , Phoenice , Palaestina , Arabia , Anatolia 's eastern regions and later ( following the campaign of 262 ) Osroene and Mesopotamia . 
 = = = = First Persian campaign 262 = = = = 
 Perhaps driven by the will to take revenge for the destruction of Palmyrene trade centers and discourage Shapur from initiating future attacks , Odaenathus launched an invasion against the Persians . In the spring of 262 , the king marched north into the occupied Roman province of Mesopotamia , driving out the Persian garrisons and freeing Edessa and Carrhae . The first onslaught was aimed at Nisibis , which Odaenathus regained but sacked since the inhabitants were sympathetic toward the Persian occupation . The Palmyrene monarch destroyed the Jewish city of Nehardea , 45 km west of the Persian capital Ctesiphon , as he deemed the Jews of Mesopotamia loyal to Shapur . By late 262 or early 263 , Odaenathus stood at the walls of the Persian capital . 
 The exact route taken by Odaenathus from Palmyra to Ctesiphon remains uncertain ; it is probably similar to the route emperor Julian took in 363 during his campaign against Persia . Using this route , Odaenathus would have crossed the Euphrates at Zeugma then moved east to Edessa followed by Carrhae then Nisibis ; here , he would have descended south along the Khabur River to the Euphrates valley and marched alongside the river 's left bank to Nehardea . After taking the city , he penetrated the Sassanian province of <unk> and marched along the royal canal <unk> towards the Tigris where the Persian capital stood . 
 Once at Ctesiphon , Odaenathus immediately began the siege of the well @-@ fortified winter residence of the Persian kings ; severe damage was inflicted upon the surrounding areas due to the battles with Persian troops . The city held its ground and the logistical problems of fighting in enemy 's land probably prompted the Palmyrenes to lift the siege . Odaenathus headed north along the Euphrates carrying with him numerous prisoners and booty . The invasion resulted in the full restoration of the Roman lands ( Osroene and Mesopotamia provinces ) occupied by Shapur since the beginning of his invasions in 252 . However , Dura @-@ <unk> and other Palmyrene posts south of Circesium , such as Anah , were not rebuilt . Odaenathus sent the captives to Rome and by the end of 263 , Gallienus added <unk> Maximus ( " The great victor in Persia " ) to his titles and held a triumph . 
 = = = King of Kings = = = 
 In 263 , after his return , Odaenathus assumed the title King of Kings of the East ( Mlk Mlk ) , and headed to Antioch , the traditional capital of Syria , where he crowned his son Hairan I as co @-@ King of Kings . The title was a symbol of legitimacy in the East , starting with the Assyrians then the Achaemenids who used it to symbolize their supremacy over all other rulers and was adopted by the Parthian monarchs following their defeat of the Seleucids to legitimize their conquests . The first Sassanian monarch Ardashir I adopted the title following his victory over the Parthians . Odaenathus ' son was crowned with a diadem and a tiara ; the choice of the location was probably meant to express that the Palmyrene monarchs were now the successors of the Seleucid and Iranian rulers who controlled Syria and Mesopotamia in the past . 
 = = = = Relation with Rome = = = = 
 In the Roman empire 's hierarchical system , a vassal king usage of the King of Kings title did not indicate that he is a peer of the emperor or that the vassalage ties were cut . The title was probably a challenge not to the Roman emperor but to Shapur I ; Odaenathus was declaring that he , not the Persian monarch , was the legitimate King of Kings in the East . A <unk> depicting Hairan I shows him wearing a crown shaped like that of the Parthian monarchs , so it must have been Odaenathus ' crown ; this combination of title and imagery indicate that Odaenathus considered himself the rival of the Sassanians and the protector of the region against them . 
 Odaenathus ' intents are questioned by some historians such as Drinkwater who attribute the attempted negotiations with Shapur to Odaenathus ' quest for power . However , in contrast to the norm of his period when powerful generals proclaimed themselves emperors , Odaenathus chose not to usurp Gallienus ' throne , and minted no coins bearing his own image . The king had total control over his kingdom of Palmyra and effective control over the Roman East where his military authority was absolute . Odaenathus respected Gallienus ' privilege to appoint provincial governors , but dealt swiftly with opposition ; the Anonymus post Dionem mention the story of <unk> ( Quirinus ) , a Roman official , who showed dissatisfaction with Odaenathus ' authority over the Persian frontier and was immediately executed by the king . 
 In general , Odaenathus ' actions were connected to his and Palmyra 's interests only ; his support of Gallienus and his Roman titles did not hide the Palmyrene base of his power and the local origin of his armies , as with his decision not to wait for the emperor to help in 260 . Odaenathus ' status seems to have been , as Watson put it , " something between powerful subject , independent vassal king and rival emperor " . 
 = = = = Administration = = = = 
 Outside his kingdom , Odaenathus had an overall administrative and military authority over the provincial governors of the Roman eastern provinces . Inside Palmyra , no Roman provincial official had any authority ; the king filled the government with Palmyrene staffs . In parallelism to the Iranian practice of making the government appear as a family enterprise , Odaenathus bestowed his own <unk> ( Septimius ) upon his leading generals and officials such as <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . 
 The Palmyrene constitutional institutions continued to function normally during Odaenathus ' reign ; he maintained the council and most civic establishments , permitting the election of magistrates until 264 . When Odaenathus was on campaign , the kingdom was administered by a viceroy , Septimius <unk> . 
 = = = = Second Persian campaign 266 = = = = 
 Sources are silent regarding the events following the first Persian campaign but the silence in itself is an indication of the peace that prevailed and that the Persians stopped being a threat to the Roman East . The evidence for the second campaign is meager ; Zosimus is the only one to mention it specifically . A passage in the Sibylline Oracles is interpreted by Hartmann as an indication of the second invasion . The campaign took place in 266 or 267 and was aimed directly at Ctesiphon ; Odaenathus reached the walls of the Persian capital but had to cancel the siege and march north to face the influx of Germanic riders attacking Anatolia . 
 = = = = Anatolian campaign = = = = 
 The Romans used the designation " Scythian " to denote many tribes regardless of ethnic origin and sometimes the term would be interchangeable with Goths ; the tribes attacking Anatolia were probably the Heruli who built ships to cross the Black Sea in 267 and ravaged the coasts of Bithynia @-@ Pontus besieging Heraclea Pontica . According to Syncellus , Odaenathus arrived at Anatolia with Hairan I and headed to Heraclea but the riders were already gone . They loaded the spoils onto their ships but many perished in a sea battle probably conducted by Odaenathus ; another possibility is that they were shipwrecked . 
 = = Assassination = = 
 Odaenathus was assassinated along with Hairan I in late 267 ; the date is debated and some scholars propose 266 or 268 , but Vaballathus dated his first year of reign between August 267 and August 268 , making late 267 the most probable date . The assassination took place either in Anatolia , or in Syria while the king was returning to Palmyra ; there is no consensus on the manner , perpetrator or the motive behind the act . 
 According to Syncellus , Odaenathus was assassinated near Heraclea Pontica trying to quell a tribal incursion into Pontus ; he gives the name of the assassin as another Odaenathus who may or may not have been a relative of the king . The assassin was killed by the king 's bodyguard . Hartmann support the theory that Odaenathus was killed in Pontus . 
 Zosimus simply mention that Odaenathus was killed by conspirators near Emesa at a friend 's birthday party without naming the killer . Zonaras attributes the crime to a nephew of Odaenathus but does not give a name . 
 The Augustan History claims that a cousin of the king named Maeonius killed him , while the Anonymus post Dionem names the assassin as another Odaenathus . 
 = = = Burial = = = 
 The stone block found in the Temple of Bel bearing Odaenathus ' sepulchral inscription was brought from the tomb built by him ; this shrine 's location is unknown . At the western end of the Great Colonnade at Palmyra , a shrine designated the " Funerary Temple no . 86 " ( also known as the House Tomb ) is located . Inside its chamber , steps lead down to a vault crypt which is now lost . This mausoleum might have belonged to the royal family , being the only tomb inside the city 's walls . 
 = = = Assassination theories = = = 
 Roman conspiracy : John <unk> accuse Gallienus of the assassination . An interesting passage in the work of the Anonymus post Dionem speaks of a certain " Rufinus " who orchestrated the assassination on his own initiative then explained his act to the emperor who condoned the crime . This story talks about Rufinus ordering the murder of an older Odaenathus out of fear that he would rebel , and has the younger Odaenathus complaining to the emperor . Since the older Odaenathus ( Odaenathus I ) was proved to be a fictional character , the story was neglected by most scholars . However , according to Theodor Mommsen , younger Odaenathus is an oblique reference to Vaballathus ; Rufinus should be identified with Cocceius Rufinus , the Roman governor of Arabia between 261 / 262 . The evidence for a Roman conspiracy is very weak and can not be confirmed . 
 Family feud : According to Zonaras , Odaenathus ' nephew misbehaved during a lion hunt ; he made the first attack and killed the animal to the dismay of the king . Odaenathus warned the nephew who ignored the warning and repeated the act twice causing the king to deprive him of his horse which is a great insult in the East . The nephew threatened Odaenathus and was put in chains as a result ; Hairan I asked his father to forgive his cousin and his request was granted but as the king was drinking , the nephew approached him with a sword and killed him along with Hairan I. The bodyguard immediately executed the nephew . 
 Zenobia : the wife of Odaenathus was accused by the Augustan History of having formerly conspired with Maeonius , as Hairan I was her stepson and she could not accept that he was the heir to her husband instead of her own children . However , there is no suggestion in the Augustan History that Zenobia was involved in the event that saw her husband 's murder ; the act is attributed to Maeonius ' degeneracy and jealousy . Those accounts by the Augustan History can be dismissed as fiction . The hints in modern scholarship that Zenobia had a hand in the assassination out of her desire to rule the empire and dismay with her husband 's pro @-@ Roman policy can be dismissed as there was no reversal of that policy during the first years following Odaenathus ' death . 
 Persian agents or Palmyrene traitors : the possibility of a Persian involvement exists but the outcome of the assassination would not have served Shapur without establishing a pro @-@ Persian monarch on the Palmyrene throne . Another possibility would be Palmyrenes dissatisfied with Odaenathus ' reign and the changes of their city 's governmental system . 
 = = Family and succession = = 
 Odaenathus was married twice ; nothing is known about his first wife 's name or fate . Zenobia was the king 's second wife whom he married in the late 250s when she was 17 or 18 years old . 
 The number of children Odaenathus had with his first wife is unknown and only one is attested : 
 Hairan I : the name appears on a 251 inscription from Palmyra describing him as Ras implying that he was already an adult by then . In the Augustan History , Odaenathus ' eldest son is named Herod ; the inscription at Palmyra dating to 263 celebrating Hairan 's coronation mentions him with the name Herodianus . It is possible that Hairan of the 251 inscription is not the same as Herodianus of the 263 , but this is contested by Hartmann who conclude that the reason for the difference in the spelling is due to the language used in the inscription ( Herodianus being the Greek version ) , meaning that Odaenathus ' eldest son and co @-@ king is Hairan Herodianus . 
 The children of Odaenathus and Zenobia are : 
 Vaballathus : he is attested on several coins , inscriptions , and in the ancient literature . 
 Harian II : his image appear on a seal impression along with his older brother Vaballathus as the sons of Zenobia ; his identity is much debated . Potter suggest that he is the same as Herodianus who was crowned in 263 and that Hairan I mentioned in 251 died before the birth of Hairan II . 
 <unk> and <unk> : the two were mentioned in the Augustan History and are not attested in any other source ; <unk> might be a conflation of Hairan and Herodianus while <unk> is most probably a fabrication , although Dietmar <unk> suggest that he might be Vaballathus . 
 Possible descendants of Odaenathus living in later centuries are reported ; " Lucia <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " is known through a dedication dating to the late third or early fourth century inscribed on a tombstone erected by a wet nurse to her " sweetest and most loving mistress " . The tombstone was found in Rome at the San Callisto in Trastevere . Another possible relative is " Eusebius " who is mentioned by Libanius in 391 as a son of an " Odaenathus " who was in turn a descendant from the king ; the father of Eusebius is mentioned as fighting against the Persians ( most probably in the ranks of emperor Julian ) . In 393 , Libanius mentioned that Eusebius promised him a speech written by Longinus for the king . In the fifth century , the philosopher " Syrian Odaenathus " lived in Athens and was a student of Plutarch of Athens ; he might have been a distant descendant of the king . 
 The Augustan History claims that Maeonius was proclaimed emperor for a brief period before being killed by the soldiers . However , no inscriptions or other evidence exist for Maeonius ' reign and he was probably killed immediately after assassinating the king . Odaenathus was succeeded by his son , the ten @-@ year @-@ old Vaballathus under the regency of Zenobia . Hairan II probably died soon after his father , as only Vaballathus succeeded to the throne . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Odaenathus was the founder of the Palmyrene royal dynasty ; he left Palmyra the premier power in the East , and his actions laid the foundation of Palmyrene strength which culminated in the establishment of the Palmyrene Empire in 270 . Many writers wrote about deeds of Odaenathus ; Nicostratus of Trebizond probably accompanied the king on his campaigns and wrote a history of that period starting from Philip the Arab and ending shortly before the king 's death . According to Potter , Nicostratus ' account was meant to glorify Odaenathus and demonstrate his superiority over Roman emperors . 
 The memory of Odaenathus was highly esteemed in the Roman empire ; the Augustan History , written in the fourth century , places Odaenathus among the Thirty Tyrants ( probably because he assumed the title of king ) . However , it speaks highly of his role in the Persian war and credit him with saving the empire : " Had not Odaenathus , prince of the Palmyrenes , seized the imperial power after the capture of Valerian when the strength of the Roman state was exhausted , all would have been lost in the East " . 
 The king was praised by Libanius , and was the subject of a prophecy in the Thirteenth Sibylline Oracle : " Then shall come one who was sent by the sun [ i.e. Odaenathus ] , a mighty and fearful lion , breathing much flame . Then he with much shameless daring will destroy ... the greatest beast — venomous , fearful and emitting a great deal of hisses [ i.e. Shapur ] " . 
 Odaenathus is viewed negatively in Rabbinic sources ; his sack of Nehardea mortified the Jews , and he was cursed by the Babylonian Jews and the Jews of Palestine . 
 = Banksia violacea = 
 Banksia violacea , commonly known as violet banksia , is a species of shrub or tree in the plant genus Banksia ( family Proteaceae ) . It generally grows as a small shrub to 1 @.@ 5 m ( 5 ft ) high with fine narrow leaves , and is best known for its unusually coloured dark purple @-@ violet inflorescences . The colour of the inflorescences , short leaves , and flattened follicles which are sticky when young , help identify this species from others in the field . It is found in low shrubland in southern regions of Western Australia from Esperance in the east to Narrogin in the west , growing exclusively in sandy soils . 
 First described in 1927 by the West Australian botanist Charles Gardner , the species was at one stage considered a variety of B. sphaerocarpa . Although there are no recognised subspecies or varieties , both lignotuberous and nonlignotuberous forms exist for Banksia violacea . Wasps , ants and flies have been recorded visiting flower spikes . Banksia violacea is classified as Not Threatened under the Wildlife Conservation Act of Western Australia . Regarded as of little value to floriculture , it is rarely cultivated . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banksia violacea grows as a shrub up to 1 @.@ 5 m ( 5 ft ) tall , with narrow leaves 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) long and about 0 @.@ 15 cm ( 0 @.@ 06 in ) wide . New growth occurs in summer , and flowering ranges from November to April with a peak in February , but can be irregular in timing . Flowers arise from typical Banksia " flower spikes " , and the inflorescences are made up of hundreds of pairs of flowers densely packed in a spiral around a woody axis . Roughly spherical with a diameter of 2 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) , the flower spikes arise from lateral stems lie partly within the foliage . Unusually for Banksia species , the inflorescences are often violet in colour , ranging anywhere from a dark violet @-@ black through various combinations of violet and greenish @-@ yellow in less pigmented blooms . Each flower consists of a tubular perianth made up of four fused tepals , and one long wiry style . The styles are hooked rather than straight , and are initially trapped inside the upper perianth parts , but break free at anthesis . The old flowers gradually fade to brown . The fruiting structure or follicle is a stout woody " cone " , with a hairy appearance caused by the persistence of old withered flower parts . These follicles are crowded around the globular spike ( called an infructescence at this point ) and are oval to rhomboid , although the crowding makes some irregularly shaped . They measure 1 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 in ) long , 0 @.@ 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 in ) high and 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 9 in ) wide . They are quite flattened and lack a ridge along the valve line . When young , the follicles are greenish in colour and slightly sticky , and covered in fine white hairs , fading to tan or grey with age . They open with fire , releasing a winged wedge @-@ shaped ( cuneate ) seed 2 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 in ) long . The mottled dark grey seed body is falcate ( crescent @-@ shaped ) and measures 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 – 0 @.@ 7 in ) long and 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 25 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 in ) wide , with a flattened dark brown wing 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 5 in ) wide . The woody separator has the same dimensions as the seed . 
 The bright green cotyledon leaves of the seedlings are oblong to linear in shape and measure 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) long by 0 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 in ) wide . The greenish red hypocotyl is hairy , as are the stems of young plants . The hairy seedling leaves are crowded and oppositely arranged . They measure 0 @.@ 7 – 1 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 5 in ) in length and have recurved margins . Young plants often begin branching within their first year of life . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The type specimen of Banksia violacea was collected by the West Australian botanist Charles Gardner on 14 December 1926 in the vicinity of Lake Grace . The following year , he published a description of the species in Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of Western Australia . He placed it in section Oncostylis of Bentham 's taxonomic arrangement of Banksia , giving it the specific epithet violacea in reference to the violet flowers . Thus the full name of the species , with author citation , is Banksia violacea <unk> The species has been considered a variety of B. sphaerocarpa ( Fox Banksia ) ; this view was published by William Blackall in his 1954 How to know Western Australian wildflowers . He considered B. violacea to be a variety of B. sphaerocarpa with violet flowers . This description was an invalid publication , however , and a nomen nudum . In 1981 Alex George declared Banksia sphaerocarpa var. violacea Blackall a nomenclatural synonym of B. violacea . 
 In George 's 1981 arrangement , B. violacea was placed in subgenus Banksia because its inflorescence is a typical Banksia " flower spike " ; section Oncostylis because of its hooked styles ; and series Abietinae because its inflorescence is roughly spherical . It was placed in taxonomic sequence between B. incana ( Hoary Banksia ) and B. meisneri ( Meissner 's Banksia ) . 
 In 1996 , Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published the results of a cladistic analysis of morphological characters of Banksia . They retained George 's subgenera and many of his series , but discarded his sections . B. ser . Abietinae was found to be very nearly monophyletic and so it was retained . It further resolved into four subclades , so Thiele and Ladiges split it into four subseries . B. violacea appeared in the last of these : 
 This clade became the basis of B. subseries <unk> , which Thiele defined as containing those taxa with very long and slender styles , smoothly convex perianth limbs without a costal ridge , and thickened margins . In accordance with their cladogram , their arrangement placed B. violacea first in taxonomic sequence , followed by B. laricina ( Rose @-@ fruited Banksia ) . However , Thiele and Ladiges ' arrangement was not accepted by George , who , questioning the emphasis on cladistics , rejected most of their changes in his 1999 arrangement , restored B. series Abietinae to his broader 1981 definition , and abandoned all of Thiele and Ladiges ' subseries . George commented that the species has no close relatives , being " loosely allied " to B. sphaerocarpa ( Fox Banksia ) and B. telmatiaea ( Swamp Fox Banksia ) . Despite this , the sequence of the series was altered so that B. violacea fell between B. scabrella ( Burma Road Banksia ) and B. incana , and its placement in George 's arrangement may be summarised as follows : 
 Banksia 
 B. subg . Banksia 
 B. sect . Banksia ( 9 series , 50 species , 9 subspecies , 3 varieties ) 
 B. sect . Coccinea ( 1 species ) 
 B. sect . Oncostylis 
 B. ser . Spicigerae ( 7 species , 2 subspecies , 4 varieties ) 
 B. ser . Tricuspidae ( 1 species ) 
 B. ser . Dryandroideae ( 1 species ) 
 B. ser . Abietinae 
 B. sphaerocarpa ( 3 varieties ) 
 B. micrantha 
 B. grossa 
 B. telmatiaea 
 B. leptophylla ( 2 varieties ) 
 B. lanata 
 B. scabrella 
 B. violacea 
 B. incana 
 B. laricina 
 B. pulchella 
 B. meisneri ( 2 subspecies ) 
 B. nutans ( 2 varieties ) 
 B. subg . Isostylis ( 3 species ) 
 Since 1998 , an American botanist , Austin Mast , has been publishing results of ongoing cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for the subtribe Banksiinae . His analyses suggest a phylogeny that is very greatly different from George 's arrangement , and somewhat different from Thiele and Ladiges ' . With respect to B. violacea , Mast 's results agree with its placement near B. laricina and B. incana , placing it in a clade with these two species and B. sphaerocarpa var. dolichostyla ( treated at species rank as B. dolichostyla ) . However , Thiele 's B. subseries <unk> appears to be polyphyletic , as do both definitions of B. ser . Abietinae — that is , none form a natural grouping . 
 Early in 2007 , Mast and Thiele initiated a rearrangement of Banksia by merging Dryandra into it , and publishing B. subgenus Spathulatae for the taxa having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. violacea is placed in B. subgenus Spathulatae . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 B. violacea occurs in southern regions of Western Australia , from Woodanilling to Esperance and as far north as Hyden . This distribution includes areas of the Avon Wheatbelt , Esperance Plains and Mallee biogeographic regions . It favours white sandy soils , often overlying laterite , clay or quartzite . It usually grows among heath and shrublands , associated with mallee eucalypts and Banksia sphaerocarpa var. caesia . Banksia violacea is classified as Not Threatened under the 1950 Wildlife Conservation Act of Western Australia . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Like most other Proteaceae , Banksia violacea has proteoid roots , roots with dense clusters of short lateral rootlets that form a mat in the soil just below the leaf litter . These enhance solubilisation of nutrients , thus allowing their uptake in low @-@ nutrient soils such as the phosphorus @-@ deficient soils of Australia . B. violacea is highly susceptible to Phytophthora cinnamomi dieback . 
 Banksia violacea is one of a small number of Banksia species that has both lignotuberous and non @-@ lignotuberous populations . In both cases , plants are adapted to release their aerial seed bank following a bushfire , ensuring seedlings are established on clear and relatively fertile ground ; however the possession of a lignotuber makes plants much less reliant on fire regime for population maintenance and regeneration , as maternal plants are not killed by bushfire , but resprout from below ground level . <unk> plants generally occur among the north @-@ eastern populations , in the vicinity of Woodanilling . An investigation into the biogeography of these plants failed to find any vegetative , climatic or other environmental factors associated with the possession of a lignotuber . 
 Banksia flowerheads in general play host to a variety of birds , mammals and insects . However , only wasps , ants and flies were recorded visiting flower spikes during observations for The Banksia Atlas in the mid @-@ 1980s . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Banksia violacea is rarely cultivated . It is a slow @-@ growing plant that tends to become untidy with age , and generally does not flower until four to five years after sprouting from seed . Flowers are an unusual colour , but occur within the bush where they grow within and are usually obscured by foliage . It tolerates light pruning not below the green foliage , except for the variant with a lignotuber , which may be pruned heavily . George recommends a sunny position in light , sandy soil . Professor Margaret Bernard Sedgley of the Waite Institute suggests the species is of no value to floriculture , as the inflorescences are too small and obscured by the foliage , although she does add that the purple colour may be a worthwhile character to select for in plant breeding . Seeds do not require any treatment , and take 19 to 50 days to germinate . 
 = Rob Howard = 
 Rob Howard ( born 1954 or 1955 ) is a Canadian politician who was elected to the 39th Parliament of British Columbia as the Member of the Legislative Assembly of British Columbia from the riding of Richmond Centre . A member of the BC Liberal Party , he replaced retiring BC Liberal Olga Ilich in that riding , by winning the riding in the 2009 provincial election . While his party formed a majority government , Howard was not included in Gordon Campbell 's cabinet but was appointed to several committees , including the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts in the first two sessions , and Select Standing Committee on Finance and Government Services in the third and fourth session . Howard introduced one piece of legislation , the Trustee Board of the Church of God , Richmond Municipality , B.C. ( Corporate Restoration ) Act , 2009 ( Pr 402 ) , to retroactively restore that organization 's corporate status . 
 As chair of the Select Standing Committee on Finance and Government Services , Howard supported Premier Campbell 's efforts at establishing the Harmonized Sales Tax . Following Campbell 's resignation , Howard endorsed Kevin Falcon but Christy Clark won the leadership election . Clark eventually made Howard a Parliamentary Secretary in the Ministry of Transportation . In this position he advocated for Open Sky agreements and continued this advocacy in his post @-@ political life by establishing the non @-@ profit organization <unk> . Howard did not seek re @-@ election during the 2013 provincial election and was replaced by BC Liberal Teresa Wat . 
 Prior to his election to the legislature , Howard worked in property management . He served as a City Councillor in the Richmond , British Columbia for seven years . He was first elected to the Richmond , British Columbia City Council in the October 2001 by @-@ election as a member of the Richmond Non @-@ Partisan Association and was re @-@ elected in the November 2002 and 2005 civic elections as a member of the Richmond First Party . He sat on council as an independent starting in 2006 . While on council he advocated in favour of casino expansion , locating the Olympic speed @-@ skating oval in Richmond , and developing a convention centre . 
 = = Background = = 
 Rob Howard was born and raised in Richmond . He graduated from the University of British Columbia where he studied Urban Land Economics . He went on to work at Richmond Savings Credit Union for almost 20 years , and in 1994 , started his own business , <unk> Real Estate Management , which specialized in Property Development and property management . He is married to Trudy and has one son , Justin ( Jay ) . 
 Howard volunteered with the Richmond Minor Hockey Association for over 12 years , and was active with Tourism Richmond , the Richmond Chamber of Commerce , and the Real Estate Institute of BC . While his mother had served as an <unk> on the Richmond City Council , Howard 's political career began with a civic bylaw election in October 2001 . Howard , belonging to the civic political party Richmond Non @-@ Partisan Association , was elected to one of the three available seats on the Richmond City Council . After less than a year on council , Howard left the Richmond Non @-@ Partisan Association to join a new pro @-@ business political party , Richmond First , which he saw as being less controlling and allowing him to make more independent decisions . He was re @-@ elected in the November 2002 civic election , with his Richmond First party taking four of the eight council seats . 
 On local issues , Howard was an advocate of opening Richmond to gambling facilities , which led to the River Rock Casino Resort . He was supportive of heritage preservation measures but opposed Richmond 's tree preservation bylaw . He was the only one on council who preferred the elevated option for the Canada Line ( then known as the Richmond @-@ Airport @-@ Vancouver Line ) , whereas the other councillors preferred the ground level option or no SkyTrain extension at all . He was an advocate for building a convention centre and the most ardent supporter of removing a 55 @-@ acre piece of land from the Agricultural Land Reserve as a possible location for it , though the removal was refused . When the possibility of the city constructing a speed @-@ skating oval associated with the 2010 Winter Olympics came , Howard was a vocal supporter . He travelled to Lillehammer , Norway , in 2004 as part of a committee to investigate similar facilities built for the 1994 Winter Olympics . He also traveled to Pierrefonds , Quebec and Asia as part of the sister city program . He was not supportive of proposals to build a new soccer facility or financially contributing to tall ships tourism attractions . Because previous councils had made funding commitments at the expense of the city 's reserve funds rather than the tax base , Howard 's time on council was marked with consistent property tax increases around 3 to 4 % each year . Howard unsuccessfully lobbied other councillors to hire more police officers . He became the subject of a lawsuit , along with other Richmond First councillors , alleging a conflict @-@ of @-@ interest occurred after they approved a rezoning allowing a controversial pub . 
 In the 2005 civic election , he was again elected , though his Richmond First party only won three of the eight seats . He unsuccessfully lobbied his fellow councillors to appoint him to fill one of Richmond 's two seats at Metro Vancouver . With not even his own party members supporting him for the Metro Vancouver seat and finding himself being alone in a number of issues , such as supporting the SkyTrain line being elevated , opposing the tree preservation bylaw , and wanting to hire more police officers , Howard left the Richmond First party in February 2006 to be an independent . 
 = = Provincial politics = = 
 Following the announcement by Richmond Centre MLA Olga Ilich that she would not be seeking re @-@ election , Howard announced , in January 2008 , that he would seek to replace Ilich as the BC Liberal Party candidate in the next election . As no one else came forward to challenge Howard , he was acclaimed , in November 2008 , to be the BC Liberal candidate . In the general election , held in May 2009 , he was challenged by a New Democratic Party candidate , notary public Kam Brar , and a Green Party candidate , teacher Michael Wolfe , and Nation Alliance Party candidate , accountant Kang Chen . The riding was considered to be a safe seat for the BC Liberals to win , which the 54 @-@ year @-@ old Howard did win with over 60 % of the vote , with his BC Liberal Party winning a majority government . 
 As the 39th Parliament began , BC Premier Gordon Campbell did not include Howard in his cabinet . Howard was appoint to the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts in the first two sessions and then the Select Standing Committee on Finance and Government Services in the third and fourth sessions , in which he chaired the committee and traveled the province gathering public input regarding budget spending priorities . He was also appointed to the Select Standing Committee on Crown Corporations and the Select Standing Committee on Education in the first two sessions , but neither committee held any meetings . He introduced one piece of legislation , a private members bill , the Trustee Board of the Church of God , Richmond Municipality , B.C. ( Corporate Restoration ) Act , 2009 ( Pr 402 ) which retroactively restored that organization 's corporate status . 
 Howard toured the province advocating for the federal government to enter into Open skies agreements with Asian nations . He also advocated for the Harmonized Sales Tax . Howard remained loyal to Premier Campbell , praising his October 2010 announcement of using the remainder of the budget to cut income tax by 15 % , two weeks before the Select Standing Committee on Finance and Government Services was to deliver its report on public consultation for budget priorities . After Campbell resigned , and the tax cut undone , the 2011 BC Liberal leadership election ensued . Along with Richmond 's other two MLAs , John Yap and Linda Reid , Howard endorsed Kevin Falcon to be the new party leader , citing Falcon 's willingness to listen to all arguments and saying " I think he can bring a new dynamic , a youthful energy to the discussion ; he 's a great speaker , a great debater . " Christy Clark eventually won the leadership and became premier but , like Campbell , did not include Howard in the executive council . In March 2012 , Premier Clark promoted Howard to a parliamentary secretary position under the Ministry of Transportation and directed to focus on air services agreements where he served until September . In early 2013 , Howard was selected by BC Liberal caucus chair , Gordon Hogg , to assist with the party 's investigation into the party 's alleged use of government resources and employees in partisan promotional efforts in certain ethnic communities . 
 Following a summer of deliberations on his future , Howard cited " personal reasons " including a desire to spend more time with his wife , in his September 2012 announcement that he would not be seeking re @-@ election in the up @-@ coming May 2013 provincial general election . This decision was a surprise to his party because his Richmond Centre riding was considered a safe seat for him to be re @-@ elected . With no obvious successor , a competitive BC Liberal Party primary began . By the end of the year , two candidates announced their intention to run : school trustee Grace Tsang and RCMP officer Gary Law . However , Howard approached Teresa Wat , the CEO of the Chinese language radio station <unk> , to be his replacement . Though she did not live in the riding , she was viewed as a better candidate and , in January 2013 , the party announced she would be the candidate . While the other candidate Tsang withdrew his nomination to accept a position on a political advisory committee , Law alleged he was harassed to drop out and requested a RCMP investigation . Law decided to run as an independent candidate but only received <unk> of the vote , with Wat winning the election and subsequently being named Minister of International Trade . Following the election Howard founded the non @-@ profit organization <unk> to advocate for Open Sky agreements to allow more airline competition in Canadian international airports . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = Oribi = 
 Oribi ( pronounced / <unk> / ) ( Ourebia ourebi ) is a small antelope found in eastern , southern and western Africa . The sole member of its genus , the oribi was first described by the German zoologist Eberhard August Wilhelm von Zimmermann in 1782 . Eight subspecies are identified . The oribi reaches nearly 50 – 67 centimetres ( 20 – 26 in ) at the shoulder and weighs 12 – 22 kilograms ( 26 – 49 lb ) . This antelope features a slightly raised back , and long neck and limbs . The glossy , yellowish to rufous brown coat contrasts with the white chin , throat , underparts and rump . Only males possess horns ; the thin , straight horns , 8 – 18 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 1 – 7 @.@ 1 in ) long , are smooth at the tips and ringed at the base . 
 Typically diurnal , the oribi is active mainly during the day . Small herds of up to four members are common ; males defend their group 's territory , 25 – 100 hectares ( 62 – 247 acres ) large . The oribi is primarily a grazer , and prefers fresh grasses and browses occasionally . A seasonal breeder , the time when mating occurs varies geographically . Unlike all other small antelopes , oribi can exhibit three types of mating systems , depending on the habitat – polyandry , polygyny and polygynandry . Gestation lasts for six to seven months , following which a single calf is born ; births peak from November to December in southern Africa . Weaning takes place at four to five months . 
 The oribi occurs in a variety of habitats – from savannahs , floodplains and tropical grasslands with 10 – 100 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 – 39 @.@ 4 in ) tall grasses to montane grasslands at low altitudes , up to 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) above the sea level . This antelope is highly sporadic in distribution , ranging from Senegal in the west to Ethiopia and Eritrea in the east and southward to Angola and the Eastern Cape ( South Africa ) . The oribi has been classified as Least Concern by the IUCN ; numbers have declined due to agricultural expansion and competition from livestock . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The scientific name of the oribi is Ourebia ourebi . The sole member of its genus , the oribi is placed under the family Bovidae . The species was first described by the German zoologist Eberhard August Wilhelm von Zimmermann in 1782 . The oribi was formerly included in the tribe Neotragini , that comprised a variety of other dwarf antelopes , including Dorcatragus ( <unk> ) , Madoqua ( dik dik ) , Neotragus , Oreotragus ( klipspringer ) and Raphicerus . In 1963 , German mammalogist Theodor Haltenorth separated the oribi and Raphicerus into a new tribe , <unk> ; later on , zoologist Jonathan Kingdon assigned the oribi to <unk> , a tribe of its own . The common name " oribi " ( pronounced / <unk> / ) comes from the Afrikaans name for the animal , <unk> . 
 In a revision of the phylogeny of the tribe Antilopini on the basis of nuclear and mitochondrial data in 2013 , Eva Verena <unk> ( of the University of Cambridge ) and colleagues showed that the oribi is the sister taxon to all other antilopines . The cladogram below is based on the 2013 study . 
 The following eight subspecies are identified : 
 Of these , zoologists Colin Groves and Peter Grubb identify O. o. hastata , O. o. montana , O. o. ourebi and O. o. <unk> as independent species in their 2011 publication <unk> Taxonomy . 
 = = Description = = 
 The oribi is a small , slender antelope ; it reaches nearly 50 – 67 centimetres ( 20 – 26 in ) at the shoulder and weighs 12 – 22 kilograms ( 26 – 49 lb ) . The head @-@ and @-@ body length is typically between 92 and 110 centimetres ( 36 and 43 in ) . Sexually dimorphic , males are slightly smaller than females ( except for O. o. ourebi , in which females are smaller ) . This antelope features a slightly raised back , and long neck and limbs . The glossy , yellowish to rufous brown coat contrasts with the white chin , throat , underparts and rump . The bushy tail , brown to black on the outside , has white insides ( except in O. o. hastata , that has a completely black tail ) . The subspecies show some variation in colouration ; O. o. ourebi is a rich rufous , while O. o. hastata is yellower . 
 Only males possess horns ; the thin , straight horns , 8 – 18 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 1 – 7 @.@ 1 in ) long , are smooth at the tips and ringed at the base . The maximum horn length , 19 @.@ 1 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) , was recorded in 1998 from Malawi . The oribi has at least six different , well @-@ developed scent glands ( such as the prominent preorbital glands near the eyes ) . The body has several modifications , such as the large fossae below the eyes , to accommodate such a large number of glands . Females have four teats . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 The oribi is diurnal ( active mainly during the day ) , though some activity may also be observed at night . The animal rests in cover during rain events . Unlike all other small antelopes , oribi can exhibit three types of mating systems , depending on the habitat – polyandry , polygyny and polygynandry ; polygyny tends to prevail as the female @-@ to @-@ male ratio increases . A study suggested that polygyny is preferred in areas of high predator risk , as it leads to formation of groups as an anti @-@ predator measure . Small herds of up to four members are also common . 
 Males defend their group 's territory , 25 – 100 hectares ( 62 – 247 acres ) large ; female members may also show some aggression and drive away intruders . A study showed that the number of females that visit the male 's territory depends on the appearance ( particularly the symmetry ) of the male 's horns . Males mark vegetation and soil in their territories by preorbital gland secretions and excrement ; the intensity of marking increases with the number of male neighbours . Dominant males tend to have greater access to females in and around the territory than other males . An important feature of the social behaviour of oribi is the " dung ceremony " , in which all animals form temporary dung middens . Oribi at least three months old have been observed giving out one to three alarm whistles on sensing danger . These whistles are more common in adults than in juveniles , and males appear to whistle more . Common predators include carnivorans such as jackals . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Primarily a grazer , the oribi prefers fresh grasses and browses occasionally . Grasses can constitute up to 90 % of the diet ; preferred varieties include Andropogon , Eulalia , Hyparrhenia , <unk> , Pennisetum and Themeda species . Mineral licks are also visited regularly . Oribi have been observed feeding on flowers and Boletus mushrooms . Groups of oribi congregate in the rainy season , when grasses are abundant . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Both sexes become sexually mature at 10 to 14 months . A seasonal breeder , the time when mating occurs varies geographically . Mating may peak in the rainy season ( August to September ) . When a female enters oestrus ( which lasts for four to six days ) , it seeks the company of males . During courtship , the male will pursue the female , test her urine to check if she is in oestrus and lick her rump and flanks . Gestation lasts for six to seven months , following which a single calf is born ; births peak from November to December in southern Africa . The newborn is kept in concealment for nearly a month ; the mother pays regular visits to her calf to suckle it for nearly half an hour . Males may guard their offspring from predators and keep away other males . Weaning takes place at four to five months . The oribi lives for 8 to 12 years in the wild , and for 12 to 14 years in captivity . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The oribi occurs in a variety of habitats – from savannahs , floodplains and tropical grasslands with 10 – 100 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 – 39 @.@ 4 in ) tall grasses to montane grasslands at low altitudes , up to 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) above the sea level . Recently burnt areas often attract groups of oribi . The choice of habitat depends on the availability of cover needed to escape the eyes of predators . Population densities typically vary between 2 and 10 individuals per km2 ; however , densities as high as 45 individuals per km2 have been recorded in tropical grasslands that receive over 110 centimetres ( 43 in ) of annual rainfall and open floodplains . The oribi 's range overlaps with those of larger grazers such as the African buffalo , hippopotamus , hartebeest , Thomson 's gazelle and topi . These separate species often occur in close proximity to each other , increasing predator vigilance . 
 This antelope is highly sporadic in distribution ; it occurs mainly in eastern , southern and western Africa , ranging from Nigeria and Senegal in the west to Ethiopia and Eritrea in the east and southward to Angola and the Eastern Cape ( South Africa ) . It is feared to be extinct in Burundi . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 The oribi has been classified as Least Concern by the IUCN . The total population ( as of 2008 ) is estimated at 750 @,@ 000 . However , the subspecies O. o. <unk> is listed as Vulnerable because , as of 2008 , the total population is estimated at less than 10 @,@ 000 mature individuals , and is feared to be declining . Hunting is a relatively minor threat , since the oribi shows some tolerance to hunting . Nevertheless , the steep fall of 92 % in oribi populations in Comoé National Park ( Côte d 'Ivoire ) has been attributed to poaching . Numbers have also declined due to agricultural expansion and competition from livestock . 
 The oribi occurs in a number of protected areas throughout its range , such as : <unk> Gumti National Park in Nigeria , the Pendjari and W National Parks ( Benin ) ; <unk> Hunting Zone ( Chad ) ; <unk> , Bouba Njida and Faro National Parks ( Cameroon ) ; Manovo @-@ Gounda St. Floris National Park ( Central African Republic ) ; <unk> , <unk> and <unk> National Parks ( Congo @-@ Kinshasa ) ; Omo National Park ( Ethiopia ) ; Masai Mara Game Reserve and Ruma National Park ( Kenya ) ; Golden Gate Highlands National Park ( South Africa ) ; Serengeti National Park ( Tanzania ) ; <unk> Valley , Lake <unk> and Murchison Falls National Parks ( Uganda ) ; Kafue and <unk> Plain National Parks and Bangweulu Swamp ( Zambia ) . 
 = Rockstar 101 = 
 " Rockstar 101 " is a song by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna from her fourth studio album , Rated R ( 2009 ) . The song features the British @-@ American guitarist Slash of the rock group Guns N ' Roses . It was released on May 18 , 2010 , as the fifth single from the album . Rihanna wrote the song in collaboration with the producers The @-@ Dream and Christopher " Tricky " Stewart ; vocal production was carried out by Makeba Riddick . The album version is a hip hop song , while the remix EP 's consist of dance , dubstep and electronic music adaptations , some of which were remixed by Dave Audé and Mark Picchiotti . 
 Critical response to " Rockstar 101 " was mixed ; some critics praised Rihanna 's " bravado " while others criticized the " aggressive " tone . The song charted at number 64 on the United States ' Billboard Hot 100 chart , and number two on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart . To promote the song , Rihanna performed on American Idol in April 2010 . It has been included on the set lists of her Last Girl on Earth Tour ( 2010 – 11 ) and Diamonds World Tour ( 2013 ) . Melina Matsoukas directed the song 's music video , which portrays Rihanna impersonating Slash . She wears custom made jewelry designed by Fannie Schiavoni in some parts of the video , while Blink @-@ 182 drummer Travis Barker makes a cameo appearance . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Rihanna co @-@ wrote " Rockstar 101 " in collaboration with the song 's producers The @-@ Dream and Christopher " Tricky " Stewart . Her vocals and the instrumentation for the song were recorded at Serenity Sound Studios in Los Angeles , California , the Boom Boom Room in Burbank , California and Triangle Sound Studios in Atlanta , Georgia . It was mixed by Jaycen Joshua at Larrabee Studios in Universal City , California ; he was assisted in the process by Giancarlo Lino . Rihanna 's vocals were produced by Makeba Riddick . The song was engineered by Marcus Tovar , Brian " B @-@ LUV " Thomas , Andrew Wuepper and Chris " TEK " O 'Ryan . Additional engineering was done by Pat Thrall . Guitar was provided by Tim Stewart , while Monte Neuble performed additional keys . The song features a guitar performance by Slash , the British @-@ American musician , songwriter and former lead guitarist of the American hard rock band Guns N ' Roses . 
 " Rockstar 101 " was the fourth single from the album Rated R to be released in the US and the fifth overall . It was sent to contemporary hit and rhythmic radio stations in the US on May 18 , 2010 , and to Australian radio stations on July 19 , 2010 . The song was released as an extended play ( EP ) in the United States through <unk> on June 2 , 2010 , to the iTunes Store on July 13 , and in the United Kingdom through Amazon on June 29 , 2010 . These EP 's consist of remixes by various DJs and music producers , including Dave Audé and Mark Picchiotti . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Rockstar 101 " is a hip hop song which lasts for three minutes and fifty @-@ eight seconds . It features an " aggressive " guitar solo from Slash , according to Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly . Rihanna uses her lower register and " heavy " modulation to perform the most of the song , and she " growls " the lyric " The only thing I 'm missing is a black guitar " . Rihanna " struts her stuff " as she insists that she is a " big shit talker " as she proclaims that " I 'll never play a victim / I 'd rather be a stalker " . Sean Fennessey for Spin thought that when Rihanna sings the line " Got my middle finger up , I don 't give a fuck " , it sounded as though she had never sworn before due to how she <unk> <unk> the word ' fuck ' . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Rockstar 101 " received mixed responses from music critics . Brian Linder for IGN praised the song , writing that it " actually works " despite sounding disjointed at first . Emily Tartanella of PopMatters defined " Rockstar 101 " as a " brilliant bit of bravado " during her review of Rated R , while Ailbhe Malone for NME wrote that Rihanna sings with " swagger " on the track , which was something that she has Hova to thank for . Jon Pareles for The New York Times simply highlighted a line from the song , " I never play the victim " . Neil McCormick for The Daily Telegraph thought that " Rockstar 101 " was one of the few songs on the album to retain the " vaguest leftover hints of her warm Caribbean vocal flavouring " . Ann Powers for the Los Angeles Times was critical of Slash 's inclusion on the song , and she described it as an " afterthought " . Powers wrote " she can definitely get by without that ultimate rock phallic symbol " , a reference to Slash . Pitchfork Media 's Ryan Dombell felt that " Rockstar 101 , alike " Russian Roulette " and " The Last Song " , were " instantly @-@ dated missteps from a bygone era when a Slash feature was cool " . He further wrote that " Rockstar 101 " and " G4L " were " harder to justify considering their mindless boasts and torpid production " . The song was met with a negative review from The Guardian 's Alex Petridis , who wrote " At one extreme , the resemblance of ' Umbrella ' ' s chorus to that of a stadium rock ballad seems to have encouraged Rihanna to cut out the middle @-@ man and just start making stadium rock : cue the awful <unk> @-@ woo guitars of ' Rockstar 101 ' and ' Fire Bomb ' " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Rockstar 101 " made its first chart appearance on the United States ' Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart , where it peaked at number two ; it stayed on the chart for 14 weeks . The song peaked on the US Hot Digital Songs chart at number 28 , spending seven weeks on the chart . It subsequently peaked at number 64 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and spent five weeks on the chart . It also peaked at number 10 on the US R & B / Hip @-@ hop Digital Songs chart . " Rockstar 101 " debuted on the Australian Singles Chart at number 50 on August 22 , 2010 ; it peaked at number 24 two weeks later for one week , and remained on the chart for six weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The director Melina Matsoukas filmed the music video for " Rockstar 101 " in April 2010 ; she had previously directed the videos for Rihanna 's singles " Hard " and " Rude Boy " . This video was edited by Nabil Mechi from Murex , who previously edit videos for " S.O.S. " and " Umbrella " . On May 19 , 2010 , Rihanna released a 30 @-@ second sneak @-@ peek preview of the video on the internet , whilst the full video premiered on May 25 , 2010 through the high @-@ definition music video website VEVO . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 According to Jayson Rodriguez of MTV , the video is " a mix of goth bondage @-@ esque voyeurism , complete with Rihanna 's gyrating moves and a raging band that features Travis Barker on the drums . " Shortly after the video was released , Slash said that he was " flattered " that Rihanna had impersonated him in the video , saying " The video is way better with her being me than with me being me ... all things considered , it brings an element of sexuality to it that I probably wouldn 't have been capable of . I think it 's hot . Everything works out the way it 's supposed to . " 
 Although Slash is featured on " Rockstar 101 " , he does not appear in the music video . Instead , Rihanna pays homage to him by impersonating him by presenting herself wearing a skull @-@ laden top hat , wig , leather jacket , dark glasses and toothpick : Rihanna can be seen strumming a guitar Slash 's style . Rihanna is seen in eight different scenes and settings , one of which showed an almost nude Rihanna covered in black body paint wearing only a spiked crown and jewelry chains , which were created by designer Fannie Schiavoni . In other scenes , Rihanna smashes a black electric guitar and can be seen wearing an outfit made from parts of a guitar . Blink @-@ 182 drummer Travis Barker makes a cameo appearance and is featured as one of the drummers in Rihanna 's rock band . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Rihanna first performed " Rockstar 101 " on American Idol on April 7 , 2010 . She wore a black PVC catsuit and was accompanied on stage by guitarist Nuno Bettencourt ; the set design included flame throwers and a video screen which showed guitars , lightning bolts and skulls . At one point , the singer picked and played up a black Gibson Flying V guitar . Larry Carroll for MTV wrote that the extent of Rihanna 's ability to play the guitar was limited to playing it with one finger on one of the strings . However , he complimented Rihanna 's overall performance , writing that her shoulder pads were " nearly as huge as her presence " . He went on to write that she " half @-@ sung , half @-@ spoke " the song . A reviewer for MTV UK agreed with Carroll , writing that " halfway through the performance [ Rihanna ] donned a ' black flying v guitar ' although we 're not sure you could say she ' played ' it ! " Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone praised Rihanna 's performance , writing " if the introductory rules of rock stardom are ' teach thyself to pick slide , ' ' tight clothes ' and ' pyro ! ' then Rihanna has been paying attention in her ' Rockstar 101 ' classes after all " . 
 A reporter for the Daily Mail wrote that Rihanna displayed her competitive side during her performance on American Idol , after " Lady Gaga set such high standards " . Writing for About.com , Bill Lamb was critical of Rihanna 's decision to perform " Rockstar 101 " on American Idol . He commented that previous media reports had indicated that the singer would be debuting a different album track , " Te Amo " , which was later released as the sixth and final single from Rated R. Lamb thought that " Rockstar 101 " was one of the " weaker " songs on the album , and predicted that it would be " destined to end the streak of three consecutive top 10 pop hits from the album " . While he wrote that the " intensely chilly , distant feel of the song works " within the context of Rated R , Lamb was unsure of whether or not it would appeal to the masses on radio . The song was included on the set list of the Last Girl on Earth Tour ( 2010 – 11 ) . Clay Cane for BET wrote that Rihanna " deserves a round of applause for doing something different , straying away from being a standard pop tart " . " Rockstar 101 " is also included on Rihanna 's Diamonds World Tour ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Serenity Sound Studios , Los Angeles , CA ; The Boom Boom Room , Burbank CA ; Triangle Sound Studios , Atlanta , GA 
 Mixed at Larrabee Studios , Universal City , CA 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the inlay cover of Rated R. 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = St Mary 's Church , Rhodogeidio = 
 St Mary 's Church , Rhodogeidio is a small medieval church , dating from the 15th century , near Llannerch @-@ y @-@ medd , in Anglesey , north Wales . It served as a chapel of ease to another church in the area , St Ceidio 's . Some restoration work was carried out in the 19th century , but St Mary 's has since fallen into disuse and is now largely in ruins . 
 It is a Grade II listed building , a national designation given to " buildings of special interest , which warrant every effort being made to preserve them " , in particular because it is " a late Medieval church of exceptionally simple character " , and is virtually unaltered despite its poor condition . One writer has said that St Mary 's " has the distinction of probably being the most isolated church in Anglesey " . 
 = = History and location = = 
 St Mary 's Church is in the countryside in Rhodogeidio , in Anglesey , north Wales . It is about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) north of Llannerch @-@ y @-@ medd , towards the north of Anglesey . It is reached by a footpath from a farm – it is only accessible on foot – and is surrounded by a churchyard . 
 It was built in the 15th century as a chapel of ease to serve St Ceidio 's Church , Rhodogeidio , about 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 25 km ) to the east . Restoration work was carried out in the 19th century , but the church later fell into disuse . It has been in ruins since sometime between 1937 , when the survey by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire recorded its condition as " fair " , and 1970 , when it was given listed building status and its " very poor " condition noted . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
