 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 * Playing stats from Total Hockey 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = WPHL = = = 
 = = = IPHL = = = 
 * Awards from Total Hockey 
 = How the Scots Invented the Modern World = 
 How the Scots Invented the Modern World : The True Story of How Western Europe 's <unk> Nation Created Our World & Everything in It ( or The Scottish Enlightenment : The Scots invention of the Modern World ) is a non @-@ fiction book written by American historian Arthur Herman . The book examines the origins of the Scottish Enlightenment and what impact it had on the modern world . Following the Great Man approach , Herman focuses on individuals and presents their biographies in the context of their individual fields and also in terms of the theme of Scottish contributions to the world . 
 The book was published as a hardcover in November 2001 by Crown Publishing Group and as a trade paperback in September 2002 . Critics found the thesis to be over @-@ reaching but descriptive of the Scots ' disproportionate impact on modernity . In the American market , the trade paperback peaked at # 3 on The Washington Post bestseller list , while in the Canadian market it peaked at # 1 . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the time of publication , the author was the coordinator of the Western Civilization Program at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington , DC . The book grew out of a class topic at the Smithsonian regarding intellectual life in Edinburgh in the 18th century . Herman was impressed by the fact that so many prominent individuals who had a significant impact on modernity had come from such a specific geographic location and time @-@ frame . 
 Herman had only once been to Scotland as a teenager when his father , a professor , spent a semester at Edinburgh University . Though born and raised in the Midwestern United States , his ancestry traces back to Norway ; there are no Scots in his ancestral background of whom he is aware . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The book is divided into two parts . The first part , Epiphany , consists of eight chapters and focuses on the roots , development , and impact of the Scottish Enlightenment on Scotland and Great Britain . The roots come from an appreciation for democracy and literacy that developed from the Scottish Reformation , when John Knox brought Calvinist Presbyterianism to Scotland . He preached that God ordained power into the people and that it was for the people to administer and enforce God 's laws , not the monarchy . For common people to understand God 's laws they had to be able to read the Bible , so schools were built in every parish and literacy rates grew rapidly , creating a Scottish @-@ oriented market for books and writers . 
 Though they each resented one another , the English and Scots joined in 1707 to form the Kingdom of Great Britain ; the English wanted the Scots controlled and the Scots realized they could not match English power . The Scots immediately benefited from a centralized government that paid little attention to it -- for example , inexpensive imports reduced the impacts of famines and allowed a Scottish culture to flourish . Herman calls the Scottish Enlightenment " more robust and original " than the French Enlightenment and that the product of the " Scottish school " was that humans are creatures of their environment , constantly evolving and trying to understand itself via social sciences . 
 The defeat of the 1745 Jacobite rising decimated the antiquated social structure based around clans lorded over by chieftains . This liberalized the Scottish way of life by allowing citizens to own land and keep the profits instead of giving all profits to the chieftains who owned all the land . Their literate foundation allowed the Scots to become economically literate and take advantage of trade . Edinburgh and Glasgow became epicenters of intellectual thought . There existed in Scotland a clergy who believed that a moral and religious foundation was required for , and compatible with , a free and open sophisticated culture , which moderated hardline conservatives . Herman presents biographies of Francis Hutcheson , Henry Home ( Lord Kames ) , Robert Adam , Adam Smith , and others to illustrate the Scottish development . 
 The second part , Diaspora , focuses on the impacts of Scots on events , the world , and industries . Most Scots immigrants in the American colonies sympathized with the British during the American Revolutionary War but those who did fight in the militias were the most capable because many were the same refugee families from the 1745 Jacobite rising . Herman claims that the Scottish School of Common Sense influenced much of the American declaration of independence and constitution . 
 After Great Britain lost the American colonies , a second generation of Scottish intellectuals saved Britain from stagnation and reinforced a self @-@ confidence that allowed the country to manage a world empire during the Victorian era . Scots in India , like James Mill , led the British idea of liberal imperialism , that they had to take over indigenous cultures and run their society for their own good , or " the white man 's burden " . Herman claims that Sir Walter Scott invented the historical novel , giving modernity a " self @-@ conscious antidote " , and gave literature a " place as part of modern life " . 
 In science and industry Herman states that James Watt 's steam engine " gave capitalism its modern face , which has persisted down to today " . It permitted business to choose its location , like in cities close to inexpensive labor , and it was Scots who rectified negative impacts industry had , i.e. the public health movement . Scots ' contribution to modern society is illustrated with biographies of Scots like Dugald Stewart , John Witherspoon , John McAdam , Thomas Telford , and John Pringle , among others . 
 = = Style = = 
 Herman wrote the book for an American audience which may not have been very familiar with Scottish history . He provides a historical overview and short biographies of the most prominent Scots . The historical approach uses the Great Man Theory , that a historical narrative can be told through the lives of a few prominent figures . Regarding this approach Michael Lynch of The Globe and Mail wrote , the biographies " reveal subtle but important links between these figures and their ideas , which Herman seeks to characterize , with some success , as a coherent body of distinctively ' Scottish ' thought . " 
 One reviewer noted the book 's " almost complete dependence on secondary sources " . Herman provides a section , at the end of the book , listing sources used and suggestions for further reading on each chapter . In this section , he notes that some of the most influential sources consulted included the works of Scottish historians Bruce <unk> , John Prebble , Thomas Devine , and Duncan Bruce , amongst others . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 The book was published by Random House 's Crown Publishing Group . The hardcover was released on November 27 , 2001 and the trade paperback , published by the Three Rivers Press imprint , was released on September 24 , 2002 . In the US market the hardcover spent 3 weeks on The Washington Post bestseller list peaking at # 5 followed by a 14 @-@ week run by the trade paperback , peaking at # 3 . In the Canadian market , the trade paperback spent 80 weeks on The Globe and Mail bestseller list , peaking at # 1 . 
 The British version re @-@ titled the book The Scottish Enlightenment : The Scots invention of the Modern World and released in the UK market by Fourth Estate , a HarperCollins imprint . It was long @-@ listed by the 2002 Samuel Johnson Prize for Non @-@ Fiction . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Regarding the title and thesis , that the people of Scotland invented the modern world , nearly every reviewer commented on it , some calling it " provocative " , a " hyperbole " , " absurd " and " pandering to prejudice " . 
 In the The Scotsman , Graham Leicester writes that the " overblown rhetoric invites a sceptical reaction . But I suggest we just accept this extraordinary compliment graciously . " It was likely influenced by Thomas Cahill 's How the Irish Saved Civilization and the result of a marketing strategy . Several reviewers found that Herman was successful in proving that Scots did have a disproportionate impact on modernity . Herman continued this type of theme with his next book , To Rule the Waves : How the British Navy Shaped the Modern World , published in 2004 . 
 Critics found the book well @-@ written and scholarly but with an over @-@ reaching thesis . The reviewer for the National Review defended Herman 's use of the word " invented " , writing that it has " an older meaning : to discover and understand . The [ Scots ] did not , like a number of their French counterparts , seek to construct a new world ... they instead tried to understand certain traditions and institutions that had spontaneously arisen in the course of man 's work , but that were still misunderstood even by many intelligent observers . " In the The Scotsman , reviewer George <unk> wrote that Herman may have successfully proven his thesis but does not satisfactorily account for " why Scotland ? " 
 Irvine Welsh accused Herman of neglecting or down @-@ playing some of the unfavourable actions by Scots , like the Highland Clearances , prominence in the slave trade , and the formation of the Ku Klux Klan . The reviewer for The National Interest noted that Herman 's study falls short of explaining why the Scottish Enlightenment ended and why " Scotland had declined into a backwater by the end of the 19th century " . 
 = The Dry Salvages = 
 The Dry Salvages is the third poem of T. S. Eliot 's Four Quartets and marks the beginning of when the series was consciously being formed as a set of four poems . It was written and published in 1941 during the air @-@ raids on Great Britain , an event that threatened him while giving lectures in the area . The title comes from the name of a rock formation near a town he spent time at as a child , which reflects Eliot 's references to his own past throughout the poem . 
 The poem discusses the nature of time and what humanity 's place is within time . Life is described metaphorically as travelling in a boat and humanity 's fixation on science and future gain keeping the travellers from reaching their destination . Within the poem , Eliot invokes the image of Krishna to emphasise the need to follow the divine will instead of seeking personal gain . 
 = = Background = = 
 Eliot began working on The Dry Salvages during World War II at a time when London was experiencing air @-@ raids near the end of 1940 . During the time , he moved around often and spent his time writing mostly lectures or tiny poems . However , he was able to find time to work on the third poem that would become part of the Four Quartets : Eliot envisioned that Burnt Norton , East Coker , The Dry Salvages , and a fourth , yet uncreated poem would be united in a set . Eliot wrote the poem quickly and sent the first draft off on 1 January 1941 to John Hayward . After Hayward received the draft , the two began corresponding about corrections and alterations to the poem . Geoffrey Faber joined in and then the poem was soon finished . It was published in February 1941 issue of the New English Weekly . 
 According to a note by Eliot under the title , " The Dry Salvages — presumably les trois sauvages — is a small group of rocks , with a beacon , off the north east coast of Cape Ann , Massachusetts . Salvages is pronounced to rhyme with assuages . " The location is a place that Eliot knew , and the poem links the image of Cape Ann to Eliot 's boyhood sailing at Gloucester Harbor . The Dry Salvages also invokes images of the Mississippi River and Eliot 's childhood in St Louis . These images and the other personal references were originally intended to be discussed in an autobiographical work that was to collect a series of essays about Eliot 's childhood . 
 = = Poem = = 
 The poem is described as a poem of water and hope . It begins with images of the sea , water , and of Eliot 's past ; this water later becomes a metaphor for life and how humans act . This transitions into an image of a ringing bell and a discussion on time and prayer . Images of men drowning dominate the section before leading into how science and ideas on evolution separate mankind from properly understanding the past . This ends with Krishna stating that the divine will , and not future benefits or rewards , matters . The fourth section is a prayer to the Virgin Mary for fishermen , sailors , and the drowned . 
 The end of The Dry Salvages starts with a discussion about how people attempt to see the future through various superstitious means . Then the narrator tries to convince the reader that resignation about death is necessary . However , such resignation should be viewed as pushing the self towards redemption and the eternal life in the next world . By acting properly , one would be able to overcome life and move towards the next world . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The central image of The Dry Salvages is water and the sea . The images are similar to the Odyssey but represent internal aspects . Humanity loses itself to technology and theories like evolution that separate mankind philosophically from the past . According to Eliot , within each man there is a connection to all of mankind . If we just accept drifting upon the sea , then we will end up broken upon rocks . We are restrained by time , but the Annunciation gave mankind hope that he will be able to escape . This hope is not part of the present . What we must do is understand the patterns found within the past to see that there is meaning to be found . This meaning allows one to experience eternity through moments of revelation . Through Christ , we are able to overcome time unless we do not know him . Our corruption can be overcome and that we are able to join the eternal . 
 Eliot invokes images of original sin and Adam 's fall when talking about the past and points out that such events can be forgotten but can still affect mankind . Eliot brings in the image of Krishna to discuss how the past and future are related : Krishna , speaking to Arjuna , claims that death can come at any time and that men should always find the divine will instead of worrying about what their actions will bring . If an individual were to follow Krishna 's words then they would be able to free their self from the limitations of time . Even if it cannot be fully attained , the effort in attempting it is still important . The way for mankind to understand the divine will is through prayer and through the power of the Holy Spirit . 
 Many of the images connect back to his earlier works . The images of life as boat adrift with a leak is similar to the " Death by Water " section of The Waste Land . Like images about old age and experience found in East Coker , this image reinforces the need to look at the whole of life and try to see things beyond the limitations of time . Men are supposed to progress , but they aren 't supposed to focus on what they can gain in the future . The prayer to the Virgin Mary is intended to help guide the journey which would end with understanding eternity and the Annunciation . It is Mary who will guide the metaphorical sailors to their proper harbour . While connecting back to his earlier works , Eliot also connects back to his family 's past ; the " Dry Salvages " was part of the landscape his ancestor Andrew Eliott travelled to in 1669 . 
 = = Source = = 
 Part of The Dry Salvages refers to Eliot 's joining the Anglican Church and his personal pursuit of the divine . There are also many references to events and places that Eliot knew as a child . In terms of literary allusions , Eliot brings in Krishna 's and Arjuna 's discussion from the Bhagavad @-@ Gita on acting according to the divine will along with allusions to Dante 's Paradiso , the philosophy of Heraclitus , and the Book of Common Prayer . In regards to these allusions , Eliot would mark up his own editions of the works to note where he used quotes or allusions to lines within his work . In particular , his edition of the Mahabharata included a page added which compared battle scenes with " The Dry Salvages " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A review in the Times Literary Supplement dated 4 September 1941 stated that there was a " note of quiescence , even of bleak resignation " in the poem and that it " lost that spice of wit which was woven into the logic of the earlier poems " . Later , Bernard Bergonzi claimed that " The Dry Salvages is the least satisfactory of the sequence , though at the same time it contains some of its best lines . The opening lines are poor , in a weakly sub @-@ <unk> fashion . Yet the writing suddenly picks up at the words , ' The river is within us , ' and from there to the end of the section we have a magnificently sustained sequence " . F. B. Pinion believed that " ' The Dry Salvages ' is a complicated , uneven , and rather <unk> poem , in which Eliot continues to say the same thing , with some progression , mainly in maritime imagery " . 
 = Mine Again = 
 " Mine Again " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey , from her tenth studio album The Emancipation of Mimi ( 2005 ) . It was co @-@ written and co @-@ produced by Carey and James Poyser . It was recorded at MSR Studios and Honeywest Studios , both located New York City . It is a neo soul and soul inspired ballad . The lyrics revolve around the protagonist wishing for a second chance at a seemingly failed relationship . The song garnered positive reviews from music critics , praising Carey and Poyser 's production and her vocal performance . Upon the release of The Emancipation of Mimi , " Mine Again " debuted on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart at number 82 , and reached a peak of number 73 . In 2006 , it was nominated for the Best Traditional R & B Performance at the Grammy Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2001 , Carey suffered a physical and emotional breakdown , causing her to abandon promotion of her then @-@ released studio album Glitter ( 2001 ) , and its accompanying film . Since she was hospitalized for exhaustion , the film project received strongly negative critical feedback , with the album faring slightly better . Following Carey 's absence from the public eye , as well as her abandonment of promotional appearances for the film and soundtrack , her unprecedented $ 100 million five @-@ album record deal with Virgin Records ( EMI Records ) was bought out for $ 50 million . After recovering and completing her contractual agreement with Virgin Records , Carey began recording her intended " comeback " and follow @-@ up album , Charmbracelet ( 2002 ) . The album focused on incorporating several inspirational ballads and re @-@ capturing Carey 's audience from the 1990s . However , critics took notice of Carey 's different vocals . 
 As Glitter was an unsuccessful mixture of covers and dance music , Charmbracelet incorporated slower , contemporary melodies . In his review of the album , Stephen Thomas Erlewine criticized the album 's content , describing Carey 's voice as " in tatters " . He wrote , " Whenever she sings , there 's a raspy whistle behind her thin voice and she strains to make notes throughout the record . She cannot coo or softly croon , nor can she perform her trademark gravity @-@ defying vocal runs . Her voice is damaged , and there 's not a moment where it sounds strong or inviting . " Though fueled by strong media attention regarding Carey 's return to music , as well as her new deal with Island Records , the album failed to deliver the type of success she had been accustomed to throughout the 1990s , and only managed sales of five million copies globally . After the album 's release , and its succeeding tour , Carey began conceptualizing and working on a new project , eventually titled The Emancipation of Mimi , her tenth studio effort . By November 2004 , Carey had already recorded several songs for the album . 
 = = Production and recording = = 
 " Mine Again " was co @-@ written and co @-@ produced by Carey and James Poyser . The song was recorded at MSR Studios and Honeywest Studios , both located in New York City . The engineers were Dana Jon Chappelle and Brian Garten , and they were assisted by Jason Finkel and Michael Leedy . " Mine Again " was mixed by Phil Tan at MSR Studios , while the song was mastered by Herb Powers at the now closed The Hit Factory in New York City . A multitude of instrumental musicians were involved with the song 's production , including Chops Horns playing the horn , Darryl Dixon playing the alto saxophone , Joe <unk> playing the trumpet and flugelhorn , Jeff Dieterle playing the trombone and bass trombone , Rick <unk> playing the tenor saxophone and flute , Randy Jackson on the bass , Poyser on the keyboards , Jeffrey Lee Johnson on the guitars and Charles Drayton on the drums . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Mine Again " is an " old @-@ school ' 70s smooth soul " , and neo soul ballad . The lyrics revolve around the protagonist wishing for a second chance at a seemingly failed relationship . " Mine Again " is written in the key of B @-@ flat major and is set in common time with a moderate dance groove with 66 beats per minute ( BPM ) . Carey 's vocal range spans three octaves from the lower note of F4 to the higher note of F ♯ 7 . The song includes piano keys and guitar strings as part of its instrumental composition . The song begins with the lyric , " I remember when you used to be mine , way back then . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Mine Again " garnered positive reviews from music critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine for Allmusic wrote that " Mine Again " was " especially welcome " and " deliciously sleek " and praised Poyser 's production . Todd Burns for Stylus Magazine wrote that the song was a Carey " signature show @-@ off track . " Sal <unk> for Slant Magazine noted that the songs which did not work well on the album were the ones where Carey performs a song in the " style of her successors " , such as Usher by way of Jermaine Dupri on " Shake It Off " , Twista via The Legendary Traxster on " One and Only " , and The Neptunes on " To the Floor " . However , Cinquemani praised Carey for " channeling a predecessor " instead of one of her successors , such as channeling Prince on " Mine Again " and " Joy Ride " , describing the outcome " sublime " . Cinquemani also wrote that " Mine Again " , and another track from the album called " I Wish You Knew " , were over sung and " would blow the 7th grade talent show competition away . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at MSR Studios , New York City and Honeywest Studios , New York City . 
 Mixed at Larrabee Studios in Universal City , California . 
 Mastering at The Hit Factory , New York City . 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of The Emancipation of Mimi . 
 = = Charts = = 
 " Mine Again " debuted on the at number 82 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart on June 6 , 2005 . On August 13 , 2005 , the song charted and number 77 , and fell to 89 the following week . For the week dated September 17 , 2005 , " Mine Again " charted at number 95 . The song peaked at number 73 on October 29 , 2005 , and fell to number 85 the following week . It remained on the chart for a total of 14 weeks . 
 = Numerical weather prediction = 
 Numerical weather prediction uses mathematical models of the atmosphere and oceans to predict the weather based on current weather conditions . Though first attempted in the 1920s , it was not until the advent of computer simulation in the 1950s that numerical weather predictions produced realistic results . A number of global and regional forecast models are run in different countries worldwide , using current weather observations relayed from radiosondes , weather satellites and other observing systems as inputs . 
 Mathematical models based on the same physical principles can be used to generate either short @-@ term weather forecasts or longer @-@ term climate predictions ; the latter are widely applied for understanding and projecting climate change . The improvements made to regional models have allowed for significant improvements in tropical cyclone track and air quality forecasts ; however , atmospheric models perform poorly at handling processes that occur in a relatively constricted area , such as wildfires . 
 <unk> the vast datasets and performing the complex calculations necessary to modern numerical weather prediction requires some of the most powerful supercomputers in the world . Even with the increasing power of supercomputers , the forecast skill of numerical weather models extends to about only six days . Factors affecting the accuracy of numerical predictions include the density and quality of observations used as input to the forecasts , along with deficiencies in the numerical models themselves . Post @-@ processing techniques such as model output statistics ( MOS ) have been developed to improve the handling of errors in numerical predictions . 
 A more fundamental problem lies in the chaotic nature of the partial differential equations that govern the atmosphere . It is impossible to solve these equations exactly , and small errors grow with time ( doubling about every five days ) . Present understanding is that this chaotic behavior limits accurate forecasts to about 14 days even with perfectly accurate input data and a flawless model . In addition , the partial differential equations used in the model need to be supplemented with <unk> for solar radiation , moist processes ( clouds and precipitation ) , heat exchange , soil , vegetation , surface water , and the effects of terrain . In an effort to quantify the large amount of inherent uncertainty remaining in numerical predictions , ensemble forecasts have been used since the 1990s to help gauge the confidence in the forecast , and to obtain useful results farther into the future than otherwise possible . This approach analyzes multiple forecasts created with an individual forecast model or multiple models . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of numerical weather prediction began in the 1920s through the efforts of Lewis Fry Richardson , who used procedures originally developed by Vilhelm Bjerknes to produce by hand a six @-@ hour forecast for the state of the atmosphere over two points in central Europe , taking at least six weeks to do so . It was not until the advent of the computer and computer simulations that computation time was reduced to less than the forecast period itself . The ENIAC was used to create the first weather forecasts via computer in 1950 , based on a highly simplified approximation to the atmospheric governing equations . In 1954 , Carl @-@ Gustav Rossby 's group at the Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute used the same model to produce the first operational forecast ( i.e. , a routine prediction for practical use ) . Operational numerical weather prediction in the United States began in 1955 under the Joint Numerical Weather Prediction Unit ( JNWPU ) , a joint project by the U.S. Air Force , Navy and Weather Bureau . In 1956 , Norman Phillips developed a mathematical model which could realistically depict monthly and seasonal patterns in the troposphere ; this became the first successful climate model . Following Phillips ' work , several groups began working to create general circulation models . The first general circulation climate model that combined both oceanic and atmospheric processes was developed in the late 1960s at the NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory . 
 As computers have become more powerful , the size of the initial data sets has increased and newer atmospheric models have been developed to take advantage of the added available computing power . These newer models include more physical processes in the simplifications of the equations of motion in numerical simulations of the atmosphere . In 1966 , West Germany and the United States began producing operational forecasts based on primitive @-@ equation models , followed by the United Kingdom in 1972 and Australia in 1977 . The development of limited area ( regional ) models facilitated advances in forecasting the tracks of tropical cyclones as well as air quality in the 1970s and 1980s . By the early 1980s models began to include the interactions of soil and vegetation with the atmosphere , which led to more realistic forecasts . 
 The output of forecast models based on atmospheric dynamics is unable to resolve some details of the weather near the Earth 's surface . As such , a statistical relationship between the output of a numerical weather model and the ensuing conditions at the ground was developed in the 1970s and 1980s , known as model output statistics ( MOS ) . Starting in the 1990s , model ensemble forecasts have been used to help define the forecast uncertainty and to extend the window in which numerical weather forecasting is viable farther into the future than otherwise possible . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The atmosphere is a fluid . As such , the idea of numerical weather prediction is to sample the state of the fluid at a given time and use the equations of fluid dynamics and thermodynamics to estimate the state of the fluid at some time in the future . The process of entering observation data into the model to generate initial conditions is called initialization . On land , terrain maps available at resolutions down to 1 kilometer ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) globally are used to help model atmospheric circulations within regions of rugged topography , in order to better depict features such as downslope winds , mountain waves and related cloudiness that affects incoming solar radiation . The main inputs from country @-@ based weather services are observations from devices ( called radiosondes ) in weather balloons that measure various atmospheric parameters and transmits them to a fixed receiver , as well as from weather satellites . The World Meteorological Organization acts to standardize the instrumentation , observing practices and timing of these observations worldwide . Stations either report hourly in METAR reports , or every six hours in SYNOP reports . These observations are irregularly spaced , so they are processed by data assimilation and objective analysis methods , which perform quality control and obtain values at locations usable by the model 's mathematical algorithms . The data are then used in the model as the starting point for a forecast . 
 A variety of methods are used to gather observational data for use in numerical models . Sites launch radiosondes in weather balloons which rise through the troposphere and well into the stratosphere . Information from weather satellites is used where traditional data sources are not available . Commerce provides pilot reports along aircraft routes and ship reports along shipping routes . Research projects use reconnaissance aircraft to fly in and around weather systems of interest , such as tropical cyclones . Reconnaissance aircraft are also flown over the open oceans during the cold season into systems which cause significant uncertainty in forecast guidance , or are expected to be of high impact from three to seven days into the future over the downstream continent . Sea ice began to be initialized in forecast models in 1971 . Efforts to involve sea surface temperature in model initialization began in 1972 due to its role in modulating weather in higher latitudes of the Pacific . 
 = = Computation = = 
 An atmospheric model is a computer program that produces meteorological information for future times at given locations and altitudes . Within any modern model is a set of equations , known as the primitive equations , used to predict the future state of the atmosphere . These equations — along with the ideal gas law — are used to evolve the density , pressure , and potential temperature scalar fields and the air velocity ( wind ) vector field of the atmosphere through time . Additional transport equations for pollutants and other aerosols are included in some primitive @-@ equation high @-@ resolution models as well . The equations used are nonlinear partial differential equations which are impossible to solve exactly through analytical methods , with the exception of a few idealized cases . Therefore , numerical methods obtain approximate solutions . Different models use different solution methods : some global models and almost all regional models use finite difference methods for all three spatial dimensions , while other global models and a few regional models use spectral methods for the horizontal dimensions and finite @-@ difference methods in the vertical . 
 These equations are initialized from the analysis data and rates of change are determined . These rates of change predict the state of the atmosphere a short time into the future ; the time increment for this prediction is called a time step . This future atmospheric state is then used as the starting point for another application of the predictive equations to find new rates of change , and these new rates of change predict the atmosphere at a yet further time step into the future . This time stepping is repeated until the solution reaches the desired forecast time . The length of the time step chosen within the model is related to the distance between the points on the computational grid , and is chosen to maintain numerical stability . Time steps for global models are on the order of tens of minutes , while time steps for regional models are between one and four minutes . The global models are run at varying times into the future . The UKMET Unified Model is run six days into the future , while the European Centre for Medium @-@ Range Weather Forecasts ' Integrated Forecast System and Environment Canada 's Global Environmental Multiscale Model both run out to ten days into the future , and the Global Forecast System model run by the Environmental Modeling Center is run sixteen days into the future . The visual output produced by a model solution is known as a prognostic chart , or prog . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Some meteorological processes are too small @-@ scale or too complex to be explicitly included in numerical weather prediction models . <unk> is a procedure for representing these processes by relating them to variables on the scales that the model resolves . For example , the <unk> in weather and climate models have sides that are between 5 kilometers ( 3 mi ) and 300 kilometers ( 200 mi ) in length . A typical cumulus cloud has a scale of less than 1 kilometer ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) , and would require a grid even finer than this to be represented physically by the equations of fluid motion . Therefore , the processes that such clouds represent are parameterized , by processes of various sophistication . In the earliest models , if a column of air within a model <unk> was conditionally unstable ( essentially , the bottom was warmer and moister than the top ) and the water vapor content at any point within the column became saturated then it would be overturned ( the warm , moist air would begin rising ) , and the air in that vertical column mixed . More sophisticated schemes recognize that only some portions of the box might <unk> and that entrainment and other processes occur . Weather models that have <unk> with sides between 5 and 25 kilometers ( 3 and 16 mi ) can explicitly represent convective clouds , although they need to parameterize cloud <unk> which occur at a smaller scale . The formation of large @-@ scale ( stratus @-@ type ) clouds is more physically based ; they form when the relative humidity reaches some prescribed value . Sub @-@ grid scale processes need to be taken into account . Rather than assuming that clouds form at 100 % relative humidity , the cloud fraction can be related a critical value of relative humidity less than 100 % , reflecting the sub grid scale variation that occurs in the real world . 
 The amount of solar radiation reaching the ground , as well as the formation of cloud droplets occur on the molecular scale , and so they must be parameterized before they can be included in the model . Atmospheric drag produced by mountains must also be parameterized , as the limitations in the resolution of elevation contours produce significant underestimates of the drag . This method of <unk> is also done for the surface flux of energy between the ocean and the atmosphere , in order to determine realistic sea surface temperatures and type of sea ice found near the ocean 's surface . Sun angle as well as the impact of multiple cloud layers is taken into account . Soil type , vegetation type , and soil moisture all determine how much radiation goes into warming and how much moisture is drawn up into the adjacent atmosphere , and thus it is important to parameterize their contribution to these processes . Within air quality models , <unk> take into account atmospheric emissions from multiple relatively tiny sources ( e.g. roads , fields , factories ) within specific grid boxes . 
 = = Domains = = 
 The horizontal domain of a model is either global , covering the entire Earth , or regional , covering only part of the Earth . Regional models ( also known as limited @-@ area models , or <unk> ) allow for the use of finer grid spacing than global models because the available computational resources are focused on a specific area instead of being spread over the globe . This allows regional models to resolve explicitly smaller @-@ scale meteorological phenomena that cannot be represented on the coarser grid of a global model . Regional models use a global model to specify conditions at the edge of their domain ( boundary conditions ) in order to allow systems from outside the regional model domain to move into its area . Uncertainty and errors within regional models are introduced by the global model used for the boundary conditions of the edge of the regional model , as well as errors attributable to the regional model itself . 
 = = Coordinate systems = = 
 = = = Horizontal coordinates = = = 
 Horizontal position may be expressed directly in geographic coordinates ( latitude and longitude ) for global models or in a map projection planar coordinates for regional models . 
 = = = Vertical coordinates = = = 
 The vertical coordinate is handled in various ways . Lewis Fry Richardson 's 1922 model used geometric height ( <formula> ) as the vertical coordinate . Later models substituted the geometric <formula> coordinate with a pressure coordinate system , in which the geopotential heights of constant @-@ pressure surfaces become dependent variables , greatly simplifying the primitive equations . This correlation between coordinate systems can be made since pressure decreases with height through the Earth 's atmosphere . The first model used for operational forecasts , the single @-@ layer barotropic model , used a single pressure coordinate at the 500 @-@ millibar ( about 5 @,@ 500 m ( 18 @,@ 000 ft ) ) level , and thus was essentially two @-@ dimensional . High @-@ resolution models — also called mesoscale models — such as the Weather Research and Forecasting model tend to use normalized pressure coordinates referred to as sigma coordinates . This coordinate system receives its name from the independent variable <formula> used to scale atmospheric pressures with respect to the pressure at the surface , and in some cases also with the pressure at the top of the domain . 
 = = Model output statistics = = 
 Because forecast models based upon the equations for atmospheric dynamics do not perfectly determine weather conditions , statistical methods have been developed to attempt to correct the forecasts . Statistical models were created based upon the three @-@ dimensional fields produced by numerical weather models , surface observations and the climatological conditions for specific locations . These statistical models are collectively referred to as model output statistics ( MOS ) , and were developed by the National Weather Service for their suite of weather forecasting models in the late 1960s . 
 Model output statistics differ from the perfect prog technique , which assumes that the output of numerical weather prediction guidance is perfect . MOS can correct for local effects that cannot be resolved by the model due to insufficient grid resolution , as well as model biases . Because MOS is run after its respective global or regional model , its production is known as post @-@ processing . Forecast parameters within MOS include maximum and minimum temperatures , percentage chance of rain within a several hour period , precipitation amount expected , chance that the precipitation will be frozen in nature , chance for thunderstorms , cloudiness , and surface winds . 
 = = Ensembles = = 
 In 1963 , Edward Lorenz discovered the chaotic nature of the fluid dynamics equations involved in weather forecasting . Extremely small errors in temperature , winds , or other initial inputs given to numerical models will amplify and double every five days , making it impossible for long @-@ range forecasts — those made more than two weeks in advance — to predict the state of the atmosphere with any degree of forecast skill . Furthermore , existing observation networks have poor coverage in some regions ( for example , over large bodies of water such as the Pacific Ocean ) , which introduces uncertainty into the true initial state of the atmosphere . While a set of equations , known as the Liouville equations , exists to determine the initial uncertainty in the model initialization , the equations are too complex to run in real @-@ time , even with the use of supercomputers . These uncertainties limit forecast model accuracy to about five or six days into the future . 
 Edward Epstein recognized in 1969 that the atmosphere could not be completely described with a single forecast run due to inherent uncertainty , and proposed using an ensemble of stochastic Monte Carlo simulations to produce means and variances for the state of the atmosphere . Although this early example of an ensemble showed skill , in 1974 Cecil Leith showed that they produced adequate forecasts only when the ensemble probability distribution was a representative sample of the probability distribution in the atmosphere . 
 Since the 1990s , ensemble forecasts have been used operationally ( as routine forecasts ) to account for the stochastic nature of weather processes – that is , to resolve their inherent uncertainty . This method involves analyzing multiple forecasts created with an individual forecast model by using different physical <unk> or varying initial conditions . Starting in 1992 with ensemble forecasts prepared by the European Centre for Medium @-@ Range Weather Forecasts ( ECMWF ) and the National Centers for Environmental Prediction , model ensemble forecasts have been used to help define the forecast uncertainty and to extend the window in which numerical weather forecasting is viable farther into the future than otherwise possible . The ECMWF model , the Ensemble Prediction System , uses singular vectors to simulate the initial probability density , while the NCEP ensemble , the Global Ensemble Forecasting System , uses a technique known as vector breeding . The UK Met Office runs global and regional ensemble forecasts where perturbations to initial conditions are produced using a Kalman filter . There are 24 ensemble members in the Met Office Global and Regional Ensemble Prediction System ( <unk> ) . 
 In a single model @-@ based approach , the ensemble forecast is usually evaluated in terms of an average of the individual forecasts concerning one forecast variable , as well as the degree of agreement between various forecasts within the ensemble system , as represented by their overall spread . Ensemble spread is diagnosed through tools such as spaghetti diagrams , which show the dispersion of one quantity on prognostic charts for specific time steps in the future . Another tool where ensemble spread is used is a <unk> , which shows the dispersion in the forecast of one quantity for one specific location . It is common for the ensemble spread to be too small to include the weather that actually occurs , which can lead to forecasters <unk> model uncertainty ; this problem becomes particularly severe for forecasts of the weather about ten days in advance . When ensemble spread is small and the forecast solutions are consistent within multiple model runs , forecasters perceive more confidence in the ensemble mean , and the forecast in general . Despite this perception , a spread @-@ skill relationship is often weak or not found , as spread @-@ error correlations are normally less than 0 @.@ 6 , and only under special circumstances range between 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 7 . The relationship between ensemble spread and forecast skill varies substantially depending on such factors as the forecast model and the region for which the forecast is made . 
 In the same way that many forecasts from a single model can be used to form an ensemble , multiple models may also be combined to produce an ensemble forecast . This approach is called multi @-@ model ensemble forecasting , and it has been shown to improve forecasts when compared to a single model @-@ based approach . Models within a multi @-@ model ensemble can be adjusted for their various biases , which is a process known as superensemble forecasting . This type of forecast significantly reduces errors in model output . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Air quality modeling = = = 
 Air quality forecasting attempts to predict when the concentrations of pollutants will attain levels that are hazardous to public health . The concentration of pollutants in the atmosphere is determined by their transport , or mean velocity of movement through the atmosphere , their diffusion , chemical transformation , and ground deposition . In addition to pollutant source and terrain information , these models require data about the state of the fluid flow in the atmosphere to determine its transport and diffusion . Meteorological conditions such as thermal inversions can prevent surface air from rising , trapping pollutants near the surface , which makes accurate forecasts of such events crucial for air quality modeling . Urban air quality models require a very fine computational mesh , requiring the use of high @-@ resolution mesoscale weather models ; in spite of this , the quality of numerical weather guidance is the main uncertainty in air quality forecasts . 
 = = = Climate modeling = = = 
 A General Circulation Model ( <unk> ) is a mathematical model that can be used in computer simulations of the global circulation of a planetary atmosphere or ocean . An atmospheric general circulation model ( <unk> ) is essentially the same as a global numerical weather prediction model , and some ( such as the one used in the UK Unified Model ) can be configured for both short @-@ term weather forecasts and longer @-@ term climate predictions . Along with sea ice and land @-@ surface components , <unk> and oceanic <unk> ( <unk> ) are key components of global climate models , and are widely applied for understanding the climate and projecting climate change . For aspects of climate change , a range of man @-@ made chemical emission scenarios can be fed into the climate models to see how an enhanced greenhouse effect would modify the Earth 's climate . Versions designed for climate applications with time scales of decades to centuries were originally created in 1969 by <unk> Manabe and Kirk Bryan at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory in Princeton , New Jersey . When run for multiple decades , computational limitations mean that the models must use a coarse grid that leaves smaller @-@ scale interactions unresolved . 
 = = = Ocean surface modeling = = = 
 The transfer of energy between the wind blowing over the surface of an ocean and the ocean 's upper layer is an important element in wave dynamics . The spectral wave transport equation is used to describe the change in wave spectrum over changing topography . It simulates wave generation , wave movement ( propagation within a fluid ) , wave shoaling , refraction , energy transfer between waves , and wave dissipation . Since surface winds are the primary forcing mechanism in the spectral wave transport equation , ocean wave models use information produced by numerical weather prediction models as inputs to determine how much energy is transferred from the atmosphere into the layer at the surface of the ocean . Along with dissipation of energy through <unk> and resonance between waves , surface winds from numerical weather models allow for more accurate predictions of the state of the sea surface . 
 = = = Tropical cyclone forecasting = = = 
 Tropical cyclone forecasting also relies on data provided by numerical weather models . Three main classes of tropical cyclone guidance models exist : Statistical models are based on an analysis of storm behavior using climatology , and correlate a storm 's position and date to produce a forecast that is not based on the physics of the atmosphere at the time . Dynamical models are numerical models that solve the governing equations of fluid flow in the atmosphere ; they are based on the same principles as other limited @-@ area numerical weather prediction models but may include special computational techniques such as refined spatial domains that move along with the cyclone . Models that use elements of both approaches are called statistical @-@ dynamical models . 
 In 1978 , the first hurricane @-@ tracking model based on atmospheric dynamics — the movable fine @-@ mesh ( MFM ) model — began operating . Within the field of tropical cyclone track forecasting , despite the ever @-@ improving dynamical model guidance which occurred with increased computational power , it was not until the 1980s when numerical weather prediction showed skill , and until the 1990s when it consistently outperformed statistical or simple dynamical models . Predictions of the intensity of a tropical cyclone based on numerical weather prediction continue to be a challenge , since statistical methods continue to show higher skill over dynamical guidance . 
 = = = Wildfire modeling = = = 
 On a molecular scale , there are two main competing reaction processes involved in the degradation of cellulose , or wood fuels , in wildfires . When there is a low amount of moisture in a cellulose fiber , volatilization of the fuel occurs ; this process will generate intermediate gaseous products that will ultimately be the source of combustion . When moisture is present — or when enough heat is being carried away from the fiber , charring occurs . The chemical kinetics of both reactions indicate that there is a point at which the level of moisture is low enough — and / or heating rates high enough — for combustion processes become self @-@ sufficient . Consequently , changes in wind speed , direction , moisture , temperature , or lapse rate at different levels of the atmosphere can have a significant impact on the behavior and growth of a wildfire . Since the wildfire acts as a heat source to the atmospheric flow , the wildfire can modify local advection patterns , introducing a feedback loop between the fire and the atmosphere . 
 A simplified two @-@ dimensional model for the spread of wildfires that used convection to represent the effects of wind and terrain , as well as radiative heat transfer as the dominant method of heat transport led to reaction @-@ diffusion systems of partial differential equations . More complex models join numerical weather models or computational fluid dynamics models with a wildfire component which allow the feedback effects between the fire and the atmosphere to be estimated . The additional complexity in the latter class of models translates to a corresponding increase in their computer power requirements . In fact , a full three @-@ dimensional treatment of combustion via direct numerical simulation at scales relevant for atmospheric modeling is not currently practical because of the excessive computational cost such a simulation would require . Numerical weather models have limited forecast skill at spatial resolutions under 1 kilometer ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) , forcing complex wildfire models to parameterize the fire in order to calculate how the winds will be modified locally by the wildfire , and to use those modified winds to determine the rate at which the fire will spread locally . Although models such as Los Alamos ' <unk> solve for the concentrations of fuel and oxygen , the computational grid cannot be fine enough to resolve the combustion reaction , so approximations must be made for the temperature distribution within each grid cell , as well as for the combustion reaction rates themselves . 
 = Evelyn Waugh = 
 Arthur Evelyn St. John Waugh ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> / ; 28 October 1903 – 10 April 1966 ) was an English writer of novels , biographies and travel books . He was also a prolific journalist and reviewer of books . His most famous works include the early satires Decline and Fall ( 1928 ) and A Handful of Dust ( 1934 ) , the novel Brideshead Revisited ( 1945 ) and the Second World War trilogy Sword of Honour ( 1952 – 61 ) . Waugh is recognised as one of the great prose stylists of the English language in the 20th century . 
 The son of a publisher , Waugh was educated at Lancing College and then at Hertford College , Oxford , and briefly worked as a schoolmaster before he became a full @-@ time writer . As a young man , he acquired many fashionable and aristocratic friends , and developed a taste for country house society . In the 1930s , he travelled extensively , often as a special newspaper correspondent in which capacity he reported from Abyssinia at the time of the 1935 Italian invasion . He served in the British armed forces throughout the Second World War ( 1939 – 1945 ) , first in the Royal Marines and then in the Royal Horse Guards . He was a perceptive writer who used the experiences and the wide range of people he encountered in his works of fiction , generally to humorous effect . Waugh 's detachment was such that he fictionalised his own mental breakdown , which occurred in the early 1950s . 
 After the failure of his first marriage , Waugh converted to Catholicism in 1930 . His traditionalist stance led him to strongly oppose all attempts to reform the Church , and the changes by the Second Vatican Council ( 1962 – 65 ) greatly disturbed his sensibilities , especially the introduction of the vernacular Mass . That blow to his religious traditionalism , his dislike for the welfare state culture of the postwar world and the decline of his health , darkened his final years , but he continued to write . To the public , Waugh displayed a mask of indifference , but he was capable of great kindness to those whom he considered to be his friends . After his death in 1966 , he acquired a following of new readers through the film and television versions of his works , such as the television serial Brideshead Revisited ( 1981 ) . 
 = = Family background = = 
 Arthur Evelyn St. John Waugh was born on 28 October 1903 to Arthur Waugh ( 1866 – 1943 ) and Catherine Charlotte Raban ( 1870 – 1954 ) , into a family with English , Scottish , Welsh , Irish and Huguenot origins . Distinguished forebears include Lord Cockburn ( 1779 – 1854 ) , a leading Scottish advocate and judge , William Morgan ( 1750 – 1833 ) , a pioneer of actuarial science who served the Equitable Life Assurance Society for 56 years , and Philip Henry Gosse ( 1810 – 1888 ) , a natural scientist who became notorious through his depiction as a religious fanatic in his son Edmund 's memoir Father and Son . Among ancestors bearing the Waugh name , the Rev. Alexander Waugh ( 1754 – 1827 ) was a minister in the Secession Church of Scotland who helped found the London Missionary Society and was one of the leading Nonconformist preachers of his day . His grandson Alexander Waugh ( 1840 – 1906 ) was a country medical practitioner , who bullied his wife and children and became known in the Waugh family as " the Brute " . The elder of his two sons , born in 1866 , was Arthur Waugh . 
 After attending Sherborne School and New College , Oxford , Arthur Waugh began a career in publishing and as a literary critic . In 1902 he became managing director of Chapman and Hall , publishers of the works of Charles Dickens . He had married Catherine Raban ( 1870 – 1954 ) in 1893 ; their first son Alexander Raban Waugh ( always known as Alec ) was born on 8 July 1898 . Alec Waugh later became a novelist of note . At the time of his birth the family were living in North London , at Hillfield Road , West Hampstead where , on 28 October 1903 , the couple 's second son was born , " in great haste before Dr Andrews could arrive " , Catherine recorded . On 7 January 1904 the boy was christened Arthur Evelyn St John Waugh but was known in the family and in the wider world as Evelyn . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 = = = Golders Green and Heath Mount = = = 
 In 1907 , the Waugh family left Hillfield Road for Underhill , a house which Arthur had built in North End Road , Hampstead , close to Golders Green , then a semi @-@ rural area of dairy farms , market gardens and bluebell woods . Evelyn received his first school lessons at home , from his mother , with whom he formed a particularly close relationship ; his father , Arthur Waugh , was a more distant figure , whose close bond with his elder son , Alec , was such that Evelyn often felt excluded . In September 1910 , Evelyn began as a day pupil at Heath Mount preparatory school . By then , he was a lively boy of many interests , who already had written and completed " The Curse of the Horse Race " , his first story . Waugh spent six relatively contented years at Heath Mount ; on his own assertion he was " quite a clever little boy " , who was seldom distressed or overawed by his lessons . Physically pugnacious , Evelyn was inclined to bully weaker boys ; among his victims was the future society photographer Cecil Beaton , who never forgot the experience . 
 Outside school , he and other neighbourhood children performed plays , usually written by Waugh . On the basis of the xenophobia fostered by the genre books of Invasion literature , that the Germans were about to invade Britain , Waugh organised his friends into the " Pistol Troop " , who built a fort , went on manœuvres and paraded in makeshift uniforms . In 1914 , after the First World War began , Waugh and other boys from the Boy Scout Troop of Heath Mount School were sometimes employed as messengers at the War Office ; Evelyn loitered about the War Office in hope of glimpsing Lord Kitchener , but never did . 
 Family holidays usually were spent with the Waugh aunts , at Midsomer Norton , in a house lit with oil lamps , a time that Waugh recalled with delight , many years later . At Midsomer Norton , Evelyn became deeply interested in high Anglican church rituals , the initial stirrings of the spiritual dimension that later dominated his perspective of life , and he served as an altar boy at the local Anglican church . During his last year at Heath Mount , Waugh established and edited The Cynic school magazine . 
 = = = Lancing = = = 
 Like his father before him , Alec Waugh went to school at Sherborne , and , it was presumed by the family that Evelyn would follow , but in 1915 , the school asked Alec to leave , after a homosexual relationship came to light . Alec departed Sherborne for military training as an officer , and , while awaiting confirmation of his commission , wrote The Loom of Youth ( 1917 ) , a novel of school life , which alluded to homosexual friendships at a school that was recognisably Sherborne . The public sensation caused by Alec 's novel so offended the school that it became impossible for Evelyn to go there . In May 1917 , much to his annoyance , he was sent to Lancing College , in his opinion , a decidedly inferior school . 
 Waugh soon overcame his initial aversion to Lancing , settled in and established his reputation as an aesthete . In November 1917 his essay " In Defence of Cubism " ( 1917 ) was accepted by and published in the arts magazine Drawing and Design ; it was his first published article . Within the school , he became mildly subversive , mocking the school 's cadet corps and founding the Corpse Club " for those who were weary of life " . The end of the war saw the return to the school of younger masters such as J. F. Roxburgh , who encouraged Waugh to write and predicted a great future for him . Another mentor , Francis Crease , taught Waugh the arts of calligraphy and decorative design ; some of the boy 's work was good enough to be used by Chapman and Hall on book jackets . 
 In his later years at Lancing , Waugh achieved success as a house captain , editor of the school magazine and president of the debating society , and won numerous art and literature prizes . He also shed most of his religious beliefs . He started a novel of school life , untitled , but abandoned the effort after writing about around 5 @,@ 000 words . He ended his schooldays by winning a scholarship to read Modern History at Hertford College , Oxford , and left Lancing in December 1921 . 
 = = Oxford = = 
 Waugh arrived in Oxford in January 1922 . He was soon writing to old friends at Lancing about the pleasures of his new life ; he informed Tom Driberg : " I do no work here and never go to Chapel " . During his first two terms , he generally followed convention ; he smoked a pipe , bought a bicycle , and gave his maiden speech at the Oxford Union , opposing the motion that " This House would welcome Prohibition " . Waugh wrote reports on Union debates for both Oxford magazines , Cherwell and Isis , and he acted as a film critic for Isis . He also became secretary of the Hertford College debating society , " an onerous but not honorific post " , he told Driberg . Although Waugh tended to regard his scholarship as a reward for past efforts rather than a stepping @-@ stone to future academic success , he did sufficient work in his first two terms to pass his " History Previous " , an essential preliminary examination . 
 The arrival in Oxford in October 1922 of the sophisticated Etonians Harold Acton and Brian Howard changed Waugh 's Oxford life . Acton and Howard rapidly became the centre of an avant @-@ garde circle known as the Hypocrites , whose artistic , social and homosexual values Waugh adopted enthusiastically ; he later wrote : " It was the stamping ground of half my Oxford life " . He began drinking heavily , and embarked on the first of several homosexual relationships , the most lasting of which were with Richard Pares and Alastair Graham . He continued to write reviews and short stories for the university journals , and developed a reputation as a talented graphic artist , but formal study largely ceased . This neglect led to a bitter feud between Waugh and his history tutor , C. R. M. F. Cruttwell , dean ( and later principal ) of Hertford College . When Cruttwell advised him to mend his ways , Waugh responded in a manner , he admitted later , was " <unk> haughty " , from then on , relations between the two descended into mutual hatred . Waugh continued the feud long after his Oxford days by using Cruttwell 's name in his early novels for a succession of ludicrous , ignominious or odious minor characters . 
 Waugh 's dissipated lifestyle continued into his final Oxford year , 1924 . A letter written that year to a Lancing friend , Dudley Carew , hints at severe emotional pressures : " I have been living very intensely these last three weeks . For the last fortnight I have been nearly insane .... I may perhaps one day in a later time tell you some of the things that have happened " . He did just enough work to pass his final examinations in the summer of 1924 with a third @-@ class degree . Having begun at Hertford in the second term of the 1921 – 22 academic year , Waugh had completed only eight terms when he sat his finals ; under the university 's statutes , nine terms ' residence were necessary before the degree could be awarded . Waugh 's poor results led to the loss of his scholarship , which made it impossible for him to return to Oxford for that final term , so he left without his degree . 
 Back at home , Waugh began a novel , The Temple at Thatch , and worked with some of his fellow Hypocrites on a film , The Scarlet Woman , which was shot partly in the gardens at Underhill . He spent much of the rest of the summer in the company of Alastair Graham ; after Graham departed for Kenya , Waugh enrolled for the autumn at a London art school , Heatherley 's . 
 = = Early career = = 
 = = = Schoolmaster and incipient writer = = = 
 Waugh began at Heatherley 's in late September 1924 , but became bored with the routine and quickly abandoned his course . He spent weeks partying in London and Oxford before the overriding need for money led him to apply through an agency for a teaching job . Almost at once , he secured a post at Arnold House , a boys ' preparatory school in North Wales , beginning in January 1925 . He took with him the notes for his novel , The Temple at Thatch , intending to work on it in his spare time . Despite the gloomy ambience of the school , Waugh did his best to fulfil the requirements of his position , but a brief return to London and Oxford during the Easter holiday only exacerbated his sense of isolation . 
 In the summer of 1925 , Waugh 's outlook briefly improved , with the prospect of a job in Pisa , Italy , as secretary to the Scottish writer Charles Kenneth Scott Moncrieff , who was engaged on the English translations of Marcel Proust 's works . Believing that the job was his , Waugh resigned his position at Arnold House . He had meantime sent the early chapters of his novel to Acton for assessment and criticism . Acton 's reply was so coolly dismissive that Waugh immediately burnt his manuscript ; shortly afterwards , before he left North Wales , he learned that the Moncrieff job had fallen through . The twin blows were sufficient for him to consider suicide . He records that he went down to a nearby beach and , leaving a note with his clothes , walked out to sea . An attack by jellyfish changed his mind , and he returned quickly to the shore . 
 During the following two years Waugh taught at schools in Aston Clinton ( from which he was dismissed for the attempted drunken seduction of a school matron ) and Notting Hill in London . He considered alternative careers in printing or cabinet @-@ making , and attended evening classes in carpentry at Holborn Polytechnic while continuing to write . A short story , " The Balance " , written in an experimental modernist style , became his first commercially published fiction , when it was included by Chapman and Hall in a 1926 anthology , Georgian Stories . An extended essay on the Pre @-@ Raphaelite Brotherhood was printed privately by Alastair Graham , using by agreement the press of the Shakespeare Head Press in Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon , where he was undergoing training as a printer . This led to a contract from the publishers Duckworths for a full @-@ length biography of Dante Gabriel Rossetti , which Waugh wrote during 1927 . He also began working on a comic novel ; after several temporary working titles this became Decline and Fall . Having given up teaching , he had no regular employment except for a short , unsuccessful stint as a reporter on the Daily Express in April – May 1927 . That year he met ( possibly through his brother Alec ) and fell in love with Evelyn Gardner , the daughter of Lord and Lady Burghclere . 
 = = = = " He @-@ Evelyn " and " She @-@ Evelyn " = = = = 
 In December 1927 , Waugh and Evelyn Gardner became engaged , despite the opposition of Lady Burghclere , who felt that Waugh lacked moral fibre and kept unsuitable company . Among their friends , they quickly became known as " He @-@ Evelyn " and " She @-@ Evelyn " . Waugh was at this time dependent on a £ 4 @-@ a @-@ week allowance from his father and the small sums he could earn from book reviewing and journalism . The Rossetti biography was published to a generally favourable reception in April 1928 : J. C. Squire in The Observer praised the book 's elegance and wit ; Acton gave cautious approval ; and the novelist Rebecca West wrote to express how much she had enjoyed the book . Less pleasing to Waugh was the Times Literary Supplement 's references to him as " Miss Waugh " . 
 When Decline and Fall was completed , Duckworths objected to its " obscenity " , but Chapman and Hall agreed to publish it . This was sufficient for Waugh and Gardner to bring forward their wedding plans . They were married in St Paul 's Church , Portman Square , on 27 June 1928 , with only Acton , Alec Waugh and the bride 's friend Pansy Pakenham present . The couple made their home in a small flat in Canonbury Square , Islington . The first months of the marriage were overshadowed by a lack of money , and by Gardner 's poor health , which persisted into the autumn . 
 In September 1928 , Decline and Fall was published to almost unanimous praise . By December , the book was into its third printing , and the American publishing rights were sold for $ 500 . In the afterglow of his success , Waugh was commissioned to write travel articles in return for a free Mediterranean cruise , which he and Gardner began in February 1929 , as an extended , delayed honeymoon . The trip was disrupted when Gardner contracted pneumonia and was carried ashore to the British hospital in Port Said . The couple returned home in June , after her recovery . A month later , without warning , Gardner confessed that their mutual friend , John Heygate , had become her lover . After an attempted reconciliation failed , a shocked and dismayed Waugh filed for divorce on 3 September 1929 . The couple apparently met again only once , during the process for the annulment of their marriage a few years later . 
 = = Years of celebrity = = 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 Waugh 's first biographer , Christopher Sykes , records that after the divorce friends " saw , or believed they saw , a new hardness and bitterness " in Waugh 's outlook . Nevertheless , despite a letter to Acton in which he wrote that he " did not know it was possible to be so miserable and live " , he soon resumed his professional and social life . He finished his second novel , Vile Bodies , and wrote articles including ( ironically , he thought ) one for the Daily Mail on the meaning of the marriage ceremony . During this period Waugh began the practice of staying at the various houses of his friends ; he was to have no settled home for the next eight years . 
 Vile Bodies , a satire on the Bright Young People of the 1920s , was published on 19 January 1930 and was Waugh 's first major commercial success . Despite its quasi @-@ biblical title , the book is dark , bitter , " a manifesto of disillusionment " , according to biographer Martin Stannard . As a bestselling author Waugh could now command larger fees for his journalism . Amid regular work for The Graphic , Town and Country and Harper 's Bazaar , he quickly wrote Labels , a detached account of his honeymoon cruise with She @-@ Evelyn . 
 = = = Conversion to Catholicism = = = 
 On 29 September 1930 , Waugh was received into the Catholic Church . That shocked his family and surprised some of his friends , but he had contemplated the step for some time . He had lost his Anglicanism at Lancing and had led an irreligious life at Oxford , but there are references in his diaries from the mid @-@ 1920s to religious discussion and regular churchgoing . On 22 December 1925 , Waugh wrote : " Claud and I took Audrey to supper and sat up until 7 in the morning arguing about the Roman Church " . The entry for 20 February 1927 includes , " I am to visit a Father Underhill about being a parson " . Throughout the period , Waugh was influenced by his friend Olivia Plunket @-@ Greene , who had converted in 1925 and of whom Waugh later wrote , " She bullied me into the Church " . It was she who led him to Father Martin D 'Arcy , a Jesuit , who persuaded Waugh " on firm intellectual convictions but little emotion " that " the Christian revelation was genuine " . In 1949 , Waugh explained that his conversion followed his realisation that life was " unintelligible and unendurable without God " . 
 = = = Writer and traveller = = = 
 On 10 October 1930 , Waugh , representing several newspapers , departed for Abyssinia to cover the coronation of Haile Selassie . He reported the event as " an elaborate propaganda effort " to convince the world that Abyssinia was a civilised nation that concealed that the emperor had achieved power through barbarous means . A subsequent journey through the British East Africa colonies and the Belgian Congo formed the basis of two books ; the travelogue Remote People ( 1931 ) and the comic novel Black Mischief ( 1932 ) . Waugh 's next extended trip , in the winter of 1932 – 1933 , was to British Guiana ( now Guyana ) in South America , possibly taken to distract him from a long and unrequited passion for the socialite Teresa Jungman . On arrival in Georgetown , Waugh arranged a river trip by steam launch into the interior . He travelled on via several staging @-@ posts to Boa Vista in Brazil , and then took a convoluted overland journey back to Georgetown . His various adventures and encounters found their way into two further books : his travel account Ninety @-@ two Days , and the novel A Handful of Dust , both published in 1934 . 
 Back from South America , Waugh faced accusations of obscenity and blasphemy from the Catholic journal The Tablet , which objected to passages in Black Mischief . He defended himself in an open letter to the Archbishop of Westminster , Cardinal Francis Bourne , which remained unpublished until 1980 . In the summer of 1934 , he went on an expedition to Spitsbergen in the Arctic , an experience he did not enjoy and of which he made minimal literary use . On his return , determined to write a major Catholic biography , he selected the Jesuit martyr Edmund Campion as his subject . The book , published in 1935 , caused controversy by its forthright pro @-@ Catholic , anti @-@ Protestant stance but brought its writer the Hawthornden Prize . He returned to Abyssinia in August 1935 to report the opening stages of the Second Italo @-@ Abyssinian War for the Daily Mail . Waugh , on the basis of his earlier visit , considered Abyssinia " a savage place which Mussolini as doing well to tame " according to his fellow reporter , William Deedes . Waugh saw little action and was not wholly serious in his role as a war correspondent . Deedes remarks on the older writer 's snobbery : " None of us quite measured up to the company he liked to keep back at home " . However , in the face of imminent Italian air attacks , Deedes found Waugh 's courage " deeply reassuring " . Waugh wrote up his Abyssinian experiences in a book , Waugh in Abyssinia ( 1936 ) , which Rose Macaulay dismissed as a " fascist tract " on account of its pro @-@ Italian tone . A better @-@ known account is his novel Scoop ( 1938 ) in which the protagonist , William Boot , is loosely based on Deedes . 
 Among Waugh 's growing circle of friends were Diana Guinness and Bryan Guinness ( dedicatees of Vile Bodies ) , Lady Diana Cooper and her husband Duff Cooper , Nancy Mitford who was originally a friend of Evelyn Gardner 's , and the Lygon sisters . Waugh had known Hugh Patrick Lygon at Oxford ; now he was introduced to the girls and their country house , Madresfield Court , which became the closest that he had to a home during his years of wandering . In 1933 , on a Greek islands cruise , he was introduced by Father D 'Arcy to Gabriel Herbert , eldest daughter of the late explorer Aubrey Herbert . When the cruise ended Waugh was invited to stay at the Herbert family 's villa in Portofino , where he first met Gabriel 's 17 @-@ year @-@ old sister , Laura . 
 = = = Second marriage = = = 
 On his conversion , Waugh had accepted that he would be unable to remarry while Evelyn Gardner was alive . However , he wanted a wife and children , and in October 1933 , he began proceedings for the annulment of the marriage on the grounds of " lack of real consent " . The case was heard by an ecclesiastical tribunal in London , but a delay in the submission of the papers to Rome meant that the annulment was not granted until 4 July 1936 . In the meantime , following their initial encounter in Portofino , Waugh had fallen in love with Laura Herbert . He proposed marriage , by letter , in spring 1936 . There were initial misgivings from the Herberts , an aristocratic Catholic family ; as a further complication , Laura Herbert was a cousin of Evelyn Gardner . Despite some family hostility the marriage took place on 17 April 1937 at the Church of the Assumption in Warwick Street , London . 
 As a wedding present the bride 's grandmother bought the couple Piers Court , a country house near Stinchcombe in Gloucestershire . Their first child , a daughter , Maria Teresa , was born on 9 March 1938 and a son , Auberon Alexander , on 17 November 1939 . Between these events , Scoop was published in May 1938 to wide critical acclaim . In August 1938 Waugh , with Laura , made a three @-@ month trip to Mexico after which he wrote Robbery under Law , based on his experiences there . In the book he spelled out clearly his conservative credo ; he later described the book as dealing " little with travel and much with political questions " . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Royal Marine and commando = = = 
 Waugh left Piers Court on 1 September 1939 , at the outbreak of the Second World War / and moved his young family to Pixton Park , Somerset , the country seat of the Herbert <unk> he sought military employment . He also began writing a novel in a new style , using first @-@ person narration but abandoned work on it when he was commissioned into the Royal Marines in December and entered training at Chatham naval base . He never completed the novel : fragments were eventually published as Work Suspended and Other Stories ( 1943 ) . 
 Waugh 's daily training routine left him with " so stiff a spine that he found it painful even to pick up a pen " . In April 1940 , he was temporarily promoted to captain and given command of a company of marines , but he proved an unpopular officer , being haughty and curt with his men . Even after the German invasion of the Low Countries ( 10 May – 22 June 1940 ) , his battalion was not called into action . Waugh 's inability to adapt to regimental life meant that he soon lost his command , and he became the battalion 's Intelligence Officer . In that role , he finally saw action in Operation Menace as part of the British force sent to the Battle of Dakar in West Africa ( 23 – 25 September 1940 ) in August 1940 to support an attempt by the Free French Forces to overthrow the Vichy French colonial government and install General Charles de Gaulle . Operation Menace failed , hampered by fog and misinformation about the extent of the town 's defences , and the British forces withdrew on 26 September . Waugh 's comment on the affair was this : ″ Bloodshed has been avoided at the cost of honour . ″ 
 In November 1940 , Waugh was posted to a commando unit , and , after further training , became a member of " Layforce " , under Brigadier Robert Laycock . In February 1941 , the unit sailed to the Mediterranean , where it participated in an unsuccessful attempt to recapture Bardia , on the Libyan coast . In May , Layforce was required to assist in the evacuation of Crete : Waugh was shocked by the disorder and its loss of discipline and , as he saw it , the cowardice of the departing troops . In July , during the roundabout journey home by troop ship , he wrote Put Out More Flags ( 1942 ) , a novel of the war 's early months in which he returned to the literary style he had used in the 1930s . Back in Britain , more training and waiting followed until , in May 1942 , he was transferred to the Royal Horse Guards , on Laycock 's recommendation . On 10 June 1942 , Laura gave birth to Margaret , the couple 's fourth child . 
 = = = Frustration , Brideshead and Yugoslavia = = = 
 Waugh 's elation at his transfer soon descended into disillusion as he failed to find opportunities for active service . The death of his father , on 26 June 1943 , and the need to deal with family affairs prevented him from departing with his brigade for North Africa as part of Operation Husky ( 9 July – 17 August 1943 ) , the Allied invasion of Sicily . Despite his undoubted courage , his <unk> and insubordinate character were rendering him effectively unemployable as a soldier . After spells of idleness at the regimental depot in Windsor , Waugh began parachute training at Tatton Park , Cheshire , but landed awkwardly during an exercise and fractured a fibula . Recovering at Windsor , he applied for three months ' unpaid leave to write the novel that had been forming in his mind . His request was granted and , on 31 January 1944 , he departed for Chagford , Devon , where he could work in seclusion . The result was Brideshead Revisited : The Sacred & Profane Memories of Captain Charles Ryder ( 1945 ) , the first of his explicitly Catholic novels of which the biographer Douglas Lane Patey commented that it was " the book that seemed to confirm his new sense of his writerly vocation " . 
 Waugh managed to extend his leave until June 1944 . Soon after his return to duty he was recruited by Randolph Churchill to serve in a military mission to Yugoslavia , and , early in July , flew with Churchill from Bari , Italy , to the Croatian island of Vis . There , they met Marshal Tito , the Communist leader of the Partisans , who was leading the guerrilla fight against the occupying Axis forces with Allied support . Waugh and Churchill returned to Bari before flying back to Yugoslavia to begin their mission , but their aeroplane crash @-@ landed , both men were injured , and their mission was delayed for a month . 
 The mission eventually arrived at Topusko , where it established itself in a deserted farmhouse . The group 's liaison duties , between the British Army and the Communist Partisans , were light . Waugh had little sympathy with the Communist @-@ led Partisans and despised Tito . His chief interest became the welfare of the Catholic Church in Croatia , which , he believed , had suffered at the hands of the Serbian Orthodox Church and would fare worse when the Communists took control . He expressed those thoughts in a long report , " Church and State in Liberated Croatia " . After spells in Dubrovnik and Rome , Waugh returned to London on 15 March 1945 to present his report , which the Foreign Office suppressed to maintain good relations with Tito , now the leader of communist Yugoslavia . 
 = = Postwar = = 
 = = = Fame and fortune = = = 
 Brideshead Revisited was published in London in May 1945 . Waugh had been convinced of the book 's qualities , " my first novel rather than my last " . It was a tremendous success , bringing its author fame , fortune and literary status . Happy though he was with this outcome , Waugh 's principal concern as the war ended was the fate of the large populations of Eastern European Catholics , betrayed ( as he saw it ) into the hands of Stalin 's Soviet Union by the Allies . He now saw little difference in morality between the war 's combatants and later described it as " a sweaty tug @-@ of @-@ war between teams of indistinguishable louts " . Although he took momentary pleasure from the defeat of Winston Churchill and his Conservatives in the 1945 general election , he saw the accession to power of the Labour Party as a triumph of barbarism and the onset of a new " Dark Age " . 
 In September 1945 , after he was released by the army , he returned to Piers Court with his family ( another daughter , Harriet , had been born at Pixton in 1944 ) but spent much of the next seven years either in London , or travelling . In March 1946 , he visited the Nuremberg trials , and later that year , he was in Spain for a celebration of the 400th anniversary of the death of Francisco de Vitoria , said to be the founder of international law . Waugh wrote up his experiences of the frustrations of postwar European travel in a novella , Scott @-@ King 's Modern Europe . In February 1947 , he made the first of several trips to the United States , in the first instance to discuss filming of Brideshead . The project collapsed , but Waugh used his time in Hollywood to visit the Forest Lawn cemetery , which provided the basis for his satire of American perspectives on death , The Loved One . In 1951 he visited the Holy Land with his future biographer , Christopher Sykes , and in 1953 , he travelled to Goa to witness the final exhibition before burial of the remains of the 16th century Jesuit missionary @-@ priest Francis Xavier . 
 In between his journeys , Waugh worked intermittently on Helena , a long @-@ planned novel about the discoverer of the True Cross that was " far the best book I have ever written or ever will write " . Its success with the public was limited , but it was , his daughter Harriet later said , " the only one of his books that he ever cared to read aloud " . 
 In 1952 Waugh published Men at Arms , the first of his semi @-@ autobiographical war trilogy in which he depicted many of his personal experiences and encounters from the early stages of the war . Other books published during this period included When The Going Was Good ( 1946 ) , an anthology of his pre @-@ war travel writing , The Holy Places ( published by the Ian Fleming @-@ managed Queen Anne Press , 1952 ) and Love Among the Ruins ( 1953 ) , a dystopian tale in which Waugh displays his contempt for the modern world . Nearing 50 , Waugh was old for his years , " selectively deaf , rheumatic , irascible " and increasingly dependent on alcohol and on drugs to relieve his insomnia and depression . Two more children , James ( born 1946 ) and Septimus ( born 1950 ) , completed his family . 
 From 1945 onwards , Waugh became an avid collector of objects , particularly Victorian paintings and furniture . He filled Piers Court with his acquisitions , often from London 's Portobello Market and from house clearance sales . His diary entry for 30 August 1946 records a visit to Gloucester , where he bought " a lion of wood , finely carved for £ 25 , also a bookcase £ 35 ... a charming Chinese painting £ 10 , a Regency easel £ 7 " . Some of his buying was shrewd and prescient ; he paid £ 10 for Rossetti 's " Spirit of the Rainbow " to begin a collection of Victorian paintings that eventually acquired great value . Waugh also began , from 1949 , to write knowledgeable reviews and articles on the subject of painting . 
 = = = Breakdown = = = 
 By 1953 , Waugh 's popularity as a writer was declining . He was perceived as out of step with the Zeitgeist , and the large fees he demanded were no longer easily available . His money was running out and progress on the second book of his war trilogy , Officers and Gentlemen , had stalled . Partly because of his dependency on drugs , his health was steadily deteriorating . Shortage of cash led him to agree in November 1953 to be interviewed on BBC radio , where the panel took an aggressive line : " they tried to make a fool of me , and I don 't think they entirely succeeded " , Waugh wrote to Nancy Mitford . Peter Fleming in The Spectator likened the interview to " the goading of a bull by matadors " . 
 Early in 1954 , Waugh 's doctors , concerned by his physical deterioration , advised a change of scene . On 29 January , he took a ship bound for Ceylon , hoping that he would be able to finish his novel . Within a few days , he was writing home complaining of " other passengers whispering about me " and of hearing voices , including that of his recent BBC interlocutor , Stephen Black . He left the ship in Egypt and flew on to Colombo , but , he wrote to Laura , the voices followed him . Alarmed , Laura sought help from her friend , Frances Donaldson , whose husband agreed to fly out to Ceylon and bring Waugh home . In fact , Waugh made his own way back , now believing that he was being possessed by devils . A brief medical examination indicated that Waugh was suffering from bromide poisoning from his drugs regimen . When his medication was changed , the voices and the other hallucinations quickly disappeared . Waugh was delighted , informing all of his friends that he had been mad : " Clean off my onion ! " . The experience was fictionalised a few years later , in The Ordeal of Gilbert Pinfold ( 1957 ) . 
 = = = Late works = = = 
 Restored to health , Waugh returned to work and finished Officers and Gentlemen . In June 1955 the Daily Express journalist and reviewer Nancy Spain , accompanied by her friend Lord Noel @-@ Buxton , arrived uninvited at Piers Court and demanded an interview . Waugh saw the pair off and wrote a wry account for The Spectator , but he was troubled by the <unk> decided to sell Piers Court : / " I felt it was polluted " , he told Nancy Mitford . Late in 1956 , the family moved to the manor house in the Somerset village of Combe Florey . In January 1957 , Waugh avenged the Spain – Noel @-@ Buxton intrusion by winning libel damages from the Express and Spain . The paper had printed an article by Spain that suggested that the sales of Waugh 's books were much lower than they were and that his worth , as a journalist , was low . 
 Gilbert Pinfold was published in the summer of 1957 , " my barmy book " , Waugh called it . The extent to which the story is self @-@ mockery , rather than true autobiography , became a subject of critical debate . Waugh 's next major book was a biography of his longtime friend Ronald Knox , the Catholic writer and theologian who had died in August 1957 . Research and writing extended over two years during which Waugh did little other work , delaying the third volume of his war trilogy . In June 1958 , his son Auberon was severely wounded in a shooting accident while serving with the army in Cyprus . Waugh remained detached ; he neither went to Cyprus nor immediately visited Auberon on the latter 's return to Britain . The critic and literary biographer David Wykes called Waugh 's sang @-@ froid " astonishing " and the family 's apparent acceptance of his behaviour even more so . 
 Although most of Waugh 's books had sold well , and he had been well @-@ rewarded for his journalism , his levels of expenditure meant that money problems and tax bills were a recurrent feature in his life . In 1950 , as a means of tax avoidance , he had set up a trust fund for his children ( he termed it the " Save the Children Fund " , after the well @-@ established charity of that name ) into which he placed the initial advance and all future royalties from the Penguin ( paperback ) editions of his books . He was able to augment his personal finances by charging household items to the trust or selling his own possessions to it . Nonetheless , by 1960 , shortage of money led him to agree to an interview on BBC Television , in the Face to Face series conducted by John Freeman . The interview was broadcast on 26 June 1960 ; according to his biographer Selena Hastings , Waugh restrained his instinctive hostility and coolly answered the questions put to him by Freeman , assuming what she describes as a " pose of world @-@ weary boredom " . 
 In 1960 , Waugh was offered the honour of a CBE but declined , believing that he should have been given the superior status of a knighthood . In September , he produced his final travel book , A Tourist in Africa , based on a visit made in January – March 1959 . He enjoyed the trip but " despised " the book . The critic Cyril Connolly called it " the thinnest piece of book @-@ making that Mr Waugh has undertaken " . The book done , he worked on the last of the war trilogy , which was published in 1961 as Unconditional Surrender . 
 = = = Decline and death = = = 
 As he approached his sixties , Waugh was in poor health , prematurely aged , " fat , deaf , short of breath " , according to Patey . His biographer Martin Stannard likened his appearance around this time to that of " an exhausted rogue <unk> up by drink " . In 1962 Waugh began work on his autobiography , and that same year wrote his final fiction , the long short story Basil Seal Rides Again . This revival of the protagonist of Black Mischief and Put Out More Flags was published in 1963 ; the Times Literary Supplement called it a " nasty little book " . When the first volume of autobiography , A Little Learning , was published in 1964 , Waugh 's often oblique tone and discreet name changes ensured that friends avoided the embarrassments that some had feared . 
 Waugh had welcomed the accession in 1958 of Pope John XXIII and wrote an appreciative tribute on the pope 's death in 1963 . However , he became increasingly concerned by the decisions emerging from the Second Vatican Council , which was convened by Pope John in October 1962 and continued under his successor , Paul VI until 1965 . Waugh , a staunch opponent of Church reform , was particularly distressed by the replacement of the universal Latin Mass with the vernacular . In a Spectator article of 23 November 1962 , he argued the case against change in a manner described by a later commentator as " sharp @-@ edged reasonableness " . He wrote to Nancy Mitford that " the buggering up of the Church is a deep sorrow to me .... We write letters to the paper . A fat lot of good that does . " 
 In 1965 , a new financial crisis arose from an apparent flaw in the terms of the " Save the Children " trust , and a large sum of back tax was being demanded . Waugh 's agent , A.D. Peters , negotiated a settlement with the tax authorities for a manageable amount , but in his concern to generate funds , Waugh signed contracts to write several books , including a history of the papacy , an illustrated book on the Crusades and a second volume of autobiography . Waugh 's physical and mental deterioration prevented any work on these projects , and the contracts were cancelled . He described himself as " toothless , deaf , melancholic , shaky on my pins , unable to eat , full of dope , quite idle " and expressed the belief that " all fates were worse than death " . His only significant literary activity in 1965 was the editing of the three war novels into a single volume , published as Sword of Honour . 
 On Easter Day , 10 April 1966 , after attending a Latin Mass in a neighbouring village with members of his family , Waugh died of heart failure at his Combe Florey home , at 62 . He was buried , by special arrangement , in a consecrated plot outside the Anglican churchyard in Combe Florey . A Requiem Mass , in Latin , was celebrated in Westminster Cathedral on 21 April 1966 . Laura Waugh died in 1973 of pneumonia after a short illness and was interred next to her husband in Combe Florey . 
 = = Character and opinions = = 
 In the course of his lifetime , Waugh made enemies and offended many people ; writer James Lees @-@ Milne said that Waugh ″ was the nastiest @-@ tempered man in England ″ . Waugh 's son , Auberon , said that the force of his father 's personality was such that , despite his lack of height , ″ generals and chancellors of the exchequer , six @-@ foot @-@ six and exuding self @-@ importance from every pore , quail [ ed ] in front of him ″ . 
 In the biographic Mad World ( 2009 ) , Paula Byrne said that the common view of Evelyn Waugh as a " snobbish misanthrope " is a caricature ; he asks : " Why would a man , who was so unpleasant , be so beloved by such a wide circle of friends ? " His generosity to individual persons and causes , especially Catholic causes , extended to small gestures ; after his libel @-@ court victory over Nancy Spain , he sent her a bottle of champagne . Hastings said that Waugh 's outward personal belligerence to strangers was not entirely serious but an attempt at " finding a sparring partner worthy of his own wit and ingenuity " . Besides mocking others , Waugh mocked himself — the elderly buffer , ″ crusty colonel ″ image , which he presented in later life , was a comic impersonation , and not his true self . 
 As an instinctive conservative , Waugh believed that class divisions , with inequalities of wealth and position , were natural and that " no form of government [ was ] ordained by God as being better than any other " . In the post @-@ war " Age of the Common Man " , he attacked socialism ( the " Cripps – Attlee terror " ) and complained , after Churchill 's election in 1951 , that " the Conservative Party have never put the clock back a single second " . Waugh never voted in elections ; in 1959 , he expressed a hope that the Conservatives would win the election , which they did , but would not vote for them , saying " I should feel I was morally <unk> in their follies " and added : " I do not aspire to advise my sovereign in her choice of servants " . 
 Waugh 's Catholicism was fundamental : ″ The Church ... is the normal state of man from which men have disastrously exiled themselves . ″ He believed that the Catholic Church was the last , great defence against the encroachment of the Dark Age being ushered in by the welfare state and the spreading of working class culture . Strictly observant , Waugh admitted to Diana Cooper that his most difficult task was how to square the obligations of his faith with his indifference to his fellow men . When Nancy Mitford asked him how he reconciled his often objectionable conduct with being a Christian , Waugh replied that ″ were he not a Christian he would be even more horrible ″ . 
 Waugh 's conservatism was aesthetic as well as political and religious . Although he praised younger writers , such as Angus Wilson , Muriel Spark and V.S. Naipaul , he was scornful of the 1950s writers ' group known as ″ The Movement ″ . He said that the literary world was " sinking into black disaster " and that literature might die within thirty years . As a schoolboy , Waugh had praised the art of Cubism but soon abandoned his interest in artistic Modernism . In 1945 , Waugh said that Pablo Picasso 's artistic standing was the result of a " mesmeric trick " and that his paintings " could not be intelligently discussed in the terms used of the civilised masters " . In 1953 , in a radio interview , he named Augustus Egg ( 1816 – 1863 ) as a painter for whom he had particular esteem . Despite their political differences , Waugh came to admire George Orwell , because of their shared patriotism and sense of morality . 
 Throughout his literary works , Evelyn Waugh freely expressed racial and anti @-@ semitic prejudices , especially in the books he wrote before the Second World War . The writer V.S. Pritchett said that Waugh 's anti @-@ semitism , ″ like Mount Everest , is there , nonviolent , but undeniable ″ . Wykes said that anti @-@ semitism is Waugh 's " most persistent nastiness " , adding that Waugh 's racism was " an illogical extension of his views on the naturalness and rightness of hierarchy as the [ main ] principle of social organisation " . As an admirer of Waugh 's writing , Orwell said that Evelyn Waugh was " almost as good a novelist as it is possible to be ... while holding untenable opinions " . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Themes and style = = = 
 Wyke observes that Waugh 's novels reprise and <unk> the principal events of his life , although in an early essay Waugh wrote : " Nothing is more insulting to a novelist than to assume that he is incapable of anything , but the mere transcription of what he observes " . The reader should not assume that the author agreed with the opinions expressed by his fictional characters . Nevertheless , in the Introduction to the Complete Short Stories , Ann Pasternak Slater said that the " delineation of social prejudices and the language in which they are expressed is part of Waugh 's meticulous observation of his contemporary world " . 
 The critic Clive James said of Waugh : " Nobody ever wrote a more <unk> elegant English ... its hundreds of years of steady development culminate in him " . As his talent developed and matured , he maintained what literary critic Andrew Michael Roberts called " an exquisite sense of the ludicrous , and a fine aptitude for exposing false attitudes " . In the first stages of his 40 @-@ year writing career , before his conversion to Catholicism in 1930 , Waugh was the novelist of the Bright Young People generation . His first two novels , Decline and Fall ( 1928 ) and Vile Bodies ( 1930 ) , comically reflect a futile society , populated by two @-@ dimensional , basically unbelievable characters in circumstances too fantastic to evoke the reader 's emotions . A typical Waugh trademark evident in the early novels is rapid , unattributed dialogue in which the participants can be readily identified . At the same time Waugh was writing serious essays , such as " The War and the Younger Generation " in which he castigates his own generation as " crazy and sterile " people . 
 Waugh 's conversion to Catholicism did not noticeably change the nature of his next two novels , Black Mischief ( 1934 ) and A Handful of Dust ( 1934 ) , but , in the latter novel , the elements of farce are subdued , and the protagonist , Tony Last , is recognisably a person rather than a comic cipher . Waugh 's first fiction with a Catholic theme was the short story " Out of Depth " ( 1933 ) about the immutability of the Mass . From the mid @-@ 1930s onwards , Catholicism and conservative politics were much featured in his journalistic and non @-@ fiction writing before he reverted to his former manner with Scoop ( 1938 ) , a novel about journalism , journalists , and unsavoury journalistic practices . 
 In Work Suspended and Other Stories Waugh introduced " real " characters and a first @-@ person narrator , signalling the literary style he would adopt in Brideshead Revisited a few years later . Brideshead , which questions the meaning of human existence without God , is the first novel in which Evelyn Waugh clearly presents his conservative religious and political views . In the LIFE magazine article , " Fan Fare " ( 1946 ) , Waugh said that " you can only leave God out [ of fiction ] by making your characters pure abstractions " and that his future novels shall be " the attempt to represent man more fully which , to me , means only one thing , man in his relation to God . " As such , the novel Helena ( 1950 ) is Evelyn Waugh 's most philosophically Christian book . 
 In Brideshead , the proletarian junior officer Hooper illustrates a theme that persists in Waugh 's postwar fiction : the rise of mediocrity in the " Age of the Common Man " . In the trilogy Sword of Honour ( Men at Arms , 1952 ; Officers and Gentlemen , 1955 , Unconditional Surrender , 1961 ) the social pervasiveness of mediocrity is personified in the semi @-@ comical character " Trimmer " , a <unk> and a fraud who triumphs by contrivance . In the novella " Scott @-@ King 's Modern Europe " ( 1947 ) , Waugh 's pessimism about the future is in the schoolmaster 's admonition : " I think it would be very wicked , indeed , to do anything to fit a boy for the modern world " . Likewise , such cynicism pervades the novel Love Among the Ruins ( 1953 ) , set in a dystopian , welfare @-@ state Britain that is so socially disagreeable that euthanasia is the most sought @-@ after of the government 's social services . Of the postwar novels , Patey says that The Ordeal of Gilbert Pinfold ( 1957 ) stands out ″ a kind of mock @-@ novel , a sly invitation to a game ″ . Waugh 's final work of fiction , " Basil Seal Rides Again " ( 1962 ) , features characters from the prewar novels ; Waugh admitted that the work was a ″ senile attempt to recapture the manner of my youth ″ . Stylistically this final story begins in the same fashion as the first story , ″ The Balance " of 1926 , with a " fusillade of unattributed dialogue " . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Of Waugh 's early books , Decline and Fall was hailed by Arnold Bennett in the Evening Standard as " an uncompromising and brilliantly malicious satire " . The critical reception of Vile Bodies two years later was even more enthusiastic , with Rebecca West predicting that Waugh was " destined to be the dazzling figure of his age " . However , A Handful of Dust , later widely regarded as a masterpiece , received a more muted welcome from critics , despite the author 's own high estimation of the work . The book 's ending , with Tony Last condemned forever to read Dickens to his mad jungle captor , was thought by the critic Henry Yorke to reduce an otherwise believable book to " phantasy " . Cyril Connolly 's first reaction to the book was that Waugh 's powers were failing , an opinion that he later revised . 
 In the latter 1930s , Waugh 's inclination to Catholic and conservative polemics affected his standing with the general reading public . The Campion biography is said by David Wykes to be " so rigidly biased that it has no claims to make as history " . The pro @-@ fascist tone in parts of Waugh in Abyssinia offended readers and critics and prevented its publication in America . There was general relief among critics when Scoop , in 1938 , indicated a return to Waugh 's earlier comic style . Critics had begun to think that his wit had been displaced by partisanship and propaganda . 
 Waugh maintained his reputation in 1942 , with Put Out More Flags , which sold well despite wartime restrictions on paper and printing . Its public reception , however , did not compare with that accorded to Brideshead Revisited three years later , on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean . Brideshead 's selection as the American Book of the Month swelled its US sales to an extent that dwarfed those in Britain , which was affected by paper shortages . Despite the public 's enthusiasm , critical opinion was split . Brideshead 's Catholic standpoint offended some critics who had greeted Waugh 's earlier novels with warm praise . Its perceived snobbery and its deference to the aristocracy were attacked by , among others , Conor Cruise O 'Brien who , in the Irish literary magazine The Bell , wrote of Waugh 's " almost mystical veneration " for the upper classes . Fellow writer Rose Macaulay believed that Waugh 's genius had been adversely affected by the intrusion of his right @-@ wing partisan alter ego and that he had lost his detachment : " In art so naturally ironic and detached as his , this is a serious loss " . Conversely , the book was praised by Yorke , Graham Greene and , in glowing terms , by Harold Acton who was particularly impressed by its evocation of 1920s Oxford . In 1959 , at the request of publishers Chapman and Hall and in some deference to his critics , Waugh revised the book and wrote in a preface : " I have modified the grosser passages but not obliterated them because they are an essential part of the book " . 
 In " Fan Fare " , Waugh forecasts that his future books will be unpopular because of their religious theme . On publication in 1950 , Helena was received indifferently by the public and by critics , who disparaged the awkward mixing of 20th century schoolgirl slang with otherwise reverential prose . Otherwise , Waugh 's prediction proved unfounded ; all his fiction remained in print and sales stayed healthy . During his successful 1957 lawsuit against the Daily Express , Waugh 's counsel produced figures showing total sales to that time of over four million books , two thirds in Britain and the rest in America . Men at Arms , the first volume of his war trilogy , won the James Tait Black Memorial Prize in 1953 ; initial critical comment was lukewarm , with Connolly likening Men at Arms to beer rather than champagne . Connolly changed his view later , calling the completed trilogy " the finest novel to come out of the war " . Of Waugh 's other major postwar works , the Knox biography was admired within Waugh 's close circle but criticised by others in the Church for its depiction of Knox as an unappreciated victim of the Catholic hierarchy . The book did not sell well — " like warm cakes " , according to Waugh . Pinfold surprised the critics by its originality . Its plainly autobiographical content , Hastings suggests , gave the public a fixed image of Waugh : " stout , splenetic , red @-@ faced and reactionary , a figure from burlesque complete with cigar , bowler hat and loud checked suit . " 
 = = = Reputation = = = 
 In 1973 , Waugh 's diaries were serialised in The Observer prior to publication in book form in 1976 . The revelations on his private life , thoughts and attitudes created controversy . Although Waugh had removed embarrassing entries relating to his Oxford years and his first marriage , there was sufficient left on the record to enable enemies to project a negative image of the writer as intolerant , snobbish and sadistic , with pronounced fascist leanings . Some of this picture , it was maintained by Waugh 's supporters , arose from poor editing of the diaries , and a desire to transform Waugh from a writer to a " character " . Nevertheless , a popular conception developed of Waugh as a monster . When , in 1980 , a selection of his letters was published , his reputation became the subject of further discussion . Philip Larkin , reviewing the collection in The Guardian , thought that it demonstrated Waugh 's elitism ; to receive a letter from him , it seemed , " one would have to have a nursery nickname and be a member of White 's , a Roman Catholic , a high @-@ born lady or an Old Etonian novelist " . 
 The publication of the diaries and letters promoted increased interest in Waugh and his works and caused publication of much new material . Christopher Sykes 's biography had appeared in 1975 , between 1980 and 1998 three more full biographies were issued and other biographical and critical studies have continued to be produced . A collection of Waugh 's journalism and reviews was published in 1983 , revealing a fuller range of his ideas and beliefs . The new material provided further grounds for debate between Waugh 's supporters and detractors . The 1982 Granada Television adaptation of Brideshead Revisited introduced a new generation to Waugh 's works , in Britain and in America . There had been earlier television treatment of Waugh 's fiction , as Sword of Honour had been serialised by the BBC in 1967 , but the impact of Granada 's Brideshead was much wider . Its nostalgic depiction of a vanished form of Englishness appealed to the American mass market ; Time magazine 's TV critic described the series as " a novel ... made into a poem " , and listed it among the " 100 Best TV Shows of All Time " . There have been further cinematic Waugh adaptations : A Handful of Dust in 1988 , Vile Bodies ( filmed as Bright Young Things ) in 2003 and Brideshead again in 2008 . These popular treatments have maintained the public 's appetite for Waugh 's novels , all of which remain in print and continue to sell . Several have been listed among various compiled lists of the world 's greatest novels . 
 Stannard concludes that beneath his public mask , Waugh was " a dedicated artist and a man of earnest faith , struggling against the dryness of his soul " . Graham Greene , in a letter to The Times shortly after Waugh 's death , acknowledged him as " the greatest novelist of my generation " , while Time magazine 's obituarist called him " the grand old mandarin of modern British prose " and asserted that his novels " will continue to survive as long as there are readers who can savor what critic V. S. Pritchett calls ' the beauty of his malice ' " . Nancy Mitford said of him in a television interview , " What nobody remembers about Evelyn is that everything with him was jokes . Everything . That 's what none of the people who wrote about him seem to have taken into account at all " . 
 = Project Sylpheed = 
 Project Sylpheed ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , also known as Project Sylpheed : Arc of Deception in North America , is a space simulation game for the Xbox 360 console . It was developed by <unk> and published by Square Enix and Microsoft . The game is acknowledged as the spiritual successor to the Silpheed video game series , which comprised 3D rail shooters : players pilot a starfighter , shooting incoming enemies on a vertically scrolling third @-@ person playing field . Project Sylpheed uses full 3D computer graphics and allows the player to instead pilot his or her spacecraft in any direction . 
 Project Sylpheed 's plot is set in a fictional 27th century where an interstellar human empire is about to erupt in a civil war . The game pits the protagonist and his spacecraft , configured with a variety of weapons and augmentations , against masses of small enemy fighters and large capital <unk> he game is interjected at various points with cutscenes that reveal the story . Critical opinions on Project Sylpheed were mixed ; reviews varied from considering it an exciting cinematic shooter to calling it a clichéd and complicated simulator . Microsoft considered the game a commercial success , branding it one of Xbox 360 's Platinum Collection . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Project Sylpheed , players take on the role of a rookie pilot and fly the Delta Saber starfighter in a campaign that comprises 16 missions . Typical mission objectives are to destroy specific enemy targets and to protect allied ships . There are also optional secondary goals , such as completing certain tasks within a time limit or without taking damage . Completing the primary objectives within a time limit successfully completes a mission ; failure to do so ends the game . If the player fails a mission several times in a row , the game offers an option to skip to the next stage . 
 Players control the Delta Saber from a view as if they were in the cockpit , or a slight distance away from and outside the craft . The controller 's thumbstick are used to fly the starfighter in any direction . By pressing the maneuver button and pushing the thumbstick in a direction , the player makes his or her fighter perform aileron rolls and 180 @-@ degrees turns ( half @-@ loops ) . Various button combinations control the Delta Saber 's speed , allowing the craft to boost to great speeds with afterburners , coast on inertia without power , or match speed with a target . Certain maneuvers require the expenditure of shield energy , which protects starships from damage ; an unshielded vessel under attack suffers damage to its armor . A ship is destroyed when its armor is depleted . 
 On starting a new campaign , the player receives a small selection of missiles , guns , beams , and bombs to mount on his or her ship . By accomplishing certain goals in the game , the player obtains advanced weaponry — possessing greater damage , range , and targeting abilities — for his or her spacecraft . He or she can also purchase more powerful equipment with the points gained by completing missions . These points are determined by factors such as the number of enemies destroyed , the time the mission is completed in , and the number of secondary objectives completed . Aside from functioning as a form of currency to purchase equipment , the points act as a score of the players ' performance . 
 After completing a campaign , the player can replay it in a New Game Plus mode , restarting the new campaign with weapons and equipment gathered in the previous run . Besides the campaign , Project Sylpheed offers six standalone missions that are downloaded over Xbox Live . These missions , with goals such as killing as many enemies as possible within a time limit , provide online leaderboards for players to compare their scores against each other . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Project Sylpheed 's setting , <unk> through flashback sequences during the game , is a fictional 27th century in which human civilization has expanded beyond Earth for 500 years , colonizing several worlds and forming the Terra Central Government ( TCG ) . Seated on Earth , the government uses military force to suppress colonial uprisings . The ADAN Alliance , formed by colonists of four star @-@ systems , initially engaged in politics to seek independence for their worlds . The central government 's responded by destroying the terraforming facilities of an alliance planet , Acheron , killing many colonists and turning the world inhospitable . ADAN does not believe TCG 's cover @-@ up of its involvement in the planet 's devastation and launches a war on what they see as a tyrant government . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Reviewers noted that Project Sylpheed 's character designs were very similar to those in Square Enix 's Final Fantasy line of games : sporting hair of various colors , generously endowed females and androgynous men make up the cast . Exhibiting many outbursts of emotions , the characters are heavily modeled after personalities commonly found in typical Japanese animation ( anime ) . Characters are given voice in the animated cutscenes that <unk> the game 's story , and in the missions , they radio the player character with vocal comments and updates . 
 The player assumes the role of Katana Faraway , a young talented pilot in the Terra Central Armed Forces ( TCAF ) . Faraway possesses a strong sense of loyalty to his friends and affiliation . As the game progresses , he gradually falls in love with Ellen Bernstein , a close friend and fellow pilot . Pitted against them are the forces of ADAN . The most prominent among them is <unk> Mason , who is modeled after the typical anime antagonist . A close friend of Faraway and Bernstein , Mason was evicted from Earth as tensions escalated between TCG and ADAN . During his return to his homeworld ( Acheron ) , he witnesses its devastation by the TCAF . He joins ADAN to exact vengeance on the TCAF . Commanding ADAN is Doris Egan , daughter of a prominent anti @-@ government activist who was killed in the attack on Acheron . Like Mason , she is also pursuing vengeance , but with an extremist attitude . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Project Sylpheed 's plot has the style and substance of typical anime , depicting characters as the focal points of events rather than individual pawns in the grand scheme of things . Told through an hour 's worth of animated cutscenes , the story starts in the <unk> star system where Faraway 's squadron is ambushed by ADAN forces . Losing a pilot , the squadron fights its way out , along with its mother ship — the Acropolis . The attacking force is later revealed to be part of a larger invasion fleet . After defending the planet from the invaders and cruise missiles , <unk> is evacuated and the TCAF retreats from the system . As Faraway and his team retreat , the fleeing civilians are attacked by ADAN forces , this time led by <unk> Mason . Though having the opportunity to kill Faraway , Mason spares him on account of their friendship , though warns him to leave the military or be killed on their next encounter . Acropolis withdraws to the planet <unk> where the TCAF is massing against ADAN 's onslaught . 
 After repairs , the carrier joins a task force on a mission , attacking deep into the enemy 's territory to draw away part of ADAN 's fleet . The task force commander , however , fell for an ambush . Panicking , he orders a retreat , abandoning the Acropolis , which was investigating nearby Acheron . While defending the carrier , Faraway shoots down Mason 's fighter . Landing where Mason crashed , Faraway engages him in a fistfight and learns the story behind Acheron 's devastation . After Mason 's rescue by ADAN , Faraway returns to Acropolis . The mothership retreats to <unk> and rejoins its defenders , holding off several waves of ADAN attacks . However , Egan arrives with her superweapon , the Promethus Driver , and destroys most of the TCAF defenders and several ADAN ships with a single shot that also devastates the planet 's surface . Too few to mount an effective assault against ADAN , the remaining TCAF ships , including Acropolis , retreat to Earth . Bent on revenge , Egan announces Earth as ADAN 's next target despite Mason 's heavy disapproval . 
 Scouting ahead of ADAN 's main force , Mason 's squadron is challenged and destroyed by Faraway 's fighters . Mason is captured and Faraway persuades him to defect ; the TCAF learns the weakness of the Promethus Driver from Mason . In the final battle , Mason flies alongside Faraway , destroying many of ADAN 's ships and sacrificing himself to clear a way for his friend to reach the Promethus Driver 's firing mechanism . Faraway destroys the mechanism , causing the superweapon to implode and form a gravity well . His ship fails to escape the well 's pull and loses power ; however , Mason 's spirit appears and restarts the Delta Saber , helping Faraway to escape . The post @-@ credits scene shows Faraway and Bernstein , as they stand together on a revitalized Acheron . 
 = = Development = = 
 Project Sylpheed was first announced by Square Enix to be in development on April 5 , 2006 . The video games publisher proclaimed at an Xbox 360 conference in Tokyo , Japan , that the game was the company 's first exclusive title for the Microsoft game console . This was part of Enix 's strategy to diversify its market , spreading its interests among the Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , and Wii . Initially titled Project Sylph , the game was renamed Project Sylpheed for a more obvious connection with its predecessor , Silpheed . The original game , first released in 1986 , was a rail shooter rendered with 2D computer graphics ; dodging and shooting at incoming enemies , the player 's starship moved around a playing field that scrolled vertically . Enix also credited Game Arts , the company that had created Silpheed , as the developers of Project Sylpheed . 
 Game Arts 's presence on the project , however , was more of a supervisory role . Project Sylpheed was conceived and developed by <unk> 's <unk> team , which comprised former Game Arts employees who had worked on the Silpheed series . The team intended to use the latest technology at the time to produce a sequel to Silpheed . The new game would allow player characters to move anywhere in a three @-@ dimensional playing arena , instead of restricting them to fixed paths as in standard rail shooters . Computer graphics studio , Anima , was brought in to develop the game 's story and characters , creating the animated cut scenes that are interspersed among the missions . The product of this collaboration was showcased at Tokyo Game Show 2006 ; journalists had fun with the space shooter , commenting that its controls and learning curve were simpler than those of space flight simulators . 
 Project Sylpheed was first released in Japan on September 28 , 2006 ; Square Enix published the game with only Japanese text and audio . Microsoft Game Studios handled the releases for Europe and North America , localizing Project Sylpheed for the English @-@ speaking market . Voice actors of the Western anime industry were brought in ; Vic Mignogna — whose credits included Fullmetal Alchemist and The Super Dimension Fortress Macross — voiced Faraway , and Kari Wahlgren — who voiced characters in Blood + and Final Fantasy XII — provided Bernstein 's voice . A demo of the game , providing a single mission and a small selection of the weapons in the retail version , was available for downloading over Xbox Live on June 14 , 2007 , and the game went on sale outside Japan two weeks later . On July 25 , the game 's downloadable content was made available for free on Xbox Live . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The 1980s was a period of fast growth for the video game industry . The shooter genre was enjoyed by gamers , who loved its fast paced action and high score boards that allowed them to compete with each other . Influential shooters , such as R @-@ Type and Radiant Silvergun , revolutionized the genre by introducing new elements to the gameplay . Although not as innovative , Silpheed won critical acclaim and attracted a following by allowing players to customize their ships ' weapons . The popularity of shooters began to wane in the 1990s as gamers turned their attention to video games that featured the latest technology — 3D computer graphics . Members of the industry believed the genre was about to fade into obscurity or already in the throes of its demise . Project Sylpheed 's announcement gave them pause and led them to wonder if the new game would rejuvenate the genre . Project Sylpheed lets players fly starfighters and dogfight many enemies in the vastness of space ; however , G4tv 's reviewer , David Francis Smith , said that the game 's designers had " no idea how to create structured , intelligible action in such a big area . " Several of his colleagues agreed , finding the game flawed in the design of its missions . They were disappointed that most missions , in the words of Xbox World 's Michael Gapper , tasked them to " fly , shoot , rearm , [ and ] shoot more " endlessly . Reviewers were also irked that they were not informed about the secondary objectives in a mission ; the goals were only revealed after the reviewers had completed them unawares . Further frustration arose from the fact that certain time limits were only displayed on nearing expiration . Other reviewers had no qualms with these flaws , stating that the intense dogfights more than compensate such shortcomings ; Game Informer 's Andrew Reiner wrote that the " rewarding quick @-@ trigger combat and thrill of overcoming the worst of odds makes Project Sylpheed a memorable play for gamers who daydream of galaxies far , far away . " 
 In Project Sylpheed , starfighters and missiles leave colorful contrails in their wake as they move through the void of space , and explode into fireballs when destroyed . The graphics impressed several critics ; in his article for Play magazine , Dave Halverson called the game " by far the prettiest free @-@ roaming shooter ever created " . Other reviewers felt the effects were not outstanding ; IGN 's Erik Brudvig said the explosions looked like " bloody snot " . Finding the maelstrom of color contrails distracting , Justin Hoeger wrote in his article for The Sacramento Bee that he was dogfighting " garish , neon @-@ colored contrails " instead of enemy fighters , a sentiment shared by several others . Will Freeman of Videogamer.com , however , appreciated the contrails for filling the emptiness of space with " tangled webs of gently shimmering blue and red " and found them useful as " a way of tracking [ his ] enemies " . 
 Certain reviewers had negative experiences with the game caused by other factors . They had difficulty picking out enemies , which were small or fleeting targets because of their distance or speed , among a " haze of microscopic heads @-@ up labels . " Chris Dahlen of The A. V. Club criticized the game for forcing the player to constantly focus on the instruments to locate targets , thus breaking the illusion of dogfighting in a <unk> . Other reviewers had a hard time with the game 's controls , finding them too complex ; however , those who mastered the controls could perform deft maneuvers with their starfighters . Another disappointment for reviewers was Project Sylpheed 's failure to provide a game mode that they and their friends could play together online . 
 The weaving of a storyline with its missions made Project Sylpheed unique ; shooters rarely did so . TeamXbox 's Andy Eddy called the story " absolutely the best part of the game " , and several of his colleagues agreed . The focus on relationships made it more complex and easier to relate to than those found in other shooters , and Halverson praised the game for lacing a " mission @-@ based space opera " with " real emotion " . Again , differing opinions are not uncommon ; Hardcore Gamer 's Thomas Wilde was disappointed to find the game akin to an exaggerated science @-@ fiction soap opera . Others found the story clichéd and uninteresting , especially for those who have watched plenty of " Japanese video game drama " . According to Dahlen , it is a " story of warring fleets of strippers and Muppet @-@ boys determined to wipe each other out of the galaxy . " Gapper wished that the story 's cutscenes stop interrupting his enjoyment of shooting the enemies . 
 Overall , critical reactions of the game were varied ; its features did not have universal appeal . Wilde argued that only rabid fans of the themes incorporated in Project Sylpheed would be interested in the game . His colleague , <unk> Hatchett , felt the game would have been better as a rail shooter with 3D graphics . The general sentiment among reviewers was that Project Sylpheed could not spark a revival of interest in a long @-@ dying genre regardless of whatever qualities it may have . Despite receiving such reactions , Project Sylpheed sold enough copies ( as judged by Microsoft ) in Japan within the first nine months of its release to become part of Xbox 360 's Platinum Collection on November 1 , 2007 . 
 = El Señor Presidente = 
 El Señor Presidente ( Mister President ) is a 1946 novel written in Spanish by Nobel Prize – winning Guatemalan writer and diplomat Miguel Ángel Asturias ( 1899 – 1974 ) . A landmark text in Latin American literature , El Señor Presidente explores the nature of political dictatorship and its effects on society . Asturias makes early use of a literary technique now known as magic realism . One of the most notable works of the dictator novel genre , El Señor Presidente developed from an earlier Asturias short story , written to protest social injustice in the aftermath of a devastating earthquake in the author 's home town . 
 Although El Señor Presidente does not explicitly identify its setting as early twentieth @-@ century Guatemala , the novel 's title character was inspired by the 1898 – 1920 presidency of Manuel Estrada Cabrera . Asturias began writing the novel in the 1920s and finished it in 1933 , but the strict censorship policies of Guatemalan dictatorial governments delayed its publication for thirteen years . 
 The character of the President rarely appears in the story but Asturias creates a number of other characters to show the terrible effects of living under a dictatorship . His use of dream imagery , onomatopoeia , simile , and repetition of particular phrases , combined with a discontinuous structure , which consists of abrupt changes of style and viewpoint , springs from surrealist and <unk> influences . The style of El Señor Presidente influenced a generation of Latin American authors . The themes of Asturias 's novel , such as the inability to tell reality apart from dreams , the power of the written word in the hands of authorities , and the alienation produced by tyranny , center around the experience of living under a dictatorship . 
 On its eventual publication in Mexico in 1946 , El Señor Presidente quickly met with critical acclaim . In 1967 , Asturias received the Nobel Prize in Literature for his entire body of work . This international acknowledgment was celebrated throughout Latin America , where it was seen as a recognition of the region 's literature as a whole . Since then , El Señor Presidente has been adapted for the screen and theater . 
 = = Background = = 
 In a 1970 interview , the German critic Gunter W. Lorenz asked Miguel Ángel Asturias why he began to write and the novelist replied : 
 Yes , at 10 : 25 pm on the 25th of December in 1917 , an earthquake destroyed my city . I saw something like an immense cloud conceal the enormous moon . I had been placed in a cellar , in a hole , in a cave or someplace else . It was then that I wrote my first poem , a song of farewell to Guatemala . Later , I was angered by the circumstances during which the rubble was cleared away and by the social injustice that became so bloodily apparent . 
 This experience , at the age of 18 , led Asturias to write " Los <unk> <unk> " ( " The Political Beggars " ) , an unpublished short story that would later develop into his first novel , El Señor Presidente . Asturias began writing El Señor Presidente in 1922 , while he was still a law student in Guatemala . He moved to Paris in 1923 , where he studied anthropology at the Sorbonne under George Raymond . While living in France , he continued to work on the book and also associated with members of the Surrealist movement as well as fellow future Latin American writers such as Arturo Uslar Pietri and the Cuban Alejo Carpentier . The novel was completed in 1933 , shortly before Asturias returned to Guatemala . 
 Even though El Señor Presidente was written in France and is set in an unnamed Latin American country , governed by an unnamed President in the late nineteenth or early twentieth century , there is still plenty of support linking the novel to the Manuel Estrada Cabrera era in Guatemala . For example , as critic Jack Himelblau explains , " Asturias [ ... ] wrote his novel primarily with his compatriots in mind , who , undoubtedly , had lived through the tyranny of Estrada Cabrera from 1898 to 1920 . " Estrada Cabrera was notorious for his brutal repression of dissent in Guatemala , and Asturias had been involved in protests against his rule in 1920 . Asturias integrated and reworked incidents from Estrada Cabrera 's dictatorship into the novel , such as the torture of a political adversary , who had been tricked " into believing that his innocent wife had been unfaithful to him " . 
 Estrada Cabrera was eventually forced out of office as a result of popular disturbances and the intervention of U.S. and other foreign diplomats . Rather than go into exile , however , the ex @-@ president opted to defend himself against criminal charges . In the ensuing trial , Asturias served as a legal secretary and so , as Gregory Rabassa 's biographical sketch points out , he had the opportunity to base his own fictional leader — the President — on his observations of the disgraced Guatemalan dictator . As Asturias himself put it : 
 I saw him almost every day in the prison . And I found that there 's no doubt that men like that have a special power over people . To the extent that while he was a prisoner people would say : " No , that can 't be Estrada Cabrera . The real Estrada Cabrera escaped . This is some poor old man that they 've locked up in here . " 
 El Señor Presidente was not published until years after it was written . Asturias claims that Jorge Ubico y Castañeda , the dictator of Guatemala from 1931 to 1944 , " prohibited its publication because his predecessor , Estrada Cabrera , was my Señor Presidente which meant that the book posed a danger to him as well " . Additionally , because Ubico was Guatemala 's dictator while the novel was being finished , critics have linked him with the characterization of the President in El Señor Presidente . As Himelblau notes , elements of the book " could easily have been interpreted as reflecting [ ... ] General Ubico 's dictatorship " . The novel eventually first saw the light of day in Mexico , in 1946 , at a time when Juan José Arévalo was serving as Guatemala 's first democratically elected president . 
 Despite the manifest influence of Asturias 's experiences in Guatemala under Estrada Cabrera and Ubico , and despite certain historical ties , critic Richard Callan observes that Asturias 's " attention is not limited to his times and nation , but ranges across the world and reaches back through the ages . By linking his created world with the dawn of history , and his twentieth @-@ century characters with myths and archetypes , he has anchored them to themes of universal significance . " Asturias himself affirms that he " wrote El Señor Presidente without a social commitment " . By this he means that unlike some of his other books , such as Leyendas de Guatemala ( Legends of Guatemala ) or Hombres de <unk> ( Men of Maize ) , " El Señor Presidente had a wider relevance because it did not focus so heavily on Guatemalan myths and traditions . " Asturias depicts aspects of life that are common to all dictatorial regimes , and so establishes El Señor Presidente as one of his most influential works . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 = = = Part one = = = 
 The novel begins on the Cathedral Porch , where beggars spend their nights . One beggar , the Zany , is exhausted after being continually harassed about his deceased mother . When one of the President 's loyal military men , Colonel Jose Parrales Sonriente , jeers the word " mother " at him , the Zany instinctively retaliates and murders the Colonel . The beggars are interrogated and tortured into agreeing that the retired General Eusebio Canales , once in the President 's military , and the independent lawyer Abel Carvajal killed the Colonel because according to the President 's men , there is no way " an idiot is responsible " . Meanwhile , a delusional Zany flees " away down the shadowy streets in a paroxysm of mad terror " . 
 A rare glimpse of the President shows him ordering Miguel Angel Face , sometimes referred to as the President 's " favourite " , to help General Canales flee before he is arrested in the morning for the murder of Sonriente . The President , who presumably orchestrated the accusations for his own purposes , wants Canales to flee because " running away would be a confession of guilt " . 
 At the Two Step , a local tavern , Miguel Angel Face meets Lucio Vásquez , a policeman , and is inspired to tell Vásquez that he is kidnapping General Canales 's daughter , Camila , as " a ruse to deceive the watchful authorities " . He claims to be kidnapping Camila to cover up the truth of Canales 's escape . Later , Vásquez meets with his friend Genaro Rodas , and upon leaving a bar they see the Zany . To Genaro Rodas 's horror , Vásquez shoots the Zany . The aftermath of this scene is witnessed by Don Benjamin , a puppet @-@ master , whose " puppets took the tragedy as their theme " . Genaro Rodas returns home and discusses the murder of the Zany with his wife , Fedina de Rodas , and informs her that the police plan to arrest Canales in the morning . Meanwhile , Canales leaves Miguel Angel Face 's home , exhausted and anxious about fleeing the country . Later that evening , Canales escapes safely while the police ransack his home and Miguel Angel Face sneaks in to bring Camila safely to the Two Step . 
 = = = Part two = = = 
 In the early morning , Fedina de Rodas rushes to Canales 's house in an attempt to save him from arrest for the murder of Colonel Sonriente . She arrives too late and is found by the Judge Advocate , an aide to the President . He arrests her as an accomplice in Canales 's escape , and tortures her in hopes of learning Canales 's location . The soldiers smear lime on her breasts before giving her back her baby , which causes its death as it refuses to feed from " the sharpness of the lime " . 
 Back at the Two Step , Miguel Angel Face visits Camila . He tries to find her a home with her aunts and uncles but they all refuse to take her in for fear of losing their friends and being associated with " the daughter of one of the President 's enemies " . More is revealed of Miguel Angel Face 's complex character and the struggle between his physical desires for Camila and his desire to become a better person in a world ruled by terror . 
 Camila grows very ill and a boy is sent to inform Miguel Angel Face that her condition has worsened . He dresses quickly and rushes to the Two Step to see her . Eventually relieved of charges by the President , Fedina de Rodas is purchased by a brothel , and when it is discovered that she is holding her dead baby in her arms , she is placed in a hospital . Miguel Angel Face informs Major <unk> , who is in the service of the President , that there is a threat to his life . By this act saving a man in danger , Angel Face hopes " God would grant him Camila 's life in exchange " . General Canales escapes into a village and , assisted by three sisters and a smuggler , crosses the frontier of the country after saving the sisters by killing a doctor who harassed them with the payment of an absurd debt . 
 = = = Part three = = = 
 A student , a sacristan and Abel Carvajal , together in a prison cell , talk because they are " terrified of the silence " and " terrified of the darkness " . Carvajal 's wife runs all over town , visiting the President and influential figures such as the Judge Advocate , begging for her husband 's release because she is left in the dark regarding what has happened to him . Carvajal is given a chance to read his indictment but , unable to defend himself against falsified evidence , is sentenced to execution . 
 Miguel Angel Face is advised that if he really loves her then Camila can be spared " by means of the sacrament of marriage " and the two of them are soon married . Camila is healing and struggling with the complexities of her new marriage . General Canales dies suddenly in the midst of plans to lead a revolution when he is falsely informed that the President has attended his daughter 's wedding . 
 The President runs for re @-@ election , championed in a bar by his fawning supporters , while Angel Face is entrusted with an international diplomatic mission . Camila and Angel Face share an emotional parting . Major <unk> intercepts Angel Face once he reaches the port and arrests him on the President 's orders . Angel Face is violently beaten and imprisoned and an impostor takes his place on the departing ship . Camila , now pregnant , waits anxiously for letters from her husband . When she is past hope , Camila moves to the countryside with her young boy , whom she calls Miguel . Angel Face becomes the nameless prisoner in cell 17 . He thinks constantly of Camila as the hope of seeing her again is the " last and only thing that remained alive in him " and ultimately dies heartbroken when he is falsely told that she has become the President 's mistress . 
 = = = Epilogue = = = 
 The Cathedral Porch stands in ruins and prisoners who have been released are quickly replaced by other unfortunate souls . The puppet @-@ master , Don Benjamin , has been reduced to madness because of the environment of terror he has been made to endure . Readers are given one more glimpse of the maddening state of life under a dictatorship . The epilogue concludes with a more hopeful tone , which is seen through a " mother 's voice telling her rosary " which concludes with the Kyrie eleison ; the call for the " Lord to have Mercy " . 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Major characters = = = 
 = = = = The President = = = = 
 The fact that the novel 's title character , the President , is never named gives him a mythological dimension , rather than the personality of a specific Guatemalan dictator . Literary scholar Kevin Bauman notes that readers are not let into the mind of the President ; instead his appearance is " continually re @-@ evaluated , re @-@ defined , and , ultimately , re @-@ constructed according to his perception by others , similar to Asturias 's own novelistic ( re ) vision of Estrada Cabrera 's regime " . According to literary critic Hughes Davies , the President " represents political corruption but his presentation as an evil deity who is worshiped in terms that mockingly echo religious ritual elevates him to a mythical plane " and he is " an inverted image of both the Christian and Mayan deities since he is the source only of death " . The dictator also has an element of mystery about him — it seems that no one knows where he is because he occupies several houses on the outskirts of the town . Mystery also surrounds the questions of when and how he sleeps . In the novel , rumors abound that he sleeps beside the telephone with a whip in his hand while others claim that he never sleeps at all . Because the appearance of the President is infrequent in the novel , readers ' perceptions of him are formed through other , often minor , characters and episodes . As such , literary critic Himelblau states that " the novel does not develop the figure of the President as a fictive personage , does not follow the President through a series of actions or diegetic complications that lead to psychological @-@ existential changes or transformations of his character " . 
 = = = = Miguel Angel Face = = = = 
 Miguel Angel Face ( orig . Spanish Miguel Cara de Ángel ) is the novel 's complex protagonist . He is introduced as the President 's confidential adviser ; there are many references to him as the President 's favorite and he is repeatedly described " as beautiful and as wicked as Satan " . As the plot proceeds readers see his struggle to remain loyal to the dictator in the face of the regime 's increasingly horrific acts . Angel Face is faced with the challenge of reconciling his position of power among a terrorized people with his desire to fulfill a higher moral purpose . In the words of literary critic Richard Franklin , he " struggles to affirm his absolute existence and to relate this to an authentic self " . Angel Face 's linguistic intensity often reflects his inner moral struggle : 
 <unk> animal makes no mistake in its sexual reckonings , ' he thought . ' We piss children into the graveyard . The trumpets of Judgement Day — very well , it won 't be a trumpet . Golden scissors will cut through the continuous stream of children . We men are like pigs ' <unk> stuffed with mincemeat by a demon butcher to make sausages . And when I mastered my own nature so as to save Camila from my desire , I left a part of myself <unk> ; that 's why I feel empty , uneasy , angry , ill caught in a trap . Woman is the mincemeat into which man stuffs himself like a pig 's <unk> for his own gratification . What <unk> 
 = = = = General Eusebio Canales = = = = 
 General Eusebio Canales ( alias <unk> or Prince of Arms ) is forced into exile after being accused of the murder of Colonel José Parrales Sonriente . He appears to be organizing a guerrilla attack on the President , but dies of a broken heart after reading a false news report detailing his daughter 's wedding to Miguel Angel Face , at which the President was apparently present . The character of the General comes into clearer focus while he is on the road to exile . Canales 's road to exile also introduces readers to the desperate financial situation of three sisters who are being taken advantage of by a doctor who visited their ailing mother . This episode demonstrates that corruption and malice exist not just in the capital city but also in rural villages . 
 = = = = Camila = = = = 
 Camila , General Canales 's daughter , is ( somewhat reluctantly ) rescued by Miguel Angel Face , when none of her relatives will take her in upon the flight of her father . Eventually Angel Face chooses Camila over his former master , the President . The two marry and she gives birth to his son , but only once Angel Face has disappeared . She and her son , whom she names Miguel , are last seen having moved to the countryside to escape the President 's influence . She is the very picture of the adolescent who has been denied even the smallest margin of liberty , as critic Callan observes : " when Camila was thought to be dying a priest came to administer the sacrament of Penance . Her girlish faults stand out in the contrast with the evil that weighs upon the city . Indeed , one of the things she mentions in her confession is no fault at all : she went horseback riding astride , in the presence of some Indians . " 
 = = = = The Zany = = = = 
 The Zany ( orig . Spanish el Pelele ) , also translated as the Idiot by some critics , appears only in the first four chapters and again at the end of chapter seven but serves a critical function in the novel . The Zany , who " looked like a corpse when he was asleep " and had eyes that " saw nothing , felt nothing " is critical to establishing the tone of the novel and triggering the novel 's action . Critic John Walker argues that , by " choosing the Idiot as a representative of the innocent , the a @-@ political , who suffer the abuses of a totalitarian regime [ ... ] Asturias shows how dictatorship corrupts people and destroys their values to the extent that compassion for one 's companion in distress ceases to exist . " In fact , it becomes clear that the only happiness that the Zany experiences is through the memory of his dead mother . Asturias then shows how el Pelele , a mother @-@ loving figure , " suffers at the hands of those who , long under the domination of the over @-@ aggressive father figure , lack love and pity " . Furthermore , el Pelele is a tool that allows readers to see the psychological effects of living under a dictatorship ruled by terror . His murderous act seems to trigger the subsequent events of the novel and to impact on all the characters . Also important is the fact that the one moment of complete happiness experienced by the Zany in the novel takes place while he is in a dream @-@ like state . Walker argues that this serves to highlight the harsh , nightmarish world of reality in which he has been forced to live . 
 = = = Minor characters = = = 
 The novel includes a host of minor characters who , in Richard Franklin 's words , " grope for the means to assert the validity of self and to anchor this individuality in a nightmare which constantly faces it with black nothingness " . These characters range from Colonel José Parrales Sonriente , otherwise known as the " man with the little mule " , whose murder at the Cathedral Porch opens the novel , to a series of beggars , prisoners , minor officials , relatives , flatterers , <unk> and prostitutes . Some of these are tragic figures , such as Fedina de Rodas , who readers see tortured and then sold to a brothel while she still clutches her dead baby in her arms . Others , however , provide comic relief . Sometimes they have colorful or playful names or nicknames , such as " Flatfoot " ( a beggar ) , the " Talking Cow " ( a woman who delivers a speech of praise to the President ) , or Doña Benjamin <unk> , who , with her husband the puppet @-@ master Don Benjamin , closes the novel with a lament for the demise of the Cathedral Porch . 
 = = Genres = = 
 = = = Magic realism = = = 
 According to scholar Luis Leal , in the genre of magic realism , " the writer confronts reality and tries to untangle it , to discover what is mysterious in things , in life , in human acts . " Magic realist writing does not create imaginary creatures or places ; instead , the writer tries to display " the mysterious relationship between man and his circumstances " . Leal further points out that in magic realism , " key events have no logical or psychological explanation . The magical realist does not try to copy the surrounding reality or to wound it but to seize the mystery that breathes behind things . " He also clarifies that " magical realism is not magic literature either . Its aim , unlike that of magic , is to express emotions , not to evoke them " . 
 To many scholars , El Señor Presidente is a landmark Latin American novel because of Asturias 's early use of magic realism , a literary technique often employed by acclaimed Latin American writers such as Gabriel García Márquez . In an interview with Asturias , Gunter Lorenz heralded Asturias as the inventor of magic realism , and even as its most successful practitioner . Asturias himself defines this style not as " a concrete reality but a reality that arises from a definitely magical imagination ... in which we see the real disappear and the dream emerge , in which dreams are transformed into a tangible reality " . Richard Franklin argues that magic realism is most evident in Asturias 's exploration and depiction of the innermost reality of the human mind . This exploration is combined with " the material content of an urban mass caught in the grip of an iron regime " throughout the novel . Franklin goes on to herald the synthesis of these two elements as " a real contribution to the novelistic genre of America " . 
 = = = Dictator novel = = = 
 Asturias first wrote El Señor Presidente in response to the dictatorial rule of Manuel Estrada Cabrera . Because Asturias spent a decade writing the novel , the delay in its publication , and the fact that it never names its eponymous President , many scholars have noted that it could equally be taken to apply to the subsequent regime of Jorge Ubico . Moreover , since the novel 's publication , it has been used to critique dictatorial rule throughout Latin America . In its examination of the nature of dictatorial power in general , it helped initiate the new genre of the dictator novel . As literary critic Gerald Martin argues , El Señor Presidente is " the first real dictator novel " . 
 The dictator novel is a genre that has developed as a vehicle for Latin American writers to critique concentrated authority . Assistant Professor of Spanish at Walsh University , Jorge J Barrueto , argues that El Señor Presidente has been heralded as epitomizing dictatorship , " a phenomenon perceived to be a natural and inherent trait in the region " . According to Garcia Calderon , the legacy of colonialism in Latin America has often led to the rise of an absolute authority , which seeks to contain a nation 's inner conflict . Once in power , the man in charge often seeks complete control ; he often amends constitutions , dismantling laws which previously prevented his re @-@ election . For example , in 1899 General Manuel Estrada Cabrera altered the Guatemalan Constitution which had previously prohibited his re @-@ election . Typically , however , dictator novels attempt to examine the abstract nature of authority figures and to question the idea of authority in general instead of focusing on the rule of a particular dictator . 
 Asturias 's text marks a dramatic shift in narrative writing . Precursors such as Domingo Sarmiento 's Facundo ( 1845 ) were judged on how adequately they reflected reality . With its stylized magic realism , Asturias 's El Señor Presidente broke from this realist paradigm — it is an avant @-@ garde novel that laid the foundation for many other authors to develop what is now a broad and extensive genre . 
 = = Style = = 
 According to Latin American literary scholar Gerald Martin , Asturias 's El Señor Presidente , which was written and published before the Latin American Boom of the 1960s , uses a style now classified as the " new novel " or " new narrative " . In this novel , Asturias breaks from the historic and realist style that dominated novels at the time . Martin argues that the novel " exemplifies more clearly than any other novel the crucial link between European Surrealism and Latin American Magical Realism . It is , indeed , the first fully @-@ fledged Surrealist novel in Latin America . " 
 Richard Franklin contends that on occasion surrealist writing obscures meaning , but in El Señor Presidente Asturias avoids this flaw . His combination of rationalism with " a world of forms " creates " an imagery which reveals a deeper reality , one which is more deeply rooted in the human psyche " . As such , Asturias 's surrealist style highlights the modern disintegration of long @-@ standing belief systems . Literary scholar Gabriele Eckart gives as an excellent example of Asturias 's surrealist style his portrayal of The Zany 's psychic processes in which " language sometimes breaks apart into incomprehensible sounds " . This allows Asturias to present the real and imaginary , as well as the communicable and <unk> , as non @-@ contradictory . Himelblau also highlights how El Señor Presidente projects " reality in relative , fluid terms — that is it allows its characters to disclose the temporal setting of the novel 's fictional events " . In this regard , then , Himelblau notes that El Señor Presidente " is also , as far as we are aware , the first novel in Spanish America that seeks to render fictional reality of time as a function of point of view " . The novel defies traditional narrative style by inserting numerous episodes that contribute little or nothing to the plot as the characters in these episodes often appear inconsistently . Instead of relaying the book 's themes through characters , Asturias uses repetition of motifs and a mythical substructure to solidify the book 's message . 
 Asturias employs figurative language to describe dream imagery and the irrational . Literary critic Hughes Davies points out that Asturias frequently appeals to the reader 's auditory senses . Asturias 's often incantatory style employs " unadulterated poetry to reinforce his imagery through sound " . This helps readers to understand the physical as well as the psychological aspects of the novel . According to Knightly , " few of Asturias 's characters have much psychological depth ; their inner conflicts tend to be externalized and played out at the archetypal level " . More significantly , Asturias was the first Latin American novelist to combine stream of consciousness writing and figurative language . Hughes Davies argues that from the outset of El Señor Presidente , the gap between words and reality is exemplified through onomatopoeia , simile and repetition of phrases . Knightly notes that " animistic elements surface occasionally in the characters ' stream of consciousness " . For example , in the chapter " Tohil 's Dance " , Tohil , the God of Rain in Maya mythology , is imagined by Angel Face as arriving " riding on a river of pigeons ' breasts which flowed like milk " . In Angel Face 's vision , Tohil demands a human sacrifice and is content only so long as he " can prevail over men who are hunters of men " . Tohil pronounces : " Henceforth there will be neither true death nor true life . Now dance . " As Knightly explains , this scene follows the President 's orders for Miguel Angel Face to go on a mission that ends in his death , and is " a sign of the President 's evil nature and purposes " . Davies contends that these literary techniques , when " combined together with a discontinuous structure , give the text its surrealistic and nightmarish atmosphere " . 
 = = Major themes = = 
 = = = Reality vs. dream = = = 
 Asturias blurs the separation between dream and reality throughout El Señor Presidente , making it one of the novel 's most prominent themes . Latin American writer and critic Ariel Dorfman notes that the mixing of dream and reality is partly a result of Asturias 's frequent use of figurative language . This stylistic choice is reflected in the content of the story itself , which suggests that an important effect of dictatorial power is the blurring of dreams and reality . Dorfman also notes that the President is sustained by fear , which further blurs the distinction between reality and dream . This fear grants him the voluntary or involuntary support of others , enabling the President to exercise his mandates . Dorfman asserts that the President 's use of fear elevates his mandates to legends . These legends are then able to " impose itself upon reality because men live it fully in a way to make sense of their humanity " . One example of this theme , elucidated by Eckart , is a series of scenes leading to the arrest of the lawyer Carvajal . When the President decides to blame Carvajal for the murder of Colonel Sonriente , it is clear that Carvajal is confounded by the charges . Moreover , despite being a lawyer , Carvajal is unable to defend himself during the sham trial with " the members of the tribunal so drunk that they cannot hear him " . As Eckart asserts , " to be captured and tortured without ever knowing why is another horrible feature of a dictatorship . For the victim , reality unexpectedly becomes unreality , no longer comprehensible by a logical mind . " Therefore , the use of fear by a dictatorship blurs the line between reality and dream for the people being ruled . 
 Asturias 's ambiguous use of detail adds to the confusion between reality and dream . For example , the title pages of parts one and two state that they take place between April 21 and 27 . Part three , on the other hand , occurs over " Weeks , Months , Years " . While this time @-@ scale initially appears very specific , no year is indicated . Furthermore , the novel is set in a country similar to Guatemala and includes references to Maya gods ( such as in the chapter " Tohil 's Dance " ) but no direct statement by any character confirms this . Bauman argues that Asturias , by " preferring instead to distance himself from the immediate historical reality and focus critical light on the internal problems " , attends to what " he sees there " . This enables Asturias to address a wider audience , not restricted to Guatemalans , that can relate individually to the experience of living under dictatorial rule . 
 In obscuring reality , truth becomes unclear . As literary critic Mireille Rosello notes , it is the President who decides what is true , denying any other opinion , even if other characters witness an event with their own eyes or ears . Unlike the characters in the novel , readers are aware that the characters are relying on a notion of truth or reality that no longer exists under the dictatorship of the President . " Truth " does not exist before the President puts it into words , and even at that , the only " truth " under dictatorial rule is the words the President is speaking at any given moment — one cannot even safely repeat the President 's versions of events . The characters are thus left unaware of what constitutes the " truth " . 
 = = = Writing and power = = = 
 A major theme of the dictator novel concerns the use of writing as a medium of power . In El Señor Presidente , Asturias uses language to challenge dictatorial power . Throughout the novel the reader observes the authority of the President over the people through his control of what they write . In the chapter " The President 's Mail @-@ Bag " , a stream of letters informs the President of peoples ' actions . While many are " writing the truth " and turning in their fellow citizens , many others feel that " it is not safe to trust to paper " . Writing is closely linked to authority and is a means to solidify power , because language can be manipulated into lies that eventually kill . For example , the President orders a newspaper to include the false statement that he attended the wedding of Camila , the daughter of General Canales . When the General reads these words and perceives them as truth , his heart is broken and he subsequently dies . Miguel Angel Face is also killed by the manipulation of words : he is told that Camila has become the President 's mistress , and upon hearing this falsified news , he loses the will to live . These episodes in the novel demonstrate how closely language , the written word , and power are linked . The characters in El Señor Presidente lose their sense of reality , making it difficult for them to know who to trust . As Rosello argues , " in this state of terror , language is deliberately used as a means of seducing the addressee into harmlessness , and has lost its function of conveying information " . 
 = = = Hope = = = 
 In El Señor Presidente , hope is suppressed by the dictatorship . As the Judge Advocate states in the novel , " the President 's first rule of conduct is never to give grounds for hope , and everyone must be kicked and beaten until they realise the fact " . It can be argued that Camila represents hope in the novel because both her father and husband were able to persevere under the dictatorship by thinking of her ; however , the President destroys this sense of hope with false stories . When the thought of her loyalty is eliminated , both her father and husband die because they have lost the hope of returning to her . Furthermore , Camila 's happiness with her child and their escape to the countryside can be seen as the one glimpse of hope in an otherwise dark and disturbing ending . For critic Jean Franco , it is love that offers what little hope there is in the novel : " The system is undermined only by love — the love of an idiot for his mother , a woman trying desperately to save her husband from death . " 
 = = = Tyranny and alienation = = = 
 The theme of tyranny and alienation shows how a dictatorship not only alienates and " others " the people in the country , but also prevents the country itself from achieving European modernization . In a 1967 essay , literary critic Ariel Dorfman argues that " dictatorship , which in El Señor Presidente manifested itself in the political realm , is now a dictatorship of fire of the word , but always a tyranny that men themselves ask for , adore , and help to build " . Dorfman also notes that " The ' little human bundles ' of Asturias 's world end up destroying themselves , being disintegrated by the very forces that they themselves spoke . " By this he means that the characters are undone by their own actions and words as the President uses and twists them . The tyranny of language perversely parallels the political oppression which is omnipresent in Asturias 's world . Richard Franklin argues that " in a philosophical sense , Asturias has eloquently affirmed the validity of individual experience " . 
 Asturias shows how , under the conditions of dictatorship , characters slowly lose their human identities . The Zany , for instance , while fleeing the city , is described as running " aimlessly , with his mouth opened and his tongue hanging out , <unk> and panting " . Just a few lines later , the Zany is " <unk> [ ing ] like an injured dog " . In what is in part a critique of the book , Jorge Barrueto argues that El Señor Presidente depicts Latin America as a whole as " Other " . Everyone from the President to the Zany displays this " otherness " as they cannot be civilized . Dictatorship produces Otherness , by dehumanizing its subjects , but is also itself presented as barbaric , absurd , and no more than an " imitation of the European ways " . Thanks to phenomena such as dictatorship , Latin America appears to be a land where " Otherness " prevails and for this reason Latin America cannot " evolve " or reach truly European levels of modernity . For Barrueto , " this narrative 's goal is to prove that Latin American societies , though they are aware of the blueprint of Modernity , are unable to act accordingly . " 
 = = = Fertility and destruction = = = 
 According to Latin American literature scholar Richard Callan , the dichotomy between destruction and fertility is embodied in the opposition between the President and Miguel Angel Face . While the President represents sterility and destruction , his favorite , Miguel Angel Face , embodies fertility , a positive and generative force of nature . Callan notes that Miguel Angel Face 's transformation from the President 's favorite to a positive generative force is not deliberate . Instead , Callan argues that " it results from the birth of true love in his formerly barren heart . However , he is too engrossed in his love to notice the shift in his relationship with the President . " The President , not surprisingly , identifies himself candidly with death . Examples from the novel include the death sentences he gives to Abel Carvajal ( for a crime the President is fully aware the man did not commit ) and to Lucio Vasquez , a man in his service that carried out his wish for the Zany to be killed and yet is still executed . In contrast to the President , Callan highlights Miguel Angel Face 's association with love . The love that Miguel Angel Face develops for Camila identifies him with love and life , and leads to procreation — the birth of his son . Rosello argues that even before his transformation , Miguel Angel Face was aware of the President 's destructive nature . As such , Rosello argues that Miguel Angel Face " knew from the beginning that the only ' safety ' in the President 's world is a form of self destruction : only by losing his identity and letting the President 's mind invade his own could he hope to remain alive " . So , when he failed to comply , he did indeed lose his life . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In Guatemala , El Señor Presidente received significant attention from the date of its first publication . Mostly this was from other left @-@ wing writers and intellectuals , who recognized and praised both its stylistic innovation and its political commitment , if sometimes with the complaint that the novel was overly influenced by European modernism . But , as Dante <unk> observes , " those in power have not been able to stand Asturias 's voice " . 
 Critical reception elsewhere in Latin America was also enthusiastic . One of the book 's first reviewers was María Rosa Oliver , writing in the influential Argentine journal Sur shortly after the novel 's second edition was produced in Buenos Aires . She particularly praises the plot : the fact that the novel is more than simply a lyrical still life . Rather , she argues , El Señor Presidente " stirs our five senses . " And her conclusion stresses the book 's Latin American qualities , arguing that it " enchants us , stirs us , moves us , and softens us all at the same time , producing much the same effect as when we travel , eyes and heart wide open , around these Latin American lands or the pages that tell their history . " 
 Before long the novel 's fame spread around the world . The first award Asturias received for El Señor Presidente was the French Prix du Meilleur Livre Étranger in 1952 . El Señor Presidente has steadily garnered further acclaim . In the words of literary scholar Jack Himelblau , the book is " an avant @-@ garde and critically significant novel in the history of Spanish @-@ American fiction " and Latin American history and literature scholar Charles Macune includes El Señor Presidente in a list of prominent translated Latin American novels . For Macune , novels and novelists of Latin America are " both history makers as well as reflections of the region 's history " . Unlike Latin American newspapers and archival materials , translated Latin American novels are far more accessible to readers without a knowledge of Spanish . In fact , Macune shows that El Señor Presidente has been well @-@ received not only in its original Spanish but also in its English translation . 
 = = = Nobel Prize = = = 
 In December 1967 Asturias won the Nobel Prize in Literature for his life 's work , including El Señor Presidente . Upon receiving the prize , he gave a lecture regarding Latin American literature as both " testimony " and " instrument for struggle " . In particular , he spoke about the possibility of forging a new style of novel in Latin America , drawing on the region 's indigenous heritage . This new style would make the novel a vehicle of hope and light in what he termed " this night that threatens us now " . It would be " the affirmation of the optimism of those writers that defied the Inquisition , opening a breach in the conscience of the people for the march of the Liberators " . 
 The Nobel Prize Committee , in awarding the prize , described El Señor Presidente in the following terms : 
 This magnificent and tragic satire criticizes the prototype of the Latin American dictator who appeared in several places at the beginning of the century and has since reappeared , his existence being fostered by the mechanism of tyranny which , for the common man , makes every day a hell on earth . The passionate vigour with which Asturias evokes the terror and distrust which poisoned the social atmosphere of the time makes his work a challenge and an invaluable aesthetic gesture . 
 Asturias 's home country celebrated his international recognition . In Guatemala his face soon adorned postage stamps , a street was named after him , and he received a medal . According to Kjell Strömberg in The 1967 Prize , " the whole of his little country was given over to rejoicing " . Further admiration was expressed throughout Latin America , where Asturias 's Nobel Prize was viewed as an accomplishment for Latin American literature as a whole , rather than the achievement of a single author or country . As scholar Richard Jewell notes , there had been substantial criticism that Latin American writers were being ignored by the Nobel committee . Beginning with Miguel Ángel Asturias in 1967 , however , the academy selected four Latin American writers within twenty @-@ four years . 
 Biographer Gregory Rabassa , who has translated other works by Asturias , highlights the effects of the Nobel Prize on Asturias 's subsequent work , saying , " [ h ] is winning the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1967 gave him a long @-@ awaited financial independence that ... enabled him to withdraw to his writing and the many aims and possibilities that [ had ] been on his mind for so many years " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 El Señor Presidente has been adapted into three Spanish @-@ language films and one play . The first of the films , filmed in black and white , was made in 1970 , by Argentine director Marcos Madanes . It was originally shown at the 1970 Venice Film Festival . The cast included Pedro <unk> as the President , Luis <unk> as Miguel and Alejandra <unk> as Camila . As in Asturias 's novel , the action is instigated when the village idiot kills a jeering army colonel , and in response , the president decides to blame the murder on a political adversary , but from that point on the film diverges from the novel . In the film , an operative is sent to spread rumors about the accused but instead he falls in love with the accused man 's daughter . Once this happens , the operative defies his loyalty to the president and helps the daughter and her father incite a revolution with what he knows about the corrupt leader . Asturias himself complained about the film : he " sent a telegram to the Venice Film Festival denying permission to show the feature , but the letter arrived a day late . The unfortunate audience then had to endure this malodorous melodrama . " 
 El Señor Presidente was adapted for the stage by playwright Hugo Carrillo , and first performed in a production of the Compañía de Arte <unk> de la Universidad Popular directed by Rubén Morales at the twelfth Festival of Guatemalan Theatre in 1974 . It was a great popular success , with over 200 performances during its ten @-@ month run , much longer than the two months of weekend performances that were standard for the festival , and the run broke Central American box office records . The production later toured Central America and other groups have also performed it , so that over 50 @,@ 000 people have seen the play in over eight other countries besides Guatemala . Carrillo was notably concerned about the staging of the play by others ; he grew angry at a Salvadoran production that changed a few scenes , and casting differences with Joseph Papp led to the cancellation of the play at the 1987 New York Latin American Festival ( this canceled production was the origin of the English translation of the play , written by Margarita <unk> , a student of Carrillo ) . 
 The play was also critically acclaimed , receiving many awards and has been written of as the zenith of a " Golden Age " of Guatemalan theatre . The play engaged the politics of the time ( the Institutional Democratic Party was then in power ) , and Carrillo felt it necessary at first to attribute the script to the pseudonym " Franz Metz " , and had photos taken of someone portraying " Metz " with the director ; on opening night , secret police came inquiring after the address of Asturias ( who had died earlier that year ) , and the government started paying attention to the previews of plays in the next year . 
 The second film adaptation , in 1983 , was directed by Manuel Octavio Gómez , and was one of the last films made by this prolific Cuban film director . It starred French actor Michel <unk> as " El Presidente " . 
 The most recent film adaptation , directed by Venezuelan Rómulo Guardia Granier and produced by RCTV ( Radio Caracas Televisión Internacional ) , was released in November 2007 and is the first film produced by RCTV in more than twenty years . This version paints the picture of a hopeless love story — one that is unable to succeed under the terrorizing and corrupt dictatorship . It therefore plays up what is only hinted at in the novel itself , the possibility that the President is driven at least in part by sexual desire . 
 Perhaps the most striking aspect of this film version is the way in which it was immediately taken as a commentary on the present government of Venezuela . Director Granier divulged in an interview , " We had to film in secret in order to avoid being shut down . " Antonio Blanco , who also worked on this adaptation , said that : " We plan to market the film as a Guatemalan story to avoid any problems with authorities . " RCTV lost its terrestrial broadcasting rights in mid @-@ 2007 when the government of Hugo Chávez ( who was democratically elected , but accused by opponents of harboring dictatorial tendencies ) did not renew the network 's license . 
 = = Publication details = = 
 Selected editions : 
 1946 , Mexico , Costa @-@ <unk> ( ISBN NA ) , hardback ( First edition , original Spanish ) 
 1948 , Argentina , Losada ( ISBN NA ) , hardback ( Second edition , Spanish ) 
 1952 , Argentina , Losada ( ISBN NA ) , hardback ( Third edition , Spanish , corrected by author ) 
 1963 , UK , Victor Gollancz ( ISBN NA ) , paperback ( Eng. trans. by Frances Partridge as The President ) 
 1964 , USA , Atheneum ( ISBN NA ) , paperback ( Eng. trans. by Frances Partridge as El Señor Presidente ) 
 1972 , UK , Penguin ( ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 ) , pub date 30 March 1972 , paperback ( Eng. trans. as The President ) 
 1978 , France , <unk> , and Mexico , Fondo de Cultura Económica ( ISBN NA ) ( Spanish , first critical edition , ed. by Ricardo Navas Ruiz and Jean @-@ Marie Saint @-@ Lu , part of Asturias 's Complete Works ) 
 1997 , USA , Waveland Press ( ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 951 @-@ 2 ) , pub date August 1997 , paperback ( Eng. trans. as The President ) 
 2000 , Spain , Galaxia Gutenberg , and France , <unk> XX ( ISBN 84 @-@ <unk> @-@ 51 @-@ 2 ) , hardback ( Spanish , critical edition ed. by Gerald Martin ) 
 2005 , Spain , Alianza ( ISBN 978 @-@ 84 @-@ 206 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 ) , pub date 2 January 2005 , paperback ( Spanish ) 
 A manuscript exists of the first draft of El Señor Presidente , which at that time ( July 1933 ) was entitled Tohil . This is now in the National Library of Paris . " Tohil 's Dance " is the title of chapter 37 of the finished work . The main differences between this draft and the published book can be found in chapter 12 ( " Camila " ) and in the fact that the former lacks the latter 's epilogue . 
 The first published version of El Señor Presidente came out in 1946 , while Asturias was semi @-@ exiled in Mexico City . The publication was financed by Asturias himself , aided by his parents , as the manuscript had been rejected by the publishers to whom he had sent it . This first edition suffered from numerous typographical errors . These errors were only rectified in the third edition , published in Argentina in 1952 , which also included numerous substantial changes introduced by Asturias himself . This edition is , therefore , the first definitive version of the book . As noted by Gerald Martin , editor of the 2000 critical edition , " measured in terms of its decisive historical influence , " the third ( Losada ) edition is " easily the most important of them all " . 
 = Anarchism in Cuba = 
 Anarchism as a social movement in Cuba held great influence with the working classes during the 19th and early 20th century . The movement was particularly strong following the abolition of slavery in 1886 , until it was repressed first in 1925 by President Gerardo Machado , and finally by Fidel Castro 's Marxist – Leninist government following the Cuban Revolution in the late 1950s . Cuban anarchism mainly took the form of anarcho @-@ collectivism based on the works of Mikhail Bakunin and , later , anarcho @-@ syndicalism . The Latin American labor and by extension the Cuban labor movement itself was at first more influenced by anarchism than Marxism . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Colonial era = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 19th century , Cuban society was highly stratified , consisting of a Spanish creole ruling class of tobacco , sugar , and coffee plantation owners , a middle class of black and Spanish plantation workers , and an underclass of black slaves . The upper echelons of society were also deeply divided between the creoles and Spaniards ( known as peninsulares ) , with the Spaniards benefiting greatly from the colonial regime . Cuba was a colony of Spain , although there were movements for independence , integration into the U.S. , and integration with Spain . The roots of anarchism were first seen in 1857 , when a Proudhonian mutualist society was founded . After being introduced to the ideas of Pierre @-@ Joseph Proudhon by José de Jesus Márquez , Saturnino Martínez ( an Asturian immigrant to Cuba ) founded the periodical La Aurora in 1865 . Directed at tobacco workers , it included the earliest advocation of cooperative societies in Cuba . By the Ten Years ' War , the insurgents against Spain included expatriates from the Paris Commune , and others influenced by Proudhon , including Salvador Cisneros Betancourt and Vicente García . 
 = = = = Early development of the movement = = = = 
 By the 1880s , the first explicitly anarchist influence had manifested when José C. Campos established links between Cuba and Spanish anarchists operating in Barcelona by importing anarchist pamphlets and newspapers . At the same time , many Spanish anarchists emigrated to Cuba , and it became very common for workers to read anarchist literature aloud in the tobacco factories , thereby greatly helping the dissemination of anarchist ideas amongst the workers . During the 1880s , and up through the early 1890s , Cuban anarchists favored an anarcho @-@ collectivist method of organizing and action similar to that of Spain 's Federación de Trabajadores de la Región Española ( Workers ' Federation of the Spanish Region , <unk> ) , following an " each to his contribution " line , as opposed to the " each to his need " line of the anarcho @-@ communists . 
 Enrique Roig San Martín founded the Centro de Instrucción y <unk> de Santiago de Las Vegas in 1882 , to advocate the organization of labor and distribute literature from anarcho @-@ collectivists in Spain . The Centro had a strict policy accepting all Cubans , " regardless of their social position , political tendency , and differences of color . " The same year , the Junta Central de <unk> ( Central Group of Artisans ) was founded following Roig San Martín 's statement that " no guild or working class organization should be tied to the feet of capital " . Roig San Martín wrote for El Boletín del <unk> de <unk> , and for the first explicitly anarchist periodical in Cuba , El Obrero , which was founded in 1883 by republican @-@ democrats but quickly turned into a mouthpiece for anarchists when Roig San Martín took over as editor . He then founded El Productor in 1887 . In addition to San Martín , El Productor had writers in the Cuban cities of Santiago de Las Vegas and <unk> , and the cities of Tampa and Key West in Florida , and published reprinted articles from the French @-@ language Le <unk> and Barcelona 's La <unk> . 
 Founded in 1885 , the Círculo de Trabajadores organization concentrated on educational and cultural activities , hosting a secular school for 500 poor students and meetings for workers ' groups . The next year , leaders of the Círculo ( with Enrique <unk> at the head ) formed an aid committee to raise funds for the legal troubles of eight Chicago anarchists who had been charged with murder in connection with the Haymarket affair . Within a month and a half , the committee had raised approximately US $ 1 @,@ 500 for the cause . In addition , a few days prior to the anarchists executions , the Círculo organized a demonstration of 2 @,@ 000 people in Havana to protest the state 's decision to execute the Americans . The Círculo and El Productor were both fined - the paper for an editorial written by Roig San Martín about the executions , and the Círculo for displaying a painting that commemorated the execution . The colonial government also prohibited the demonstrations that would be held every year on anniversary of the execution . 
 = = = = Strengthening organization and action = = = = 
 The first explicitly anarchist organization , the Alianza Obrera ( Workers ' Alliance ) , was founded in 1887 . This organization participated along with the <unk> de Trabajadores de la Habana ( Havana Workers ' Federation ) and El Productor in the first Congreso Obrero de Cuba ( Cuban Workers ' Congress ) , which took place on October 1 , 1887 . The congress was mostly attended by tobacco workers , though not exclusively . It issued a " dictum " encompassing six points : opposition to all vestiges of authority , unity among workers ' organizations through a federative pact , complete freedom of action among all groups , mutual cooperation , solidarity among all groups , and the prohibition within the federation of all political and religious doctrines . <unk> Martínez looked disapprovingly on the outcome of the congress , favoring more reformist ideas of organizing . This led to a rivalry between him and Roig San Martín and the splitting of the unions into two camps . 
 Soon after the congress , tobacco workers initiated a series of strikes at three factories , one of which lasted through to the end of November . Later , in the summer of 1888 , strikes by tobacco workers led to a lockout by factory owners in more than 100 factories . The Círculo de Trabajadores organized a collection drive to support the locked out workers , going so far as to send representatives to Key West , Florida to solicit donations from American tobacco workers . By October , the lockout was ended by factory owners agreeing to meet with workers in negotiations . The outcome of this situation was so favorable to the Alianza Obrera that the union saw its membership jump from 3 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 in the subsequent six months , making it the most powerful union in Cuba . The following year , Roig San Martín died at age 46 , just days after his release from jail by the Spanish colonial government ; his funeral was reportedly attended by 10 @,@ 000 mourners . Just a few months later , in response to a lockout / strike in the tobacco industry , the colonial head Manuel Salamanca y Negrete closed the manufacturer 's union , the Alianza Obrera and the Círculo de Trabajadores , although the four schools maintained by the Círculo were allowed to remain open , and the Círculo as a whole was allowed to reopen the following year by the new administration . 
 = = = = Government response and the War of Independence = = = = 
 The first May Day demonstration in Cuba was held in 1890 , and consisted of a march followed by a meeting addressed by 18 anarchist speakers . In the following days , strikes by workers in many industries led to the colonial government once again closing the Círculo de Trabajadores , only to rescind the decision when faced with a manifesto issued in protest by 2 @,@ 300 workers . Later that year , 11 anarchists were tried for the murder of Menéndez <unk> , a director of the moderate <unk> Obrera ( Workers ' Union ) . Though all 11 were found innocent , Captain @-@ General Camilo García <unk> used the situation as pretext for shutting down production of El Productor , and repression of anarchists in general . In 1892 , another labor congress was held in which it reconfirmed its anarcho @-@ syndicalist principles and expressing solidarity with the women in the working class ( a new idea for a predominantly male working class that felt competed against by women in the workplace ) , declaring , " It is an urgent necessity not to forget women , who are beginning to fill the workshops of several industries . They are driven by necessity and by bourgeois greed to compete with us . We cannot oppose it ; let us help them . " However , the outcome of this was government suppression of the movement by means of deportation , imprisonment , the suspension of the right to free assembly , and closing of organizations ' headquarters to quell organizing efforts . 
 During the war of independence from Spain , anarchists joined others in the labor movement in distributing propaganda to Spanish soldiers , urging them not to oppose the separatists , and to join the anarchist cause . A few years previously , anarchists had embraced the ideas espoused by Spanish anarchists of organizing not just in unions , but also forming anarchist groups to educate people and commit violent anti @-@ state acts known as " propaganda of the deed " , which carried on into the war of independence . Anarchists placed bombs that blew up bridges and gas pipelines , and contributed to the failed separatist attempt to assassinate the colonial head Captain General <unk> <unk> in 1896 . This led to the government further repressing of anarchists , closing the Sociedad General de Trabajadores ( which grew out of the Círculo ) , mass deportations of activists , and even the forbidding of the <unk> in the workplace . 
 = = = The early 20th century = = = 
 Following the Spanish – American War , which gave Cuba its independence from Spain , many anarchists were dissatisfied with the conditions that persisted after independence . They cited conditions that were perpetuated by the new government , like suppression of labor movements , US occupations , and dissatisfaction with the school systems . By 1899 , anarchist workers had reorganized themselves , under the Alianza de Trabajadores ( Worker 's Alliance ) . By September of this year , five of the groups organizers had been arrested , following a mason 's strike which spread to all of the construction trade . Around this time , anarchist organizer Errico Malatesta visited Cuba , giving speeches , and interviews to several periodicals , but was soon barred from further speaking engagements by civil governor Emilio Nuñez . Around 1902 @-@ 03 , anarchists and other labor organizers began to attempt to organize the sugar industry , then the largest industry in Cuba . But owners responded quickly , and two workers were murdered , and the crimes never solved . 
 As well , anarchist activists focussed much of their energy towards preparing society for social revolution through education . Anarchists ran schools for children to run counter to the Catholic schools and public schools , believing that religious schools were anathema to their ideas of freedom , and that public schools were too often used to instill ideas of " patriotic nationalism " and discourage free thought in children . In issues of ¡ Tierra ! , a weekly anarchist newspaper ( published from 1899 through 1915 , putting out more than 600 issues ) , writers denounced the public school requirement to pay allegiance to the Cuban flag , and encouraged teaching children that the flag was a symbol of " closed mindedness and divisiveness . " Anarchists claimed that students enrolled in such schooling would become " cannon fodder " for a conflict of Liberal and Conservative Party leaders in 1906 , which caused the US to intervene and occupy Cuba through 1909 . Though anarchists had been running schools since that of the Círculo de Trabajadores , it wasn 't until 1906 that the schools began to take on a less traditional flavor . In 1908 , anarchists included a manifesto in issues of ¡ Tierra ! and La Voz del <unk> , calling for the establishment of schools modeled after Francesc Ferrer 's Escuela Moderna ( Modern School ) . 
 = = = = Repression and syndicalist activity = = = = 
 In 1911 , following an unsuccessful strike by tobacco workers , bakers , and teamsters , all supported by ¡ Tierra ! , the new Governmental Secretary , Gerardo Machado had many Spanish anarchists deported and Cuban anarchists jailed . The repressive policies instituted at this time would continue for 20 years . After García Menocal seized control of the Cuban government in 1917 , several general strikes were met with violence from the state . Several anarchist organizers were killed by the state , including <unk> Fernández and Luis Díaz Blanco . However , anarchists responded in kind with their own violent acts . In time , a group of 77 that the government labeled an " anarcho @-@ syndicalist mob " were deported to Spain . As well , anarchist publications were outlawed ( ¡ Tierra ! having been shut down in 1915 ) , and the anarchist Centro Obrero ( Worker 's Center ) was forced to close . Following the anarchist Congress of 1920 in Havana , several bombings took place , including that of the Teatro Nacional while Enrico Caruso was performing , earning 15 to 20 times the yearly salary of an average Cuban worker for the single performance . The following year , Menocal lost control of the government to Alfredo Zayas y Alfonso , leading to a proliferation of anarchist activity . The ¡ Tierra ! group began to publish books and pamphlets , and at least six other regular anarchist periodicals were publishing . 
 At this time , the anarcho @-@ syndicalists were still at the head of the labor movement in Cuba . However , despite the maritime , railway , restaurant and tobacco industries being controlled by organized anarchists , it wasn 't until 1925 that a major anarchist federation was successfully organized by workers . Similar to the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo of Spain , non @-@ anarchist members of the Confederación Nacional Obrera Cubana ( National Cuban Workers Confederation ) , eventually formed the Communist Party of Cuba in August 1925 . By this time , many anarchists ( including Alfredo López and Carlos <unk> ) had become swept up in the excitement about the Russian Revolution , and had become party to more authoritarian forms of organizing . Many strikes occurred in the fall of 1925 , and the government , once again under the leadership of Machado , was quick to suppress the labor movement . Several labor leaders were shot , and several hundred Spanish anarchists were deported in one month . Machado stated " You are right - I don 't know what anarchism is , what socialism is , what communism is . For me they are all the same . All bad patriots . " Alfredo López , then secretary @-@ general of the CNOC , was arrested first in October 1925 , and encouraged to join the government , followed by a second arrest in July 1926 . He was " disappeared " at this point , only to have his body found in 1933 , after the fall of the Machado government . 
 = = = = Reorganization after the departure of López and the Spaniards = = = = 
 With López gone , control of the CNOC was now fought over by anarchists and Communists . By 1930 @-@ 1 , CNOC had been taken over by the Communists , with anarchists being turned over to the police , still under the control of Machado . Many of the Spanish anarchists involved decided to go back to Spain . Following the new government 's passage of a law dictating that at least half of an employer 's employees be Cuban @-@ born , a large number of Cuba 's Spanish @-@ born anarchists were forced by economic necessity to return to Spain , which greatly diminished the clout of the anarchist movement in Cuba . However , soon the Juventud Libertaria ( Libertarian Youth ) was founded by a younger generation of anarchists , and by 1936 , after the start of the Spanish Civil War , Cuban anarchists had founded the Solidaridad Internacional <unk> ( SIA ) , to help send money and arms to the CNT and FAI . Many Cuban @-@ born anarchists went to Spain to join the fight , alongside many Spanish @-@ born anarchists exiled from Cuba . 
 With the rights guaranteed by the 1940 Constitution , anarchists could once again organize themselves with less risk of death or deportation . The SIA and the <unk> de Grupos <unk> de Cuba dissolved themselves , their thousands of members forming the <unk> Libertaria de Cuba ( Cuban Libertarian Association ) . The ALC held the Primer Congreso Nacional Libertario ( First National Libertarian Congress ) in 1944 , electing a Secretary General , and an Organizational Secretary . This was followed in 1948 by a second congress , which featured the German anarchist Augustin Souchy delivering the opening address . Also , an official propaganda organ for the ALC was chosen , <unk> Gastronómica , which was published monthly up until it was shut down by the Castro government in December 1960 . A third congress was held in 1950 , with a heavy focus on keeping the labor movement apolitical and free of interference from politicians and bureaucrats . By the mid @-@ 1950s , Fulgencio Batista was once again in power after a successful coup d 'état . Many anarchists joined guerrilla groups fighting the Batista government , including that of Fidel Castro 's 26th of July Movement , which led to Batista 's fleeing Cuba on the last day of 1958 . A key figure of the 26th of July Movement was Camilo Cienfuegos , an anarchist from a Spanish family who fled the civil war , who was chosen to fight by Che Guevara " on account of the audacity of his blows , his tenacity , his intelligence , and unequalled devotion . Camilo practiced loyalty like a religion . " 
 = = = Post @-@ revolutionary period = = = 
 = = = = 1960 – 1961 = = = = 
 In the first days after taking power , Castro expelled known anarcho @-@ syndicalists from the <unk> de Trabajadores de Cuba ( Cuban Workers Confederation , CTC ) . Because of this , and a general suspicion towards governments , the ALC 's national council issued a manifesto denouncing the Castro government and its actions . The periodical Solidaridad Gastronómica also announced their displeasure with the government , saying that it was impossible for a government to be " revolutionary " . In January 1960 , the ALC convened an assembly , calling for support of the Cuban Revolution , while also declaring opposition to totalitarianism and dictatorships . By the end of the year , the group 's journal ( Solidaridad Gastronómica ) would be shut down by the government . The final issue of the journal commemorated the death of Spanish anarchist Buenaventura Durruti , and contained an editorial declaring that " dictatorships of the proletariat " were impossible , opining that no dictatorship could be of the proletariat , only dominate it . 
 In the summer of that year , the German anarchist Augustin Souchy was invited by the Castro government to survey the agrarian sector . He was not impressed with what he found , and declared in his pamphlet <unk> sobre la Revolución Cubana that the system was too close to the Soviet model . Three days after Souchy departed Cuba , the entire print run was seized by the government , and destroyed . However , an Argentinian anarchist publisher republished the pamphlet the following December . Around the same time , the ALC , alarmed at the movement of the Castro government towards a Marxist – Leninist form of rule , issued a declaration , under the name Grupo de <unk> <unk> to prevent reaction against the ALC 's membership . The document declared opposition to the centralism , authoritarian tendencies , and militarism of the new government . After a denunciation of the document by the Secretary General of the Partido <unk> Cubano ( PCC ) , anarchists failed in their search for a printer who would publish a reaction to the denunciation . The publication El Libertario published its last edition that summer . 
 Following these actions , many anarchists chose to go underground , resorting to " clandestine direct action " as their only means of struggle . According to Cuban anarchist Casto Moscú , " An infinity of manifestos were written denouncing the false postulates of the Castro revolution and calling the populace to oppose it ... plans were put into effect to sabotage the basic things sustaining the state . " After Manuel Gaona Sousa , one of the founders of the ALC and a former anarchist , issued a manifesto in support of the government , declaring all those opposing the government to be " traitors " , Moscú and another anarchist , Manuel González were arrested in Havana . When they were freed , they both immediately went to the Mexican Embassy , where they were accepted . Both eventually made their way from Mexico to Miami , Florida , where they would reunite with many of their Cuban associates . 
 = = = = Exile = = = = 
 Beginning in mid – 1960 , but greatly accelerating in the summer of 1961 , great numbers of Cuban anarchists migrated to the United States . That summer , in New York , the Movimiento Libertario Cubano en el <unk> ( Cuban Anarchist Movement in Exile [ MLCE ] ) was formed by some of these exiles , making contact with Spanish anarchists exiled following the Spanish Civil War , who were also living in New York . They also made contact with Sam Dolgoff and the New York @-@ based Libertarian League . Very quickly , donations to exiled Cuban anarchists were collected from around the world . However , donations soon dried up following the publishing of the Gaona manifesto , as many anarchists in other countries were swayed by the arguments in the document . In response to the widespread effect of the manifesto , the MLCE issued the Boletín de <unk> Libertaria with support from the Libertarian League , and the paper of the Federación Libertaria Argentina ( FLA ) . Among many others , the FLA printed an essay by Abelardo Iglesias titled Revolución y <unk> which stated the differences the Cuban anarchists saw between Marxist and anarchist revolution : " To expropriate capitalist enterprises , handing them over to the workers and technicians , THIS IS REVOLUTION . But to convert them into state monopolies in which the only right of the producer is to obey , THIS IS <unk> @-@ REVOLUTION . " 
 While Cubans exiled in the U.S. were trying to raise money to support anarchists imprisoned in Cuba , the MLCE was being denounced by anarchists in the U.S. and other countries as puppets of the CIA , and " mere anti @-@ communists " . The anarcho @-@ pacifist periodical Liberation printed pro @-@ Castro articles , leading to a protest at their offices by the MLCE and Libertarian League . But in 1965 , the MLCE sent Iglesias to Italy to present the case against Castro to the Federazione Anarchica Italiana ( <unk> ) . The <unk> was convinced , and published condemnations in Italian anarchist periodicals such as <unk> Nova , and collected signatures to the condemnation from the Federación Libertaria Argentina , the Federación Libertaria Mexicana , the Anarchist Federation of London , the Sveriges <unk> Central @-@ Organisation , the French Anarchist Federation , and the Movimiento Libertario Español . 
 Despite the denunciations from the anarchist organizations and periodicals around the world , opinion began to change in 1976 , when Sam Dolgoff published his book The Cuban Revolution : A Critical Perspective . [ 1 ] As well , in 1979 , the MLCE began publishing a new magazine titled Guángara Libertaria , reprinting Alfredo Gómez ' article The Cuban Anarchists , or the Bad Conscience of Anarchism . In 1980 , the MLCE and Guángara Libertaria supported the mass evacuation of Cubans from Cuba after many Cuban dissidents occupied the Peruvian embassy in Havana . Many of those who left Cuba at this time joined the editorial collective of Guángara . By 1985 , the collective had correspondents around the world , including Mexico , Hawaii , Spain , and Venezuela . The magazine reached a press run of 5000 copies in 1987 , making it the largest circulation anarchist periodical in the U.S. However , in 1992 , the collective ceased publication of GL , though many of its members continued to publish writings . By 2008 , the MLCE was structured as an affinity group and coordinating network for Cuban anarchists of diverse tendencies . 
 = Audition ( Glee ) = 
 " Audition " is the second season premiere and twenty @-@ third episode overall of the American television series Glee . The episode was written by Ian Brennan , directed by Brad Falchuk , and premiered on the Fox network on September 21 , 2010 . In " Audition " , the glee club members attempt to attract new recruits , including foreign exchange student Sunshine Corazon ( Charice ) and transfer student Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) . A new football coach , Shannon Beiste ( Dot @-@ Marie Jones ) , arrives at McKinley High , and school blogger Jacob Ben Israel ( Josh Sussman ) provides updates on the glee club 's summer break . 
 The episode features eight musical and dance performances , five of which were released as singles , available for download . Musical performances attracted mixed reviews from critics . Lea Michele 's rendition of " What I Did for Love " from A Chorus Line was described by Robert Bianco of USA Today as putting " every amateur musical performance on every TV talent show this year to shame " , though both Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times and Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club found it incongruous in context . Charice 's performances were well received by American and Filipino critics , and Alicia Keys expressed approval of the Glee cast cover of " Empire State of Mind " . 
 " Audition " was watched by 12 @.@ 45 million American viewers , and attained Glee 's series high Nielsen rating in the 18 – 34 demographic . It received generally favorable reviews from critics , and Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack and the New York Post 's Jarett Wieselman both stated that it had assuaged their fears of the show declining in quality in its second season . Brett Berk of Vanity Fair and Rolling Stone 's Erica Futterman both felt the show had returned to form following an increasingly disappointing first season . Several critics highlighted racial issues with the episode : Fred Topel of Hollywood News described a scene involving Sunshine as " downright racist " , and Brittany Drye of The Stir also questioned the pairing of Asian characters Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) and Tina Cohen @-@ Chang ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Following New Directions ' loss at Regionals , the glee club members attempt to recruit new students to bolster their competition performances . Upon learning that Nationals will be held in New York this year , they decide to perform " Empire State of Mind " in the school courtyard , hoping to pique the interest of their schoolmates . Foreign exchange student Sunshine Corazon ( Charice ) from the Philippines and transfer student Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) take notice and are intrigued by the performance . Club co @-@ captain Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) later encounters Sunshine in the girls ' bathroom , and they sing an impromptu duet of " Telephone " by Lady Gaga and Beyoncé . Rachel is intimidated by her performance , and directs Sunshine to a crack house instead of the auditorium in an attempt to sabotage her glee club audition . Rachel is reprimanded by glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) when this is discovered . Sunshine later auditions successfully , impressing the club members with her rendition of " Listen " from Dreamgirls . 
 Co @-@ captain Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) encourages Sam to audition after overhearing him singing " Every Rose Has Its Thorn " by Poison . In the choir room , Sam , Finn , Mike ( Harry Shum Jr . ) , Artie ( Kevin McHale ) , and Puck ( Mark Salling ) sing Travie McCoy 's " Billionaire " together . However , Sam declines to audition due to the low social status of the glee club members . 
 Shannon Beiste ( Dot @-@ Marie Jones ) is appointed as the new coach of McKinley High 's failing football team , resulting in reductions to the glee and cheerleading budgets in favor of the football team . Will and cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) team up , hoping to drive Beiste out of the school and have their budgets restored . Amidst her scheming with Will , Sue also demotes Santana ( Naya Rivera ) from her position as head cheerleader after learning she has had breast implants , replacing her with Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) . Artie asks Finn to help him join the football team . He hopes to win back his girlfriend Tina ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) , who has broken up with him to date Mike . Beiste believes that Finn is colluding against her by forcing her to reject a wheelchair @-@ dependent student , and drops Finn from the team , appointing Sam as the new quarterback . Will is unable to convince her to take Finn back , but realizes that his hostile behavior is hurting his new colleague . Later , he defends Beiste from a Sue @-@ driven sexual harassment accusation by Brittany ( Heather Morris ) , and apologizes , re @-@ earning Sue 's enmity . 
 Acting on her refuelled rivalry with Will , Sue contacts Dustin Goolsby ( Cheyenne Jackson ) , the new director of rival glee club Vocal Adrenaline . Dustin is able to secure permanent US residency for Sunshine and her mother on the proviso that she joins his club . Sunshine confesses that she felt driven out of New Directions by Rachel 's hostile behavior . After admitting that she values herself above the other club members , Rachel sings " What I Did for Love " from A Chorus Line alone in the auditorium , before heading to the choir room to apologize . 
 = = Production = = 
 On January 11 , 2010 , Fox President Kevin Reilly announced that Glee had been picked up for a second season , and would be holding nationwide , open casting calls to fill three new roles . The auditions were intended to be the subject of a multi @-@ part television special , which would air in the lead @-@ in to the second season premiere , with the new cast members revealed in the first episode . Series creator Ryan Murphy stated that Glee aimed to become " the first interactive musical comedy on television " . Ultimately , the reality show did not go ahead , due to Murphy 's desire to concentrate on the main series and fear that the distraction of the reality show might damage Glee . 
 As of " Audition " , formerly recurring cast members Heather Morris and Naya Rivera were promoted to series regulars as cheerleaders and glee club members Brittany Pierce and Santana Lopez respectively . The episode introduced four new cast members . Chord Overstreet plays Sam Evans , a recurring character who is initially an athletic protégé of glee club member Finn , but becomes his rival . Charice appears as Sunshine Corazon , a foreign exchange student and rival to Rachel . Charice was a fan of the show during its first season , and had her manager approach Murphy about casting her in season two . Dot @-@ Marie Jones was cast as football coach Shannon Beiste , replacing season one cast member Patrick Gallagher as Ken Tanaka . Cheyenne Jackson appears as Dustin Goolsby , the new director of rival glee club Vocal Adrenaline , replacing Shelby Corcoran ( Idina Menzel ) . Jackson was originally considered for the role of Will , and in 2009 was cast in the Glee episode " Acafellas " as Vocal Adrenaline choreographer Dakota Stanley , but he was unable to perform due to illness . Murphy described Dustin as " a complete villain " , and stated that he would " become very intertwined in Will 's life " . 
 = = Music = = 
 The episode featured cover versions of " Empire State of Mind " by Jay @-@ Z featuring Alicia Keys , Lady Gaga 's " Telephone " featuring Beyoncé , " Billionaire " by Travie McCoy featuring Bruno Mars and " Every Rose Has Its Thorn " by Poison . " What I Did for Love " from A Chorus Line , " Getting to Know You " from The King and I , and " Listen " from the film adaptation of Dreamgirls were also performed vocally , while " The Power " by Snap ! featured as a dance performance . All of the songs performed in the episode except " Every Rose Has Its Thorn " , " Getting to Know You " and " The Power " were released as singles , available for download , and " Empire State of Mind " and " Billionaire " are included on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 4 . Following their release , over 250 @,@ 000 Glee tracks were downloaded digitally within the first forty @-@ eight hours , and over 409 @,@ 000 within the first week , according to Nielsen SoundScan . Additionally , " Empire State of Mind " saw the largest first @-@ day sales for any Glee cover released to that point . 
 Musical performances in the episode attracted mixed reviews . USA Today 's Robert Bianco deemed the highlight " What I Did for Love " , and wrote that Michele 's performance " puts every amateur musical performance on every TV talent show this year to shame . " Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal agreed that it was the best song of the episode , " done with smart aplomb [ and ] heart " . In contrast , Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times called it a " non @-@ sequitur song " which " seemed shoehorned in by Michele 's agent " , Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone deemed it touching but unmemorable , and Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club stated that it was " well @-@ performed " but " so poorly chosen that an emotional moment becomes unintentionally hilarious " . 
 VanDerWerff felt that there were " some odd song choices " throughout , particularly Overstreet 's introductory number , which he called " adequate " , though he noted that it " doesn 't do nearly as good a job at introducing his character " as Charice 's " Listen " . Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack graded the performance of " Listen " an " A + " , and wrote that he wanted to give it a standing ovation . Jacque Wilson of CNN praised both of Charice 's performances and hoped that she would reappear in the series , while Ricky Lo of The Philippine Star discussed <unk> reception of her role and said that her singing was " drop @-@ dead stunning " and that she " really made Filipinos proud . " 
 MTV 's Kyle Anderson commented that the songs overall were " sharp and well @-@ presented " ; he highlighted the two hip @-@ hop numbers for particular praise . Anderson felt that the choreography of " Empire State of Mind " compensated for any awkwardness in its delivery , and lauded McHale 's " unusual swagger " during " Billionaire " . Emily Yahr of the Washington Post deemed " Billionaire " the best performance of the episode ; her colleague Lisa de Moraes agreed , though she characterized the runner @-@ up performance of " Empire State of Mind " as " maybe @-@ trying @-@ too @-@ hard " . Aly Semigran , also writing for MTV , felt " Empire State of Mind " was lacking the gravitas of the original version , but reported that Keys had deemed the Glee cover " amazing " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Audition " was watched by 12 @.@ 45 million American viewers . The episode led in the 18 – 49 demographic for the night , attaining a 5 @.@ 6 / 16 Nielsen rating / share , up 50 percent on the first season premiere , " Showmance " , in September 2009 . It was Glee 's second @-@ highest rated telecast ever among adults 18 – 49 , and its series high among adults 18 – 34 , attaining a 6 @.@ 4 / 20 rating / share . In Canada , " Audition " was watched by 2 @.@ 24 million viewers . It was the most @-@ watched programme of the night , and beat Dancing with the Stars , its closest competitor in the 8 pm timeslot , by 170 percent in the 18 – 49 demographic . In Australia , the episode drew 1 @.@ 23 million viewers and was the seventh most @-@ watched programme of the night . In the UK , the episode was watched by 2 @.@ 999 million viewers ( 2 @.@ 486 million on E4 , and 513 @,@ 000 on E4 + 1 ) , becoming the most @-@ watched show on E4 and E4 + 1 for the week , and the second most @-@ watched show on cable for the week , as well as hitting a series high for the show . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The episode received generally favorable reviews from critics . VanDerWerff graded the episode " A − " . He felt it was imperfect , but that " Audition " demonstrated the Glee executives had learned " a surprising amount about what does and doesn 't work within its format " . He added , " as a season premiere and promise for what 's to come ? ' Audition ' is very good indeed . " David Hinckley of the Daily News rated " Audition " 4 / 5 . He felt that the episode was " a little self @-@ indulgent " with " a dizzying series of cross @-@ plots " , but hoped that it was setting the foundations for an " interesting , evolving story " in the season to come . Bianco called the episode a " heady , sometimes @-@ too @-@ rich mix of song @-@ and @-@ dance magic , high school musical spoof and overall excess " , and concluded : " It 's a mess , but it 's the kind of joyous mess that makes you think order can be overrated . " Both Amy Reiter of the Los Angeles Times and Jessica <unk> of CBS News praised the episode 's musical numbers and Sue 's lines , while Stack and the New York Post 's Jarett Wieselman deemed the episode to have assuaged their worries about Glee experiencing a " sophomore slump " and commented positively on the opening scene that directly addressed criticism of the first season . Vanity Fair 's Brett Berk received the episode positively , despite having been disappointed with the second half of the first season , a sentiment shared by Futterman , who deemed " Audition " a " fresh start " after " a first season that devolved into a frenzy of too many songs and not enough long @-@ term plot " . 
 TV Guide 's Matt Roush wrote that " Audition " was " far from [ his ] favorite episode " , disliking the " cruelty and dirty tricks " employed by the characters , though he commented that " the moments that soar remind us why this is a genuine pop @-@ culture phenom " . James Poniewozik of Time called it a " solid " episode , one which was " neither awful nor amazing " , but set up promising storylines for the season ahead . He felt there were no stand out musical performances , but commented , " it gave the season some emotional grounding [ ... ] It showed us a Glee that 's not working double @-@ time to give us everything we want all at once , and that 's pretty much what I want from it . " John Doyle of The Globe and Mail wrote that , with " Audition " , Glee had become formulaic , and asserted that " Glee fanatics won 't be disappointed . The rest of us are . " 
 In an overall positive review of the episode , Fred Topel of Hollywood News wrote that the opening scenes that addressed fan criticisms were a little too harsh on the show 's fictional characters , having gone overboard to the point of offensiveness . He highlighted as a concern the " downright racist " scene ten minutes into the show between Rachel and Sunshine which he could have " done without " . Meghan Carlson of BuddyTV also described Rachel 's behavior in the aforementioned scene as " totally , patronizingly racist " . Writing for The Stir , Brittany Drye asked " Is Glee racist ? " , and cited several moments in " Audition " which could be perceived as racist . She found the scene with Rachel screaming at Sunshine in the bathroom in broken English to be distasteful , and also highlighted the pairing of Tina and Mike ( noting their shared surname , " Chang " ) and the joke of Jacob assuming they are a couple because they are both Asian . However , Drye speculated that in attempting " self @-@ aware racism " the show was intentionally trying to point out the inanity of racist beliefs , and concluded that Glee 's self @-@ awareness in this matter was its saving grace . 
 = Ernest Brooks ( photographer ) = 
 Ernest Brooks ( 23 February 1878 — after 1936 ) was a British photographer , best known for his war photography from the First World War . He was the first official photographer to be appointed by the British military , and produced several thousand images between 1915 and 1918 , more than a tenth of all British official photographs taken during the war . His work was often relatively posed and formal , but several of his less conventional images are marked by a distinctive use of silhouette . Before and immediately after the war he worked as an official photographer to the Royal Family , but was dismissed from this appointment and stripped of his official honours in 1925 . 
 = = Career = = 
 Born on 23 February 1878 , he grew up near Windsor , Berkshire , where his father worked in the Great Park , and as a child frequently encountered members of the Royal Family . After leaving school in 1890 , he worked as a boy on the estates , where one of his duties was to look after a mule given to Queen Victoria by Lord Kitchener . In 1892 he enlisted in the 3rd Dragoon Guards , and after leaving the army joined the Glamorganshire Yeomanry as a volunteer . 
 His first encounter with photography came after he took a position in the household of Lady Vivian , widow of Hussey Vivian , 3rd Baron Vivian ; Lady Vivian 's twin daughters each had a camera , and Brooks was entrusted with developing the films . He bought a camera himself , paying by weekly shilling instalments , which he used to take pictures of prominent people for publication ; his first portrait was sold to several newspapers through an agency , earning him the sum of seven guineas . 
 Realising that he could support himself comfortably on this income , Brooks left Lady Vivian 's employment , and returned to Windsor . Here , he worked as a freelance newspaper photographer , using his contacts within the royal household to arrange access to his subjects . After a short period , he became an official photographer to the Royal Family . By 1906 he was established enough to accompany Princess Ena to Spain for her marriage to King Alfonso XIII , where he took the first formal portrait of the couple before their wedding . Brooks ' photographs were published in a wide range of newspapers , including the Daily Mirror , and the Manchester Guardian ; his contract with the Royal Family prevented him from selling exclusive rights to any particular publication . Each photograph sold for around 10s 6d . 
 In late 1910 , he accompanied the Duke of Connaught to South Africa , and in 1911 accompanied King George V to India for the Delhi Durbar , where he had the opportunity to photograph the King on a tiger hunt as well as in more formal contexts . After returning from India he left the royal household to open a studio on Buckingham Palace Road in central London , though he continued to describe himself as the Official Photographer to the King and Queen . 
 After the outbreak of the First World War he served in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve , enlisting on 25 January 1915 . When the Gallipoli landings were being prepared , Winston Churchill , who had himself been a war correspondent , arranged for there to be journalists and photographers accompanying the expeditionary force . Brooks , as a professional photographer already in uniform , was appointed as the Admiralty official photographer . In March 1916 , he was transferred from the Admiralty to the War Office , given the honorary rank of second lieutenant and appointed the official photographer for the Western Front . He was the only professional photographer to cover the Battle of the Somme , recording the attack on the first day from the front @-@ line trenches near Beaumont Hamel . In 1917 he was appointed a Chevalier of the Belgian Order of the Crown . In 1918 , he covered the Italian campaign and naval activity . The same year , he was awarded the French Croix de Guerre . 
 He later returned to royal service , accompanying the Prince of Wales on his tour of Canada and the United States in 1919 , and Australia in 1920 . The American tour posed some problems with people trying to capitalise on the Prince 's appearance for publicity purposes ; one prominent actress , Mildred Harris Chaplin , passed herself off as the niece of a local dignitary in order to be photographed , whilst another simply offered Brooks a bribe of a thousand dollars to arrange the picture . He admitted that he " nearly gave in " , but backed out at the last minute for fear of offending the Prince . He was less successful in avoiding offence with another photograph , this time of the Prince in his bath during the voyage ; after it was published , George V strongly objected to it as inappropriate , and Brooks was reprimanded . 
 For reasons that were not publicly disclosed , his appointment as a royal photographer was cancelled in 1925 . His appointment as Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) and his British Empire Medal ( BEM ) were also " cancelled and annulled " . A subsequent newspaper story suggested that his downfall was linked to another indiscreet photograph of the Prince of Wales , taken by Brooks and widely published , showing the Prince dressed in a woman 's kimono and wig after appearing in a play . 
 However , he continued to work as a photographer ; in 1928 , he was convicted of disorderly behaviour outside a ball in Grosvenor Square , after claiming that he was acquainted with the hostess and that had been invited there to take pictures . He continued in photojournalism at least as late as 1936 , when he is credited with taking two photographs of Jerome Brannigan being arrested , after Brannigan had attempted to assassinate King Edward VIII . 
 = = Photographic work = = 
 Much of his wartime work , though technically proficient and consistent , was rather conventional , often involving posed photographs rather than more candid impromptu shots of his subjects . His work was noted as being characterised by a " conscious seeking after a publishable photograph " , and it was recorded that he occasionally persuaded soldiers to pose for staged pictures of routine activity in the trenches . However , he was insistent that combat photographs were never faked – " we have strict instructions not to do – we have never done it " . He had a fondness for a dramatic use of silhouette , with images composed to show soldiers walking along a ridge against the light . These images , where individual men were not easily recognisable , often were used to illustrate the " anonymous heroes " of the war . 
 Brooks was the first and the longest @-@ serving of the British war photographers , and took more than 4 @,@ 400 images . This was the most of any individual photographer , and represented more than 10 % of all the official photographs . A large collection of his photographs is now held by the Imperial War Museum , and a second collection is held by the National Library of Scotland as part of Earl Haig 's papers ; both have been digitised . 
 A number of formal images from his pre @-@ war service with the Royal Family are held by the National Portrait Gallery , including several from the Delhi Durbar as well as a portrait of Prince Arthur of Connaught and Princess Alexandra , taken at their wedding . Two portraits of the young Prince John , both in 1913 . 
 = Little Nemo ( 1911 film ) = 
 Little Nemo , also known as Winsor McCay , the Famous Cartoonist of the N.Y. Herald and His Moving Comics , is a 1911 silent animated short film by American cartoonist Winsor McCay . One of the earliest animated films , it was McCay 's first , and featured characters from McCay 's comic strip Little Nemo in Slumberland . Its expressive character animation distinguished the film from the experiments of earlier animators . 
 Inspired by flip books his son brought home , McCay came to see the potential of the animated film medium . He claimed to be the first to make such films , though James Stuart Blackton and Émile Cohl were among those who preceded him . The short 's four thousand drawings on rice paper were shot at Vitagraph Studios under Blackton 's supervision . Most of the film 's running time is made up of a live @-@ action sequence in which McCay bets his colleagues that he can make drawings that move . He wins the bet with four minutes of animation in which the Little Nemo characters perform , interact , and metamorphose to McCay 's whim . 
 Little Nemo debuted in movie theaters on April 8 , 1911 , and four days later McCay began using it as part of his vaudeville act . Its good reception motivated him to hand @-@ color each of the animated frames of the originally black @-@ and @-@ white film . The film 's success led McCay to devote more time to animation . He followed up Little Nemo with How a Mosquito Operates in 1912 and his best @-@ known film , Gertie the Dinosaur , in 1914 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Winsor McCay ( c . 1867 – 71 – 1934 ) had worked prolifically as a commercial artist and cartoonist by the time he started making newspaper comic strips such as Dream of the Rarebit Fiend ( 1904 – 11 ) and his signature strip Little Nemo ( 1905 – 14 ) . In 1906 , McCay began performing on the vaudeville circuit , doing chalk talks — performances in which he drew before live audiences . 
 Inspired by flip books his son Robert brought home , McCay " came to see the possibility of making moving pictures " of his cartoons . McCay , then in his early forties , claimed he was " the first man in the world to make animated films " , but he was likely familiar with the earlier work of American James Stuart Blackton and the French Émile Cohl . In 1900 , Blackton produced The Enchanted Drawing , a trick film in which an artist interacts with a drawing on an easel . Blackton used chalk drawings in 1906 to animate the film Humorous Phases of Funny Faces , and used stop motion techniques to animate a scene in the 1907 film The Haunted Hotel . Cohl 's films , such as 1908 's <unk> , were dreamlike <unk> pieces in which characters and scenes continually changed shape . Cohl 's films were first distributed in the United States in 1909 , the year McCay said he first became interested in animation . According to McCay biographer John Canemaker , McCay combined the interactive qualities of Blackton 's films with the abstract , shapeshifting qualities of Cohl 's into his own films . In the films of all three , the artist interacts with the animation . 
 = = = Little Nemo = = = 
 Considered McCay 's masterpiece , Little Nemo in Slumberland debuted in October 1905 as a full @-@ page Sunday strip the New York Herald . Its child protagonist , whose appearance was based on McCay 's son Robert , had fabulous dreams that would be interrupted with his awakening in the last panel . McCay experimented with the form of the comics page , timing and pacing , the size and shape of panels , perspective , architectural and other details . 
 The strip has seen a number of other adaptations . An extravagant $ 100 @,@ 000 Little Nemo stage show with score by Victor Herbert and lyrics by Harry B. Smith played to sold @-@ out audiences in 1907 . A joint American @-@ Japanese feature @-@ length film Little Nemo : Adventures in Slumberland appeared in 1989 , with contributions by Ray Bradbury , Chris Columbus and Moebius . Little Nemo : The Dream Master was a 1990 side @-@ scrolling platform video game adaptation of the 1989 film . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Following credits proclaiming McCay as " The Famous Cartoonist of the New York Herald " and " the first artist to attempt drawing pictures that will move " , McCay sits in a restaurant with a group of colleagues , cartoonist George McManus , actor John Bunny and publisher Eugene V. Brewster among them . McCay bets the group that in one month he can make 4 @,@ 000 drawings move . The group laughs and gestures that he is drunk or crazy . McCay sets to work in a studio where he directs workers to move around bundles of paper and barrels of ink . A month later , McCay gathers his colleagues in front of a film projector . McCay rapidly sketches characters from the cast of his Little Nemo comic strip . 
 McCay places a drawing of the character Flip in a wooden slot in front of the camera . The words " Watch me move " appear above Flip 's head , and he begins to make gestures while smoking his cigar . Blocks fall from the sky and assemble themselves into the character Impie , and the pair 's figures distort , disappear , and reappear , before a fantastically @-@ dressed Little Nemo magically materializes . Nemo prevents the two others from fighting and takes control of their forms — he stretches and squashes them with the raising and lowering of his arms . Nemo then draws the Princess and brings her to animated life . He gives her a rose which has suddenly grown nearby , just as a gigantic dragon appears . The pair seat themselves on a throne in the dragon 's mouth and wave to the audience as the dragon carries them away . 
 Flip and Impie attempt to follow the dragon in a <unk> , but the car explodes and sends them into the air . Doctor Pill arrives to help , but cannot find anyone until Flip and Impie land on him . The pair try to help the doctor to his feet when the animation freezes . The camera zooms out to reveal the serial number " No. 4000 " , and a thumb holding the drawing . 
 = = Production = = 
 By late 1910 , McCay had made the 4000 rice @-@ paper drawings for the animated portion of the film . Each was assigned a serial number , and marks were made in the top corners for registration . They were mounted on sheets of cardboard to make them easier to handle and photograph . Before he had them photographed , he tested them on a hand @-@ cranked 24 × 12 × 20 @-@ inch ( 61 × 30 × 51 cm ) Mutoscope @-@ like machine to ensure the animation was fluid . Photography was done at the Vitagraph Studios under the supervision of Blackton . The animated portion took up about four minutes of the film 's total length . In only one sequence did McCay use an animation loop for a repeated action ; re @-@ used a series of seven drawings six times ( three forward , three back ) to have Flip move his cigar up and down in his mouth three times . McCay made more extensive use of this technique in his later films . 
 = = Style = = 
 McCay 's drawings are in the heavily outlined Art Nouveau style familiar to the readers of his comics . Its expressive character animation differentiated Little Nemo from the films of Blackton and Cohl . There are no backgrounds ; McCay 's first film with backgrounds was 1914 's Gertie the Dinosaur . McCay demonstrated his mastery of linear perspective in scenes such when the dragon disappears smoothly into the distance . 
 The film 's positive reception motivated McCay to hand @-@ color each of the 35mm frames of the originally black @-@ and @-@ white film . The dragon chariot that carries off Nemo and the Princess originally appeared in three episodes of Little Nemo in Slumberland in mid @-@ 1906 . 
 Academic Mark Winokur noted racial hierarchies in the Little Nemo strip and film . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Nemo is depicted as " most human " , while the Irish Flip is drawn as a minstrel caricature , and the mute African Impie is most grotesquely caricatured . Nemo , at the top of this hierarchy , exerts his authority over the other characters , as when he distorts them with magic . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Distributed by Vitagraph , the film debuted in theaters on April 8 , 1911 . McCay included the film as part of his vaudeville act beginning April 12 . Little Nemo was popular with audiences and earned positive reviews . Film magazine The Moving Picture World called Nemo " an admirable piece of work ... one of those films which have a natural advertising heritage in the great and wide popularity of its subject — Little Nemo is known everywhere . " The Morning Telegraph called McCay 's new film @-@ enhanced act " even a greater go than his previous one " , and put McCay on its " Blue List " of vaudeville " Actors and Acts of the Highest Ratings " . In 1938 architect Claude <unk> reminisced of the excitement he felt when he saw Little Nemo , saying he " had witnessed the birth of a new art " . Nemo appeared on stage and in theaters within the same week , but McCay postponed the theatrical releases of his next two films , How a Mosquito Operates ( 1912 ) and Gertie the Dinosaur ( 1914 ) , for some time after he used them in his stage show . 
 Animation historian <unk> Bendazzi saw the transforming series of images in the plotless Nemo serving as little more than a demonstration of the animation medium 's capabilities . Bendazzi wrote that McCay overcame this overt experimentalism in How a Mosquito Operates . 
 McCay 's working method was laborious , and animators developed a number of methods to reduce the workload and speed production to meet the demand for animated films . Within a few years of Nemo 's release , Canadian Raoul Barré 's registration pegs combined with American Earl Hurd 's cel technology became near @-@ universal methods in animation studios . In 1916 , McCay himself adopted the cel method , beginning with his fourth film The Sinking of the Lusitania ( 1918 ) . 
 In 2009 , Little Nemo was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . 
 = Chromium = 
 Chromium is a chemical element with symbol Cr and atomic number 24 . It is the first element in Group 6 . It is a steely @-@ grey , lustrous , hard and brittle metal which takes a high polish , resists tarnishing , and has a high melting point . The name of the element is derived from the Greek word <unk> , <unk> , meaning color , because many of the compounds are intensely colored . 
 <unk> alloy is commercially produced from chromite by <unk> or aluminothermic reactions ; and chromium metal by roasting and leaching processes followed by reduction with carbon and then aluminium . Chromium metal is of high value for its high corrosion resistance and hardness . A major development was the discovery that steel could be made highly resistant to corrosion and discoloration by adding metallic chromium to form stainless steel . Stainless steel and chrome plating ( electroplating with chromium ) together comprise 85 % of the commercial use . 
 Trivalent chromium ( Cr ( III ) ) ion is an essential nutrient in trace amounts in humans for insulin , sugar and lipid metabolism , although the issue is debated . 
 While chromium metal and Cr ( III ) ions are not considered toxic , hexavalent chromium ( Cr ( VI ) ) is toxic and carcinogenic . Abandoned chromium production sites often require environmental cleanup . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical = = = 
 Chromium is remarkable for its magnetic properties : it is the only elemental solid which shows antiferromagnetic ordering at room temperature ( and below ) . Above 38 ° C , it changes to paramagnetic . 
 = = = = Passivation = = = = 
 Chromium metal left standing in air is passivated by oxidation , forming a thin , protective , surface layer . This layer is a spinel structure only a few molecules thick . It is very dense , and prevents the diffusion of oxygen into the underlying metal . This is different from the oxide that forms on iron and carbon steel , through which elemental oxygen continues to migrate , reaching the underlying material to cause incessant rusting . Passivation can be enhanced by short contact with oxidizing acids like nitric acid . <unk> chromium is stable against acids . Passivation can be removed with a strong reducing agent that destroys the protective oxide layer on the metal . Chromium metal treated in this way readily dissolves in weak acids . 
 Chromium , unlike such metals as iron and nickel , does not suffer from hydrogen embrittlement . However , it does suffer from nitrogen embrittlement , reacting with nitrogen from air and forming brittle nitrides at the high temperatures necessary to work the metal parts . 
 = = = Occurrence = = = 
 Chromium is the 22nd most abundant element in Earth 's crust with an average concentration of 100 ppm . Chromium compounds are found in the environment from the erosion of chromium @-@ containing rocks , and can be redistributed by volcanic eruptions . Typical background concentrations of chromium in environmental media are : atmosphere < 10 ng m − 3 ; soil < 500 mg kg − 1 ; vegetation < 0 @.@ 5 mg kg − 1 ; freshwater < 10 ug L − 1 ; seawater < 1 ug L − 1 ; sediment < 80 mg kg − 1 . 
 Chromium is mined as chromite ( FeCr2O4 ) ore . About two @-@ fifths of the chromite ores and concentrates in the world are produced in South Africa , while Kazakhstan , India , Russia , and Turkey are also substantial producers . <unk> chromite deposits are plentiful , but geographically concentrated in Kazakhstan and southern Africa . 
 Although rare , deposits of native chromium exist . The Udachnaya Pipe in Russia produces samples of the native metal . This mine is a kimberlite pipe , rich in diamonds , and the reducing environment helped produce both elemental chromium and diamond . 
 The relation between Cr ( III ) and Cr ( VI ) strongly depends on pH and oxidative properties of the location . In most cases , Cr ( III ) is the dominating species , but in some areas , the ground water can contain up to 39 µg / liter of total chromium of which 30 µg / liter is Cr ( VI ) . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Naturally occurring chromium is composed of three stable isotopes ; 52Cr , 53Cr and <unk> , with 52Cr being the most abundant ( 83 @.@ 789 % natural abundance ) . 19 radioisotopes have been characterized , with the most stable being <unk> with a half @-@ life of ( more than ) 1 @.@ 8 × 1017 years , and <unk> with a half @-@ life of 27 @.@ 7 days . All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half @-@ lives that are less than 24 hours and the majority less than 1 minute . This element also has 2 meta states . 
 53Cr is the radiogenic decay product of 53Mn ( half @-@ life = 3 @.@ 74 million years ) , and chromium isotopes are typically collocated ( and compounded ) with manganese isotopes . This circumstance is useful in isotope geology . <unk> @-@ chromium isotope ratios reinforce the evidence from 26Al and 107Pd concerning the early history of the solar system . Variations in 53Cr / 52Cr and Mn / Cr ratios from several meteorites indicate an initial 53Mn / 55Mn ratio that suggests Mn @-@ Cr isotopic composition must result from in @-@ situ decay of 53Mn in differentiated planetary bodies . Hence 53Cr provides additional evidence for nucleosynthetic processes immediately before coalescence of the solar system . 
 The isotopes of chromium range in atomic mass from 43 u ( <unk> ) to 67 u ( <unk> ) . The primary decay mode before the most abundant stable isotope , 52Cr , is electron capture and the primary mode after is beta decay . 53Cr has been posited as a proxy for atmospheric oxygen concentration . 
 = = Compounds = = 
 Chromium is a member of Group 6 , of the transition metals . Chromium ( 0 ) has an electronic configuration of <unk> , owing to the lower energy of the high spin configuration . Chromium exhibits a wide range of oxidation states , with + 3 the most stable ; the + 3 and + 6 states are the most common in chromium compounds , while + 1 , + 4 and + 5 are rare . 
 The following is the Pourbaix diagram for chromium in pure water , perchloric acid or sodium hydroxide : 
 = = = Chromium ( III ) = = = 
 A large number of chromium ( III ) compounds are known . Chromium ( III ) can be obtained by dissolving elemental chromium in acids like hydrochloric acid or sulfuric acid . The Cr3 + ion has a similar radius ( 63 pm ) to Al3 + ( radius 50 pm ) , and they can replace each other in some compounds , such as in chrome alum and alum . When a trace amount of Cr3 + replaces Al3 + in corundum ( aluminium oxide , Al2O3 ) , pink sapphire or red @-@ colored ruby is formed , depending on the amount of chromium . 
 Chromium ( III ) ions tend to form octahedral complexes . The color of these complexes is determined by the ligands attached to the Cr center . Commercially available chromium ( III ) chloride hydrate is the dark green complex [ <unk> ( H2O ) 4 ] Cl . Closely related compounds have different colors : pale green [ <unk> ( H2O ) 5 ] Cl2 and violet [ Cr ( H2O ) 6 ] Cl3 . If water @-@ free green chromium ( III ) chloride is dissolved in water , the green solution turns violet after some time as the chloride in the inner coordination sphere is replace by water . This kind of reaction is also observed with solutions of chrome alum and other water @-@ soluble chromium ( III ) salts . 
 Chromium ( III ) hydroxide ( Cr ( OH ) 3 ) is amphoteric , dissolving in acidic solutions to form [ Cr ( H2O ) 6 ] 3 + , and in basic solutions to form [ Cr ( OH ) 
 6 ] 3 − . It is dehydrated by heating to form the green chromium ( III ) oxide ( Cr2O3 ) , a stable oxide with a crystal structure identical to that of corundum . 
 = = = Chromium ( VI ) = = = 
 Chromium ( VI ) compounds are powerful oxidants at low or neutral pH . Most important are chromate anion ( CrO2 − 
 4 ) and dichromate ( <unk> − ) anions , which exist in equilibrium : 
 2 [ <unk> ] 2 − + 2 H + ⇌ [ <unk> ] 2 − + H2O 
 Chromium ( VI ) halides are known also and include the hexafluoride <unk> and <unk> chloride ( CrO 
 2Cl 
 2 ) . 
 Sodium chromate is produced industrially by the oxidative roasting of chromite ore with calcium or sodium carbonate . The dominant species is therefore , by the law of mass action , determined by the pH of the solution . The change in equilibrium is visible by a change from yellow ( chromate ) to orange ( dichromate ) , such as when an acid is added to a neutral solution of potassium chromate . At yet lower pH values , further condensation to more complex oxyanions of chromium is possible . 
 Both the chromate and dichromate anions are strong oxidizing reagents at low pH : 
 Cr 
 2O2 − 
 7 + 14 H 
 3O + + 6 e − → 2 Cr3 + + 21 H 
 2O ( ε0 
 = 1 @.@ 33 V ) 
 They are , however , only moderately oxidizing at high pH : 
 CrO2 − 
 4 + 4 H 
 2O + 3 e − → Cr ( OH ) 
 3 + 5 OH − ( ε0 = 
 − 0 @.@ 13 V ) 
 Chromium ( VI ) compounds in solution can be detected by adding an acidic hydrogen peroxide solution . The unstable dark blue chromium ( VI ) peroxide ( <unk> ) is formed , which can be stabilized as an ether adduct CrO 
 5 · OR 
 2 . 
 Chromic acid has the hypothetical formula H 
 <unk> 
 4 . It is a vaguely described chemical , despite many well @-@ defined chromates and <unk> being known . The dark red chromium ( VI ) oxide CrO 
 3 , the acid anhydride of chromic acid , is sold industrially as " chromic acid " . It can be produced by mixing sulfuric acid with dichromate , and is a strong oxidizing agent . 
 = = = Chromium ( V ) and chromium ( IV ) = = = 
 The oxidation state + 5 is only realized in few compounds but are intermediates in many reactions involving oxidations by chromate . The only binary compound is the volatile chromium ( V ) fluoride ( <unk> ) . This red solid has a melting point of 30 ° C and a boiling point of 117 ° C. It can be prepared by treating chromium metal with fluorine at 400 ° C and 200 bar pressure . The <unk> ( V ) is another example of the + 5 oxidation state . Potassium <unk> ( K3 [ Cr ( O2 ) 4 ] ) is made by reacting potassium chromate with hydrogen peroxide at low temperatures . This red brown compound is stable at room temperature but decomposes spontaneously at 150 – 170 ° C. 
 Compounds of chromium ( IV ) ( in the + 4 oxidation state ) are slightly more common than those of chromium ( V ) . The tetrahalides , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , can be produced by treating the trihalides ( <unk> 
 3 ) with the corresponding halogen at elevated temperatures . Such compounds are susceptible to disproportionation reactions and are not stable in water . 
 = = = Chromium ( II ) = = = 
 Many chromium ( II ) compounds are known , including the water @-@ stable chromium ( II ) chloride , <unk> 
 2 , which can be made by reducing chromium ( III ) chloride with zinc . The resulting bright blue solution is only stable at neutral pH . Many <unk> carboxylates are known , most famously the red <unk> acetate ( <unk> ( <unk> ) 4 ) that features a quadruple bond . 
 = = = Chromium ( I ) = = = 
 Most Cr ( I ) compounds are obtained by oxidation of electron @-@ rich , octahedral Cr ( 0 ) complexes . Other Cr ( I ) complexes contain cyclopentadienyl ligands . As verified by X @-@ ray diffraction , a Cr @-@ Cr quintuple bond ( length 183 @.@ 51 ( 4 ) pm ) has also been described . Extremely bulky <unk> ligands stabilize this compound by shielding the quintuple bond from further reactions . 
 = = = Chromium ( 0 ) = = = 
 Many chromium ( 0 ) compounds are known . Most are derivatives of chromium <unk> or bis ( benzene ) chromium . 
 = = History = = 
 Chromium was discovered as an element after it came to the attention of the Western world in the red crystalline mineral crocoite ( lead ( II ) chromate ) , discovered in 1761 and initially used as a pigment . Nearly all chromium is commercially extracted from the single commercially viable ore chromite , which is iron chromium oxide ( FeCr2O4 ) . Chromite is now the principal source of chromium for pigments . 
 Weapons found in burial pits dating from the late 3rd century B.C. Qin Dynasty of the Terracotta Army near Xi 'an , China have been analyzed by archaeologists . Although buried more than 2 @,@ 000 years ago , the ancient bronze tips of crossbow bolts and swords found at the site showed unexpectedly little corrosion , possibly because the bronze was deliberately coated with a thin layer of chromium oxide . However , this oxide layer was not chromium metal or chrome plating as we know it . 
 Chromium minerals as pigments came to the attention of the west in the 18th century . On 26 July 1761 , Johann Gottlob Lehmann found an orange @-@ red mineral in the <unk> mines in the Ural Mountains which he named Siberian red lead . Though misidentified as a lead compound with selenium and iron components , the mineral was in fact crocoite ( lead chromate ) with a formula of PbCrO4 . 
 In 1770 , Peter Simon Pallas visited the same site as Lehmann and found a red lead mineral that had useful properties as a pigment in paints . The use of Siberian red lead as a paint pigment then developed rapidly . A bright yellow pigment made from crocoite also became popular . 
 In 1797 , Louis Nicolas Vauquelin received samples of crocoite ore . He produced chromium trioxide ( <unk> ) by mixing crocoite with hydrochloric acid . In 1798 , Vauquelin discovered that he could isolate metallic chromium by heating the oxide in a charcoal oven , for which he is credited as the discoverer of the element . Vauquelin was also able to detect traces of chromium in precious gemstones , such as ruby or emerald . 
 During the 1800s , chromium was primarily used as a component of paints and in tanning salts . At first , crocoite from Russia was the main source , but in 1827 , a larger chromite deposit was discovered near Baltimore , United States . This made the United States the largest producer of chromium products till 1848 when large deposits of chromite were found near Bursa , Turkey . 
 Chromium is also known for its luster when polished . It is used as a protective and decorative coating on car parts , plumbing fixtures , furniture parts and many other items , usually applied by electroplating . Chromium was used for electroplating as early as 1848 , but this use only became widespread with the development of an improved process in 1924 . 
 = = Production = = 
 Approximately 28 @.@ 8 million metric tons ( Mt ) of marketable chromite ore were produced in 2013 , and converted into 7 @.@ 5 Mt of ferrochromium . According to John F. Papp , writing for the USGS , " <unk> is the leading end use of chromite ore , [ and ] stainless steel is the leading end use of ferrochromium . " 
 The largest producers of chromium ore in 2013 have been South Africa ( 48 % ) , Kazakhstan ( 13 % ) , Turkey ( 11 % ) , India ( 10 % ) with several other countries producing the rest of about 18 % of the world production . 
 The two main products of chromium ore refining are ferrochromium and metallic chromium . For those products the ore smelter process differs considerably . For the production of ferrochromium , the chromite ore ( FeCr2O4 ) is reduced in large scale in electric arc furnace or in smaller smelters with either aluminium or silicon in an aluminothermic reaction . 
 For the production of pure chromium , the iron must be separated from the chromium in a two step roasting and leaching process . The chromite ore is heated with a mixture of calcium carbonate and sodium carbonate in the presence of air . The chromium is oxidized to the hexavalent form , while the iron forms the stable Fe2O3 . The subsequent leaching at higher elevated temperatures dissolves the chromates and leaves the insoluble iron oxide . The chromate is converted by sulfuric acid into the dichromate . 
 4 FeCr2O4 + 8 Na2CO3 + 7 O2 → 8 <unk> + 2 Fe2O3 + 8 CO2 
 2 <unk> + H2SO4 → <unk> + Na2SO4 + H2O 
 The dichromate is converted to the chromium ( III ) oxide by reduction with carbon and then reduced in an aluminothermic reaction to chromium . 
 <unk> + 2 C → Cr2O3 + Na2CO3 + CO 
 Cr2O3 + 2 Al → Al2O3 + 2 Cr 
 = = Applications = = 
 Metal alloys now account for 85 % of the use of chromium . The remainder is used in the chemical , refractory , and foundry industries . 
 = = = Metallurgy = = = 
 The strengthening effect of forming stable metal carbides at the grain boundaries and the strong increase in corrosion resistance made chromium an important alloying material for steel . The high @-@ speed tool steels contain between 3 and 5 % chromium . Stainless steel , the main corrosion @-@ proof metal alloy , is formed when chromium is added to iron in sufficient concentrations , usually above 11 % . For its formation , ferrochromium is added to the molten iron . Also nickel @-@ based alloys increase in strength due to the formation of discrete , stable metal carbide particles at the grain boundaries . For example , Inconel 718 contains 18 @.@ 6 % chromium . Because of the excellent high @-@ temperature properties of these nickel superalloys , they are used in jet engines and gas turbines in lieu of common structural materials . 
 The relative high hardness and corrosion resistance of unalloyed chromium makes it a good surface coating , being still the most " popular " metal coating with unparalleled combined durability . A thin layer of chromium is deposited on <unk> metallic surfaces by electroplating techniques . There are two deposition methods : Thin , below 1 µm thickness , layers are deposited by chrome plating , and are used for decorative surfaces . If wear @-@ resistant surfaces are needed then thicker chromium layers are deposited . Both methods normally use acidic chromate or dichromate solutions . To prevent the energy @-@ consuming change in oxidation state , the use of chromium ( III ) sulfate is under development , but for most applications , the established process is used . 
 In the chromate conversion coating process , the strong oxidative properties of chromates are used to deposit a protective oxide layer on metals like aluminium , zinc and cadmium . This passivation and the self @-@ healing properties by the chromate stored in the chromate conversion coating , which is able to migrate to local defects , are the benefits of this coating method . Because of environmental and health regulations on chromates , alternative coating methods are under development . 
 Chromic acid anodizing ( or Type I anodizing ) of aluminium is another electrochemical process , which does not lead to the deposition of chromium , but uses chromic acid as electrolyte in the solution . During anodization , an oxide layer is formed on the aluminium . The use of chromic acid , instead of the normally used sulfuric acid , leads to a slight difference of these oxide layers . The high toxicity of Cr ( VI ) compounds , used in the established chromium electroplating process , and the strengthening of safety and environmental regulations demand a search for substitutes for chromium or at least a change to less toxic chromium ( III ) compounds . 
 = = = Dye and pigment = = = 
 The mineral crocoite ( lead chromate PbCrO4 ) was used as a yellow pigment shortly after its discovery . After a synthesis method became available starting from the more abundant chromite , chrome yellow was , together with cadmium yellow , one of the most used yellow pigments . The pigment does not <unk> , but it tends to darken due to the formation of chromium ( III ) oxide . It has a strong color , and was used for school buses in the US and for Postal Service ( for example Deutsche Post ) in Europe . The use of chrome yellow declined due to environmental and safety concerns and was replaced by organic pigments or alternatives free from lead and chromium . Other pigments based on chromium are , for example , the bright red pigment chrome red , which is a basic lead chromate ( PbCrO4 · Pb ( OH ) 2 ) . A very important chromate pigment , which was used widely in metal primer formulations , was zinc chromate , now replaced by zinc phosphate . A wash primer was formulated to replace the dangerous practice of <unk> aluminium aircraft bodies with a phosphoric acid solution . This used zinc <unk> dispersed in a solution of polyvinyl <unk> . An 8 % solution of phosphoric acid in solvent was added just before application . It was found that an easily oxidized alcohol was an essential ingredient . A thin layer of about 10 – 15 µm was applied , which turned from yellow to dark green when it was cured . There is still a question as to the correct mechanism . Chrome green is a mixture of Prussian blue and chrome yellow , while the chrome oxide green is chromium ( III ) oxide . 
 Chromium oxides are also used as a green color in glassmaking and as a glaze in ceramics . Green chromium oxide is extremely light @-@ fast and as such is used in cladding coatings . It is also the main ingredient in infrared reflecting paints , used by the armed forces , to paint vehicles , to give them the same IR reflectance as green leaves . 
 = = = = Synthetic ruby and the first laser = = = = 
 Natural rubies are corundum ( aluminum oxide ) crystals that are colored red ( the rarest type ) due to chromium ( III ) ions ( other colors of corundum gems are termed sapphires ) . A red @-@ colored artificial ruby may also be achieved by doping chromium ( III ) into artificial corundum crystals , thus making chromium a requirement for making synthetic rubies . Such a synthetic ruby crystal was the basis for the first laser , produced in 1960 , which relied on stimulated emission of light from the chromium atoms in such a crystal . 
 = = = Wood preservative = = = 
 Because of their toxicity , chromium ( VI ) salts are used for the preservation of wood . For example , <unk> copper arsenate ( CCA ) is used in timber treatment to protect wood from decay fungi , wood @-@ attacking insects , including termites , and marine borers . The formulations contain chromium based on the oxide <unk> between 35 @.@ 3 % and 65 @.@ 5 % . In the United States , 65 @,@ 300 metric tons of CCA solution were used in 1996 . 
 = = = Tanning = = = 
 Chromium ( III ) salts , especially chrome alum and chromium ( III ) sulfate , are used in the tanning of leather . The chromium ( III ) stabilizes the leather by cross linking the collagen fibers . Chromium tanned leather can contain between 4 and 5 % of chromium , which is tightly bound to the proteins . Although the form of chromium used for tanning is not the toxic hexavalent variety , there remains interest in management of chromium in the tanning industry such as recovery and reuse , direct / indirect recycling , use of less chromium or " chrome @-@ less " tanning are practiced to better manage chromium in tanning . 
 = = = Refractory material = = = 
 The high heat resistivity and high melting point makes chromite and chromium ( III ) oxide a material for high temperature refractory applications , like blast furnaces , cement kilns , molds for the firing of bricks and as foundry sands for the casting of metals . In these applications , the refractory materials are made from mixtures of chromite and magnesite . The use is declining because of the environmental regulations due to the possibility of the formation of chromium ( VI ) . 
 = = = Catalysts = = = 
 Several chromium compounds are used as catalysts for processing hydrocarbons . For example , the Phillips catalyst , prepared from chromium oxides , is used for the production of about half the world 's polyethylene . Fe @-@ Cr mixed oxides are employed as high @-@ temperature catalysts for the water gas shift reaction . Copper chromite is a useful hydrogenation catalyst . 
 = = = Other use = = = 
 Chromium ( IV ) oxide ( CrO2 ) is a magnetic compound . Its ideal shape anisotropy , which imparts high <unk> and remnant magnetization , made it a compound superior to the γ @-@ Fe2O3 . Chromium ( IV ) oxide is used to manufacture magnetic tape used in high @-@ performance audio tape and standard audio cassettes . <unk> can prevent corrosion of steel under wet conditions , and therefore chromates are added to drilling muds . 
 Chromium ( III ) oxide ( Cr2O3 ) is a metal polish known as green rouge . 
 Chromic acid is a powerful oxidizing agent and is a useful compound for cleaning laboratory glassware of any trace of organic compounds . It is prepared by dissolving potassium dichromate in concentrated sulfuric acid , which is then used to wash the apparatus . Sodium dichromate is sometimes used because of its higher solubility ( 50 g / L versus 200 g / L respectively ) . The use of dichromate cleaning solutions is now phased out due to the high toxicity and environmental concerns . Modern cleaning solutions are highly effective and chromium free . Potassium dichromate is a chemical reagent , used as a <unk> agent . It is also used as a mordant ( i.e. , a fixing agent ) for dyes in fabric . 
 = = Biological role = = 
 In the form trivalent chromium , Cr ( III ) , or Cr3 + , chromium was identified as an essential nutrient in the late 1950s and later accepted as a trace element for its roles in the action of insulin , a hormone critical to the metabolism and storage of carbohydrate , fat and protein . The precise mechanism of its actions in the body , however , have not been fully defined , leaving in question whether chromium is essential for healthy people . 
 Trivalent chromium occurs in trace amounts in foods , wine and water . In contrast , hexavalent chromium ( Cr ( VI ) or <unk> + ) is highly toxic and mutagenic when inhaled . Cr ( VI ) has not been established as a carcinogen when in solution , although it may cause allergic contact dermatitis ( ACD ) . 
 Chromium deficiency , involving a lack of Cr ( III ) in the body , or perhaps some complex of it , such as glucose tolerance factor is controversial . Some studies suggest that the biologically active form of chromium ( III ) in an <unk> called Low @-@ molecular @-@ weight chromium @-@ binding substance ( <unk> ) , which might play a role in the insulin signaling pathway . 
 Although the mechanism in biological roles for chromium is unclear , dietary supplements for chromium include chromium ( III ) <unk> , chromium ( III ) <unk> , and related materials . The benefit of supplements has not been proven . 
 In the United States , the dietary guidelines for daily chromium intake were lowered in 2001 from 50 – 200 µg for an adult to 35 µg ( adult male ) and to 25 µg ( adult female ) . In 2014 , the European Food Safety Authority published a report stating that the intake of chromium ( III ) has no beneficial effect on healthy people , thus the Panel removed chromium from the list of nutrients and essential elements . 
 Chromium content of common foods is generally low ( 1 @-@ 13 micrograms per serving ) . Chromium content of food varies widely due to differences in soil mineral content , growing season , plant cultivar , and contamination during processing . In addition , large amounts of chromium ( and nickel ) leach into food cooked in stainless steel . 
 = = = Dietary reference intake = = = 
 The Food and Nutrition Board of the U.S. Institute of Medicine updated Estimated Average Requirements ( EARs ) and Recommended Dietary Allowances ( RDAs ) in 2001 . For chromium there was not sufficient information to set EARs and RDAs , so needs are described as estimates for Adequate Intakes ( AIs ) . The current AIs for chromium for women ages 14 and up is 25 μg / day up to age 50 and 20 μg / day for older . AI for pregnancy is 30 μg / day . RDA for lactation is 45 μg / day . For men ages 14 and up 35 μg / day up to age 50 and 30 μg / day for older . For infants to children ages 1 – 13 years the AI increases with age from 0 @.@ 2 to 25 μg / day . As for safety , the Food and Nutrition Board also sets Tolerable Upper Intake Levels ( known as ULs ) for vitamins and minerals when evidence is sufficient . In the case of chromium there is not yet enough information and hence no UL . Collectively the EARs , RDAs , AIs and ULs are referred to as Dietary Reference Intakes . The European Food Safety Authority reviewed the same safety question and did not set a UL . The World Health Organization has tentatively set UL at 250 μg / day . In the United States many dietary supplement companies offer chromium products at 200 to 800 μg / day . 
 For U.S. food and dietary supplement labeling purposes the amount in a serving is expressed as a percent of Daily Value ( % DV ) . For chromium labeling purposes 100 % of the Daily Value was 120 μg , but as of May 2016 it has been revised to 35 μg . Food and supplement companies have until July 28 , 2018 to comply with the change . A table of the pre @-@ change adult Daily Values is provided at Reference Daily Intake . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 Water @-@ insoluble chromium ( III ) compounds and chromium metal are not considered a health hazard , while the toxicity and carcinogenic properties of chromium ( VI ) have been known for a long time . Because of the specific transport mechanisms , only limited amounts of chromium ( III ) enter the cells . Several in vitro studies indicated that high concentrations of chromium ( III ) in the cell can lead to DNA damage . Acute oral toxicity ranges between 1 @.@ 5 and 3 @.@ 3 mg / kg . A 2008 review suggested that moderate uptake of chromium ( III ) through dietary supplements poses no genetic @-@ toxic risk . In the US , the Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) has designated a permissible exposure limit ( PEL ) in the workplace as a time @-@ weighted average ( TWA ) of 1 mg / m3 . The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH ) has set a recommended exposure limit ( REL ) of 0 @.@ 5 mg / m3 , time @-@ weighted average . The IDLH ( immediately dangerous to life and health ) value is 250 mg / m3 . 
 = = = Cr ( VI ) = = = 
 The acute oral toxicity for chromium ( VI ) ranges between 50 and 150 µg / kg . In the body , chromium ( VI ) is reduced by several mechanisms to chromium ( III ) already in the blood before it enters the cells . The chromium ( III ) is excreted from the body , whereas the chromate ion is transferred into the cell by a transport mechanism , by which also sulfate and phosphate ions enter the cell . The acute toxicity of chromium ( VI ) is due to its strong <unk> properties . After it reaches the blood stream , it damages the kidneys , the liver and blood cells through oxidation reactions . Hemolysis , renal , and liver failure result . Aggressive dialysis can be therapeutic . 
 The <unk> of chromate dust has been known for a long time , and in 1890 the first publication described the elevated cancer risk of workers in a chromate dye company . Three mechanisms have been proposed to describe the <unk> of chromium ( VI ) . The first mechanism includes highly reactive hydroxyl radicals and other reactive radicals which are by products of the reduction of chromium ( VI ) to chromium ( III ) . The second process includes the direct binding of chromium ( V ) , produced by reduction in the cell , and chromium ( IV ) compounds to the DNA . The last mechanism attributed the <unk> to the binding to the DNA of the end product of the chromium ( III ) reduction . 
 Chromium salts ( chromates ) are also the cause of allergic reactions in some people . <unk> are often used to manufacture , amongst other things , leather products , paints , cement , mortar and anti @-@ corrosives . Contact with products containing chromates can lead to allergic contact dermatitis and irritant dermatitis , resulting in ulceration of the skin , sometimes referred to as " chrome ulcers " . This condition is often found in workers that have been exposed to strong chromate solutions in electroplating , tanning and chrome @-@ producing manufacturers . 
 = = = Environmental issues = = = 
 Because chromium compounds were used in dyes , paints , and leather tanning compounds , these compounds are often found in soil and groundwater at abandoned industrial sites , now needing environmental cleanup and remediation in accordance with the United States regulations for the treatment of brownfield land . Primer paint containing hexavalent chromium is still widely used for aerospace and automobile refinishing applications . 
 In 2010 , the Environmental Working Group studied the drinking water in 35 American cities in the first nationwide study . The study found measurable hexavalent chromium in the tap water of 31 of the cities sampled , with Norman , Oklahoma , at the top of list ; 25 cities had levels that exceeded California 's proposed limit . Concentrations of Cr ( VI ) in US municipal drinking water supplies reported by EWG are within likely , natural background levels for the areas tested and not necessarily indicative of industrial pollution , as asserted by EWG . This factor was not taken into consideration in the EWG report . 
 = Shalden = 
 Shalden is a village and civil parish in the East Hampshire district of Hampshire , England . It is 2 @.@ 3 miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) northwest of Alton and 1 @.@ 9 miles ( 3 @.@ 1 km ) northeast of Bentworth , just off the A339 road . The parish covers an area of 1 @,@ 536 acres ( 622 ha ) and has an average elevation of 600 feet ( 180 m ) above sea level . The nearest railway station is Alton , 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) southeast of the village . According to the 2011 census , it had a population of 435 . 
 Bronze Age and Roman remains have been found in the area . The manor of Shalden was first mentioned in the Domesday Survey of 1086 , and was included in the Odiham Hundred . A Saxon church was in the village , but was destroyed and replaced with a newer church , which was constructed in 1863 . Shalden was in the national headlines in 1867 due to its association with the murder of Sweet Fanny Adams in a nearby hop field . The village contains twelve Grade II listed landmarks , including St Peter and St Paul 's church , Shalden Lodge and Manor Farmhouse , a Grade II * listed building . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prehistory to Roman = = = 
 The village name has been spelled in various ways , including <unk> ( 11th century ) , <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> ( 12th century ) , and <unk> or <unk> ( 13th century ) . There is evidence of Roman occupation in the village , with several Roman coins and pottery remains being found near Shalden school in 1905 . There is further evidence to suggest that a Roman villa was once constructed in or near the village . Bronze Age remains found in the area include a looped palstave and a cinerary urn . A Saxon church was formerly in the village ; this was rebuilt in the nineteenth century , with flint with Bath stone . 
 = = = Medieval = = = 
 The manor of Shalden was first mentioned in the Domesday Survey of 1086 by William Mauditt of Hanslope . It had formerly been in the ownership of four freemen of King Edward the Confessor as an " <unk> " . Shalden was included in the Odiham Hundred . The ownership of the manor was eventually passed to the descendants of William Mauditt alongside the manor of the nearby hamlet , Hartley Mauditt , of which the manor of Shalden was held under . The manor was apparently held by the Mauditt family of Hartley Mauditt until near the end of the 12th century , when William Mauditt gave the manor to his brother Robert Mauduit of Warminster , to be held by William and his heirs for the service of half a knight 's fee . Robert Mauditt died in 1191 , and his son and successor Thomas was holding the manor between 1235 and 1236 . He died in 1244 , and was succeeded by his son , also named William . 
 William Mauditt left a son and heir , Warin , a minor , whose custody was assigned by Henry III to his brother Richard , Earl of Cornwall . During this time , Richard temporarily held the manor of Shalden from Henry until his death 1272 . Consequently , Warin Mauditt held the manor until his death in either 1299 or 1300 . Interest in the manor passed down to his son Thomas , in which he granted a sum of land at Shalden to a Knight named Walter Stoner and his freeman , in gratitude for his homage and services . At that time Sir Nicholas de Boys held the manor of Shalden as a tenant for life . In 1297 the Earl of Cornwall , in consideration of the services of Sir Nicholas , granted the manor to him and his heirs indefinitely . Sir Nicholas paid nothing for the manor , though his heirs were to pay £ 12 a year . 
 In 1309 Sir Nicholas de Boys granted the manor of Shalden to Robert de Kendale and his wife , Margaret , along with her heirs . The manor was then held by Ralph le <unk> indefinitely . He was still holding it in 1310 , however it had passed to Robert de Kendale sometime before 1316 . Robert died in 1330 , and his son Edward succeeded to the manor , but it was held by his widow Margaret until her death in 1347 . Sir Edward de Kendale died in 1373 , leaving a son as his heir for the manor of Shalden . Edwards 's son and his brother , Thomas , both died without issue in 1375 . Sir Robert Turk and his wife , Beatrice , conveyed the manor in 1376 – 7 to Sir William <unk> and William <unk> , trustees of Sir Edward de Kendale , to whom they transferred to in the same year . Robert 's daughter , Elizabeth , soon married Sir Thomas Barre , and died in 1421 . Her heir was her grandson , but the manor of Shalden passed to John de Kendale , who held it in 1428 . 
 = = = Tudor to Georgian = = = 
 Ownership of the manor was passed on to William Dyer in 1444 , who was a trustee of a lord named Robert Lee . Ownership was then transferred in 1485 to Maud , Anne , Elizabeth , Jane , and Ellen , daughters of John Lee , who had claimed the issues of the manor was under the will of their father , and complained that they had been prevented from enjoying them by Reginald <unk> and Robert Norton , who were also trustees . In 1567 , William Lee sold the manor to Anne <unk> , and in 1591 Richard Miller sold it to Sir William of <unk> . It was sold again in 1628 by Sir William 's son and successor Edward Kingswell to Sir Richard Young of Weybridge , of whom it was purchased in 1632 by Sir Humphrey Benett . Benett then compounded his estate in 1649 , and sold the manor of Shalden in 1653 to Anne <unk> . 
 = = = 19th century and the murder of Fanny Adams = = = 
 At the beginning of the 19th century , the manor of Shalden was passed to John <unk> and his wife , Anne , of whom it was eventually succeeded by their John , at an unknown point . The manor was then ceded on to the Knights of Chawton , in whose family it remained until 1840 , when it was sold by Edward Knight to John Wood , the owner of Thedden Grange in Bentworth . Upon his death in 1871 , it was finally renounced to his son John Gathorne Wood , who was the last owner of the manor from 1871 to some time after 1912 . In 1870 – 72 the Imperial Gazetteer of England and Wales by John Marius Wilson described Shalden as : 
 ... a parish in Alton district , Hants ; 2 ½ miles N W of Alton r. station . Post @-@ town , Alton . Acres , 1 , 509 . Real property , £ 1 , 396 . Pop . , 185 . Houses , 37 . The manor belongs to J. Wood , Esq . The living is a rectory in the diocese of Winchester . Value , £ 331 . * Patron , the Lord Chancellor . The church is ancient . 
 Shalden gained national notoriety due to its association with the murder of Sweet Fanny Adams . On 24 August 1867 , Fanny Adams and her friend , Minnie Warner , both eight years old , were approached by <unk> Baker , a local solicitor 's clerk . Baker offered Fanny a halfpenny if she would accompany him to walk to Shalden from her home in Alton . Fanny refused , but took the halfpenny anyway . Shortly afterwards , he abducted Fanny and carried her into a hop field near Shalden . He proceeded to mutilate and butcher her in the hop field , severing her head on two poles and deeply slashing her mouth to ear across the temples . Her right ear had been cut off and both her eyes were missing , which were later found in the nearby River Wey . Baker was later discovered by a group of angry residents from Alton , and was soon tried and sentenced to death in Winchester Crown Court on 5 December . The term " Sweet Fanny Adams " , or " Sweet FA " for short , was gradually accepted throughout the British armed services as a euphemism for " sweet nothing " , as it passed into common usage . 
 = = Geography and demographics = = 
 Shalden is located in the eastern central part of Hampshire , in South East England , 2 @.@ 1 miles ( 3 @.@ 4 km ) northwest of Alton , its nearest town . The parish covers an area of 1 @,@ 536 acres ( 622 ha ) , of which 194 acres ( 79 ha ) are woodland . It has an average elevation of approximately 600 feet ( 180 m ) above sea level , with some parts of the southern parish falling to heights of around 400 feet ( 120 m ) . The landscape is dominated by farms and woodland such as Shalden Manor , Glenville Farm and <unk> Wood . The soil is of clay and chalk , with a subsoil of chalk , and the prominent crops produced in the area are cereals . A large number of old chalk pits indicate that the chalk was once worked in the parish . The parish contains four individual hamlets ; <unk> , Shalden Green , <unk> and Golden Pot . According to the 2011 census , the parish of Shalden had a population of 435 people . In addition , there are 168 households in the parish with an average size of 2 @.@ 59 people . 
 = = Notable landmarks = = 
 The present church , St Peter and St Paul , was built in 1863 , and is reminiscent of the 13th century in design . The bell @-@ cot contains one modern bell . The old Saxon church stood a few feet to the south of the present one , and has been completely destroyed . The only piece of architecture that remains of the Saxon church is the font , which was re @-@ used for the new church . The front dates from the 15th century and is of octagonal form , with a moulded octagonal stem and a panelled bowl . The old Saxon church was given by William Mauditt to the prior and convent of Southwick between 1147 and 1153 . The grant was confirmed by Pope Eugenius III and Pope Urban III in 1185 . In the present church , a book of the registers contains baptisms from 1686 and marriages and burials from 1687 , baptisms running to 1790 , and marriages to 1753 . 
 Shalden contains 12 Grade II listed buildings , in addition to one Grade II * listed building . St Peter and St Paul 's church is a Grade II building , and the Manor Farmhouse in Shalden Lane is a Grade II * building . The Manor Farmhouse a late @-@ medieval hall house , built with a timber framed structure that covers two stories , dates from the 16th century , with early 19th @-@ century cladding and 20th @-@ century extensions . The house has a boarded door and a large porch . Inside are two wide fireplaces and a room with a Tudor arch . Shalden Lodge , another Grade II building , dates from the late 18th century , with early and late 19th @-@ century alterations and additions . 
 = London Calling = 
 London Calling is the third studio album by English punk rock band the Clash . It was released as a double album in the United Kingdom on 14 December 1979 by CBS Records , and in the United States in January 1980 by Epic Records . London Calling is a post @-@ punk album that incorporates a range of styles , including punk , reggae , rockabilly , ska , New Orleans R & B , pop , lounge jazz , and hard rock . 
 The album 's subject matter included social displacement , unemployment , racial conflict , drug use , and the responsibilities of adulthood . The album received widespread acclaim and was ranked at number eight on Rolling Stone 's list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time in 2003 . London Calling was a top ten album in the UK , and its lead single " London Calling " was a top 20 single . It has sold over five million copies worldwide , and was certified platinum in the United States . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 After recording their second studio album Give ' Em Enough Rope ( 1978 ) , the band separated from their manager Bernard Rhodes . This separation meant that the group had to leave their rehearsal studio in Camden Town and find another location to compose their music . Tour manager Johnny Green and drum roadie Baker had found the group a new place to rehearse called Vanilla Studios , which was located in the back of a garage in Pimlico . 
 Prior to this move to the Vanilla Studios rehearsal space , the Clash 's songwriters Mick Jones and Joe Strummer had experienced a period of writer 's block . They had not written a new song from scratch in over one year , with the material on their recently @-@ released Cost of Living EP , composed of a cover song and three songs that had all been written over 12 months earlier . The Clash arrived at Vanilla in May 1979 without a single new song prepared for their third album . 
 Once in Vanilla Studios , the group began performing cover songs from a variety of genres , such as rockabilly , rock ' n ' roll , rhythm and blues , and reggae . In contrast to previous rehearsal sessions , the band kept these rehearsals private , and disallowed hangers @-@ on from attending the Vanilla sessions . This seclusion allowed the band to rebuild their confidence without worrying about the reaction from outsiders , who were familiar with their older punk rock musical style . 
 The band developed an " extremely disciplined " daily routine of afternoon musical rehearsals , broken by a late @-@ afternoon social football game , which fostered a friendly bond between the band members . The daily football match was followed by couple of drinks at a local pub , which was itself followed by a second musical rehearsal session at Vanilla Studio in the evening . 
 The band gradually rebuilt their musical and songwriting confidence during these rehearsal sessions during the summer of 1979 , with the styles of the sessions ' early cover songs setting the template for the diverse material that would be written for London Calling . The band were also encouraged by a growing appreciation of drummer Topper Headon 's drumming skills , which they realised could be used to perform music in a wide array of genres and styles beyond punk rock . The Clash wrote and recorded demos , with Mick Jones composing and arranging much of the music and Joe Strummer generally writing the lyrics . 
 As early as their second album , the Clash had started to depart from the punk rock sound . While touring in the United States twice in 1979 , they chose supporting acts such as rhythm and blues artists Bo Diddley , Sam & Dave , Lee Dorsey , and Screamin ' Jay Hawkins , as well as <unk> country artist Joe Ely and punk rockabilly band the Cramps . This developed fascination with rock and roll inspired their approach for London Calling . 
 In August 1979 , the band entered Wessex Studios to begin recording London Calling . The Clash asked Guy Stevens to produce the album , much to the dismay of CBS Records . Stevens had alcohol and drug problems and his production methods were unconventional . During a recording session he swung a ladder and upturned chairs – apparently to create a rock & roll atmosphere . The Clash got along well with Stevens , especially bassist Paul Simonon , who found his work to be very helpful and productive to his playing and their recording as a band . The album was recorded during a five- to six @-@ week period involving 18 @-@ hour days , with many songs recorded in one or two takes . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 According to the music critic Mark <unk> , London Calling is the first post @-@ punk double album and exhibits a broader range of musical styles than the Clash 's previous albums . Stephen Thomas Erlewine said that the album appropriates the " punk aesthetic into rock & roll mythology and roots music " , and incorporates a wider range of styles such as punk , reggae , rockabilly , ska , New Orleans R & B , pop , lounge jazz , and hard rock . According to Greg Kot , the band 's embrace of specific musical traditions deviated from punk 's " blow @-@ up @-@ the @-@ past attitude " . Writer Jack Sargeant remarked that " whether the Clash completely abandoned their punk roots or pushed punk 's musical eclecticism and diversity into new terrain [ on the album ] remains a controversial issue . " 
 The album 's songs are generally about London and feature both fictional and life @-@ based characters , such as an underworld criminal named Jimmy Jazz and a gun @-@ toting Jimmy Cliff <unk> living in Brixton . Some have more widely <unk> narratives , including references to the " evil <unk> " working for the " clampdown " , the lingering effects of the Spanish Civil War , and how constant consumerism leads to unavoidable political apathy on " Lost in the Supermarket " . Sal <unk> of PopMatters felt that the songs encompass an arrangement of urban narratives and characters , and touch on themes such as sex , depression and identity crisis . Music critic Tom Carson viewed that , while the album draws on the entirety of rock and roll 's past for its sound , the concepts and lyrical themes are drawn from the history , politics and myths associated with the genre . 
 " London Calling " , the album 's title track , was partially influenced by the March 1979 accident at a nuclear reactor at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania . Strummer 's lyrics also discuss the problems of rising unemployment , racial conflict and drug use in Britain . The second track , " Brand New Cadillac " , was written and originally recorded by Vince Taylor and was the first track recorded for London Calling . The band cite the song as " one of the first British rock 'n'roll records " and had initially used it as a warm up song before recording . " <unk> Can 't Fail " , the album 's fifth song , features a horn section and mixes elements of pop , soul , and reggae music together . Its lyrics chronicle the life of a fun @-@ loving young man who is criticised for his inability to act like a responsible adult . Strummer wrote " Lost in the Supermarket " after imagining Jones ' childhood growing up in a basement with his mother and grandmother . " Clampdown " began as an instrumental track called " Working and Waiting " . Its lyrics comment on people who forsake the idealism of youth and urge young people to fight the status quo . 
 " The Guns of Brixton " was the first of Paul Simonon 's compositions the band recorded , and the first to have him sing lead . Simonon was originally doubtful about its lyrics , which discuss an individual 's paranoid outlook on life , but was encouraged by Strummer to continue working on it . On " Death or Glory " , Strummer examines his life in retrospect and acknowledges the complications and responsibilities of adulthood . While working on " The Card Cheat " , the band recorded each part twice to create a " sound as big as possible " . " Lover 's Rock " advocates safe sex and planning . The final track , " Train in Vain " , was originally excluded from the back cover 's track listing . It was intended to be given away through a promotion with NME , but was added to the album at the last minute after the deal fell through . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 The album 's front cover features a photograph of bassist Paul Simonon smashing his Fender Precision Bass ( on display at the Cleveland Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as of May 2009 ) against the stage at The Palladium in New York City on 20 September 1979 during the Clash Take the Fifth US tour . Simonon explained in a 2011 interview with Fender that he smashed the bass out of frustration when he learned the bouncers at the concert would not let the audience members stand up out of their seats . Pennie Smith , who photographed the band for the album , originally did not want the photograph to be used . She thought that it was too out of focus , but Strummer and graphic designer Ray Lowry thought it would make a good album cover . In 2002 , Smith 's photograph was named the best rock and roll photograph of all time by Q magazine , commenting that " it captures the ultimate rock 'n'roll moment – total loss of control " . 
 The cover artwork was designed by Lowry and was an homage to the design of Elvis Presley 's self @-@ titled debut album , with pink letters down the left side and green text across the bottom . The cover was named the ninth best album cover of all time by Q magazine in 2001 . In 1995 , Big Audio Dynamite ( a band fronted by former Clash member Mick Jones ) used the same scheme for their F @-@ Punk album . The album cover for London Calling was among the ten chosen by the Royal Mail for a set of " Classic Album Cover " postage stamps issued in January 2010 . 
 = = Release = = 
 The album was released in the United Kingdom on vinyl in mid @-@ December 1979 , and in the United States on vinyl and 8 @-@ track tape two weeks later . A gatefold cover design of the LP was only released in Japan . Though London Calling was released as a double album it was only sold for about the price of a single album . The Clash 's record label , CBS , at first denied the band 's request for the album to be released as a double . In return CBS gave permission for the band to include a free 12 @-@ inch single that played at 33 ⅓ rpm . Ultimately , the planned 12 @-@ inch record became a second nine @-@ track LP . 
 Upon its release , London Calling sold approximately two million copies . The album peaked at number nine in the United Kingdom and was certified gold in December 1979 . The album performed strongly outside the United Kingdom . It reached number two in Sweden and number four in Norway . In the United States , London Calling peaked at number 27 on the Billboard Pop Albums chart and was certified platinum in February 1996 . The album produced two of the band 's most successful singles . " London Calling " preceded the album with a 7 December 1979 release . It peaked at number 11 on the UK Singles Chart . The song 's music video , directed by Letts , featured the band performing the song on a boat in the pouring rain with the River Thames behind them . In the United States , " Train in Vain " , backed with " London Calling " , was released as a single in February 1980 . It peaked at number 23 on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart and " London Calling " / " Train in Vain " peaked at number 30 on the Billboard Disco Top 100 chart . 
 A UK only cassette was released in 1986 . A CD was released in the US in 1987 , with a remastered version in the UK in 1999 followed by the US in 2000 , along with the rest of the band 's catalogue . In 2004 , a 25th anniversary Legacy Edition was published with a bonus CD and DVD in digipack . The bonus CD features The Vanilla Tapes , missing recordings made by the band in mid @-@ 1979 . The DVD includes The Last Testament – The Making of London Calling , a film by Don Letts , as well as previously unseen video footage and music videos . A limited edition picture disc LP was released in 2010 . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 London Calling received widespread critical acclaim when it was first released in 1979 . In a contemporary review for The New York Times , John Rockwell said the album finally validated the acclaim received by the Clash up to that point because of how their serious political themes and vital playing were retained in music with innovative features and broad appeal : " This is an album that captures all the Clash 's primal energy , combines it with a brilliant production job by Guy Stevens and reveals depths of invention and creativity barely suggested by the band 's previous work . " Charles Shaar Murray wrote in NME that it was the first record to be on @-@ par with the band 's hype , while Melody Maker critic James Truman said the Clash had " discovered themselves " by embracing American music styles . Rolling Stone magazine 's Tom Carson claimed the music celebrated " the romance of rock & roll rebellion " and was vast , engaging , and enduring enough to leave listeners " not just exhilarated but exalted and triumphantly alive " . In the opinion of Down Beat journalist Michael Goldberg , the Clash had produced " a classic rock album which , literally , defines the state of rock and roll and against which the very best of [ the 1980s ] will have to be judged . " Charlie Gillett was less impressed , believing some of the songs sounded like poor imitations of Bob Dylan backed by a horn section . In Sounds , Garry Bushell was more critical and gave the record two out of five stars , claiming the Clash had " <unk> " to Rolling Stones @-@ style " outlaw imagery " and " tired old rock clichés " . 
 London Calling was voted the best album of 1980 in the Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of American critics published by The Village Voice . Robert Christgau , the poll 's creator and supervisor , also named it the year 's best record in an accompanying piece and remarked that " it generated an urgency and vitality and ambition ( that Elvis P. cover ! ) which overwhelmed the pessimism of its leftist world @-@ view . " In a retrospective review , he called it the best double album since the Rolling Stones ' Exile on Main St. ( 1972 ) and said it expanded upon rather than compromised the Clash 's driving guitar sound in a " warm , angry , and thoughtful , confident , melodic , and hard @-@ rocking " showcase of their musical abilities . 
 According to the English music writer Dave Thompson , London Calling established the Clash as more than " a simple punk band " on what was a " potent " record of neurotic post @-@ punk , despite its amalgam of disparate and occasionally disjointed musical influences . Don McLeese from the Chicago Sun @-@ Times hailed it as their best album and " punk 's finest hour " , as it found the band broadening their artistry without compromising their original vigor and immediacy . PopMatters critic Sal <unk> called it a " big , loud , beautiful collection of hurt , anger , restless thought , and above all hope " that still sounds " relevant and vibrant " . In a review of its reissue , Uncut wrote that the songs and characters in the lyrics cross @-@ referenced each other because of the album 's exceptional sequencing , adding that " The Vanilla Tapes " bonus disc enhanced what was already a " masterpiece " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 London Calling has been considered by many critics to be one of the greatest rock albums of all time , including AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine , who said that it sounded more purposeful than " most albums , let alone double albums " . According to Acclaimed Music , it is the 6th most ranked record on critics ' lists of the all @-@ time greatest albums . In 1987 , Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times named it the fourth best album of the previous 10 years and said while the Clash 's debut was a punk masterpiece , London Calling marked the genre 's " coming of age " as the band led the way into " fertile post @-@ punk territory " . In 1989 , Rolling Stone ranked it as the best album of the 1980s . In 1999 , Q magazine named London Calling the fourth greatest British album of all time , and wrote that it is " the best Clash album and therefore among the very best albums ever recorded " . In 2002 , Q included it on its list of the 100 Best Punk Albums , and in 2003 , Mojo ranked it twenty second on their list of the Top 50 Punk Albums , while British writer Colin Larkin named it the second greatest punk album of all time . 
 London Calling was ranked as the sixth greatest album of the 1970s by NME , and the second best by Pitchfork Media , whose reviewer Amanda Petrusich said that it was the Clash 's " creative apex " as a " rock band " rather than as a punk band . In 2003 , London Calling was ranked number eight on Rolling Stone 's list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . Entertainment Weekly 's Tom Sinclair declared it the " Best Album of All Time " in his headline for a 2004 article on the album . In 2007 , London Calling was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame , a collection of recordings of lasting qualitative or historical significance . The album was included in the BBC Radio 1 2009 Masterpieces Series , marking it as one of the most influential albums of all time , some thirty years after its original release . 
 = = Film = = 
 In December 2010 , the BBC reported that a film about the recording of London Calling was in the early stages of production . Mick Jones and Paul Simonon are working as executive producers for the film . The script was written by Jez Butterworth and shooting would begin in 2011 . Alison Owen and Paul <unk> had been chosen as the producers . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Joe Strummer and Mick Jones , except where noted . 
 On the original version of the album , " Train in Vain " was not listed on the sleeve , nor the label on the record itself , but an extraneous sticker indicating the track was affixed to the outer cellophane wrapper . It was also scratched into the vinyl in the run @-@ off area on the fourth side of the album . Later editions included the song in the track listing . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The Clash 
 Joe Strummer – lead and backing vocals , rhythm guitar , piano 
 Mick Jones – lead guitar , piano , harmonica , backing and lead vocals 
 Paul Simonon – bass guitar , backing vocals , lead vocals on " The Guns of Brixton " 
 Topper Headon – drums , percussion 
 Additional performers 
 Mickey Gallagher – organ 
